

SEe WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S.A.
OFFICERS
J. P. Rutherford, President TV. E. Van Ambct.gh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah §4:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, Is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world ; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah's kingdom under Christ, which has now begun ; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the diviue mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Pbice
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign. $1 50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian___________7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African __________________Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this Journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may hare The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each 3ear, stating the reason for so requesting it We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when ■ equested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn. N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 187S.
“INTEGRITY” TESTIMONY PERIOD
Midwinter field maneuvers test the integrity, and the united testimony period during February is appropriately thus named. This “Integrity” Testimony Period will be the opening month of the 1942 three-month Watchtower campaign, hence the people of integrity toward God will specialize on taking subscriptions for the magazine The Watchtower, announcing Jehovah’s kingdom or Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus Additional to the intrinsic value of the magazine itself, the latest book, Children, will be gncn as a premium with all new subscriptions for a year, and that at the regular subscription rate of $1.00. God’s people of integrity will be steadfast therein and will prove their blanicless-ncss of devotion by taking part in this Testimony regardless of the cost to self. Many newly interested readers of The Watchtower, deeply appreciating it, will be desirous of joining in this special testimony privilege, and we invite such to write this office for leferences needed to put them in touch with the nearest local company organized for this campaign. A record should be kept of all work done and the result, and the same reported in the appointed manner at the close of February.
RE TBE 1942 YEARBOOK
Due to the uncertain and disrupted conditions on earth over which we have no control the information for the compilation of .1 report of the work world-wide for the service year 1940-1941 is
belated. Hence the production of the 1942 Yearbook of Jehovah’: witnesses has been unavoidably held up Announcement of its publication will be made shortly, and which report, we believe, «ill be well worth waiting for.
1942 CALENDAR
The text chosen for the year 1942, to wit, “Blameless in the day of our Lord” (1 Cor. 1: 8), provides the theme for a calendar picture which is most befitting these days of decision. Highly artistic and novel, the picture clearly and eloquently sets out the choice God’s covenant people must make concerning the great issue of world domination. Beneath is a neat calendar pad, indicating the line of activity of Jehovah’s blameless ones for each month of 1942, naming the special Testimony Periods and also the special endeavors to be made during the intervening months. The contribution for this service calendar is 25c each, or $1.00 for 5 copies mailed together to one address. Companies should send m combination orders, with remittance to cover, through their local company servant.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of February 1: “Micah” (Part 1), 1-17 inclusive, The Watchtower January 1, 1942.
Week of February 8: “Micah” (Part 1), 1} 18-38 inclusive. The Watchtower Janunrv 1, 1942.
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
No. LXIII	January 1, 1942	No 1
MICAH
PART 1
‘Hear, ye peoples, all of you; hcaiken, 0 earth, and all that therein is: and let the Lord Jehovah be uit-ness against you, the Lord from his holy temple.”—Mic. 1:2, A.I?.T7.
JEHOVAH’S judgment day is here. He appears in his high court representatively by his commissioned High Judge, Christ Jesus, to whom he has committed full power and authority to render judicial decisions and to execute the judgments rendered. (John 5: 22, 27) Jehovah is no respecter of persons and shows no partiality toward anyone in judgment. Knowing the end from the beginning, Jehovah in the centuries past caused his judgments to be written, and which judgments apply to those who come within the scope or terms thereof. When the time comes to take account with his creatures he causes his law to be proclaimed, and this becomes a witness for or against those who hear. The creatures themselves have much to do in putting themselves in position to receive the judgment of condemnation or the judgment of approval. This is especially true at the present time, for the reason that Christ Jesus, the great Judge, now sits upon his judgment seat and before him all nations and peoples are gathered. The nations are now being judged and separated, and this is done just preceding the execution of the final judgments.
2 Judgment, as the Scriptures declare, begins “at the house of God”. (1 Pet. 4:17) That means that the judgment of the Lord first takes account with those covenanting to do the will of God, including both those in the expressed covenant and those in an implied covenant with Jehovah. It means the taking into account the true and faithful followers of Christ Jesus, and the “evil servant” class, and all those who hold themselves out as the people of God and the followers of Christ Jesus. The judgments of the Lord must of necessity be announced and executed after the great Judge comes to his temple, because there is the place of judgment. It was in 1914, as shown by the Scriptures and the physical facts, that Jehovah placed his beloved Son, Christ Jesus, upon his throne and directed him to rule while the enemy was still carrying on his wicked work. (Ps. 110:2) It was in 1918, as shown by both the Scriptures and the physical facts, that Christ Jesus came to the temple of Jehovah for judgment. (Mal. 3:1) There are those
even at the present time who claim to have made a covenant with Jehovah to do his will but who do not see and appreciate the evidence showing the presence of Christ Jesus. Such are described by the apostle as “ever learning [making a pretense of learning], and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth”.—2 Tim. 3: 7.
s During the past few years the Lord has furnished such an abundance of proof showing the presence of Christ Jesus at his temple that it would appear to be a waste of time to discuss in detail at this time the evidence concerning his presence, and especially when there is so much that we must now get in mind. Those who truly love the Lord’s appearing, as mentioned by the apostle (2 Tim. 4:8), are of the temple company and appreciate the light that shines in their hearts; but all others are in the dark, some in gi eater darkness than others.
4 The Lord’s Word says: “Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart.” (Ps. 97: 11) The righteous here mentioned are not those who merely express their faith in Christ Jesus as the Savior, but the righteous are those whom the Lord ‘hath clothed with the garments of salvation and covered with the robe of righteousness’. (Isa. 61: 10) Such are the ones who are in the temple and are righteous by reason of having received the favorable judgment of approval by the Lord, and are made a part of his organization. Such approved ones by reason of being covered with the robe of righteousness now “greatly rejoice in the Lord”, and continue to serve with joy. It is for such that the light shines in the temple, and for such the light was sown. It is the light of Jehovah’s glory shining in the face of Christ Jesus, his great High Priest, and which light is reflected or mirrored to those in the temple, and who are therefore in the covenant for the Kingdom. (2 Cor. 4:4-6, Roth.) The light is veiled from the eyes of those who are moved by selfishness, envy’, covetousness or ambition. Such persons do not see and appreciate the unfolding of prophecy which the Lord God is unfolding in these days of judgment. To
a
4
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
those who have a pure heart the light shines upon their countenance, illuminating their minds and filling the heart with joy. The pure in heart is one who is wholly devoted to God and his kingdom, and who is free from selfish exaltation or a desire to receive the plaudits of men. Those who possess an upright and pure heart are the ones to whom God’s light at the temple now brings great gladness.
“ As The Watchtower has heretofore said, there is now a war on, in which the forces of Satan attempt to accomplish the destruction of Jehovah’s witnesses and all others who worship and serve Jehovah in spirit and in truth and who associate with Jehovah’s witnesses. (Rev. 12:17) One who has made a covenant to do the will of God, and who then is envious, covetous and ambitious, shows that he has yielded to the seductive influence of Satan. He does not appreciate the real issue that is now to be finally determined. It is the name of Jehovah that is involved; and the holy name of Almighty God will be vindicated, and that within a short time. It is the will of God that his name shall now be proclaimed throughout the earth as a witness to the people. After this is done, God declares, he will demonstrate his supreme power to all creation. (Ex. 9:16, Leeser) To be faithful to God, and to continue to have a part in the proclamation of his truth, the creature must put self entirely in the background and must delight to do whatsoever is the will of God, even though in the doing of the same he is placed in a position of less honor amongst men than that occupied by others. In order to see and appreciate the issue, and in ol der to be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might, those in the covenant for the Kingdom must continue to obey the injunction written by the apostle to "study to shew thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth”. (2 Tim. 2:15) In order to divide and properly apply the truth one must see and appreciate that Jehovah is God and that his name is above all others; that it has been defamed and must now be vindicated; that Christ Jesus is the great Vindicator; and that he is now at the temple conducting judgment for the vindication of Jehovah’s name; that those of the temple class constitute his “faithful and wise servant”, to whom the Lord has committed the work of delivering his message of the Kingdom, and hence to them is committed all of his Kingdom interests on earth; that the preaching of this gospel is (1) to notify the people that Jehovah is God and that his kingdom is here, and (2) to give warning and information to those who desire to be on the side of Jehovah; and that by this means Jehovah through Christ Jesus is gathering unto himself his “other sheep”, and that this work must be done before the wrath of God breaks upon the enemy organization.
8	If one becomes imbued with the thought that he is singled out to do a certain and a great work, and he proceeds upon that theory, he thus shows himself to be a fool, within the meaning of the Scriptures: “The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God.” (Ps. 53:1) He does not say this in words uttered by his mouth, but by his course of action he shows that his motive is to ignore God. He does not have in mind that God has put in his organization his creatures as it pleases him (1 Cor. 12:18), and that those who are of that organization gre taught, not by men, but by Jehovah and by Christ Jesus. (Isa. 30:20; 54:13) Such selfish persons disregard the instructions of Jehovah and Christ Jesus, and pursue a course of lawlessness or iniquity. “A fool despiseth his father's instruction; but he that regardeth reproof is prudent.” (Prov. 15:5) Such person disregards what God gives his people through Christ Jesus at the temple, and in the place thereof he sets forth his own wisdom, speaking of a great work that he as a man is delegated to do in behalf of those who shall be saved, and he further says that he is not doing such work because his hands are tied. Those who are wise hear the words of the Lord and follow his Word. Such study the prophecies and watch carefully the events that come to pass showing the fulfillment of prophecy. The prophecies were written for the very purpose that the man of God might be fully furnished and prepared for the work that is now being done at the end of the world and which must be completed before Armageddon.
T Complainers say of The Watchtower that it contains nothing new and of interest but continues to harp on the same thing, and that such shows that The Watchtower contains only the opinion of man. Let God’s people be.reminded that Jehovah caused a number of his prophets to write about the same thing, each one disclosing a picture of what shall come to pass in the future. To be sure, the Lord knows how difficult it is for imperfect men to keep in mind the things which God caused to be recorded, and he continues to give instructions, causing the light to shine upon his prophecy and exhibiting it to the view of his people that they may learn and keep in mind what the issue now is and what they must do. For this reason a number of the prophets wrote or prophesied about the same thing, and the facts come to pass in fulfillment of such prophecies in order that the man of God may have proof upon proof that is corroborative evidence of the fulfillment of the prophecy, and this in order that the man of God may be kept strong in faith and in hope. To this end we must be diligent in the study of God’s Word, that our hope may be strong: “And we desire that every one of you do shew the same diligence to the full assurance of hope unto the end.”—Heb. 6:11,12.
Januaby 1,1942
WATCHTOWER-
5
8	AVitli this issue of The Watchtower a study of the prophecy of Micah is undertaken. Those who possess a pure heart and mind will pursue this study and find much corroborative proof of what has heretofore been learned, and therefore will have more evidence to make strong their hope of accomplishing that which the Lord has committed to his people who love him and who serve him. The record of the prophecy written aforetime by Micah, and for the benefit of the remnant, opens with the statement: “The word of the Lord that came to Micah the Morasthite in the days of Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah, which he saw concerning Samaria and Jerusalem.” (Mic. 1:1) Not the word of man, but the Word of Jehovah God, hence as from the oracle or most holy of the temple, and therefore the sure and safe guide to the one who has undertaken to serve Jehovah. It is the authoritative word of God, therefore, that came to Micah and comes to the people whom Micah foreshadows and represents. That Word of God is always a safe guide. “The word of the Lord is right.” (Ps. 33: 4) “Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path. I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments. Thy word is true from the beginning; and every one of thy righteous judgments endureth for ever.”—Ps. 119:105,106,160.
8	It clearly appears that Jehovah by Christ Jesus is doing his work on earth among his people and hence is guiding his people in the right way according to his promise. (Prov. 3:5,6) Jehovah always performs his promises faithfully. To his covenant people Jehovah says: “I have put my words in thy mouth, and I have covered thee in the shadow of mine hand.” (Isa. 51:16; Jer. 1:9) Thus the Lord declares he has entrusted his people with the privilege and obligation of telling his message: “Ye are my witnesses . . . that I am God.” (Isa. 43:10,12) Jehovah having thus favored his people, they must be true to him and speak his word to others: “He that hath my word, let him speak my word faithfully.” (Jer. 23:28) The Lord does not say to speak the words of wisdom of man, nor to be influenced or guided by the word of man. Those who are convinced that The Watchtower is publishing the opinion or expression of a man should not waste time in looking at it at all, because a man’s opinion proves nothing except when that opinion is based wholly upon the Word of God. Those who believe that God uses The Watchtower as a means of communicating to his people, or of calling their attention to his prophecies, should study The Watchtower with thankfulness of heart and give Jehovah God and Christ Jesus all the honor and credit and give neither honor nor credit to any man. The prophecy of Obadiah shows clearly that the identity of the persons or individuals en
gaged in God’s service is not now material. To highly esteem men or for one himself to seek high esteem from men cannot be pleasing to the Lord, and such persons could not receive the Lord’s blessings. Likewise the man who seeks to justify himself in the eyes of men that they might approve and honor him could not have the Lord's favor in so doing. “And he said unto them, Ye are they which justify yourselves before men; but God knoweth your hearts; for that which is highly esteemed among men, is abomination in the sight of God.”—Luke 16:15.
10	The time when the word of God came to Micah, together with the surrounding conditions, fixes or locates the time when the prophecy is in course of fulfillment. It is there written that it was “in the days of Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah”, that Jehovah sent his word to Micah. The facts relating thereto and immediately following show the time of the fulfillment is after the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple, which occurred in 1918. The names by which Jehovah’s prophets are identified are always significant. The name “Micah” is an abbreviation of the name “Micaiah”, and which means “Who [is] like Jah?” (See Revised Version, margin, and Rotherham, margin, at Jeremiah 26:18.)
11	A prophecy usually has at least a partial fulfillment before God's people discern the same. Prior to the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple in 1918 the faithful servants of God on earth looked for the establishment of the Kingdom and for their own going to heaven, and the “restitution” of mankind in general. It was after 1918 that God’s people on earth began to realize that the name of Jehovah is the all-important issue, and then they began to ask, as Micah asked, “Who is like Jah?” The word “Jah”, or Hebrew Yah, is an abbreviation or contraction of the word “Jehovah” and means the same thing. (Ps. 68: 4, R.V.) The remnant now see that there is none like Jehovah; and therefore they have set this question before all the world, and particularly by bringing this question before “Christendom”, as being the main or chief issue now to be settled for ever. None of the remnant saw that this is the great issue until after Satan was cast out of heaven and Christ Jesus came to the temple for judgment. The proof increases, as progress is made in the study of prophecy, and shows beyond all doubt that the prophecy began to have fulfillment after the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple.
12	The prophet Micah was “the Morasthite” (“Morashtite,” R.V.)-, hence he was from the town of Moresheth-gath. (Vs. 14) That town was near the Philistine city of Gath. Micah, who was God’s witness, pictures Jehovah’s witnesses now in close contact with the modern-day Philistines, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and allied clergy, otherwise
6
fEe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
called “organized Christianity’. Moresheth means “possession”. Gath means “vat”, as a place for the pressing of grapes, that is, a winepress. The Philistine giant Goliath came from the city of Gath. (1 Sam. 17:4) King Uzziah of Judah “warred against the Philistines, and brake down the wall of Gath” and other cities of the Philistines. (2 Chron. 26: 6, 7) That was just before Micah became a prophet. Micah appears to have been a Judean, of the tribe of Judah. Micah began to prophesy in the reign of Jotham, the son of Uzziah. The name “Jotham” means “Jehovah [is] perfect”. He succeeded his father Uzziah, who was stricken with leprosy from the Lord and died of that malady. This suggests the period of time after “Christendom” was similarly smitten spiritually in the year 1918. (2 Ki. 15: 7, 3638; 2 Chron. 26:23; 27:1-9) Because of his faithfulness to Jehovah Jotham became mighty. “So Jotham became mighty, because he prepared his ways before the Lord his God. He was five and twenty years old when he began to reign, and reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. And Jotham slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city of David; and Ahaz his son reigned in his stead.” (2 Chron. 27 : 6, 8, 9) This was long after King David defeated the Philistines at Mount Perazim and at Gibeon. The fact that the Philistines still manifested themselves against the Israelites after David defeated them does not at all alter the fact that those two battles were typical of what would come to pass at the end of the world. Each prophetic picture or drama is separate and distinct from the others and manifestly is recorded for a specific reason, and the chronological happening thereof has nothing to do with the real meaning of the picture.
13	Uzziah made war with the Philistines and broke down their wall (2 Chron. 26:6,7); and after that his grandson, Ahaz, the son of Jotham, reigned, and •luring his reign the Philistines came and made war upon the Israelites. The Edomites made war against Judah. "The Philistines also had invaded the cities of the low country, and of the south of Judah, and had taken Beth-shemesh, and Ajalon, and Gederoth, and Shocho with the villages thereof, and Timnah with the villages thereof, Gimzo also and the villages thereof; and they dwelt there.” (2 Chron. 28:18) This strongly supports the conclusion that in the day of Jehovah’s witnesses, the remnant, whom Micah pictured, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and allies would make war against the people of God, which war we now see in progress.
14	The name “Ahaz” means ‘Tie hath grasped”. He was a wicked ruler. “For the Lord brought Judah low, because of Ahaz king of Israel; for he made Judah naked, and transgressed sore against the Lord.” (2 Chron. 28:19) He wrongfully grasped that
which belonged to the Lord and gave it to a heathen king: “For Ahaz took away a portion out of the house of the Lord, and out of the house of the king, and of the princes, and gave it unto the king of Assyria ; but he helped him not. And in the time of his distress did he trespass yet more against the Lord: this is that king Ahaz. For he sacrificed unto the gods of Damascus, which smote him; and he said, Because the gods of the kings of Syria help them, therefore will I sacrifice to them, that they may help me. But they were the ruin of him, and of all Israel." —2 Chron. 28:21-23.
“ Isaiah prophesied during the reign of Ahaz and pronounced doom upon the confederacy that Israel made with Assyria, saying, “Associate yourselves, 0 ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces.” The World War came suddenly to an end in 1918, and at once the League of Nations began to be formed. It was in 1919 that the clergy issued a manifesto declaring that “the League of Nations is the political expression of God’s kingdom on earth”. In other words, the clergy, representing “Christendom”, so called, and which is unfaithful Israel, entered into a confederacy with the Devil’s organization, substituting the Devil’s makeshift for and in the place and stead of the kingdom of heaven under Christ Jesus. The prophet Isaiah continued the warning to Israel, declaring that the confederacy with the heathen king would be disastrous under the rule of Ahaz. The prophet Isaiah, in prophesying concerning the confederacy, said: “Take counsel together, and it shall come to nought; speak the word, and it shall not stand; for God is with us [that is to say, Isaiah and all who stood faithful to Jehovah God], For the Lord spake thus to me with a strong hand, and instructed me that I should not walk in the way of thi-people.”—Isa. 8:10,11.
18	Ahaz ignored the warning given by Isaiah, just as “Christendom” ignored the warning given by God's people at the end of the World War, and turned awaj from Christ Jesus the King and made an alliance with the Devil or otherwise openly declared for the Devil. It was the fear of man that drove “Christendom’s” leaders fully into the Devil’s camp. Continuing then his prophecy, Isaiah addressed his words to the faithful servant of Jehovah: “Say ye not, A confederacy, to all them to whom this people shall say, A confederacy; neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid. Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself; and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. And he shall be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of stumbling, and for a rock of offence, to both the houses of Israel [both houses, that is, natural Israel and unfaithful spiritual Israel, which is ‘Christendom’ and which entered into the confederacy of the nations under the Devil’s control] ; for a "in and for
J ANU ABY 1, 1942
THE WATCHTOWER
a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. And many among them [including Ahaz; the modern clergy leaders or religionists in particular] shall stumble, and fall, and be broken, and be snared, and be taken. Bind up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples.” (Isa. 8:9-lG) All this strongly supports the conclusion that the prophecy of Micah is fulfilled and applies after the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple and after the setting up of “the abomination of desolation”, which occurred early in the year 1919 according to the world calendar.—Dan. 12:11.
17	It was about that time (A.D. 1919) that the so-called “Protestantism”, represented by the “Protestant” clergy, died completely out. The “young lion”, mentioned in the Scriptures, that roared against God’s antitypical Samson, ceased to exist at that time and the “Protestant” clergy went over, body and breeches, to the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, the modern Philistines. (Judg. 14:5,6) Since then the Roman Catholic Hierarchy has considered that they have a clean field to shortly conquer and rule the whole world, and in this they are making particular progress in America at the present time. Ahaz, who also pictured the so-called “Protestant” clergy, who had grasped that which had belonged to the Lord and turned it over to the Devil, died; and that also pictured the end of “Protestantism”. Prophetically concerning this it is written: “In the year that king Ahaz died was this burden. Rejoice not, O Philistia, all of thee, because the rod that smote thee is broken; for out of the serpent’s root shall come forth an adder, and his fruit shall be a fiery flying serpent. And the first-born of the poor shall feed, and the needy shall lie down in safety; and I will kill thy root with famine, and thy remnant shall be slain. Howl. 0 gate; cry, 0 city; thou art melted away, O Philistia, all of thee; for there cometh a smoke out of the north, and there is no straggler in his ranks.” (Isa. 14:28-31, Am. Rev. Ter.) If the Roman Catholic Hierarchy had any vision whatsoever of Jehovah’s purposes that crowd would not now be boasting and felicitating each other, because their days are numbered and the end thereof is near, and this is shown by the prophecies.
18	Hezekiah, the son of Ahaz, then came to the throne of Israel, and Micah continued to prophesy during his reign. (2 Chron. 28: 27) The name Hezekiah means “Strength of Jah”, and, true to his name, Jehovah did strengthen him. ‘“Hezekiah began to reign when he was five and twenty years old, and he reigned nine and twenty years in Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Abijah, the daughter of Zechariah. And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according to all that David his father had done.” (2 Chron. 29:1, 2) This Hezekiah also fought against the enemy of God, including the
Philistines: “And the Lord was with him; and he prospered whithersoever he went forth; and ho rebelled against the king of Assyria, and served him not. He smote the Philistines, even unto Gaza, and the borders thereof, from the tower of the watchmen to the fenced city.” (2 Ki. 18: 7, 8) Hezekiah followed in the steps of David: “He, in the first year of his reign, in the first month, opened the doors of the house of the Lord, and repaired them”; this because Hezekiah told the priests that they must cleanse the house of the Lord. “For our fathers have trespassed, and done that which was evil in the eyes of the Lord our God, and have forsaken him, and have turned away their faces from the habitation of the Lord, and turned their backs. Also they have shut up the doors of the porch, and put out the lamps, and have not burned incense nor offered burnt offerings in the holy place, unto the God of Israel. Now it is in mine heart to make a covenant with the Lord God of Israel, that his fierce wrath may turn away from us. My sons, be not now negligeut: for the Lord hath chosen you to stand before him, to serve him, and that ye should minister unto him, and burn incense.” “And they gathered their brethren, and sanctified themselves, and came, according to the commandment of the king by the words of the Lord, to cleanse the house of the Lord.”—2 Chron. 29:3, G, 7,10,11,15.
16 Micah was prophesying during that time, and this apparently supports the conclusion that the prophecy of Micah began to have fulfillment with the coming of Christ Jesus, and after the coming of the Lord to the temple, and while the remnant is being taken into the Kingdom covenant and the sanctuary is cleansed. Now the Micah class, that is, the remnant, see and appreciate that there is a war in progress against the modern Philistines, and they greatly rejoice as they contemplate the Lord’s complete victory over that wicked croud in God's own due time.
ARMAGEDDON’ FORESHADOWED
20	It was during the reign of King Hezekiah that Jerusalem was assaulted by the enemies of the Lord. Sennacherib, the king of Assyria, took the fenced cities in the land of Palestine, and then sent Rab-shakeh, his messenger, to Jerusalem and there tried to induce the Jews to forsake Hezekiah and willingly surrender to Sennacherib. Likewise Satan's emissaries have employed many devices in an attempt to seduce God's people and cause them to forsake the kingdom of God and go over to the Devil's organization. At the present time the Devil’s representative, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and allied clergy, working behind the scenes, are trying to induce God's people to bow to men and images and to salute them and to salute flags, and to thereby attribute salvation to things rather than to God, the purpose of the
8
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
enemy being to cause men to be unfaithful to the Lord and to thereby bring about their own destruction. The boastful threats of Rabshakeh and his principal, Sennacherib, being told to Hezekiah, that king sent a messenger to the prophet Isaiah, asking him to inquire of the Lord what he must do: “And Isaiah said unto them, Thus shall ye say unto your master, Thus saith the Lord, Be not afraid of the words that thou hast heard, wherewith the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me. Behold, I will send a blast upon him; and he shall hear a rumour, and return to his own land; and I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own land.” (Isa. 37: 6, 7) In this prophetic picture it is clearly seen that Jehovah will fight the battle of Armageddon and destroy the enemy and preserve alive those who faithfully stand with him.
21	It was “in the days of . . . [the] kings of Judah” that the word of Jehovah came to Micah. Antityp-ically this means that in the day of the coming of Christ Jesus the King, and of the gathering unto himself of all others who praise and serve Jehovah, the prophecy has fulfillment. At the same time the unfaithful rulers in “Christendom” (like Ahaz the unfaithful) are in power, ruling the nations of the earth. Jehovah’s witnesses are now in the land of “praise”, for which “Judah” stood, and they are seen actively engaging in praising and serving Jehovah God. The word of Jehovah came to Micah at a time in which “he saw concerning Samaria and Jerusalem”. Micah prophesied within twenty-one years, up until the destruction of Samaria and the carrying away of the ten tribes of Israel. “And it came to pass in the fourth year of king Hezekiah, which was the seventh year of Hoshea son of Elah king of Israel, that Shalmaneser king of Assyria came up against Samaria, and besieged it. And at the end of three years they took it, even in the sixth year of Hezekiah (that is the ninth year of Hoshea king of Israel) Samaria was taken. And the king of Assyria did carry away Israel unto Assyria, and put them in llalah and in Habor by the river of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes.”—2 Ki. 18:9-11.
22	Samaria means “watch station”. It was the capital city of the ten tribes, which composed one of the two houses of Israel, and concerning whom Isaiah prophesied that Christ would be a stone of stumbling. (Isa. 8:14) Therefore Samaria well pictures the “Catholic population”, which is under the domination of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and also the laity or common people of the so-called “Protestant” religious organization; and also includes all those who are guilty of the “sin of Samaria”, that is, the worshipers of religious leaders or so-called “heroes”. Micah prophesied up to within 110 years of the destruction of Jerusalem, the name of which city means
“possession of peace”. Unfaithful Jerusalem pictures the ruling class of “organized religion” (otherwise called “Christendom”, in which the clergy are the chief actors) and also pictures the “man of sin”, “the son of perdition,” or the Judas class.—2 Thess. 2:3-12; John 13:26,27; 17:12.
2S	Jehovah by his prophet now addresses his command to all the religionists, as well as to all other peoples of the earth, and says to them: “Hear, all ye people [Hear, ye peoples, all of you (Rev. Per.)] ; hearken, 0 earth, and all that therein is: and let the Lord God be witness against you, the Lord from his holy temple.” (Micah 1: 2) That means Catholics and “Protestants”, so called, and all other religious systems, including laymen and clergymen or shepherds, and the “principal of the flock”, the “elective elder” class, and the “man of sin” class, and all who follow after or associate with them. Otherwise stated, the command is addressed to all of Satan’s organization, including the leading men or the rulers thereof, and all supporters thereof, that is, all to whom the Devil has come down in wrath and for all of whom it is now a time of woe. (Rev. 12:12) To all of such Jehovah says: “Let the Lord God [sovereign Jehovah] be witness against you”; “and let my Lord Jehovah be among you for a witness.” (Rotherham) Christ Jesus had then been enthroned by Jehovah, had cast Satan out of heaven, and now began to give his attention particularly to the things of the earth, when this part of the prophecy specifically began to apply. The World War was stopped by Jehovah in order that the peoples of earth might have an opportunity to hear Jehovah’s testimony, which he would deliver by and through his witnesses, before he executed Satan’s organization at Armageddon. The time had come to hear, and they must “hear” and “hearken”, though they forbear, that is, desist or refuse to give heed to the commandment. This gospel of God’s kingdom must now 'be preached as a witness to all the nations before the end comes, as the Lord Jesus subsequently stated.—Matt. 24:14,21.
24	Mark this, that the command comes “from his holy temple”. That exactly corresponds with the time when the “Messenger of the covenant” has suddenly or straightway come to the temple, having finished the work of preparing the way before Jehovah. (Mal. 3:1) It is the time when Jehovah has ‘brought forth his servant The Branch’ at the temple. (Zech. 3: 8) Jehovah’s great Vindicator, the High Priest after the order of Melchizedek, has come to the temple and hence ‘the desire of all nations has come’. (Hag. 2:7) The great High Priest is now “a priest upon his throne”, ministering to the things of Jehovah God according to His sovereign will. (Zech. 6:12,13) Therefore in the representative capacity of his Christ, and clearly in line with the prophecy uttered
January 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER,
9
by Micah, “Jehovah is in his holy temple; let all the earth keep silence before him” and bear the testimony which the Lord has commanded his witnesses to deliver: “But Jehovah is in his holy temple: let all the earth keep silence before him.” (Hab. 2:20, Am. Rev. Ver.) It is the time of judgment: “The Lord is in his holy temple, the Lord's throne is in heaven; his eyes behold, his eyelids try, the children of men. The Lord trieth the righteous; but the wicked, and him that loveth violence, his soul hateth. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest; this shall be the portion of their cup. For the righteous Lord loveth righteousness ; his countenance doth behold the upright.” —Ps. 11:4-7.
25	The judgment begins at the house of God. (1 Pet. 4:17) Then the judgment proceeds to the separating of the nations and identifying and marking each class. (Matt. 25: 31-46) It is the time when the temple of God is opened in heaven and the ark of the covenant is seen therein, which denotes the presence of Jehovah. (Rev. 11: 19, J.1?.F.) These scriptures are all in exact harmony, to be sure; all bear testimony not only that the Lord Jesus is present as King and that the end of Satan’s rule is at hand, but that the Lord Jesus, as the great and duly commissioned Judge of Jehovah, now carries forward his work of judgment.
26	Heretofore students of the Scriptures have relied upon chronology to prove the presence of the Lord, but the strongest evidence, and the most conclusive proof of his presence, is the fulfillment of prophecy, which has taken place and which could take place only after the coming of the Lord to the temple. Some persons who think themselves in Christ Jesus will now quibble over the word “sign” as that word is found in Matthew 24: 3, and will say that ‘the word is in the singular, showing that there is but one sign, and therefore there is no evidence of Christ’s presence’. Such a conclusion is entirely without reason and is exactly contrary to the Scriptures. The apostles propounded the question to Jesus, “What shall be the sign of thy coming?” (Matt. 24: 3) The word “sign” used therein,' while in the singular, does not denote merely one thing. The word means, and is so defined by lexicographers: “An indication, token or proof of a fact.” Many witnesses may be called to testify to establish a certain thing or fact, and their testimony as a whole is referred to as the proof, indication, token or sign in support of the question at issue. It is not the purpose here to discuss the proofs of the Lord’s presence at any length, because that question is now fully and completely settled to the entire satisfaction of those who love and serve Jehovah and requires no discussion by those
who are thus fully consecrated and devoted to doing the will of God.
27	The Lord God now gives the warning and commands the attention of all, saying, “For, behold,” thus drawing the clear and undivided attention to what is about to be said. The Lord is at his temple, and now the people must receive notice of warning because the ‘day of the vengeance of our God’ is here, and those commissioned by the Lord God must now bear testimony of and concerning Jehovah’s vengeance against Satan’s organization and give warning thereof to the people. (Isa. Gl: 2) It is a time to be most serious, attentive, and obedient to the Lord God.
2’ The prophecy then announces why the Lord is commanding attention: “For, behold, the Lord cometh forth out of his place, and will come down, and tread upon the high places of the earth.” (Mic. 1:3) “The Lord cometh forth out of his place,” says the prophecy, which place is Zion, his official habitation, and in which he has been since 1918 and where he is located permanently: “For the Lord hath chosen Zion; he hath desired it for his habitation. This is my rest for ever; here will I dwell; for I have desired it.”—Ps. 132:13,14.
29 At this point of the prophecy Satan has been cast out of heaven and down to the earth and Jehovah now’ gives his attention to the things of the earth, acting, as he always does, through his great High Priest, to w’hom he has committed all power in heaven and earth. This is the time to which Jehovah’s prophet referred when he wrote these words: “0 that thou wouldest rend the heavens, that thou wouldest come down, that the mountains might flow down at thy presence, as when the melting fire burnetii, the fire causeth the waters to boil, to make thy name known to thine adversaries, that the nations may tremble at thy presence!”—Isa. G4:1, 2.
50 It is the time for the giving of testimony of warning and for the vindication of Jehovah’s name. The earth, as the Scriptures clearly declare, is the footstool of Jehovah, and now the time has come for the enemies of God to be trodden under foot by Christ Jesus, his Executor. (Ps. 110:1-5) Therefore Jehovah has come down to “tread upon the high places of the earth”. No religionists, rulers, organizations or persons may now act proudly before Jehovah and get away with it, because the time has come to bring the high and mighty, the haughty and scornful, down to the dust. Regardless of how lofty and high anything in the earth may be, still it is beneath the heel of Jehovah and that of his Christ. No rulers of the wicked world constitute the “higher powers” (Rom. 13:1), regardless of all the fuss that has been made about this, because Jehovah God and Christ Jesus are the Higher Powers, and Jehovah alone is supreme, and he makes all the earth to be the footstool
10
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
of his Christ: “The lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down; and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. For the day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low.”— Isa. 2:11,12.
” The kingdoms and the rulers of the earth have long been the backbone of Satan's earthly organization, but now the time has come when those scornful and haughty men, who have hardened their hearts like stone against Jehovah, must be and will be broken and brought down to the dust: “And the mountains shall be molten under him, and the valleys shall be cleft, as wax before the fire, and as the waters that are poured down a steep place.”-Mic. 1:4.
82 The backbone of Satan’s organization is represented by the “mountains”, which stand out above the other parts of the ground. Jehovah is as “a consuming fire” to his enemies, which fire will quickly melt down the powers that now rule the nations. “But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat; the earth also, and the works that are therein, shall be burned up.” “Looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the heavens, being on fire, shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat.”—2 Pet. 3:10,12.
83 The great governments and rulers of the earth, likened unto the mountains, shall be split and valleys shall be cleft in them, destroying their adhesiveness, dividing and breaking their unity, and leaving them in ruin. Their leagues and treaties and alliances and confederacies will not hold. Jehovah caused his prophet to utter a prayer which shows his purpose to destroy all these wicked earthly powers: “As smoke is driven away, so drive them away; as wax mclteth before the fire, so let the wicked perish at the presence of God.”—Ps. 68:2.
84 The Lord also uses a flood of waters as a figure of speech, saying: “As the waters that are poured down a descent.” (Margin) This shows that when Jehovah God begins the execution of his judgments the earthly organizations will be dissolved quickly and shall melt away like a mountain torrent, which rushes down and sweeps everything that is in its path.
35 This prophecy is also a statement of Jehovah’s judgment and determination to destroy all of Satan’s organization at Armageddon and is another positive and conclusive statement that the witness work to be done by Jehovah’s witnesses must be completed before Armageddon, which is great tribulation falling upon Satan’s organization. This is an urgent reason why Jehovah’s witnesses must be dili
gent in the performance of their commission now and continuously until Armageddon. If the battle of the great day of God Almighty is merely to accomplish the destruction of the wicked, then why should the Lord command all to hear and to give heed to what he is about to do? To be sure, Jehovah could have destroyed the Devil and his organization long ago; but it clearly is his will that something else must be done. Here again appears the supreme issue, which is strongly emphasized, that is, the vindication of Jehovah’s name. Satan has builded a mighty organization in defiance of Jehovah God. He and his agents have brought great reproach upon the name of Jehovah, and this he has accomplished chiefly by employing religionists to carry on a racket in the name of the Lord God and in the name of Christ. The effect upon the common or ordinary people has been and is that they have been deceived, being given entirely the wrong impression of Jehovah and his purpose, and this has caused them to disregard God’s Word and to curse his name. Now Jehovah brings about the end of all the wicked rulers and the ruled. His purpose is to destroy the enemy, not merely to get the enemy out of the way, but that his name may be vindicated, and that all creation that lives may know and understand that he is God, whose name alone is Jehovah, and those that live can receive life only from Jehovah through Christ Jesus our Lord and Redeemer.
88 The Devil and his crowd, particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and allied clergy, fight from behind, because they are the cowards working in the darkness under the forces of darkness. They take advantage of their adversary and stab him in the back. Jehovah proceeds exactly in a contrary manner, because Jehovah is righteous, always right. When the time comes for him to fight he gives the enemy full and fair warning and then tells him to get ready and to do his worst, because the enemy is going to be destroyed. At the same time he gives fair warning to the people, including all those of good-will who desire righteousness, warning them of the day of the expression of his wrath upon Satan and his organization; and this he does in order that those of good-will who hear and give heed may flee “into the mountains” (Matt. 24:15,16), to the “cities of refuge” (Num. 35:11-15), the only place of safety, that is, to God’s kingdom under Christ. This favor and blessing the people can have only by placing themselves with God’s organization and rendering themselves in obedience to his commandments.
81 This is a most solemn time and requires the most serious consideration to be given to God’s Word, not only by the people of good-will who are thus warned, but also by those who are commissioned by Jehovah to give the warning. God commands his witnesses to
Januaby 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
11
go throughout the land and give the warning by informing the people of his vengeance that will shortly be expressed. Christian people formerly thought that God’s purpose is chiefly to save them and give them life; but now it appears that there is much more involved. Those who do get life with Christ Jesus must fully obey the commandments given by the Lord. He tells his witnesses in plain phrase that if they fail to give the warning, as commanded, they shall suffer destruction. “’So thou, 0 son of man, I have set thee a watchman unto the house of Israel; therefore thou shalt hear the word at my mouth, and warn them from me. When I say unto the wicked, 0 wicked man, thou shalt surely die; if thou dost not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall die in liis iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine hand.”—Ezek. 33: 7, 8.
38 There are those who claim to be followers of Christ Jesus and in line for the Kingdom who seem to have no appreciation of these and like texts in the Scriptures. They go to a convention of God’s people and apparently listen to some speaker whom they fancy deliver his speech, and when it comes to serious consideration of what God commands them to do they
are wholly indifferent. They seldom take part in the witness work, saying that someone else may do that. Whether such indifferent ones are in the temple or not, they have been informed of God’s purpose and commanded to make that purpose known unto others. (Rev. 22:17) Therefore there rests upon such a very grave responsibility of participating actively in the witness work. The Watchtower calls attention to these things because it seems clearly to be necessary to repeatedly warn some of the consecrated that there now rests upon them a very great obligation and duty, and their failure to give heed to the Scriptures, which Jehovah has caused to be written by hi-prophets, will bring all such negligent ones clearly to the point of adverse judgment, which they will receive. God is no respecter of persons, and each one who hears his commandments is responsible to the Lord. Further consideration of this prophecy that follows discloses that Jehovah assigns a reason why he gives the warning, and why he will execute his vengeance upon the various ones who do not heed his Word and show their complete willingness to obey and then obey the commandments of the Most High.
(To be continued)
DUAL POWER FORESEEN
A ND I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth; and he had two iiokns like a lamb, and he x spake as a dragon And he exerciseth all the power of the first beast [that rose up out of the sea] before him, and causeth the earth and them which dwell therein to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was healed. And he docth great wonders, so that he maketh fire come down from heaven on the earth in the sight of men, and deceiveth them that dwell on the earth by the means of those miracles which he had power to do in the sight of the beast; saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they should make an image to the beast, which had the wound by a sword, and did live.”—Rev. 13:11-14.
Here the apostle John, representing God’s anointed witnesses on earth today, beheld “another beast” having “two horns like a lamb” and “coming up out of the earth”, and its speech was like a “dragon”, which is a symbol of Satan. Within the meaning of the prophetic Scriptures, “beast,” briefly defined, means a rule by violence; that is, (1) a violent coercion of the conscience of the governed, the people ; and (2) a rule over or control of the person by the exercise of force in a violent manner. Gradually the Lord God has made known to his people on earth the identity of this two-horned beast, as well as the wild sea beast. In God’s organization the symbol of “the wheels” is found. (See Ezekiel 1:16.) In an assembled and operating machine there are wheels within wheels. Every great organization has parts, and the wheels represent important parts. Satan, the mimic god, we might expect to try to follow in his organization a course similar to that of Jehovah God. Satan brought “out of the sea” his “wild beast” organization, and
this dates from ancient Egvpt forward and continue-, down to the seventh world power today. Satan built up a puv, er-ful organization with many parts thereto. That v isible earthly organization is otherwise symbolized by “the earth”, and which, according to 2 Peter 3:10, is marked for destruction. The two-horned beast comes up out of the earth, that is to say, grows up out of the organization that already existed. The two-horned beast then directs the making of the “image of the beast”.
That “wild beast” that came up “out of the sea” is Satan’s entire visible organization on earth. It had one of its seven heads wounded in the World War of 1914-1918. and the wound was healed. The two-horned beast is the Anglo-American imperialism, that is to say, the combined powei of Britain and America, and which is a part of the organization of “the god of this world”. (2 Cor. 4:4; Luke 4 : f>-7) The British Empire is the seventh of the world powers listed in the Bible (Rev. 17: 9, 10), and it is the most powerful of all. That world po wer grew up out of the nations and peoples that had already been organized into Satan's visible organization, symbolized by “the earth”. Hence the Scriptures say that ‘the two-horned beast came up out of the earth’. This does not at all militate against the fact that it was and is a part (the seventh head) of the wild beast that came up out of the sea. Growing up out of this Devil organization (the ‘sea beast’) came the two-liorncd beast.
The “two horns” would symbolize a dual power. It is to be noted that these horns are like a lamb’s. A lamb’s horns are just beginning to sprout; they are not very much in evidence. This would seem to suggest that the power exercised by the Anglo-American imperialism would be exer
12
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
cised in an apparently innocent way. A lamb is an apparently innocent beastie. It is well known that the British are past masters at diplomacy. They are suave and exercise their power in a diplomatic manner. In other words, this symbolic beast has tremendous forces at work, silently exercising influence where few suspect it is active. The apostle John says that this “beast” spoke “as a dragon”.
The British Empire really started as an empire when its ruling sovereign chartered the English East India Company in A.D. 1600. Centuries before that England was a part of the Roman Empire; therefore, as an empire she grew up “out of the earth”, that is to say, out of Satan’s visible organization already in existence. Within seven years after the beginning of the empire, to wit, May 13, 1G07, the first permanent settlement in America was founded at Jamestown, Virginia. That marked the beginning of the thirteen colonies of the British Empire in America; and for 169 years thereafter these colonies were an integral part of the British Empire. Even today in America Great Britain is referred to as “the mother country”. The revolution of 1776, and the subsequent establishing of the independent government of the United States, does not at all militate against the fact that the symbol of ‘the two-horned beast’ refers to Britain and the United States.
The two nations or countries have had too many contacts and important and related interests, to separate them English is the common language of the two nations, and is today the dominant language of the earth. Some British imperialists view the United States as one of the integral parts of the British Empire, now the British Commonwealth of Nations since 1931. By act of the British Parliament the various countries forming the empire, or commonwealth, have each a recognized measure of independence and autonomy, and each has had a separate seat in the League of Nations. To be sure, the United States stands out in a class all by herself amongst the English-speaking people, and that makes of her distinctly one of the “horns” of the twohorned beast and also a part of the seventh world power.
It is true that there was war between Britain and the United States in 1812, but it is also true that there have been many rebellions in Ireland. At the time of the World War the United States and Britain were so interconnected in their financial relationships that they were practically one. The commercial interests of the two countries are vitally tied together. The sinking of a British vessel was the real pretext for America to enter the World War, and during the war most of the American troops and supplies were carried in British ships. It was the British-owned American newspapers that took the lead in the propaganda campaign carried on to put America in the World War, and she went in as an ally of Britain.
There is today a reciprocity agreement between the United States and Canada, a part of the dominion of the British Commonwrealth of Nations. The Latin countries of South America have feared the imperialistic aims of the United States. In the Pan-American Union the United States is the dominant figure, of course. The imperialism of America dates from December 2, 1823, with the “Monroe Doctrine”, which doctrine does not declare against the United States^ enlarging her territory on the Western Continent at the expense of minor American republics.
A religious tie binds the British and American nations as one. Although the Catholics are strong in Britain and America, these two countries are the bulwark of Protestantism. No Catholic has ever been able to be elected president of the United States. Nominally, England has a king; yet in fact it is a democratic representative government in form and is ruled by the commercial and political interests in which the clergy unite; the Protestant clergy constitute an important part. There are in the official government lords temporal and lords ecclesiastical. There is also a financial or commercial relationship between the two countries of Britain and America that binds them together. They are in fact one great country, acting separately and distinctly and yet together, and fitly represented by the “two horns”.
Concerning American imperialism as dating from the “Monroe Doctrine” of 1823, that doctrine is, in substance, that European monarchies or governments must not by conquest acquire territory and rulership over the countries of North and South America and make them colonics and thereby enlarge the territory of the European nations. The doctrine does not declare, however, against enlargement of United States territory on the Western Continent at the expense of smaller American republics, and history records that America did make war with Mexico and took over Texas; she made war with Spain and established a pio-tectorate over Cuba and Puerto Rico. For a time she established a protectorate over Santo Domingo, Haiti, and put in operation a military policy in Nicaragua. In co-operation with Brazil and the Netherlands government in exile the American army troops took up positions in Dutch Guiana (Surinam) on November 23, 1941, allegedly to guard the aluminum ore deposits there, for the duration of the present war or of the emergency. America acquired the Canal Zone and Alaska. She also acquired title to the Philippine Islands, to the Hawaiian Islands, and to Samoa and Guam, and thereby enlarged her territory.
True to the traditional policy (to wit, diplomatic hypocrisy) of the two-horned beast, the ostensible reason for the Monroe Doctrine was to protect the infant republics of the American continent. The real reason was in the interest of Britain and America. In support of this conclusion the following historical fact is related, as quoted from The Encyclopedia Americana, Volume 19, pages 373, 374: “This feeling of confidence in the continuance of the new governments [Colombia, Chile, Mexico, Brazil, and LaPlata] received a severe shock when the combination of central European powers, commonly called the Holy Alliance [the chief amongst which was Germany], after crushing several attempts at liberal government in Europe, turned its attention to Spain and to the Spanish colonies . . . The United States feared that France would undertake this commission also and would claim Cuba as the price of service to Spain, thereby securing a broader foothold in America.” To show that Great Britain was deeply interested in the policy of the Monroe Doctrine, and that Britain and America were working in conjunction with each other, the following historical fact is quoted:
“The time seemed to have eome in 1823 for some sort of action that would head off the threatened invasion of Latin America by third parties in behalf of Spain. Something
January 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER.
13
was also needed to check the Russian advance into North America, and the opportunity was convenient for expressing the undying love of Americans for the popular government that they had chosen. At this moment George Canning, Foreign Minister of Great Britain, stepped into the controversy. England was interested in unrestricted trade with the Spanish-American countries and was extremely opposed to the constricting policy of the Holy Alliance, both in Europe and America. Hence, in August and September 1823, Canning four times proposed to Richard Rush, our Minister in London, that the United States join England in a declaration against intervention, and [President] Monroe was inclined to accept the proposal. After long Cabinet discussions John Quincy^ Adams, Secretary of State, convinced the President that it would be better to make an independent declaration. Adams’ papers show that he not only suggested but formulated most of the important presidential message of 2 Dec. 1823, several passages in which, construed together, constitute the original and genuine Monroe Doctrine.”
As with the League of Nations compact of 1919, an American president got the credit for writing the Monroe Doctrine, but it really emanated from a fertile British mind. In support of this conclusion the following historical fact is important:
‘‘The original Monroe Doctrine was at once effective. Canning [the Foreign Minister of Great Britain] was so much interested in the result that he claimed it for himself and said (21 Dec. 1826) : ‘I looked another way ... I sought for compensation in another hemisphere. ... I called the new world into existence to redress the balance of the old.’ ” (Page 374) The same authority further says: •'During the Spanish War of 1898 Great Britain made it clear that other European powers must not interfere with the American policy of the United States.” (Page 375) —The Encyclopedia Americana, Volume 19.
This shows that both of the horns of the “beast” were working together, and the physical facts of 1941 show they continue to do so.
There never before was a land monster like the 'two-homed beast’. Says The Encyclopedia Americana, Vol. 4, page 558, under the title “British Empire”: “It is the largest body of land and of people under any one jurisdiction on the globe, comprising about one-fourth of the earth's surface, and one-fourth of its inhabitants. Extensive portions of it lie in each of the five grand divisions of the globe. Its organization is entirely different from that of any other 'empire’ in history.”
If to the above are added the vast domains of the United States and its territories it is seen that this two-horned “beast” governs and easts a shadow over a large part of the earth’s surface. This imperialism dating from A.D. 1G00 is unparalleled and is the greatest empire of all time.
The vision shows this beast with “two horns like a lamb”. A lamb is an inoffensive creature and acts only on the defensive. It is the boast of the British that England has always waged a defensive warfare. The Americans claim that America is always on the defensive. Both Britain and America claim to be always on the defensive and as harmless as a lamb. Revelation 13:11 proceeds with the description: “And he spake as a dragon.” Concerning the Dragon, Revelation 12: 3,4 says: “And the dragon stood before the woman [God’s organization] which was ready to be delivered, for to devour her child [The Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus] as soon as it was born.” Thus it makes a vicious attempt to destroy God’s kingdom.
One of the names of the Dragon is that of Serpent, which means deceiver; and while this two-horned ‘'beast” has had a lamb-like appearance, its words have been deceptive. 'Thy speech betrayeth thee.’ Its speech shows it to be the offspring of the great Dragon, the Devil, because history shows it is poisonous, deceptive and devouring, and making a vicious attempt to destroy Jehovah’s kingdom and the witnesses thereof, in order to gain world domination.
Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ shall gain the world domination and exercise it forever.
DAILY TEXTS AND COMMENTS
JANUARY 1
They that understand among the people shall instruct many. —Dan. 11:33.
Jehovah’s faithful witnesses have become instructors of many by visiting them at their homes and by holding study meetings and aiding them in studying God’s Word. Such has been and is a tremendous witness work, carried on in divers ways, to wit, by use of books, booklets, magazines, radio, phonographs, and by traveling from place to place and from house to house, speaking to those willing to hear. They have met with many who have had a hearing ear, and these the witnesses have instructed in the way of the Scriptures. Their journey and work as Jehovah’s servants are along the rough and rugged way, viewed from the human viewpoint, but always the way of joy of heart to those who willingly engage in the field witness work. It is not expected it would be easy on the human organism; it has not been. It has been too hard for some. Therefore says the prophecy: “Yet they shall fall.” W 10/15/11
JANUARY 2
In all this did not Job sin with his lips.—Job 2: 10.
It is the Theocratic Government that is of paramount importance. Therefore the prophetic drama of Job includes the Head and body members of that government, also the faithful men of old who will be the earthly representatives of that government and rule amongst men, filling the places of visible governors; and also those who receive the divine commission from Jehovah and who act under that government to carry out that divine mandate to fill the earth. The severe test to which Job was subjected foretold the test to which the members of The Theocracy are put; and a like test is put upon every one who holds an official position under that righteous government. Each and every one under the test must hold fast his integrity in order to receive the approval of the Lord Jesus Christ the King and of Jehovah. IV 8/15/11
14
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
JANUARY S
But thou. Lord, art most high for evermore. For, lo, thine enemies, 0 Lord, . . . shall perish.—Ps. 92: 8, 9.
Jehovah will vindicate his name by destroying all those who work against his government under Christ Jesus. It is Satan, that wicked one, operating his religious-totalitarian conspiracy against The Theocracy that is now desperately fighting against Jehovah’s kingdom. There is no compromise and no possibility of peace between God and the wicked. Today the Vatican officials, together with the dictators, are moving with all their power to destroy everything in the earth that will not submit to the devilish rule. All this is in defiance of Almighty God and a reproach upon his name. Jehovah’s name must be vindicated It shall be vindicated! The only possible way to bring about the vindication of Jehovah’s name is the complete destruction of the wicked, every part of Satan’s organization. At the battle of that great day of God Almighty all the wicked shall be destroyed. IV 1/15/11
JANUARY 4
My son, forget not my law; but let thine heart keep my commandments.—Prov. 3:1.
The true followers of Christ Jesus are begotten or accepted by Jehovah and acknowledged by him as his children orsons, and these must be obedient to Jehovah God their Father if they would receive life everlasting. These become new creatures in Christ Jesus, who is the Head of the new creation or spiritual Israelites: “Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are passed away; behold, all things are become new.’’ (2 Cor. 5:17) Having received the spirit of God, these are led by his spirit and are his sons. (Rom. 8:14-16) As children they must be obedient to his commandments; they could not live otherwise. Such are and must be witnesses to Jehovah and bear testimony to 1ns name and to his kingdom, and hence they are called by the Lord Jehovah “My witnesses’’.-Isa. 43:10-12. IV 2/15/4.1
JANUARY 5
The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, he will not turn from it; Of the fruit of thy body will 1 set upon thy throne.
'	—Ps. 132: 11.
Jehovah's Word makes it impossible for the faithful servant to doubt the establishment and complete domination of The Theocracy. Not only has Jehovah given his unchangeable word, but he has confirmed his word by his oath that he will build up his capital organization Zion with his beloved One, Christ Jesus, as the Head thereof, upon the throne of the organization, and that his good and righteous government shall rule the world in righteousness and that rule shall never end. King David stood as the representative of Christ Jesus, and the words above are the response of Jehovah to David’s prayer ; which words He binds with his oath, thus making doubly sure that He will bring forth his government, The Theocracv, to complete victory and glory. IV 3/15/41	‘
JANUARY fi
Then Jael, Heber’s wife, took a nail of the tent, and took an hammer m her hand, and went softly unto him, and smote the nail into his temples.—Judg. 4:21.
It is not sufficient for one to say, “I am a Christian; I love The Lord’’; but in judging himself one must ask himself : "Am I proving my faith and devotion by joyfully and enthusiastically obeying the commandments of Jehovah and his King? Am I giving my entire and undivided devotion to
The Theocracy! If I am not wholly and entirely for The Theocracy I am against The Theocracy.” One cannot be negligent or indifferent to God’s commandments concerning The Theocratic Government and expect to receive God’s approval. Jael was put to the test, and she without hesitation put herself entirely on the side of Jehovah and his typical covenant people, who there remained faithful to God. Jael pictured a faithful, obedient class who shall receive the everlasting blessings of Jehovah and his King. W 5/1/41
JANUARY 7
God spared not . . . the old world, but saved Noah, the eighth person, a preacher of righteousness, bringing in the flood upon the world.—2 Pet. 2: 4, 5.
Jehovah set Noah before men as an example for those to follow who have faith in God and in his kingdom and who would be faithful. When God puts his approval upon a man, others who come afterwards do well to give consideration as to why God marks that man with approval. God never changes, and when he approves one man we may be sure that his approval will be placed upon other men who likewise do well before him. God is no respecter of persons. What is required of one to merit God’s approval he likewise requires of all others who receive his approval. The Scriptures disclose the reason why God approved Noah He was just, was blameless in his conduct, maintained his integrity, was a man of faith, and was faithful under the test, being obedient to God. W 5/15/41
JANUARY 8
The Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful God, which keepeth covenant and mercy.—Deut. 7: 9.
Jehovah, the Almighty God, has announced his purpose concerning man and has caused that announced purpose to be recorded in the Bible, which is His Word Jehovah’s expressed purpose concerning man constitutes or is God’s covenant concerning man. A “covenant” is a binding promise, or a declaration of purpose, to do or not to do a <’cr-tain thing. When God makes a covenant he binds himself to keep it faithfully. Nothing any creature can do would hinder God in carrying out his announced purpose Every expressed purpose of Jehovah concerning man is a covenant which Almighty God performs in his own due time If God takes a man into covenant with him, that is called a two-sided or bilateral covenant. The obligation re<ts upon both parties to the covenant to carry that covenant into complete operation according to its terms IV 6/15/41
JANUARY 9
I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing-therefore choose life, that both thou and thy seed
may live.—Deut. 30:19.
Such is the statement of the divine rule, from which Jehovah never deviates, and everyone who believes God can rely upon that rule. Jehovah does not arbitrarily compel any man to take a specific course. God made man a fiee creature with the privilege of choosing to obey the great Creator or to take an opposite course. That rule applied to Adam, the first man. It is the fixed rule of Jehovah, and he never changes. Jehovah’s purpose is to give men a full and fair opportunity to gain life by choosing the same or to choose the very opposite of life, which is extinction. Knowledge is required to make the choice, and God affords every opportunity for man to gain such knowledge Jehovah furnishes the opportunity to man to know which is the right way. W 2/1/41
January 1,1942
WATCHTOWER,
15
JANUARY 10
Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee.—Isa. 60:1.
Jehovah gives this command to his covenant people when his time arrives for them to go into action. The commandments of the Most High cannot be ignored or sidestepped. To receive his approval even- creature who has made a solemn covenant to do Uis will must act, not with sullenness or stubbornness, but with a burning zeal and genuine joy. Such a one has a heart full of gratitude which leads to unselfish devotion and zeal for the Lord. With Jehovah there is a fixed time for everything. When that time arrives it is the duty and privilege of his covenant people to quickly respond to his commandments. In the hour of gross darkness upon Satan’s organization and all people under it the great Vindicator of Jehovah appears and makes himself manifest to his faithful servants, and his glory and power are seen to be on those who faithfully follow his lead. IT i/1/41
JANUARY 11
Lo! Jehovah emptying the earth and laying it tvaste; and he tcill overturn the face thereof, and scatter them ivho dwell therein . . . for Jehovah hath spoken this
word.—Isa. 24:1,3, Rotherham.
Jehovah inspired his prophet to tell of a vision of Armageddon which he had, and which prophetic utterance is about due for fulfillment. The prophecy discloses what will be the result of Jehovah’s ‘'strange act” upon the earth. There can be no doubt that Jehovah will do exactly as his words announce by the prophet, because “Jehovah hath spoken this word”. Uis word cannot return to him void, but shall accomplish his announced purpose. (Isa. 55:11; 46: 11) But who on earth now believes what He has announced? Only those who have taken their stand firmly on the side of The Theocracy and who joyfully support that kingdom. To them Jehovah has given full assurance, for their comfort and hope. IF 4/15/11
JANUARY 12
'■Ian shall not live by bread alone, but by every ivord that proceedcth out of the mouth of God.—Matt. 4: 4.
Now in these last days the demons are seducing and debauching the entire human creation, and the only exceptions thereto are those who devote themselves to and faithfully obey the Lord God. If the people now on earth who are of good-will toward God would find the way to life everlasting they must be led by the true guide, which is God’s Word. The will of Almighty God expressed to his creatures is his Word and constitutes the true guide, which directs mankind into the way of life everlasting. Jehovah sent Jesus to the earth to proclaim His expressed will, and this he did for the purpose of guiding men in the right way. The message which Jesus declared was and is not his own, but is that which proceeds from the mouth of Almighty God. Jesus said: “The Father which sent me, he gave me a commandment, what I should say.”—John 12: 49. IF 6/1/41
JANUARY 13
The tray of life is above to the wise, that he may depart from hell beneath.—Prov. 15: 24.
Jehovah has made plain his purpose to permit men to choose the way of life or ehoose the way of death. God placed before Adam the way of life and the way of death. God informed man that he must obey if he would live, but if he should choose to disobey he must die. Had Adam always
looked to God and obeyed his law he would not have died Adam chose the opposite course, with the result that he died and all others of humankind came under condemnation by inheritance. In due time all the race must die All do die and remain dead except those who choose the way of life and conform to the rules God has laid down, pointing out the course they must take. To escape death, dcsenbed as “hell”, which is the grave, they must look above That means they must look to Jehovah for guidance in the way of life if they would become wise in God's way. IV 15'11
JANUARY 14
Study to shew thyself approved unto God. a workman that needeth not to be ashamed.—2 Tim. 2:15.
The Scriptures are provided by the Lord for his covenant people that they may be fully equipped for every good w ork One who neglects to study the Scriptures and to be guided by the advice and admonition there given cannot have the Lord's approval. We must study his Word and do his works, that we may receive his approval. Study classes and service meetings are regularly held amongst God’s people for the purpose of enabling them to keep in mind the proper things and their mind fixed upon the righteous things of the Lord Even’ one of God’s covenant people should attend such meetings when it is reasonably possible and take an active part in them. One who is negligent and not attending .>ueh study classes is failing to seek righteousness and meekness, which the Lord requires of all he approves IV 5 '15'11
JANUARY 15
These words, tvhich I command thee this day, shall be upon thy heart; and thou shalt teach them diligently unto thu children —Deut. 6: 6, 7, A.R r.
Jehovah’s words are not altered and are heard with compelling force now by every one who has given his devotion to The Theocratic Government. Today the obligation is laid upon every parent who is in a covenant to do Jehovah’s will to bring his children into the congregation, that they may learn the Lord’s words and see their privilege of serving The Theocratic Government The parents that serve Jehovah and love their children will be diligent to instruct them in the way of righteousness, that they may serve the Lord and live. Parents who neglect this divine obligation drclose thereby that they have not a proper appreciation of their relationship to God nor of their obligation to the children they brought into the world. IV 9/1/41
JANUARY 16
My covenant will I not break, nor alte> the thiny that i-gone out of my lips.—Ps 89: 34.
Jehovah’s covenant cannot be altered or hindered lib covenant here named is his unbreakable word that his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, his Beloved One, shall be established and rule the world in righteousness. The Theocratic Government is of greatest importance, because by it Jehovah’s name shall be vindicated, The completion and operation of that Theocracy is about to be revealed to all creation, and now the demons have mustered all their force and power to resist The Theocracy that they might continue to rule the world in wickedness. The controversy is that all the demons are against The Theocracy, and this controversy will be settled finally at Armageddon Individual salvation, while important to creatures, is of small importance when compared with The Theocratic Government. IV 10/1/41
FIELD EXPERIENCES
JUVENILE ENTHUSIASTS, SALT LAKE CITY
“Saturday mornings, 9 a.m., I have been meeting with a group of school children (average attendance 14) and studying the book Children for one hour before going into field service. These children are enthusiastic; some have started into service for the first time in such features of the work as back-calls, street work, and delivering Children Study Courses to homes. They are so eager to write bookstudy questions that we hax e questions for two weeks ahead and are now taking turns on handing in questions. The children willingly worked the very block they live on, and yesterday I saw two little girls playing the phonograph for another little girl on a porch. "When they returned to my car I asked about their experience, and one said: ‘Oh, she is a school chum of mine Her father doesn’t believe there is a God, so we played the record for her and gave her a booklet to read and then give to her father.’
“I took a little boy, age eight, on the street with me. Timid at first, he held my hand tightly. Pretty soon he was calling out ‘Consolation!’ himself; so I placed him by a post a few feet from me. He continuing offering the magazine even though one ‘goat’ rebuffed him. Soon I saw a well-dressed man talking to him and a small crowd of boys around him. I first thought I should go over and help him; then I recalled ‘Wisdom uttereth her voice in the streets’ (Proverbs 1:20) and how the Informant urged the young people to place themselves in the Lord’s hands in street work. So I watched the scene until the man walked off carrying a magazine. The boys remained; so I walked over to see if they were bothering the little publisher. On the contrary, they were asking questions and gladly accepted a sample copy. Then the little publisher repeated this conversation with the well-dressed man: Alan asked, ‘Who arc you serving? Hitler?’ Boy replied: ‘No, God.’ Man: ‘Who is God?’ Boy: ‘Jehovah.’ Man: ‘Who is Jehovah?’ The boy, in an exasperated manner, said: ‘So I just pointed up into the sky, and finally he caught on.’ The gentleman contributed five cents for the magazine, insisting the boy take one penny for himself.”
DELIVERING “THEOCRACY” TO BRITISH CLERGY
“I called upon one rector of a near-by village [near Thornhill, Dewsbury, England], with whom I have previously held conversations regarding the truth. On this occasion I was invited into his study to discuss the presentday problems and their relation to Bible prophecy. The rector agreed to read the booklets Theocracy and Satisfied. I noticed a set of Vindication on his bookshelves. I referred him to Christ’s words at Matthew chapter twenty-three, pointing to its present-day application. I invited him to study the command at Revelation 18:4: ‘And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.’ On leaving he accompanied me to the car, where he carried on conversation with my wife and daughter, with the result that he asked us to spend an evening by appointment with him. A week later we were all three working from door to door in this village, and these remarks were passed to us: ‘Are you the Bible people that the rector mentioned in his sermon on Sunday last?’ On questioning we found the rector had told his congregation
that that afternoon he had had a visit from Jehovah’s witnesses who were going around with books explaining the Scriptures. He said what these books contained was true and that Jehovah’s witnesses were doing a fine work. The result was that in one hour’s calling, at no more than thirty houses, seven bound books were placed. Rest of village is still to do.”
INTERESTED INQUIRY FOR STUDY CLASS (ENGLAND)
“Dear Sir: I have read your pamphlet Theocracy, and I understand that your Association sponsors groups to study the Bible; will you therefore please give me the address of a group in or near Sanderstead or Croydon (Surrey) so that I may get in touch with them. Will you please send me another 6 copies of your pamphlet, for which I enclose 1/-; if this is not sufficient I will send the balance when I know how much is due. I enclose a stamped and addressed label.”
IN THE RURALS OF SOUTHERN MISSISSIPPI
“The first house I stopped at in the morning was a small farm house. There was a group of people on the porch, so I played them the recording “Message of Hope’, and then presented the books Religion and Theocracy. One of two men in the group, whom I had thought were politicians or preachers and who turned out to be preachers, took the books to examine them. Then both began to ask me questions and to answer them their way, refusing to take my answers. They belittled me and my work and the ‘damnable doctrine’ I was distributing, one of them saying: ‘I wouldn’t carry old Judge Rutherford around in a box; if I was going to preach I would not use a second-hand sermon.’ The one who had the books handed me a quarter and said to the other: ‘I want this book; it is a new one.’ They had evidently read the other books too. They then advised me, very seriously, to stop this work. The one who had taken the books said: ‘I wouldn’t carry that around for a thousand dollars a day.’ I told him I would not stop for a thousand a day. Their parting words were: ‘I am going to fight this damnable doctrine in this community while we are holding this revival here.’ He did. The next day, and the second house we stopped at, we were met with these words: ‘I heard you preached about last night, but I have been reading these books for four years, and I know he was lying.’ This was from a lady of seventy years. It developed that she was visiting her daughter and lived six miles up the way we were working, and she asked to ride with us After leaving her daughter’s home, who had believed the preacher, our friend said: ‘My son was coming by for me, but I wanted to get off and talk with you folks and to be with someone who is trying to do right.’ She stayed with us the balance of the day, and most of the ones we called on were her relatives and opposed the truth. She has never been associated with Jehovah’s witnesses, but she will be hereafter.”
WHO INTERESTED THE NEW PUBLISHER?
“One new one reports for the first time this month. (Mt. Pleasant, Utah) This new publisher is the party where our 10-year-old publisher started a model study about two months ago. The little children are now doing things that many experienced publishers have thought difficult.”
THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street	- - Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford, President W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” • Isatah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to bis creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam's wrong act ail men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world ; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah's organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord's next great act Is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction In the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and miscellaneous Foreign, JI 50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England Canadian .......-..........40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian........... 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African _________________Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
AH sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The IVotrh-toicer free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers.- Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying aotice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879.
MEMORIAL
Tuesday, March 31, after six p.m., is the date Scnpturally arrived at for 1942 for the memorial celebration to both Jehovah’s name and the sacrifice of the Lamb of God, Christ Jesus, his Theocratic King. Each Christian company, therefore, should assemble after six p.m. of March 31, and the anointed ones thereof celebrate the Memorial, their companions the “other sheep” being present as observers. If there is no competent person present to deliver a brief discourse immediately before the partaking of the emblems, that short article appearing in the March 15, 1939, issue of The Watchtower should be read before those assembled prior to partaking. Since the breaking of the bread and drinking of the wine both picture the death of Jesus, it follows that both emblems should be served together at partaking, and not separately. The emblems should be unleavened bread and real red wine. Jesus and his apostles used real red wine in symbol of his blood, and the anointed remnant should follow their lead. A report of the celebration should be made to the Society as instructed in the Informant. In preparation therefor the article “Memorial” suggested above will be studied with profit.
"INTEGRITY" TESTIMONY PERIOD
Midwinter field maneuvers test the integrity, and the united testimony period during February is appropriately thus named.
This “Integrity” Testimony Period will be the opening month of the 1942 three-month Watchtower campaign, hence the people of integrity toward God will specialize on taking subscriptions for the magazine The Watchtower, announcing Jehovah’s kingdom or Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. Additional to the intrinsic value of the magazine itself, the latest book, Children, will be given as a premium with all new subscriptions for a year, and that at the regular subscription rate of $1.00. God's people of integrity will be steadfast therein and will prove their blamelessness of devotion by taking part in this Testimony regardless of the cost to self. Many newly interested readers of The Watchtower, deeply appreciating it, will be desirous of joining m this special testimony privilege, and we invite such to write this office for references needed to put them in touch with the nearest local company organized for this campaign. A record should be kept of all work done and the result, and the same reported in the appointed manner at the close of February.
“THE WATCHTOWER”
The Watchtower is a magazine without equal in the earth, and is conceded this rank by all that have been faithful readers thereof during its more than sixty years of publication. The Watchtower has increased in importance with the progress of the years, and (Continued on page 31)
VWCHTOWER.
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
No. LXIII	January 15, 1942	No 2
MICAH
PART 2
‘'Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain."—Ex. 20:7.
JEHOVAH'S name confers great honor upon the creature or organization that takes or receives that name. God chose the city of Jerusalem as a place of habitation for his covenant people, and he put his name there and thereby made it a most famous city. God caused his temple to be built at Jerusalem and made that the place to worship him. It was Jehovah’s city, symbolic of his organization on earth. The city of Jerusalem and almost all of the people there received the favor and name of Jehovah in vain, and this, of course, in violation of God’s commandment. Likewise “Christendom”, which was foreshadowed by Jerusalem, has received the name and favor of God in vain. To ‘take the name of God in vain’ does not mean the man in the street who uses vile language, as the clergymen are in the habit of applying this text. The one who consecrated himself to do the will of God, exercising faith in Christ Jesus as his Savior, and who starts to follow in the footsteps of Jesus and then draws back, has taken the name of God in vain. Or if he takes a course contrary to what the Scriptures point out, becoming heady, haughty and highminded and smiting his brethren, he has received the name of God in vain. Those who take God’s name in vain bring great reproach upon his name, and their end is destruction. Some may ignorantly get off on the wrong path after they have taken the Lord’s name, but, when receiving the warning and the knowledge directing them in the right way, if they would live they must quickly change their course and walk in the right way.
2	The wicked are those who have received enlightenment from God concerning his purpose and who then turn away from and put themselves in opposition to God. Lucifer was great in the organization of Jehovah, was enlightened, occupied a place of great responsibility, became covetous and ambitious, and turned himself in full opposition to Jehovah. He is therefore designated in the Scriptures as “that wicked one”. (1 John 3:12) All who have known God and Christ Jesus and who have then repudiated
Jehovah’s Word and turned away from him have reproached his name and taken God’s name in vain, and are placed by the Lord in the class of the wicked. Jehovah has been long-suffering with the wicked, and concerning this the apostle says: “When once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing.” (1 Pet. 3:20) The English word “suffer”, as used, is given various meanings, among which is: To permit, or tolerate; to hold up, or delay; such as holding up or delaying the execution of a judgment. The Scriptural meaning of the word is often the same. It means being slow to express anger, forbearing, to defer, that is, to permit the wicked one to take his own course until God’s due time to act.
3	This forbearance or long-suffering of God does not mean that he ever looks with favor upon the wrongdoer. On the contrary, it is written: “God judgeth the righteous, and God is angry with the wicked every day [God . . . hath indignation every day (A.R.F.)].” (Ps. 7:11) Again it is written: "Ail the wucked will [God] destroy.” (Ps. 145:20) However, Jehovah waits his own due time to execute his judgment against the wicked. The followers of Christ Jesus also must learn to be long-suffering and forbearing. To such these words of the Scriptures are addressed, to wit: “Walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called, with all lowliness and meekness, with longsuffering, forbearing one another in love.” (Eph. 4:1,2) “Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any: even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye.”—Col. 3:13.
‘ These scriptures cannot be properly construed to mean that one who has received the name of the Lord should never be angry. Righteous indignation against wrongdoing is proper and right, because the man who follows the Lord Jesus Christ cannot look with approval upon wrongdoing. The following words are addressed to those who have consecrated themselves to do the Lord’s will, and to follow in the
19
20
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
footsteps of Jesus, to wit: “Be ye angry, and sin not.” (Eph. 4:26) How can one be angry and not commit sin? How can one sin by becoming angry or because of anger? Sin is the transgression of God’s law. (1 John 3:4) When one becomes angry he may desire to give expression to that anger by administering bodily punishment to the one against whom he is angry. Such is a violation of God’s law, and therefore sin. The law of God says: “To me belong-eth vengeance, ... I will render vengeance to mine enemies.” (Deut. 32:35,41,43; Rom. 12:19; Heb. 10: 30) As the Lord is long-suffering toward his enemies, biding his own due time to punish them, so those who have received the name of Jehovah must be long-suffering and forgiving and leave it to God in his own due time to execute his judgment against the wrongdoers. The followers of Christ Jesus in the day of Jehovah’s vengeance have a work to do in connection with the expression of Jehovah’s vengeance, and that work is, as their commission states, ‘to declare the day of the vengeance of our God.’ (Isa. 61: 2) However, Jehovah declares in his Word his vengeance against all defamers of his name, but that he will do the executing. The scripture also says that all the saints shall have part in the execution of judgment, in this: that they have part in binding the wicked ones by declaring the judgments of Jehovah already written.—Ps. 149:8,9.
’ The remnant must do the part assigned to them, which part is to boldly proclaim God’s purpose as expressed in his Word. Jehovah caused his prophets of old to declare and to write down the judgments, and it is these judgments of the Lord God heretofore written that his faithful witnesses now must make known, declaring to those who will hear God’s purpose of executing such judgments.
THE REASON
6	Taking up here now the further consideration of the prophecy of Micah, note that Jehovah’s word came to Micah, and Micah was commanded to declare that word; and now Jehovah’s witnesses, whom Micah pictured, must likewise declare the Word of God. “Christendom” has taken the name of Jehovah God; and by “Christendom” is meant the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, the other clergy, “elective elders,” the “man of sin”, “the son of perdition,” the Judas company, and all others who profess to be servants of God, regardless of denomination or name, and who are associated together as a part of Satan’s organization. As there was only a remnant of Israel that remained true to Jehovah, even so now there is only a remnant of those who profess to be servants of God that remain true to their covenant. Jehovah by his prophet Micah now here states the reason why God will execute his vengeance upon
those who have taken his name in vain. “For the transgression of Jacob is all this, and for the sins of the house of Israel. What is the transgression of Jacob? is it not Samaria? and what are the high places of Judah? are they not Jerusalem?”—Mic. 1:5.
T As used in this text the name “Jacob” (meaning “supplanter”) stands primarily for the northern house, that is, the ten tribes of Israel having their capital at Samaria. The remaining tribes of Israel had their capital at Jerusalem. Thus, antitypically, all “Christendom” is wrapped up in the disobedience of and in opposition to Jehovah God.
’ They are his enemies and shall suffer his vengeance. The prophet then propounds the question concerning the “transgression of Jacob”, and by another question answers the first, to wit: “Is it not Samaria?” King Omri, the father of Ahab, made Samaria the capital of the ten tribes of the house of Jacob. (1 Ki. 16:23,24) The prophet Micah later in his prophecy (6:16) says of the transgression : “For the statutes of Omri are kept, and all.the works of the house of Ahab [the Baal or Devil worshipers], and ye walk in their counsels.” Besides Baal worship, the “sin of Samaria” included the worship of the golden calves at Dan and Bethel which confounded the worship of Jehovah God with idols and turned the people away from the true worship of Jehovah at his temple. (1 Ki. 12: 26-33; Amos 8:14) It was also the kingdom of Samaria that formed the conspiracy or confederacy with Damascus in Syria to fight against Judah, and concerning which confederacy Isaiah prophesied that it should be broken in pieces for the reason, as the prophet stated, “God is with us,” his faithful people. (Isa. 7 :1-9; 8: 9,10) Therefore “the transgression of Jacob” applies to “the friendship of the world”, that is, Baalism, the Devil worship; also the giving of great honor to and worshiping creatures (especially religious leaders, who claim to represent or stand for God), and particularly honor and worship such as to the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and other clergymen who demand and receive such honor and worship from their subjects. It also includes the great honor and worship to men who are religious leaders in any organization of religionists that has taken the name of God and Christ Jesus; also those participating in the “confederacy”, or League of Nations, which is set up in the place of and in opposition to Christ Jesus the King, “The Lion of the Tribe of Judah.” All these things are included in that transgression or sin of Samaria. When the Greater Jehu, Christ Jesus, comes down to modern-day Samaria, he puts an end to such transgressions and to the transgressors by executing Jehovah’s judgment against them, as foreshadowed in the prophecies.—2 Ki. 10:1-27; Isa. 28: 1-4.
January 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER.
21
PLACE OF WORSHIP
’ Jehovah put his name upon Jerusalem and caused his temple to be builded there, and at Jerusalem was the place to worship Jehovah God. The “high places”, as that phrase is used in connection with Israel, were forbidden places for going through a form of worship. Jerusalem was the only lofty place for the worship of Jehovah and where it was done according to his law; therefore the question propounded in this prophecy: “And what are the high places of Judah?” meaning, Where is the responsibility for the high places throughout Judah?
10	From the earliest times, as stated by historical authority, it was the custom among the heathen nations to erect a place of worship on a high or conspicuous spot. The Roman Catholics have ever followed this course. Call to mind now that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy have erected their buildings in the most conspicuous spots in every country. They seek the high or lofty places to make great show of themselves. When God made the covenant with Israel in Moab, he there in the law stated to the Israelites: “Ye shall utterly destroy all the places wherein the nations which ye shall possess served their gods, upon the high mountains, and upon the hills, and under every green tree; and ye shall overthrow their altars, and break their pillars, and burn their groves with fire; and ye shall hew down the graven images of their gods, and destroy the names of them out of that place. Ye shall not do so unto the Lord your God. But unto the place which the Lord your God shall choose out of all your tribes to put his name there [that is, Jerusalem], even unto his habitation [his temple] shall ye seek, and thither thou shalt come: and thither ye shall bring your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, and your tithes, and heave offerings of your hand, and your vows, and your freewill offerings, and the firstlings of your herds and of your flocks: and there ye shall eat before the Lord your God, and ye shall rejoice in all that ye put your hand unto, ye and your households, wherein the Lord thy God hath blessed thee.” (Deut. 12:2-7) At the beginning of Solomon's reign there was no temple for worship at Jerusalem: “Only the people sacrificed in high places, because there was no house built unto the name of the Lord, until those days. And Solomon loved the Lord, walking in the statutes of David his father: only he sacrificed and burnt incense in high places. And the king went to Gibeon to sacrifice there; for that was the great high place: a thousand burnt offerings did Solomon offer upon that altar. In Gibeon the Lord appeared to Solomon in a dream bv night: and God said, Ask what I shall give thee.” —1 Ki. 3:2-5.
11	Concerning the high places that were forbidden the Lord said: “Are they not Jerusalem?” The Jews,
from the royal family down to the common people, because of unfaithfulness, did not confine their worship to the temple at Jerusalem, as commanded, but they sought other places to carry on a form of worship, both inside and outside of Jerusalem. Thus doing, Jerusalem, by reason of being the capital city, became responsible for the improper use of the liiirli places throughout the nation. Their course of action shows that they had taken and received the name of God in vain. The king failed to cut off those high places, and that brought still greater responsibility upon the city and the king. Then Solomon the king became unfaithful in his old age and turned to Devil worship.—1 Ki. 11:7-13.
12	The prophet Micah began to prophesy in King Jotham’s reign, and concerning such king it is written : “And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord; he did according to all that his father Uzziah had done. Howbeit, the high places were not removed; the people sacrificed and burned incense still in the high places. He built the higher gate of the house of the Lord.” (2 Ki. 15: 34, 35) As for Jotham's son, Ahaz, he grossly violated God's law: “And he sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places, and on the hills, and under every green tree.” (2 Ki. 1G: 4) The ten tribes of the northern kingdom of Israel also violated God’s law by using such high places for their forms of worship. When the ten tribes made a league with the king of Syria against Judah, Ahaz, the king, brought the kingdom of Judah into a league with Assyria: “And Ahaz took the silver and gold that was found in the house of the Lord, and in the treasures of the king’s house, and sent it for a present to the king of Assyria. And the king of Assyria hearkened unto him; for the king of Assyria went up against Damascus, and took it, and carried the people of it captive to Kir, and slew Rezin.”—2 Ki. lG:5-9.
18 Modern-day worshipers, who make a pretense of worshiping God by indulging in forms of godliness and speaking meaningless words, do this while their hearts are far removed from Jehovah, and they insist upon what they call their “rights and liberties”, and set up their own organization of worship and adopt these forms of service to suit their own fancies. They have no interest in the kingdom of God, and the Kingdom interests are removed far from them, and for that reason the Lord gives these Kingdom interests ‘to a people bringing forth the fruits thereof’. (Matt. 21:43) These modern-day religionists make a league or confederacy with the iniquitous nations of this world which oppose Jehovah and his kingdom. King Hezekiah destroyed the high places of ungodly worship; as it is written: “He removed the high places, and brake the images, and cut down the groves, and brake in pieces the brazen serpent that Moses had made; for unto those days the children
22
WATCHTOWER.
of Israel did burn incense to it; and he called it Nehushtan {{margin) a piece of brass]. He trusted in the Lord God of Israel; so that after him was none like him among all the kings of Judah, nor any that were before him."—2 Ki. 18: 4, 5.
Today one greater than Hezekiah is needed to clean out the unholy practice of the religionists, and Jesus Christ proceeds to do that very thing. The son of King Hezekiah went contrary to what his father had done and built high places contrary to God’s law: “For he built again the high places which Hezekiah his father had destroyed; and he reared up altars for Baal, and made a grove, as did Ahab king of Israel; and worshipped all the host of heaven, and served them. And he built altars in the house of the Lord, of which the Lord said, In Jerusalem will I put my name.’’—2 Ki. 21: 3, 4.
15 The Roman Catholic Hierarchy and allies follow the same course of the wicked king Manasseh. The w’ord of the prophet Ezekiel applying to the unfaithful “Christendom” says: “Thou hast also built unto thee an eminent place, and hast made thee an high place in every street. Thou hast built thy high place at every head of the way, and hast made thy beauty to be abhorred, and hast opened thy feet to every one that passed by, and multiplied thy whoredoms. In that thou buildest thine eminent place in the head of every way, and makest thine high place in every street; and hast not been as an harlot, in that thou scornest hire; but as a wife that committeth adultery, which taketh strangers instead of her husband! They give gifts to all whores; but thou givest thy gifts to all thy lovers, and hirest them, that they may come unto thee on every side for thy whoredom. And I will also give thee into their hand, and they shall throw down thine eminent place, and shall break down thy high places; they shall strip thee also of thy clothes, and shall take thy fair jewels, and leave thee naked and bare.” (Ezek. 16: 24, 23, 31-33, 39; see Vindication, Book One, page 191 and following) Thus Jehovah foretells his purpose to destroy the religionists that have assumed his name and have wickedly reproached his name, and that have therefore taken his name in vain. These truths are now revealed and given to God’s people that they may carry the same to the people of good-will, who may now hear the command of the Lord coming from his temple and seek the Lord’s favor as he has directed.
18 Jehovah then declares his purpose to ruin Samaria: “Therefore I will make Samaria as an heap of the field, and as plantings of a vineyard; and I will pour down the stones thereof into the valley, and I will discover the foundations thereof.” (Mic. 1:6) Even though Samaria was a strong and defended city able to withstand a siege for three years, which it did, in due time it fell. Likewise boastful “Christen
Bbooklyn, N. Y.
dom”, which claims to be so strong that it is unbreakable; it shall be brought down to ruin and become like a field of desolation. Describing the ruin that should come upon Samaria, and likewise upon “Christendom”, or organized religionists and their organizations, the prophet said: “I will make [it] . . . as plantings of a vineyard”; “vineyard plantations” {Leeser).
17 Isaiah, who prophesied also in the days of Micah, said of unfaithful “Christendom”: “And now, go to; I will tell you what I will do to my vineyard; I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; and break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down; and I will lay it waste; it shall not be pruned nor digged; but there shall come up briers and thorns; I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it. For the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah his pleasant plant; and he looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for righteousness, but behold a cry.”—Isa. 5: 5-7.
18 As Jehovah said concerning Samaria that he would “pour down the stones thereof”, so he thus foretells how he will completely wreck and ruin exalted “Christendom”, and especially the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and allied clergy. Jehovah foretold the same thing by his prophet Obadiah. In this manner Jehovah emphasizes his purpose to destroy the hypocritical religionists, that no one will have any excuse to be ignorant of what is coming upon that great hypocritical and devilish organization.
18 The prophecy of Micah discloses Jehovah’s purpose to destroy “Christendom’s” superstructure and also that he will wreck it and tear it down to its very foundations and sweep away its great heap of lies, and expose it to shame and disgrace. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy and allied clergy and their “principal of the flock” have rejected Christ Jesus, the sure Foundation Stone, and now within a short time Jehovah shall completely destroy all of that wicked organization.—Isa. 28:16-21.
50 For many years “Christendom” has practiced the Devil religion and has committed the sin of Samaria by extolling creatures, pretending to canonize and make saints of them and to exalt them as objects of worship, and has taught the people to pray to and worship such so-called “saints”, which “saints” never did in fact exist, but are wholly a fraud and a subterfuge. This wicked thing has been done in open violation of Jehovah’s commandment at Exodus 20:1-5. Graven images are everywhere used by “Christendom”, and particularly by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, to impress the people and to hoodwink them and to cause them to give honor and worship to creatures and things. Therefore Jehovah foretold by his prophet what shall come upon “Christendom”: “And
January 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
23
all the graven images thereof shall be beaten to pieces, and all the hires thereof shall be burned with the fire, and all the idols thereof will I lay desolate; for she gathered it of the hire of an harlot, and they shall return to the hire of an harlot.”—Mic. 1: 7.
21	The people of good-will who are of the “Catholic population”, and others of honest heart, must now learn of these truths, and the obligation is laid upon Jehovah’s remnant to see to it that they do have the opportunity to hear and to learn these great truths. The beating to pieces of Samaria’s graven images foreshadows the destruction that shall come upon the religious systems of “Christendom” that have used these inanimate things to deceive and rob the people. In Moab Jehovah commanded his people, saying: "There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor a sodomite of the sons of Israel. Thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog, into the house of the Lord thy God for any vow; for even both these are abomination unto the Lord thy God.” —Deut. 23:17,18.
22	Here Israel foreshadowed “Christendom”, which for a long while has practiced whoredom and continues to indulge therein. “Christendom” has brought “the liire of a whore” and “the price of a dog” into the religious organizations that have assumed the name of God and Christ; and all of such is a direct violation of God’s law. The religionists have sought after and committed whoredom or illicit relationship with all other parts of the Devil’s earthly organization. Crooked commercial traffickers and corrupt politicians have been invited and taken into the organizations of these religionists, and they have all worked together to extract filthy lucre from the people whom they have seduced and debauched by their devilish doctrines. By means of such whoredom the hire, or money derived therefrom, has been brought into the organization that claims to represent God on earth. A sodomite was likened unto the “price of a dog’’, and such have also been brought into the organization that sails under the name of Christ. Roman Catholic priests claim to be moral and stand as guardians of the people to safeguard and preserve their morals, but in truth and in fact they are the most lecherous crowd amongst men. They have used and continue to use the cloak of their so-called "Christian religion”, by which to hide and carry on at will their immoral practices to satisfy their sensual desires.
23	Jehovah gives full assurance that “Christendom” shall be destroyed and “all of the idols thereof will I lay desolate”. (See Ezekiel 23:2-10; Vindication, Book One, page 303.) For what reason will the Lord thus do? “For she [‘Christendom’] gathered it of the hire of an harlot, and they shall return to the hire of an harlot.” All the images, beads, gold lace, holy
water, dead women’s toes, crucifixes, and all manner of images for idol worship and practices by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and allies, stand lor nothing other than harlotry toward Jehovah, and that at the purchase price of some selfish inducement or "hire". The clergy, and particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, have built up a fraudulent system into which they have drawn the worst kind of criminals, and have used the name of Jehovah and of Christ Jesus to induce the poor and ignorant to support them and to bring into the coffers of the old “harlot” their hard-earned money to satisfy the selfish desires of a crowd of dissolute men. It is cruel enough to practice fraud upon the people and to thereby fleece them out of their hard earnings, but it is far more wicked to use the name of the Lord as a shield for their practice of cruelty, in order to carry out their fraudulent schemes.
24	By their practices of idolatry those religion mongers have defrauded the people, enriched themselves with material things, and have defamed the reputation and name of Almighty God. Hence, says the Lord of them, they shall find their proper place, that is, in destruction. “For out of the reward of unchastity she gathered them, and unto the reward of unchastity shall they return.” (Rotherham) Jehovah inspired his faithful servant James to address his words to the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and allies, including the “principal of the flock” who have assumed the name of the Lord and have at the same time formed a part of Satan’s world, and therefore it is written: “Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world, is the enemy of God.”—Jas. 4:4.
25	For a long while those men have lived wantonly, using their ill-gotten gains for their own sensual pleasure. God announces his purpose to destroy their institutions and those who have budded them up. But, say the opponents of the Kingdom, why say anything about these things now? The answer is, Because Jehovah has commanded his witnesses to declare the day of his vengeance upon those who have defamed his name and have taken his name in vain, to the end that the people may be warned of their approaching doom, and that those of good-will who have been held in subjection to those practicers of fraud may have opportunity to flee to God and to Christ. The work of Jehovah’s witnesses in thus proclaiming the truth at the present time is done that the “great multitude” may find the way to Zion before the battle of the great day of God Almighty begins. The W atchtower publishes these things for the benefit of all those who love and serve Jehovah God.
26	The prophecy of Micah at this point makes a picture of what the religionists will do when they
24
THE WATCHTOWER
come to realize that sudden destruction is just before them: “Therefore I will wail and howl, I will go stripped and naked; I will make a wailing like the dragons, and mourning as the owls.” (Mic. 1: 8) That picture is not one expressing sympathy with the religionists, but is for a sign unto them, indicating prophetically to “Christendom” what awaits that unholy organization. It is not the will of Jehovah that his faithful people should howl and lament for anyone that becomes unfaithful to God and his kingdom, and who has for that reason lost all. Anyone who howls and laments because the wicked suffer destruction shows that he is not faithful to and does not love the Lord God. This is made certain by the words of the prophet Jeremiah: “For thus saith the Lord, Enter not into the house of mourning, neither go to lament nor bemoan them [symbolically]; for I have taken away my peace from this people, ^aith the Lord, even lovingkindness and mercies. Both the great and the small shall die in this land; they shall not be buried, neither shall men [the Jonadabs or ‘other sheep’; the ‘great multitude’] lament for them, nor cut themselves, nor make themselves bald for them.”—J er. 16: 5, 6.
27	Concerning this Jehovah instructed Ezekiel that he should not weep when his unfaithful wife was taken away suddenly in death, thus picturing those who are unfaithful to and defame God’s name. “Son of man, behold, I take away from thee the desire of thine eyes with a stroke; yet neither shalt thou mourn nor weep, neither shall thy tears run down. Forbear to cry, make no mourning for the dead [who have been guilty of the sin of Samaria], bind the tire of thine head upon thee, and put on thy shoes upon thy feet, and cover not thy lips, and eat not the bread of men.”—Ezek. 24:16,17; see Vindication, Book One, page 332.
28	When one who has been in God's organization and in his service proves unfaithful and destruction awaits him, those who are faithful to God will not lament or weep for such. The greatest favor that ever came to man is to know and serve Jehovah and bear the name of Jehovah, and anyone who is unfaithful to that blessing and privilege is unworthy of sympathy. Further supporting this conclusion the prophet of Jehovah wrote: “And the slain of the Lord shall be at that day from one end of the earth even unto the other end of the earth; they shall not be lamented, neither gathered, nor buried; they shall be dung upon the ground.”—Jer. 25: 33.
28	The prophet Micah says: "I will go stripped and naked”; and by doing so a picture is made of the captives taken when the Lord ‘leads captivity captive’. (Ps. 68:18; Eph. 4:8) Concerning Assyrian treatment of the captives of Samaria the prophet of God wrote: “So shall the king of Assyria lead away the
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Egyptians prisoners, and the Ethiopians captives, young and old, naked and barefoot, even with their buttocks uncovered, to the shame of Egypt.”—Isa. 20:4.
” Further depicting the miserable condition of the religionists when their calamity befalls them the prophet wails “like the dragons [crocodiles, (Leeser)].” The crocodile, when angry, produces a snorting sound; and according to Rotherham, this text says the noise is like wild dogs. Likewise the clergy (“dumb dogs”), when fully realizing that their end has come, will howl. Furthermore the prophet says: “Mourning as the owls”; that is, with a loud and woeful mourning. Concerning those same religion mongers it is foretold by another prophet of Jehovah that these shall howl; as it is written: “Howl, ye shepherds, and cry; and wallow yourselves in the ashes, ye principal of the flock.” (Jer. 25: 34) James tells of the same crowd that will indulge in extreme howling in that day. (Jas. 5:1-6) The prophet Micah, therefore, by thus howling and going naked and wailing, foretells what shall befall the unfaithful “Christendom”, and particularly the leaders thereof.
31	“Christendom” has already received a stroke from the Lord, and now she begins to give evidence thereof; but soon her howl will be much more distinct and distressing: “For her wound is incurable; for it is come unto Judah; he is come unto the gate of my people, even to Jerusalem.” (Mie. 1: 9) Jehovah has given his word that “Christendom” shall receive the destructive blow with his “glittering Sword”. (Deut. 32:41) That stroke by Jehovah's Executioner will not be like the World War bump that was given the “beast” on the head that was afterwards “healed” (Rev. 13:3,12); but it will be a deadly blow from which there will be no recovery. It will be a devastating slaughter, “according to the slaughter of Midian at the rock of Oreb.” (Isa. 10:26) The deadly wound received there cannot be healed. Armageddon will destroy the religionists and also the others that are against God, including the “man of sin”, the Judas class, and every part of “Christendom”, and all of Satan’s organization.
32	The Philistines hated the Israelites; and likewise the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, the modern Philistines, hate God’s people now on earth. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy pretends to be friendly to all professing Christians who are called “Protestant” or by other names, and even friendly to the Jews, who completely reject Christ Jesus, but all this apparent friendliness on the part of the Hierarchy is hypocritical and dishonest. That cold-blooded organization has no kind feeling for anyone, but is entirely selfish. The news to the modern Philistines concerning the calamity that will come upon the other religionists would be good news to them. The prophet
January 15,1942
5THE WATCHTOWER,
25
of Jehovah says: “Declare ye it not at Gath [In Gath do not tell (Rotherham)}, weep ye not at all; in the house of Aphrah roll thyself in the dust.” (Mic. 1:10) The giant and champion of Gath, Goliath, was slain by David when David was a mere shepherd lad, and from that time on the Philistines had a bitter hatred against the Israelites and thereafter sought to “destroy it for the old hatred”. (Ezek. 25:15-17) In the prophecy of Micah the Lord says ‘it is not to be told in Gath’; and this appears to mean that the message is not to be told for the benefit of the modern Goliath, the giants of the modern Philistines, but Jehovah’s witnesses are to declare the vengeance of Jehovah for the benefit of those that are held in restraint by the Philistines, that is to say, the honest-hearted Catholics, to the end that these might learn the truth and flee from the doomed organization. While the message must tell of the wickedness of the modern Philistines, the real purpose is to benefit the honest people. The witnesses of Jehovah are not to weep at all because of the calamity that shall befall the modern Philistines-or any part of Satan’s organization. The adverse judgment of Jehovah is against all Philistines and all others who are against God and his kingdom, and there shall be no weeping because of the exposure of that crowd and the proclamation of the adverse judgment against them. Jehovah brings punishment upon that city or organization that has assumed his name, and it shall come upon every part of Satan’s organization. (Jer. 25: 28, 29) Says the prophet: “In the house of Aphrah roll thyself in the dust.” The name “Aphrah”, as here used, means “dust”. (Margin) When Jehovah performs “his act, his strange act”, and Satan’s crowd see it about to fall upon them, they will wallow in the dust. This is expressly stated concerning the shepherds and the “principal of the flock”: “Wail, ye shepherds, and cry; and roll yourselves about (in the dust), ye leaders of the flocks; for full are your days for you to be slaughtered, and I will scatter you; and ye shall fall like a costly vessel.”—Jer. 25: 34, Leeser.
33	Jehovah chose Jerusalem and put his name there and made that place “beautiful for situation”. (Ps. 48: 2) Likewise when God, through Christ Jesus and his faithful apostles, began his organization upon the earth and God put his name upon it, that also was beautiful. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy, thereafter organized by Satan, entered in amongst the true followers of Christ Jesus and corrupted the organization on earth, and in time all “Christendom” became corrupt, and the faithful servants of God withdrew therefrom. In relation thereto the prophet says: “Pass ye away, thou inhabitant of Saphir, having thy shame naked: the inhabitant of Zaanan came not forth in the mourning of Beth-ezel; he shall receive of you his standing.” (Mic. 1:11) The name
“Saphir” there used means “beautiful; goodliness”; that which was once beautiful, and which became filthy by reason of the Devil’s planting selfish men therein to corrupt it. The Lord declares his purpose to strip “Christendom” naked, disgrace her. and expose her to shame and contempt. She is now no longer 'garnished by Jehovah’s spirit’. (Job 26:13) Gods faithful servant class alone can say, “The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup; thou maintainest my lot. The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly heritage. 1 will bless the Lord, who hath given me counsel; my reins also instruct me in the night seasons.” (Ps. 16: 3-7) “His enemies will I clothe with shame; but upon himself shall his crown flourish.”—Ps. 132:18.
’4 The prophet Micah here, according to the Ju-thorized Version, says: “The inhabitant of Zaanan came not forth in the mourning of Beth-ezel.” But according to the Rotherham it reads: “The inhab-itress [female] of Zaanan hath not gone forth.” The name “Zaanan” means “migrating”, that is, moving habitually from place to place. This description fits well the hooded female division that is sent forth by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, moving about from place to place to extract hard-earned money from the pockets of the “Catholic population”, which common people are forced by reason of fear to dig up regularly for the support of the unholy organization. Jehovah’s Executioner comes up before the face of this wicked crowd; as it is written: “He that dasheth in pieces is coine up before thy face.” (Nah. 2:1) When this takes place, and is about to fall upon the enemy, these cannot migrate from place to place and gather sustenance from the pastures for the benefit of the worldly crowd of bloodsuckers who defame Jehovah’s name; and in this connection says another prophet of Jehovah: “The Lord hath spoiled their pasture.” (Jer. 25:36) The above-described gatherers of funds from the people go about in a mourning attitude, as if they were poor and needy; but the end of their hypocritical work is soon to come.
,s In recent years the organization once known as “Protestant” has become the ally of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. In this connection note the words of the prophecy, “in the mourning of Beth-ezel.” (Mic. 1:11) According to the other translators it appears that this phrase does not belong to the preceding, but to the words that follow, to wit, “He shall receive of you his standing.” “At the lamentation of Beth-ezel shall he [that is, Jehovah’s Vindicator and Avenger] take from you his station.” (Rotherham) “The wailing of Beth-ezel [ (margin) a place near] shall take from you the stay thereof.” (R.V.) The name “Beth-ezel” means “near-by house”, that is, a neighbor, a stand-by or an ally, or organizations allied together. The alliance of the Roman Catholic
2S	3He WATCHTOWER,	Brooklyn, N. Y.
Hierarchy includes all the neighbor religionists of "Christendom”; and these allies, when it comes to the showdown, will be useless, and their mourning and lamentation will accomplish nothing. It will be no advantage to the allies to be thus associated, because Jehovah’s Executioner will bring down mourning and disaster on the allies, so that the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and every other part of the religious crowd will be unable to stand and none will be able to fall back and receive aid and support their allies. Christ Jesus will execute all the enemies of God. These facts must now be known to those who love the Lord. For this reason he causes them to be made known, so that the man of God may be fully equipped for the war.
86 Immediately following the World War international schemes were brought forward and put into operation in an effort to stabilize the nations and to save the governments from crashing. Such schemes have accomplished nothing, and there have been many of them. Woe after woe has befallen the peoples of earth, and the rulers have refused to hear and learn the reason for such woe and distress. Concerning this it is written in the Scriptures: ‘Woe to the inhabiters of the earth, and of the sea! for the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time.”—Rev. 12:12.
” It has been a time of great sorrow upon the rulers and upon the people, and only those who have turned to the Lord and serve him have understood the reason for such wToe and distress. The clergy would make the people of their parishes to believe that the many woes and distresses upon the world are because the people are not faithful to their church organization. The Scriptures are emphatic in that all these woes proceed from the Devil for the purpose of turning the people away from and causing them to curse God. The clergy therefore are doing the work of Satan in inducing the people to believe that God is sending these woes at the present time, and thus inducing the people to curse God. Referring to this same time Jehovah’s prophet wrote: "For the inhabitant [inhabitress (Rotherham and Leeser)] of Maroth waited carefully [anxiously] for good; but evil came down from the Lord unto the gate of Jerusalem.” (Mic. 1:12) The name “Maroth” means “bitternesses”, such as bitter waters or springs of water. In the face of repeated woes the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, taking the lead, brought together all religious organizations and the principal ones of their flock, including the most unscrupulous politicians and heartless commercial traffickers; and all these together, and with great blare of trumpets, launched the so-called “holy year” and expressed in their loud-sounding prayers and speeches the hope
that the “holy year” would sweep the nations into great prosperity. Dismal failure has been the result, and, instead of great prosperity, the woes increase. Scheme after scheme is brought forth, such as the NRA, which the Roman Catholic Hierarchy claims to have originated, and this falls flat. All such schemes have failed. As the prophet says: “Christendom” waited “anxiously for good” (R.V.), but good did not come. Instead of blessings, such as worldwide prosperity which the worldly-wise prophesied would come, “Christendom” gets exactly what her name here means, that is, bitter things, waters filled with poison, schemes of death and destruction. “Christendom” has turned entirely away from God, and all “Christendom” shall be turned into destruction. “The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God.”—Ps. 9:17.
88 The religionists, and particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, loudly proclaim that they will save the world from disaster, and the rulers who form the principal ones of the flocks join with the religionists in opposing and persecuting all who truly serve God and who declare to the people the real cause of the trouble and what shall be the remedy. Jehovah’s Word makes it clearly to appear that all human schemes for world recovery, reconstruction and stabilization, will end up with bitter realities and the schemes will all fail and disappear. “Organized religion,” the antitype of faithless Jerusalem, cannot possibly save the situation. Particularly since 1918 the organizations of this world have been a real “Maroth”, that is, ever-increasing ‘bitterness’, exactly as the Scriptures have foretold. (Rev. 12:12; 8:10,11) Jehovah will wind up and finish this organization with far greater bitterness at the battle of Armageddon. As the “seven last plagues” have been bitter to “Christendom”, even so with everincreasing bitterness will come the world’s complete destruction. “Behold, their valiant ones shall cry without; the ambassadors of peace shall weep bitterly.” (Isa. 33: 7) “And I [Jehovah] will make it as the mourning of an only son. and the end thereof as a bitter day.” (Amos 8:10) “The great day of the Lord is near, it is near, and hasteth greatly, even the voice of the day of the Lord; the mighty man shall cry there bitterly.” (Zeph. 1:14) As that bitter climax comes near God commands his witnesses in thunder tones sounding above the bitter weeping of the world, saying to his people: “Let not thine hands be slack.” (Zeph. 3:16) The Watchtower urgently calls attention to these things, and repeatedly does so, that the witnesses whom Jehovah has commissioned may not become negligent in obeying the commandments of the Lord. The “great multitude” must be warned and helped to see their privileges.
88 Verse twelve of Micah’s prophecy further says:
January 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER,
27
“Evil came down from the Lord unto the gate of Jerusalem.” Manifestly this refers to Jehovah’s “work”, which stings and brings into disgrace the religionists, and more particularly to Jehovah’s “strange act”, which will completely destroy unfaithful Jerusalem and all other parts of Satan’s organization. “Organized religion” and her allies continue to look to earthly things, human institutions, for good, entirely ignoring God and his provision for the human race. Instead of good resulting to them, their woes continue. The woe that the Devil brings upon the people is that of general suffering, whereas the “evil” that the Lord brings upon the clergy is first to disgrace them by exposing them and then to completely destroy them at Armageddon.
40	Further addressing the headstrong and boastful, who have forsaken God and who are now God-forsaken, the prophet of the Most High says: “0 thou inhabitant [inhabitress (Hebrew)] of Lachish, bind the chariot to the swift beast [the steed (Rotherham) ; horses (Leeser)] : she is the beginning of the sin to the daughter of Zion; for the transgressions of Israel were found in thee.”—Mic. 1:13.
41	The name “Lachish” means “obstinate, height, impregnable”. In ancient times the city of Lachish had. been made a fortified city by the unfaithful king Rehoboam. (2 Chron. 11: 5, 9) In bringing about the destruction of Jerusalem Nebuchadnezzar, the executioner of Jehovah at that time, fought against Lachish. (Jer. 34:7) Now “Christendom”, which is unfaithful to God and which was foreshadowed by unfaithful Jerusalem, is involved and is in for a cleanup. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy has always been against God and his kingdom, although, falsely, claiming to represent God and Christ. In these latter days all the organizations religious have joined hands with the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and all have trusted, and continue to trust, in the governments of the nations of this world, as high and impregnable fortresses, as a place of defense and security; but none of those so-called impregnable forces shall be able to stand when Jehovah’s Executioner moves into action.
42	In this part of the prophecy the beginning of the sin of “organized Christianity”, or “organized religion”, is named. According to another translation the text reads: “Bind the chariot to the swift steed, 0 inhabitant of Lachish: she was the beginning of sin to the daughter of Zion; for the transgressions of Israel were found in thee.”—Mic. 1:13, A.R.V.
43	The city of Lachish is not the “beginning of the sin”, but the beginning of the sin is “the chariot” to which the sw’ift steed is bound. Steeds or horses are symbolic of military equipment of the world of Satan. When God made a covenant with Israel in Moab, he anticipated that Israel would desire and would
set up a king, and concerning the king Jehovah commanded what should be done, in these words: "But he shall not multiply horses to himself, nor cause the people to return to Egypt [for military equipment or help], to the end that he should multiply horses [to be bound to chariots]; forasmuch as the Lord hath said unto you, Ye shall henceforth return no more that way.”—Deut. 17:16.
44	But in time the Israelites entirely forgot this commandment of the Lord. It is written that Solomon had forty thousand horses for his chariots. (1 Ki. 4: 26) He had “cities for his chariots, and cities for his horsemen”, and “rulers of his chariots, and his horsemen”. (1 Ki. 9:19-22) He had horses aud chariots brought up out of Egypt. (1 Ki. 10:26-29) He forgot to depend on the Lord, but disregarded God's commandment and went according to the ways that “Christendom” now goes. “Organized religion” or “Christendom” has made a like grievous error. Those great religionists claim to represent God, but instead of depending on God they have depended upon the strong military arm of this world, that is, the 'chariots’ and ‘swift beasts’. In this they have shown a lack of faith in God, and because of fear of man the whole organization of “Christendom” has been brough: into the snare of the Devil. The beginning of this sin of the professed daughter of Jerusalem, that is, “organized Christianity” so called, was the putting of faith in and depending upon the military and strong powers of this world for help, and thereby entirely departing from Jehovah God.
45	Referring to this same thing the psalmist says: “Some trust in chariots, and some in horses; but we will remember the name of the Lord our God.” (Ps. 20: 7, 8) But it is certain, as stated by Jehovah, that the power in which “Christendom” has trusted has completely failed her. “And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord, that I will cut off thy horses out of the midst of thee, and I will destroy thy chariots.” (Mic. 5:10) Now "Christendom” faces that foretold destruction. The transgression of God’s law is seen, and says God’s prophet: “For the transgressions of Israel [Jacob the unfaithful, who started to serve God] were found in thee.” Then the question is propounded, “AVhat is the transgression of Jacob [Israel] ?” (Vs. 5) The answer is: “The sin of Samaria.” It was found in unfaithful Jerusalem, and now that similar condition and sin is found in “Christendom”. The “sin of Samaria” was and is creature worship, Devil worship, rebellion against God's commandment, the worship of creatures and things, and all this in plain violation of God’s law. At the present time this sin has reached a climax in an attempt by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their allies to compel the people to salute men and flags and other things and thereby attribute protection and salva
28
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
tion to things of this world, whereas all protection and salvation is of God through Christ Jesus. The remnant and the Jonadabs stand out firmly against such sinful practice; and with determination to not yield to the enemy, these faithful ones attribute and boldly make known that all protection and salvation is of God through Christ Jesus.
46	Jerusalem was unfaithful to God, and likewise her antitype, “Christendom,” has proved entirely unfaithful to God. The judgment against the offenders has been written: “Therefore shalt thou give presents [dismissals (Hebrew); a dismission (Roth.); a parting gift (A.R.P.) ] to Moresheth-gath: the houses of Achzib shall be a lie to the kings of Israel.” (Mic. 1:14) The name “Moresheth-gath” used in this prophecy means “possession of Gath, or, inheritance of Gath”, and the name appears to be used ironically towards Jerusalem, and her antitype, that is, “Christendom.” Instead of possessing and inheriting, Jerusalem would have to yield it up as a possession of her enemy, and would also be compelled to dismiss or let go her enemy with presents or gifts, thereby losing the city, and be compelled to pay in addition to that loss. This was illustrated when the Israelites were leaving Egypt and when the Egyptians gave to them jewels of silver, and of gold and raiment. The Hebrews spoiled the Egyptians. (Ex. 12:35,36) It foreshadowed what should come to “Christendom”. “Christendom” will be compelled to surrender what she looked upon as her possession and inheritance and to suffer additional ills. “Christendom,” and particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, boastfully says: “We will possess and rule the world, because that is our right.” Instead of realizing that desire, “Christendom” will have to yield possession to her enemy, the Executioner of Jehovah, because Jehovah’s King has received from the hand of the Alo&t High “the nations for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron ; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel”. (Ps. 2:8, 9, A.R.V.) Those who are faithful unto God and unto their covenant shall be with Christ Jesus and, by the grace of Jehovah, shall with him be joint-heirs in all of his possession and inheritance.—Rom. 8:16,17.
*' According to the American Revised Version the latter part of the verse (Micah 1:14) reads: “The houses of Achzib shall be a deceitful thing unto the kings of Israel.” The name “Achzib” means “deceitful, falsehood, or, a deceitful thing”. True to the name, the houses of Achzib became an unfaithful ally and yielded to Sennacherib, forsaking the alliance with Israel. The Hebrews called Achzib by the name ‘liar’ or ‘deceitful’. It was “as a liar, and as waters that fail” in the summer heat.—Jer. 15:18.
48 The religionists of “Christendom” have made an
alliance with the commercial traffickers and professional politicians and all other elements of Satan’s seed, and look to such for help; but her allies or helpers will fail her and “Christendom” will say: “My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook, and as the stream of brooks they pass away.” (Job 6:15) The Roman Catholic Hierarchy and her co-religionists constitute ‘the house of lies and deceit’, and that wicked organization hides her crookedness behind such deceit and lies and depends upon the same for protection and strength. That hypocritical organization says, as God’s prophet foretold she would say: “We have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid ourselves.” But the Lord declares that such refuge of lies he will completely destroy. The reason is, Jehovah declares that he will sweep away the refuge of lies and expose the wickedness of those religious organizations and completely destroy the same, and the religion mongers also. (Isa. 28:15-21) For a long while now the religionists have tried to make themselves popular with their allies, the commercial traffickers and politicians, by howling long and loud in defense of the present world powers, and declaring themselves as the supporters of these world powers. Thus they have shown themselves, as the Scriptures declare, as the open enemies of God; and being God’s enemies, they shall, together with all other enemies, suffer complete destruction.—Jas. 4: 4.
48 Those who love and serve Jehovah are now being permitted to see the light shining upon the prophecies of Jehovah, by means of which they are given an understanding of God’s purposes to complete!} destroy the religious organizations and the men who use them to carry on their cruel racket, and to also destroy all other elements of Satan’s organization: and that such destruction is near at hand. The revealing of these truths to his witnesses in this day of Jehovah lays upon the consecrated and anointed ones a far greater obligation than they have heretofore had or seen. What is Jehovah’s purpose in now permitting his people to have an understanding of his prophecies? Manifestly his chief purpose is that his people, whom he has taken out of the world for his name, may see and understand their great privilege of bearing his name and exhibiting the same before the people and telling the people of God’s purpose before Jehovah’s great power is executed against the enemy. Never before has there been given to creatures such a privilege, and it clearly appears that there never again will be another such opportunity to bear witness to the name of Jehovah God. Long ago Jehovah appointed Christ Jesus the heir of all things; and the time is at hand for Christ Jesus to take possession of all things, and the time is also at hand for these great truths to be made known to the
January 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
29
world, and particularly to those of good-will, that they may seek a place of refuge and safety. As the examination of this prophecy continues it will be seen that by his prophet Micah God foretells the taking possession of all things by the Lord Jesus Christ, and what shall follow. The greatest crisis of all time is here, and it behooves everyone that would live to acquaint himself with the present-day truths and hasten to obey the Lord, the rightful King of the world, who is now present and moving into possession of his inheritance. These truths The Watchtower endeavors to publish in harmony with God’s will,
and the privilege and obligation is laid upon all the Jonadabs, as well as upon the remnant, to study the prophecies, that they may be equipped to perform the part assigned to them in Jehovah’s great arrangement. These great truths Jehovah has hidden in his Word until his due time to vindicate his name; and that time is now here. It behooves all, therefore, who would live, to avail themselves of the opportunity of knowing Jehovah God and his purpose, and to sing forth the praises of his King and of his Kingdom.
(To be continued)
DAILY TEXTS AND COMMENTS
JANUARY 17
Wherein God, willing more abundantly to shew unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath.—Ileb. 6:17.
Men who have pledged themselves to serve Jehovah God have divided themselves into two classes: some have departed from that covenant, while others have been faithful. The failure of some, in turning away from their covenant, has in no wise altered His announced purpose. Having purposed it, he will do it. There cannot be the slightest doubt about the result in the mind of one who loves Jehovah, and for the comfort and assurance of his faithful servants Jehovah supports his word by his unbreakable oath. From Abel to the last of God’s holy prophets there were faithful men on the earth who not only believed in The Theocracy but staked their all on it and gladly suffered martyrdom rather than to yield to the enemy’s power, and thus they maintained integrity to God. IV 3/15/4.1
JANUARY 18
Blessed is the nation whose God is Jehovah, the people whom he hath chosen.—Ps. 33:12, Am. Rev. Ver.
Set over in contrast with the wicked are those who have covenanted to do God’s will and who faithfullj' and steadfastly abide by that agreement and carry out their covenant. The destiny for such is life everlasting in peace, joy and glory forever in the presence of the Most High. That “blessed nation” is the nation of which Christ Jesus is the Head, and including all who are made members of God's capital organization under Christ. Now God’s time has come when he, by Christ Jesus, is gathering to himself his “other sheep”. These should be enlightened concerning what is required of all who undertake to be servants of God and Christ. What God has caused to be written in his Word of and concerning others that have gone before serves to furnish a guide to those who are now seeking the way of faithful service and everlasting life. IV 7/1/41
JANUARY 19
He gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.
—John 3:16.
Man is given the choice of believing on the Lord Jesus Christ, if he would live and not perish. It follows, therefore, if he does not believe he will perish. Man was already subject to death by reason of inheriting the result of Adam’s violation of God's law, and now Jehovah was giving man an opportunity to choose to extricate himself from death by
taking the side of the Lord Jesus Christ. If a man does not choose to take that step, then what? “He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life; and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him.” (Vs. 36) This is in harmony with the statement of the divine rule announced by Moses, in which Jehovah set before the Israelites life or death and permitted them to choose their way.—Deut. 30:19. IV 2/1/41
JANUARY 20
Then the people of Jehovah went down to the gates Awake, aivake, Deborah; awake, awake, utter a song: Arise, Barak.
—Judg. 5:11,12, Am. Rev 1'cr.
Four times the word “awake” is uttered. It was a call from Jehovah to his servants then to awake and stir themselves unto active service and praise of IIis name It was a fourfold call to awake, hence a full and complete call. The prophecy here foretells the call of Jehovah to his organization on earth (“Deborah”) at the coming of Christ Jesus (“Barak”) to awake and arise to activity and to advertise his name and his kingdom. This he does just preceding the time when he exercises his supreme power against Satan and his entire organization. Those of Jehovah’s organization must obey his commandment to immediately and actively participate in declaring the name of Jehovah in singing his praises, and declaring his judgment already written against those who are opposed to him and to his kingdom. IT 4/1/41
JANUARY 21
I delight to do thy will, 0 my God; yea, thy law is within my heart.—Ps. 40: 8.
Because of his full and complete obedience unto his Father under the most trying conditions Jesus was given life immortal, the highest place in the universe next to Jehovah, and the administration of Jehovah’s will (Phil. 2:8-11) Because of his complete obedience Christ Jesus is made the Author of eternal salvation to all that obey him. (Heb 5: 8, 9) It is of the greatest importance to know these facts, if one would live. All humankind were born in sin because of the sin committed by Adam, and therefore all of his children inherited death. God has provided redemption and salvation of men from death by and through the sacrifice of the man Jesus unto death God therefore provides the gift of life to all men who believe on the Lord Jesus Christ as the Savior and who then covenant to be obedient to the laws of God and hence obedient to Christ Jesus. IV 2/15/41
30
WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
JANUARY 22
The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto their cry.—Ps. 34:15.
Jehovah beholds the righteous in distress, hears their cry for help, and delivers them. He deals exactly in an opposite manner with the wicked, and the memory of them shall perish from the earth. As all are born in sin by reason of the disobedience of the first man, a man becomes righteous only by faith in Jehovah and in Christ Jesus’ shed blood as his redemptive price, and by full consecration and obedience to God and Christ. Before man can be made righteous he must show’ his faith in God and in Christ Jesus by willingly making a covenant to do the will of the Most High, and then he must maintain his righteousness which he has received through Christ Jesus by faithfully performing the terms of that covenant. He must be entirely for Jehovah and his kingdom and not compromise with the enemy. IV 5/1/41
SKSVKW'i 23
Noah was a just man, and perfect in his generations, and Noah walked with God.—Gen. 6: 9.
“Perfect” is defined by the best Biblical authorities as “blameless, sound, sincere, undcfiled and upright, one of integrity and a bearer of the truth”. Noah was a man of faith, and he was faithfully obedient to God. He ascertained God’s commandment and rendered himself in obedience thereto. It follows, therefore, that every’ other who may expect and hope to receive God’s approval must be just, sincere, pure in thought and action, a bearer of the truth, and one who maintains his integrity toward God. He must have faith in God and be faithfully obedient to God’s will or commandment. Noah was a “preacher of righteousness” at a time when the earth was filled with violence. Undoubtedly he maintained his integrity toward God under great adversity and shunned not to declare the truth under all circumstances, which truth he received from God. IV 5/15/41
JANUARY 24
His secret is with the righteous.—Prov. 3:32.
The purpose of Jehovah is a secret to sinful men. Since each announced purpose of Jehovah is a secret, his covenant is a secret to all against The Theocracy. What, then, is required of man before he can be taken into covenant with Jehovah’’ He must fear God. He must have knowledge that the Almighty God is Jehovah, the Creator, the Fountain of life, and the only Giver of life everlasting He then recognizes Jehovah as the all-powerful One who is just and righteous and entirely unselfish. Believing that all blessings flow from Almighty God, the creature man fears to take any course that would cause him to miss the blessings God gives. He believes that disobedience to God would cause him to lose God’s favor, and fears lest he might not receive God’s favor. He desires to be taught of God, that he may’ go in the right way. W 6/15/41
JANUARY 25
Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof.—Rom. 6:12.
Why have so many creatures failed? There has been one chief besetting sin that has caused failure, and that besetting sin is demonism, otherwise ealled “religion”. It was that close-girdling sin, religion, concerning which the apostle wrote to those who had made a covenant to be faithful servants and witnesses of Jehovah: ‘Let us lay aside every
weight and the sin which so easily besets us ’ God's people today have all the wealth of his revealed Word and the record of faithful men who have gone before and who proved their integrity tow’ard God, together now with an abundance of physical facts which have come to pass in fulfillment of God’s prophecies, to uphold and strengthen them and to fully fortify them against all opposition and violence heaped upon them by the enemies of The Theocracy. IV 3/15/41
J ANU ARY 26
The Lord preserveth the faithful.—Ps. 31:23.
There are those who have made a covenant to do God’s will and who later, because of fear of man. and particularly’ of those who rule, have declined to take any part in His “strange work” and have withdrawn themselves from activity. Such fearful and negligent ones will not receive any protection and blessing from the Lord. The faithful and obedient ones, who do not fear men but who fear God and joyfully obey his commandments, will receive protection and blessings from the Lord Jehovah and his King. The faithful “remnant” and their true “companions”, the Lord’s “other sheep”, now read the prophecies and their explanations which God has provided, and, so doing, they rejoice that the evidence is clear that the day’ of deliverance from oppression is near at hand and the day’ of vindication of Jehovah’s name will be the result. They’ have faith that God will do exactly as he has promised. W 4/15/41
JANUARY 27
For the commandment is a lamp, and the law is light; and reproofs of instruction are the way of life.—Prov. 6: 23.
The person who desires God’s approval must be guided aright. The Bible, which contains God’s Word, is true and is the correct guide: “Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path.” (Ps. 119:105) The Bible guides sincere persons to desire and pray’ for the most important things that may result to their welfare. God has put such prayers into the mouth of his sincere servants, and one of these prayers is this: “Shew me thy ways, 0 Lord , teach me thy paths. Lead me in thy truth, and teach me” (Ps 25:4,5) The sure and unfailing promises of God to such sincere seekers for truth arc certain, and God will fulfill those promises. He who would be wise in things that are right seeks pure knowledge, such as is contained in the Bible: “Wise men lay up knowledge.”—Prov. 10:14 IV 6/1/41
JANUARY 28
He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathercth not with me scattercth—Luke 11:23.
A man may be ignorantly against The Theocracy and the King thereof, but when he is enlightened he must quickly turn about and take the right course, and, doing so, he will be forgiven. When a man learns of Jehovah and his gracious goodness manifested through Christ Jesus and then treats that great truth with indifference or with willfulness, his wrong course is not forgivable. He thus sins auamst light or against the holy spirit, which is light The blood of Christ Jesus is the price that purchased mankind, and is not a common thing. Therefore when a man sees and understands that his hope of life is by faith and obedience unto Jehovah God and Christ and he then spurns or disregards that favor, the wrath of God remains upon him and his end is with all others of the wicked class. IV 5/1/41
January 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER,
31
JANUARY 29
Noah went in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives with him, into the ark, because of the .waters of the flood.
—Gen. 7:7.
The people in Noah’s day heard the sound of his voice warning of the coming flood, but they gave no heed to that warning. They knew Noah was building the great boat, which was a testimony of his faith in God, but the people who saw it regarded it as of no importance. Noah’s work and testimony were so important in the carrying out of Jehovah’s purposes that God used him to foretell what must come to pass at the time of setting up the Kingdom. The ark which Noah built at Jehovah’s command pictured the organization built by the Host High through Christ Jesus and which is God's capital organization with Christ Jesus as Head. Carrying the eight persons over the flood pictured the survivors of Armageddon that God will carry over to the new world. IV 5/15/41
JANUARY 30
A wise man will hear, and will increase learning; and a man of understanding shall attain unto wise counsels.
—Prov. 1:5.
Who will hear, give heed, understand, and choose the way of life 1 Jehovah's answer is: “The wise shall understand.” God's Word shows that there are two classes now on the earth: (1) those who will be wise and shall find the way to righteousness and life; and (2), the other class, which continues in wickedness, darkness and religion, and remains under condemnation and suffers eternal death. The present is “the time of the end”, that is, the end of Satan’s uninterrupted rule. Such is the due time for those who are wise to understand Jehovah’s purpose and take the course that leads to life everlasting. Now is the due time when those who shall form the "great multitude” must hear and choose wisely, and will understand. For this reason the Lord causes the message of The Theocracy to be sounded. W 7/15/41
JANUARY 31
The government shall be upon his shoulder; and his name shall be called . . . The everlasting Father, The Prince
of Peace.—Isa. 9: 6.
Centuries ago Jehovah announced his purpose to create and set up a paternalistic government, to be presided oier by his beloved Son. That government is the great Theocracy, by which Christ Jesus exercises a paternal care over the interests of the people that shall live on the earth. lie is the King and the Father of them that obey him, and they, as his children, will address Christ Jesus as “Father". Jehovah God is the King of Eternity, and the fountain of life None can get life contrary to his will. Jehovah has delegated to his beloved Son, the King, full authority to administer life to those who shall receive life everlasting. In these latter days the Most High has made this fact clear to those who have fled to the Lord and found refuge. IT 9/1/41
FEBRUARY 1
Still he holdeth fast his integrity.—Job 2:3.
Integrity means “innocence, blamelessness, that is, without fault”. Job stood for Jehovah and his promised Kingdom. Job held fast his integrity, and therefore was blameless before God. Was he blameless because he was perfect in organism and had the right to life? No; he was the offspring of Adam and hence under condemnation. His integrity, or blamelessness, consisted in the fact that he refused to be moved from his steadfast devotion to God and his coming Kingdom by the Messiah. Job would suffer all things rather than be unfaithful to The Theocracy. Job’s integrity foretells that those whom he pictured must be immovabh devoted to the Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, and that regardless of what the enemy is permitted to inflict upon them. They must remain faithful, true and wholly devoted thereto. In no other way could they be blameless before God. IT 8/15/41
(Continued from page IS)
never has it been more valuable than today, at this world crisis, when the destiny of each intelligent human creature is being decided. The getting of correct information and instruction, just such as is required for the times, to decide your course wisely to a happy destiny, was never more vital than now, for “where there is no vision, the people perish”. Informed persons well acquainted with the consistent contents of The Watchtower agree that those who want to gain life in peace and happiness without end should read and study it together with the Bible and in company with other readers. This is not giving any credit to the magazine’s publishers, but is due to the great Author of the Bible with its truths and prophecies, and who now interprets its prophecies by events in fulfillment and thereby enlightens the meek ones concerning the establishment of his Theocratic Government and its blessings and requirements for those who shall live He it is that makes possible the material that is pubbshed in the columns of this magazine and who gives promise that it shall continue to publish the advancing truths as long as it continues to exist for the service of the interests of his Theocratic Government. Carefully and prayerfully read this issue of The Watchtower. Then do not delay to mail in your subscription that you may receive it regularly, twice a month, twenty-four copies the year. It is only $1.00 in the United States, or $1.50 in foreign countries.
RE THE 1942 YEARBOOK
Due to the uncertain and disrupted conditions on earth over which we have no control the information for the compilation of
a report of the work world-wide for the service year 1940-1941 is belated. Hence the production of the 1942 Yearbook of Jehovah’s witnesses has been unavoidably held up. Announcement of its publication will be made shortly, and which report, we believe, will be well worth waiting for.
1942 CALENDAR
The text chosen for the year 1942, to wit, “Blameless in the day of our Lord” (1 Cor 1:8), provides the theme for a calendar picture which is most befitting these days of decision Highly artistic and novel, the picture clearly and eloquently sets out the choice God’s covenant people must make concerning the great issue of world domination Beneath is a neat calendar pad, indicating the line of activity of Jehovah’s blameless ones for each month of 1942, naming the special Testimony Periods and also the special endeavors to be made during the intervening months. The contribution for this service calendar is 25c each, or $1 00 for 5 copies mailed together to one address. Companies should send in combination orders, with remittance to cover, through their local company servant.
"WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of February 15: “Micah” (Part 2), fl 1-25 inclusive, The Watchtower January 15, 1942.
Week of February 22: “Micah” (Part 2), fl 26-49 inclusive, The Watchtower January 15, 1942.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
TAKING THEIR STAND IN NEW MEXICO
“Another magazine publisher and I called at each room in an Albuquerque hotel, assisted by the bellboy, who told us when the people in the different rooms would be in. Completing the rooms, we proceeded to the lobby to offer the magazines there. One man refused The Watchtower, saying that it was against the government and we were conscientious objectors and should all be in concentration camps and that’s where we would be soon. The hotel manager, having overheard the conversation, said he was glad to contribute for The Watchtower, as he knew something about us, that he knew our organization was the first that had been stopped in Germany. The man who had refused The Watchtower, overhearing the hotel manager, had nothing more to say. In an apartment house, my knock caused two adjacent doors to be opened at the same time. The clergyman answering one door said: 'Don’t go in there: that woman’s mind is unbalanced.’ The lady at the door where I knocked stepped out and said: ‘Young man, how dare you tell anyone not to come into my house with a phonograph. I will have the law put you out.’ Then to me she said: ‘Come right in and play the record.’ At its conclusion she remarked how well she appreciated it, inviting me to call back again. She expressed shame that her preacher-neighbor had ordered me away, saying she knew he sold dope and that she would make it necessary for him to move away. Around the block, a young lady of about 25 answered the door and invited me to play the record. Inside, the landlord Catholic priest quickly rose from his chair and said: ‘No, you don’t want to hear that—it is against us Catholics’ (waving his arms in rage). The girl said: 'Yes, I want to hear it.’ He said: ‘No, if you listen to that you arc not a true Catholic.’ She: ‘You can’t give me life, and I want life.’ The priest then addressed me: 'You can't play that in my house.’ I then showed her Conspiracy Against Democracy (with one of the conspirators glaring at me, white with anger). Said the lady • ‘Yes, I want that, he can’t keep me from reading it, and you people call again when he is not in.’ ”
IN BOMB-SCARRED LIVERPOOL
"One Saturday morning I called upon a lady. After explaining to her the message on my Testimony card, she decided to take the booklets Government and Peace and Refugees. I called back to see how she enjoyed them, and she told me she started to read them the same night, when she was alone, owing to her husband’s working as a bus conductor until midnight, as it was his turn to work late duty. This lady lives in Kensington, a suburb of Liverpool, and this particular night was the worst they had ever had for air raids. Strange to say, she never heard the air-raid warning, neither did she hear the noise of exploding bombs, and was quite surprised when her husband came and told her what a terrible night it had been. I started a model study of the Bible with her, which she greatly enjoys, and she has subscribed for The Watchtower. She now comes out on the work when she can, and also attends the Watchtower study. She is full of questions when I go. Her husband also reads the publication. She says the truth is marvelous, and she realizes that religion has become political and commercial. What comfort those first two booklets gave!”
UNDER THE SAME CARETAKER
“A publisher (Bergen, N.J.) brings Mrs. H------ The
Watchtower and Consolation every week, and learns that she has a crippled sister in Leicester, England, from whom she has not heard recently. In Consolation she reads of bombing raids on Leicester, and wonders about her sister, and writes, mentioning the article in Consolation and that it is the first she has heard of the raids. A lovely calm letter returns from the sister, assuring Mrs. H that she is all right and not mentioning the bombing raids at all, but rather that two lovely Jehovah witnesses sisters call on her regularly and bring her great comfort—and now hold a study in her home each week. P. S. Mrs. H sees the Lord’s care over her sister all the time she has been anxious about her, and now Mrs. H is a Jehovah’s witness herself'.”
IF YOUR MAGAZINE ACCOUNT IS GOOD
“While engaged in street-witnessing work with the magazines, at Tucson, Arizona, five of us, all pioneers but one, were arrested for ‘peddling without a license’. We were thrown into a filthy jail, full of drunks because this was the week-end, and all night long the place was a madhouse. Fighting and cursing went on till Sunday morning. However, when most of these sobered up, they were of good-will, and resented the injustice done to us, and they gladly received the message of God’s kingdom. One prisoner, being held for burglary in several states, reminded us many times to send him literature when he goes up to serve eight years in prison. Another Mexican, who had been fighting all night, asked questions all the next day, and he promised to come to the Watchtower studies when released. (He came to our house the other day and took the book Children.) We were in jail five days and found many ‘sheep’ who recognized our message as the truth. One army boy, arrested for stealing an auto while drunk, told us when he sobered up that he came from St. Louis, Mo. On being asked if he remembered the Theocratic convention of Jehovah’s witnesses, he immediately answered: ‘Oh, sure, I went to hear Judge Rutherford, “one of the boys.” I’ve been to some Watchtower meetings, and they’re the best I’ve ever been to.’ Many other prisoners eagerly ate up all we had to tell them. When we were finally released on bail, immediately we made preparations for Saturday’s magazine work We printed stickers entitled ‘Free Sample’ to be placed on our magazine bags. Also all the back-date magazines we could get hold of were stamped ‘Free sample copy’ (we had been arrested following the State Supreme Court decision that receiving a contribution for literature was selling). Several hours were set aside that Saturday for street distribution, and by the end of the first hour we had placed, by the Lord’s grace, 300 magazines. By evening we placed the grand total of 787 magazines. These were placed in the hands of many people of good-will for the reason that the ‘goats’ refused to take them, even though they were free. The police could find no excuse to interfere, and a great many people said they saw no reason for arresting us in sueh a wonderful work. Thus was shown again to the Lord’s people how Satan’s plots backfire and work to the interest of Jehovah’s Theocracy.”
32
THE WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S.A.
OFFICERS
N. H. Knorr, President	W. E. Van Ambut.gh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” ~ Isaiah §4:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos Is now the Lord Jesns Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it Is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God's kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah's kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan's organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS Journal la published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for Its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge In controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, JI.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, JI 50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6r. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British____________________ 34 Craven Terrace. London, W.2, England
Canadian.........._..... 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian__________7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. 3. W„ Australia
South African Boston House, Cape Torrn, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, norc-tv or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may bate The 11 atch-tower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are giad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers' Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Chance of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one mon’li A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires
Entcied as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, .V. Y., under the Act of llarch 3, 1879.
MEMORIAL
Tuesday, March 31. after six pm, is the date Scripturally arrived at for 1942 for the memorial celebration to both Jehovah’s name and the sacrifice of the Lamb of God. Christ Jesus, his Theocratic King. Each Christian company, therefore, should assemble after six p.m. of March 31, and the anointed ones thereof celebrate the Memorial, their companions the ‘‘other sheep” being piesent as observers. If there is no competent person present to deliver a brief discourse immediately before the partaking of the emblems, that short article appealing in the March 15, 1939, issue of The Watchtower should be read before those assembled prior to partaking. Since the breaking of the bread and drinking of the wine both picture the death of Jesus, it follows that both emblems should be served together at partaking, and not separately. The emblems should be unleavened bread and real red wine. Jesus and his apostles used real red wane in symbol of his blood, and the anointed remnant should follow their lead. A report of the celebration should be made to the Society as instructed in the Informant. In preparation therefor the article “Memorial” suggested above will be studied with profit.
“INTEGRITY” TESTIMONY PERIOD
Midwinter field maneuvers test the integrity, and the united testimony period during February is appropriately thus named. This “Integrity” Testimony Period is the opening month of the
1942 three-month Watchtower campaign, hence the people of integrity toward God now specialize on taking subscript ions for the magazine The Watchtower, announcing Jehovah's kingdom or Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus Additional to the intrinsic value of the magazine itself, the latest book, Children, is given as a premium with all new subscriptions for a vear, and that at the regular subscription rate of $1 00. God’s people of integrity will be steadfast therein and will prove their blamelessness of devotion by taking part in this Testimony regardless of the cost to self. Many newly interested readers of The Watchtower. deeply appreciating it, will be desirous of joining in this special testimony privilege, and we invite such to write this office for references needed to put them in touch with the nearest local company organized for this campaign. A record should be kept of all work done and the result, and the same reported in the appointed manner at the close of February.
1942 YEARBOOK OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
It is now available, this new Yearbook the publication of which was held up owing to circumstances which you will appreciate when you read it. Yet the interest which this 1942 Yearbook holds for all who are concerned about the progress of God's work in the earth remains just as vital and presently helpful as if issued
(Continued on page 47)
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
No. LXIII	February 1, 1942	No. 3
FINAL GATHERING
"Behold, I will send for many fishers, saith the Lord, and they shall fish them; and after ivill I send for many hunters, and they shall hunt them from every mountain, and from every hill, and out of the holes of the rocks."—J er. 16:16.
JEHOVAH knows who are his people. He knows where they have been scattered by the forces of demonism. “The foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his.” (2 Tim. 2:19) He declares it to be his irresistible and unalterable purpose to gather together in one all intelligent creatures on earth, whether of the spiritual or of the earthly class, who take their stand for his Theocratic Government by the Messiah. This gathering together to the Lord’s side must take place before the final war of Armageddon, and hence those gathered must flee now from the enemy organization and to The Theocracy. That Government is now in operation in the midst of its enemies. The time has come to the full for the administration or “dispensation” of the great Messiah at God’s right hand, and the gathering has been in progress now since A.D. 1918, first of the spiritual class, and more recently of the other class who shall live on earth forever in unbroken peace and happiness under the righteous dispensation of The Theocracy. “He hath purposed in himself: that in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him.”—Eph. 1: 9,10.
2 The beginning of the righteous administration means that the nations of the world have reached “the time of the end”. That time began with the incoming of the day of Jehovah in 1914, and the final end thereof will come at Armageddon. There the primary issue of universal domination will be settled once and for all time. The Theocracy will settle it right, which is, in favor of the great Theocrat, Jehovah, the Almighty God. That victory will be a vindication of God’s name and will mean deliverance and blessing to all creatures who live and who love righteousness and truth. Jehovah is the Supreme Being and the only source of life, of law and of order, and his Theocratic rule over all the universe, including this earth, is the only rightful rule.
Because of the important bearing of the prophecy npon Jehovah's '‘strange work” of the immediate present time, this article takes the place of Part 3 of the series on “Micah”, and Part 3 will be published in the next issue.
’ The nations of the earth, particularly those that make up so-called “Christendom”, have been notified and warned by those whom God has gathered and whom he has made his witnesses, of and concerning his purpose to establish the Theocratic rule over the earth by and through his King, Christ Jesus. The nations have treated God’s faithful witnesses with contempt; they have spurned the message these witnesses have faithfully proclaimed, and they have preferred to ignore God and have chosen the rule of demons in furtherance of their own selfish schemes for world domination. They leave the expressed will and written Word of God out of all their plans; they put not their trust in Jehovah to set up his righteous kingdom over humankind by his own almighty power; they prefer to exercise governmental control themselves and refuse to entertain any thought of the direct rule of God by his King Christ Jesus, or submit thereto. They take the name of God upon their lips in connection with their religious rites, but by their course of action they have forgotten Him. God’s judgment concerning them is: “The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God.” (Ps. 9:17) Shortly they shall suffer the same fate as unfaithful Jerusalem in the days of Jeremiah, and which city became religious and broke her covenant with Jehovah God and was completely destroyed by his executioner. Religious Jerusalem was the prototype of present-day “Christendom”. All who abide in her and support her and trust in her leadership shall go down into the ditch of “hell” with her, suffering a like fate as did the demon religionists of Jerusalem. Then only the prophet Jeremiah and his faithful companions, such as the Jona-dabs and Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, escaped with their lives and with God’s approval. Likewise at Armageddon only members of the spiritual remnant faithful to Jehovah God, and also their devoted earthly companions, shall escape destruction of “Christendom” and the other nations of the world.
35
36
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. ¥.
1 The establishment of The Theocratic Government of Jehovah God in the hands of his beloved King in 1914, and the proclamation of its establishment thereafter, have served as a great judgment test of all on earth, both those claiming to be “Christians’’ or in a covenant with God and those composing the nations of -the world. As anointed King, Christ Jesus also exercises judicial functions, and has come to the place of judgment, God's temple. The judgment has been in progress since 1918, with his coming then to the temple. He examines first his own servants to whom he has committed his Kingdom interests, “his goods,” and then those who profess to be his servants but who are evil, slothful and wicked servants and in reality servants of the enemy. “For the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God: and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the gospel of God? And if the righteous [servant] scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?” (1 Pet. 4:17,18) Thereafter the judgment proceeds to all the nations of the world, particularly ■Christendom”, which claims to serve God and to be his kingdom.
5	This order of judgment was shown in Jesus’ prophecy concerning events at the end of the world of Satan, where we now are. The Lord Jesus there foretold that Jehovah’s “faithful and wise servant” would become manifest, and also “that evil servant”. (Matt. 24:45-51) Then the Lord gave the parable of the wise and the foolish virgins, illustrating the same two classes, and their final judgment. (Matt. 25:1-13) Also the parable of the servants to whom their lord entrusted the talents of his kingdom interests, which servants their lord at his coming as ruler or king judged, rewarding the faithful servants and causing the wicked and slothful servant to be cast out of his organization and into the world in darkness. (Matt. 25: 14-30) Then the Lord Jesus concluded his prophecy by giving the parable concerning the judgment of the nations at his return as King and Judge, in which judgment the people of goodwill who do good to his brethren who are Jehovah’s witnesses are symbolized by sheep and gathered to his right side of favor and protective power; and those who mistreat his brethren because they are Jehovah’s witnesses are likened unto goats and separated to his left side of disfavor and condemnation. The “goat” class are turned into fiery destruction, to which the Devil and all his angels are reserved. The “sheep” class are blessed and after Armageddon are ushered into everlasting life on earth under the Theocratic kingdom of blessings. (Matt. 25:31-46) Those blessings under the Kingdom include the joyful privilege of fulfilling the divine mandate to “be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the earth” with a right
eous race. This they will do after Armageddon has cleared the earth of the nations that forget God; and thus will be fulfilled the mandate which God originally gave to Adam and Eve in Eden, but in which they failed.—Gen. 1: 28.
“The judgment of the nations still continues, and all the evidences are that it is rapidly coming to a close and the time for the pronouncement and execution of the Lord’s righteous judgment. There are yet many persons of good-will, or sheep-like ones, to be gathered to the side of The Theocracy. The final end being at hand, they now must be gathered with no loss of time or of motion. The prophet Jeremiah and his faithful companions lived in the final years of judgment upon religious Jerusalem and saw its destruction, and they survived it in vindication of Jehovah’s promise of preservation. Jeremiah spoke in the name of Jehovah God and was one of Jehovah's unbroken line of witnesses from and after Abel. He therefore pictured the remnant of spiritual Israelites who are Jehovah’s witnesses in these the last days of “Christendom”.
T Jeremiah prophesied from and after the thirteenth year of King Josiah. (Jer. 25: 1-3) Because of Josiah’s faithfulness and devotion to Jehovah and his typical Theocracy Jehovah God did not bring the destruction of doomed Jerusalem in his day, but postponed it for forty years from the time that Jeremiah began his ministry of witnessing. Thus Jeremiah prophesied during the reign of the wicked kings that followed Josiah and until the last earthly king, wicked Zedekiah, in whose day Jehovah God executed his judgment upon covenant-breaking Jerusalem. These forty years of grace afforded time for Jehovah’s witnesses, the prophets Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Zephaniah, to give a final witness to Judah and Jerusalem, for the benefit of all those of good-will toward Jehovah and as a warning of impending destruction to the covenant-breakers, the demon religionists and their political and commercial allies and supporters. Those who heeded the warning and abandoned the religion organization and went over to Jehovah’s executioner escaped together with Jehovah’s faithful prophets; those who refused to take the message seriously and persecuted Jeremiah and his companions and who clung to the things of religion and trusted in the self-righteousness of their religious leaders perished.
’These things were recorded in the Bible, not for a mere record of ancient history having little or no bearing upon persons of modern times, but for the instruction of those in these days who seek life and desire to know the right course that leads to life. The larger and complete fulfillment of those ancient judgments of Jehovah God are brought to pass upon like organizations and classes of people at the end
February 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
37
of the uninterrupted rule of Satan. Concerning those natural Jews it is written: “Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples: and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.” (1 Cor. 10:11) ‘•'Whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope.” (Rom. 15: 4) Those who hope to live to see a righteous government established on earth which shall deliver man from the rule of the wicked and bless all lovers and doers of righteousness must study those ancient “ensamples” or types and follow the admonition therein contained. Such are filled with comfort and strengthened to endure until the end of the mournful rule of wickedness, and maintain their integrity toward God. Those who do not take heed unto these things written aforetime, but think they can stand in their own strength and wisdom, fall in the great temptation and perish.
6	The doom of “Christendom” is sealed. Armageddon is very near. The destruction there will be tremendous, exceeding anything of past human history. What, then, shall Jehovah’s witnesses, as foreshadowed by faithful Jeremiah, and their companions, the Lord's “other sheep”, now do? Shall they mourn at the sure prospect of the death and destruction of the millions of religionists? Shall they devote part of their time to the Lord's witness work and spend the rest of the time in carefree pleasure-seeking and enjoyment like those who are “lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God"? The answer is found in the instruction given to Jeremiah under like circumstances.
A SIGN
10	When Jerusalem's doom of destruction was determined, Jeremiah writes, “the word of the Lord came also unto me, saying, Thou shalt not take thee a wife, neither shalt thou have sons or daughters in this place.” (Jer. 16:1) Jeremiah was one of the Levite priests and from the city of Anathoth in the land of the tribe of Benjamin ; and those priests were permitted to marry. Jeremiah was a young man when the Lord called him to be a prophet. He was fully devoted to Jehovah God and his service, and completely determined to do the Lord’s will. There is no record that he ever married; in this he followed the strict instruction of Jehovah God specifically to him. This applied to him as long as he was “in this place”, that is, witnessing within doomed Judah and Jerusalem, and he was there forty years, until its final destruction. Jeremiah never complained because any marriage he might entertain was postponed and must be deferred through all those years. He served the great Theocrat, Jehovah; he was subject to Jehovah's will, whose prophet and witness he was, and he understood the proper reason for
Jehovah's instruction. Unburdened singleness was enjoined on Jeremiah, not merely that he might be free of distracting earthly responsibilities and unnecessary weights that would hinder him in performing his covenant toward God. By this course of action Jeremiah would be for a warning sign to his companions and to the religionists; also it would bear out his sincerity in delivering the message, and also the truthfulness and dead certainty of his message.
11	Jehovah’s witnesses today are not under the restriction such as the Lord put on Jeremiah, but, in view of the serious conditions now with us and which bespeak more terrible things shortly to come, they do well to consider their course, whether it be well for them to follow the course of Jeremiah under like conditions in behalf of a full part in Jehovah's “strange work” that is to end at Armageddon. Jehovah assigned the reason for his restriction upon his obedient prophet: “For thus saith the Lord concerning the sons and concerning the daughters that are born in this place, and concerning their mothers that bare them, and concerning their fathers that begat them in this land: they shall die of grievous deaths; they shall not be lamented, neither shall they be buried; but they shall be as dung upon the face of the earth; and they shall be consumed by the sword, and by famine; and their carcases shall be meat for the fowls of heaven, and for the beasts of the earth." (Jer. 16:3,4) Hence Jeremiah's childlessness and his freedom from home cares and burdens would be a telling example and would be in full agreement with the warning of impending danger and destruction which he proclaimed.
12	In the destruction of Jerusalem which followed shortly thereafter the Lord’s executioner did not spare the sons and daughters of the religionists. This brought great grief upon their parents, who had broken their covenant with God and turned to religion. After Jehovah sends forth his witnesses pictured by the man clothed in linen with an inkhorn by his side to mark the meek or teachable ones in their forehead, meaning the seat of intelligence and understanding, the Lord God gives command to his executioners: “And to the others he said m mine hearing, Go ye after him through the city, and smite; let not your eye spare, neither have ye pity: slay utterly old and young, both maids, and little children, and women; but come not near any man upon whom is the mark; and begin at my sanctuary. Then they began at the ancient men [religious clergy] which were before the house [the temple]. And he said unto them, Defile the house, and fill the courts with the slain; go ye forth. And they went forth, and slew in the city.”—Ezck. 9: 5-7.
13	That those having children would have difficulties on that account at this end of the world of demon
38
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
rule, Jesus plainly showed in his prophecy, saying: “And woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck in those days!” (Matt. 24:19) And when he was on his way to his death he turned to the women that were following, and said: “Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for yourselves, and for your children. For, behold, the days are coming, in the which they shall say, Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that never bare, and the paps which never gave suck. Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us; and to the hills, Cover us.” (Luke 23: 28-30) This clearly makes it to appear why it is better and wiser for those of the Lord’s “other sheep”, and who hope to become of the “great multitude” that shall survive Armageddon and thereafter be given the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous offspring, to defer matters until after the tribulation and destruction of Armageddon are past; then the new and righteous invisible overlord of mankind will exercise dominion over the cleansed earth and the Lord God will restate the divine mandate to the Armageddon survivors. Those waiting on the Lord spare themselves many difficulties, burdens, heartaches and griefs and enjoy the greatest measure of freedom for a part in the work foreshadowed by the activities of Jeremiah and his companions. Those of the Lord’s “other sheep” who now have children or to whom children are born in the natural course of things do well to follow the advice of the apostle and “bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord”; and the children of such consecrated and devoted parents do that which is right and commanded of the Lord when they “obey your parents in the Lord”. (Eph. G: 1-4) This is the only course of wisdom, leading to the Lord’s approval and to safety during the Armageddon tribulation.
11 Jehovah gives further instruction to his servants concerning their course of action in the^e days of world crisis: “For thus saith the Lord, Enter not into the house of mourning, neither go to lament nor bemoan them: for I have taken away my peace from this people, saith the Lord, even lovingkindness and mercies. Both the great and the small shall die in this land: they shall not be buried, neither shall men lament for them, nor cut themselves, nor make themselves bald for them. Neither shall men tear themselves for them in mourning, to comfort them for the dead; neither shall men give them the cup of consolation to drink for their father or for their mother.” (Jer. lG:5-7) The judgments of the Lord are righteous, and the execution thereof is done in righteousness. Those who are his servants and who have his spirit do not mourn the destruction of the wicked at the hands of the Lord’s appointed executioner. Their destruction is in vindication of Jehovah’s name, which name the wicked have despised and blas
phemed and reproached, and at such vindication all his servants rejoice. For forty years Jeremiah personally warned Jerusalem and Judah, yet they did not repent At the destruction of the city and the desolation of that land they died in their sins and iniquities, which destiny they had willingly chosen by their course of conduct toward Jehovah’s message and his messengers.
1S	For more than sixty years now, and particularly since 1918, “Christendom” has been warned of the approach of Armageddon and been shown the way of escape which Jehovah God has provided. The religious leaders and their political and commercial allies have scoffed at the warning, and even called it seditious, and have persecuted and do persecute Jehovah’s faithful witnesses and their companions. Now we are near the final end of the “time of the end”, and the nations of “Christendom” are in the throes of war and turmoil. The political and commercial elements hypocritically offer prayers, presumably to God, for peace, and they look to the head of the greatest religious organization on earth as their mediator to intercede with God, for God to grant peace and prosperity once again on earth. While they all look to and mouth petitions to God for his blessing of peace they at the same time make war on faithful Christians, God’s witnesses, who lawfully and harmlessly proclaim the Theocratic Government of Jehovah God by his “Prince of Peace”, Christ Jesus. They expect, by the complete suppression of these faithful witnesses for The Theocracy, to come to the condition where they can with relief say, “Peace and safety.” Thereby they make war upon Jehovah and his Theocracy. lienee all their peace prayers, peace plans, peace conferences, and peace treaties and organizations shall be in vain and be but the prelude to their “sudden destruction”; “For I have taken away my peace from this people, saith the Lord, even lovingkindness and mercies.” Though God has no pleasure in the deatli of the wicked, he does not mourn their destruction, and he instructs his faithful servants not to mourn. Such refusal to mourn in advance is also a sign of what shall come to pass at Armageddon with its blotting out of all religionists and the principal of their flock. That great destruction will be so stunning that those suffering bereavement and who themselves are headed for destruction will be unable to weep and mourn. (Jer. 25:33-35) They have been duly warned. Their blood is on their own heads. Those who have faithfully and persistently given the testimony and warning are clear and innocent of all blood thus shed.
16	Because the religionists and their supporters and hangers-on do not take seriously the message delivered by Jehovah’s witnesses, the state of affairs to
February 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
39
day is as in the days of Noah. (Matt. 24: 37-39; Luke 17: 26, 27) They feast as did King Belshazzar right before his own death and Babylon’s overthrow; they intoxicate themselves with the things of Satan's world, and this has become a “jazz” age, so called. Even the professed “Christian religionists” are now “lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God”. (2 Tim. 3:4) “Written aforetime” for the admonition of Jehovah’s witnesses in this very day is the further instruction to Jeremiah: “Thou shalt not also go into the house of feasting, to sit with them to eat and to drink. For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will cause to cease out of this place in your eyes, and in your days, the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride.” (Jer. 16:8,9) The like desolate condition was foretold on that great organization called Babylon, symbolizing Satan’s organization, to wit: “With violence shall that great city Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all. And the voice of harpers, and musicians, and of pipers, and trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in thee; and no craftsman, of whatsoever craft he be, shall be found any more in thee; and the sound of a millstone shall be heard no more at all in thee; and the light of a candle shall shine no more at all in thee; and the voice of the bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard no more at all in thee: for thy merchants were the great men of the earth; for by thy sorceries were all nations deceived. And in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth.” (Rev. 18:21-24) Hence such pleasures and merry-making are short-lived now. Foolish, and wasting valuable time and opportunity, are all those who indulge therein.
17	The modern world boasts of its achievements and of what it expects yet to accomplish, but it has absolutely nothing over which to brag nor any cause for real joy. Its pleasures are merely superficial and fleeting. They are demon-controlled and turn the attention and interest away from the only source of life and joy everlasting, to wit, The Theocratic Government, or Zion, which is prophetically called “the joy of the whole earth”, that is, of the “new earth”. (Ps. 48: 2) The worldly pleasures are no part of the “joy of the Lord” nor of the “pleasures for evermore”, which are at his right hand. (Ps. 16:11) Therefore the faithful Christian whose hope is in the new w’orld, wherein dwelleth righteousness, cannot rejoice with this doomed and dying world. Jehovah's witnesses, as pictured by Jeremiah, have a great and serious job to do, and the time in which to do it is limited by the approaching hour which God knows and has fixed for the beginning of Armageddon, “his strange act.”
16 What remains yet of God’s “strange work” of witnessing, which immediately precedes that “strange act”, is nearing a completion, and, when finished, this grandest privilege on earth will for ever have passed. Jehovah’s witnesses, therefore, can ill afford to divide their time and attention between the Lord's active service part of the time and for the rest of the time indulging in the pleasure-mad doings of the nations that forget God. To do so would be a slackening of the hand in his service and would be a violation of their covenant to do the Lord’s will all the time and the Devil’s none of the time. Let none think that, because they put in a stated minimum requirement of hours in the Lord’s service or the average working hours of a laboring man of the world, they are thereafter released and are justified in "jazzing” about in the worldly fashion and spending time and bodily energy in the empty and purposeless socialities, which take one’s thoughts and affection off the Creator and his Theocracy and expose one to demon attacks and temptations. The faithful must be servants of the great Theocrat and his glorious Government continually, “day and night.” Faithfulness to duty in the “strange work” of the Lord is our safeguard, and now, when so near the goal, the vindication of His name and the complete triumph of his Theocracy, we cannot safely or with wisdom let down the barriers to the invasion and control of the demons. Moreover, the refusal to go in the same way of pleasure which the world goes is a sign by Jehovah through his witnesses on earth that the days are limited for “Christendom’s” selfish seeking of pleasures instead of the seeking first the Kingdom of God.
insincerity
” Insincere religious hypocrites take great offense at the proclamation of the judgments of the Lord against “Christendom”. In their self-righteousness, and blinded by religion and the demons, they are unable to see their shortcomings and willful violation of the Lord's commandments. Their susceptibilities are offended at the bold proclamation of Kingdom requirements and of the day of vengeance of our God against religion or demonism and those who practice such. They pretend to see no fault nor sin in their religious doctrines, rites and activities, and their participation in the world’s affairs which ignore The Theocracy, and they cry for “more religion” and plan a “new world order” wherein there shall be “more religion”. Such insincerity Jehovah foretold to Jeremiah, saying: “And it shall come to pass, when thou shalt shew this people all these words, and they shall say unto thee, Wherefore hath the Lord pronounced all this great evil against us? or what is our iniquity? or what is our sin that we have committed against the Lord our God? Then shalt thou
40
^He WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
say unto them, Because your fathers have forsaken me, saith the Lord, and have walked after other gods, and have served them, and have worshipped them, and have forsaken me, and have not kept my law: and ye have done worse than your fathers; for, behold, ye walk every one after the imagination of his evil heart, that they may not hearken unto me; therefore will I cast you out of this land into a land that ye know not, neither ye nor your fathers; and there shall ye serve other gods day and night; where I will not shew you favour.”—Jer. 16:10-13.
20	It is this very condition in modern-day “Christendom” that has caused honest men and women to turn away from her in disgust. She has grown worse after her fifteen centuries of existence, not better, and her wound is beyond cure; and for this reason many persons of good-will who are yet held in “Christendom” are perplexed and sigh and cry because of the abominations which are done in the midst of her to the reproach of God and his King Christ Jesus. “Christendom” worships the demon gods and demonized men, and human creations of her own hands. She objects to the exposing of the “eternal torment” and “purgatory” doctrines of religion, and prefers to worship a fiendish god who believes in tormenting creatures in literal fire and brimstone for eternity after death. Her ruling factors “frame mischief by law” in order to put the modern-day Jeremiah class “on the spot”, and punish the parents who teach their children God’s commandments and obedience thereto. They deprive the children of these parents of the right to an education in their public schools because such children refuse to idolize and salute flags and emblems and to thereby break God’s commandments as taught. They regiment the people and exalt creatures and order all to heil men and ascribe salvation and protection to them. They exalt the political state above Jehovah God and his Theocracy and require obedience to the laws of the state which were made without regard to the will and commandments of God and to obey which laws would mean to violate a Christian’s covenant by breaking the supreme commandments of the Most High.
21	Further, “Christendom’s” governing factors take away the free and open right and privilege to worship Jehovah God in spirit and in truth by proclaiming the good news of his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, and thereby take away the Christians’ “daily sacrifice” to Almighty God. They ignore his promised Government of the world and propose a “new world order” of their own making instead of The Theocracy, and they set up this “abomination of desolation” and make it their idol and render allegiance and worship to it. The beastly world organization and this totalitarian “image” thereof they call “the higher powers”, and insist that all peoples
engage in the worship of the “beast and his image”. Instead of rendering obeisance to God’s anointed King, Christ Jesus, they without Scriptural warrant and authority set up a man as ‘vicegerent of Christ Jesus’ and as the one who occupies on earth the place of Almighty God, and they literally kiss the toe of this puny man before whom they bow in worship. Now, after a witness to the kingdom of God such as “Christendom” and the world has never before known, by the distribution by Jehovah’s witnesses of hundreds of millions of books and booklets and tracts in many languages, and over many years, the vast majority of “Christendom” willfully and blindly continue on following their blind religious guides and in indifference or open and express opposition to The Theocracy. Never was “Christendom’s” responsibility greater than now.
22	Therefore Jehovah assures his witnesses that he will destroy the entire religious organization of “Christendom” as surely as he did ancient Jerusalem. Jeremiah lived to see the fulfillment of the prophecy he pronounced moved by Jehovah's spirit. The organization of “Christendom” will be desolated as was the land of Judah and of Jerusalem. Those religionists who commit hypocrisy and demonism within her in the name of the Lord shall find their refuge of lies a false stronghold and shall be driven out into the open and shown up as none other than devil-worshipers and part of the Devil’s organization, symbolized by Babylon. Such compare with those religious Jews who were cast out of the land of their fathers and taken captive by the armies of Nebuchadnezzar and carried off to demon-ruled Babylon, to die there as revolters against Jehovah God. It shall be with them as with the “evil servant”: “The Lord . . . shall cut him asunder [from His organization], and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites.” (Matt. 24: 51) There is “where I will not shew you favour”, declares Jehovah God. This is in line with his utterance, “Let favour be shewed to the wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness: in the land of uprightness will he deal unjustly, and will not behold the majesty of the Lord.” (Isa. 26:10) During all the years of the favorable time during which the message of The Theocracy has been preached they have rejected the Lord’s provided way to life and security, and have shown themselves “goats”. They are gathered to the Lord’s side of disfavor, and are cursed and sent away into destruction suffered by the Devil and his entire organization.
” The nations that forget God, and the wicked covenant-breakers, shall never return from destruction : “For the day of the Lord is near upon all the heathen [the nations] ; . . . they shall be as though they had not been.” (Obad. 15,16) Those who trouble
February 1,1942
3THE WATCHTOWER.
41
the Lord’s faithful witnesses and refuse to know Jehovah God and to obey the good news of his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus ‘‘shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power”. (2 Thess. 1:6-9) Hence the next words of Jehovah through his prophet Jeremiah could not apply to those destroyed covenant-breakers after Armageddon : “Therefore behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that it shall no more be said, The Lord liveth that brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt; but, The Lord liveth that brought up the children of Israel from the land of the north, and from all the lands whither he had driven them: and I will bring them again into their land that I gave unto their fathers.” (Jer. 16:14,15) The Israelites, together with their father Jacob, moved down into the land of Egypt. After the death of Jacob and his son Joseph, then ruler of Egypt, the Israelites fell away to the devil religion of Egypt and their enemies greatly oppressed them. Jehovah then raised up his prophet Moses and turned the Israelites away from religion to worship the true and living God, “whose name alone is Jehovah.” For his name’s sake he led them forth from Egypt by the hand of Moses, and while so doing he made a name for himself. (2 Sam. 7:23) Therefore it was said: “The Lord liveth that brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt.”
21	Due to yielding to religion, the Israelites were later taken into captivity and exile at Babylon and their homeland lay desolate for seventy years. Then Jehovah through his typical instrument, King Cyrus of Persia, decreed that the temple should be built at Jerusalem, and his professed people who were restrained in Babylon he brought into judgment before him on this issue of the temple. A remnant showed faith and obedience and responded to the call to the temple service, and Jehovah brought them out of Babylon, which lay to the north, and other lands and restored them to his chosen land and set them to work at temple service. Not only a remnant of faithful Israelites returned and entered the temple service, but also multitudes of companions who were not Israelites by birth. These were the proselytes, and particularly those known as “the Nethinims”, that i§, “the given ones” for auxiliary service at the temple, and who were from many nations and tongues. (See Ezra 2:1, 2, 43-60 and 8:17-20; also Nehemiah 3:26-31 and 7:46-62.) These also correspond with the “mixed multitude” of various non-Jewish nationalities that went up with the Israelites when Moses led them out of Egypt Being non-Israelites, all these picture the Lord’s “other sheep” of the present time whom he has been gathering and continues to gather into the one fold to become the devoted companions
of the remnant of faithful spiritual Israelites, Jehovah's witnesses.—John 10:10,16.
23	The physical facts fulfilling Bible prophecies multiply to prove that the Lord Jesus, the Greater Cyrus, came to the temple in 1918 for judgment. His faithful remnant, who sought to worship God in spirit and in truth, were then being held in restraint and bondage to the demon-controlled world organization pictured by Babylon. Gradually he revealed to them the truths now due of and concerning the Kingdom, and thereby freed them from the fear and servitude to that organization and brought them to him in the temple condition and set them to work. He judged all the professed ones by his truth and service, and sent forth the approved ones, anointed with the Lord’s spirit, to ‘preach this gospel of the Kingdom for a witness unto all nations’. (Matt. 24:14) Many persons of good-will have heard the witness and followed after the faithful remnant over the highway that leads to God’s organization, Zion, and have put themselves under its protection. Multitudes of these have already thus come to Zion and been brought into his temple to there serve God “day and night”; and many more will continue to come. Recently, at St. Louis, Missouri, in August, 1941, these were plainly visible in great numbers as they gathered there with the diminishing number of the remnant, in a grand Theocratic Assembly totaling in excess of 115,000 persons. Continuing faithful, such shall form the “great multitude”, which shall carry out the divine mandate to bring forth and fill the earth with righteous creatures. Thus the physical facts are plainly at hand whereby it may be said: “Jehovah liveth, that brought up the children of Israel from the land of the north, and from all the countries whither he had driven them.” (Am. Rev. Ver.) This is all part of Jehovah's “strange work”, and it excites the wonder and the malicious opposition of all nations, both those making up “the king of the north” and those making up “the king of the south” and their allies. —Dan. 11: 40.
fishers
28	The nations that forget God seek to hinder the gathering of these “other sheep” of the Lord; and this at the instigation of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, which purposes to make all the world Catholic and totalitarian and seeks to bring all human creatures by totalitarian methods into the fold of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy to be fleeced and oppressed. Thus the “strange work” is fast coming to a close, as evidenced by the forcible shutting down of this work in many nations. In parts the Lord is still holding open the opportunity for work, particularly in Britain and America and other democratic lands. Even in the lands where the totalitarian governments and dictators have banned the freedom of
42
THE WATCHTOWER.
speech and of assembly and of worship of Almighty God and have declared the work “illegal”, some work continues to be done and some of the “other sheep” are found and fed and helped unto the Lord. Hence the further words of Jehovah are yet true, and which appear to have a special application at this late date when he has brought his gathered ones into a unity and put in operation among them his Theocratic organization for service: “Behold, I will send for many fishers, saith the Lord, and they shall fish them; and after will I send for many hunters, and they shall hunt them from every mountain, and from every hill, and out of the holes of the rocks.” (Jer. 16:16) This clearly appears to mean that the nations where yet many of the Lord’s “other sheep” are scattered are determined to hinder and possibly prevent the gathering work and therefore these sheep are in hiding from the enemies in fear and restraint; but that Jehovah God by Christ Jesus is determined that all the rest of his “other sheep” shall be gathered and that the gathering shall be brought to a completion, to wit, before Armageddon, which hastens on.
27	Jehovah has his ways and means of doing his work and carrying out his will. These are “strange” unto the enemies, the religionists, and it is a “strange work” unto them, and they do not believe its purpose, but impute evil motives to it. They seek to hold onto the strayed and scattered sheep and to keep them subject to their selfish uses and exploitation. The time for the gathering is soon up; there is no time to be lost now by those whom the Lord graciously uses on earth in the gathering work. It requires a unity of action and a co-ordinating of operations by all those engaged therein and a use of all the means and ways He has provided for the work. It calls for a careful combing of territory and a diligent searching of the isolated, remote and scattered places where the sheep are not associated in a company but are dispersed, knowing not whither to go for the Good Shepherd’s care. They will not be left to perish at Armageddon. “For thus saith the Lord God; Behold I, even I, will both search my sheep, and seek them out. As a shepherd seeketh out his flock in the day that he is among his sheep that are scattered; so will I seek out my sheep, and will deliver them out of all places where they have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day. And I will bring them out from the people, and gather them from the countries, and will bring them to their own land, and feed them upon the mountains of Israel by the rivers, and in all the inhabited places of the country.”—Ezek. 34:11-13.
29	The Good Shepherd, Christ Jesus, at the temple, is in charge of the gathering of his “other sheep”. As “the Son of man” he was given dominion over all earthly things: “all sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field; the fowl of the air, and the fish of
Brooklyn, N. Y.
the sea, and whatsoever passeth through the paths of the seas.” (Ps. 8:4-8 and Heb. 2:6-9) When he was on earth he called fishermen to be his apostles that they might be “fishers of men”. (Matt. 4:18-22) Once he taught the people from fisherman Simon’s boat slightly off shore, and thereafter bade the owner, “Launch out into the deep, and let down your nets for a draught.” “And Simon, answering, said unto him. Master, we have toiled all the night, and have taken nothing: nevertheless, at thy word I will let down the net. And when they had done this, they inclosed a great multitude of fishes: and their net brake. And they beckoned unto their partners, which were in the other ship, that they should come and help them. And they came, and filled both the ships, so that they began to sink. . . . And Jesus said unto Simon, Fear not; from henceforth thou shalt catch men.” (Luke 5:1-11) Later, to pay the tax or tribute money, Jesus sent fisherman Peter, saying: “Go thou to the sea, and cast an hook, and take up the fish that first cometh up; and when thou hast opened his mouth, thou shalt find a piece of money; that take, and give unto them, for me and thee.” (Matt. 17: 27) After his resurrection from the dead he appeared on the seaside to his apostles while fishing, and who bad fished all night without success, and then he repeated the miracle of the sudden draught of fishes for them. (John 21: 1-14) On their coming ashore he already had fish broiling on the fire for them. In his parable of the dragnet he had foretold how at the end of Satan’s uninterrupted rule he would use his holy angels with him as fishers to do a separating work toward the good and the bad “fish”: “So shall it be at the end of the world: the angels shall come forth, and sever the wicked from among the just.” (Matt. 13: 47-30) Christ Jesus is the great Fisher.
2a Then Christ Jesus sent forth his apostles as “fishers of men”. Since his coming to the temple, in 1918, the river of truth of life has flowed forth from God’s temple with healing to all who partake of the truth with faith and obedience. Jehovah God, by his prophet Ezekiel, foretold this in a vision, and added: “And it shall come to pass, that every thing that liveth, which moveth, whithersoever the rivers shall come, shall live: and there shall be a very great multitude of fish, because these waters shall come hither: for they shall be healed; and every thing shall live whither the river cometh. And it shall come to pass, that the fishers shall stand upon it ... to spread forth nets; their fish shall be according to their kinds as the fish of the great sea, exceeding many.” (Ezek. 47:1-10) Under the guidance of his holy angels Christ Jesus has sent forth the faithful remnant approved in the temple judgment, and anointed and commissioned as Jehovah’s witnesses, and they with united action cast in the net under the
February 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
43
direction of the great Fisherman, and he has gathered unto him thereby many “fish”, to wit, many persons of good-will, his “other sheep”. These have devoted themselves to God and now, in obedience to the Fisher’s invitation, join in the fishing.
HUNTERS
30	“And after will I send for many hunters, and they shall hunt them.” Not all the Lord's “other sheep” are gathered unto him at the temple by the fishing method. He follows this up with the hunt. The first hunter mentioned in Scripture was the covenant-breaking Nimrod, who built Babylon and established the first dictatorship, or totalitarian rule, and was worshiped religiously as “Nimrod, the mighty hunter before [superior to and in opposition to] Jehovah”. (Gen. 10: 8-10, Am. Rev. Ver.) Today Satan, the chief of demons, and who established Nimrod as dictator, has restored the totalitarian rule by the conspiracy of the political and commercial and religious elements of his visible organization. Such elements use the military and strong-arm squad to regiment and terrorize the people. As Nimrod hunted and pursued both beasts and men and broke the everlasting covenant concerning the sanctity of Godgiven life, likewise totalitarian dictatorship, “the abomination of desolation,” hunts and pursues all nations and organizations of humankind, and great is the destruction of human life in violation of God's everlasting covenant. This is with the full connivance, approval, blessing and co-operation of the “fifth column” religious element, particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. Some prophecies liken the religious clergy to hunters that hunt for unsuspecting victims of their racket (Ezek. 13: 18-20; Jer. 5:26-31), but they specially hunt down the faithful servants of Jehovah God to destroy them. (Lam. 3: 52; 4:18,19; Mie. 7: 2) Then Jehovah likens himself to a skillful hunter and says: “Therefore wait ye upon me, saith the Lord, until the day that I rise up to the prey; for my determination is to gather the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce anger.” (Zeph. 3: 8) “"Evil shall hunt the violent man to overthrow him.”—Ps. 140:11.
31	Due to the unfaithfulness of the religious clergy, and their carelessness and indifference to the needs and eternal interests of the flock, those whom the Lord now gathers as his “other sheep” have been preyed upon by the totalitarian “beast” and “his image”, and have been scattered, and they have hid themselves upon “every mountain” and “every hill” and in “the holes of the rocks”, for fear of men and demonized creatures. Now, before Armageddon breaks, these must be sought out and stirred up to come forth and identify themselves as for the great
Theocrat and his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. To this end the Lord now sends “for many hunters, and they shall hunt them”; for they belong to the Lord, being of good-will toward him. “For every beast of the forest is mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills. I know all the fowls of the mountains ; and the wild beasts of the field are mine. If I were hungry, I would not tell thee: for the world is mine, and the fulness thereof.” (Ps. 50: 10-12) Now at the time Jehovah God by Christ Jesus is about to rise up to the prey against the enemies of God and his people, he sends forth his remnant of anointed witnesses and their devoted companions on the hunt for the scattered ones of good-will who desire to come into the Lord's fold, his organization, there to enjoy peace and safety and the Lord’s provided food.
32	Hunting requires courage, endurance, alertness, promptness to spring into action, constant keeping on the track and stalking the game; a diligent search of the isolated and scattered parts, leaving no place untouched or uninvestigated, and particularly the places where game are wont to come for food, drink or rest in security, and even to leave some choice desired food for the scent of the game and to invite and attract them to manifest themselves. It requires watching and waiting, with hope. Where “many hunters” work together, they surround a certain area, which they have divided off, and then move in steadily toward the common center, beating the hushes or underbrush as they draw together in order to stir up their quarry. Thus they work together in unity, and jointly seek to let nothing escape, and they assist and help one another. They carry their equipment with them, keep their eyes and ears open, entertain no fear of creatures, and act with speed in the use of their provided equipment.
33	AVith totalitarian rule overrunning the whole earth, and Armageddon swiftly approaching, the conditions now require that Jehovah’s commissioned people and their companions follow the example of the huntsman. For several years now Jehovah has had in effect his Theocratic organization, and he has been training and instructing them for this very work. They have been assigned each one his territory in the field, and they must not permit their attention to be drawn away, but be constant in doing the one thing, knowing what they are seeking for, and they must walk circumspectly, ever ready to use the Lord’s equipment provided for this late day, and must act and work together in absolute unity. Thus the Lord God, who sends them forth, will uncover the creatures upon whom he has set his eyes. It may be, when He fulfills his prophecy at Daniel 11: 44, to wit, “But tidings out of the east and out of the north shall trouble [the totalitarian ‘king of the north’ and his allies],” that then the warning of the Lord will be
44
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
so emphatic and unmistakable that many of those after whom he sends his hunters will be stirred up and manifest themselves.
’* The Lord knows where they are and how to reach them, and he will not let his hunters stalk around fruitlessly. “For mine eyes are upon all their ways; they are not hid from my face, neither is their iniquity hid from mine eyes.” (Jer. 16: 17) Their iniquity is their yielding to religion and restraining themselves for fear of men ; and the Lord has let them suffer from the mournful authority of the wicked until they “sigh and cry for the abominations'’ that these do, and particularly the totalitarian “abomination of desolation”. Now that this “desolating abomination” seeks to stand in the place “where it ought not”, to wit, in the place and stead of God's Theocratic Government over humankind, God bids them flee, and he uses his hunters to stir them up to flee without delay to God’s organization of refuge.
35 Because of their practice of religion and their service of creatures and things instead of the Creator Jehovah, he says: “And first [that is, before gathering them unto the temple] I will recompense their iniquity and their sin double; because they have defiled my land, they have filled mine inheritance with their carcases of their detestable and abominable things.” (Jer. 16:18) Religionists have done these things, by wanton bloodshed which they have approved and supported; by man-made and demon-inspired images and things and organizations which they have set up for adoration and worship to draw away the affection and service of mankind from the Creator; by the heiling and honoring of men; and by their opposition to God’s Theocratic rule by Christ Jesus and their persecution of Jehovah’s faithful witnesses, who obey God rather than men. Thus such have defiled the things pertaining to God. to wit, “my land” and “mine inheritance”. By membership in and attendance at and support of such religious and allied organizations and movements, the ensnared persons of good-will partake of these sins and iniquities of the organizations, and hence Jehovah's disfavor and displeasure is upon them and he recompenses them accordingly as long as they continue therein.
30 But how does the Lord “recompense their iniquity and their sin double”? This does not refer to a duplicate or double period of time. Other translations of this part of the Hebrew text make the meaning clearer: “And I will repay first their double iniquities, and their sins.” (Catholic Douay translation) “And (thus) will I pay them at the first their twofold iniquity and their sin.” (Leeser's translation) “And I will recompense first the double of their iniquity and their sin.” (Literal Hebrew7 translation) The iniquity and sin is “double”, that is to say, “enor
mous,” being multiplied because of the light that is shining today through God’s organization and because of the added responsibility such light brings. “Christendom’s” responsibility is therefore multiplied in comparison with that of ancient Judah and Jerusalem. First the kingdom of the ten tribes of Israel fell away to religion or demonism, and Jehovah punished them first by letting their capital Samaria be destroyed and the surviving Israelites be carried away exiled to a strange heathen land. Judah and Jerusalem looked on at the religion and unfaithfulness of Israel and Samaria and at God’s punishment thereof, but Judah and Jerusalem did not take heed to this warning example. They likewise turned away to demonism or religion, and their sin and iniquity were doubled; and Jehovah punished them and delivered only a remnant who maintained their integrity under His discipline.—See Jeremiah 3:6-11; Ezek. 23:11.
3T “Christendom” has the Bible in its completeness and with its record of the warning examples of the ten tribes of Israel, and of Judah and Jerusalem. "Christendom” has not taken heed thereto, nor regarded the warning of Jehovah’s witnesses. Hence her lawlessness and her sins of religion are manifold greater in enormity than those of the typical covenant people of Jehovah God. God duly recompenses “Christendom”, and none can continue in or undei her for any length of time without experiencing a measure of that recompense. The full recompense will come at Armageddon, now near. It therefore behooves Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions to lose no time, but to make every effort and use every opportunity to aid all persons of good-will to get out promptly lest these share “Christendom's” destruction. As pictured by the Jewish captives and exiles in Babylon, they must come out of Babylon and come unto Zion, God’s organization.
38	Jehovah God has foretold that this would come to pass, and it is proper that his covenant-people should expect it and now watch and work for it to come to pass in vindication of His word. Jeremiah the prophet, and one of Jehovah's witnesses, savs: “0 Jehovah, my strength, and my stronghold, and my refuge in the day of affliction [which is now], unto thee shall the nations come from the ends of the earth, and shall say, Our fathers have inherited nought but lies, even vanity and things wherein there is no profit.” (Jer. 16:19, A.R.F.) As a result of the fishing and hunting, the multitudes of the persons of good-will are coming forth from the religious and worldly organizations, in this time when Satan the Devil brings great wroe and distress upon all nations. These seekers of the Lord come from all nations and kindreds and people and tongues and confess that Jehovah God and bis Theocracy are their strength,
February 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER.
45
stronghold and refuge in this period of great affliction. Their combined harmonious testimony and voluntary confession is that their religious fathers, in “Christendom” and in heathendom, inherited nought but lies of demonism and of traditions of men, and which are vain babblings of men and absolutely unprofitable, and in reality injurious and leading to destruction. They abandon religion as a deadly thing, and now practice Christianity, which is the worship of God in spirit and in truth. They take the Lord’s side in the great issue which must shortly be decided for all eternity.
38	The primary issue now up for final determination is universal domination : Who is the Almighty God, the Supreme Power, who shall rule heaven and earth and who shall be worshiped by all creatures therein that live? Knowing his power and position, Jehovah, for the good of his covenant people, commands that they shall worship him and have no gods besides him. (Ex. 20:1-5) “Christendom” pretends to be in a covenant with God, but, on the contrary, brings great reproach upon the name of Jehovah and his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. She worships false gods, or mighty ones, which demon-controlled men make and set up and require the people to worship in a regimented fashion. Because the issue is due to be determined, the Lord says: “Shall a man make gods unto himself, and they are no gods? Therefore, behold, I will this once cause them to know, I will cause them to know mine hand and my might; and they shall know that my name is The Lord [or, JEHOVAH (marginal reading)].”— Jer. 1G: 20, 21.
40	At Armageddon Jehovah God will make manifest his mighty “right hand”, to wit, Christ Jesus, his Executive Officer, and by him Jehovah will demon
strate that Satan is a mimic god and that the demons under Satan and which the nations that have forgotten God now worship in the name of religion are no gods, but are false, deceiving and sentenced to everlasting destruction. Under the control of the demon-gods, men, including the religious clergy, refuse to believe the record of the exercise of God's hand and might in his acts as set forth in the Bible; but at Armageddon God will repeat those acts on a vaster scale and thereby make the scoffing religionists know his hand and his power. He will fight the battle of that great day of God Almighty just once; it will not be repeated, because he will fight it to a completion in the total destruction of all opposers and all who challenge him as the only true and living God. And before they descend in disgraceful defeat into destruction he will make “Christendom” and all for-getters of God to know that his name is the holy name that they have despised and reproached, Jehovah I
41	All these things being so, the final gathering by the Lord is on. Let nothing for one instant interrupt the onward push of his covenant-people in His service. The time is short, the opportunity is great, and blessed is he that has a part in it. Now to hold fast our integrity toward the Almighty God is the allimportant thing, and to receive the approval of the Lord in this “day of the Lord”, that we may be blameless in His sight, and have some place assigned to us to continue forever in His glorious service. Lose no time at all. Steadfastly and unceasingly do your duties as assigned by the Lord. Walk close to the Lord. Walk circumspectly. Show kindness, mercy and loving devotion to all who are of good-will. Shortly his gathering of all such will be finished, his “strange work” will be done, and he will bring to pass his “strange act” of vindication of His name.
A FAITHFUL WITNESS
January 9, 1942
To all Lovers of The Theocracy :
On January 8, 1942, our beloved brother, J. F. Rutherford, faithfully finished his earthly course as a warrior for The Theocractic Government and a minister of the Word of God. Knowing of your deep concern and of your prayers to God for him ever since his serious illness prior to the Detroit Convention of July, 1940, we hasten to notify you.
It was Brother Rutherford’s desire to “die fighting with his boots on”; and this he did. The Lord graciously spared him to complete the report of the 1942 Yearbook of Jehovah’s witnesses, therein showing that the greatest witness ever given had been accomplished and that the year’s distribution of books and booklets reached the grand total of 36,030,595 copies. He always had foremost in mind to do this one thing, to declare the name of Jehovah and his kingdom, to keep covenant with Him, and to look well to the interests of his brethren.—1 John 3:16.
To him it was a joy and comfort to see and know that all the witnesses of the Lord are following, not any man, but the King Christ Jesus as their Leader, and that they
will move on in the work in complete unity of action, as they unanimous!}' expressed at the Theocratic Assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses in St. Louis.
All those standing steadfast for The Theocracy will now not mourn or be disturbed or fearful, but will rejoice that their faithful fellow servant and brother has maintained his integrity toward the Lord, in sickness and in health, through evil report and through good report, and has now entered a higher field of service forever with the Lord.—2 Tim. 4: 7, 8.
Brother Rutherford’s consistent faithful activity and unbending devotion to The Theocracy, especially since becoming president of the Society, January 6, 1917, has been and continues to be a true and blessed example to us all as of one who ‘fought a good fight and kept the faith’ and proved worthy of a part in the vindication of Jehovah’s name by Christ Jesus; and for this we give thanks to God
With you keeping on working, determined, by the Lord’s grace, to let nothing stop us until the Lord’s “strange work” is finished, we are,
Your brethren and fellow servants, Watchtower Bible and Tract Society, Inc.
DAILY TEXTS AND COMMENTS
FEBRUARY 2
Set your hearts unto all the words which I testify among you this day, which ye shall command your children to observe to do.—Deut. 32:46.
It cannot properly be said that these laws of God apply only to the ancient Israelites. Exactly the contrary is expressed in God’s Word. His law is the same toward all who seek to live. Children seek knowledge and must be taught, and it is the desire of all sane persons, both adults and children, to receive life everlasting. Obligation is laid by the Lord upon consecrated parents to see to it that their children are instructed in God’s law. They cannot disregard this obligation and expect his favor. It is also the duty of the parents to have their children in subjection and carefully guide them in the way of righteousness. All parents who have agreed to do God’s will are bound by the commandments of Almighty God to teach their children the Word of God and to instruct them in the way of righteousness. —Deut. 4: 9 ; 6: 6, 7. IV 2/15/41
FEBRUARY 3
But for this cause have I allowed thee to remain, in order to show thee my power; and in order that they may proclaim my name throughout all the earth.—Er. 9:16, Leeser.
God announced his purpose to have his name declared throughout all the earth before he exercises his power in the destruction of Satan’s organization. To have witnesses in the earth to declare his name was God’s announced purpose ; and therefore it is written: 'God first visited to take out of the nations a people for his name . . . that the residue of men might seek out the Lord, and all the nations upon whom my name is called.’ (Acts 15: 14-18, Roth.) All of which was God’s purpose, known unto him from the beginning; and likewise the end was known. That covenant of Jehovah is everlasting and unchangeable All of God’s covenants arc everlasting, and are not subject to change. IV 6/15/11
FEBRUARY 4
Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness, and princes shall rule in justice.—Isa 32: 1, Leeser.
“Princes,” or governors, are those who exercise a ruling power under the command and supervision of the higher power The new heaven is the new invisible ruling power, whereas the new earth is the rule of the people by visible representatives of the supreme and umsible power. Since the new heaven and new earth is a rule of righteousness, there must be men fully qualified to fill the place of visible ruiership. They must be righteous. God has fixed the rules by which men can qualify, and all who are placed by the Lord in positions to rule and administer the laws of The Theocracy must act under The Theocracy and must first qualify according to the divine rules. All such must have full faith in God and in Christ Jesus and be subject to crucial tests in order to prove their faithfulness. That rule of righteousness, visible and invisible, shall bring great joy to men. IV’ 3/1/41
FEBRUARY 5
The tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God.—Rev. 21:3.
In vision John saw the Holy City, which is The Theocracy, coming down from God out of heaven to rule in righteousness. It is that Theocracy by Christ Jesus that will carry out God’s purpose to wipe out wickedness and bring joy and everlasting peace to those that live. It is in that Theocracy, Zion, where God shall dwell. Every human creature
that lives everlastingly must be wholly and completely devoted to Almighty God and to his beloved Son, Christ Jesus. This is the covenant that Jehovah God remembers for ever, the word which he commanded to a thousand generations, which covenant he made with Abraham and sw’ore to the antitypical Isaac, Christ Jesus, that in his Seed, The Christ, blessings shall eome to those who obey,—Ps. 105: 7-9.
IP 10/1/41
FEBRUARY 6
Let none that wait on thee be ashamed.—Ps. 25:3.
David had waited patiently for Jehovah to manifest himself and to deliver David from his enemies. In his own due time Jehovah did deliver David. To wait patiently means to fully trust in God and confidently move forward in performance of assigned duty, well knowing that one is on the right way and backed up by the King of Eternity. Such ones never try to run ahead of Jehovah, but follow explicitly the instructions given. One who is patient is anxious in his mind, watching with great eare that he may not miss an opportunity to honor Almighty God. Patience, therefore, means a trial of faith and a refusal to be turned aside from steadfast devotion to God, regardless of what persecution the enemy may bring. When Jehovah’s due time arrives for him to avenge his servants he will do so, his primary purpose being to vindicate his holy name IV 3/1/41
FEBRUARY 7
See, I have set before thee this day life and good, and death and evil; in that I command thee this day to love the Lord thy God.—Deut. 30:15,16.
God led the Israelites out of Egypt by the hand of Moses. In this he was giving them an experimental education that they might freely choose either the way of life or the way of death. God made prophetic pictures with those choosing, by which he emphasized the divine rule that men are free to choose the way of life or the way of death In due time he sent his beloved Son to earth to declare the truth and to make known to man the only means of receiving life everlasting No man, however, was then compelled to accept Jehovah’s appointed way, but the same was offered to him freely. When a man makes an intelligent choice to enter into a covenant with Jehovah God, thereby agreeing to do His will, he then enters upon the way of life. He must meet the requirements of God’s law to receive the blessings of life eternal. IV 2/1/41
FEBRUARY 8
The Lord rebuke thee, 0 Satan; even the Lord that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee: is not this a brand plucked out of the firet—Zech. 3:2.
At the temple judgment Satan was there to look after his religionists, whom he had subtly trapped by means of deceit and the practice of formalism and other religious ceremonies. The faithful ones standing there with the Lord are as “brands plucked from the fire’. What fire! The destructive fire of demonism or religion. Some who had covenanted to do God’s will had withstood that destructive influence and power even though they were mixed up with and identified as religionists. Their “garments” are symbols of identification, and the soils on their garments pictured the religion or demon influence. At the temple judgment the rejected ones were unwilling to divest themselves of their religious garments, but the faithful and approved ones were anxious to do God’s will and follow the great Judge. W 3/15/41
February 1,1942
WATCHTOWER
47
FEBRUARY 9
Blessed above women shall Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite be; blessed shall she be above women in the tent.
—Judg. 5:24.
Jael was blessed because of her faith and obedience. Therefore she pictured a class on earth following the beginning of the temple judgment, who hear the message of The Theocracy, believe in God and Christ, and covenant to do God’s will, and who then prove their faith by being obedient to His commandments. Jael is mentioned in strict contrast to the indifferent and negligent and unfaithful. Jael pictured the Lord's “other sheep”. She was a weaker vessel compared with the men of Meroz; yet she showed her faith and devotion, where the unfaithful men failed. God pronounced his curse upon Meroz, which curse proclaims that the persons against The Theocracy, and who fail, either by negligence or willful disobedience, to render service to The Theocracy, are wicked. IT 5/1/41
FEBRUARY 10
Stand against the wiles of the devil.—Eph. 6:11.
Satan’s purpose is to carry out his original challenge to Jehovah and being about the destruction of all who have made a covenant to do God’s will. As to Jehovah and his purpose, He permits the Devil and his associate demons to beset His covenant people in order to give Satan full opportunity to carry out his wicked challenge and at the same time to afford an opportunity for those who have made a covenant with God to obey him and maintain their integrity toward him. It is the time of crucial testing. The same rules of the Lord apply to those who are Jonadabs and who have hope to be of the “great multitude” as apply to others who have made a covenant to do the Lord's will. Let this be kept in mind: that the demons now direct their wicked action chiefly against God's covenant people, both of the “remnant” and of the Jonadabs, because the demons have control over all the others of this wicked world. IT 5/15/41
FEBRUARY 11
The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God.—Ps. 9:17.
Jehovah has made known his fixed rule, which rule applies to all persons or nations that at one time pretended or claimed to serve him and then turned away from and against the Most High This is a warning from Almighty God given to all those who have assumed the obligation of serving him. lie compels no one to serve him, but when they undertake it they must bear the responsibility of fulfilling their covenant. One may enter into an actual covenant with God to do his will, while others may be in an implied covenant to do God’s will by reason of their information and outward claim of being God’s servants God's rules do not change. God is no respecter of persons. He makes known his rules, and the creature who agrees or undertakes to obey them must perform or take the consequences. W 7/1/41
FEBRUARY 12
0 Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book, even to Gir time of the end; . . . But go thou thy way till the end be: for thou shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the end
of the days.—Dan. 12:4,13.
By his prophet Daniel the Almighty says: “The end shall be at the time appointed.” (11:27) Those words arc a guarantee from Jehovah that the end of the rule of the world by the demons shall come, and that at the time lie has appointed. Nothing can change that time. Daniel is certain to have a “better resurrection” and to be one of the “princes in all the earth”. He finished his course as a faithful servant and prophet of God, and died like other men and went to rest in the grave, there to remain until God’s due time to awaken him out of death. Time of his resurrection may be any day now, when he, as one of earth’s governors, shall appear and assume his divinely appointed office. IV 9/15/41
FEBRUARY 13
He hath put a new song in my month, even praise unto our Ged: many shall see it, and fear.—Ps. 40:3
By faith now God’s remnant see the day of deliverance is near, and they are all filled with the song of prai'-e to the Most High. And what results from their singing the victory song and continuing faithfully in the service in these dark days now upon the world? They sec people of good-will who are being awakened, hurriedly taking tlicir place on the side of The Theocracy and wending their way to refuge and life. As the Psalm of David says: “Many shad see it J The Theocracy, and the deliverance and blessings that iighteous government brings], and fear [Jehovah], and shall tris'. in the Lord,” Jehovah, the King of Eternity, and in 1 he King Christ Jesus It is timely and appropriate that they join in the song. Therefore such arc putting their trust m the Lord and are finding refuge under his organization, and they too join in the song IV 3/1/11
FEBRUARY 14
Despise not the chastening of the Lord.—Prcv 3:11.
Persons who have for years been serving Jehovah and Christ Jesus are still subjected to severe trials. Some wonder why. The answer is that all who receive Jehovah's approval must prove their steadfastness for The Thcocraev One can prove this only by being put to the test and remaining immovable under it and continuing steadfast for Jehovah and his King Even now, when the King of The Theocracy is upon his throne, his servants on earth find themselves beset by many trials; but to the faithful such trials arc not at all surprising Those wholly devoted to The Theoeraev and who sec the great fight being made by the enemy against The Theocracy can appreciate why the individual-, in God's organization are put to the test As with Job, so now one vvho will receive the reward of Jehovah’s approval mir-t bo put to the test and prove entirely blameless before God. IV 11/1/41
(Continued from page 34)
at the usual time. The president’s report of the past year’s work throughout this war-swept world shows up the supreme issue which affects the lives of all and which makes most important the proclamation of the message now delivered to all nations by Jehovah’s witnesses. You will be joyfully surprised at the sum total of work reported done in the service year fraught with greatest difficulty. The Yearbook further includes the yeartext with its comment, and also a text for each day of the year and a pointed comment thereon according to the latest revelations of Kingdom truth and prophecy. The edition of the Yearbook is always limited, thereby increasing the printing expense, more so now with rising costs of materials,
and hence a contribution of 50c is asked for a single copy Mail in now your order with remittance to cover. Companies v.ll make up combination orders and send such in through the local company servant.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of March 1: “Final Gathering,”
fl 1-14 inclusive, The Watchtower February 1, 1942.
Week of March 8: “Final Gathering,”
fl 15-25 inclusive, The Watchtower February 1, 1942.
Week of March 15: “Final Gathering,”
fl 26-41 inclusive, The Watchtower February 1, 1942.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
18 YEARS OLD AND 18 STUDIES WEEKLY
“As I was going to my car a boy of about eight came up on his bicycle and asked what I was selling, and if I had called at his home. I told him his mother did not care for the literature because 'she had her own religion’. He said he would like to read and understand the Bible and asked if I had a little booklet he could have to read. I gave him Theocracy. He promised to read it, and sped away. Three weeks ago I passed a small airport and stopped to watch them awhile. As I was sitting in my car a young boy came along on his bicycle and sat on the fender of my car. He happened to look in, saw my books, and asked if I was not the same Bible man that had talked to him a long time ago. I recognized him, and asked if he had enjoyed his booklet, lie was very sorry but his sister had burned it accidentally while cleaning house and he felt very bad. I asked if he was still interested in understanding the Bible. ‘Yes!’ I invited him to sit in the car with me and we would try to understand it together. We looked up the scriptures about the soul, death and hell. We talked for about an hour and he asked if I would come over to his house and tell his mother these scriptures. I went, and he called out his mother. Abrupt in manner, she said she did not want me to call because she did not know who Jehovah was and did not want to find out. The boy followed me to my car and whispered that he did not want to go to church any more and would I please come over to the airport next Sunday same time and he would meet me there and we could have a real good study in the Bible. I promised. The next Sunday I kept my appointment. I waited. In a few minutes he came, all out of breath from going so fast. We had a very interesting study. After it was over he asked if we were the ones that played the victiolas, and asked if he could hear the music. I played ‘Message of Hope’ and he said it was better than music. I have been coming for about three weeks now. I now have over eighteen model studies a week and most of them are with young boys and girls. They are really taking hold faster than their parents. I am eighteen years old, and I wish to encourage more young witnesses about my age to become more active in back-call work.”
"CHILDREN WILL GET IT QUICKER”
“ ‘No, I don’t eare for your books at all. I’m a Catholic' But the booklet you left—Johnny, show the lady your book ’’ Twelve-year-old Johnny produced a well-worn copy of Armageddon, marked and underlined. Mother: ‘You can see how he has studied it, and as we haven’t a Bible he even took it down to the library and asked the librarian to show him how to find the places in the Bible!’ Pioneer - ‘Johnny, I want to make you a personal gift of this book Children. I have several little second-hand Bibles at home that I picked up in a bookstore, and you are welcome to one. You’ll soon receive a few “surprises”, so be sure to read the book and I’ll be over again in a few weeks to help you to study.’ Mother: ‘I don't know if he should take it. We're Catholics—.’ Johnny: ‘Believe me, if I had any money, I’d sure buy the book myself.’ The book stayed put! Another instance: Mother: ‘I just don’t like your literature. I got the book Children, but I simply don’t like it at all. My sevenyear-old boy, however, keeps following me around: “Mama, won’t you please read to me out of this beautiful book?”
He says it’s God’s book and every word is true. When I don’t want to read it to him he says: “Mama, I’ll explain it to you, if you’ll only read it. You see religion didn’t do what it was supposed to, and God had to send these people around with the books!” ’ Another child told his parents they ought to do something about this work, or how else should they expect God to protect them in Armageddon'"
A LAD IN BANGALORE, SOUTHERN INDIA, WRITES:
“I am engaged in a work that is very interesting. May I join in the work, and I like to be Jehovah’s witness, as I see the books tell me the truth. I met Mrs. Mergler giving leaflets, and helped her. I am keeping a report of what I have done. I have done eight hours and collected 10 annas. I did two hours this morning. I am taking books from Mr. Mergler. My mother is a Catholic and my brothers and sisters are too. But my mother says I can be what I like. I think religion is all rubbish, because it has proved false. My name is Bobby Skill. I am eleven years old. Mr. Mergler has given me some territory, and I am going to set to work every evening. I spent this week-end with Mrs. Mergler, and I slept in the car. Charles is going back to school, and Mrs. Mergler will be away; so I have to work all by myself. At last I have found some work to do, real work.”
IN WORKING DURHAM, N. H., A COLLEGE TOWN
“A fine-looking man opened the door. Introducing the phonograph, I started it going. Upon finishing the lecture ‘Message of Hope’ I asked: ‘How did you like that?’ Hurriedly he stepped out onto the porch and said in broken English and all in one breath: ‘I am a German refugee. I like that. I believe that. You are one of Jehovah’s witnesses, are you not? I know of you in Germany; they call you Bib el for scher, do they not? Yes, Jehovah’s witnesses are the most wonderful people. They do so much good in the concentration camps. One of Jehovah’s witnesses saved my friend’s life. He was going to commit suicide in the concentration camp and one of Jehovah’s witnesses comforted him and gave him hope not to die. When first we heard about the Bibelforseher we didn’t care for them; but they are so good, so bold, so courageous, and so fearless that we love the sound of the words “Jehovah’s witnesses”. I never knew I would really see one. I was a lawyer in Germany. I heard much about them, but never saw one. They did so much good in the concentration camps that they had to make smaller concentration camps inside of the others and put Jehovah's witnesses there so that no one else could get near them I never knew I would ever see one. I thank God that I have seen one free and going around like this.’ During this time he was searching all his pockets; he found twenty cents, which he insisted on my accepting for the work. I handed him Children. He declined, saying, ‘I would rather you give this to someone else so they too can find out about this. You see I already know and love Jehovah’s witnesses.’ I answered: ‘To know and to feel as you do is right, but not enough. This book was not printed for the other fellow, but for the ones who feel as you do, persons of good-will It will help you to find out what to do, because if you would survive Armageddon you must not only love Jehovah’s witnesses, you yourself must become a witness and share in the work we are doing.’ His joyful reply was: 'Then I will accept it; and be assured I want to do my part.’ ”
48
THE WATCHTOWER,
Published Scmixionthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street «	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
N. H. Knorr, President	W. E. Van Amblt.ch, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - La:^h
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and eartli and the Giver of life to Ins cieatuies ; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created pel feet man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God's law and was sentenced to death ; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to Leaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Chi ist Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah's organization. and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will bear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and Is proceeding to the establishment of God's kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah's kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the peonle of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to ‘‘fill the earth" with a righteous race
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents In the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to per onalitics.
Yearly Subscription Price
Exited States, $100; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $150; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by international Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British .................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian................. 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Austr alasian ......... 7	Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S W., Australia
South African ......... _......Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(■TranaJations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label witbin one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, .V. Y., under the Act of March S, 1879.
MEMORIAL
Tuesday, March 31, after six p m , is the date Scnpturally arrived at t’or-1942 for the memorial celebration to both Jehovah's name and the sacrifice of the Lamb of God. Christ Jesus, his Theocratic King. Each Christian company, theiefore, should assemble after six p.m. of March 31, and the anointed ones thereof celebrate the Memorial, their companions the “other sheep” being present as observers. If there is no competent person present to deliver a brief discourse immediately before the partaking of the emblems, that short article appearing in the March 15, 1939, issue of The Watchtower should be read before those assembled prior to partaking. Since the breakmg of the bread and drinking of the wmc both picture the death of Jesus, it follows that both emblems should be served together at partaking, and not separately. The emblems should be unleavened bread and real red vvme. Jesus and his apostles used real red wine tn symbol of his blood, and the anointed remnant should follow their lead. A report of the celebration should be made to the Society as instructed in the Informant. In preparation therefor the article “Memorial” suggested above will be studied with profit.
“INTEGRITY” TESTIMONY PERIOD
Midwinter field maneuvers test the integrity, and the united testimony period during February is appropriately thus named. This "Integrity” Testimony Period is the opening month of the
1942 three-month Watchtower campaign, hence the people of integrity toward God now specialize on taking subscriptions for the magazine The Watchtower, announcing Jehovah’s kingdom or Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. Additional to the intrinsic value of the magazine itself, the latest book, Children, is given as a premium with all new subscriptions for a year, and that at the regular subscription rate of $1.00. God’s people of integrity will be steadfast therein and will prove their blameicss-ncss of devotion by taking part in this Testimony regardless of the cost to self. Many newly interested readers of The Watchtower, deeply appreciating it, will be desirous of joining in this special testimony privilege, and we invite such to write this office for references needed to put them in touch with the nearest local company organized for this campaign. A record should be kept of all work done and the result, and the same reported in the appointed manner at the close of February.
1942 YEARBOOK OF JEHOVAH’3 WITNESSES
It is now available, this new Yearbook the publication of winch was held up owing to circumstances which you will appreciate when you read it. Yet the interest which this 1942 Yearbook holds for all who are concerned about the progress of God’s work in the earth remains just as vital and presently helpful as if issued at the usual time. The president’s report of the past year’s work (Continued on page 63}
WCHTDWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
No. LXIII	February 13, 1942	No 4
MICAH
PART 3
God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spaice in time past unto the fathersby the prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things.—Heb. 1:1,2.
1 EHOVAH is the Eternal One, who lives forever. I “For I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live J for ever.” (Deut. 32:40) Creatures whom he approves and to whom he gives the right to life may thereafter live forever, but concerning Jehovah only is it written: “Even from everlasting to everlasting, thou art God.” (Ps. 90: 2) He is the King of Eternity: “Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honour and glory for ever and ever. Amen.” (1 Tim. 1:17) He shall never leave his supreme estate, but it is his right and within his almighty power to determine who shall be next to Him and sit at his right hand. Such one he calls and makes his “heir”. It is his beloved and only begotten Son whom Jehovah has appointed to this favored position. First, however, the Son must maintain the honor of his Father’s name by holding fast his integrity to God under the most crucial test from the enemy and by remaining “faithful unto death”. That was nineteen centuries ago. There God sent his Son as the greatest of his prophets unto his typical covenant people, Israel, to bear witness to the name of his Father. Israel rejected the words he spake unto them in his Father's name and by His authority. They warred against him and killed him; which conduct marked the “last days” of that typical people. Israel’s religious leaders said: “This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance.”—Matt. 21: 38.
2	God raised his proved and faithful Son from the dead and exalted him to his own right hand in heaven, as His heir of right, according to the terms of their covenant. Now that great Prophet, foreshadowed by Moses, has come to the temple, and through his fellow witnesses yet on earth he speaks unto the professed people of God, including “Christendom”. "Christendom” claims the rulership of the world for herself, and would seize upon the Kingdom and hold it by totalitarian dictators. The time is at hand for God's appointed Heir, Christ Jesus, to take possession of all things. He guarantees that his faithful followers who are the members of “his body” shall
be “heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ", and shall share the inheritance with him.—Rom. 8: 1G, 17; 12:4, 5.
3	Now “Christendom” is torn by war between “the king of the north” and “the king of the south” over world domination, and which "kings” seem to be pictured by “the kings of Israel” concerning whom Micah prophesied, one king with his capital at Samaria to the north and the other king with his capital at Jerusalem to the south. In the days of these two world powers locked in battle Jehovah's words by his prophet apply with greater force: “Yet will I bring an heir unto thee, 0 inhabitant of Mareshah: he shall come unto Adullam the glory of Israel." (Mic. 1:15) The places bearing those names have long passed away, but the names are full of meaning and apply now to organizations and conditions in “Christendom” particularly. The name "Mareshah” means “inheritance”. “Christendom” claims the inheritance of the Kingdom and seeks to be the “in-habitress” thereof. Her two “kings” battle for the world control, and her chief religious organization, with headquarters at Vatican City, favors the totalitarian “king of the north” as against the so-called "democratic”, liberal “king of the south”. The pope offers himself to act as mediator in settling the issue at the coming peace conference, but Jehovah God alone will decide the issue of world domination : “Yet will I bring an heir unto thee, 0 inhabitant of Mareshah.” That “heir” is Jehovah's anointed and appointed King of his Theocratic Government, Christ Jesus, and the government of the new world shall be upon his shoulder forever. The word “heir" in the Hebrew text literally means “possessor” (Rotherham's translation, margin). “Christendom” will not inherit the kingdom of heaven. Her chief religious representative, who claims to be the “vicar of Christ", will not inherit with Christ Jesus, and “Christendom’s” two “kings” shall not gain the world domination. All these shall be destroyed at the battle of Armageddon by Jehovah’s “heir of all things”. Christ Jesus becomes “possessor” of the dominion, by con
52
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
quest as well as by Jehovah’s appointment and authorization.
‘ “He shall come unto Adullam the glory of Israel,” says the sure word of prophecy. The name “Adullam” means “justice of the people”, or, “hiding place.” Near the ancient city of Adullam was the cave of Adullam where David and his companions hid from the face of the demonized King Saul. (1 Sam. 22:1; 2 Sam. 23:13) Other renderings of the text are: “The glory of Israel shall come even unto Adullam.” (A?». Rev. Ver.) “As far as Adullam shall enter the glory of Israel.” (Rotherham) The nations and rulers of “Christendom” have failed to render justice to the people who love righteousness and hate iniquity. Such lovers of righteousness will glory in the One whom Jehovah sends to render justice, and who is the representative of the great “God of glory”. The nation of natural Israel rejected and still reject Jehovah and his heir, and “Christendom” has followed the unfaithful example of her prototype and done the same. Now Jehovah and his Kingdom Heir are the glory of spiritual Israel, and concerning this true “Israel of God” he says: "For I, saith the Lord, will . . . be the glory in the midst of her.’’-Zech. 2:5.
5	Deferring to the unfaithful nation of Israel and her antitype, “Christendom,” Jehovah says: “Hath a nation changed their gods, which are yet no gods? but my [professed] people have changed their glory for that which doth not profit. For my people have committed two evils; they have forsaken me, the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns. broken cisterns, that can hold no water.” (Jer. 2:11.13) Under the influence of the demons “Christendom” is given over to religion, which is the worship of the creature and not the Creator: “and changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to bird’, and fourfooted beasts, and creeping things.” (Rom. 1: 23) Concerning these things which religionists and their allies have adopted for worship Jehovah says: "Therefore will I change their glory into shame.” (Iios. 4: 7) He has already put them to shame by the message of the truth and of the true worship proclaimed by his faithful servants and witnesses on the earth.
6	The religionists, whether of “the king of the north" or of “the king of the south", now piously cry out through the newspapers and over the radio for a “peace with justice". They try to hide themselves under this sham to appear as the just guardians of the peoples’ interests and to hold their political and commercial allies in line. “Christendom’s” rulers and “mighty ones” (or gods), both demons and men, are her glory; but Jehovah’s Heir and King, who is “the glory of Israel”, shall at Armageddon advance against these enemies and “shall come unto
Adullam”. The totalitarian monstrosity and all its religious, political, commercial and military allies will be forced to retreat and draw back to “Adullam”, their last defense line and standing place. Their “refuge of lies” and hiding-place of falsehood shall not be successful camouflage, and Jehovah’s glorious King shall execute justice against them. Thereby he justifies or vindicates his Father’s name Jehovah and renders justice in behalf of his people, avenging them upon their enemies. The religious shepherds and the principal of their flock shall find no safe hiding or escape, but Jehovah’s people who have sought meekness and righteousness shall “be hid” in that day of the Lord’s anger and shall survive Armageddon. Thus shall be fulfilled the prophecy concerning Jehovah’s Elect Servant and King: “He shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles”; that is, to the “great multitude” out of all nations and who are delivered from the unjust demon rule over humankind.—Isa. 42:1.
7	The world, particularly “Christendom”, now mourns because of the destruction caused by the great war between the two “kings” for world domination, and the pope's “sorrowing heart" is much mentioned in the news by press and radio. But Armageddon, which shall be the world's greatest and last tribulation, is immediately ahead and unavoidable ; and looking ahead to it Jehovah says to “Christendom’’ concerning the organizations and movements which she has mothered and nourished: “Make thee bald, and poll thee for thy delicate children; enlarge thy baldness as the eagle; for they are gone into captivity from thee.” (Mic. 1:16) The nations which call themselves "Christian” practice heathenish rites in the name of religion; and the heathen shaved the head with a razor in mourning. Polling tlie head was a sign of distress, grief, anguish and mourning. “Cut off thine hair, O Jerusalem, and cast it away, and take up a lamentation on high places; for the Lord hath rejected and forsaken the generation of his wrath. For the children of Judah have done evil in my sight, saith the Lord; they have set their abominations [particularly the totahtaiian ‘abomination of desolation’] in the house which is called by my name, to pollute it.” (Jer. 7: 29, 30) If “Christendom” believed Jehovah’s message sent through his faithful remnant and their companions, “Christendom” would mourn over what is coming to her and her supporters and hangers-on at Armageddon. But she sorrows not over this, because of unbelief, nor over the persecutions which she has heaped upon Jehovah’s servants and witnesses, nor for the reproach she has cast upon his name and his Theocratic Government.
’ The Lord bids her mourn for her “delicate children”, or, “for the children of thy delight.” (A»i. Rev. Ver.) The Roman Catholic Hierarchy claims hun
February 15,1942
3Ee WATCHTOWER-
53
dreds of millions throughout the earth as “children of the Catholic Church”; but the nations and governments of “Christendom” have many other children. They have rejected God’s beloved Son and his faithful brethren and refused The Theocratic Government, which is the people’s only hope and salvation. They have brought forth human schemes and organizations and movements, all under demon inspiration and influence, and they have announced these offspring of theirs as sure and reliable remedies for the ills of the people. At great cost and at the expense of the taxed common people they have anxiously mothered and nursed and reared such offspring, as recovery acts, financing institutions, relief organizations, cultural societies, industrial and occupational guilds, economic boards, and sundry committees, leagues, commissions, authorities and companies, fronts and unions, Fascism, Nazism, Communism, and especially the totalitarian-religious “abomination of desolation”. These “Christendom” has brought forth and nurtured as a sign of her religious culture and “civilization” and to uphold her name and carry forward her plans and policies, and to sustain her into perpetuity regardless of the will of God. The continuing and increasing troubles and difficulties upon the people show the failure and futility of these “delicate children” of religion’s “civilization”.
8	Furthermore, as part of this demon organization under Satan, “the god of this world,” they shall pass away at Armageddon. They will not survive, and “Christendom” will not be able to hold onto them. They are doomed with her. Hence God will enforce his command to her: “Enlarge thy baldness as the eagle; for they are gone into captivity from thee.” This particular eagle family has the crown of the head and also the neck, or the part where the skull and beak meet, all bald or bare of feathers. To enlarge the baldness like such eagle’s denotes that the approaching time of mourning would be no ordinary event for “Christendom”, but one such as was never before, nor shall ever be repeated. It is her everlasting defeat and destruction. All men of good-will who desire to live should not mourn but should flee from her to The Theocracy, and without delay.
WOE
10	The cry of “AVoe!” is not very agreeable to hear, and “shocks the sensibilities” of some, but it is a warning to those who seek righteousness. It is therefore a benefit for such to arouse them as to what they should avoid if they would have God’s approval and live. “The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and the good.” (Prov. 15:3) He beholds the evils afflicting the people in “Christendom” at the end of the world, where we now are, and he makes them clearly to appear by his record of like things that existed amongst his typical covenant peo
ple; and this He does for our admonition in these perilous times. “Woe to them that devise iniquity, and work evil upon their beds! when the morning i< light, they practise it, because it is in the power of their hand.” (Mic. 2:1) This means that their lawlessness is deliberate. Amongst the Israelites it was a willful violation of their covenant toward God. Today the Bible has been spread over the world by hundreds of millions of copies, in a thousand tongues, particularly in the nations that profess to be “Christian”. “Christendom” has the Bible, and in it is set forth fully and clearly the law of Jehovah God. “Organized religion” has these Scriptures and claims to study and to be familiar with them, and yet the law of God is flagrantly broken throughout “Christendom”, and the lovers of righteousness suffer and are afflicted. The political and commercial elements and the “strong-arm squad” continually commit lawlessness in contempt of God's commandments, and the religious element do not protest, but connive at the lawlessness lest they should lose the financial aid and the political and legal and police backing and protection of their political and judicial and commercial allies.
11	Therefore the religious element, that is, the clergy, are the most blameworthy. They are most responsible before God, and shall not escape rendering a full account therefor. The common people pay them and look to them for teaching on the law of God, but instead they have been taught human moral standards of so-called “character”, and traditions of men which transgress and make of none effect God’s law; and the people in general do not object, but “love to have it so”. They submit to the advice of their religious clergy that they must not revolt against the iniquities of these religious ruling elements because the clergy say these are “the higher powers” and are “ordained of God”; whereas in truth and in fact the only “higher powers” are Jehovah God and Christ Jesus. (See Romans 13: 1-10.)
12	Concerning the order-loving and law-abiding ones it is written: “The sleep of a labouring man is sweet, whether he eat little or much: but the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep.” (Eccl. 5:12) Instead of enjoying such sweet sleep the devisers of iniquity hatch lawless schemes while the righteous peacefully sleep. Concerning the “man of sin” class, of which the Roman Catholic Hierarchy are the most powerful and prominent part, the servant of the Lord says: “There is no fear of God before his eyes. The words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit: he hath left off to be wise [to have the fear of God], and to do good. He deviseth mischief upon his bed; he setteth himself in a way that is not good; he abhorreth not evil.” (Ps. 36: 1, 3, 4) By the time of morning light they have made sure of the
54
STie WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
craftiest and the outwardly most respectable and “legalized"’ way to take to do their iniquity, and when their allies are also awake to co-operate with them.
13	And why do they thus defy God and flout his law? “Because it is in the power of their hand” to do it now and get away without any accounting to the cowed and oppressed people. Jehovah declared that for a limited time he would permit Satan and his demons to remain, and at the end of which time Jehovah would have his witnesses to declare his name throughout all the earth. It has been the day of power of the demons and their deluded dupes and agents on earth, and now the time of their power is near its end. Hence the demons now feverishly drive these to use their power in defiance of Jehovah God while it is in their hand to do so. They attempt to increase their power and to do still more iniquity against the people of good-will toward God. Some time before the World War a well-known Paulist father of the chief religious organization on earth was asked at a public mission: “Does the Catholic Church regard Protestants as heretics, and does it not believe and teach that heretics should be punished, even with death if necessary?” To which this religionist of today replied: "I do not doubt, if they were strong enough, that the Catholic people would hinder, even by death if necessary, the spread of such errors through the people. And I say, rightly so.”
14	That published statement (reported in the New York Herald') has never been officially denied or renounced ; and it is significant and prophetic in view of what is seen coming to pass upon the smaller or weaker Protestant, non-Catholic and democratic, liberal nations of the world and at the hands of Catholic totalitarian dictators who have a concordat arrangement with the head of this Paulist father at Vatican City, Italy. It is made clearly to appear, by deed and course of action, that the totalitarian monstrosity, “the abomination that maketh desolate,” is earning out the will of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and is “the sword of the church” in its hand of power. Only God’s Word gives hope and comfort to seekers of truth and of righteousness, that this exceptional outbreak of religious-totalitarian wickedness is an evidence that it is now about to be destroyed by the Lord, and with it all workers of iniquity.—Ps. 92: 7-9.
15	Further showing the lawlessness that is now practiced and that shall be shortly cleared off the earth the prophet says: “And they covet fields, and take them by violence; and houses, and take them away: so they oppress a man and his house, even a man and his heritage.” (Mic. 2: 2) Christ Jesus cried woe to the religious clergy’ of his day because of like crimes by them: “Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye devour widows’ houses, and
for a pretence make long prayer: therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation.” (Matt. 23:14) The prophet Isaiah pronounced a similar woe: “Woe unto them that join house to house, that lay field to field, till there be no place, that they [the landholders] may be placed alone in the midst of the earth [on vast landed estates; whereas the poor, propertyle«s classes are herded together in overcrowded blocks in tene-ment districts and slums]! In mine ears said the Lord of hosts, Of a truth, many houses [of the covetous ones in power] shall be desolate, even meat and fair, without inhabitant.” (Isa. 5:8,9) The vast landed estates, the great mansions and edifices, and the blocks of property possessed by the clergy, particularly those of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, stand in marked contrast with the dingy living quarters of those who are the regular contributors to the upkeep of the religious leaders and their expensive organization. This is a convincing testimony proving the application of these prophecies to our very day.
16	The favorites of the religious organization are likewise owners of broad lands and many house-, and they’ are made “the principal of the flock”. History records that the clergy have been notorious for their covetousness of the fields, houses and other property of the members of their congregations, and they have used religious frauds and crafty arguments and means to gain them while the owners lived or by bequests at their death. Now the great religious o: gani-zation is allied with the arbitrary dictators, which covet the rich and productive lands of other nations great and small, and which dictators build up the most powerful military organization in the world and by violence unequaled, and aided by a religion-“fifth column”, invade the countries one after another and grab the land and its natural resources and the properties builded thereon.
17	The combine called “the king of the north”, and which is made up of the “Axis powers" and the Hierarchy that have their headquarters at the Vatican, is out for world domination in order to set up again the old “Holy Roman Empire”, this time world-wide. Foretelling the covetous and violent course of this composite world power, or ‘Ting”, the prophecy says (Dan. 11:40-43) : “And the king of the north -hall come against him like a whirlwind, with chariots [motorized equipment], and with horsemen [swiftmoving forces], and with many ships [raider ships, submarines, airships] ; and he shall enter into the countries, and shall overflow and pass over. He shall enter also into the glorious land [the things pertaining to Jehovah’s covenant people], and many countries shall be overthrown; but ... He shall stretch forth his hand also upon the countries; and the land of Egypt shall not escape. But he shall have power over the treasures of gold and of silver, and over
February 15,1942
SEe WATCHTOWER.
55
all the precious things of Egypt.” It was recently announced in the news that the religious member of this “king of the north” has built fifty churches on wheels to reach isolated districts and conduct masses, and also that the Vatican has for some time been training priests to follow the Axis armies into the occupied regions of Russia and to take over the orthodox churches there. Ever since the break between the Eastern and Western religious organizations about ten centuries ago the Roman Catholic Hierarchy has coveted this. Now the opportunity to satisfy this greed has come.
16	Christ Jesus, by virtue of his perfection and obedience when a man, is called “The Son of man”. His faithful members of “his body” who follow him are the house of sons of God, over which Christ Jesus is the Head. To these faithful followers he said: “Blessed are the meek; for they shall inherit the earth.” (Matt. 5:5) “But the meek shall inherit the earth, and shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace.” (Ps. 37:11) Besides these who compose this “little flock”, the Lord now brings “other sheep” into the fold, to wit, the people of good-will toward God and his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. and who shall form the “great multitude”. (Rev. 7:9-17) If these hold fast their integrity and abide faithful to The Theocracy till Armageddon is ended, their everlasting heritage shall be life on the earth under that righteous government. These now must seek righteousness and meekness to realize the promise of being “hid in the day of the Lord’s anger”.— Zeph. 2:3.
19	Now the faithful remnant and their companions, these “other sheep”, are greatly oppressed in all nations, and especially by the totalitarian powers and those of that spirit in other lands. All these powers were foreshadowed by the Amalekites and the Mid-ianites under their princes, Oreb and Zeeb, and concerning whom the psalmist says: “The Midianites . . . like Oreb, and like Zeeb; yea, all their princes as Zebah and as Zalmunna: who said, Let us take to ourselves the houses of God in possession.” (Ps. 83: 9,11, 12) In like manner the ruling powers, at the instigation of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and their clergy allies, have seized the property and literature and the very persons of Jehovah’s witnesses in the land brought under the totalitarian rule and seek to run them off the earth or to destroy them. They greatly oppress these covenant people of Jehovah because such seek to “dwell in the house of the Lord for ever”. (Ps. 23: 6) Jesus foretold that these would be now “hated of all nations for my name’s sake”. (Matt. 24:9) For the comfort of such robbed and oppressed ones Jehovah by his prophet says: “For evil doers shall be cut off: but those that wait upon the Lord, they shall inherit the earth. For yet
a little while, and the wicked shall not he: yea. thou shalt diligently consider his place, and it shall rot be.” (Ps. 37:9,10) Hence, woe to the wicked!
20	Those in a covenant with God to do his will are all of one family of the great Life-giver and Father : “of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named.” (Eph. 3:15) The very name “Christendom'’ means to say that the nations thus called profess to be “Christian” and thereby imply that they are in a covenant to do God’s will, and they claim to be God's family. Instead, they are of the great family of religion or demonism, and speak much of “the fatherhood of God, and the brotherhood of man"; but they do not say which god. They should not be haughty, but should think over what Christ Jesus told the clergy and their dupes as to which god was their father. (John 8 : 42-44) True to their own family, they do not treat Jehovah’s witnesses as brothers of their family; which they are not. Then the Lord, having in mind the aforementioned devices of iniquity, warns “Christendom”, the modern counterpart of unfaithful Israel: "Therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold, against this family do I devise an evil, from which ye shall not remove your necks; neither shall ve go [walk] haughtilv: for this time is evil."— Mic. 2: 3.
21	The evil which Jehovah devises against the family of “Christendom” is not iniquity or wickedness. “For all his ways are judgment; a God of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he.” (Dent. 32: 4) Hence the “evil” is that which brings grief, pain, injury and loss, and which Jehovah God by Christ Jesus executes against those wicked covenant-breakers as a judgment and punishment against them for their lawlessness and wickedness. This evil shall come upon them at Armageddon, when they have filled up the measure of the iniquity of their religious fathers. The destruction shall suddenly take them, like the noose of a trap, and they shall not be able to pull back their haughtily tilted heads and stiff necks. "The lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down; and the Lord [Jehovah] alone shall be exalted in that day. For the day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low.”—Isa. 2:11,12.
22	On the earth pride has gone to seed, and the haughty and the stiffnecked ones, because of the pride of their hearts and their pride in their religious organizations, will not seek after Jehovah God and his Theocratic Government, but exalt themselves and other creatures instead. For them Armageddon does not bring deliverance from destruction and the bondage to Satan’s organization; for them “this time is evil”. “For it is an evil time.” (Am. Rev. Ver.) It
56
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
brings the evil or calamity which Jehovah in his righteousness has devised for all workers of iniquity, particularly those who do such under the cloak of religion and, worse, in the name of God. For all such there shall be no way of escape. (Jer. 25:34,35) “Organized religion,” which has pretended to be the city or organization of the Lord, shall go down first, but the political and commercial elements and their supporters need not think to escape unpunished thereafter. “For, lo, I begin to bring evil on the city which is called by my name, and should ye be utterly unpunished? Ye shall not be unpunished: for I will call for a sword [Armageddon] upon all the inhabitants of the earth, saith the Lord of hosts.” “He will give them that are wicked to the sword, saith the Lord.” (Jer. 25:29,31) For “Christendom” there is now only a “certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries”. (Heb. 10:27) “Thus saith the Lord God, An evil, an only evil, behold, is come. An end is come, the end is come: it watcheth for thee; behold, it is come.” (Ezek. 7: 5, 6) Jehovah's witnesses now sound the warning.
PARABLE
23	The “day of Jehovah” dates from the year 1914. in which the period of uninterrupted rule of Satan as “the god of this world” ended: there also the “times of the Gentiles” ran out, which times began at the overthrow of the typical Theocracy at Jerusalem in 606 B.C. and continued for “seven times”, or 2,520 years. (Luke 21:24; Ezek. 21:24-27) The “day of Jehovah”, therefore, began with the setting up by Jehovah of his true Theocracy with Christ Jesus as King; and this Jehovah accomplished by the enthroning of his anointed King on Zion and sending him forth to rule in the midst of his enemies. (Pss. 2:6; 110:1, 2) It is also spoken of in the prophecies as "that day”. Therefore since A.D. 1914 this prophecy is due to be fulfilled, and is being fulfilled: "In that day shall one take up a parable against you. and lament with a doleful lamentation, and say, We be utterly spoiled; he hath changed the portion of my people: how hath he removed it from me! turning awax he hath divided our fields.”—Mic. 2: 4.
24	Here the "parable” is a pithy, taunting prophetic statement, and presents a likeness of what is foretold to come upon those whom the speaker of the parable imitates. To those it is not pleasant to hear, and it is delivered to them as a “lament", and “with a lamentation of lamentation”. (Hebrew) It torments their susceptibilities, and they by all means try to stop the lamenting of the parable; they do not believe it, but are afraid it might be true. Hence it is manifest that the one who takes up and laments the parable is the servant class of Jehovah, his witnesses under his Chief Witness, Christ Jesus, and who "keep the com
mandments of God and have the testimony of Jesus Christ”. To such ones the words of the prophecy are a command to deliver the parable, and they have been delivering it, especially since 1922, as the facts of record disclose. They do not lament for “Christendom”, but rejoice at the prospect of the vindication of Jehovah by his destroying everything that blasphemes and reproaches his name. They have no sympathy with the wicked, nor do they regret the punishment coming upon such from the hand of God. In the spirit of the parable of lamentation they deliver His message and show what “Christendom” shall complain of and lament for, particularly at the climax of this day of judgment.
25	“Christendom” has not been a glory to God, nor a blessing to the people, but she has claimed the people for her own “pasture” and has spoiled them. Claiming it as her “portion” to exalt herself and rule as the kingdom of God and as the “higher powers”, she has blinded the people concerning the true Kingdom of God and still tries desperately to keep them from going over to The Theocratic Government now being proclaimed to the nations for a witness. (Matt. 24:14) She now tries to deceive them, and does deceive them, by setting up “the abomination of desolation” as a “new world order” in the place and stead of Jehovah’s Theocracy by Christ Jesus. She goes totalitarian, one nation after another, to hold the people in line under a strict regimentation by demonized men. Already the religious pastors howl that the proclamation of The Theocratic Government has spoiled their pastures. However, when Armageddon begins, the ruling factors, and particularly the religious part thereof, shall say. as foretold in the parable: “We be utterly spoiled." These being now so entrenched in power, only Jehovah God by Christ Jesus could do such spoiling; and He will. “A voice of the cry of the shepherds, and an howling of the principal of the flock, shall be heard; for the Lord hath spoiled their pasture.” (Jer. 25: 36) "The day [of the Lord] that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.” (Mal. 4:1) Christ Jesus also says to them, because they have not brought forth the fruits (that is, the truths and works) of the Kingdom: “The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.”—Matt. 21:43.
26	“Christendom” claims to be the visible representation of God’s kingdom on earth and feels cocksure of standing for ages and then at last entering into her portion in heaven. Her greatest religious organization has claimed to be built upon “this rock” and that ‘the gates of hell shall not prevail against her’. By having his truths of the Bible proclaimed Jehovah has exposed her and shown that her claimed
February 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
57
“portion” is a false claim. At Armageddon he will give her cause to complain and lament that God has changed her self-assumed portion and removed from her all things she arrogantly pretended were her rightful and God-given portion. He has already taken away from her the privilege of being his witnesses, and has conferred it upon the humble and faithful “people for his name”, whom he has for years been taking out from the nations for his purpose. Because these abandon “Christendom” for The Theocracy and are therefore not of this world, even as Christ Jesus is not of it, these are as rebels and apostates unto ’'Christendom”, and concerning them she laments: “Turning away he hath divided our fields”; (Am. Rev. Ver.) “to the rebellious he divideth our fields”; (Rotherham) “to an apostate our fields doth he apportion.” Unto Christ Jesus, whom “organized religion” crucified as a rebellious apostate, Jehovah has given the nations for his inheritance and possession, and at Armageddon he shall dash them in pieces. Thereafter he shall give the habitation of the broad fields of the earth over to the "great multitude” that survives. Here ends the parable of lamentation, and the prophet next shows the cause why the lamenting one complains.
27	“Therefore thou shalt have none that shall cast a cord by lot in the congregation of the Lord.” (Mic. 2: 5) The “cord” here is a “measuring line" (Rotherham), as for measuring off the bounds of an assigned portion of land: “He cast out the heathen also before them, and divided them an inheritance by line, and made the tribes of Israel to dwell in their tents." (Ps. 78:55) In 1918, by reason of the acts of the religionists of “Christendom” then rent by war, God’s consecrated people were cast out of their earthly condition of service as heralds of the Kingdom, and for a time they were exiled from such privileged earthly condition. Then they repented of their failure in God’s service due to fear of men, and the Lord delivered them and restored them to his organization and its active service as Jehovah's witnesses on earth.
26	The measuring of the growth of Jehovah’s visible service organization then is pictured symbolically under the figure of Jerusalem: “I lifted up mine eyes again [after A.D. 1918], and looked, and, behold, a man with a measuring line in his hand. Then said I, Whither goest thou? And he said unto me, To measure Jerusalem, to see what is the breadth thereof, and what is the length thereof. And, behold, the angel that talked with me went forth, and another angel went out to meet him, and said unto him, Run, speak to this young man, saying, Jerusalem shall be inhabited as towns without walls for the multitude of men and cattle therein.” (Zech. 2:1-4) The Theocratic Assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses in St. Louis, Missouri, for five days in August, 1941, was an illus
tration of this, where the vast throng of Jehovah’s anointed remnant and their companions packed out the enormous 25,000-seat-capacity Arena and swelled out beyond the walls thereof and over the adjacent grounds, and including a distant trailer city, to make a total audience of over 115,000; and this representing the United States and Canada alone. A like Assembly of Jehovah's witnesses and companion-, in Leicester, England, the following month, had an attendance of 12,000, in spite of wartime conditions and danger of raids by the air “arm” of “the king of the north”. And it appears there is yet much work to be done in these lands of “the king of the south”. Hence the remnant and companions can say and do say: “The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly heritage.”—Ps. 16: 6.
29 In these service privileges “Christendom” and her religionists have no part. They have no heritage to measure or bound off in the Lord’s organization, in Jehovah’s “holy land”. “Christendom” has rejected his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus and has persecuted and continues to hate the messengers thereof, and the Lord has cast her off, and for her there will be no restoration. At Armageddon destruction awaits her. The Lord at the temple has weighed her in his balances of judgment and found her wanting and she has no standing with or among the congregation of the Lord. “The ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous.” (Ps. 1:5) This is a warning to all persons yet found in “Christendom” to flee out before Armageddon.
OBEYING god
33 The experiences of Jehovah’s witnesses and companions in the so-called “Christian nations" make clear the application of the further words of the prophecy: "Prophesy ye not, say they to them that prophesy: they shall not prophesy to them, that they shall not take shame.” (Mic. 2: 6) The Lee-er translation renders the text more literally: “ 'Preach not’; (but) they shall preach.” This agrees with what befell another witness of Jehovah, to wit, the prophet Amos, at the hands of Amaziah the priest of rchuion, who said: "Prophesy not again any more at Bethel: for it is the king’s chapel, and it is the king's court.” "Then answered Amos, and said to Amaziah, . . . Now therefore hear thou the word of the Lord: Thou sayest, Prophesy not against Israel, and drop not thy word against the house of Isaac. Therefore thus saith the Lord; Thy wife shall be an harlot in the city, and thy sons and thy daughters shall fall by the sword, and thy land shall be divided by line; and thou shalt die in a polluted land: and Israel shall surely go into captivity forth of his land.” (Amos 7: 10-17) This shows the shame that shall surely come upon opposers of Jehovah’s message.
58
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
31	By virtue of their consecration to God and their covenant with him to do his will, and by virtue of the anointing of his spirit, Jehovah’s witnesses are his ordained ministers of the gospel and are under instruction and command from him to preach “all the counsel of God”, and that whether the religionists hear or forbear to hear. No creature or organization of creatures has the right or authority, because God’s message does not please or agree with such, to command Jehovah’s witnesses to keep silence and then to try to enforce them into silence by restraining them from contact with others who desire to hear. Jehovah and Christ Jesus are “the Higher Powers”, and their commandments are prior to and superior to those of men and organizations on the earth. In a clash with laws of men the superior or supreme law of God must prevail and must be obeyed by those in a covenant to do the will of the Most High. Any other course on the part of Jehovah’s covenant people would be disobedience and covenant-breaking and would be punishable with everlasting death, destruction. The Lord’s commandment given 1900 years ago, before any of the present governments of “Christendom” came into existence, and which commandment has never been revoked but now’ applies at this end of the world to Jehovah’s covenant people, is, to wit: “And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come.” (Matt. 24:14) Particularly since the coming of the Lord to his temple in 1918 this prophecy and commandment has been undergoing fulfillment in the face of the hatred of the nations and the world-wide opposition to and persecution of Jehovah's witnesses.
32	In every nation where Jehovah's witnesses and companions have preached the message of the Kingdom the governing factors, at the prodding of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and other clergy allies, have made strenuous efforts to stop the preaching or prophesying. The Hierarchy, presuming to dictate to the political, judicial and police elements, order them to stop the witnesses by illegal means and by force and violence. They conspire together and misapply the commercial regulations and sedition laws and frame mischief by new laws specially made, and then order and threaten Jehovah's witnesses: “Preach not!” God’s covenant people reply: “AVe ought to obey God rather than men” (Acts 5:29); and they keep on obeying him, preaching the same as hitherto and increasing their efforts, “putting on more steam,” though they suffer a jail sentence or mob violence or concentration camp or even a sentence to death. In this course they follow in the steps of Christ Jesus, who left them the right example. (1 Pet. 2:21) The proclamation of the truth exposes those who practice demonism, particularly the reli
gious clergy, and who defy God and are determined to rule or ruin, and they feel embarrassment at the Theocratic message, and take shame. Hence their final aim is that Jehovah’s witnesses “shall not prophesy to them, that they shall not take shame". The prophecy shows that eventually they shall seemingly succeed, and then they shall cry, “Peace and safety!” and shall honor and felicitate one another. Then when they think they have hidden their shame, ‘sudden destruction shall come upon them; and they shall not escape.’ (1 Thess. 5:3) Hence the prophecy says: “He will not escape shame.”-Mic. 2:6, Harkaiy.
’’Jehovah, the God of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, addresses his words directly to “Christendom”, which religionists call “the house of Jacob ’. Jacob was the father of the house called by his name, that is, the Israelites after the flesh. Now “Christendom” pretends to he spiritual Israel and lays claim to the birthright which Jacob had according to the will and decree of God. “Christendom,” which is now going totalitarian, feels hurt at the message of Jehovah by his witnesses, and assigns wicked motives to them in proclaiming his Theocracy. She declares their words do harm and injury to the people and especially to the State and to religion. The religious clergy, both Catholic and Protestant, and their duped servants cry it is Communism and that Jehovah’s witnesses are stirring up religious hatred and bigotry and are conducting a “campaign of hate” leading to religious intolerance. But their own actions of violence and in contempt of Constitutional law prove that they are the intolerant ones. To such Jehovah by his prophet now speaks: “0 thou that art named the house of Jacob [{Rotherham) 0 thou who art said to be the house of Jacob], is the spirit of the Lord straitened [shortened; impatient]? are these his doings'? do not my words do good to him that walketh uprightly?”—Mic. 2:7.
31	The Roman Catholic Hierarchy claims to be the oldest religious organization in “Christendom”, and has actually about 1500 years of existence; and the so-called “Protestants” date from and after the Reformation period of 400 years ago. During the forty years prior to A.D. 1918, when Christ Jesus, the Messenger of Jehovah, was ‘preparing the way before Him’ that he might come to the temple for judgment (Mal. 3:1-3), Jehovah’s consecrated people on earth were telling of the establishment of his Kingdom and of the end of Satan’s world and of the battle of Armageddon and were warning the people to flee from the wrath to come there; but since the Lord’s coming to the temple in 1918 they have given an even greater witness and warning to “Christendom” and all nations. Shall the religionists and their allies, now’ at this late date, say rightly that Jehovah is without long-suffering and forbearance and is in
February 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
39
tolerant in sending his witnesses to ‘‘declare . . . the day of vengeance of our God" as being at hand? Is it tlie Lord's way of doing to send catastrophe upon the world as a punishment without first sending due notice and warning over a period of time? It is Satan’s doings to now bring woes upon the people without previous warning. Jehovah’s course at the time of the Flood in Noah's day and at the destruction of Jerusalem first in Jeremiah’s day and again in the days of the apostles of Jesus Christ shows it is His rule to forewarn the disobedient of the evil to come and to mercifully allow the persons of good-will an opportunity to hear and heed and to escape to safety and preservation. Therefore Jehovah squarely puts the question up to "Christendom” concerning the words which his witnesses declare: "Do not my words do good to him that walketh uprightly '?" Hence the ones that take offense show thereby that they are at fault and are not walking uprightly before God. However, the religionists continue to justify themselves and to protest against the truth and to "fight against God", and hence his words do good only to the people of good-will, who become the Lord’s “other sheep” and who shall form the "great multitude”.
35	Furthermore the Lord says: “Even of late my people [thou that art named the house of Jacob] is risen up as an enemy: ye pull off the robe with the garment from them that pass by securely as men averse from war.” (Mic. 2:8) Those who practice religion or demonism draw near to God with their lips and in buildings dedicated to religion, but their hearts are far removed from Him and his Theocracy by his King. The clergy, and particularly the reigning religdous ruler at Vatican City and his Hierarchy who also sit on thrones, apply to themselves the prophecies and promises concerning God's kingdom, and they give false instruction concerning the Kingdom to the political and judicial rulers of "Christendom”, and now they speak of themselves establishing a “new world order" in which religion will rule, after this war. Thus they rage and imagine a vain thing, and the rulers take counsel together against Jehovah and his anointed King and Theocratic Government; and they charge that the proclamation of that righteous Government is seditious and dangerous to the security of the state, and persecute Jehovah’s witnesses and declare them illegal. “Even of late,” as it were, “even yesterday” (marginal reading), their opposition has become more marked and widespread. Satan is the arch enemy of God, and they make themselves friends of Satan’s world organization and thereby make themselves God’s enemies.—Ps. 2:1-6; Jas. 4: 4.
36	In an orderly manner Jehovah’s witnesses are doing a lawful work, which is also commanded by the Lord. They are peaceably minded and without
thought of injuring anyone, hut only dosirimr to "comfort all that mourn". When they entei a community and bring tlie Kingdom me-saue from door to door, they do so fearlessly and "pass hv seeuiely as men averse from war". They are neutral a- to the war of the nations of the world and do not de-ire to enter into a fight or controversy with any human creatures; their battle is not with flesh and blood, but against the demons. (Eph. 6:12) However, the actions of the enemies of the truth now over a period ofv ears hardly permit the Kingdom publishers to pass by with any sense of human security from assault, because they are now aware that the enemies have plotted and are lying in wait as highwaymen or bandits. Their identity as Jehovah’s approved and commissioned witnesses is pictured as a robe. The enemy sneeringly speak of them as "Jehovah’s witnesses” and challenge their right to this "new name'5, and they "pull off the robe” from the undergarment, figuratively speaking. So doing, they would make God’s covenant people to outwardly appear a> without marks of God’s true organization and not beautified with the true Kingdom gospel. Instead, they accuse them of being disguised hawkers, booksellers, propagandists, Communists, seditious, ensailing in commercial work for selfish gain, proselytizers. and disturbers of the public peace and invading the rights of others to worship God as they please. Says Jehovah’s witness: “I am for peace; but when I speak, they are for war.” (Ps. 120: 7) The faithful servants continue on in obedience to God’s commands, and therebv “put to silence the ignorance of foolish men”. —1 Pet. 2:15.
37	In the Scriptures God’s organization is pictured under the symbol of good women whom he approved, and whom he used to give birth to his witnesses; for example, Sarah, who bare Isaac; and Rebekah. who bare Jacob; and Rachel, who bare Joseph and Benjamin; and Amram's wife, who bare Moses and Aaron. Jehovah’s universal organization is called Zion, and gives birth to his capital organization under Christ Jesus, the Head thereof. Therefore Zion is symbolized as the woman which gives birth to the "man child”, the Theocratic Government with Christ as King. (Rev. 12:1-5) Concerning such Jehovah by the prophet Micah foretold, saving: "The women of my people have ye cast out from their pleasant houses; from their children have ye taken away my glory for ever.” (Mic. 2:9) This does not ajiply to literal women, although the governing factors of “Christendom” have literally done the things here described and which the Israelites also did in the type.
38	The systems of religion claim to be God’s organization, but do not bring forth the fruits of Uis organization, to wit, the truth and works of the Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus; nor do they
60
STie WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
bring forth the “children of the kingdom’’, those who shall be the “heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ”, and who shall “reign with him a thousand years". (Matt. 21:43; Rom. 8:16,17; Rev. 20:4,6) The religionists do not discern the two great organizations in opposition to each other, Jehovah’s organization and that of Satan, nor that religion is demonism. Religionists have nothing in common with God's organization, Zion, his “woman”, but are friends of the world in which Satan is “the god of this world”. Hence, being the seed of Satan's “woman” or organization, they fight against God’s woman and her seed, particularly “the remnant of her seed” down here at the end of the world. (Gen. 3:15; Rev. 12:17) They cast out God's true “woman'"', particularly those who become of his capital organization called "the Lamb's wife” or “bride", as though these “women" had no place in the “pleasant house" of the Lord. The religionists in the “king of the north" combination back up the “Axis powers” in their fight for world domination by restoring the “Holy Roman Empire”, and concerning which “king of the north” it is written: “Neither shall he regard the God of his fathers, nor the desire of women [God’s organization and its desirable children], nor regard any god: for he shall magnify himself above all.”—Dan. 11:37.
30	Jehovah's glory is upon the faithful children of his organization and who are Jehovah's witnesses, lie honors them with his message and the privilege of declaring it, and his protection as a glory is over them. They must maintain their integrity toward God under the crucial test unto the end if they would enter into the heavenly glory reserved for them. The demonized religionists seek to bring about the destruction of these children by causing them to break faith with God and to let go their integrity and to violate their covenant with God. With some like Judas the religionists succeed in their vicious efforts, and thus they take away for ever from these unfaithful children their worthiness to Jehovah's reserved glory. A faithful remnant do hold fast their integrity like Job, and the glory of Jehovah is risen upon them and they continue to shine as his witnesses and at the last inherit the promised glory.—Isa. 60: 1.
40	For centuries the people have sought rest in religion and in the organization called "Christendom". Today the politicians and commercial element and the clergy of all denominations cry out in public: “What the world needs is more religion.’’ But they have not given the people rest by religion, up till now. nor can they do so by “more religion" in a proposed "new world order” after this war. “Christendom” will find no rest through the schemes of her demonized rulers and backers. Her “new world order” leaves Jehovah and his Theocratic Government out of consideration and is opposed to his purpose and
is therefore “the abomination that maketh desolate”. This “abomination” may now be seen “standing where it ought not”, to wit, “in the holy place,” where the Theocracy by Christ Jesus only has the right and appointment by God to stand. Therefore Jehovah by his prophet now says to all persons of good-will toward him and his Kingdom: “Arise ye, and depart: for this is not your rest: because it is polluted, it shall destroy you, even with a sore destruction.” (Mic. 2:10) This corresponds with the warning of Jesus concerning the present totalitarian monstrosity that aims to rule the world: “When ye, therefore, shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, stand in the holy place, (whoso readeth, let him understand:) then let them which be in Judaea flee into the mountains.” (Matt. 24:15,16) Jehovah is the great Mountain or Rock, and Christ Jesus is his “express image”; and those who would escape must flee from “Christendom” and take refuge under Jehovah and his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. To remain in “Christendom” would mean to perish at Armageddon; for “Christendom” is polluted and leads to destruction at Armageddon, where she also shall be destroyed.
41	These are the “last days”, and Jesus warned that then false prophets would arise. (Matt. 24: 24) Such prophets are not filled with the spirit of the Lord, but have filled their belly with the east wind. (Job 15: 2) They sow not the Word of God, but sow the wind and shall reap the whirlwind of Armageddon. These political and religious prophets make big predictions and teach the traditions of men that make void God's Word of prophecy. (Matt. 15: 1-6) They stand out in striking contrast with Jehovah’s faithful witnesses and their companions who strictly hold to and preach God’s Word and its prophecies now undergoing fulfillment. Which of the two do the penpie of “Christendom” prefer and choose’’ Jehovah by his mouthpiece answers : "If a man, walking in the spirit [for, (A»i. Rev. Ver., margin) If a man walking in wind; (Rotherham) a man whogoeth after wind] and falsehood, do lie, saying, I will prophesy unto thee of wine and of strong drink; he shall even be the prophet of this people.”—Mic. 2: 11.
42	The apostle also foretold this, saying: “The time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears; and they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables.” (2 Tim. 4:3,4) Thus the nations have forgotten God. They put their trust in men, and resent God’s true message of judgment and warning and choose to listen to demonized men who predict good times to come by human achievements without the need of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. To such prophets they do not say:
February 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
61
“Prophesy not.” Hence they choose religion, and shall not drink joy, but only sorrow and death at Armageddon. The Devil’s efforts by these false prophets is to deceive the remnant of Jehovah's elect and their devoted companions. The faithful ones will not permit themselves to be deceived by religion or demonism,
but will maintain their integrity and continue to proclaim the true prophecy of God’s Word and to stand immovable for his Theocracy, that thus they may be “blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ". —1 Cor. 1: 8.
(To be continued}
UNITED SERVANTS
THE Lord’s work never stands still; it is always progressing. It is always on scheduled time. The Lord often changes the personnel of his visible earthly organization, but the work of witnessing to his Theocracy by Christ Jesus goes grandly on. All the opposition that the great adversary can muster cannot interfere with Jehovah's Theocratic arrangement for doing his “strange work”.
In 1916 the Lord God called to rest one whom he had long used prominently on earth in connection with His work, and the adversary did everything possible to disrupt the work entirely. He had already sown the seeds of criticism, discontent, jealousy, and egotism in the hearts of self-seeking and self-conceited ones within, aside from enemies without, and such included even some of the members of the board of directors of the Society, and of the headquarter’s working force, and also some in the field abroad. There were siftings all along the line, which were brought to a climax with the Lord’s coming to the temple in 1918 for judgment, as announced in the prophecy at Malachi 3: 1-3. But tins in no wise interfered with the Lord’s accomplishing his purpose through his organization.
Jehovah duly raised up another servant, and the work thereafter increased by leaps and bounds, and all today associated with and active in the Society can bear testimony to the privileges enjoyed in that great work. Now the Lord has called home that faithful servant whom He has greatly used in the proclamation of Jehovah's name and Kingdom, to receive his reward. But the Lord's work is now so well organized under the leadership of the Lord himself that there is complete unity and harmony in the field at large, at the Bethel family, and among the members of the boards of directors of both the Pennsylvania and the New York corporation of the Society. There are no ‘‘fifth columnists” of the adversary anywhere manifest, as were so noticeable from 1916 to 1918. This of itself is great evidence that Jehovah is working through the hearts of Ins devoted people, directly guiding them and directing the work of the organization through which he carries on his present work on the earth.
There are several indications that the Lord still has a great work to do before the final battle of Armageddon. To this end it is necessary that his people be in proper condition to fight on as one. It is not the province of any of the members of the Lord’s body to say who shall be his representative on earth in any special capacity. That is for the great Theocrat alone. However, the Lord Jesus laid down the rule that we must “render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar’s”, until The Theocratic Government is functioning everywhere and “Caesar” is no more.
In order to comply with present legal requirements, two corporations were formed, known as the Watch Tower Bible
& Tract Society, of Pennsylvania, and the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society, Incorporated, of New York These arc necessary for the purpose of doing such business as transfer of property, having bank accounts, and various other legal duties connected with the work of the Lord’s visible organization of his covenant people.
The charter of each corporation conforms to the law. In harmony with the requirements thereof, shorth before finishing his earthly labors the president, J. F. Rutherford, called four members of the corporations together and suggested that, as soon after his death as possible, the members of the two boards be called in joint session and a president and vice-president be elected in order that the work might continue to be properly carried on without interruption.
On the afternoon of January 13, 1942, the full membership of the two boards convened in the parlor at the Brooklyn Bethel home. Nathan II. Knorr, who at the last general election at Pittsburgh was elected vice-president, had requested several days before that the members of the boards make it a point to earnestly seek divine wisdom b\ pra\er and meditation, that they might be guided aright, and this they did. The joint meeting opened with prayer, especially requesting that Jehovah God might grant wisdom m the choice of such servants as He desired to represent him in a legal way under the organizations.
After due and careful consideration the following bieth-ren were respectively nominated and unanimously elected, namely, Nathan II. Knorr, as president, and Hayden C. Covington, as viee-president, of the two corporations Later that same day, at a gathering of the Bethel family at Brooklyn, the results of the election were announced by the secretary of the board of directors, and met with an enthusiastic response Tins was later supplemented by a leltei, which, because of its interest to all lovers of The Thloc-it\CY, we herewith publish.
124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, N Y , January 14, 1942 Watchtower Bible & Tract Society, Inc., 117 Adams Street, Brooklyn, New York.
Dear Brethren :
Even though we had been continually advised of Brother Rutherford’s condition, m accordance with his direction, word of his passing on came with a momentary shock; but the knowledge that he has gone on to his reward and a higher field of scrxicc is a source of deep joy. Because of our intimate association with Brother Rutherford in the Kingdom service, permitting us to see his untiring zeal and unswerving devotion to The Theocracy, we are sure that he is now with the Lord in joy.—2 Timothy 4: 7, 8
While we greatly miss his counsel to and fellowship with this family, we recognize that it would be selfishness on our part to
62
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
wish to 11 svc it other then the Lord has directed. Therefore we accept with joy the Loid’s will in this matter. “The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord.” —Job 1:21.	’
Wp were conversant with the conditions of his illness and know that every prov ision was made that consecrated and human skill and loving devotion could provide to fulfill the medical requirements for his care and comfort, and which was according to his own supervising and direction.
We realize that there remains a tremendous amount of work ahead for us to do. Therefore his change shall not slow us up in the performance of the task the Lord has assigned to us. We are determined to keep close to the Lord and to one another, firmly pushing the battle to the gate, fighting shoulder to shoulder.— Isaiah 2S.6; Zephaniah 3:9, .4.1?.!’., margin.
Since the days of Jesus, the Lord God has had no visible earthly leader of His organization We recognize that Jehovah has an orderly and systematic way of carrying on His work, according to His will, and the law of the land properly requires that someone occupy the office of president of the Society, which Society is used by His people under the direction of Christ Jesus, God's anointed King and our Leader. The Lord ‘sets the members in the body according to his pleasure’, and it now pleases him that our beloved Brother Knorr act as president of the Society, he being the unanimous choice of the board of directors as guided by the Lord, the official notice whereof every member of the Bethel family enthusiastically received.
Our intimate association with Brother Knorr for approximately twenty ycais. who almost half of that tune served in a confidential relationship with Brother Rutherford and under his dn action in an executive capacity, enables us to appreciate the Lord’s direction in the choice of Brother Knorr as president and thereby the loving vvatch-eare of the Lord over His people
We are moved by the Lord to here express our determination to go forward with greater zeal m closer unitv, recognizing now, more than ever before, the need of a solid phalanx against the enemy. We will support and co-operate with one another in The Theocracy with wholehearted devotion to Jehovah, our Loid Jesus Christ, the Society, and its president.
All this is further corroborative proof that the Society is Jehovah’s visible organization, u=cd by Him to carry on His work on the earth at the present time, and that it will continue as such regardless of any change in personnel.
As admonished by the apo-.tlc, at Ephesians 6. IS, we assure you of our daily prayers to God in your behalf, and continue
Your willing fellow servants.
The Bethel Family
In harmony with the prophetic pictuie at Joel 2:7, S, 11 o: the steady forward movement of Jehovah's army of warriors for The Theocracy, when one devoted servant faithfully finishes his work in the flesh the surviving ones do not break ranks nor halt and cease following the Lamb of God whithersoever He leadeth, but close up the ranks and press on at Jehovah's command. The following, which are part of the many telegrams and letters received, show that Jehovah's servants are united in his Theocratic organization and will carry on with the work until finished.
Dear Brethren :
Yesterday the radio broadcast news concerning the death of Brother Rutherford. At first it seemed hardly true, yet the second broadcast in the day and early this morning has brought it home to us that he has finished his course.
e mourn Ins death. It is our loss. We felt bewildered as we realized he was no longer with us on earth, and felt hke expressing the words of Joash, the king of Israel, at the time when Elisha
died: “My father, my father! the chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof!” We now have mingled feelings of sorrow at the loss of a true friend, counselor and faithful servant of the Lord, and yet have a rejoicing toward Jehovah because we know that His spirit was upon one who had fought a good fight, finished bis course, and was changed in a twinkling of an eye. and will be with the Lord in the invisible capital organization forever ‘Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord ’
The sorrow of the brethren at Brooklyn, who no longer vv.'.l have his immediate direction and advice, is shaied by us IV c know your confidence is in Jehovah, and that the Lord Jesus will continue to direct us, knowing The Theocracy is here.
We wish to state our confidence is in The Theocracy, and to the best of our ability, by the Lord’s grace, we will carry on the work as directed and given us to do. We are eager, anxious and willing to comply with and carry out organization instructions :n every detail as they proceed from the Lord’s organization We stand in our place, and with determination, boldness and joy pai-ticipate in the “strange work”, co-operating and working undvr your supervision until the work is completed. Our prayers ascend to Jehovah that you will be given wisdom, courage and faitn to perform whatever is Jehovah’s will.
In the grace and strength which the Lord will supply, we will bear our burdens, keeping our minds always fixed on Jehovah and The Theocracy, the vindication of His glorious name and the work being done by our Lord Jesus Christ, and we pray that we all may be kept in perfect peace, as the Lord has promised “Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee because he trusteth in thee. Trust ye in the Loud for ever, for m the Lord JEHOVAH is everlasting strength.” We arc
Your brethren in the service of The Theocrat,
Toronto, Can
Stockholm, Sweden, January 15, 1942
Press dispatch Judge’s death stirred us, calling forth expressions gratitude for his faithful service and prayers in behalf those now bearing responsibility.
Johan Enekotii
South African friends rejoice with Judge that he lias finished his course and entered into his revvaid faithful unto death We shall miss him, but our full confidence for future direction of the work continues in the Lord We extend our sympathy to you and assurance of our prayers for guidance
Capetown- (S.A.) Branch Office
Wc have just learnt of the death of our beloved Brother Rutherford, and we hasten to offer the Bethel Family (who nJ! perhaps miss him most) our heartfelt sympathy in their loss Our hearts are sore at the knowledge that our counselor and friend is no longer with us, but at the same time we rejoice that tlrs loving, loyal servant of Jehovah has entered his eternal reward, and is for ever with our King We do not know what experiences yet remain for us this side the veil, but we take this opportunity of assuring you of our continued love and co-operation in the interests of The Theocracy All God’s people in British Guiana join in wishing you the Lord’s guidance and richest blessings With much love, we remain,
Yours for The Theocracy.
British Guiana Branch, F. E Phillips
Dear Brethren :
Greetings in the name of Jehovah, our God, and Christ Jesus, our King. It is with sorrow that we learn through the press of your loss and our loss in Brother Rutherford's death. Be assured, dear brethren, not only of our sorrow and sympathy, but also our determination to press on in the Lord’s work Notwithstanding our love and esteem for Brother Rutherford because of Ins faithfulness to Almighty God, we fully realize that we are following
February 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER,
63
Jehovah’s Anointed. Christ Jesus, our King, and that He will continue to lead His people to a glorious victory and the vindication of Jehovah’s name
AX ith warm Christian love, we are
Youis for the great Theocrvt,
Washington [D.C i Company or Jehovah’s witnesses Northwest Unit
Publishers here recognize the “Society” as God's instrument and channel under The 1 heocract to carry on the work of preaching the gospel of God’s kingdom under Christ; that God and Christ are our Leaders and Teachers, and that we are determined to cany on under supervision of the Society till this work is done, and any further service that God may purpose. Eighty-seven join tn this assurance to you.
Tacoma Company Jehovah’s witnesses
We sorrow with you tn the departure of our fellow sen ant Brother Rutherford, but also rejoice that he died faithful to the great Jehovah, our Father, and Christ His King We assure you of our loyalty to, and continued service in, The Theocracy in brotherly love and devotion to the end that we shall “be steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord”.
Allegheny Unit of
PlTTSBLRGH COMPANY OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
Dear Brethren :
We vv ish to express our sympathy in the passing on of our deal brother and fellow servant in The Theocracy; also rejoice with you, knowing Brother Rutherford died faithful and entered into greater service. We are in full harmony with the Watchtower Society and recognize it as the channel of Jehovah on earth and that our leaders are Jehovah and Christ the King.
Jehovah’s witnesses Boyertown [Pa.] Company
With mingled joy and sorrow we learn of Brother Rutherford’s death. He gave Ins all. We praise Jehovah for his great labor of love for The Theocracy. May Jehovah guide and protect you in meeting the perplexing problems of this evil day as you care for the interest of His visible organization We pledge our full loyalty and co-operation.
Atlanta [Ga.] Company
Have just learned of Brother Rutherford’s entrance into his reward, and have comfort in contemplating that wonderful meeting with the Lord and the glorified members of the temple company. Although greatly missing his earthly presence, we now wish to pledge our continued unswerving loyalty to The Theocracy in full co-operation with the Society in God's “strange work”, looking for the sign of Jehovah’s complete victory over all unrighteousness.
Sweetwater [Tex.] Company of Jehovah’s witnesses
Word of Brother Rutherford’s passing received with mingled feelings of sorrow and joy; sorrow for separation from a faithful and valiant fellow soldier, wise counselor and brother, and joy that he has finished his course and received his well-earned
reward. Be assured of our continued co-operation and "r'piil We believe tins expresses the sentiment of tin-, section of M..11 e united with you in The Theocracy be Hi- giace
Scott ani> Bl<n -let
Though heavy in heart, rejoicing in Brother Ruthe’to'd'~	-
tore the Miami Company unitedly pledge then unipinli! cd <tc-eotion to Jehovah and full co-operation with the Soe.ete
The Miami [Fla.] Company Jehovah’s
We rejoice with you m Brother Rutherford’s zealous, fc.ithful. unflinching devotion to Almighty God and His Theociacv, and that after suffering mueh for a little time he has at hist enleied into his everlasting blessed inheritance We loved him b“\ond words, and you also who continued to serve with him
Mr. and Mrs. C. J Woodworth
124 Columbia Heights January 13, 1942
Dear Brother Knorr:
It was my privilege to be at the tabic this evening when Brother Van Amburgh introduced you to the family as the new president of the Society, the Lord’s organization on the eai'.h
I want to take this opportunity to express to you. as the visible dnector of the earthly interests of The Theocrvcy, my wholehearted expression of unity and my love for you as a sei vant of Jehovah and my desire to co-operate with you in doing the Lends will.
I know that by being obedient to the directions that come from you I will be properly guided, because you are now the thief servant of the Lord here on earth. The apostle Paul, when writing to the saints at Ephesus, stated, at Ephesians 6- 5-7, that the brethren are to be obedient to them that are masters according to the flesh, and to do this, not with the intention of receiving the praise and honor from men, but to do it as unto Christ Jesus, the King of The Theocracy. That is my aim.
Ever thankful for the fact of my privilege of being at headquarters and with you in endeavoring to prove our integnty, I remain
For The Theocracy,
Geo W. Kelly Nathan Knorr, 124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, N. Y.
May rich portion Lord’s spirit be poured out upon your new privileged appointment. Greatly rejoice to wLoleheaiteuiy cooperate with you.
Albert Schroeder, London Branch Servant
Cable received Association heartily conforms Othei Branches advised. We jom you in the great vvoik of witness.
Jesse IIemery, London.
Unable to publish or to acknowledge indiv idually all the gracious communications received, even from worldly concerns of good-will, vve herewith express our deep appreciation and thanks to each sender.
(Continued from page 50)
throughout this war-swept world shows up the supreme issue which affects the lives of all and which makes most important the proclamation of the message now delivered to all nations by Jehovah’s witnesses. You will be joyfully surprised at the sum total of work reported done in the service year fraught with greatest difficulty. The Yearbook further includes the yeartext with its comment, and also a text for each day of the year and a pointed comment thereon according to the latest revelations of Kingdom truth and prophecy. The edition of the Yearbook is always limited, thereby increasing
the printing expense, more so now with rising costs of materials, and hence a contribution of 50c is asked for a single copy Mail in now your order with remittance to cover. Companies tv ill make up combination orders and send such in through the local company servant.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of March 22: “Micah” (Part 3), 1-22 inclusive, The Watchtower February 15, 1942.
Week of March 29: “Micah” (Part 3), 23-42 inclusive, The Watchtower February 15, 1942.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
STUDY IN THE INTERNMENT CAMP
“I received a letter from Fred B , Fort -------------,
North Dakota, and I immediately called on him. He is a young man. aged 26, and has been in detention seven months. His parents taught him out of C. T. Russell’s books, but he had never had access to any of Judge Rutherford’s publications. He speaks and reads English as well as German, so I gave him four German books and Religion and Children, and now I have a study with him every’ two weeks. I haven’t got inside yet, but I call for him and they bring him out. I have been with him three times, and now he has a Children book study going inside, from 9 to 10 p.m. every day, with a few joining in with him. (John 10 ■ 27-29) I also give him The Watchtower and Consolation.”
MEXICAN SHEPHERD KNOWS THE SHEPHERD’S VOICE
“A publisher with a smattering of the Spanish language placed a Watchtower in the Spanish with Mr. G---------, a
sheepherder in New Mexico, who speaks only a few words in English, and left Salvation as the premium book. On making a routine back-call with the newly translated book Religion, the publisher was surprised to find Mr. G-----
had carefully read Salvation and, as Spanish books have no index, had made his own on the last blank page, listing a number of things that especially interested him, 'Joseph and his brethren,’ ‘Beth-Sarim,’ among others. Arrangements were made to call with a lecture series in his own language. After Mr. G------ heard it he turned to various places in the books where points mentioned in the speech were discussed more at length. He had finished the second book and wanted to contribute something to the publisher for playing the recordings; so a book Prophecy was suggested and placed with him instead, also a Bible suggested and ordered. When the Bible was delivered Mr. G ‘s employer was there, and told the publisher how glad he was that his sheepherder was so interested in a good work, and pointed out that he had installed electricity for him, now that he studied so much. At a later call, which was for the purpose of assisting Mr. G---to attend a public model
study, in Spanish, another series of recordings was played and Mr. G------ could point out things in the third book
and even in the Bible, which is the first he has ever owned He has purchased new clothes to attend the study and was so delighted with the first study that he doesn't want to miss one, and we expect him to join us soon in feeding the Lord's ‘other sheep’.”
THE ARREST IN TUCSON, ARIZONA
“A man in civilian clothes walked up to Hal, pulled The Watchtower from Hal’s hand and gave one penny for it. Hal asked: ‘Is this all you would wish to contribute for it?’ to which the religious dupe answered, ‘Oh!’ and handed Hal a quarter. Hal proceeded to give the man change, when he heard a policeman behind him say: ‘You’re under arrest for peddling The Watchtower without a license.’ This policeman (named Hines) must have been behind Hal all this time. As soon as the arrest took place, the civilian-clothes man grinned to the cop and disappeared in the crowd without taking his change. This was hot stuff for the other ■'boys’ at the stationhouse, because they came around corners on two wheels and picked up four other publishers who were merely displaying The Watchtower. We were in jail for five days
before we got out on bond. The trial was held, and the true colors of the judge and officers were made clear. Mr Hines said: ‘This boy took the twenty-five cents for The Watchtower and put it in his pocket.’ The prosecuting attorney saw he could not find any charge against us and said ‘Let it go; I have nothing more to say.’ So the judge became the prosecuting attorney: ‘Where do you get these Watch-towersf When, and how much, do you pay for them? Who takes charge of this work here?’ He went to the smallest detail to find evidence against us, but in this he failed. Despite this Hal was found guilty of violating the city's ordinance No. 729, ‘Peddling Without a License,’ and was sentenced to ten days or a fine of ten dollars, and the other four witnesses were dismissed. The case has been appealed to the Superior Court of Arizona. The next morning, about 3 a.m., one could hear fire engines clanging! Their destination happened to be the Woolworth Building. It also happened that the judge's offices were located in this building It was too bad for him! The whole place burned to the groundj including Judge Celia’s offices, furniture, papers, and all. We’re out on the streets every week now, holding up high the banner of truth, The Watchtower.''
THE FIRE CAPTAIN’S SUBSCRIPTION EXPIRED
“On contacting him I found he was interested and had been reading The Watchtower for seven years, but had ‘just let the subscription expire’. He had never attended a meeting and knew very little about the’ organization except to get the literature from time to time. After I ran several series of recorded lectures at the fire station I conducted one model study there and placed a full set of Judge Rutherford’s books and a subscription for The Watchtower and for Consolation with him. Since there was too much interruption at the station the fire captain invited me to come to his home for the studies. There I found his wife and children also of good-will, but not reading any of the literature for themselves. All took part in the studies, and the interest grew rapidly. Of course, the Devil got busy immediately. Soon after we had started the studies, the fix e-year-old baby drowned. This, however, did not weaken their faith, but, rather, strengthened them. The ‘Job’s comforters' were gix en a real witness by the newly interested mother The fire chief, not knowing Jehovah’s witnesses conducted funeral serx-ices, had engaged a minister to do so, but told him he must preach from the Bible, and ‘no lies about the baby going to heaven’, etc. Now the father and mother and three of the children are in the service and attending the meetings
“Saturday night in the magazine street distribution I xvalked into a barbershop where I usually place a Consolation and found the men arguing on the soul question I produced Consolation No. 578, showed them Judge Rutherford’s article on ‘Holy Souls—Dead or Alive?’ and placed twelve copies. Only one present failed to get it.”
“A beauty parlor manager who had known nothing of the Truth except the booklet Millions Now Living Will Never Die, xvhich she read as a child, was so well impressed with it that she recognized the work by hearing the phonograph record. Arranged for a model study in the beautyparlor for Sunday’ morning. After hearing “Children of The King'’ she realizes churches are no place for her children, and now’ takes them to Watchtower studies ”
64
No. 5
MARCH 1, 1942
76
. . 77
Celebrating the Memorial ..
. 79
. . 80
Field Experiences . ..
. 66
“Watchtower” Studies
. 66
“Hope”
. 66
1942 Yearbook of Jehovah’s witnesses 66
. 67
70
“Children of The King”
Testimony Period
CONTENTS
Micah (Part 4) .
Hear ... .
No Vision . ..
Spirit
Memorial .
Vol. LXIII
Semimonthly


WATCHTOVVkr

They shall know that I am Jehovah!
Ezekiel 35:15.
" YEAREM Y'WiTNE55£5(,5 AITH JEHOVAH, TH ATI AM GODr-lsa/BJZ
THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
officers
N. II. Knorr, President	TV. E. Van AMBLT.cn, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God. is from everlasting to even lasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with al) power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to Life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind ; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Oflicer thereof and is the rightful King of the world, that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God's kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth ean come only by and through Jehovah's kingdom under Christ, which has now begun : that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to "fill the earth’’ with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible Instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for Its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid Ln such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for Its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It Is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Pbice
United States, $100; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign. $150; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remit-tances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British _____________________ 34 Craven Terrace. London, W.2, England
Canadian...................40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian...........7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. IV , Australia
South African _________________Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or ndiersity are unable to pay the subscription price may hate The Watc/i-toicer free upon written npplication to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting 1L We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers • Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with tho journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. 7., under the Act of ilarch 3, IBIS.
"CHILDREN OF THE KING" TESTIMONY PERIOD
The spring month of April is a favorable time for the "Children of The King” Testimony Petiod. and which is theiefore a world wide period of united action by those adveitising the King and the Kingdom. In all the earth not only those of the anointed remnant, but also all those hoping to become the earthlv "children o: the King”, will take part, and if any such want relerenecs to companies organized for this testimony let them without delay write the office tn their respective countries. Much advance preparation for this campaign is required. Apnl being the elo>e of the three-month Watchtower Campaign, the servants and children of the King will continue offering the special combination, namely, a year’s Watchtower subscription, together with the piemium of the book Children and the new booklet Hope, and all this for the tegular subscription rate of S1.00 ;n America, and correspondingly in the other lands. Let this be your best month of the campaign. and at the end thereof you will with joy turn m your report of activities and the fruits thereof.
“WATCHTOWER" STUDIES
Week of April 5: “Micah” (Part 4),
fl 1-20 inclusive, The Watchtower March 1, 1942.
Week of Apnl 12: “Micah” (Part 4), fl 21-42 inclusive, The Watchtower March 1, 1942.
“HOPE”
With pleasure the Society announces publication of a new booklet, Hope—for the Dead—for the Survivors—m a Righteous Wot Id. The theme itself impresses one that the booklet meets a very present need, when millions of hearts need to be infused with new hope both for the living and for the newly dead; and the contents, in an up-to-date setting, will delight you It is a 64-page booklet, self-covered, but having a very engaging cover design Date of its release for general circulation in the field is announced elsewhere, but you will first desire to read and enjoy it yourself and thereby know how best to present and use it in ‘comforting all that mourn’. You may obtain your personal copy now, contributing 5c therefor.
1942 YEARBOOK OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
This new Yearbook presents the president’s report on the work throughout the world this past year, showing the greatest year’s work yet despite persecution and war. It further includes the yeartext and comment, and also a text for each day of the year and a pointed comment thereon. The edition of the Yearbook is always bunted, hence a contribution of 50c a copy is asked. It will be mailed to you postpaid on receipt of your order with lemittance to cover.
VWCfflDWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM
No. LXIII	March 1, 1942	No 5
MICAH
PART 4
“He shall feed his flock like a shepherd, he shall gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are zuith young."—Isa. 40:11.
JEHOVAH is the Great Shepherd. “Jehovah is my I shepherd; I shall not want,” gratefully sung one J of His “sheep”. (Ps. 23:1, Am. Rev. Ver.) These words, though glibly repeated by religionists as beautiful poetry, do not apply to all human creatures. Few, comparatively, seek the leadership, protection and provision of the great Keeper of His own flock. The psalmist David was a shepherd before becoming king of Israel, and he was one of the typical covenant people of Jehovah God. Both as a shepherd and as the first king of the typical Theocracy in Israel, David was a type of the Good Shepherd, who gave his life for his sheep, and who is made the “King of kings, and Lord of lords”. David anointed his obedient sheep with oil; and the Great Shepherd anointed the One who is “the Lamb of God” with the oil of gladness above his fellows, and he is Jehovah’s Anointed King, that is to say, Christ the King of The Theocratic Government. When David was anointed to be king the spirit of Jehovah came upon him: and the spirit of the Lord God is likewise upon Christ Jesus to be his Chief Witness, whose name is called “Faithful and True”.
2	David fought the Philistines, the demonized enemies of God’s covenant people, and including the giant Goliath, who pictures the terrible totalitarian monstrosity of the present time, and David also won the strange battles against them at Mount Perazim and at Gibeon. Now the Greater David, Jehovah's Beloved One, gains for his followers the victory over the religious-totalitarian rule of the world, and at “the battle of that great day of God Almighty” he shall destroy all the demon-worshiping modern Philistines, the religionists and their political and commercial allies. Now he carries on Jehovah’s “strange work” of notifying such in advance of that “strange act-’.
3	The effort of the thieves and the wild beasts is to scatter the sheep, to make them their prey. The loving purpose of the Great Shepherd is to gather his sheep and to keep them together under his watchcare and protection. At times sheep stray away; and
religion, which is demonism, has deceived many of the Lord’s “sheep” and caused them to stray from the path of truth and of the worship of God in spirit and in truth. The worldly organizations of rulei.Aiip have taken advantage of this and, like wild beasts, have preyed upon the strayed sheep and scattered them. The political element have been induced to do this under the influence of the demons, who use religion and religionists to stir them up to such action against Jehovah’s sheep. Concerning such religionists it is written: “Neither have ye brought auain that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost; but with force and with cruelty have ye ruled them. And they were scattered because there is no shepherd: and they became meat to all the beasts of the field when they were scattered. My sheep wandered through all the mountains, and upon every high hill: yea, my flock was scattered upon all the face of the earth, and none did search or seek after them.”—Ezek. 34: 1-6.
4	The great scattering of Jehovah’s covenant people in fulfillment of this prophecy took place at the height of the World War in 1918, and at the instance of the religionists of “Christendom”, particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. Such took advantage of the war state to carry out their conspiracy with politicians and judicial officers, to wit, to break up the organization of Jehovah’s servants proclaiming God’s kingdom by Christ Jesus. (Matt. 24:7-9) Thereby a great test came upon these consecrated ones; but a faithful remnant endured the severe trial of their faith and devotion and held fast to Jehovah God and his kingdom, and shortly tliereaiter and in his due time Jehovah by the Good Shepherd regathered the scattered remnant unto himself at the temple for his further service.
5	“I will surely assemble, 0 Jacob, all of thee; I will surely gather the remnant of Israel; I will put them together as the sheep of Bozrah, as the flock in the midst of their fold: they shall make great noise by reason of the multitude of men.” (Mie, 2:12) “Israel” was the name Jehovah gave to Jacob be
67
G8
WATCHTOWER.
cause he maintained his integrity toward God and kept his faith in Jehovah’s coming Theocratic Government and refused to compromise with the governments of this world. Both names applied to the natural Israelites, and now apply in an antitypical sense to Jehovah’s covenant people, who are the spiritual Israelites, and of whom Christ Jesus is the Head. “But he is a Jew, which is one inwardly; and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter.” (Rom. 2:29) The faithful stand in marked contrast with those who claim to be spiritual Israelites and therefore heirs of the birthright, but who are hypocritical religionists, and whom the prophet addressed earlier, saying: “0 thou that art named the house of Jacob, is the spirit of the Lord straitened?” (Mic. 2:7) Such have the spirit of Esau, w’ho proved unworthy of the birthright and was willing to sell it for a mess of pottage and then sought to kill his brother Jacob and caused him to flee from home and become a wanderer.—Gen. 25: 29-34; 27 : 41-46; 28:1-10.
6	The assembly which Jehovah God makes is greater than appears to the human eye. The apostle foretold of those who come “to the general assembly and church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant.” (Heb. 12: 23, 24) The assembling is unto Zion, which is Jehovah’s capital organization, his Theocratic Government by his beloved King, Christ Jesus. “I will surely assemble ... all of thee,” says the Lord; and this includes those faithful Christians who maintained their integrity toward God even unto the death and who died prior to the coming of the King to the temple for judgment. These were sleeping in the graves at the time of his coming, and their being assembled would mean being awakened out of death and being “changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye”, and being “raised a spiritual body”.—1 Cor. 15: 51, 52,44.
’ Concerning this assembly the apostle further says: “Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him.” (2 Thess. 2:1) The assembling of these sleeping saints, including the apostles and those who have believed through their word, ‘prevents’ or precedes the gathering of the devoted servants of Jehovah yet alive on earth. “Even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which are asleep. . . . and the dead in Christ shall rise first.” (1 Thess. 4:14-16) Their resurrection, being in the spirit, of necessity must be invisible to human eyes, and their gathering is unto the great King and Judge at the
Brooklyn, N. Y.
temple, which is the condition of unity with him and is in the place that is unseen to the eye of the natural man.
8	Concerning the faithful remnant of spiritual Israelites alive in the flesh at the time of the Lord’s coming to his temple the prophecy states: “I will surely gather the remnant of Israel”; that is, these which had been scattered by the action of the religionists and allies, and who showed iniquity of lip by keeping silent because of fear of men, but who repented of their course of submission to worldly powers opposed to God and thereafter sought the face of the Lord and a renewing of their activities in his service. The Lord showed such his mercy, and early in 1919 he began to gather these unto him at the temple and to revive them in his service. “The Lord doth build up Jerusalem; he gathered together the outcasts of Israel.” (Ps. 147:2) “And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time [the first time being the gathering of the Israelites back to Jerusalem in B.C. 536] to recover the remnant of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea. And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth.” (Isa. 11:11,12) The remnant are gathered as a “people for his name”, and therefore Jehovah cleanses away their uncleanness of lip and puts his word in their mouth. He sends them forth to declare his name throughout all the earth before he shows his almighty power against the Devil and the demons and their earthly agents who wickedly scattered the servants of Jehovah.
9	These servants are gathered out from the organizations of the Devil which have held them in restraint; and Bozrah, the chief city of Idumea or Edom, pictured the demon-worshiping religious system of the Devil’s organization. The word “Bozrah” means “inclosure”; that is, a “sheepfold”. Hence the correct translation of the text of Micah’s prophecy (2:12) must be as given by Leeser: “I will surely gather up the remnant of Israel; I will place them together as flocks in the fold”; to wit, in the Lord’s fold, and not in the enemy organization pictured by Bozrah. “For the Lord hath a sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great slaughter in the land of Idumea.” (Isa. 34: 6) Those represented by Bozrah have taken part in scattering Jehovah’s sheep, and they continue in this malicious effort to this day, and for this they shall be slaughtered at Armageddon. Nothing can hinder the predetermined work of God, and now he gathers into the unity and safety of his organization the faithful remnant of his “little flock”: “as droves
March 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
69
in the midst of their pen.” (Leeser) This gathering of the anointed remnant from and after 1919 continues on down more particularly to 1931, when the Lord revealed to them their “new name”, to wit, “Jehovah's witnesses." Then the Lord began to bring more fully into view the earthly class of good-will, who are pictured as the “other sheep” of the Lord and who shall live on earth for ever under the Kingdom. The “remnant” sheep are few in number, comparatively, but the Lord’s “other sheep” are those who shall form the “great multitude-’ without number, and these become the companions of the remnant in the witness work, and thus the company of all God’s sheep is increased.
10	The gathering particularly of the Lord's “other sheep” is yet going on. and will soon reach a climax before Armageddon breaks. Concerning the gathering of the spiritual Israelites and their devoted earthly companions, and the carefulness and thoroughness and urgency with which it should be done, Jehovah caused his prophet to write: “I will bring them again into their land that I gave unto their fathers. Behold, I will send for many fishers, saith the Lord, and they shall fish them; and after will I send for many hunters, and they shall hunt them from every mountain, and from every hill, and out of the holes of the rocks.” (Jer. 16:15,16) This results in a great demonstration to the glory of the Lord and which is noised abroad throughout the land, to the great chagrin and dismay of the enemy. Says the Lord of his gathered “sheep”: “They shall make great noise by reason of the multitude of men.” Rotherham renders this: “Like a flock in the midst of its pasture shall they hum with men.” This does not mean internal strife and discord among those gathered into the Lord’s fold, but denotes great activity in showing forth the praises of Jehovah and in advertising his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. “Thus saith the Lord God, I will yet for this be inquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them; I will increase them with men like a flock. As the holy flock, as the flock of Jerusalem in her solemn feasts, so shall the waste cities [made so by the enemy in 1918] be filled with flocks of men; and they shall know that I am the Lord.”—Ezek. 36: 37, 38.
11	The Lord God has given marvelous demonstrations of this in very recent years, to wit, in 1938, when approximately 150,000 gathered together in assemblies at the same time in 47 cities in Britain, America, Canada, Australia, and other lands, and by wire and wireless communication heard the same convention speeches from the key assembly at London, England; also in 1940, while war raged in Europe and great persecution was upon Jehovah’s witnesses in America, and when 18 assemblies from coast to coast were held in the United States, all tied
together by wire and public-address systems, and when 45,000 assembled in the key city, Detroit, alone; and also in 1941, when Jehovah God brought the members of the remnant and of his "other sheep-' together at one place in Theocratic Assembly, to wit, in St. Louis, Mo. There the assembly grounds and the surrounding fields of witness work fairly hummed with the joyful noise of a vast multitude of mor*' than 115,000, feeding at the Lord's provided table and sounding forth his name and his Theocratic Government, which shall rule in righteousne-s over the children of the King. Furthermore, the following month, and due to the war between the Nazi-Fascist "king of the north” and the opposing “king of the south”, a like assembly was held at Leicester, England, where 12,000 assembled to hear the same speeches by recording and to make like proclamation of The Theocracy to the peoples. The effect of these assemblies, particularly those in 1941, is to spur the Lord’s servants on to greater effort and diligence in connection with the Lord’s work of hunting and ingathering of the remainder of his “other sheep” before the universal war of Armageddon begins. They “put on more steam”.
12	The war against religion is on. It is not a Avar with carnal weapons, as with tanks and machine guns, but with the weapons of truth, including ' the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God”, and which weapons are “mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds”. (Eph. 6:17 ; 2 Cor. 10: 4) The publication of the truth will not in itself overthrow the great religious organization, but it exposes the same. It also breaks the power of religion or demonism which has been established like strongholds of error in the minds and hearts of the people, and from the restraint of which the people of goodwill must be broken loose. The strongholds of religion must be pulled down in their minds, and thev must render it a dead thing to them, and their minds must be renewed by the knowledge and the understanding of the truths of Jehovah and his Theocracy. Only the Lord God can destroy the mighty, entrenched religious organization throughout the earth; and He will do so at the beginning of Armageddon. Now he breaks the strong power of religion over the lives and actions of his remnant and their companions.
13	Religion is a great system of confusion, and therefore Jehovah calls the religious organization "Babylon”. At Babel, or Babylon, religion was first organized by the totalitarian ruler, Nimrod. For seventy years ancient Babylon held Jehovah's typical covenant people, that is, the faithful remnant thereof, in captivity as exiles from God’s organization. In due time he sent kings from the east, and they broke into the city, and thereafter the Lord released his de
70
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
voted remnant and sent them forth from Babylon. Modern Babylon, particularly "Christendom” with its "organized religion”, held Jehovah’s consecrated servants in like bondage during the World War and for some time thereafter. These were unable to free themselves. Then the Lord did so by sending his Messenger of the Covenant, to wit, Christ Jesus, ‘‘the prince of the kings of the earth,” to the temple, and he broke the restraints of the strong hold of religion for them and led them forth. Of and concerning this the prophet says: “The breaker is come up before them; they have broken up, and have passed through the gate, and are gone out by it; and their king shall pass before them, and the Lord on [at] the head of them.”—Mic. 2: 13.
14	“The breaker” is Christ Jesus, who has come to the temple and manifests his presence unto his "faithful and wise servant” class, enlightening the eyes of their understanding by the unfolding of God’s Word, and who thus ‘comes up before them’. They recognize him as their Leader, and discern that Jehovah God and Christ, and not human creatures, are their Teachers. “And though the Lord give you the biead of adversity, and the water of affliction, yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers.” (Isa. 30:20) Other translations call Christ Jesus “the wall-breaker” (Leeser); “one making a breach” (Rotherham'). The religious leaders imprison the members of their congregation behind great walls of religious traditions of men and “doctrines of demons”; they back up the political powers and give them a great build-up as the “higher powers” “ordained of God”, and they use these political powers as a wall of protection for themselves and to put and keep Jehovah’s faithful and active servants under lestraint. They did so in 1918, and succeeded then for a time. But the “wall-breaker” appeared and took the lead, and in 1919 opened the way for their free and fearless action as the witnesses of Jehovah unto all nations.
15	Following after the King of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government, the faithful remnant broke the entanglements of the besetting sin of religion, and the bonds of the fear of men, political and religious, and marched forth through the gate of Babylon and into the “liberty of the sons of God”, the Lord’s “free men”. They followed no man, but recognized that the Kingdom had come and that Christ Jesus is the King and rightful Ruler of the world, and that Jehovah was and is the Head over all, the great Theo-crat. They march away from the Devil organization of Babylon and march on to Zion, Jehovah’s capital organization, The Theocracy, which shall govern the new world in righteousness. Hence the Lord’s command to his people now is: “Go through, go
through the gates; prepare ye the way of the people; cast up, cast up the highway; gather out the stones; lift up a standard for the people.” (Isa. 62: 10) "Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean thing; go ye out of the midst of her; be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the Lord. For ye shall not go out with haste, nor go by flight: for the Lord will go before you; and the God of Israel will be your rereward [rearguard].” (Isa. 52: 11, 12) They march forth as victors over religion, not apologetically nor in fear of self-exalted men, but boldly announcing the name of Jehovah the Supreme One and also his King of the Holy City, which is the only hope of the people of good-will that seek life. The Lord’s "other sheep” follow with and after the remnant, ami the assembling of the rest of such “other sheep” continues and the gathering work increases in earnestness as the “final end” draws near.
HEAR
Religious and political leaders in the liberal nations granting free speech, free press and free worship of God enjoy these freedoms for themselves, but they declare that the servants of Jehovah have no right or commission to call public attention to and criticize the derelictions and failures of classes or organizations of men. God’s message proclaimed neither names any individuals nor attacks and ridicules such, and yet they see themselves according to the description of God’s Word as declared by God’s witnesses, and their tender religious susceptibilities are greatly shocked. Particularly do religious leaders howl that they are being subjected to that which exposes them to ridicule, shame and obloquy, and they stir up acts of violence against the witnesses. This failing to silence the faithful proclaimers of God's Word, the religious element cry out to the political element for a revamping of the Bill of human rights and for the enactment of new laws to get Jehovah's servants. Note the cunning of the Sei pent as below:
In the November, 1941, issue of the Law Reviciv of a prominent eastern religious college, a Catholic priest, who is a member of the Congregation of Missions, writes specifically concerning Jehovah’s witnesses, to wit: “Since they regard their propaganda activities as forms of worship, however, they are not likely to let the susceptibilities of others interfere with what they regard as their God-given duty. Hence it may be necessary to revise some of our statutes in the interests of the general welfare. . . . it seems as though an amendment to our statute will be necessary in order for libel of a group to be punishable criminally. If such an extension is proposed it should be limited to well ascertainable racial or religious groups, however, ...” Finally, with
March 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
71
a practical admission that Catholic-inspired mob violence has failed to halt the witnesses in America, and then artfully blaming those who fought for religious liberty in Europe as responsible for the blood spilled in the fight, this priest with oily words concludes: “Action of some sort is urgent for the protection of domestic peace and unity. The Witnesses cannot be left to the mercy of mob violence; nor is a legislative persecution proposed. But in the light of European experience as to the frightful but logical results of an unrestrained outpouring of intolerant and bigoted hatred—racial or religious—it is time for Americans to re-examine this question in its entirety and provide a remedy which will be effective as well as just and constitutional.”
17	No laws by men that would forbid the preaching of God's kingdom in the manner that Christ Jesus and his apostles preached it could be just; for only the Lord’s way is just, and what is opposed thereto could only be ‘framing mischief by a law’. (Ps. 94 : 20) The Lord has no fellowship with such iniquitous lawframers who are now in the throne on earth. Such proposed laws could not even be constitutional, because they take away the right of an unpopular minority to freely worship God by following in the steps of Jehovah’s Chief Witness as he left us the example. (1 Pet. 2: 21) When he called the religious clergy “wolves”, “hypocrites,” “liars,” “whited sepulchers” hiding the bones of Jehovah’s martyred witnesses, “vipers,” and other true terms, God's Chief Witness was not guilty of “an unrestrained outpouring of intolerant and bigoted hatred” nor of “libel of a group”; and yet He was crucified at the instance of clergymen heading a mob and as an act that was “urgent for the protection of domestic peace and unit/’.
18	The laws the Catholic priest hints at could be nothing else nor less than “legislative persecution” and would put the lawmakers in the position of fighting against God. Such Catholic advice is totally contrary to the Jewish advice given by a doctor of the law at Jerusalem: “And now I say unto you, Refrain from these men, and let them alone: for if this counsel or this work be of men, it will come to nought: but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it; lest haply ye be found even to fight against God.” (Acts 5: 38, 39) The day will soon come when the political lawmakers will realize that their present allies, the religious clergy, maneuvered them into fighting against God, “whose name alone is Jehovah,” thus marking themselves for slaughter at God's hands at Armageddon. (Rev. 17:16,17) Now, therefore, in good time Jehovah by his prophet warns all such, saying: “And I said, Hear, I pray you, 0 heads of Jacob, and ye princes of the house of Israel: Is it not for you to know judgment?”—Mic. 3:1.
19	Jehovah calls to both those of “Jacob” and tho-e of “Israel" to hear God’s message. Thereby the Lord, in the modern fulfillment, speaks to the ruling factors of both “the king of the south” and “the king of the north” now engaged in a struggle for world domination. The religious and political and commercial elements of “Christendom" do not inquire of Jehovah God and of his enthroned King Christ Jesus, nor do they ask to be told of God’s purposes toward the world and of his judgment of them; but Jehovah gives them full warning and commands his witnesses to give the warning, and he orders his enemies to “hear”. So doing, Jehovah does not take advantage of his enemies facing destruction. Were such sincere in their profession to be “Christians” and hence in a covenant with God to do his will, and if they weie sincere in claiming to be “the higher powers" and “ordained of God”, they would respectfully hear God's warning by his witnesses. As to the warning vigorously delivered by Jehovah’s witnesses, particularly down to 1940, the Lord has not asked whether they wanted to hear, but he sent forth the warning in mercy and fairness. Likewise in due time he will not ask whether the totalitarian ruling factors of “Christendom” want to hear, but, shortly now, "tidings out of the east [from Christ the King] and out of the north [from Jehovah God] shall trouble him [the rulers gone totalitarian] : therefore he shall go forth with great fury to destroy, and utterly to make away many.” (Dan. 11:44) This furious action proves that such totalitarian-religious fighters against Jehovah’s Theocratic Government did not want to hear, but were displeased at what they heard and therefore will try to make away with Jehovah’s witnesses and their faithful companions.
20	“Is it not for you to know’ judgment?” Because attempting to occupy the place of rulers ovei the peoples of “Christendom” and as guardians of their interests, the religious, political and commercial elements should know and are responsible to know what is justice or right judgment, particular!} as they claim to be the “higher powers” and repiesenting God on earth. “The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spake to me, He that ruleth over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God: and he shall be as the light of the morning, when the sun riseth, even a morning without clouds; as the tender grass springing out of the earth by clear shining after rain.” (2 Sam. 23 :3,4) Such is the prophet’s description of what the ruler, or King of Jehovah's Theocracy, is and shall be.
21	“Christendom's” ruling factors, with the clergy as their spiritual advisers, forget Jehovah God and his Theocratic Government. Now they follow the lead of the demons and seek to set up in place of that Theocracy their “new world order” with religion, or demonism, under full protection of the political rul
72
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
ers and financially supported by the commercial element. Such presumptuousness is abominable in God’s sight, and thus they stand up their “abomination of desolation" where it ought not to stand, to wit, “in the holy place,” as a fraudulent makeshift for Jehovah’s holy Government under Christ Jesus. (Matt. 24: 15; Mark 13:14) They promise the people a “peace with justice”, but in their manner of setting up the totalitarian “abomination of desolation" they have shown no justice.
22	Furthermore, by Jehovah's witnesses they have been notified that this is the day of judgment of the nations, particularly since the Lord’s coming to the temple in 1918, and that they are being judged by their acts toward The Theocracy and those who advertise it to the nations. They have the Holy Scriptures of the Bible which set forth the righteousness of God. They have their many and spacious cathedrals and religious buildings for the assembly to worship, and have a hired clergy paid to study God’s commandments and purposes. They have set aside the first day of the week for all to have opportunity of a full day to worship. As for the modern-day “heads of Jacob” and “princes [rulers; judges] of the house of Israel”, even these the religious leaders have made to be "the principal of the flock". Have they, then, any valid excuse before God not to know judgment and what is justice?
23	What, however, is their record since A.D. 1918, from and after which date all nations have been gathered before Jehovah's great Judge upon his throne at the temple ? Let the people now examine and judge as to the fulfillment of the prophecy. Even since casting Satan out of heaven Jehovah has permitted him to remain; and Satan's demon-controlled visible representatives on earth God has left to prove by their acts and deeds in office whether religion has taught them judgment and justice. Has it ? Or the contrary, the prophet speaks concerning them as those “who hate the good, and love the evil; who pluck off their skin from off them, and their flesh from off their bones: who also eat the flesh of my people, and flay tb.eir skin from off them; and they break their bones, and chop them in pieces as for the pot, and as flesh within the caldron”. (Mic.3:2,3) This compares with the action of a wild beast; and the Scriptures liken the demon-ruled totalitarian organization of “Christendom” to a “scarlet coloured beast” with religion, “the great whore,” riding on the back thereof as the spiritual superpower. (Rev. 17:1-5) The woman who rides the “beast” is responsible for its destructive, bloody course against the people, and particularly against the servants of Jehovah God. Concerning “organized religion” the record says, in symbol: “And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints, and with the blood of the martyrs [(Fount's) the blood of the
witnesses] of Jesus: and when I saw her, I wondered.” (Rev. 17 : 6) “And in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth.” (Rev. 18: 24) Therefore let all who would please God and live shun religion.
24	Particularly the religious leaders pretend to have great love for the people and to be concerned about their welfare here on earth now and their eternal life hereafter; but religion is responsible for the war since 1939 between “the king of the north" and “the king of the south”, and which is the most destructive and bloody war of human history and for which the people are suffering heavy burdens of taxation and great privations, and the totalitarian powers treat human flesh as cheap and many human bones are literally broken and bodies flayed and blown to pieces. The head of the greatest religious organization in “Christendom” oft advertises to the public his grief and “sorrowing heart” as for their sufferings, and yet he has political alliances by concordats with the political elements of “the kin? of the north”. L’nto this religious potentate the so-called “children of the church” throughout the world vow their allegiance above their allegiance unto the political State, and he claims spiritual power and authority over more than 350 million of the religious population of “Christendom”, and particularly in the nations that make up the Nazi-Fascist “king of the north", and his word to those millions is as the law of God. A few days before “the king of the north" blasted his way by blitzkrieg over Poland several hundred delegates of national, religious, veterans’ and trade-union groups met in Chicago. Illinois, and cabled a plea to the religious head at Vatican City to excommunicate that born, baptized and reared Catholic dictator of Germany, to “help the cause of freedom, Christianity, humanity, and civilization at this time”. The ‘sorrowing-hearted’ ruler of Vatican City flatly refused their petition and held fast his Concordat ties with the totalitarian dictator, and the crudest of all wars has continued since their petition over two years ago.
25	More recently, the last day of 1941, a prominent financier of Cleveland, Ohio, and who is also recognized as an “authority on world, religions”, wrote a letter to the Vatican’s “apostolic delegate” to the religionists in America. In this letter that banker and industrialist urged upon the Roman Catholic Hierarchy the “calling upon its members everywhere to oppose the pagan German and Japanese forces that seek to enslave the world. Once the [Catholic] church has spoken, Italy can no longer range herself on the side of these ruthless aggressors nor Ireland continue to remain aloof from the struggle", (Cleveland Plain Dealer, January 3, 1942; New York Times) Again the Vatican refuses to turn its millions of re
March 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
73
ligious children against its totalitarian partners whom it is using as “the sword of the church”, and the sufferings of the people increase. The ultrareligionists and allies consider that such is a cheap price for the gaining of their selfish aims, to wit, world domination contrary to the will and kingdom of Jehovah God by Christ Jesus. Now those members of the Hierarchy who swear allegiance to that foreign power at the Vatican and who reside in the lands of “the king of the south” profess to be great friends of democracy, and recently one outstanding member of the Hierarchy in America said at a large public religious gathering: “Permanent peace can be founded only on justice and charity. The only enduring peace that will restore the world to sanity and to a sense of the dignity of human personality is the peace of Pope Pius XII.” (Cincinnati Times-Star, October 13, 1941) Thus they hope to pave the way for the religious partner of “the king of the north” to sit in on the expected peace conference and to control it.
26	Also in the lands of “the king of the south” the religious, political and commercial men in authority show they “hate the good, and love the evil” in their hatred of The Theocracy and the love of the demonrule of the “present evil world”, and therefore they hate Jehovah’s witnesses who proclaim The Theocracy, and they make and improperly apply laws to suppress them. At the same time they love religion, which is demonism, and love those who are the friends of the world and hence the enemies of God, therefore “evil”. In their secular and religious newspapers and publications they flay the skin off and pick to pieces Jehovah’s witnesses, who are not of this world, and these are also bruised and torn and broken by demonized mobs and lawbreaking police and the “strong-arm squad”, stirred up by fanatical religionists. Should these of “Christendom” not have known and exercised justice and judgment?
27	Now concerning such “heads” and “rulers” and “princes” and “judges” and their agents and hangers-on the Lord God says: “Then shall they cry unto the Lord [Jehovah], but he will not hear them; he will even hide his face from them at that time, as they have behaved themselves ill in their doings.” (Mic. 3:4) These are words of comfort and encouragement to those who now suffer and whom the enemy now make to cry out unto Jehovah God and Christ Jesus for grace to help them to maintain their integrity under persecution and reproach. “And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them’ I tell you that he will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith on the earth?” (Luke 18:7,8) The religionists do not have such faith, and they take advantage of God’s forbearance and continue to heap suffering and reproach upon
the remnant of God’s elect and their companions. “The righteous cry, and the Lord heareth, and de-livereth them out of all their troubles.” (Ps. 34:17) Then the turn of the persecutors and opposers comes and they have the chance to prove how much their cries and prayers avail with God. “Then." that is, when “the breaker" begins to dash the nation* to pieces like a potter’s vessel at Armageddon and their cries to their demon gods prove unavailing, they raise their deathbed cries to Jehovah God. “And they shall know that I am Jehovah,” but their cries to him will not be of worship nor for the glory of his name and its vindication.
2S	Jehovah will vindicate his name in the destruction of the wicked; hence he will not answer their selfish prayers for preservation. “For he shall have judgment without mercy, that hath shewed no mercy.” (Jas. 2:13) "Whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry of the poor, he also shall cry himself, but shall not be heard.” (Trov. 21:13) Especially since 1918 they have been warned by Jehovah’s faithful appointed watchmen, but have scoffed at the warning and not taken advantage of the time available to flee to the “mountains” of The Theocracy ; and now the final end comes upon them. Jehovah changes not, and he sticks to his judgment written and executes the same upon them. "When your fear cometh as desolation, and your destruction cometh as a whirlwind; when distress and anguish cometh upon you. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me: for that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord : they would none of my counsel; they despised all my reproof: therefore shall they eat the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices.”—Prov. 1: 27-31.
26	The Lord must let justice have its righteous course at Armageddon. The demon-controlled religionists and their allies have behaved themselves as "goats” against the least of Christ's brethren who proclaim The Theocracy, and they are gathered to his left side of disfavor. He therefore hides his face of grace and pity from them: “The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth.” (Ps. 34:16) The Lord has given them ample warning, and now he directs his faithful servants to tend his “other sheep” and comfort all of good-will that mourn. The faithful know that the present persecution upon them is not a sign that Jehovah has hid his face from them, but is permitted as a test of their integrity toward Him and his Theocratic Government, and they therefore endure with joyfulness and hold fast their integrity. Continuing to do so, they are “blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ”.—1 Cor. 1:8.
80	Great objection has been made to the statement,
74
STe WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
“Religion is a snare and a racket.” and judges seated in solemn court have manifested great indignation against those who have published this plain fact. The political, judicial and police elements have greatly exercised themselves to protect the religious racketeers. Note now what the Lord God declares He will do, and observe whether he condemns religion as a snare and racket: “Thus saith the Lord concerning the prophets [religionists] that make my people err, that bite with their teeth, and cry, Peace; and he that putteth not into their mouths, they even prepare war against him.”—Mic. 3:5.
31	Posing as true prophets or mouthpieces of God, the religious leaders make a great display of worldly knowledge and education and make great and bold claims for themselves, that they have a stand-in with God and possess special mysterious powers peculiar to themselves; and thus they make the deceived people look to them for the exercise of such supposed powers and they gain the confidence of the ignorant ti usting people. Then they teach the people the wisdom of this world and the traditions of demonized men which make void God’s Word of life. Thereby they cause the people to err from the path of light and life and to go in the way that leads to opposition to Jehovah’s Theocratic Government and to destruction at Armageddon. These religious prophets or spokesmen of demonism make loud, boastful predictions in behalf of the works and institutions of men, such as the League of Nations, which the Federal Council of Churches in America called “the political expression of the Kingdom of God on earth”; also such as the “new order of things” by the totalitarian dictators, for which “new order" the pope prayed on November 24, 1940, and which prayer responsible Italian authorities said echoed the aims of the “Axis powers”; and also such as popular human rule, for which rule sudden friendship is now exploded by the official members in America of the totalitarian Hierarchy, the European members of which Hierarchy co-operate in the destruction of democratic and constitutional liberal governments. The advocates of all such do not take into account the "end of the world” at Armageddon, now near.
32	Further describing their racket, the Lord says; "[They] bite with their teeth, and cry. Peace.” Leeser renders this: “Who, when they have something to bite with their teeth, cry, Peace.” This proves they use religion for self-gain. To those who give them handouts, they “cry, Prosper!” (Rotherham) The apostle also speaks of the religionists, “whose God is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things.” (Phil. 3: 19) When collections and donations are coming in, they are very generous and liberal in bestowing their ecclesiastical blessings (which cost them nothing but words and motions with
the hand). Concerning those who fail to support the religious organization they publicly say that the calamities and tribulations and woes upon the people are visitations from God for forsaking religion. Further quoting the above-mentioned Hierarchy member, the newspaper reports him as saying: “Because the world is so degraded by sin—the sins of individuals, of homes, of nations—we may regard the present war as a divine chastisement.” Which is to say, that the totalitarian “king of the north” is the instrument of God and Christ to chastise the peoples of the nations that have broken away and do not submit to the ruler at Vatican City as the spiritual superpower. Such statement is a religious blasphemy against God, and is induced by the demons to turn the people against God and into Satan’s trap of religion.
113	“And he that putteth not into their mouths, they even prepare war against him.” This is the course of all racketeers. Those who refuse to come across with contributions for protection from the racket, they threaten and intimidate, and against them they carry on a war of damage and destruction. If anyone exposes their racket and thereby causes interference with their contributions and support from others who have been their victims, they war upon such one to destroy him or his influence. For this reason Jehovah’s witnesses are the object of their bitterest war and attacks. Jehovah’s witnesses do not put handouts into the mouths of the religious prophets and preachers, but are uncompromisingly opposed to religion as being demonism. They preach the truths of the Bible, and this exposes the falsity and duplicity of religious gangsters and causes the honest-hearted seekers after God to quit supporting the religious institutions and the idle, nonproducing clergy. The witnesses also go from house to hoii'-e with the message in printed and recorded form, that the people may read and hear, so that it is not necessary for the truth-seekers to go to religious meetingplaces and put money into the collection plate for the clergyman’s hire. The religious prophets or preachers see their revenue being turned away, that the victims of their racket are being put wise and snatched from their power. Hence they prepare gangster-like war against these benefactors of all who love truth and righteousness and liberty.
84 “They hallow against him a war!” (Rotherham) Such war they carry on by appealing to the politicians and lawmakers and to the police force and “strong-arm squad”; and by influencing the judtres of the courts; and by pressure and boycott on the commercial element; and by propaganda and misrepresentation in both the secular and the religious newspapers and periodicals; and by concordats and secret deals with the totalitarian dictators. The clergy speak of this as a “holy war” in behalf of
March 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
73
religion or demonism, and hallow such opposition to God’s “strange work”, and thus prove themselves to be “goats”, Jehovah foresaw this warfare, and he warns and strengthens his people against it and invites the enemy to come and to do their worst: “Proclaim ye this among the Gentiles; Prepare war, wake up the mighty men, let all the men of war draw near; let them come up: beat your plowshares into swords, and your pruninghooks into spears: let the weak say, I am strong. Assemble yourselves, and come, all ye heathen, and gather yourselves together round about: thither cause thy mighty ones to come down, 0 Loud. Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision; for the day of the Lord is near in the valley of decision.” (Joel 3: 9-14; see the book Religion, pages 316-340) The faithful remnant and their companions maintain their integrity under such warfare and assaults and i efuse to yield any support to the “prophets” of religion.
NO VISION
35	To those who war against His people of integrity giving their undivided allegiance and support to him and his Theocratic Government Jehovah now says: “Therefore night shall be unto you. that ye shall not have a vision; and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine; and the sun shall go down over the prophets, and the day shall be dark over them. Then shall the seers be ashamed, and the diviners confounded: yea, they shall all cover their lips: for there is no answer of God.” (Mic. 3: G, 7) The fulfillment of this prophecy marks the coming of the great mental and spiritual darkness upon “Christendom” and her religious leaders. Such religious leaders fear creatures and men, and not Jehovah God, and the Lord withholds from them the light of his revealed truth, because “the secret of the Lord is w’ith them that fear him”, and “light is sown for the righteous”. (Pss. 25: 14; 97:11) By the battle at Shiloh the religious organization of ancient Israel was destroyed, and now the condition has come upon “Christendom” as in the days of Israel right before the disaster of Shiloh, to wit: “And the word of the Lord was precious in those days; there was no open vision.” (1 Sam. 3:1) The prophets of religion are in the darkness of starless night; they are blind leaders of the blind. They are not of the “young men” upon whom the Lord God pours out his spirit of illumination and power and who “see visions” of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government and of his purpose to vindicate his name thereby and to bless the obedient of humankind.—Joel 2:28.
36	Now we are in “the last days” of demon rule, and the religionists together with their political and commercial allies are groping in the darkness in which the demons have been reserved unto the day of judgment. God, whom they pretend to serve, does
not fulfill to them his promise stated to his faithful witness Daniel: “Now I am come to make thee understand what shall befall thy people [Jehovah’s witnesses] in the latter days [where we now are] : for yet the vision is for many days.” (Dan. 10:14) The faithful servants and witnesses of Jehovah, however, are the ones that are now favored with the “vision” anti they see in the events of these critical dajs the fulfillment of the prophecy of Daniel 11:27-45.
37	To another of his faithful witnesses of old Jehovah commanded: "Write the vision, and make it plain upon tables, that he may run that readeth it. For the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak, and not lie: though it tairy, wait for it; because it will surely come, it will not tarry.” (Hab. 2:2,3) The religionists have re.jeeb'd the Word of the Lord, and they have no vision of The Theocracy, the sole hope of mankind. Thei efore they and their religious organizations shall be destroyed at Armageddon. “Where there is no vision, the people perish; but he that keepeth the law | of Jehovah God], happy is he.” (Prov. 29:18) There is a “vision”, but not to those religious oppose r< of The Theocracy. “And the vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book [the Bible j that is sealed [till the time of the end], which men delivei to one that is learned [in religion], saying. Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I cannot; for it i- sealed ” (Isa. 29: 11) Were Jehovah God to give any such the “vision” they would surely commercialize it, as they have done their religion. “The prophets thereof divine for money,” (Mic. 3:11) To walk in the light and to escape destruction the persons of good-will must quickly turn away from those religioni-ts and unto The Theocracy, upon which the elory of Jehovah shines, making plain his written Word.
38	Jehovah will bring to nought all the predictions and divinations of the “prophets” concerning world domination by a “new’ world order” or a "new League of Nations”, so that they shall cease to divine and predict and promise, because always with failure and self-exposure to themselves. Jehovah “frustiateth the tokens of the liars, and maketh diviners mad; that turneth w’ise men backward, and maketh their knowledge foolish’’. (Isa. 44: 25) Then those religionists who look w’ise and pretend to have a vision will be shamed by the Lord. No anti-hate laws against exposing religion to shame and public contempt will be able to protect them. Their hopes for a new day of religion in politics w’ill turn to darkness. Their sun of prosperity will set for ever, and the religious diviners of blessings promised by other ways than by God’s kingdom shall be confounded. All along they have claimed that they are God’s channels of communication and that God answers mankind through the medium of the clergy, and their mouths
76
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
have been open presumably to give the message from God. But after they begin to cry “Peace and safety!” as their one last prediction, then God will give them reason to “all cover their lips; for there is no answer of God”.—Mie. 3:7.
39	They shall cover their “upper lips” (Hebrew), to not further open their mouths and show their foolishness and lies. Doubtless, when Jehovah gives his emphatic warning to “Christendom s” religious-totalitarian rulers, as stated at Daniel 11:44, “tidings out of the east and out of the north shall trouble him,” then the religious element shall find it prudent to disguise themselves and hide out. “And it shall come to pass in that day, that the prophets shall be ashamed every one of his vision, when he hath prophesied; neither shall they wear a rough garment to deceive: but he shall say, I am no prophet, I am an husbandman; for man taught me to keep cattle from my youth. And one shall say unto him, What are these wounds in thine hands ? Then he shall answer, Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends.” (Zech. 13: 4-G) But they shall not escape destruction. That is God's only answer to them.
SPIRIT
40	In contrast with that disastrous result which has already begun fulfilling upon the religious prophets and diviners, the faithful witness of Jehovah says: “But truly I am full of power by the spirit of the Lord, and of judgment, and of might, to declare unto Jacob his transgression, and to Israel his sin.” (Mie. 3 : 8) Those who presume to act as the spiritual instructors to the nations are filled with the spirit of the world. They make friendship with the world, and hence try to carry on the “good neighbor policy” with Satan’s organization. They have utterly failed to declare to either the totalitarian or the democratic section of “Christendom” the transgression and sins these commit against Jehovah God and his King. The pontiff at Vatican City refuses to denounce and excommunicate the arbitrary dictator of Germany, or to condemn the rape of Ethiopia or the invasion of Albania and Greece; he pronounces the rebel who set up the dictatorship upon the blood-soaked ruins of the Spanish Republic a “Christian gentleman”. When that disgrace to American judicial history was selling justice for filthy lucre the Vatican knighted him as a “papal knight of the order of St. Gregory the Great”, and not one word of rebuke does that religious Hierarchy utter against him since his recent conviction and imprisonment in Federal jail. Religionists of all denominations close their eyes to history and slap one another on the back in public
and carry on a national conference of so-called “Christians” and Jews. They object to anyone discussing contradictory religious doctrines in public or to calling attention to delinquencies and hypocrisies of professional men who are responsible before God and men.
41	This is the day of judgment of “Christendom” and of all the nations. Therefore Jehovah's judgments must be declared against such, and he raises up his “people for his name”, whom he has taken out from the nations. His spirit is his invisible power by which he moves his devoted people in his service. Upon these he pours out his spirit, and he commissions and empowers them to serve as his witnesses. As clearly marked by the facts in evidence, since A.D. 1922 he has poured out his spirit of power, and they have 'the double portion of Elijah's spirit’, and are filled with the boldness and fearlessness of the prophet Elisha. (2 Ki. 2:9,1b) They are blind to everything save only The Theocracy, and, like the blinded Samson, who pulled down the pillars of demonism, they are full of power by the Lord's spirit to use the spiritual weapons of Christian warfare and which weapons are mighty through God to the pulling down of strongholds of religion or demonism. Jehovah also puts his spirit upon his “other sheep”, the companions of the remnant, just as He put his spirit upon faithful men of old before Christ, to accomplish his will and his work through them.
42	The religionists shrink from the Lord’s judgments written in his Word centuries ago and treat them as intolerant; but the “faithful and wise servant” of the Lord counts it an honor to declare such judgments and to be associated with Christ Jesus, who shall execute those judgments upon the enemy: “To execute upon them the judgment written: this honour have all his saints.” (Ps. 149:9) Such have boldness in this day of judgment. (1 John 4: 17, 18) They are filled with might, being strong in the Lord and in the power of his might. They have understanding of their relationship to Jehovah and his Theocracy, and therefore have strength. (Prov. 8:14) They glory in the might of no man, but in Jehovah. (Jer. 9:23) They keep covenant with God by fulfilling their commission, being “filled with the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding; that ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God; strengthened with all might, according to his glorious power, unto all patience and longsuffering with jovfulness”. —Col. 1: 9-11.	'
(To be continued)
Know therefore that Jehoiah thy God, he is God. the faithful God, who keepeth covenant and lovingkindness with them that love him and keep his commandments.—Deuteronomy 7: 9, A.R.V.
MEMORIAL
IN A.D 33 Jesus with his disciples kept the passover, as commanded by Jehovah God. That was the last passover. Jesus knew he was soon to be put to death and before that event he must instruct his disciples, and through them instruct others of like precious faith who should follow after, of and concerning his Father's purpose, and therefore he did the things recorded. “And as they were eating [the Passover], Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my body. And he took the eup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it: for this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins” (Alatt. 26: 26-28) The institution of this memorial by the Lord Jesus took place immediately following the eating of the last passover, and it is the memorial of Jesus’ death that his followers are commanded to annually observe.
The law covenant, which included the yearly passover, was made in Egypt with Moses as the chief one or mediator. The new coienant as foretold at Jeremiah 31:31-34 was made by Jehovah with Christ Jesus while Jesus was on earth (antitypical Egypt), and it was the blood of the Lord Jesus that made good or operative that new covenant. Therefore he said to his disciples, referring to the wine in the cup which represented his lifeblood: “This is my blood of the eovenant, . . . Drink ye all of it.”—Matt. 26 : 27, 28, Am. Rev. Ver.
Previously Jesus had uttered these words (John 6: 53) : “Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you.” He was then speaking of his “sheep”, the ‘Tittle flock” (Luke 12: 32), who become members of Jehovah’s royal house of sons. Otherwise stated, it is the ones begotten of God’s spirit as his sons and taken into the new covenant that must cat the bread and drink the blood. But do not all persons that ever get life have to ‘eat of the bread’’ No. only the spiritual sons eat the bread, and drink the blood. All who get life on earth must exercise faith in the lifeblood of Christ Jesus poured out for the remission of sins, but at the institution of the Memorial he was inviting his faithful disciples alone to be broken with him and to be dead with him and to thus share in his death and in his resurrection. Since then his words apply only to those who are consecrated to God and are spirit-begotten. Let it be carefully noted that “Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it”, and gave the broken bread to his disciples and commanded them to eat. The breaking is of very great importance and cannot be ignored or passed over. It is of vital significance to all who participate with Christ Jesus in his kingdom. It means that they must become members of the “body of Christ” (1 Cor. 12:12-18, 27) and must be broken with him and therefore die with him in order to share with him in his Kingdom glory.—1 Cor. 11:23, 24.
Jesus’ words, “This is my body,” meant, “This bread represents my body.” The bread was merely a symbol, and the breaking of it discloses what must be done to those of the 'Tjody of Christ”. The wine, or “fruit of the vine”, represented his lifeblood about to be poured out, and to the disciples he said: “Drink ye all of it.” His words clearly mean that all who will be associated with him in his house must first be broken and die and therefore share with him in his
death. That his words meant that his body members are partners in his suffering and death is fully supported by the apostle, who under inspiration of the holy spirit wrote: “The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion [partnership] of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ ? For we, being many, are one bread, and one body; for wc are all partakers of that one bread.”—1 Cor. 10:16,17.
Those taken into this sacrificial arrangement with Christ Jesus must be made acceptable therefor by being justified or made righteous through faith in Jehovah God and in his provided Lamb Christ Jesus and then making a full and unreserved consecration of themselves to God to do his will (Rom. 5:1, 9) Eating of the bread does not mean that those eating arc justified to life by that which is symbolized by the eating. Nor do those words of Jesus mean that all must feed upon that “bread” and be sustained by the humanity of Jesus. One must first be justified before one can become a part of that ‘‘bread” which is afterwards broken Jesus took the loaf of unleavened bread and broke it and said to his followers: “This is my body.” Then his words were m substance these: ‘You must eat, that is to say, partake with me and thereby become my partners or fellow sufferers, and as this bread you see me break represents the body of Christ, or the members thereof, all of such must be broken together.' Such breaking of the bread or “body” and the dunking of the blood must take place after those partaking iiaic first been justified and spirit-begotten and taken into (.'bust's body, and therefore only such properly partake of the Memorial emblems.
Justification does not result from such breaking of the body and drinking of the blood, because justification by faith and consecration must first precede or be had before the breaking of the bread and drinking of the wine can take place. Jesus did not offer the bread and wine to everyone, but only to those who had proved their faithfulness. (Luke 22:28-30) It follows, then, that only those properly partake of the emblems who are first justified and spirit-begotten, and who are in line for the kingdom of heaven. It is the will of God that Jesus shall have associated with him in his work as Vindicator of his Father’s name 144.000 members of his body, all together constituting one body or royal house of sons of God. (Rev. 14:1-4) Every one of such must undergo a test similar to that to which Jesus uas subjected and must suffer and maintain integrity or blamelessness toward God and must die with Christ Jesus as a condition precedent to entering into the Lord’s glory.
Jesus then proceeded to instruct his disciples concerning the eup. The wine in the cup referred to his blood, and his words, “This is my blood of the new testament,” in substance, meant this: ‘This represents my blood, which blood makes good the new covenant, which covenant my Father has made with me. Also, it is the price of redemption for the human race, as many thereof as believe and obey ’ Jesus knew drinking the blood meant death, according to the law of Jehovah. (Gen. 9:4; Lev. 17:11) He was therefore inviting his disciples to perform an act that meant their death, and was thus inviting them to participate in his death, and hence he said: “He that catcth mi flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him.” (John
77
78
^He WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
6-56) That is the only way to be taken into The Christ, and only those who are taken into and become members of The Christ are broken with Christ Jesus and pour out their life with him.
Everyone who makes an unconditional consecration to do God’s will properly symbolizes or gives outward testimony thereof by being baptized in water. That baptism, however, does not put him into the “body of Christ”; he must be baptized into the sacrificial death of Christ Jesus, and that must be done after he has consecrated himself to God and has. received justification. Writes the apostle: “Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death; that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection.” (Rom. 6: 3-5) Only those called to the heavenly calling will share in the sacrificial death of Christ Jesus. Only the “little flock” of the Lord’s sheep, the spirit-begotten ones, are in line to share m the death of Christ Jesus and in his glory that shall follow, and therefore only such properly partake of the Memorial symbols.
Those in Christ Jesus must and will discern the body of Christ; that is to say, they will clearly distinguish between the body of flesh and the body of The Christ. (1 Cor. 12: 12-14) Only such partake properly or worthily of the Memorial emblems. To partake unworthily means to be unfit and to partake irreverently.—1 Cor. 11:27-31.
Says the apostle (1 Cor. 5: 7, 8) : “Christ our passover is sacrificed for us: therefore let us keep the feast.” The apostle means those that are in the class to which he belonged, therefore the spiritual class. (1 Cor. 1:1, 2) If one is of the Lord’s “other sheep”, or Jonadabs, who shall form the “great multitude” that survives the final battle of Armageddon and shall live on earth for ever, he is not “in Christ”. (John 10 : 16 ; 2 Ki. 10 :15-23 ■ Rev. 7 : 9-17) And if one is not in Christ he cannot share in the death and resurrection of Christ. Therefore it would be improper for him to partake of the Memorial emblems.
“TILL HE COME”
The apostle writes: “For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do shew the Lord’s death till he come.” (1 Cor. 11:26) Those who partake properly and with understanding and discernment thereby show that they recognize the purpose of the death of Christ Jesus and that it is their privilege to suffer and die with him in order to live and reign with him, sharing his glory. As foretold at Malachi 3:1-3, Christ Jesus has now come to the temple for judgment ; but there are yet on earth in the flesh those who properly continue to celebrate the Memorial feast and should do so until their ‘change’ comes at death, when they are “changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye”, giving up the human organism and receiving at the hands of the Lord a spiritual body. (1 Cor. 15: 50-54) It is enjoined upon them to celebrate the Memorial and thus bear testimony of their relationship to God and Christ Jesus, and they would be woefully negligent if they failed to do so. “Till he come,” therefore, is properly construed to mean until the last member of Christ’s body on earth finishes his course and is
changed from human to spirit. Only such as are in a relationship to the Lord similar to that between the apostles and the Lord could be taken into the covenant for the Kingdom. (See Luke 22:28-30.) Therefore it is only those who are in Christ and who share in his death that have a part in the Kingdom, The Theocracy. This excludes everyone but the spiritual and anointed ones, and these alone properly partake of the Memorial emblems.
Those who properly and therefore worthily partake of the emblems must be first justified, and then spirit-begotten, and gathered to the temple and anointed now with God's spirit. The Jonadabs are a class consecrated to do God’s will, but are not spirit-begotten. They are not justified. Their hope is not in heaven, but is that they may live on earth for ever. They have found refuge in Jehovah’s organization under Christ Jesus, where they must remain until the day of Jehovah’s wrath is passed; and while remaining in bounds, they must continue to seek righteousness and meekness. Being ‘strangers in the camp’ (Ex. 20: 10), who have devoted themselves to God and Christ, they must participate in declaring the name and kingdom of God under Christ. But since they cannot share in the death of Christ Jesus, and hence cannot partake of his resurrection, it would be entirely out of order and improper for them to partake of the emblems. Being under the protection of God's organization, they are companions of the anointed and must serve with the anointed and joyfully do with their might what their hands find to do. The Scriptural evidence and the facts show that the Lord’s “other sheep”, or Jonadabs, are now being gathered to the Lord and, as such, they are continuously praising God and Christ his King, because they see that the day of salvation and deliverance has come. Therefore they hail Christ, the King of glory, and joyfully serve him continuously.
All the Scriptural argument, therefore, conclusively establishes these facts, that the Lord Jesus Christ instituted the memorial of his death and commanded that this should be celebrated only by those who are begotten of God's spirit and baptized into the spiritual body of Christ; that such spiritual sons would fail of their duty and miss their great privilege if they did not partake of the Memorial; that once each year it is their duty and privilege to thus celebrate the Memorial. It is entirely right and proper for the Jonadabs to be present at such meeting and observe what is done, that they may have a keener appreciation of the relationship of the anointed ones to Jehovah and a keener appreciation of the relationship of the Lord’s “other sheep” to God and to Christ. It should be and is a time of rejoicing for them also, because they appreciate the fact that the day of deliverance has come.
By having in mind the inspired words of the apostle, to wit, “Christ our passover is sacrificed . . . therefore let us keep the feast,” it is easy to be seen that the flock or class of which the apostle himself was and is a part, to wit, all like members of the spiritual company, alone can properly partake of the Memorial emblems. Jonadabs, or those who shall compose the “great multitude”, can never properly partake of those emblems. To do so would be doing injury to themselves, as warned at 1 Corinthians 11:27-31.
It was in A.D. 1918 that the Lord Jesus appeared at the temple for judgment and there began the judgment of the
March 1,1942
SEe WATCHTOWER-
79
consecrated, spirit-begotten ones. (Mal. 3:1-3) The ones approved at that judgment have been taken into the temple. Since that time, therefore, the true followers of Christ Jesus have partaken of the emblems, not in sorrow, but with joy, because the Lord, the Head of the house, is with them. (.Matt. 26:29) “The fruit of the vine” is the wine, and
upon his second coming the wine pictured the “joy of the Lord”. Now all of the temple company are iejoicmg m the Lord, as symbolized by drinking with him the vine "new", and they are there in the temple showing forth, the prunes of Jehovah their Father. “And in his temple doth eveiy one speak of his glory.”—Ps. 29: 9.
CELEBRATING THE MEMORIAL
IN CELEBRATING the Memorial as commanded by the Great Theocrat Jehovah through his King Christ Jesus all religion must be avoided, to wit, the traditional formalities and ceremonies of men under the influence of demonism, which is religion. To observe the Memorial and to follow the procedure of our Leader Christ Jesus is a part of Christianity, or doing the will of God. All those who have taken their stand for The Theocracy and who desire to fulfill the Theocratic rule will without fail assemble themselves to keep the Memorial at the time appointed.
According to the law of God and the example of Christ Jesus the time corresponding with the night of Nisan 14, which is Tuesday, March 31, 1942, after sundown, is the proper date to hold this feast to the vindication of Jehovah's name and in remembrance of the sacrifice of his Vindicator, Christ Jesus, “the Lamb of God.” Therefore, after 6 p.m. of March 31 all Christians seeking meekness and righteousness will gather together to honor and give praise to God and his King. This privilege and obligation includes not alone the anointed remnant who shall partake of the bread and the wine, but also all persons of good-will, the Lord’s “other sheep”, or Jonadabs. The assembling of these latter with the remnant on this occasion shows that they have been gathered into the one fold in company with the Lord's “little flock”, that they are all at unity and fighting shoulder to shoulder for The Theocracy, and that they are not ashamed to confess Christ’s brethren before men but their hope of salvation is in Jehovah and his provided Lamb, Christ Jesus.
The full preparations for an orderly observance should be made by the appointed servants of the group assembling. Since those of the spirit-begotten remnant are primarily concerned, such of them as are capable should rightly be given the preference as to service. One should act as chairman of the assembly. Where those to partake of the emblems are all females, then a Jonadab brother might conduct, if present, otherwise a sister will have to serve as chairwoman. The celebration should be opened with an appropriate song and a prayer. Then the chairman or other competent person should deliver a brief discourse setting forth the points covered in the article appearing above; or if no capable speaker is available, then the said article should be read by one who reads well. Prior to this occasion the article should have been studied by all, both privately and in the company, by the remnant and the Jonadabs, that thereby each one may have understanding of his relationship to the Lord and may discern whether he should partake' of the emblems or not.
As emblems the Lord Jesus and his apostles used real red wine in symbol of his blood, and also unleavened bread,
and the feet-members of the “body of Christ” should follow their lead Because the breaking the bread and dunking the wine both symbolize the identical thing, thee should be served to and partaken of together by the anointed remnant. Therefore before the partaking there should be just one prayer offered over both emblems togethci, instead ot an individual prayer upon each emblem separate!v Eun where there appear to be none to partake of the emblems and all are Jonadabs, such should assemble, the discouise should be spoken or read, and the emblems should be provided 101 any emergency and should be offered at the proper time lor any possible one desiring to fulfill his covenant obligation to partake thereof.
This Scriptural record show’s that after paitaking ot the emblems the Lord Jesus and the apostles talked about a number of things pertaining to the Lord's service and maintaining their integrity by continuous and steadfast act u ity therein. Likewise it would next be in order and pleasing to the Lord for the chairman to use a few minutes to cal! attention to and discuss the field service, especially muting all present to take part in the current }\atihtmxr campaign and also the “Children of The King” Testimony Period beginning the very next morning, Wednesday, Api il 1 Accordingly’ provision should be made that after the dismissal any of the attendants may obtain needed literature or territory and arrangements be made to take newly interested ones present into the witness work.
The record by Matthew and Mark state that after Jesus and the apostles had sung a hymn or psalm they -went out of the assembly place. (Matt. 26:30; Mark 14: 26) But the record by John shows that immediately before going out the Lord Jesus uttered a final prayer, as contained in John chapter 17 and after which verse one of chapter eightien says "When Jesus had spoken these words, he went faith with his disciples over the brook Cedron, wheie was a garden, into the which he entered, and his disciples” It there-fore docs not appear improper that a suitable song be sung in closing and thereafter a brief prayer be offered and the assembly be thus dismissed to go forth to the Lord's further service in the field. A report of each gathering is dcsiied by the Society, showing both the total number attending and those thereof partaking of the emblems.
ALL READERS OF “THE WATCHTOWER"
are cordially invited to attend the celebration of the Memorial by Jehovah’s witnesses in their respective locality on March 31. 1942. Also all the Kingdom publishers will see to it that all interested ones in their territory are notified and urged to be present. All those complying with the Loid's joy’ful Memorial arrangement will receive his approval, blessing and strength.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
REACTIONS IN THE CONVENTION CITY
“I have been working in a strong Catholic district and it was interesting to see how the message of truth given at the convention reacted on those that love to be in the dark. These are some of the expressions made when witnessing at the door: 'Are you one of the Jehovahs that were here at The Arena? Scram! Keep moving! We are Roman Catholics.’ ‘You Jehovah witnesses ought to be in concentration eamps.’ ‘Why don’t you people let us alone? This is a free country.’ ‘You people have a lot of nerve coming to a Catholic city like St. Louis.’ Many were really tormented, but there are many sincere Catholics here and very much interested in the message and they are reading our literature. One Catholic lady said two nuns were at her home and they said Jehovah’s witnesses were hurting the Catholic religion (spoiling their pastures). The ‘loeusts’ must have eaten the varnish off, showing them up in their true nature. Many Jehovah’s witnesses stopped at Catholic homes during the convention and they gave a good witness just by getting acquainted better with our work. These are some of the expressions made: ‘Jehovah's witnesses are fine people, grand people, honest people, the finest people I ever met.’ ‘We thought you were different from what you are.’ Many are beginning to get their eyes open. Some invited me in and treated me fine and have back-calls on them. A young lady (she was the maid) came to the door and, after the witness, asked if I was one of Jehovah’s witnesses. Said she: Wes, I am a Catholic, and the people living here are Catholic.' Mr. and Mrs. W-----came to her with some books and told
her to read them, that they were the most wonderful books they had ever read. She read them, and thought the same. We talked a long time. She said ‘Mr. and Mrs.------are
on a two weeks’ vacation, and I am leaving on a two weeks’ vacation; so if you come back in two weeks, I am sure we three would like to hear more about this’. These three people were Irish. They attended the convention and were thrilled. One old Irish Catholic lady asked if all these bad things about the Catholic church were so. When we parted she said, ‘God bless you.’ ”
THE WEEKLY STUDY AND WITNESSING GO ON
“On Friday evening, about 6:30 p.m., we had a sharp raid on our territory at N--, and this without any sounding of an alert. As soon as possible I got on the scene, for I learned the bombs had fallen on the mam street, where three of our publishers and their families Inc. I am pleased to say they themselves were unhurt , but their homes were badly blasted, for they live all next door to one another, and two bombs had hit their terrace a little more than a hundred yards higher up. There being no alert, people were on the streets just finishing their shopping, and a sister T-----, who had attended the meetings for years, was killed
outright on the street where the bombs fell. Another lady walking with her lost both legs and an arm, and it is doubtful she will survive. All together, five people were killed; and there were many casualties. It is a remarkable fact that almost all houses in the main street have had to be vacated, with the exception of those of our brethren, and of those living in close proximity to them. This allows for us to continue our weekly studies there, and the witnessing of the Kingdom to all that mourn.’’—Pioneer in Britain.
THE BRAZIL BRANCH WRITES:
“The work is progressing, the number of pioneers increasing, and some, at least, realize that Armageddon is at hand and are arousing themselves to greater activity in helping the multitude' to gather into groups. One small town in the interior had one lone witness who was continually begging for helpers. A representative from the office went up there, gathered the interested together, baptized several, and now this little town is reporting twenty-four publishers each month.”
OFF TO A GOOD START (NEW YORK)
“We’ve been working in our new territory as special publishers now for ten days, and within that period of time have had some experiences which certainly prove that now is the time Jehovah is gathering his ‘other sheep’ Cohoes is generally regarded as tough territory, because it is practically solid French and Irish Catholic; nevertheless, thankful to the Lord for the privilege he had given us, we went to work, and in one week placed over fifty Children books!! This we seldom do in what is called ‘good territory’. All of these books were placed with Catholic people in Catholic homes. Never had I seen the Catholic population grab so eagerly for any of the literature as they have the book Children. It just seems to be a book that everybody wants. Yesterday Frances and I worked Church Street, on which there is a Roman Catholic church, a school and a nuns’ home; and in eight and one-half hours’ work our sound attendance amounted to 65 persons that listened to the recording ‘Children’. Not one person was nasty, but all agreed with what was on the record and accepted literature. The back-calls on these persons of good-will should prove interesting. So far we have four established book studies, and next week a Watchtower study is being started. So we already have a nucleus of a company started.”
AN ALERT MAGAZINE PUBLISHER
“Just before leaving San Antonio, Texas, while I was witnessing on a street corner with magazines, a soldier came up, asked the nature of the work, also asked the meaning of Revelation, chapter 16, in regard to the pouring out of the seven vials of God’s wrath. I replied we have two books called Light, explaining all the book of Revelation, which he might obtain; they would give him a clear understanding of the vials as well as all Revelation. When he asked the meaning of ‘the wheel within the wheel’ [Ezekiel 1:16], and on my informing him that we have three books called Vindication explaining all of Ezekiel that would make it clear to him about the wheels, he asked how he might obtain these books. I replied: ‘I will bring them to this same corner tomorrow eve if you would like to come for them.’ He gladly accepted the offer, contributed for the two magazines, and went away. Next evening, at the same time, I was there with the five books, also the book Children, and showed and explained its contents to him. Result: Six bound books and two more magazines placed, he saying he got the other two magazines misplaced. I also gave him the invitation to Kingdom Hall. He has been coming to the Watchtower study ever since and likes it all very much. This is a result of street-corner witnessing; otherwise this soldier could not have been reached.”
se
3THE WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	* Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
N. H. Knorr, President	W. E. Van Ambukgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” • Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, Is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus Is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it Is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act Is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible Instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for Its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not Indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United Statzs, *1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear tn several languages.)
AH sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the aubacription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the aubacription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the past office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March S, 1S79.
“CHILDREN OF THE KING” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The spring month of April is a favorable time for the “Children of The King” Testimony Period, and which is therefore a world-wide period of united action by those advertising the King and the Kingdom. In all the earth not only those of the anointed remnant, but also all those hoping to become the earthly “children of the King”, will take part, and if any such want references to companies organized for this testimony let them without delay write the office in their respective countries. Much advance preparation for this campaign is required. April being the close of the three-month Watchtower Campaign, the servants and children of the King will continue offering the special combination, namely, a year’s Watchtower subscription, together with the premium of the book Children and the new booklet Hope, and all this for the regular subscription rate of 81.00 in America, and correspondingly in the other lands. Let this be your best month of the campaign, and at the end thereof you will with joy turn m your report of activities and the fruits thereof.
“HOPE”
With pleasure the Society announces publication of a new booklet, Hope—for the Dead—for the Survivors—in a Righteous World. The theme itself impresses one that the booklet meets a very present need, when millions of hearts need to be infused with new hope both for the living and for the newly dead; and the
contents, in an up-to-date setting, will delight you. It is a 64-page booklet, self-covered, but having a very engaging cover design. Date of its release for general circulation in the field is announced elsewhere, but you will first desire to read, and enjoy it yourself and thereby know how best to present and use it in 'comforting all that mourn’. You may obtain your personal copy now, contributing 5c therefor.
OPPORTUNITY OF SERVICE
Any single brother, unencumbered, who is an experienced organist and desires to devote full time in the service at Bethel may apply by writing
Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, President’s Office, 124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, N. Y., stating his experience and qualifications as such.
MEMORIAL
Tuesday, March 31, after six p.m., is the date Scripturally arrived at for 1942 for the memorial celebration to both Jehovah’s name and the sacrifice of the Lamb of God, Christ Jesus, his Theocratic King. Each Christian company, therefore, should assemble after six p.m. of March 31, and the anointed ones thereof
(Contiu-'ed on page 95)
VWCHTOWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM
No. LXIII	March 15, 1942	No. 6
MICAH
PART 5
"Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion, on the sides of the north, the city of the great King."—Ps. 48: 2.
TEHOVAH has chosen his city for his capital orI ganization. He himself is the builder of that glo-J rious city. Now the events of a world at war engross the human minds and draw the attention to the national capitals and away from the greatest and most important government of all, the Theocratic Government of the great God of heaven and earth. The divided interests of the nations in the fight for world domination drive the peoples into their respective camps, and the biggest fact of all human history is pushed into the background and ignored, which is, that God’s kingdom is here. It is in the hands of his Son, Christ Jesus, the King thereof. It is Jehovah’s capital organization. It holds and shall forever hold the universal domination against all contenders. Through it alone comes the deliverance of all them that fear God, and to it must humankind flow for salvation, if they would live.
2 That capital organization, in which God resides, is heavenly, hence invisible to human eyes. Its name is Zion, meaning “a monument guiding to God’’. It is the chief and highest part of his general or universal organization. It is also called “the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven”. (Rev. 21:2) Long ago Jehovah used visible things on earth to make prophetic patterns of these heavenly things, thereby to give instruction to men of faith, who look not at the things which are seen, but at the greater things, which are not seen by the natural eye and which are eternal. (Heb. 9:23,24 ; 2 Cor. 4:18) For such purpose Jehovah chose the typical city of Zion, the official residence of David, who was king of God’s typical Theocracy over the nation of Israel. Being the royal seat of God’s anointed king, and particularly being the place of God’s tabernacle or temple, Zion was the chief part of the city of Jerusalem, and therefore Jerusalem became the capital city of the nation. “Jerusalem” means “possession of peace”.
1 The great enemy Satan overreaches men and uses them wittingly or unwittingly to set up ruling organizations. Then he deceives the people in general
by causing religion to apply to such organizations the names that rightfully belong only to the organization of Jehovah God. Thus he establishes a counterfeit to mislead those who do not take the Bible as their correct guide, and thereby he lines up the people on his side, to aid him in the fight for universal domination. His purpose is to prove his challenge to Jehovah and to cause the destruction of all men at Armageddon. The Devil’s chief instrument to deceive and confuse men is religion, and he makes full use of the religious leaders. Such ultrareligionists pretend to serve God and his Christ, but their works and doctrines prove that they serve the enemy of God, and they cause the deceived and trusting people to do likewise. To hold men in their organization they fraudulently brand such by the same names Jehovah gives to his organization. They have long compromised with the rulers of the world and enticed such into joining their religious organizations. Thereafter they coerced the subjects of the rulers to join. Such nations of the world they call “Christendom”. The religious organization thereof they call “Zion” and “Jerusalem”, meaning the religious super-government of “Christendom”. Such national and religious systems claim to be in a covenant relationship with God, but, judged by their works, they do not live up to that claim, and hence take the name of God and of Christ in vain. They are covenantbreakers, and are all opposed to the Theocracy under Christ Jesus. They prove unworthy of the holy names the clergy apply to them. These facts help us to understand the words of Micah, who prophesied to like unfaithful organizations, and whose words find fulfillment today.
“NEW WORLD" BUILDERS
* “Hear this, I pray you, ye heads of the house of Jacob, and princes of the house of Israel, that abhor judgment, and pervert all equity.” (Mic. 3:9) “Christendom’s” religious clergy’ turn to the traditions and worldly-wise sayings of imperfect men, and so reject God’s Word. In their religious meeting-places
84	THE WATCHTOWER	Brooklyn, N. Y.
they do not cause these words to be heard by their political and commercial allies, whom they have made “the principal of the flock". God’s command is to “hear this”, and over a period of years now he has made them hear by his faithful witnesses. These he has raised up to announce that Jehovah is God, that Christ is the Ruler of the world of righteousness, and that The Theocracy is the Government that must rule the earth and heaven in equity, and which shall enforce the judgments of the Lord in righteousness. The judgments of the Supreme Judge over all, as written in his Holy Word, Jehovah’s faithful servants have obediently declared to all “Christendom”, but the heads and rulers thereof abhor such judgments. Such prefer human judgments, and never was the earth, and particularly “Christendom”, filled with greater injustices and inequity. When there is a conflict the demon-influenced rulers insist that the judgments of men come before those of God, and they make Christians obedient to God’s commandments to unjustly suffer penalties for keeping and declaring the judgments of the Lord. The totalitarian rulers respect the persons of men and their worldly position and power, and unequally apply the human law against the small minority who try to keep themselves unspotted from the world. The climax of their abhorrence of judgment and perversion of equity comes when they will shortly succeed in everywhere ruling that the Christian works of Jehovah’s covenant people are “illegal”, and then put them to silence under restraints forcibly. Then in all bad conscience they shall cry “Peace and safety!” and so mark themselves for sudden destruction at the hands of the God of justice, judgment and equity.
5 “They build up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity." (Mic. 3:10) The nations which practice demonism, but which they call the “Christian religion", and wrongfully so, because all religion and Christianity are opposed to each other, speak of themselves as “Christendom”. “Organized religion,” particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, takes to itself the position of a spiritual super-government over the nations of “Christendom" and seeks to convert all nations to its religious organization. Fraudulently it takes to itself the names “Zion” and “Jerusalem”, and applies to itself the promises of God applying to the true Zion and Jerusalem. Upon this basis the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, with headquarters at Vatican City, Italy, claims the right and commission from God to rule the world in the name of Christ. Being unable to do so by persuasion or conversion, it sees no other way than by coercion with violence. To this end it secretly financed and aided the totalitarian dictators into power and openly made deals or concordats with such, all to build
up again the infamous “holy Roman Empire”. As a consequence the earth is now being drenched with blood wantonly spilled in violation of God’s “everlasting covenant” concerning the sanctity of blood. —Gen. 9:6; Isa. 24: 5.
8 Such is a bloody and demonized effort to build up the religious-totalitarian “abomination of desolation” and to cause it to stand permanently in the place where it ought not and which place it can never fill, to wit, the holy place of God’s righteous government by Christ Jesus. Such now is their “iniquity”, or lawlessness. The law and decree of Jehovah is that the Theocratic Government under his Son shall rule the world. His King is the only legal or lawful Ruler, whom he has anointed to that exalted position because he loves righteousness and hates iniquity. Hence the conspiracy of the worldly rulers, under the religious guidance of the demonized clergy, to block The Theocracy and to continue misruling the earth, is a flagrant disregard of God’s law and testimony as set forth in the Bible and declared by his witnesses. It is gross iniquity and is abominable in his sight, and it deceives the whole world because it operates under the cloak of religion.
1 The prophet of Jehovah exposes further the iniquity practiced in “Christendom”: “The heads thereof judge for reward, and the priests thereof teach for hire, and the prophets thereof divine for money; yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among usT none evil can come upon us.” (Mic. 3:11) In the time of Micah the chief justices, or judges of last appeal, were the king of the nation (1 Sam. 8:5; Deut. 17:18; Prov. 29:14; 1 Ki. 3: 7-9) and also the high priest at the temple. (Ex. 28: 30; Deut. 33: 8,10; 17 : 8-13; 19:17; 21: 5; 2 Chron. 19: 8,11) Also according to the law of God the regular Levites, both priestly and non-priestly, were authorized to act as judges in a lesser capacity. (1 Chron. 23: 3, 4; 2 Chron. 19: 8; Mal. 2: 4, 7, 8) The princes, who were governors serving under and by authority of the king, also exercised judgeships (Jer. 26:10,16; 21:11,12; Ezek. 45: 9); and likewise the “elders”, understood to be experienced and mature in judgment. (Num. 11:16,17; Deut. 1:15-18) While authorized to serve in such capacity, they did not devote their entire time thereto, and God’s law made no provision for them to receive legal or judicial fees.
8 Acceptance of such judicial service and willingness to perform therein must be entirely out of love of justice and the desire to see justice executed and that righteousness obtained among the people and that Jehovah’s law was obeyed and religion was resisted and kept out. To have Jehovah’s approval the judges must fear Him, the Supreme Judge, and not fear the face of man nor regard his appearance, but deal courageously for truth and righteousness, know
Mauch 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER.
85
ing that God shall be with the good. (2 Chron. 19:11) They must not be dependent upon their judgeships for support or income. Acting as judges must be without remuneration, lest their judgments be warped or influenced. It was wholly improper to look for and accept fees and bribes. Their service must be entirely unselfish, in the interest of righteousness, and in obedience to their covenant with God. “Christendom," which claims to be spiritual Israel, has never set up or observed such an organization and process of justice. The record of the Inquisition courts of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy is a most shocking travesty of justice and a disgrace.
’ The heads of the typical nation of Israel yielded to selfishness and religion, and judged for the rewards they could extort from those whose cases they heard. In “Christendom” the law has become a profession. God-fearing law-writers of the past have declared that all proper laws of men draw their validity from the law of God and that His law is supreme and binding on all everywhere and all the time; yet the legal profession are grossly guilty of ignoring the law of God and setting it aside. In cases where the servants of the Most High God are involved and there is a clash between the supreme law of God and the contrary laws of men, the judges of “Christendom” are repeatedly guilty of degrading God’s perfect law. How? By trampling upon it and exalting mischievously framed laws of men as warrant to punish God’s servants for strict obedience to divine law. Such judges pervert justice “for reward”, that is, for some selfish consideration, whether the desire for the political support of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy or the approval of so-called “patriotic groups”, or the fear of the mob or creatures who are in power and who threaten violence if their demon-inspired wishes are not obeyed. They refuse to grant Jehovah’s covenant people the “equal protection of the law”, but show respect to religion and practitioners of religion.
10	The prophecies exactly describe the condition in “Christendom”. In the light of such prophecies the judges and legal profession do wisely to examine and judge themselves respecting their motives and actions in dealing with Jehovah’s obedient servants: “Thy princes are rebellious, and companions of thieves: every one loveth gifts [blinding one to justice], and followeth after rewards: they judge not the fatherless, neither doth the cause of the widow come unto them.” (Isa. 1: 23) “The judge asketh for a reward.” (Mic. 7:3) “For I know your manifold transgressions and your mighty sins: they afflict the just, they take a bribe, and they turn aside the poor in the gate [where court was held] from their right.” (Amos 5:12) Such is contrary to God’s rule, which does not change: “Ye shall do no unrighteousness in
judgment: thou shalt not respect the person of the poor, nor honour the person of the mighty: but in righteousness shalt thou judge thy neighbour.” (Lev. 19:15) “Thou shalt not wrest judgment; thou shalt not respect persons, neither take a gift: for a gift doth blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous.”—Deut. 16:19.
11	God’s Word condemns the delaying of justice in the expectation of getting something for the judge first. For example: Governor Felix sat in on the case of the apostle Paul. The religionists had forced Paul into court for preaching the gospel of God’s kingdom. Felix, in hope of self-gain, delayed the execution of justice: “he hoped also that money should have been given him of Paul, that he might loose him: wherefore he sent for him the oftener, and communed with him.” (Acts 24:26) Receiving no reward or bribe, he left Paul bound in prison for two years longer. Like the faithful apostle, Jehovah’s witnesses of today refuse to buy their way out. The apostles paid no fines for preaching the Word of God. Now when Jehovah’s servants are brought into court for obeying his command to publish his name and his kingdom, they refuse to pay fines imposed by those who “judge for reward”, and, rather, go to prison. They do not compromise on the issue. They pay no creature for the privilege to preach, nor are they themselves paid to preach. It is God’s commandment to them, and they must keep integrity to Him.
12	“And the priests thereof teach for hire.” The term “priests” here designates the “man of sin” class, which the Scriptures foretold, which class today includes the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and other priests of religion, also the “evil servant” class, and the “elective elders” of the congregations, and all those whose covenant with God put them in line for his “royal priesthood” but who then became selfseeking and fell to religion for what they could get out of it for themselves. The priests of Israel were assigned the duty and obligation of informing themselves on God’s law and of teaching the people his commandments. (Mal. 2: 7) God made due provision for their support, and they must not use their office for self-gain besides those necessaries of life which God provided. Becoming covetous, they departed from that rule and perverted their teaching and taught commandments and traditions of men, all to bring in profit for themselves. The “priests” of “Christendom” follow in the same course. They charge the people for every religious service they render their parishioners and congregations, and honest observers of the day frankly admit that religion has become the greatest money-making racket of all. The religious leaders do further seek hire in the form of flatteries and the honor and praise of men. They seek not the honor which comes from God
86
SfEe WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
only, and hence do not believe the Word of God. (John 5:44) Their love of money or selfish gam is the root of the evil of religion. They do not love God or his righteousness, and hence do not obey his commandments. Seeking to win the applause and admiration of men, they try to appear wise and learned. Assuming to be teachers, they therefore refuse to ‘'see thy teachers” and to recognize that, since the Lord's coming to the temple in 1918, Jehovah and Christ Jesus are the Teachers and that ‘all of Zion’s children shall be taught of Jehovah’, and not of men. —Isa. 30: 20; 54:13.
13	"And the prophets thereof divine for money.” The clergy of ‘‘Christendom” divine or make predictions to please the dictators or the political leaders. The political schemes and programs of such they support and make unscriptural promises for them. They turn the people away from the sure and infallible prophecies of God’s Word, and speak great things in behalf of the “new world order”, or “the new moral order”, or a “federated world after this war”, or the “new League of Nations”; which proposals of men are opposed to the rule of Jehovah’s Theocracy. For all their divination and religious service they expect and eagerly accept money, no matter how filthy the source thereof. The totalitarian dictator gives almost 900 million marks each year to the support of the Roman Catholic church in Germany and to the other religious organizations. Not strange, then, that they feel reflected upon in that Jehovah’s witnesses conduct their public and other meetings with free seats and no collections taken up. They frown upon and object to Jehovah’s servants’ freely giving of their time and means to go from house to house proclaiming the inspired prophecies of God and distributing millions of pieces of free literature and accepting only contributions for the further publication of the message. This shows up the practice of the religionists and exposes their false and demoniacal divinations, and this threatens their money-making. Their money shall perish with them at Armageddon.
14	“Yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us ?” That is, they claim the promise of the Lord’s presence and expect him to back them up in their schemes, which are contrary to God’s purpose by his kingdom. They claim that their religious organization is God’s organization, and that the people must join up in order to get saved. Their ‘leaning upon God’ is only in pretense; for they believe not his prophecies nor trust him to protect and deliver them if they strictly do his will and forsake their friendship with Satan’s world. The facts, as demonstrated by their works, show they put their reliance upon the “strong-arm squad” and the carnal weapons, and upon their own wisdom and that of other
men, and upon human schemes and plans, and human governments and peace organizations; and such governments they call “Christian nations”. “For they call themselves of the holy city, and stay themselves upon the God of Israel; the Lord of hosts is his name.” (Isa. 48: 2) Thereby they have deceived and yet deceive millions to remain in and to support “Christendom”, as though to forsake the religious organization meant forsaking God and his side.
15	Deceiving themselves and others those false prophets say: “None evil can come upon us.” “There shall not come upon us calamity.” {Rotherham) This is clearly a religious “shot” at Jehovah’s witnesses, to make out that they are liars and false prophets in declaring the day of God’s vengeance and that the battle of Armageddon is very near and there “Christendom” will be completely blotted out. “Son of man, behold, they of the house of Israel say, The vision that he seeth is for many days to come, and he proph-esieth of the times that are far off.” (Ezek. 12:27) They “put far away the evil day, and cause the seat of violence to come near. Therefore now shall they go captive with the first that go captive, and the banquet of them that stretch themselves [upon couches of self-confidence] shall be removed”. (Amos 6: 3, 7) They trust in their religious organization to endure for ever and to be a charm against calamity, as did the Israelites at Shiloh.
18	To such Jehovah God by his faithful witness says: “Trust ye not in lying words, saying, The temple of the Lord, The temple of the Lord, The temple of the Lord, are these. Therefore will I do unto this house, which is called by my name, wherein ye trust, and unto the place which I gave to you and to your fathers, as I have done to Shiloh. And I will cast you out of my sight, as I have cast out'all your brethren [the ten tribes of Israel], even the whole seed of Ephraim." (Jer.7 :4,14,15) Regardless of the ridicule of the religionists, Jehovah’s witnesses must continue to sound this warning of the Lord and to bid the people of good-will to hasten their flight out of the doomed organization, lest they be overtaken in its destruction at Armageddon. Religion’s “refuge of lies” and “hiding place of falsehood” are now being exposed by the hail and overflowing waters of truth. Such will furnish religionists no protection or preservation when the God of justice settles accounts and enforces his righteous judgments, shortly. “Christendom’s” house of religion has been left unto her desolate, and the Lord God is not therein. It shall be destroyed, like its prototype at Jerusalem. (Matt. 23:37,38) Calling itself “Zion” falsely will not save it.
17	“Therefore shall Zion for your sake be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the high places of the forest.” (Mic. 3:12) “For your sake,” that is, because
March 15,1942	THE WATCHTOWER	87
of you and as a recompense to you, you religioustotalitarian ruling powers of “Christendom” which exalt yourselves as the backbone of the “new world order” with religion riding atop shall be cut to pieces like a plowed field. Now, because of the fear of the Hierarchy and its power in all the lands, the nations composing “the king of the south” hold back from bombing Rome and its ally, the Vatican; and the religious head even offers the Vatican as the site of the expected peace conference at the end of the war. Ignoring that the Vatican’s aims of world domination and making the world Catholic are the cause of the war between “the king of the north” and “the king of the south”, those battling powers take every precaution and make every allowance to safeguard that hoary headquarters of religion or demonism on earth. (Dan. 11:41) As to self-styled “Zion”, which is a monument of “organized religion”, and as to all “Christendom”, which was foreshadowed by unfaithful “Jerusalem”, meaning “possession of peace”, such shall die, but shall not go down to the grave in peace. Their “new world order” of federated nations trying to keep the peace is put forth to mimic God’s “world to come”, “wherein dwelleth righteousness”; it shall perish like all religious hypocrites at Armageddon.
18	Self-exalting “Christendom” shall be laid low and must become empty, as a field to be plowed. God’s executioner, Christ Jesus, shall plow it from end to end with an implement that shall tear, cut deep and upturn worse than a literal plow. The palaces of political rulers, the mansions of commercial traffickers, the cathedrals and luxurious residences of religious leaders, and the lofty walls and fortresses of the “strong-arm squad” shall become heaps of ruin, as surely as such happened to Jerusalem, typifying “Christendom”. (2 Ki. 25: 8-10; Mic. 1:6) The mountain or high place upon which religion has builded her gawdy organization or “house” shall be cleared and swept clean of that devilish system. The high and respected place of the temple of “organized religion”, where it has ruled as the spiritual superpower over all nations of the world, shall be exposed as a false, unwarranted and self-assumed position. At Armageddon it shall be blasted first, and the superstructure thereon with its religious ranks and honors and official positions and high-sounding titles and pagan rituals and ceremonies and false doctrines and traditions shall be razed. The whole place will be made “like mounds in a jungle” (Rotherham), like “forest-covered high-places”. (Leeser) During the seventy years’ desolation of ancient Jerusalem the temple mountain boasted of no house of religion, but was bare, waste, and uninhabited and became overgrown with a jungle or thick forest. So shall it be with “Christendom” for ever.
” The proclamation of that hard prophecy by Micah shocked the religious susceptibilities of the judges taking reward and the priests that preached for hire and the prophets that divined for self-gain. It shook the credulity of the people in their religious outfit. It condemned the operators thereof in the eyes of the public they were deceiving. As one representative of a corporation broadcasting religious programs free over its network said recently: “I do not believe it is legitimate to hold the things that are dear to other people, things that they care about, things that men cherish in their hearts, up to public ridicule.” (See booklet Truth—Shall It Be Suppressed? pages 14,19.) Such operators and defenders of religion would have God’s truth silenced and the proclaimers thereof barred from all means of publication. What care such that “Christendom” is threatened with early and sudden destruction and the lives of the general public are in gravest danger? Let such consider this: Since God does not regard the things that are dear to and cherished by the religionists, but will destroy the same at Armageddon, then Jehovah’s servants are committing nothing illegitimate or indecent in warning mankind that God will soon destroy such religious things, and showing the people why and wherefore. That is the greatest service to the public. It is of the greatest necessity and interest to them, and, with Armageddon so near, the time was never more convenient and fitting.
20	The prophet Jeremiah later proclaimed the identical message that Micah did, to wit, during the reign of Jehoiakim, which wicked king turned away from Jehovah’s law and commandments to religion or demonism. That was a few years before the destruction of Jerusalem and its temple. Today Jehovah’s witnesses boldly declare the like message to “Christendom”, and the outcome of such faithful testimony declared is foreshadowed by what happened to Jeremiah, and which is proved by the experiences of Jehovah’s witnesses these last few years. “Now it came to pass, when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking all that the Lord had commanded him to speak unto all the people, that the priests, and the prophets, and all the people, took him, saying, Thou shalt surely die. Why hast thou prophesied in the name of the Lord, saying, This house [dear to and cherished in our hearts] shall be like Shiloh, and this city shall be desolate without an inhabitant? And all the people were gathered against Jeremiah in the house of the Lord.”
21	The religionists, to procure Jeremiah’s death, called his message seditious, disturbing to unity and against the government. Jehovah’s witness there warned them that they would bring innocent blood upon themselves and the nation if they killed him, and God would hold them responsible. Then certain
88
^He WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
men, seeing through the patriotic bluster of the clergy and not yielding to the tremendous religious pressure put upon them, stood out against the clergy and gave wise counsel. “Then rose up certain of the elders of the land, and spake to all the assembly of the people, saying, Micah the Morasthite prophesied in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, and spake to all the people of Judah, saying, Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Zion shall be plowed like a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the high places of a forest. Did Hezekiah king of Judah and all Judah put him at all to death? did he not fear the Lord, and besought the Lord, and the Lord repented him of the evil which he had pronounced against them? Thus might we procure great evil against our souls.” (Jer. 26:8-19) Jehovah delivered Jeremiah, thereby illustrating his promise to protect and deliver his faithful who speak as he commands them to do. Let the religionists and the rulers be warned: by their mistreatment and attempted destruction of Jehovah’s witnesses they procure the evil of Armageddon against their souls and at the hands of Him who can destroy both body and soul in Gehenna.—Matt. 10: 28.
CAPITAL ORGANIZATION
22	In the present conflict for world domination the controlling powers of “the king of the north” and of the rival “king of the south” seek to gain the victory and establish themselves as the capital organization over the new-world federation of nations. According to the prophecies, neither shall win complete victory, and organized religion will deal with both “kings”, recognizing both as the “higher powers”, and will herself seek to dominate them both as a super-national spiritual government. Religion and rulers will allow no place for Jehovah’s message nor for his Theocracy. Such vain imaginations and wicked devices shall not stand. Their final end shall be at God’s appointed time, at Armageddon. They are now in their last days, and Jehovah establishes his capital organization in power and glory, and it stands for ever.
23	Concerning this Jehovah inspired his prophet to say: “But in the last days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be established in the top of the mountains, and it shall be exalted above the hills; and people shall flow unto it.” (Mic. 4:1) The “time of the end” began in A.D. 1914, when the “times of the Gentiles [the nations]” expired and Jehovah enthroned Christ Jesus as his King of The Theocracy and sent him forth to rule in the midst of all enemies of The Theocracy. That Government is not made with human hands or votes. It is the Stone, which Daniel saw in vision, “cut out” of Jehovah’s universal organization and which even now moves irresistibly on its way to smite the entire
Devil’s organization, visible and invisible, including “Christendom”, and to crush it out of existence.— Dan. 2:34-45.
24	That Government is called “Mount Zion” and is the capital part of Jehovah’s universal organization. It is His royal family of sons, of which Christ Jesus is the Head. It is composed of 144,000 and One members, the One being the Head and the 144,000 being the members of “his body”. He is both the Foundation and also the Chief Corner Stone of “the temple of the living God”, of which temple they are all “living stones” conformed to His image and all built upon him as their sure Foundation and also under him as their Headstone. (Heb. 3:6; Rev. 7:4-8; 14:1-3; 1 Cor. 3:11,16,17; 1 Pet. 2:4-10; 2 Cor. 6:16) They together constitute a “kingdom of priests” and an “holy nation”, and hence are likened to a glorious temple adorning a mountaintop, as the prophetic temple at Jerusalem was builded by King Solomon on top of Mount Moriah, which temple mountain was thereafter called Zion. It is Jehovah’s official royal residence.—Ex. 19:6; Pss. 78:67-69; 87:2.
25	Necessarily Micah’s prophecy concerning the last days and the temple or “house of Jehovah” begins its fulfillment by the acts of God, particularly when he sent Christ Jesus to the temple for judgment, in 1918. Christ Jesus, the Greater Solomon, thereupon proceeded to build the spiritual or heavenly temple, first by resurrecting the body members that slept in death and then bringing the faithful and approved remnant of body members yet on earth in the flesh into unity with himself at the temple, there setting them to work at temple service as witnesses of Jehovah.
25	In 1918 Jehovah, figuratively speaking, laid Christ Jesus his King as the “precious corner stone” in Zion, and defiantly says to all the many antichrists opposing The Theocracy: “Yet have I set my king upon iny holy hill of Zion.” (Ps. 2:6) The “war in heaven” began at Christ’s enthronement in 1914, and in that war Satan and his demon hosts were defeated and cast out of heaven and down to the earth and put under Christ’s feet, debased to the position of a footstool. (Ps. 110:1, 2) At Armageddon he and all his hosts, demonic and human, shall be crushed out of existence under Christ’s heel. In fulfillment of Micah’s prophecy the royal “house of the Lord [Jehovah]” has been established as the head and capital over the universal organization of the Most High God, and hence far above the governments (mountains) of “Christendom”, which professed “Christian” governments arrogantly claim to govern the earth for and in the stead of Christ Jesus. Being under the demon rule which grabs for universal domination, the governments (mountains) of men
March 15,1942	SKe WATCHTOWER.	89
and which are overreached by such demons reject the announcement of the enthronement of Christ Jesus and that their “times of the nations”, or of their rule by sufferance of God, have run out. They reject the proclamation of the setting up of the Theocratic Government under Christ Jesus, and all nations hate and persecute Jehovah’s servants whom he commands to make the proclamation. By this course of action such professing “Christian” nations refuse to have as their Head and King the beautiful Stone cut out by the great Theocrat Jehovah, and thereby they prove themselves to be antichrist. Christ Jesus rules as Head and exalted King regardless, and his glory is not lessened. “The stone which the builders refused is become the head stone of the corner.”— Ps. 118:22.
27	The “hills” are the highest parts of the mountain, the peaks which dominate all the range. Under demon rule which challenges the universal domination of Jehovah, making universal domination the all-important issue confronting all creation, the “mountains” or governments of men now propose a higher government of their own making. Looking forward to the end of this war between the totalitarian “king of the north” and the anti-Nazi-Fascist “king of the south”, the world builders propose the establishment of a super-national government, fully protecting religion and under religion’s sponsorship and guidance. Says one self-conceited clergyman: “God desires us to build a federated world and to create a human race fit for future generations to be born into.” It was “the king of the south” that pushed the League of Nations in 1918-1920, and he now suggests a revival of such League of Nations to secure the expected “Peace and safety” and to guarantee the freedoms promised to the people. The Vatican-Nazi-Fascist-totalitarian combine, or “king of the north”, proposes a “new world order” and has already begun the nucleus of his “new League of Nations” on the European continent. All such super-governments are the “lulls” of the mountains of “Christendom”. Prophecy indicates that at the close of the conflict “the king of the north” and “the king of the south” will, under the political strategy of the Vatican, come to a compromise agreement and will set up a “new moral order”, a federated world under a super-government, pictured as the “scarlet-coloured beast” on the back of which there rides religion, the dominant part of which is the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. Today, in compliance with the sly scheme of that Hierarchy for world domination, the Catholic and Protestant and Jewish religious organizations hypocritically act out a “good neighbor” policy. Such religious federation may be expected to do at such future event as the Federation of Churches in America did in 1920, to wit, call the new political-religious world confeder
ation the political realization of the kingdom of the Messiah. So doing, they commit gross blasphemy and finally and completely reject Jehovah’s building of his Theocratic Government under Christ.
28	That proposed super-government will be the highest “hill” or peak of “Christendom”. That demonized human institution will be the final and complete expression of the antichristian “abomination of desolation”. It is opposed to the universal domination of The Theocracy. It assumes to stand in the “holy place” instead of the temple or royal family of Jehovah, His kingdom. (Dan. 11: 31; 12:11; Matt. 24:15) That 'desolating abomination’ can never boost itself to take the place and power of the high Theocracy of Jehovah’s anointed King. It shall be abased unto hell, and The Theocracy continues to be “exalted above the hills” for evermore.
22	“And peoples shall flow unto it.” (Am. Rev. Per.) These follow after God’s faithful remnant of spiritual Israelites who take the lead in the march to God’s kingdom. During the first world war the remnant were put in restraint by the enemies of the Kingdom. In 1919 Jehovah graciously delivered them from the imprisonment and bondage and they returned to his organization and its work. “And the ransomed [delivered ones] of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs, and everlasting joy upon their heads; they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.” (Isa. 35:10; 51:11) A great publicity campaign followed thereafter, to educate the peoples in the Bible truths concerning the Kingdom. In their ignorance due to religion or demonism the peoples are in perplexity and know not which way to turn, being kept in the dark concerning the real meaning of the Kingdom and its establishment. “This gospel of the kingdom” vigorously proclaimed by Jehovah’s witnesses since the World War shows them the only right way to Jehovah’s favor and protection and his Kingdom blessings in store for his “other sheep”.—Matt. 24: 7,14.
30	By now millions have heard the good news, and many thousands have joyfully accepted the message, turned their backs on religion, and turned their steps toward the glorious mountain of The Theocracy. Like a great river, made up of streams from all the nations and being continually enlarged as thousands more join the movement into the Kingdom, these “peoples” of good-will toward Jehovah and his Righteous Government flow unto it and openly and actively take their stand on His side. This the Devil, by his demonized rulers of “Christendom”, has viciously tried to prevent and to turn the flow of such peoples back, into the broad road leading to the “Dead sea” of destruction at Armageddon. This he has done by planting his totalitarian-religious organization in between The Theocratic Government and the great
90
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
“seas” of people alienated from God and under demon rule. Jehovah foretold this by his prophet, and warned that for such attempted interference with his “strange work” the demonized religious-totalitarian combine of “Christendom” shall meet a violent end at Armageddon: “And he shall plant the tabernacles of his palace between the seas [and] the glorious holy mountain; yet he shall come to his end, and none shall help him.” (Dan. 11: 45, Young's) The combined demon forces and rule cannot stop Jehovah’s “strange work” until done; and likewise they cannot halt the ingathering and flow of the peoples, the Lord’s “other sheep”, unto The Theocracy until all such are gathered into the “one fold” under Kingdom protection. Standing immovably on that side and there holding fast their integrity toward Jehovah God, they shall survive Armageddon and form the “great multitude” that He will use thereafter to fill the earth with a righteous offspring in joyous obedience to the divine mandate.—Gen. 1:28; 9:1, 7.
31	Micah’s vision of God’s “strange world’ in our days toward “men of good-will” continues: “And many nations shall come [(Am. Rev. Ver. and Rotherham) shall go], and say, Come [ye], and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths; for the law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.” (Mic. 4:2) Regardless of their nationality by birth the persons of good-will are given God’s gracious invitation. Those who shall form the “great multitude” now come out of ‘all nations, kindreds, people, and tongues’. Such were long ago foreshadowed by Rahab, Jael, Jonadab, Ebed-melech, and others of good-will, all of whom were of other nations than Israel. They shall form the nations who under The Theocratic Government shall glorify God on earth, and concerning whom it is written: “Rejoice, ye nations, with his people. And again, Praise the Lord, all ye nations; and let all the peoples praise him.” (Rom. 15:10,11, Am. Rev. Ver., margin) “Who shall not fear thee, 0 Lord, and glorify thy name? for thou only art holy: for all nations shall come and worship before thee; for thy judgments are made manifest.”—Rev. 15: 4.
32	The message of the Kingdom is not to be kept selfishly. Jehovah’s faithful “remnant” are commanded to go and preach it in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and, in turn, all of good-will who hear are commanded to let others hear: “And the Spirit [Christ Jesus] and the bride [including Jehovah’s remnant of witnesses on earth] say, Come. And let him that heareth say, Come. And let him that is athirst come: and whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely.” (Rev. 22:17) Micah’s prophecy foretells that such “shall go [to others; also
parents to their children] and say, Come ye, and let us [together] go up to the mountain of Jehovah”. (Am. Rev. Ver.) This shows that the Lord now extends to them a part in his “strange work” of witnessing to The Theocracy, and today these “other sheep” in their increasing thousands take up the joyful burden of the Lord’s work alongside of and in unity with the faithful remnant of spiritual Israel.
33	These “other sheep” of the Lord are not called to go to heaven. They do not go to heaven and never shall go up there. Their everlasting inheritance shall be on the cleansed and perfected earth. They hear the remnant boldly proclaiming that God’s kingdom was set up at his enthronement of his King in 1914 and that The Theocracy is here, to destroy the wicked and to bless the obedient and faithful. Hence they go up to that “mountain of Jehovah”, to wit, “mount Zion,” and take their stand publicly and outspokenly on the side of the great Theocrat and his everlasting Government of peace and righteousness. Their eyes have been opened to see the antichristian “abomination of desolation” presumptuously standing in the “holy place”, and they unhesitatingly obey Jesus’ command to forsake “Christendom” and her religion and to flee to the “mountains”, Jehovah God and Christ Jesus, The Theocracy. They make a full and irrevocable consecration to God by Christ Jesus and devote themselves undividedly to The Theocracy and its praise and service. They become publishers for the Lord and strive to increase the number of publishers of The Theocracy by informing others of good-will and inviting them to take a like course, to join the company of those going up to the “mountain of Jehovah”. The number “ten” applies to all the nations from which they come forth, and another prophet describes their action, in this phrase: “Thus saith the Lord of hosts, It shall yet come to pass, that there shall come people, and the inhabitants of many cities: and the inhabitants of one city shall go to another, saying, Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of hosts; I will go also. Yea, many people and strong nations shall come to seek the Lord of hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray before the Lord. Thus saith the Lord of hosts, In those days it shall come to pass, that ten men [all of good-will] shall take hold, out of all languages of the nations, even shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew [Christ Jesus, the great Judean, who leads in Jehovah’s praises], saying, We will go with you [feet members of Christ; the remnant]; for we have heard that God is with you.”—Zech. 8: 20-23.
34	They seek Jehovah’s “mountain” or Theocratic Government in order to worship him and serve him at his temple. They forsake religion, which is devil-ism or demonism, and join God’s remnant in the war
March 15,1942	THE WATCHTOWER.	91
of exposing religion as of the Devil and against Jehovah’s kingdom. Hence they say to those of a hearing ear: “Let us go up to the house of the God of Jacob.” The name “Jacob” applies antitypically to The Christ, Jesus the Head and his body members. The “God of Jacob” is Jehovah. The “other sheep” acknowledge: ‘Happy is he that hath the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in Jehovah his God.” (Ps. 146:5, A.R.V.) “Jehovah of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our refuge.” (Ps. 46:11, Am. Rev. Ver.) Such disdain the criticism and persecution, and associate themselves with Jehovah’s witnesses and shoulder a goodly portion of the witness work and responsibilities. In this they must maintain their integrity, by constancy and by faithfulness to their obligations and never permitting anything to entice and turn them away to the “rudiments” of the demonized dying world. The great High Priest of God brings these into the temple, where God’s face shines with favor and blessing upon them. “Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple: and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them.” (Rev. 7:15) The full-time service of the delightsome Theocracy is the dearest thing to their hearts, and those who during the day are obliged to do other work to provide things decent and required delight to go forth in His service at night and other times of the week and to use all possible of their waking hours in the direct service of The Theocracy.
S! The people of good-will toward God do not turn away Jehovah’s witnesses when they call at their doors, but are teachable. They listen to what the Kingdom publishers have to say, and then act thereon. In the light of the message they discern that their religious instructors have deceived them and held them in ignorance of the only true and living God, Jehovah, and now they learn that He and his Son Jesus are The Teachers, not the religionists nor any human creatures. They perceive that now Jehovah has only one organization, through which he dispenses his truth to man, and that the visible part of that organization is made up of his devoted witnesses under Christ Jesus and that the message which these bear is not man’s message, but that these “children of Zion” are taught of the Lord God Jehovah and by Christ Jesus and through his revealed Word, the Bible. (John 6:45; Isa. 54:13; 30:20) The enlightened persons of good-will turn from religion and to the great Teacher and seek more life-giving knowledge, saying confidently to one another: “And he will teach us of his ways.” Now, before it is too late, they turn out of demonized man’s ways, which lead down to destruction, and get onto the Lord’s ways, which are truth and light and righteousness and life.
” Presenting themselves in consecration to God
through faith in Christ Jesus and his ransom sacrifice they say: “And we will walk in his paths.” In this manner such meek or teachable ones heed Jehovah’s ordinance stated at Zephaniah 2:3: “Seek ye [1] Jehovah, all ye meek of the earth, that have kept his ordinances; seek [2] righteousness, seek [3] meekness: it may be ye will be hid in the day of Jehovah’s anger.” (Am. Rev. Per.) Only by following this course dare they hope to escape destruction and to survive Armageddon and thereafter form part of the “great multitude” that live and become children of The King, to forever serve and glorify Jehovah God on earth in company with the visible representatives of The Theocracy, the resurrected faithful men of old who shall be made “princes in all the earth”. (Ps. 45:16) The covenant of consecration that they make with God they must faithfully keep, to enjoy fulfillment of His promise (Ps. 25:10): “All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto such as keep his covenant and his testimonies.” His truth and testimonies concerning his purposes they must declare in unity with the remnant. So doing, they go over the ‘highway”, in the “way of holiness”, following after and with the remnant. (Isa. 35: 8-10) They walk upon the “highway” that the remnant under Christ Jesus have “cast up” and out of which they have gathered the stumblingstones of religion. —Isa. 62:10.
ST Why do they not follow the worldly slogan popular with the religionists, to wit, “All roads lead unto Rome [Vatican City],” and why do they take the way that is despised and persecuted by “Rome”, the headquarters of religion? The prophet answers: “For the law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.” Regardless of what the builders of the “new world order” claim for the “abomination of desolation”, which also they try to compel all men to worship in a regimented manner, that antiKingdom of God monstrosity is not the “higher powers” from which issue the supreme law and the word of true doctrine. Jehovah is the Supreme Power and the One Lawgiver, and Zion his capital organization is “The Higher Powers”. It is The Theocracy, the paternal government of Christ Jesus, the Everlasting Father to humankind that lives. From it issues the perfect law that shall forever govern the new world. Creatures on earth that would enjoy life everlasting may not ignore that divine law. In a conflict between the laws of “Caesar” and Jehovah’s law out of Zion there is only one choice for such. God's law is the higher and comes first; they must obey it without compromise. They dutifully obey all the laws of “Caesar” that are in harmony with righteousness and not in opposition to the law of Almighty God. His law takes hold on all the affairs of their life each day. (Ps. 119:10,11) Therefore they cannot follow
92
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
blindly in any course dictated by men in authority without reference to God’s law. For one in covenant with the great Lawgiver and Judge to break Jehovah’s law out of Zion, The Theocracy, means destruction.
“ Zion, the capital organization of the universe, is eternally Jehovah’s official residence by his spirit and power. He laid Christ Jesus as the Chief Corner Stone in Zion when Jehovah sent him to the temple, in 1918, and presented him as King of the new world to “Christendom”. Thus Jehovah “hath built up Zion”, and he appears in his glory, by the revelation of his Kingdom truth now, but by the visible exhibition of his glorious power in his “strange act” at Armageddon. (Ps. 102:16, Am. Rev. Ver.) Particularly from and after his presentation of his King on Zion Jehovah’s law has gone forth from his capital organization, Zion, the seat of the Lawgiver. To his covenant people begotten of his spirit his law out of Zion is: “Ye are my witnesses, saith Jehovah.” “This gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations.” “Proclaim . . . the day of vengeance of our God; to comfort all that mourn.” (Isa. 43:12; Matt. 24:14; Isa. 61:1, 2) To the religious, political, commercial ruling factors of the world his law has been fearlessly declared by his faithful witnesses since 1918: “Serve Jehovah with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish in the way, for his wrath will soon be kindled. Blessed are all they that take refuge in him.” (Ps. 2:10-12, Am. Rev. Ver.) The rulers, judges and clergy of the earth defy the law out of Zion and oppose The Theocratic Government and its proclamation. They shall miserably perish at the kindled wrath of the King at Armageddon. Jehovah’s faithful covenant people obey his law, even when demonized men mischievously frame laws to punish their obedience to God. The Lord’s “other sheep” learn and obey the divine law out of Zion, and serve with the remnant as witnesses to Jehovah and his Theocracy, and they take refuge in Christ Jesus, his Son and King.
38	Concerning that law out of Jehovah’s capital it is written: “The commandment is a lamp, and the law is light.” (Prov. 6:23) The King’s unchanging rule now applies: “If thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments.” (Matt. 19:17) Obedience to God’s law is the only way to life. The King on Zion showed to all the way of obedience, and he is “the
way, and the truth, and the life”. (John 14:6) He being God’s spokesman, “his name is called The Word of God.” (Rev. 19:13) He having come to the temple, it follows, as stated in the prophecy: “And the word of the Lord [Jehovah] from Jerusalem” shall go forth. Such is “the Holy Jerusalem”, which comes down from God out of heaven. Meaning The Christ, including Jesus the Head and all his body members, the apostle wrote: “But Jerusalem which is above . . . is the mother of us all.” (Gal. 4:26) It is “the city of the great King”. (Matt. 5:35) King David reigned in typical Jerusalem on earth; Christ Jesus, the Greater David, now reigns for evermore in the “holy Jerusalem”, which is heavenly and invisible to men. From Jehovah and through His King of the “holy Jerusalem” comes the word of the Lord, his message and doctrine to his servants on earth who fear him and keep his commandments. That word announces the doom of religion and traditions of men.
40	Jehovah feeds his people through his capital organization, of which Christ Jesus is the Head, and in that connection he uses the visible part of his organization. As the famished people had to come to Joseph the ruler of Egypt to get bread to live, so now those who seek life and comfort must come to Jehovah’s organization and to his Greater Joseph, who is “The Bread of Life”. “The word of the Lord abideth for ever” (1 Pet. 1:25, A.R.V.), and those desiring to live forever must feed thereon and throw religion to the dunghill. “For the word of the Lord is right.” (Ps. 33:4) The facts clearly establish that since the Lord’s coming to the temple, and particularly since 1922, the word of the Lord God Jehovah has gone forth from the heavenly Jerusalem. The wondrous truths of the Bible have been revealed, the prophecies have been made plain, and the doctrine of paramount importance has been made crystal clear, to wit, the Kingdom, The Theocracy, which shall settle the primary issue of universal domination wholly in Jehovah’s favor and in vindication of his name. Blessed are the remnant and all the meek ones of good-will who go up to the mountain of the Lord’s house and there feed upon his precious Word of life and light and who then keep his law by dispensing that Word abroad to feed his “other sheep”!
41	What shall follow? The prophecy yet to be considered makes this plain, for our further admonition and comfort.
(To be continued)
Behold, the eye of Jehovah is upon them that fear him, upon them that hope in his lovingkindness; to deliver their soul from death, and to keep them alive tn famine. Our soul hath waited for Jehovah: he is our help and our shield. For our heart shall rejoice tn him, because we have trusted in his holy name. Let thy loving-kindness, 0 Jehovah, be upon us, according as we have hoped in thee.—Psalm 33:18-22,
"IMAGE OF THE BEAST”
IN AN address before the Legislative body of America last December 26 a visiting statesman of the world said: “If we had kept together after the last war, if we had taken common measures for our safety, this renewal of the curse [the catastrophe of world war] need never have fallen upon us. . . . In the days to come the British and American people will for their own safety and for the good of all walk together in majesty, in justice and in peace.” Newspaper commentators were quite unanimous that this had reference to the League of Nations, of which there are still over forty members, and which League God's prophetic word foretold.
It has long been Britain’s proud boast that she rules the waves and that the sun never goes down on her domains and that she always takes the part of humanity. The American government makes the same boast concerning her liberality. British diplomacy is the last word in skill; America has tried to copy it. At Revelation 13:11, concerning the two-horned creature symbolizing the modern dual worldpower, the prophecy reads: “And he had two horns like a lamb, and he spake as a dragon.” At Ezekiel 29: 3 the great Dragon is described as saying of the peoples among which he operates: “My river is mine own, and I have made it for myself.” So, too, the Monroe Doctrine, of 1823, says, ‘Hands off America,’ and which speech is therefore by the two-horned creature or dual world-power and is like unto the speech of the Dragon. Revelation 13:1, 2 describes the “beast” with seven heads that came up out of the sea and representing the visible organization of the world with seven successive world powers holding the world dominance each after the other. In the fight referred to in verse 3 of the prophecy Britain and America, the symbolic two-horned beast, really constitute the power that wounded the sixth or German-controlled head of the ‘sea-beast’ in the world war of 1914-1918 and then afterwards healed its wound.
Further referring to the two-horned beast, Revelation 13:12 says: “And all the authority of the first beast he executes in his presence, and makes the earth and those who dwell in it to worship the first beast, whose mortal wound was healed.” [Emphatic Dwglott translation) The two-horned beast receives its authority from the same source, to wit, “the god of this world.” (2 Cor. 4:4) It becomes the dominant power because it is the seventh head or seventh world power of the age-old world organization; and it really takes first place, while the other nations play second fiddle. Although the sea-beast and the two-horned beast fought amongst themselves for world domination (like the hypocritical religious clergy, which form a supernational, spiritual part of the symbolic beast), they are united in one thing, to wit: they are against the Theocratic Government of Jehovah God by his Anointed King, Christ Jesus. (Ps. 2: 2, 3) Concerning the two world-powers fighting each other for world domination, namely, “the king of the north” and “the king of the south”, Daniel 11: 27 says: “They shall speak lies at one table [of the god of this world],” and feed upon the same provender. (1 Cor. 10: 21) They ignore God’s Word concerning his kingdom and all evidence of the setting up of the same. Imbued with their imperialistic idea, they go on to carry out Satan’s purpose in preparing for his final stand to rule the earth, at the battle of Armageddon.
Revelation 13 :13 states that the two-horned beast ‘performs great wonders and makes fire come down from heaven in the sight of men’. This “fire” comes down, not from Jehovah’s heaven, but from the exalted place of the “god of this world” in his organization. The evident purpose of this work of his agents is to deceive and mislead the people. It shows that the two-horned beast is a favored instrument in his hands, especially equipped to carry out his designs. Among these signs, or “wonders”, done and performed by the two-horned beast may be mentioned, to wit: the establishment by it of the greatest empire of earth, ruling both the land and the sea; the gaining of supremacy in the winning of the World War; the promoting of great religious missionary movements; the publishing and distribution of millions of Bibles, engineered by the clergy, who themselves do not believe the Bible, but which is done to deceive the people into understanding that these nations are Christian ; the capture and controlling of the banking power of the world; the capturing of the “holy city” of Jerusalem in 1917; the taking of the lead in the peace treaties of the world; the supplying of the chief portion of the money for the healing of the wounded head of the ‘sea-beast’ till the rise of Hitler; the posing as the benefactors of mankind; and their clergy turning the people away from Jehovah God and from the Bible, and causing all that dwell upon the earth to worship the anti-Theocracy organization.
Also: “He exerciseth all the power of the first beast before him, and causeth the earth and them which dwell therein to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was healed.” (Verse 12) This is another wonder like fire coming down from the heaven of the “prince of this world”. It was the two-horned beast that lined up the clergy contingent, especially to give ‘heavenly’ approval to its fight for world domination. This fire from such heaven was not for the purpose of destroying “the earth”, but to indicate that he has supernatural power to perform great things through this two-horned instrument; also for the purpose of showing that the two-horned beast has superior power to carry on destructive work, and that all the world should take note thereof and deport themselves accordingly. This program carried out did deceive the peoples of earth, and such deceptive policy is in keeping with the offspring of Satan in opposition to Jehovah’s Theocracy under Christ.
The symbolic ‘sea-beast’ includes all the world powers, but in this particular picture is represented by Germany, as the head which was wounded, and which was compelled to take a grandstand seat and watch the performance of the two-horned beast doing its tricks and performing its great wonders. The tw’o-horned beast, having the attention of all the rulers of the earth drawn to it, is represented, at Revelation 13:14, as “saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they should make an image to the beast, which had the wound by a sword, and did live”. This is that scabeast one of the heads of which had received the wound and had recovered. Rotherham renders this text: “They should make an image unto the wild-beast.”
This message or request the two-horned beast addressed to the rulers of its own empire, as well as all the other rulers of the earth. This image should be made “unto the wild-beast”, that is to say, in the likeness of the sca-bcast
93
94
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
and for the benefit of the entire world organization. The “image” which resulted was a modernization of the ancient universal-empire system, in a multilateral Peace Pact, for the preservation of the imperial rule of the “god of this world”, and for its benefit to avoid further strife between component parts of his organization, and to draw them into a compact and unite them in war against Jehovah’s Theocratic Government. This is a conspiracy against God’s organization, and is an abomination unto Him, “the abomination of desolation.” (Matt. 24:15) The facts conclusively prove that the League of Nations is that “image of the beast”. It is a formation of a thing for the benefit of the anti-Theocratic organization of “the prince of the demons”.
The proof is also overwhelming that the League of Nations compact originated with British officers and that the famous “fourteen points” and the League compact itself were drafted by British officers. But the honor of announcing the same was given to the then president of the United States. He was made the mouthpiece or spokesman for the two-horned, dual world-power, and his speech was smooth and fair and calculated to turn men away from The Theocracy.
When the American president spoke to the nations of the world concerning the League a noted Englishman said of him: “It was like the voice of God talking over our heads to the continent and to the nations of the world.” When this same great president reached Paris, there, it is written of him, ‘in Paris Wilson “received an ovation surpassing anything witnessed in France since the days of Napoleon. . . . He visited Rome, where he was counted as a sort of messiah, come to save Europe from the terrors of future wars.” In London he was made the occasion of a demonstration similar to that given in Paris.’—See The Encyclopedia Americana, under “Wilson”.
The League of Nations compact finally included all the relics or remnants of the original sea-beast having seven heads (world powers). The powers signatory to the compact embraced most of the nations of the earth. Egypt, the first world power of antiquity (now represented in Britain), and Mesopotamia, under the kingdom of Iraq (the site of Assyria, the second world power, and of Babylon, the third world power), are included in the League of Nations. Iran (Persia) and Greece, the fourth and fifth world powers, and the Anglo-American Empire, are included, and Italy (Rome, the sixth world power) was included until Mussolini announced Italy’s withdrawal December 11, 1937. It is important here to note that one of the divisions of the League is “The Permanent Court of International Justice”, at The Hague. (The Encyclopedia Americana, Vol. 17, page 177) The League of Nations was made a part of the Peace Treaty of Versailles. The president of the United States urged its adoption by the United States Senate. Opposition arose against him there, based “on substantially imperialistic grounds”. Big Business, many politicians, and practically all the clergy of America joined a like group of British ruling powers to put the League compact through. The United States Senate refused to confirm the compact and negotiated a separate treaty with the Teutonic powers. But the fight to put America into the League did not at all stop there.
The American Federation of Churches pronounced the League the “political expression of God’s kingdom on earth”; and another organization, called “League of Nations, Inc.”, sent out a circular letter urging America’s entry and asking: “In a world so dark as this, why blow out the only light there is!” The president of the United States succeeding the war president made a desperate effort to induce the ratification of the World Court, which is a part of the League of Nations compact. In May, 1923, the clergy, embracing 125,000 congregations in America, began a campaign to support the president’s proposal that the United States enter the “Permanent Court of International Justice” of the League of Nations. The Federal Council of Churches pushed this campaign and used all their power upon the politicians to bring about the desired result. They claimed to represent twenty million persons. Notwithstanding the efforts of some of her people to keep the United States out, the nation is in the League of Nations, in effect.
In 1928 the secretary of state of the United States, acting as spokesman, presented at the conference of nations at Paris the treaty known as “The General Pact for the Renunciation of War”, or the Kellogg-Briand pact. It was signed by fourteen powers all of which were members of the League of Nations, and was ratified by the United States Senate. An American newspaper said thereon : “At last the United States has joined the family of nations. We are no longer an isolated people. We are not afraid of the ghost of entangling alliances. We are ready to assume the obligation of our power and good fortune.”—Age-Herald (Birmingham, Ala.).
Another newspaper said: “The League opens the way for the United States to assume seat in World Court.” Germany’s then foreign minister, according to the press, said that “the adhesion by the United States to the Court was a logical sequel to the Kellogg Pact, that it would increase the tribunal’s prestige and greatly advance the cause of arbitration as opposed to war”. The New York Evening World, of March 8, 1929, said, “A sequel to the Kellogg Pact was seen by many in the League of Nations today when the Council approved a motion by Foreign Minister Briand of France, that a proposed treaty whereby financial assistance would be given to countries who are victims of aggression will be submitted to non-members of the League. . . . The comment in Geneva is that the United States is interested in observance of the Kellogg Pact and that if any signatory resorted to war in violation of its provisions American sympathies would lean towards an economic blockade of the aggressor and perhaps to participation in financial assistance to the victim or threatened victim.”
The Journal De Geneve, of Switzerland, which voices the sentiment of the League, thereafter said: “The League can talk with the United States in the event of war and say, 'The Kellogg Pact has been violated What are your intentions!’ Henceforth the aggressor at least will encounter the passive though none the less terrible reprobation of the United States.” The facts therefore show that the peace treaty known as “The General Pact for the Renunciation of War” was a part of the League of Nations and an indirect way, therefore a deceptive way, for the United States to get fully into the League, where she now is. A few years ago the United States joined the International Labor Or
March 15,1942
SEe WATCHTOWER.
ganization (I.L.O.) of the League which since the war is operating from its new working center in Montreal, Canada. In November of 1941 the world conference of the League’s I.L.O. was held in Columbia University in New York City, the United States secretary of labor attending.
Revelation 13:15 tells that the two-horned beast “had power to give life [ (Greek) pneuma; spirit or breath] unto the image of the beast, that the image of the beast should both speak, and cause that as many as would not worship [honor] the image of the beast should be killed”. In other words, the “image” is a kind of dummy that requires a ventriloquist to speak for it, and the two-horned beast acts in the capacity of a ventriloquist to make it speak, and when it speaks it apparently utters a sound that emanates from its promoter, the two-horned beast.
Image-making for the purpose of worship is utterly contrary to the law of God, as declared at Exodus 20:4, 5 and Romans 1:23. The religious clergy rooters for the League of Nations are most reprehensible in this respect, because they claim to represent God and yet they are openly breaking God’s law. Notwithstanding this, the clergy and their allies bend their efforts to compel the people to give their honor to and put their reliance upon, and therefore give their worship to, the “image”. According to the compact the violator of the League pledge “is automatically in a state of outlawry” with the nations which have bound themselves to sever economic relations with the defaulting League member. This is the same effect as that of the Paris Peace Pact. Thus it is seen that the “god of this world” has prepared a means, by threatening “death”, to keep the nations in line; but the actual application of this rule did not work out that way, as is evident from the course of the nations since 1931, particularly when Japan invaded Manchuria. The whole arrangement of the League of Nations or “image of the beast” is in opposition to the Lord’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, and is blasphemous. The Lord God, as represented by his Judge and King Christ Jesus, came to the temple in 1918, and here the words of Jehovah God are appropriate: “What profiteth the graven image, that the maker thereof hath graven it; the molten image, and a teacher of lies, that the maker of his work trusteth therein, to make dumb idols? Woe unto him that saith to the wood [image], Awake; to the dumb stone [image], Arise, it shall teach! Behold, it is laid over with gold and silver, and there is no breath at all in the midst of it. But the Lord is in his holy temple: let all the earth keep silence before him.”—Hab. 2 :18-20.
95
Further concerning the two-horned beast Revelation 13:16, 17 reads: “And he causeth all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads: and that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name.” This denotes regimentation of the people. Also according to the League compact every nation that would not conform to the world-combine arrangement should be boycotted in its commerce and economic sanctions be applied; that was the open threat. Liberty-lovers shudder at the possibility of all the nations of earth turning totalitarian.
The League of Nations, hailed as “the political expression on earth of God’s kingdom”, was brought forth as a substitute for Jehovah’s kingdom. The Papacy tried to ride on it but failed to get on the back thereof. The Papacy thereafter said little about or for that League of Nations. Italy and Japan were in the League from the beginning. Austria got into it in December, 1920, and Germany entered in 1926. The League of Nations served as a temporary substitute for The Theocracy until the chief of demons and his associates brought forth and placed the more abominable thing where it has no right to be. In Germany the Nazi party, with the full sanction, approval and co-operation of the Papacy, planned their own League, and to that end Catholic Hitler assumed the office of dictator, concluded his concordat with the pope in 1933, and withdrew from the Disarmament Conference and the League of Nations. Thereafter all the members of the so-called “Axis powers” withdrew from the League.
“Catholic Action” worked with the totalitarian rulers, particularly to make Hitler the spearhead of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy in the effort to overthrow democracies and to re-establish the “Holy Roman Empire”. The purpose of the religious-totalitarian combine is to carry out the wicked desire of the “Axis powers”, particularly the Catholic organization, in destroying the republics and to bring such countries into the combine. This done, the religious dictatorial power attempts to form a “new League of Nations” and to bring all the conquered territory into that League. November 20, 1940, a formal alliance was signed between the Axis powers and Japan and Hungary, at Vienna, and the construction of the “new League of Nations”, the rule of earth by dictators, proceeded. A few days thereafter Rumania joined. No European country may divorce itself therefrom. November 24, 1940, the pope prayed for such “new order”.
(Continued from page 82)
celebrate the Memorial, their companions the “other sheep” being present as observers. If there is no competent person present to deliver a brief discourse immediately before the partaking of the emblems, that short article appearing m the March 1, 1942, issue of The Watchtower should be read before those assembled prior to partaking. Since the breaking of the bread and drinking of the wine both picture the death of Jesus, it follows that both emblems should be served together at partaking, and not separately. The emblems should be unleavened bread and real red wine. Jesus and his apostles used real red wine in symbol of his blood, and the anointed remnant should follow their lead. A report of the celebration should be made to the Society as instructed in the Informant. In preparation therefor the article “Memorial” suggested above will be studied with profit.
1942 YEARBOOK OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
This new Yearbook presents the president’s report on the work throughout the world this past year, showing the greatest year’s work yet despite persecution and war. It further includes the yeartext and comment, and also a text for each day of the year and a pointed comment thereon. The edition of the Yearbook is always limited, hence a contribution of 50c a copy is asked. It will be mailed to you postpaid on receipt of your order with remittance to cover.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of April 19: “Micah” (Part 5),
U 1-21 inclusive, The Watchtower March 15, 1942.
Week of April 26: “Micah” (Part 5), U 22-41 inclusive, The Watchtower March 15, 1942.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
AN IRISH-INDIAN PIONEERS IN FLAGSTAFF, NEW MEXICO
“On my way to a back-call, I passed within a block and a half of the courthouse. One of the deputies picked me up. He said: ‘We have awfully embarrassing things to do sometimes, but we have to do them. I am not placing you under arrest, but I want you to go with me to headquarters for an investigation.’ There he asked me what it was all about. I told him a recording here would explain, and proceeded to play ‘Children’ and the reverse side on ‘Integrity’. Some seemed to enjoy the discs. The man who picked me up left after hearing the records. An American Legionnaire asked if the Nazi flag meant as much to me as the American flag, and I told him it did not; the American flag stands for liberty and justice, and the Nazi flag just the opposite. I was further asked: ‘Is it a fact that you carry those records to cover up your foreign brogue and the fact that you can’t speak English?’ (Some of my ancestors met the Mayflower of the Pilgrim fathers.) Several citizens were called on the phone; but nothing came of it. One deputy said: ‘We had you up here last week; how come you drifted back?’ I told him we had never left town. The deputy told us the county attorney had told him to tell me to get my partner and leave town. He was informed that that was impossible. Told I could go, I proceeded to a back-call, rejoicing because the Lord had made it possible to do so. Passing a house on which I had called a couple of days before, a lady called to me: ‘Hey, Mister! Have you got those magazines you had the other day?’ I replied ‘Yes’, and introduced the phonograph recording. She contributed for the book Children, and said: ‘I read that folder you left in the door, and surely did enjoy it. I am awfully sorry I treated you the way I did.’ She was informed that Jehovah’s witnesses understand the reason for the people’s being misinformed and that it hadn’t discouraged me one bit.”
SPECIAL PUBLISHERS IN AN ILLINOIS TOWN
“We decided to work the courthouse first. This town has a population of 8,200 and is very religious and superstitious. It boasts of a religious college, the largest Liberal Arts in Illinois, which is a branch of the Moody Bible Institute, turning out ministers for thirteen different brands of religion. Jehovah’s witnesses have previously been arrested here and were never accepted very well. Bill started on the top floor, while Bunt and I started on the bottom floor. We had worked only four offices when approached by two deputy sheriffs and asked to come to the sheriff’s office for questioning. What were we doing in the courthouse? I told him we were preaching the gospel and ‘hunting’ for the •other sheep’. He said, ‘I must be a goat then.’ I told him I didn’t think so, and I bet he didn’t hate me, and I believed he might be a sheep. I then handed him the Bulletin from Washington, D.C., ‘Law-abiding,’ and my Testimony card. He read them over carefully, then said that if we had asked him he would have let us finish. I told him we could not ask for permission. One of the deputies took a book Government from my ease and asked the price. I told him the sheep contributed twenty-five cents, and when they were too poor we gave it to them. So he took the book and I have a back-call on him. While the sheriff questioned us Bill finished the other floors. One of the college girls wrote a Chicago unit of Jehovah’s witnesses for information regard
ing our work. The letter was handed to Bill; so he back-called on her twice. In working the territory with the books I had to call at this home where she roomed. The lady of the house, an elderly lady, invited me in. I put the phonograph to work on ‘Children’. When through I knelt down to shut it off and heard a man’s voice behind me saying something. I began to demonstrate the book Children, showing her how the preachers had Jesus killed. The voice from behind me spoke: ‘Is this the man you called me up about ?’ The lady said ‘Yes’. ‘Did he try to sell you that book?’ ‘Not yet.’ ‘These are the people we have arrested several times; the people of Wheaton don’t want them, so any kind of charge you make I’ll arrest him. Is that all he’s done, play that record?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘Well, I guess he has that right. Do you want that man to visit your house anymore?’ ‘No, I don’t want those people around here.’ ‘Well, tack a sign up “No Trespassing”, then you’ve got them. Why don't you come to us and get a permit: we’ve arrested you people time and again.’ I replied that the court agreed we were right in doing this work, and our work is upheld by the Supreme Court. ‘Oh, the Supreme Court,’ he sneered. Then he opened the door, and I shook the dust off my feet.”
IN A BLACK-OUT ON THE PACIFIC COAST
“I was playing a series for a young lady with several small children, expecting another lady soon, when the siren blew for the black-out. The children upstairs began to cry, and she became quite panic-stricken. So we went upstairs, brought all the children down, and lined them up on the davenport. Thea, after getting the Mrs. comfortably seated by the stove with the youngest child in her lap, we started the phonograph. As Judge Rutherford’s calm voice began to speak, the children stopped whimpering and all was silence until the last record was played, all still being in absolute darkness, as the houses here are not yet equipped for black-outs. Then the woman said, ‘I’m never going to be afraid again. I am going to just trust Jehovah to protect me and my children. I knew there was no protection from men, but now I know where real protection is.’ Until the houses here are equipped we will probably have to play the series in the dark, but it is simple if one lines the records up in order, then put on No. 1 record; when that is finished drop No. 2 right on over No. 1; then turn the two over- together, which gives you No. 3 on top; then remove the top record, and you have No. 4. One can go right through the lecture series this way without a hitch.”
IN THE “LONE STAR STATE”
“During witness sen-ice with magazines on sidewalks of San Angelo Saturday afternoon a tall, elderly man approached and asked for a certain booklet. He stated he had just been talking to a preacher who was an acquaintance, when another preacher came along and said to the first preacher: ‘Look! see those Jehovah’s witnesses again on the streets. They should be run out of the city!’ the preacher evidently thinking the other two would agree with him. Instead, this tall, elderly man began to state some facts, whereupon the preacher quickly beat it. An observing person remarked: ‘This must be the Lord’s work, because it continues to go on even against vicious opposition and persecution.’ ”
96
t
t
UV,
L4~Yj




They shall know that I am Jehovah’
•Ezekiel 35:15.
Vol. LXIII Semimonthly No. 7

APRIL 1, 1942
CONTENTS


Micah (Part 6) ................
Peace and Security___________
Decision ....................
Assembly......................
"Flock-Tower” ...............
The Name to Be Honored ........
Acknowledgment ..................
Steadfastness__________________
Field Experiences..............
“Children of the King”
Testimony Period __________
“Watchtower” Studies __________
“Hope” ........................
Use Renewal Subscription Blank
r11;
•J
99
102
103
105
107
108
111
111
112

%
98
98
98
98
3Ee WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street -	» Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
N. H. Knorr, President_________W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.'* - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam's wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION Is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty’ and privilege It Is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed In the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah's kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
HIS Journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilt
It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King, It Is not dogmatic, but Invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian_________________40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian 7 Beresford Road, Strathfleld, N. S. W., AustraUa
South African Boaton House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting Lt. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers.- Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label nlthln one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. T., under the Act of II arch 3, 1879.
“CHILDREN OF THE KING” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The spring month of April is a favorable time for the “Children of The King” Testimony Period, and which is therefore a world-wide period of united action by those advertising the King and the Kingdom. In all the earth not only those of the anointed remnant, but also all those hoping to become the earthly “children of the King”, want to take part. If any such want references to companies organized for this testimony let them without delay write the office in their respective countries. April being the close of the three-month Watchtower Campaign, the servants and children of the King will continue offering the special combination, namely, a year’s Wulciitoircr subscription, together with the premium of the book Children and the now released new booklet Hope, for the regular subscription rate of $1.00 in America, and correspondingly in the other lands. Let this be your best month of the campaign. and at the end thereof you will with joy turn in your report of activities and the fruits thereof.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of May 3: “Micah” (Part 6), fl 1-19 inclusive, The Watchtower April 1, 1942.
Week of May 10: “Micah” (Part 6),
fl 20-38 inclusive, The Watchtower April 1, 1942.
“HOPE”
With pleasure the Society announces publication of a new booklet, Hope—for the Dead—for the Survivors—in a Righteous World. The theme itself impresses one that the booklet meets a very present need, when millions of hearts need to be infused with new hope both for the living and for the newly dead; and the contents, in an up-to-date setting, will delight you. It is a 64-page booklet, self-covered, but having a very engaging cover design. Date of its release for general circulation in the field is announced elsewhere, but you will first desire to read and enjoy it yourself and thereby know how best to present and use it in ‘comforting all that mourn’. You may obtain your personal copy now, contributing 5e therefor.
USE RENEWAL SUBSCRIPTION BLANK
The blank sent you one month before expiration of your Watchtower subscription should be filled out and returned to the Brooklyn office or to the Branch office in the country where you reside. Servants in the companies, and individuals, when sending in renewals for The Watchtower, should always use these blanks. By filling in these renewal blanks you are assured of the continuation of your Watchtower from the time of expiration, and without delay. It will also be a great help if you sign your name uniformly, and note any recent change of address, on the renewal shp.
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
No. LXIII
April 1, 1942
No. 7
MICAH
PART «
"For Jehovah is our judge, Jehovah is our lawgiver, Jehovah is our king; he will save us."—Isa. 33:22, Am. Rev. Ver.
TEHOVAH is the final Judge, to whom all creatures I and all organizations in the universe must render J account for their conduct. He is the Supreme Power, excelling all. “He is excellent in power, and in judgment, and in plenty of justice.” (Job 37:23) “God hath spoken once; twice have I heard this, that power belongeth unto God.” (Ps. 62:11) His faithful and devoted Son he has exalted to be next to Himself, and to him He has delegated all power in heaven and earth, to act as his Deputy Judge in the judging of all the nations of earth and to execute the judicial decisions in righteousness. “For the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son; and hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man.” (John 5:22,27) Hence Jehovah and his Son Christ Jesus are the true and only “Higher Powers”. All souls that are wise and lovers of life and righteousness will be subject to and will obey such “Higher Powers” rather than any other existing power in opposition.
2 Jehovah, by his appointed Judge of power, judges individuals and organizations. Jehovah makes the decision as to which organization shall be exalted to the head of His universal organization, and also as to which organization shall be abased unto hell or destruction. Zion is Jehovah’s organization of integrity, of which Christ Jesus is the Chief One or Head and of which organization all other members must follow in his footsteps and must like him maintain their integrity toward God even unto the death. It is a tried and faithful organization, and inseparably devoted to “holiness unto Jehovah”. Therefore the Supreme Judge, Jehovah, promotes Zion to be the capital organization of his universe, “angels and authorities and powers being made subject” thereunto. (1 Pet. 3:22) On the other hand, Jehovah declares his purpose to shortly level to the dust the unfaithful enemy organization of the demons under Satan. “For promotion cometh neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the south: but God is the judge; he putteth down one, and setteth
up another.” (Ps. 75:6,7) Jehovah makes Zion his official residence. Hence the prophecy is fulfilled that now “the law shall go forth of Zion, and the word [of truth] of the Lord from Jerusalem”. (Mic. 4:2) This sending forth of the law and word of the Lord God as set out in the Bible has been true since the coming of Jehovah’s Judge to the temple in 1918 for judgment. Now the people of good-will toward God and his capital organization are attending unto that law and word declared by His witnesses on earth. Thereby the Lord God is teaching them of his ways and enabling them to walk in his paths, which lead unto life everlasting in the paradise on earth.
8 By the light of the truth proclaimed such persons see that Jehovah has placed his Judge upon the royal throne and has exalted his capital organization Zion far above the “mountains”, or governments, of Satan’s visible organization under the shadow of which the people have suffered and mourned. Soon all peoples who continue under demon rule will, by fear of the things coming, be driven to cry “to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb [of God]: for the great day of his wrath is come; and who shall be able to standi” (Rev. 6:16,17) Such are the “goats” which are made manifest by the Lord’s judgment of the nations which is now proceeding. But the “sheep” class are meek, teachable toward the Lord. They see that all the governments under demon rule are doomed to early leveling to the ground, and hence they flee to God’s capital organization, his holy Mount Zion. They put themselves under it for protection and to be hid from Jehovah’s Executioner at the battle of Armageddon. (Zeph. 2: 3) Only thus doing may the “sheep” hope to live through that final and decisive battle between God’s organization and the Devil’s organization. All the “goats” shall die.
* Concerning Jehovah, as represented by his great Judge upon the throne in Zion, the prophecy announces: “And he shall judge among many people,
100
WATCHTOWER.
and rebuke strong nations afar off; and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up a sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.” (Mic. 4:3) This has been a favorite text with popes and statesmen when posing before the people as lovers of peace and working for international peace. In quoting this text they have applied it to themselves as if the chosen ones to establish everlasting peace on earth, and this with a view to making it agreeable for the peoples and nations to continue under demon rule. Such is presumptuousness in God’s sight. It is abominable to him, because only He, by Christ Jesus, his “Prince of Peace”, shall bring about lasting peace and an absolutely disarmed earth. The Hague Court of International Arbitration, the disarmament provisions of the Versailles Peace Treaty, the League of Nations, the Paris Peace Pact of 1928 commonly called the Kellogg-Briand pact, the pope’s “Holy Year” of 1933, and also all the hypocritical and much-advertised peace prayers from Vatican City, all such peace expedients of men to bring about a warless world have failed. The world, now engaged in total war, bars all denial of this. Now that great religious head at the Vatican, in his speech of December 24, 1941, proposes and prays for a “new order” without “total, war” or a mad rush of the nations for armaments. Actually he prays and works for a Catholicized world backed by a strong totalitarian government supervised by himself and his Hierarchy as the spiritual superpower. To this end he now uses the totalitarian Nazi-Fascist-Catholic dictators as the “sword of the church” to cut off the democratic and non-Catholic nations and also to destroy the witnesses of the Lord God who announce the Theocratic Government of Zion, Jehovah’s capital organization. And to trap the political rulers of the democratic nations the Hierarchy repeatedly declare publicly that no lasting peace with justice is possible except the present pope’s peace.
5	In all these dreams and hopes of a warless and disarmed earth by human achievement and in all the misapplying of Micah 4: 3 to themselves as peace messengers and agents, they overlook this fact: The prophecy declares that the thing which must precede everlasting “peace on earth” is that Jehovah by his Judge and King must judge among many peoples and must “rebuke” the strong nations afar off. This proves the complete inability and failure of religionists and politicians to do what God’s “Prince of Peace” alone can do.
6	Now Jehovah’s Judge is upon his throne judging the nations. His findings according to the course now being taken by the nations is that they have forgotten God and have set themselves in opposi
Brooklyn, N. Y.
tion to his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, and that therefore they are deserving of rebuke rather than of blessing on their peace plans. If the religious clergy would do their duty toward their political allies and if “Christendom’s” nations would examine God’s Word, they would find the judgment of the Lord God already written there showing his judicial decision concerning the nations and their final end. That “judgment written” will be executed without fail. (Ps. 149: 9) It is written: “The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God.” (Ps. 9:17) The clergy’ failing to call attention to God’s announced purpose in His Word, Jehovah sends forth his witnesses to all nations to declare “the judgment written”, and thus to serve notice upon them before the “battle of that great day of God Almighty”, when such written judgment shall be executed to the letter. Proclamation of such judgment written constitutes a test upon the nations of “Christendom”, and Jehovah by Christ Jesus judges them according to their course of conduct toward such proclamation and the proclaimers. The political and religious rulers condemn such proclamation. Their persecution of the proclaimers and the hindering and suppressing of the organized proclamation show that the nations have taken their stand in opposition to God and are fighting against him and have therefore forgotten him and chosen religion, which is demonism. The nations take their stand against ‘the law which goes forth out of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem’. Hence the Lord judges them adversely. He does not treat with them for peace.
T By their stand in opposition to him the nations that go totalitarian have taken a position “afar off” from Jehovah God and his Theocracy. By his judgment there is now a “great gulf” between the Lord’s “sheep” and the “goats”, which neither can cross to get to the other side, there being no chance for compromise. All the nations together are weak as compared with God. In refusing his Rightful King they have chosen to war with God. Jehovah agrees to accommodate them with a fight at Armageddon, and he bids them to muster all their strength and to come on, to the field of battle: “Beat your plowshares into swords, and your pruninghooks into spears; let the weak say, I am strong.” (Joel 3:10) The declaration of the “judgment written” by Jehovah’s witnesses has been a reproof to the nations. But it has not been strong enough nor in itself sufficient to make earth’s ruling powers mend their ways and yield to the incoming Theocratic Government. Jehovah must rebuke them with something stronger and more forceful than his message by his witnesses and their companions. That He will do, by his great Executioner at Armageddon, and the tongue thus adminis
April 1,1942
WATCHTOWER.
101
tering the rebuke is like a sword. “For, behold, Jehovah will come with fire, and his chariots [battle forces] shall be like the whirlwind: to render his anger with fierceness, and his rebuke with flames of fire. For by fire will Jehovah execute judgment, and by his sword, upon all flesh; and the slain of Jehovah shall be many.” (Isa. 66:15,16, Am. Rev. Ver.) As for Jehovah’s King: “Out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the nations: and he shall rule them with a rod of iron: and he treadeth the winepress of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God. And he hath on his vesture and on his thigh a name written, KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS.”—Rev. 19:15,16.
8	Total war now raging on the earth is driving all the nations of “Christendom” into the totalitarian rule, whether they like it or not. At the peace conference which must eventually come the political statesmen and military men shall sit down with religion and arrange a peace among themselves for their continued government of the earth under “the god of this world”. Thereat the religious Hierarchy and allied clergy will cry out to one another and to their political and commercial allies and to the war-ruined people, “Peace and safety!” (1 Thess. 5:3) Then Jehovah from his throne in the north and Christ Jesus, his King from the east or sunrising, shall send them a preliminary rebuke which shall frighten and infuriate them: “But tidings out of the east and out of the north shall trouble him [the arbitrary combine proposing peace without Theocracy]: therefore he shall go forth with great fury to destroy, and utterly to make away many.” (Dan. 11:44) At this desperate and final endeavor of demon-controlled powers to wipe out Jehovah’s faithful witnesses and their devoted companions Jehovah will rise up to the prey. He will pour out his indignation and fierce anger as a death-dealing rebuke to the God-forgetting nations, and all the visible earthly part of Satan’s organization shall be devoured with the fire of his jealousy. The nations that adopted religion or demonism and made war upon God and his witnesses shall there at Armageddon for ever disappear from existence.—Zeph. 3: 8.
9	By this “strange act” at Armageddon Jehovah God of hosts will effect the complete disarmament of the nations. Men could not do it, and the demons under Satan will not let men do it. As described at Revelation 16:13-16, the demons go forth to cause all the governing factors of the earth to arm and march forth to the battle of Armageddon, which battle the demon forces shall lose. The Devil at war mimics Jehovah God and sends forth the demon prince, Gog, as general in command, to oppose Jehovah’s Chief Field Marshal, Christ Jesus, the Prince of Life. Gog causes all his forces in earth
and heaven to arm, and by totalitarian rule he marches all forth to the assault on God’s organization, particularly the vulnerable part thereof, the remnant on earth of Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions. These are in God’s “Holy Land’’, meaning their condition on earth of complete devotion to Jehovah and his Theocratic Government. This final assault upon the remnant of spiritual Israelites and their companions will fail to cause them to break their integrity toward the Most High. Therefore God will preserve his faithful ones and will execute his vengeance upon the demon organization, from top to bottom, including Satan, Gog, and the forces of religion on earth. Ezekiel chapters 3S and 39, and Revelation 19:11-21, describe the slaughter. Their carnal weapons which they have forged in the great armaments race shall prove of no avail against the “strange” and supernatural forces of destruction with which Jehovah will rebuke the nations. They shall leave their swords and spears and other war equipment behind them strewn over the earth.
10	What then? Shall such be left to mar the beauty of the cleansed earth like war memorials? The prophecy replies that “they”, meaning the survivors of earth’s worst tribulation, to wit, the “great multitude” of the Lord’s “other sheep”, shall “beat their [the enemies’] swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks”. Foreseeing that day of peace through divine victory, Jehovah by his prophet says: “Behold, it is come, and it is done, saith the Lord God; this is the day whereof I have spoken. And they that dwell in the cities of Israel [the remnant and their companions] shall go forth, and shall set on fire and burn the weapons, both the shields and the bucklers, the bows and the arrows, and the handstaves and the spears, and they shall burn them [the combustible parts of the weapons] with fire seven years: so that they shall take no wood out of the field, neither cut down any out of the forests; for they shall burn the weapons with fire: and they shall spoil those that spoiled them, and rob those that robbed them, saith the Lord God.”—Ezek. 39: 8-10.
11	This proves that the real purpose of the demons in causing the whole world to become an armed eamp was to line up the nations against God and to bring about their destruction in the “battle of that great day of God Almighty”. Particularly down to and including the summer of 1940 the nations of the world, including “the king of the north” and “the king of the south”, have been warned against this disastrous policy of the demons. They have not heeded that, but have listened to the leaders of religion. Gazing out over the earth after the Armageddon storm the prophet says: “Come, behold the works of the Lord, what desolations he hath made
102
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
in the earth. He maketh wars to cease unto the end of the earth; he breaketh the bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder: he burneth the chariot in the fire.” Then, for the benefit of the meek “sheep” of the earth who are teachable and will hear, he says: “Be still, and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the heathen, I will be exalted in the earth. The Lord of Hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah.” (Ps. 46:8-11) The “sheep” class of good-will give heed and make Jehovah and his organization, The Theocracy, their refuge.
12	The prophecy makes it certain, therefore, that equipment used in violation of God’s “everlasting covenant” (Gen. 9:6,11) and to war against Jehovah’s universal domination shall be wrecked at Armageddon and thereafter be collected and converted into upbuilding things of usefulness and productiveness. In this work the “great multitude” surviving earth’s last tribulation will be helped and supervised by those of the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses, joined now by the faithful men of times before Christ. Such faithful men of old shall be raised to life, experiencing a “better resurrection” than the general resurrection of mankind. They shall by Christ Jesus, the great King-Father, be made “princes in all the earth”.—Ps. 45:16.
13	With these visible governors, the “princes”, the “great multitude” shall constitute the “nations” in that new earth. (Deut. 32:43; Rom. 15:10,11) Of them, and them only, will the prophecy be true: “Nation shall not lift up a sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.” To the contrary, at present “the king of the north” and “the king of the south” lift up sword against each other in total war, whole nation against whole nation, and are teaching and learning war as never before in the past, and are calculating on a long war for world domination. The demons will never permit the disarmament of the “present evil world”, but are lining up the nations for the deciding battle of Armageddon. Hence the nations will never have peace with God nor time to learn the arts of peace, but shall go down, fighting against Jehovah and his Theocracy. Finally Jehovah will cause the pope’s “new order founded on moral principles” to split in disorder and the religious, commercial and political elements thereof to fight against one another. Concerning this the sure prophecy says: “Then shall the Lord go forth, and fight against those nations, as when he fought in the day of battle. And it shall come to pass in that day, that a great tumult from the Lord shall be among them; and they shall lay hold every one on the hand of his neighbour, and his hand shall rise up against the hand of his neighbour.” (Zech. 14:3,13) “And the horses and their riders shall come down, every one by the sword of his brother.” (Hag. 2: 22) The same
confused fighting and self-destruction was pictured in the Midianites destroying one another before Gideon’s little army; and also the allied forces of Moab, Ammon and Mount Seir killing one another off before the inhabitants of Jerusalem. (Judg. 7:20-22; 2 Chron. 20:22-24) When the enemy seeks to escape, the Lord God will block his flight, and none shall survive.—Amos 9:1-4; Jer. 25:33-35.
PEACE AND SECURITY
14	Then, after Armageddon, peace shall settle down over the earth, as when the rainbow spanned the heavens after the great Flood of Noah’s day had subsided and the survivors came forth from the ark and, unitedly and without interference from the demon agents, they all joined in worship of Jehovah God, their Preserver and Deliverer. Then to those Flood survivors God issued anew the divine mandate to “be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the earth”. (Gen. 8:18-22; 9:1-16) Likewise when those preserved during Armageddon come forth thereafter from their hiding place, Jehovah by the King-Father, Christ Jesus, will restate to that “great multitude” the divine mandate to reproduce their land in righteousness and to fill the depopulated earth with a righteous offspring. Such ones will never learn war, either against one another or against The Theocracy. Why! Because the peacedisturbing enemies of God will be gone. Satan and the demons will be restrained, and the “Prince of Peace” will rule. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy and Jesuitized Catholic Action will be gone. Totalitarian dictators and the anti-God “abomination that maketh desolate” will be gone. The profit of the earth will be for all, and selfish commerce, with its “strong-arm squad”, will be gone. (Eccl. 5: 9) All religion, which is demonism, will be gone, and the law and commandments and worship of Jehovah God will be in effect and will be carried out by all that live. Politicians will be gone, and The Theocracy’s visible representatives on earth, the “princes”, will rule in judgment. “And the work of righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever. And my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places.”—Isa. 32:1,17,18.
13	Further describing that blessed time the prophecy continues: “But they shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig tree; and none shall make them afraid: for the mouth of the Lord of hosts hath spoken it.” (Mic. 4:4) This will be during the thousand-year reign of the King greater than Solomon, during the kingdom of which Solomon God’s covenant people, Judah and Israel, “dwelt safely, every man under his vine and under his fig tree.” (1 Ki. 4:25) Then the Lord’s “other sheep”
April 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER.
103
whom he preserves the Greater Solomon addresses: “Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom [blessings] prepared for yon from the foundation of the [new] world.” (Matt. 25: 34) The “princes” from Abel to John the Baptist, and including Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, shall be there, and concerning the “great multitude” over whom they shall be visible governors Jesus said: “Many shall come [and they are now coming] from the east and west, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven.” (Matt. 8:11; Luke 13:28,29) To sit with them on earth in or during the time of “the kingdom of heaven” does not mean inactivity and idleness, but to feed with them at the Lord’s table of blessings and to rest in the Lord and to enjoy peace and blessedness from serving God and walking with his “princes” in the way of righteousness.
16	“Every man under his vine and under his fig tree” does not mean personal private ownership, although doubtless humankind that lives will have the pleasure of planting many vines and trees. In the Scripture symbols the vine and the fig tree both represent the “kingdom of heaven” class and the fruit that such bear to the relief, comfort and joy and sweetening of those that accept the Lord’s message, the fruit of the vine picturing joys, and the fig tree picturing the goodness and sweetness due to the Kingdom. (John 15: l-8;Luke 13: 6-9; Judg.9:10-13) The “kingdom of heaven”, of which Christ Jesus is the true vine and all his body members are the branches, is The Theocracy. Under that great symbolic Vine and Fig Tree all humankind on earth shall “sit” in trusting dependence and shall receive of the joys and sweet blessings of the great King-Father, their Provider. “Then shall the earth yield her increase; and God, even our own God, shall bless us. God shall bless us; and all the ends of the earth shall fear him.”—Ps. 67: 6, 7.
17	They shall fear only the “Higher Powers”, and shall be afraid of none other. Cruel aggression by covetous ones shall be no more, nor wicked secret police or gestapo, nor landlords, nor religion, with its frightening doctrines of “purgatory” and “eternal torment”, nor any Roman Catholic Hierarchy and other priests and clergy to “devour widows’ houses, and for a pretence make long prayer”; nor any death to the obedient. (Matt. 23:14; Rev. 21:4; 1 Cor. 15:25,26) “They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord [due to the victory at Armageddon], as the waters cover the sea.”—Isa. 11: 9; Hab. 2:14.
1B	Doubtless, as in the days of the typical Theocracy over the nation of Israel, each family or group will be assigned a definite plot of ground, which may
not be commercialized or transferred to another. (Lev. 25:23; Num. 36:7; Ezek. 4G: 18; Josh. 14:5.13) It shall be held in trust as a grant from the great King-Father, because Christ Jesus is the “heir of all things” of Jehovah. “The earth is the Lord's [Jehovah's], and the fulness thereof; the [new] world, and they that dwell therein.” (Ps. 24:1) In the beginning, in the Paradise or garden of Eden God appointed the perfect man to “dress it and to keep it”. (Gen. 2:15) Likewise under The Theocracy each shall finally be responsible to the King-Father for his assigned portion of the earth and for the vine and fig tree or other things growing thereon, to dress and keep such. Each must do his part, both individually and in co-operation with the other members of the family and all his neighbors and all the “princes”, in glorifying the earth as instructed and helped by The Theocracy. “And they shall build houses, and inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them. They shall not build, and another inhabit; they shall not plant, and another eat: for as the days of a tree are the days of my people, and mine elect shall long enjoy the work of their hands.”—Isa. 65: 21, 22.
10	There need be no fear that this glorious outlook shall never be realized by creatures of faith who serve and obey God, “for the mouth of Jehovah of hosts hath spoken it.” (Am. Rev. Ver.) Neither the religious Hierarchy nor the totalitarian “abomination of desolation” nor the demons shall prevent this, but the invincible hosts of Jehovah shall clear them out of the earth at Armageddon and enforce peace throughout the universe. There will be no international police force of any federation of nations needed, but angelic hosts at the command of the invisible, heavenly Theocracy will safeguard the interests of all humankind' on earth that live and obey. What Jehovah the Almighty God has spoken he will do beyond the power of any opposer to hinder it, and thus He will vindicate His word. Why, then, should any doubt it or take it lightly or with indifference? Why listen now to presumptuous men in power who make flowery promises to do what God Omnipotent alone can and will do? This information is of the greatest importance to creatures, and it is God’s will and command that it now be carried abroad by his witnesses on earth to bring comfort to all lovers of God and his kingdom.
DECISION
*° The judgment of the nations being now under way to divide the people as “sheep” and “goats”, it is the time for decision by each one as to his course of action that determines his destiny. He must choose between God and the demons, between The Theocracy and demon rule. “For all the peoples
104
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
walk every one in the name of his god; and we will walk in the name of Jehovah our God for ever and ever.” (Mic. 4:5, Am. Rev. Ver.) Satan is the “god of this world”, and all the world therefore lies in that wicked one. (2 Cor. 4:4; 1 John 5:19) God’s Word plainly states that all nations practice some form of demonism, which is religion. “For all the gods of the nations are idols.” (Ps. 96: 5) The nations do not adore Jehovah God nor salute his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, but they give their devotion to the organization that opposes Jehovah, and which is the organization of the demon gods.
21	The peoples of the nations walk and conduct themselves by the authority of their “Gods”, whether demon or human such as Hitler, and they come in the name of and carry on in the name of the organizations of this world opposed to God. Though calling themselves by the name of God and Christ, they do not declare God’s name throughout all the earth nor make known the purpose for which His name stands. By opposing Jehovah’s witnesses and the message these declare concerning His kingdom by Christ Jesus the religionists of all nations belie their own claims. They prove they have taken the name of God and of Christ in vain and are walking in the name of other gods, to wit, the gods of Satan’s organization, the demons. “Christendom” claims to be in a covenant with God, and God’s command to his covenant people is, “Thou shalt have no other gods before me.” (Ex. 20:3) “Christendom” is therefore proved a covenant-breaker and worthy of destruction, and the Lord does not hold her guiltless for taking his name in vain. (Ex. 20:7) “Ye cannot serve God and mammon,” said Jesus. (Matt. 6: 24) There are only two line-ups in the great issue over universal domination, and “Christendom” lines up with mammon, and serves that god of selfish gain and covetousness. For years Jehovah’s witnesses have been declaring his name throughout the earth; but “Christendom” does not choose to walk in His name nor according to the purpose which his name signifies. So doing, she and all her supporters and hangers-on determine their destiny. This they do before Jehovah executes judgment against all the gods of “Egypt”, that is, Satan’s world, and before He famishes all her gods, spirit and human, and destroys them.—Ex. 9:16; 12:12; Zeph. 2:11.
22	In the face of “Christendom’s” decision for the “god of this world”, the small remnant of God’s covenant people, regardless of what others think about them, declare with decisiveness: “We will walk in the name of Jehovah our God for ever and ever.” The Lord’s “other sheep” make the same decision and thereby become and remain companions of the remnant. Long ago Satan the Devil turned the natural Jews to religion and thereby brought great
reproach upon Jehovah’s name. To this day the Jews have renounced that name, which name they have therefore taken in vain. Then after the death of the apostles the Devil turned the majority of the professing Christians to religion, and these too have renounced the name of Jehovah. He is practically unknown to them, and with all despite of their heart such religionists persecute those bearing the name of Jehovah. Jehovah having declared that before his demonstration of power over Satan He would have his servants declare his name throughout all the earth, Satan counters this with his boast and threat that none on earth shall ever dare to take that holy name and walk therein. So to heap further reproach upon that name he and his demons stir up the religionists of “Christendom”, particularly the Roman Catholics, to engage in riotous and violent antiSemitism to persecute the Jews who once bore Jehovah’s name. This is a demoniacal warning to all Christians not to take the holy name which the Jewish nation took in vain, and is a hint to Christians of what they shall suffer at the hands of religionists if taking the name. Nothing can thwart Jehovah’s purpose to have a “people for his name” now at the end of Satan’s world and before God shows his power over Satan.—Acts 15:14.
2S	Of old Jehovah made known his name to the prophet Moses at the burning bush. In 1918 the Greater Moses, Christ Jesus, came to the temple. Through him Jehovah has since made known to the faithful remnant his purpose to make a name for himself and has revealed to them the meaning of his name Jehovah and that the vindication of his name by his Vindicator Christ Jesus is of the highest importance. (2 Sam. 7:23) Meantime the demon forces using religion have caused Fascists and Nazis to be organized and’ to come into power and then great anti-Semitism to burst out from these religionists to degrade the name of Almighty God and to counteract the witness being given to that name by His servants. Undaunted, Jehovah in 1931 majestically revealed to his covenant people of spiritual Israel that his servants must be called by a “new name” which the mouth of the Lord God names, to wit, “Jehovah’s witnesses.” (Isa. 43:10-12; 62:2; 65:15; Rev. 2:17) At this revelation from God’s Holy Word they rejoiced: “Thy words were found, and I did eat them; and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of mine heart: for I am called by thy name, 0 Lord [Jehovah] God of hosts.” (Jer. 15:16) The devoted remnant hailed the disclosure of the new name, and they defied the demon hosts and all the religious haters and persecutors of God’s name. Gratefully they accepted the “new name”, determined to prove worthy thereof and true thereto, and forth they went with greater zeal to publish
April 1,1942	THE WATCHTOWER,	105
and "bear witness further to Jehovah’s name and kingdom. Christ Jesus is Jehovah’s Chief Witness, whose name is “Faithful and True”, and they desired to be conformed to His image. The Lord God had long ago foretold of this: “Therefore my people shall know my name: therefore they shall know in that day that I am he that doth speak; behold, it is I.” (Isa. 52: 6) “And I will strengthen them in the Lord [Jehovah] ; and they shall walk up and down in his name, saith the Lord.”—Zech. 10:12.
24	Thus the “new name” is upon God’s covenant people, not being conferred by any president of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society nor by any other man. True, Jehovah’s witnesses bear identification cards with the signature of the president or of the Society. Such, however, is merely to identify them in case of investigation to prove they are true representatives of the Society with its literature and to set forth the terms of their commission from the Lord to predch His message. So they do not walk under authorization of some man’s name signed to a permit or license to go from house to house or place to place with the Kingdom message, nor do they ask such from dictator, police, or other worldly official. Their ordination and authorization to preach is from Jehovah, whose name is called upon them, and in His name they are determined to walk for ever and ever, persecution and reproaches notwithstanding. Particularly since then the persons of good-will in all nations have heard the declaration of Jehovah’s name and purpose. These too, in steadily growing numbers, determine to “walk in the name of Jehovah our God for ever and ever”. They turn their backs upon the gods of religion and make a consecration of themselves to Jehovah and his Kingdom under Christ, and thereby become the Lord’s “other sheep” and the companions of Jehovah’s witnesses. The revilings and persecutions which this brings upon them do not cause them to break their integrity and to abandon God’s service by the side of his remnant. With an unbreakable love like that of Jonathan for David they cleave to God’s remnant, and both together walk on in Jehovah’s name in perfect unity and in like devotion to The Theocracy.
ASSEMBLY
25	To make the above possible Jehovah fulfills his promise concerning the “day of Jehovah”, which day began in 1914 at the enthroning of his King on his ‘"holy hill of Zion”. ‘Tn that day, saith the Lord, will I assemble her that halteth, and I will gather her that is driven out, and her that I have afflicted; and I will make her that halted a remnant, and her that was cast far off a strong nation; and the Lord shall reign over them in mount Zion from henceforth, even for ever.” (Mic. 4: 6,7) Before the Lord’s com
ing to the temple God’s consecrated ones on earth were not wholly cleansed from all forms of religion. The full light had not yet come, but there were those of them with pure hearts and sincere devotion to Jehovah God. Such things of religion lamed them, particularly the religious doctrine that the worldly powers of Satan’s organization are the “higher powers”, “ordained of God” and therefore to be obeyed when such worldly authorities abuse their power of office to hinder and ban the work God commissions and commands his anointed servants to do. Fear of creatures resulted and caused his servants to halt or limp, and hindered their walking boldly, uncompromisingly and without any apology for Jehovah God and Christ Jesus, the true “Higher Powers”.
26	Such halting became particularly pronounced and noticeable during the crisis of the World War, in 1914-1918, when the test of strict and unswerving obedience to God was thrust upon them by the enemy. (Ps. 38:16-19; Jer. 20:10) They limped, as if one-sided, “curved,” not yet straight on the subjects of “the higher powers”, and universal domination, and integrity or blamelessness toward God. Hence they failed of continuous and bold performance in the public proclamation of God’s kingdom. This was displeasing to Jehovah God, and he permitted them to be driven out or “driven away” from the free and open publication of His message and to be taken captive and restrained by their religious enemies, symbolized by “Babylon”. Jehovah permitted such affliction upon his consecrated servants, but he did not cast them away, forasmuch as the heart of a remnant thereof was faithful and devoted and yearning to be released from restraint for renewed service as publishers of the Kingdom. Those faithful Christians were hated of all nations for the sake of the Kingdom. The nations increased the affliction upon them, and this at the instance of the religionists. Concerning this Jehovah warns: “And I am very sore displeased with the heathen [the persecutor nations that forget God] that are at ease: for I was but a little displeased, and they helped forward the affliction.”—Zech. 1:15.
2T Beginning with 1919, shortly after the close of the World War, Jehovah God, in his mercy and pity toward them and for his name’s sake, began to regather his scattered ones. He brought them forth from their places of restraint, freed them from religion’s power and the fear of men, and filled them with Elisha’s spirit of boldness. These were comforted from all their affliction, and on them was fulfilled God’s prophecy: “And in that day thou shalt say, 0 Lord, I will praise thee: though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortedst me.” (Isa. 12:1) How did Jehovah
106
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
“make her that halted a remnant”? By bringing them to his Judge at the temple and then gathering out the rebellious “evil servant” class, the “workers of iniquity [or lawlessness]” that desired to cleave to religion and the fear of and subservience to worldly men as being “higher powers”. (Matt. 24:48-51; 13:41) This left only a remnant of faithful, devoted ones. Jehovah by his Judge approved them, anointed them as his “faithful and wise servant”, and sent them forth as his witnesses to declare his name and his Righteous Government.
18 Concerning this restoration the Lord had foretold: “The remnant shall return, even the remnant of Jacob, unto the mighty God. For though thy people Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet a remnant of them shall return.” (Isa. 10:21,22) This action of Jehovah is directly contrary to the purpose of Catholic Action by force or by persuasion to bring all nations, including the United States of America, into the Catholic camp as subjects to the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and its headquarters at Vatican City. Working to this end, and to remove a chief obstacle thereto, the Hierarchy by Catholic Action lias greatly afflicted Jehovah’s devoted ones. For their comfort Jehovah says: “Behold, at that time I will undo all that afflict thee; and I will save her that haltetb, and gather her that was driven out; and I will get them praise and fame [among men of goodwill] in every land where they have been put to shame. At that time will I bring you again, even in the time that I gather you: for I will make you a name and a praise among all people of the earth, when I turn back your captivity before your eyes, saith the Lord.” (Zeph. 3:19, 20) Since their deliverance by Jehovah’s truth and power, the faithful remnant walk erect and halt no more between two opinions, but are wholly devoted to The Theocracy. Blind to all else, they boldly declare Jehovah’s name before all nations and show’ forth his praises and his fame. And with them in this are the many loyal companions.
29	God’s “holy nation” is his new Government of Righteousness, The Theocracy, of which Christ Jesus is The King. (1 Pet. 2:9) The demonized religionists and their allies have tried to prevent the remnant from becoming a part of that “holy nation”. They try to force the remnant to break their covenant with Jehovah God and fail of making the Kingdom and thus bring destruction upon themselves as “cast far off”. But Jehovah has sent his remnant deliverance and has judged and purged them at his temple and strengthened them with his truth that they might be “strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might”. He has approved them and anointed them with his spirit to be his witnesses. They are thus in direct line for the Kingdom as
“heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ”. The combined enemies under demon rule now viciously use all sly arts and means to “cut them off from being a nation; that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance”. (Ps. 83:4) In this they continue to fail; Jehovah’s remnant endure the persecution, keep covenant with their God and hold fast their integrity toward him and thereby continue in line for the “new nation”, The Theocratic Government. That Government is a “strong nation”, its King being Christ Jesus, “The mighty God,” with all power in heaven and earth; and the faithful know that they “can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth [them]”. (Phil. 4:13) They know and confess Jehovah as their Almighty God; and now’ is fulfilled the prophecy concerning the time of the end, that “the people that do know their God shall be strong, and do exploits” as his witnesses. (Dan. 11:32) Continuing faithful unto the end, they shall not fail or be cut off from the “holy nation”, but “so an entrance shall be ministered unto [them] abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ”.—2 Pet. 1:10,11.
80	“And the Lord [Jehovah] shall reign over them in mount Zion.” Not in Rome or Vatican City, mark you, but “in mount Zion”, God’s capital organization. Jehovah now there reigns by his anointed King whom He enthroned as Rightful Ruler of the new world in 1914. In 1918 Jehovah brought him to His temple and there presented him as King. Public announcement thereof by his faithful anointed witnesses thereafter was flatly rejected by “Christendom”. She adopted instead a federation of Satan’s visible organization, the League of Nations, “the abomination of desolation.” So doing, she stumbled over The Stone, Jehovah’s anointed King; but the remnant of God’s witnesses hailed the presentation of that Chief Corner Stone at the temple with shouts of “Grace, grace”, or, “Beautiful, beautiful!” (Isa. 8:9-15; Zech. 4: 7, Rotherham') Now too the persons of goodwill who have heard and heeded the preaching of “this gospel of the kingdom” hail Jehovah’s glorious King as the “desire of all nations”.—Hag. 2: 7.
81	All Satan’s demon forces in heaven and earth cannot unseat the King of The Theocracy. Satan shall fail in his grab for universal domination, the primary issue now to be settled. Jehovah, by his King, shall reign in his official residence of Mount Zion “from henceforth, even for ever”. Hence the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses, as “the feet of Him”, are the company that “bringeth good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy God reigneth!” (Isa. 52:7) They submit to Jehovah and his kingly Representative as “the Higher Powers”, obeying them rather than the opposing men, and they thankfully accept and diligently seek
April 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
107
to increase the Kingdom interests on earth committed to them. They know it is not discretionary, but mandatory, upon them to “fear God, honour the King”, and to ‘preach this gospel of the kingdom unto all nations for a witness before such are destroyed’. (1 Pet. 2:17) In the fear of God and to the honor of His King the remnant together with their companions continue to do this one thing, and will to the FINAL END.
“FLOCK-TOWER”
82	During the waiting period, from Christ’s ascension to his Father’s right hand and until 1914, “Zion” was like a hill without a King and temple and all that goes to make up an occupied, acting capital city. Christ Jesus must wait until the Lord God Almighty takes to himself his great power and reigns at Mount Zion by his anointed King and sends forth this King to rule in the midst of his enemies, the foes of The Theocracy. (Rev. 11: 17,18; Ps. 110:1,2) It is now fulfilled prophecy, the promise that Jehovah addresses to His capital organization, of which Christ Jesus is Head and Chief: “And thou, 0 tower of the flock, the strong hold of the daughter of Zion, unto thee shall it come, even the first dominion; the kingdom shall come to the daughter of Jerusalem.” (Mic. 4: 8) These words are said for the comfort of the heavenly Father’s “little flock”, to whom it is His good pleasure to give the Kingdom, and whom he has now gathered unto the temple. (Luke 12:32) The remnant of the flock yet on earth say: “For he is our God; and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand.”—Ps. 95:7.
33	Jehovah has chosen Zion to put his name there, even as he did with the typical Zion on earth. “The name of Jehovah is a strong tower; the righteous rmmeth into it, and is safe.” (Prov. 18:10, Am. Rev. T’er.) Typical Zion, crowned with a strongly walled city and guarded by the king’s troops, was like a “strong tower from the enemy”. (Ps. 61:3) Christ Jesus as King is the strong and unconquerable One of Zion, “the Lion of the tribe of Juda.” Therefore Mount Zion, The Theocracy, is the tower of refuge and of preservation for the remnant of “the flock of God” and whose citizenship is in Zion, the heavenly city. (Phil. 3:20, Rotherham) Reference to Zion as the “tower of the flock” shows that the time of fulfillment of God’s kingdom promise is at a time of war, when universal domination is the hotly-contested issue between Jehovah and his enemies. It shows that the fulfillment is at a time when the enemies are still active and are opposing the newly enthroned King and assaulting all publishers of the King and Kingdom on earth. At that time Zion is the tower of deliverance for the remnant of the “little flock”: “For in mount Zion and in Jerusalem
shall be deliverance, as the Lord hath said, and in the remnant whom the Lord shall call.”—Joel 2: 32.
34	It is out of His universal organization of holy creatures that Jehovah takes the members who compose the “new nation”, The Theocratic Government. It is The Stone that was cut out of the great “mountain” without human hands. (Dan. 2: 34, 44,45) God's universal organization is called “Zion”, and is the mother organization from which comes forth The Theocracy, the capital organization. The latter is therefore the “daughter of Zion”. The “daughter” takes the name of the mother and is also called “Zion”. Further the apostle Paul says: “But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of us all.” (Gal. 4:26) Hence Jehovah’s royal family of The Theocracy is also called “the daughter of Jerusalem”. Typical Zion was a “strong hold”, or “hill” or “mound”, (zlm. Rev. Ver. and Roth.) King David captured it and made it his capital and located the ark of Jehovah’s covenant there as a symbol of God’s presence. That was long after the Israelites had occupied Jerusalem. Therefore “the strong hold of the daughter of Zion” has reference rather to Jehovah’s “holy nation” as the capital organization elevated over all, whereas “the daughter of Jerusalem” has reference thereto more as an organization where unity and peace rule, as the name “Jerusalem” means.
35	Over the nation of natural Israel Jehovah established a typical Theocracy. In it the visible king represented the real Ruler Jehovah, as when “Solomon sat on the throne of Jehovah as king instead of David his father”. (1 Chron. 29:23, A.R.F.) David fought and extended the typical Theocracy to the full limits on earth which Jehovah had foreordained for it, thereby picturing that the Theocratic Government of the Greater David fights from 1914 on and down to the Devil’s last stand at Armageddon and establishes the universal domination of the great Theo-crat, Jehovah. The kings of typical Jerusalem yielded to religion and became wicked, and therefore did not present a faithful picture of the true Theocracy, and Jehovah God removed the dominion from that nation, in 606 B.C. But he promised to restore or make restitution of the dominion to One who should come with the right thereto. “And it shall be no more, until he come whose right it is; and I will give it him.” (Ezek. 21:24-27) Nineteen centuries ago, after the baptism in Jordan Jehovah anointed Jesus to be the King and gave the right to him, which right Jesus maintained by his faithfulness unto death. The King must reign, and therefore Jehovah raised him out of death and exalted him to His own right hand in heaven, but instructed Jesus Christ to wait until the time for the “first dominion” and “kingdom” to come to “the strong hold of the
108
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
daughter of Zion” and "daughter of Jerusalem”.
38	The coming of the dominion must mean the end of Satan’s uninterrupted rule. At the end of the seven “times of the Gentiles” the time of delivery of dominion came, to wit, in A.D. 1914. Promptly then, at God’s own chosen and appointed time, Jehovah’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus was begun. The “chief dominion” and “kingdom” coming to Christ Jesus, Zion’s anointed Chief and King, he forthwith took up the rod or scepter of his strength and at Jehovah’s command he began to rule amidst and to proceed against his enemies. (Ps. 110: 2) Let all lovers of God and his kingdom rejoice: the Kingdom has begun and will rule for ever. Let all such publish the fact to all having an ear to hear, that the “first dominion” or “chief dominion” has come to Christ Jesus, the royal Head of Zion, God’s capital organization. “His dominion is an everlasting dominion, which "hall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.” (Dan. 7:13,14) In it the “little flock” of Jehovah’s royal family shall share with and under Christ Jesus.—Vss. 22, 27.
37	Satan, the “god of this world” and the contender against God for the universal domination, sought to nullify that birth of the Kingdom, but failed; and he and his demons were cast out of heaven. (Rev. 12:1-12) Now confined to the earth, they press further the fight over that great issue of wlio shall rule the universe. They pit the two dominant powers in earth against each other in a fight for world domination, in defiance of God’s promise of a “new
earth”. The demons lead all the nations of the world to the final and deciding battle, Armageddon, there to resist and destroy if they could the domination of God’s “new heavens” or The Theocracy. (Rev. 16:13-16) The outcome of the battle is certain! Jehovah, who gave the “first dominion” to his anointed King, will give Christ Jesus also the victory. Rival claimants thereto, demon and human, shall be utterly destroyed, and the universal domination by Christ Jesus shall be established over all creatures that live.—Rev. 19:11-21.
” Thus the chief issue of all time will be settled right, righteously, and for ever. Seeing by faith that great victory to the vindication of Jehovah’s name and word, let the remnant rejoice, and likewise all their companions who hope to become “children of the King”. The Kingdom is here and to stay! It is a time of joy and shouting, as when Christ Jesus rode into the city of Jerusalem as King and his disciples and also the children, “the babes and sucklings,” shouted praise to Jehovah and hosannas to His King. The law of Jehovah now goes forth from Zion, and his word from Jerusalem, to guide the prospective children of the King unto righteousness and life. For ever blessed are all they that faithfully walk according to his law and feed upon his life-sustaining Word. Let all such continue to walk in their integrity toward God that they may be found “blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ”. Such only shall live to rejoice for ever in the “chief dominion” of Zion, Jehovah’s Theocracy by Christ Jesus.
(To be continued)
THE NAME TO BE HONORED
THE name of Jehovah is not comparable to that of any creature. He is the Almighty God besides whom there is none. Contrary to this great truth, the name of Jehovah has been made an issue before the minds of creatures for the past six thousand years. One of his creatures called Lucifer forced the issue of universal domination and involving Jehovah’s name. In doing this Lucifer became God’s enemy and had his own name changed from that which means “bearer of light” to that which signifies everything that is evil. It has ever been the policy of this evil one to push the name of the great Jehovah God on the side, to ridicule his name, and to cause creation to defame God’s name and to regard him as an eternal-torment fiend unworthy of respect and praise. This the enemy has done in order to exalt himself that he might receive the worship of men and keep them in subjection to himself. God could have prevented the enemy from so doing, but, at Exodus 9:16, he expressed his purpose to permit the enemy to demonstrate his full and complete depravity and thereby test the integrity of faithful men, by which men God’s name shall be declared throughout all the earth before he
demonstrates his supreme power against the enemy at the final battle of Armageddon.
Jehovah God has not pushed his name to the fore. At stated intervals he has brought his name prominently before his creation. This he has done by a demonstration of his unlimited power, which has always proved that the Devil is powerless against Jehovah when the Lord God deems it proper to exercise his great power against the evil one. At these stated intervals God has brought his name before his creation, not for a selfish reason, but for the benefit of honest creatures. Unselfishness has been his motive. This is another proof that “God is love”.—1 John 4:16.
God’s Word is contained in the Bible. During the ages God has magnified his word of promise above his name. The time has come, however, when Jehovah’s name shall be exalted among all his creatures upon an equality with His word of promise. Then all creatures will know that his word is always true and that his name is above all and is worthy to be praised.
In Eden, when the Lord God was pronouncing the sentence against Adam for the violation of God’s law, he
A^i,iM2	THE WATCHTOWER.	109
took cognizance of Satan’s part in man’s evil course and he then and there gave his word of promise that at some future time “the seed of the woman”, that is, the Ruler who should come forth from God’s organization, should bruise the Serpent’s head. Time and again God magnified that word of promise. Centuries later he began to foreshadow his purpose to carry into operation that promise. He called his friend, Abraham, and made to him the promise: “In thee shall all families of the earth be blessed.” (Gen. 12:3) Here Abraham represented the Lord God, and God’s word of promise shows that the blessing of all the families of the earth must proceed from Jehovah because He is the great Life-giver. Later the Lord caused Abraham to present his son as a sacrificial offering, and it was at that time that God made to him this promise: “And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.” (Gen. 22:18) In this picture Abraham represented the Lord God, and his “seed” or son, Isaac, represented Jesus, the beloved Son of Jehovah. The promise shows that the blessings must come from Jehovah by and through his Son Christ Jesus. It also shows that The seed of promise’, which shall bruise the head of that old Serpent, the Devil, is Christ Jesus, the Beloved One of God and God’s great representative.
During all these centuries Jehovah has kept his word of promise to the fore, in this, that he has always had someone on the earth who has borne witness to his word of promise. The faithful ones of the nation of Israel magnified God’s word of promise. When Jesus came he magnified the promise of his Father. Jesus’ apostles magnified the word of promise, and the faithful Christians throughout the “Christian era” have done the same thing. The shepherd-king, David, foreshadowed the true Christians, and his prophetic words are placed in the mouth of such, to wit: “I will bow down towards thy holy temple, and thank thy name, for thy lovingkindness and for thy faithfulness. For thou hast magnified above all thy name, thy word!”— Ps. 138:2, Rotherham’s translation.
God’s word of promise is perfect. It is his expressed will. In the ages he has moved majestically forward in carrying out his will as expressed in his Word. At stated intervals, to save the honest people from complete infidelity, he has brought his name prominently before them. Now the members of “the body of Christ”, who is the true Abraham’s seed, are about completed and the time is at hand when the Lord will magnify his holj’ name before mankind. The issue will then be finally determined against Satan in favor of Jehovah. He will have a witness given in the earth of his purpose and will to magnify his name, and this witness must be given now, before Armageddon begins. The small remnant of the faithful members of Christ’s body yet on earth are granted the privilege of bearing witness to that great fact. Therefore Jehovah says to them: “Ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord [Jehovah], and my servant whom I have chosen; that ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he: before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me. . . . Therefore ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, that I am God.”—Isa. 43:10,12.
There is no doubt as to the present mission of the true Christians anointed with God’s spirit who are yet on the earth. All the prophetic evidences, viewed in the light of the physical facts from A.D. 1914 on, prove that the world,
that is, Satan’s till then uninterrupted rule of the earth, has ended, which means that Satan’s organization visible and invisible has reached its fullness: that God has set his beloved Son upon the throne, which means that Christ Jesus has assumed his great authority and begun his reign in the midst of his enemies (Pss. 2:6; 110: 1. 2) , that Satan has now been expelled from heaven and that all the forces are now gathering for Armageddon, which is the great battle of God Almighty by Christ Jesus against Satan and his organization. To the faithful Christians the Lord gives commandment to proclaim the great message of God’s truth to the nations of earth as a witness before the end, and then Armageddon shall quickly follow, and that shall be the final trouble upon earth In that great time of trouble Jehovah God will make for himself a name, even as he did when he overthrew the Egyptians and delivered his chosen people Israel from bondage.
Those now in God’s temple class he has called and taken out from the world as “a people for his name”. (Acts 15:14) It becomes the privilege and duty of such to show forth his praises, and the Lord's “other sheep” whom he now gathers and who become the active companions of the faithful “remnant” must join with them in declaring Jehovah’s name throughout the earth. The witness to his name must be done before Armageddon, because it is God’s announced purpose that it shall be done. There would seem to be no reasonable cause for giving such testimony after Armageddon The conclusion is therefore irresistible that now is the time for the temple class and their companions to prove their integrity toward God and to magnify the name of Jehovah. This they do by beginning to sing forth the honor of his name, and the members of the temple class and their earthly companions say to one another: “Sing forth the honor of his name.”—Ps. 66: 2.
The immediate prospect, therefore, is that of great activity yet on the part of the temple class and their companions in proclaiming the message of Jehovah God concerning his vengeance against Satan’s organization and concerning the vindication of his name by his Theocratic Government, the promised Kingdom which shall bring blessings to all obedient peoples of the earth.
Into the minds of some the enemy may inject vain thoughts, causing such to magnify their own importance, thereby causing them to abandon the Lord’s appointed witness work of magnifying Jehovah’s name. The Devil will work every possible scheme to overcome the “remnant” and their companions. The Lord, foreknowing the schemes of the wily enemy, and for the good of his creatures, caused to be recorded in his Word that which expresses the true Christian’s heart’s sincere desire, namely: “Remove far from me vanity and lies; give me neither poverty nor riches , feed me with food convenient for me; lest I be full, and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord [Jehovah] ? or lest I be poor, and steal, and take the name of my God in vain.” (Prov. 30:8,9) The Christian sees that extreme earthly riches would tend to cause him to forget God and his own relationship to the Almighty One. He sees that extreme poverty might cause such discouragement that he would despair. Concerning these things he  wants to have the spirit of a sound mind and to diligently and faithfully* use whatever means is available to provide the necessities and then
110
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
to use all his endowments in the service of the Lord to the glory of His name. He recognizes that God has only one way of doing His work in the earth, and the true Christian wants to keep in harmony with that way. Therefore he prays: “Feed me with food convenient for me.” That which is fit and proper, which is strengthening and builds one up as a servant of Jehovah God, is convenient food.
Where would the creature who desires life look for such food? For his physical needs he would carefully consider what natural food is best suited to give him strength of body and mind, that he might serve. For his mind he would diligently seek the food which the Lord has provided for his own. Seeing that the Lord has led his people thus far in this “time of the end” and provided them with “meat in due season” through his chosen channel, the Watch Tower Society, the servant of God has confidence that in the same manner the Lord will continue to provide for his own. Every dumb ox knows his master’s crib, from whence comes his food. (Isa. 1: 3) Surely the Lord's people should now know from whence comes their food.
The true witnesses of the Lord are few on the earth, comparatively. These are despised by the pretending Christians, even as Jesus was despised by the ecclesiastics and their allies of his time. God foreknew the conditions that would exist at this time on earth and he caused his prophet to speak to his servants, saying: “Praise ye the Lord. Praise, 0 ye servants of the Lord, praise the name of the Lord. Blessed be the name of the Lord, from this time forth and for evermore.”—Ps. 113:1,2.
This prophecy must have a fulfillment at some time. Its fulfillment has begun. From this time forward and for evermore the name of Jehovah shall be exalted, and no power can possibly prevent it. Satan’s organization must fail, and then, at Armageddon, all will be brought to know that the name of the Most High and Almighty God is Jehovah and the reproachers of that name shall be destroyed. It is the blessed privilege of Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions to now exalt Jehovah’s name in the earth before Armageddon.
The intelligent servant of God therefore sees that at this time there is a definite work to be done. This work now consists of proclaiming the glad tidings to the nations of earth that Jehovah is God, that Christ is King, and that the kingdom of God has begun. The Lord has provided the machinery to print the message for wide circulation, and continues to provide the materials with which to print. Having provided the ammunition, he calls upon his servants to go forward and press the battle against religion and for the education of the people in His truth. For their encouragement he says to such that ‘He will be for them a crown of glory, and a diadem of beauty’. (Isa. 28:5,6) He will be a shield and protector and comforter and the Blesser.
The song of glory now begun shall go forward until Jehovah causes it to fill the earth. “From the rising of the sun, unto the going down of the same, the Lord’s name is to be praised.” (Ps. 113 -. 3) This does not mean mere daily worship by some of earth’s creatures. The sun rises in the east and goes down in the west, and from east to west is every place on the earth. Therefore the time must eome when everywhere the sun shines the name of the Lord God shall be exalted in appropriate praise. All who
live will honor his holy name. God’s prophet was given a vision of the people relieved of bondage to religion and Satan’s organization, and all giving praise to God. It was a vision of the song of deliverance for humankind of goodwill toward God and his promised Government. God’s anointed witnesses and those who shall be the earthly children of his King do now on earth begin that glad song which shall never end.
The name of Jehovah God is worthy of all praise. He is the complete expression of unselfishness. His loving-liind-ness is beyond the expression of words. When the seekers for truth come to realize that the long, dark night of Satan’s uninterrupted rule has ended and their release from bondage has come; when they learn that the way to life everlasting is open to the believing and obedient ones and that God in his loving-kindness has made this provision for them, then all such will exclaim: “Who shall not fear thee, 0 Lord, and glorify thy name? for thou only art holy.” —Rev. 15:4.
The name of Jehovah will continue to be exalted. The creation invisible to man shall send forth his praises. All the visible governing “princes” in the new earth, the resurrected faithful men of old, and all the great multitude of Armageddon survivors will praise his holy name. The mighty mountains will lift their hoary heads in songs of praise. The broad fields will declare the honor of God’s name. The trees of the wood clothed in garments of verdure and beauty will rejoice, and every creature that breathes and lives shall join in the great hallelujah chorus to the honor and glory of Jehovah’s holy name.—Psalm 150.
The true child of God is anxious to sing forth the honor of Jehovah’s name now. It is due the Lord that his name be honored above all. It is due time to sing forth the honor of his name. God’s remnant are the anointed representatives of God on earth, and these are now joined by a multitude of like-minded earthly companions, and all such are greatly honored by having the privilege of representing Jehovah. Speaking for them the psalmist says: “Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name.” (Ps. 29: 2) This exhortation is also a call by each servant of Jehovah God to the others in His service.
In line with this command it is proper that each one in the service of the great Theocrat Jehovah and His King keep before his fellow servants the great importance of now having a part in the Lord’s service. While no one has a right to attempt to compel another to engage therein, it is the duty and privilege of each one to point out to his brother the great advantage and favor resulting from participating in God’s service. It is impossible to sing forth the honor of the Lord’s name now unless we avail ourselves of the remaining opportunities for serving him, because this is the means that God has provided for the witness to his name to be given. Amidst increasing opposition the little company of Jehovah’s servants delight to encourage one another and together to engage in singing the honor to the Lord’s name.
Out of darkness the Lord has called his people for a purpose and put his name upon them. In advance of others of mankind he has given his faithful ones a vision of his gracious purposes. These faithful ones are now made his witnesses. Every one now holding fast and remaining
Apbil 1,1942
JTHE WATCHTOWER.
m
faithful to the end shall see the complete triumph of Jehovah and the issue finally and for ever determined to His glory and honor. It is their duty and blessed privilege to now beseech their brethren and fellow workers in the Lord to join them by participating in the service of the Lord in singing forth the honor of his name. Let no one engage therein merely because he thinks he is compelled to do it. Let each and every one engage in the Lord’s
service because he delights to do it. In this manner we prove our love for God—1 John 5:3.
The question now is, Who is God" Who will exercise universal domination? Who is on the Lord's side" Who will joyfully be a witness to the name of the Lord God’ Let all who answer “I” look well to the provision God has made and quickly avail themselves thereof and participate in singing forth the honor of his name.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
March 3, 1942
To All Fellow Workers for The Theocracy,
Dear Brethren:
Jehovah in his loving-kindness has brought his people to unity of action. They see but one thing, The Theocracy', and their share in the vindication of Jehovah’s name and the unspeakable privilege of now proclaiming his name and his Word.
The expressions sent to me of loyalty to the Lord’s organization and of your determination to carry on in the fight have in the last few weeks brought much joy to my heart. From every corner of the earth, near and far, isolated and in companies, the expressions are the same, of recognizing “the Higher Powers”, Jehovah and Christ Jesus, as being the head of the organization that Jehovah has formed in the earth for His glory and His praise. It would take much time to personally acknowledge all these letters, but I do want to express my appreciation to all of you for your good wishes and your prayers. As you have given your assurances of continued faithful co-operation
as unto the Lord, so we here will, by the Lord’s grace, push ahead with the work and keep you supplied with “meat in due season”. We shall always look well to your interests and assist you in the fight against the forces of demonism and see that you have the means and equipment to continue comforting all that mourn.
Reports coming in from every part of the globe show that the conditions in the earth and the action of the enemy are not causing the brethren to slack their hand in the least, but that they are continuing to obey the commandments of the Lord rather than the commandments of men and that the ingathering of the Lord’s “other sheep” is progressing by leaps and bounds. All are heeding the admonition of the apostle, “Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labour is not in vain in the Lord.”—1 Cor. 15: 58.
With much love and best wishes,
Your fellow servant in The Theocracy,
N. H. Knorr, President, Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society
STEADFASTNESS
' "j-'HOSE who serve Jehovah look to him for directions I through his Son, Christ Jesus, who is at his temple.
From all parts of the world messages have come to the Watchtower office at Brooklyn expressing the same determination to carry on in the work as is set forth in the following letter from the Berne, Switzerland, Branch office.
Berne, January 15, 1942
Watch Tower Society, Brooklyn, K. Y.
Dear Brethren :
We were painfully surprised to read in all our daily papers that “the founder of the movement of Jehovah’s witnesses, which spreads over the whole earth and has more than two million members, Judge Joseph Franklin Rutherford, has died in San Diego, Cal.” Such is the wording of the news as transmitted by the Exchange.
We did not expect, of course, that you would inform us immediately by wire; we were told, however, that the Exchange Agency is reliable. Although we are grieved no more to be able to have personal contact with our dear Brother Rutherford, we do nevertheless not feel as “orphans”, because we were privileged to learn that Jehovah and Jesus Christ are our leaders, and so God’s people in Switzerland are firmly convinced that Jehovah holds in store further blessings for his people and will dispense them. How strengthening it is to see that
the church has truly reached its maturity and, as Brother Rutherford expressed it so beautifully in his last letter (October 24, 1941), which was brought to our knowledge through the Informant, is fully conscious of the fact that a time may come where the organic connection may no more exist in the same measure and may even cease entirely, when the individual servant must be able to stand and when, as Paul exhorted us to do, all would speak the same message in spite of extraordinary circumstances, namely, the only means that will help the groaning creation: The Theocracy.
The work here continues by God’s grace. We are very busy at present, having translated the book Children and preparing for its publication. It is even our great hope that during the coming “Easter” holidays we may hold our annual general convention in the big “House of Arts" in Zurich The management of these buildings has informed us in writing that they place their auditoriums at our disposal. As we informed Brother Rutherford last fall, we were privileged to give in these buildings the greatest public witness ever given in Switzerland.
And now we know, dear brethren, that you remember us daily in your prayers, and we assure you that we do the same for you, well knowing that you now have more responsibility and that your task has become more difficult. But we are confident that the Lord will give you all the wisdom you need and that he will guide you by his spirit to the doing of His will.
Closely united with you in brotherly love, we remain Your brethren in Theocratic service,
F. Zurcheb
FIELD EXPERIENCES
FROM A CIRCULAR ADDRESSED
To the readers of The Watchtower in the Netherlands: “Herewith we would like to inform you that it is no more possible to write to the office of the Society in Heemstede. The German police have closed the office and taken away all the property of the Society, although everything was marked as American property. Moreover, they have taken the whole stock of Bibles and books, for destruction. Yea, they took really everything, even the dirty laundry, the possession of those who lived in the Bible House at Heemstede. The Bible, God’s Word, has predicted these evil persecutions, but we trust in Jehovah; for what he has promised he will also carry out in Armageddon, and he will destroy all those who persecute so maliciously God’s faithful servants in their work for the glorification of his name. (Isaiah 65:11-14; Obadiah 11-16) Please also stop all payments. We shall see to it that you get The Watchtower despite all these persecutions, which Jehovah God may yet permit for a short time.”
A PUBLISHER IN THE NETHERLANDS WRITES:
“I was arrested at 8 p. m. and taken to the police office. The following day my house was searched and a gramophone and a leather bag containing about ten booklets were confiscated. Next day I was taken to-----, to the German
police. Here I was questioned by various officials for about three hours. During the hearing I was forced to remain standing with my arms upraised, which was naturally terribly tiring. However, in the afternoon I was released with the warning that if I continued proclaiming the truth they (the German police) would arrest me immediately. Two months later I was arrested again, at 10 p. m. Again I was escorted to the police office and delivered to the German police next day. Here they used much abuse, and immediately after locked me up in a subterranean cave which was absolutely dark. After some hours, an official came and asked me in German: 'What have you done?’ and in so asking punched me several times in the face with his fist. In this place there was a coffin and other things. The German official asked if I had seen this, saying that if I did not tell the truth, I would be put in it. When he saw his words made no impression, he said that I would be taken to Germany and shot out there Then I was put into a car and taken to prison for preventive arrest. After a week in this prison I was again conducted to the German police and questioned. After a quarter of an hour one of the officials got so mad that, raging terribly like a wild beast, he approached and landed me one straight in the face, this without any reason, for I had always answered kindly and quietly. Every time I quoted some Bible verses and mentioned the name of Jehovah they began to threaten me and warn me to tell the truth. So I began to tell them the truth. Then they forced me to do all kinds of physical exercises; for instance, 160 times knee-bending, and standing for an hour without interruption in a certain awkward position. Perspiration began to penetrate through all my clothes. When I broke down with overtiredness they threatened me with all sorts of things, among others that my wife and children would also be arrested. Then they took me into a little cell and asked whether I was ready to die, saying I had only a few minutes left to pray. I
told them that if Jehovah would permit that I be killed I would gladly die for his name. Upon this I was taken back to prison (preventive arrest). This procedure lasted about 3| hours. While in prison I asked for medical treatment, as I had heart palpitations; also I caught a cold.
“After four weeks’ arrest I had to appear again before the police. They made three photos of me and fingerprinted me. They said that if I would tell the truth they would allow me to go home; they were a little kinder. After being eross-examined for about an hour I was told I was going to be released, but they threatened that if I would continue to proclaim the name of Jehovah they would finish with me for good. The questions they asked me were always the same; also my answers. They asked, for instance, if I knew certain brothers and sisters, who had given me the literature and the phonograph, etc. I thank Jehovah I have not said anything against the Kingdom interests. I trust Jehovah will further strengthen me.”
CONCERNING THE FAMILY OF GOD IN FRANCE
“Thus far I and my family and also my relatives in the country are quite well. Conditions at present obtaining have forced us to restrict ourselves very much. However, I have been able to get my business here in town as well as all the branches in the country going again. All of them are carrying on in a satisfactory manner. When difficulties began, business here in town receded very much, and I then had but 80 employees. However, afterwards things improved. I was able to engage new labor, and so there are here now again 250. About the same may be said as regards my other branches. As far as I had the means, I was able to provide them all with the necessary. I am now glad that everything is proceeding so well. The great difficulty has arisen here because of France’s being divided in several parts which are separate and inaccessible to each other: ... I was able to write to my relatives in the north and to send them the necessary things. However, news from them is very sparse. I only know that thus far they are well and they can quietly go about their work, although air attacks disturb them very much.
“The liquidation of the Society seems to slumber. I haven’t heard anything more from the liquidator. A great number of judicial documents are said to have been burnt. I have left this matter in abeyance. I have been more occupied in getting my business going again and have really done what I possibly could. Only food conditions are very serious here, and if you could help me in that respect I would be very glad. It is strange how events affect people. Some in the family allow themselves to be very much depressed by these conditions and become fearful. Others are joyful, full of hope, play the gramophone, sing songs and look courageously into the future. I myself am very glad to see that, considering circumstances, my business is quite good. On the whole, during the past year, I was able to engage about 400 workers here and in the branches. Further I was able to deliver 2,500 books, 8,000 booklets, and 2,000 Bibles and New Testaments. These figures are probably too low; for I have no data from the north. We fervently thank our great God that he has blessed us so richly, and that in spite of difficult conditions we are still here and able to go ahead.”
112
5He WATCHTOWER-
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street •	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
N. H. Knorr, Preside-at	W. E. Van Amburcii, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, Is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon It; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam's wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed In the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God's kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act Is the destruction of Satan's organization and the establishment of righteousness In the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal la published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible Instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wllL It arranges systematic Bible study for Its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid In such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It Is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and Its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British. South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian_________________40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian__________ 7 Beresford Road, Stratbfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this Journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may hare The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting It. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year la required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of addresa. when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the poet office at Brooklyn, N. 7., under the Act of March S, 1879.
“CHILDREN OF THE KING” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The spring month of April is a favorable time for the “Children of The King” Testimony Period, and which is therefore a world wide period of united action by those advertising the King and the Kingdom. In all the earth not only those of the anointed remnant, but also all those hoping to become the earthly “children of the King”, are taking part, and if any such want references .to companies organized for this testimony let them without delay write the office in their respective countries. April being the close of the three-month Watchtower Campaign, the servants and children of the King continue offering the special combination, namely, a year’s Watchtower subscription, together with the premium of the book Children and the new booklet Hope, for the regular subscription rate of $1.00 in America, and correspondingly in the other lands. Let this be your best month of the campaign, and at the end thereof you will with joy turn in your report of activities and the fruits thereof.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of May 17: “Micah” (Part 7), fl 1-14 inclusive, The Watchtower April 15, 1942.
Week of May 24: “Micah” (Part 7), fl 15-28 inclusive, The Watchtower April 15, 1942.
Week of May 31: “Micah” (Part 7), fl 29-41 inclusive, The Watchtower April 15, 1942.
“HOPE”
With pleasure the Society announces publication of a new booklet, Hope—for the Dead—for the Survivors—in a Righteous World. The theme itself impresses one that the booklet meets a very present need, when millions of hearts need to be infused with new hope both for the living and for the newly dead; and the contents, in an up-to-date setting, will delight you. It is a 64-page booklet, self-covered, but having a very engaging cover design. You will desire to read and enjoy it yourself and thereby know how best to present and use it in ‘comforting all that mourn’. You may obtain your personal copy now, contributing 5c therefor.
USE RENEWAL SUBSCRIPTION BLANK
The blank sent you one month before expiration of your Watchtower subscription should be filled out and returned to the Brooklyn office or to the Branch office in the country where you reside. Servants in the companies, and individuals, when sending in renewals for The Watchtower, should always use these blanks. By filling in these renewal blanks you are assured of the continuation of your Watchtower from the time of expiration, and without delay. It will also be a great help if you sign your name uniformly, and note any recent change of address, on the renewal slip.
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
No. LXIII	April 15, 1942	No 8
MICAH
PART 7
"When ye pray, say, Our Father tvhich art in hear will be done, as in heaven
TEHOVAH is the Father to whom prayer must I be directed. His beloved One, his only begotten
J Son, is the one appointed to give instruction in prayer, and the one in whose name the prayer is authorized to be offered and heard. Following His word of instruction, the petitioner will not pray amiss. Jehovah is the Heavenly Father of every faithful one who is in the way of life and who is in a covenant for membership in the kingdom of heaven. It is the Father’s name Jehovah that must be hallowed. Because of the reproaches that religion has heaped upon that holy name, it must be vindicated before all creation. The Kingdom will do that. That righteous Government will clear out all religion and all religious practitioners from heaven and earth. In place thereof it will cause God’s will to be done on earth by all creatures that live even as it is done above by the King at God’s right hand and by the “angels and authorities and powers being made subject unto him”. (1 Pet. 3:22) The Kingdom shall settle everlastingly the issue of universal DOMINATION.
2	Many centuries ago God established a typical Theocratic government over the twelve tribes of Israel, and anointed and installed his faithful witness, David, as the king thereof. The anointed king, as representative of the invisible Supreme Ruler, “sat on the throne of Jehovah.” (1 Chron. 29:23, Am. Rev. Ver.) With the help of the great Theocrat, Jehovah, King David made Zion his capital. Then he fought against all God’s enemies and extended the power and dominion of that typical Theocracy to the farthest limits ordained by Jehovah. That was a prophetic pattern of how Jehovah’s real Theocratic Government by his beloved Son will put down and destroy all enemies everywhere and will establish the domination of the glorious Theocracy universally, including our earth. As a type of Jehovah’s Anointed One, Christ Jesus, David was born of the tribe of Judah and in the little city of Bethlehem, which is also called Ephratah: “Ephrath, which is Beth-lehem.” (Gen. 35:19) When all enemies of the
en, Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy so in earth."—Luke 11:2.
typical Theocracy had been subdued and the government had been established in peace, which peace was continued during the reign of Solomon, King David prayed to the great Theocrat: “Blessed be thou, 0 Jehovah, the God of Israel our father, for ever and ever. Thine, 0 Jehovah, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty: for all that is in the heavens and in the earth is thine; thine is the kingdom, 0 Jehovah, and thou art exalted as head above all. ... Now therefore, our God, we thank thee, and praise thy glorious name.”—1 Chron. 29:10-13, Am. Rev. Ver.
3	Jesus, who sprang out of David's tribe of Judah, was anointed with God’s holy spirit after baptism in Jordan. Immediately Christ Jesus began preaching, “The kingdom of heaven is at hand,” because he, the One anointed from heaven to be King, was present. He taught his disciples the model prayer to ever keep their minds and hearts’ desire upon the coming of the Kingdom. By giving all that he had in heaven and earth, even life itself, Christ Jesus bought the right to and ownership of the Kingdom and all who shall be included in that Kingdom. God raised him out of death and to the place of chief favor and power in heaven, next to Jehovah: “But he, when he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God; henceforth expecting till his enemies be made the footstool of his feet.” (Heb. 10:12,13, A.R.V.; Ps. 110:1) Since then, and while Christ Jesus must wait in expectation of entering actively upon his Kingdom rulership, Jehovah has been taking out from among all nations believing and faithful creatures, just 144,000 of them, to be associated with Christ Jesus in the heavenly Kingdom, The Theocratic Government, Zion.—Rev. 14:1, 3.
‘Jehovah acknowledges that Theocratic Government as his own. He is the source of its life and power, and he by his spirit begets each one who gains office in that Theocracy. It is therefore his offspring and is pictured under the symbol of a perfect “man child”. The Head of that Government
116
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
is Christ Jesus, who is called ‘-'The Son of man”. All the members of that Theocratic Kingdom being first taken out from Jehovah’s holy universal organization, His universal organization is the “mother” of the “man child” Government and is therefore pictured as a pure and devoted “woman”, whose maker, Jehovah, is her husband. (Isa. 54:5) The entering in by Christ Jesus upon the active duties of the Government is therefore pictured as the woman’s giving birth to the “man child”. The wicked demon organization under Satan is symbolized as a fiery-red dragon which is opposed to universal domination by The Theocracy and therefore seeks to devour it at the moment of its birth, in A.D. 1914. This occasioned a great war in heaven, accompanied by world war on earth, and wherein Satan and his demon hosts were defeated and cast down. Maddened with the outcome of this wrar, Satan and the demons brought great “travail” upon God’s “woman” by persecuting all her “children” on earth who are in line for the Kingdom and who are but a “remnant of her seed”. (Rev. 12:1-13,17) In olden time when David was installed as anointed king on Mount Zion the Philistines and other anti-Theocratic enemies opposed him and he must war against them to destroy them. Likewise after the birth of the “man child" in 1914 the travail of war and of enemy persecution came upon God’s “woman” and her “children”. Before the birth of the “man child” the faithful Christians on earth had with earnest desire and prayer looked forward to that foretold event. Now because of the successful birth duly announced to the nations from and after 1914 the faithful Kingdom publishers were “hated of all nations”, as prophesied by Christ Jesus. They were made to cry out to God due to persecution. (Matt. 24:7-9) God by his prophet Micah foretold these events.
’“Now7 why dost thou cry out aloud? is there no king in thee? is thy counsellor perished? for pangs have taken thee as a woman in travail.” (Mic. 4: 9) That the birth of the Government would precede this tribulation upon God’s “woman” was further confirmed by another prophet living in Micah’s day, saying: “Before she travailed, she brought forth [the man child]; before her pain came, she was delivered of a man child [The Theocracy under Christ Jesus].” (Isa. 66:7) Many consecrated Christians had been led to think that immediately the birth of the “man child” occurred they would be transferred from earth by death and an instantaneous resurrection “change” from human to spirit and a glorification in the heavenly Kingdom. They were disappointed and, under the stress of persecution besides, they cried out, “How long, 0 Lord?”
4	The Lord has since revealed to them that Christ Jesus the King is the essential one of The Theoc
racy. He needs no associates with him to begin the Government born at God’s due time, to wit, in 1914, because He bought the Government and is entrusted with all power in heaven and earth. Only by the grace of God are his faithful followers, the members of “the body of Christ”, associated with him in the Kingdom, and that first after his coming to the temple, when he raises the sleeping saints from death. The remnant on earth, judged and approved, he anoints and brings into the covenant of faithfulness for the Kingdom. Thus, after the tribulation of God’s organization came, those of the remnant were brought forth by Zion and acknowledged by Jehovah as his children, his other children besides the “man child” born in 1914. Therefore God’s prophet exclaims under inspiration: “Who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen such things? Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day? or shall a nation [The Theocracy] be born at once? for as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her children [from and after 1918, when Christ Jesus came to the temple].”—Isa. 66: 8.
’ To the persecutors and enemies of The Theocracy it appeared that God’s kingdom had not begun in 1914, despite the physical facts fulfilling Bible prophecy proving that event. They took it for granted that there was no King in the midst of Jehovah’s covenant people. Why? Because the King is the ‘image of his Father’s person’, a divine Spirit, invisible to human eyes and discerned only by the eye of faith. Also there were spirit-begotten ones that proved unfaithful and became the “evil servant” class. By their course of conduct these say: “My Lord delayeth his coming.” (Matt. 24:48-51) They have joined the religionists in the persecution of those standing faithful to the Kingdom and seeking to publish it. Jehovah had indeed set his King Christ Jesus on his holy hill of Zion and had sent him forth to rule in the midst of his enemies, but the faithful remnant of those in line for the Kingdom were left on earth. Moreover, the enemy was permitted to express hate against them in all nations, to persecute them, and to take them captive and imprison them and practically stop their publication of the newly set-up Kingdom. They were as without a protecting King and as though cut off from being a part of the “new nation”, the New Government.
8	Further, concerning the remnant, there were spots and soils of religion upon their garments of identification, and in the stress of those days of world war between “the king of the north” and “the king of the south” there seemed to be no counselor to give counsel as to what course Jehovah’s persecuted ones should take. They were not clear as to God’s will, their eyes not yet being opened to the fact that the political governments that persecute
April 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER.
117
and declare illegal the publication of God’s kingdom are not “the higher powers” “ordained of God”. Jehovah God and Christ Jesus are truly “The Higher Powers” according to God’s own ordination, and Christ Jesus is God’s Minister authorized to bear the sword for the execution of all evildoers against The Theocracy. (Rom. 13:1-4) Christ Jesus, whose “name shall be called Wonderful Counsellor”, had not yet come to the temple as Teacher. Much of the counsel hitherto received was the thoughts of a man or of men, and such failed and perished because it did not stand them in good stead in their time of need. But those with pure hearts continued to look unto the Lord for guidance and they continued faithful although they suffered “pangs” keen as those of a “woman in travail”.—Jer. 30:6, 7.
‘ At the appointed time God’s “woman” brought forth the “man child” Government quietly in heaven. It was God’s will that from then on there should be war against the foes of the new Government and that Satan’s rule, hitherto uninterrupted, should now be interfered with and destroyed. This caused Satan to bring great tribulation on those of God’s organization on earth. Hence to his organization Zion Jehovah prophetically said: “Be in pain, and labour to bring forth, 0 daughter of Zion, like a woman in travail: for now shalt thou go forth out of the city, and thou shalt dwell in the field, and thou shalt go even to Babylon; there shalt thou be delivered; there the Lord shall redeem thee from the hand of thine enemies.” (Mic. 4:10) This shows, therefore, that it was not Jehovah’s will to remove the last members of “the body of Christ” from the earth at the birth of the “man child” and to then glorify them in heaven. Christ Jesus being alone in the Government at its birth, he was in effect “the man child”. But besides the “man child” God’s organization must bring forth her other children to be members of God’s royal family in The Theocracy. Therefore the bringing forth of the “remnant of her seed” must come after the travail of the war in heaven and after the casting of Satan and his demons out of heaven. First then would such “remnant” be acknowledged of God and approved as his representatives on earth and sent forth to bear witness to the birth of the new Government and also witness to the final end of Satan’s government of the world at Armageddon.
10	The remnant on earth must undergo a trial of their faith and devotion in order to be approved, accepted and anointed as “children of Zion”. The experiences from the birth of the Kingdom to the Lord’s coming to the temple and incidental to the World War provided that test. (Matt. 24: 7-13) During those years of war and persecution (1917-1919 particularly) Jehovah’s covenant people were forced
by the religionists and their political allies to “go forth out of the city”, that is, out of their organized condition of serving Jehovah as proclaimers of his Kingdom gospel. Then their condition was as if they were without city walls to restrain and keep out the persecutors and interferers with the work of God's people. Figuratively, they were made to “dwell in the field”, dragged forth there as captives to the enemy power and exposed to the spite and vengefulness of Zion’s enemies. They were unwillingly separated from God’s continuous worship and service, and were brought to “Babylon” to there be held captive and imprisoned and thus restrained from the organized service to God. Babylon is Satan’s organization, being symbolized by the city of Babel or Babylon built by that totalitarian, demon-worshiping dictator, Nimrod, the mighty hunter.
11	Jehovah keeps his promises, both in the typical or prophetic picture and also in fulfilling the promise in completion: “There shalt thou [the remnant] be delivered; there the Lord shall redeem thee from the hand of thine enemies.” In the type Jehovah appointed Cyrus king of Persia to overthrow Babylon and let God’s people go free to return to Jerusalem and rebuild the temple on Zion. In A.D. 1919 God used the Greater Cyrus, Christ Jesus the King, to break the power of the enemies over the 'remnant of the seed’ of Zion and to free them from the restraint of the forces of religion. He restored them to God’s organization and the temple service and to the pure worship of God in spirit and in truth, cleansed from all religion. Referring to Babylon, which lay to the north, and calling to the captives of Zion there, Jehovah says: “Ho, ho, come forth, and flee from the land of the north, . . . Deliver thyself, 0 Zion, that dwellest with the daughter of Babylon.” —Zech. 2: 6, 7.
“The obedient ones longed to serve Jehovah aright and responded. From and after 1919 they came forth from Babylon’s restraints, and Jehovah revived them in his service to be his witnesses. (Rev. 11:11,12) This he did in answer to the prayers of his chastened ones and for the sake of his name. His name was upon them and was now due to be declared throughout all the earth before Jehovah’s exhibition of power over Satan and his organization at the battle of Armageddon. “Thus saith the Lord God, I do not this for your sakes, O house of Israel, but for mine holy name’s sake, which ye have profaned among the heathen, whither ye went. And I will sanctify my great name, which was profaned among the heathen.” (Ezek. 36:22,23) “Not unto us, 0 Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory, for thy mercy, and for thy truth’s sake. Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is now their God? But our God is in the heavens; he hath done
118
THE WATCHTOWER
whatsoever he hath pleased.” (Ps. 115:1-3) The redeemed ones now fulfill the purpose of their deliverance, to bear witness to Jehovah’s name and show forth its praises throughout the earth.
13 The Babylonish religionists and governing factors of “Christendom” were greatly vexed. They were terrified at the deliverance of God’s “remnant” and the going forth of these with boldness and fearlessness in God’s “strange work” against religion. Therefore, under the influence of the demons now cast down from heaven to the earth they conspire together. They unite together in an anti-Theocracy or antiJehovah federation of nations to stop the work of the visible part of God’s organization Zion. “Now also many nations are gathered against thee, that say, Let her be defiled, and let our eye look upon Zion.” (Mic. 4:11) In 1918 the World War was stopped by God’s power, but the gathering of all nations against God’s true servants and Theocratic representatives did not stop. (Zech. 14:1,2) The warning is given to His people, at Revelation 12:13,17, that after Satan’s ousting from heaven his dragon organization would go forth to make war upon the remnant of God’s woman Zion. God is gathering together by Christ Jesus all things in heaven and earth into one, and the remnant on earth have been gathered to the place or condition of assembly of God’s troops, which place is signified by the name “Armageddon”. The demons, making great noise like bullfrogs by their propaganda agencies upon the earth, particularly religion, are now engaged in influencing and maneuvering “the kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God Almighty”. The demons gather such armies round about and against the place of the assembly of God’s troops, including the remnant. So the fight is called “the battle of Armageddon”.—Rev. 16:13-16.
" The enemy seeks the defilement of Zion, as represented by the remnant. The object is to unfit her for God’s use in his Theocratic Government and to make good Satan’s wicked charge that God cannot put on earth creatures who under the severe test by Satan will maintain their integrity toward God. To this end Satan and his demons engage in turning all nations totalitarian. Therefore they bring forth the totalitarian-religious “abomination of desolation”, composed of the religious Hierarchy allied with and riding upon the arbitrary dictators. The purpose is to regiment all people into the worship of Satan’s “beast” organization and by threats and force and punishments make them submit to the ‘mark of the beast and his image’. Thereby also they hope specially to stop the work of Jehovah’s witnesses and their loyal companions and to coerce them to ‘touch the unclean thing by compromising with and taking part
Brooklyn, N. Y.
in the works of Satan’s organization. (2 Cor. 6:17; Isa. 52:11) Such defilement of the earthly part of Zion would in the eyes of the demons defile the heavenly part, because such would make it seem that the heavenly invisible part was unable to protect and sustain the visible part. But the remnant know the issue is God’s supremacy and universal domination, and they now refuse to violate their covenant with God and to cease from his worship and service. Their purpose is to prove Satan a liar and God true. Therefore they resist the demons and absolutely refuse to break their integrity toward God and to be forced into playing the hypocrite like religious “Christendom”.
15 The preliminaries in the great contest for universal domination are on. Jehovah promises the victory to Zion, his beloved organization under Christ Jesus. Nothing would give the enemy more pleasure than for their eyes to feast upon Zion destroyed, at least the remnant thereof on earth. Zion is The Theocracy, and the remnant are in line for a place therein. The demonized, totalitarian “abomination of desolation” crowd maliciously cry: “Let her be defiled, and let our eye look upon Zion”; meaning, "Let our eye see our desire upon Zion” (Am. Rev. Ver.); “let our eye look with pleasure on Zion.” (Leeser) Their slogan is: “Down with Theocracy! On with demon rule! Long live religion!” In utter contempt of Jehovah God they seek to destroy the remnant and their devoted companions, so as to make it appear that Jehovah does not exist or is impotent against those of Satan’s organization. As they persecute Jehovah’s witnesses they taunt them, saying: “Where is the Lord thy God?” (Mic. 7:10) The modern Edomites are the religionists, particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and including the “evil servant” class. Spitefully these rejoiced at the banishing of the work of Jehovah’s covenant people in 1918, and now they would repeat that triumph and this time make it complete. Warning such Edomites why He will repay them with destruction Jehovah says: “But thou shouldest not have looked on the day of thy brother in the day that he became a stranger [a banished exile]; neither shouldest thou have rejoiced over the children of Judah in the day of their destruction; neither shouldest thou have spoken proudly in the day of distress.” (Obad. 12) This time they will not get away with it.
GOD’S THOUGHTS
10 The thoughts of Jehovah concerning his enemies and The Theocracy’s enemies are set down in his written Word, and he says: “The Lord of hosts hath sworn, saying, Surely as I have thought, so shall it come to pass; and as I have purposed, so shall it stand.” (Isa. 14: 24) The nations of “Chris
April 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
119
tendom” could have known Jehovah’s thoughts by a consecrated study of his Word, but their paid clergy have failed to express God’s recorded thoughts, not believing such themselves. They have also stubbornly fought against the public expressing of His thoughts by Jehovah’s witnesses and have so remained willingly ignorant. “But they know not the thoughts of the Lord, neither understand they his counsel: for he shall gather them as the sheaves into the [threshing] floor.” (Mic. 4:12) This denotes a turning of the tables upon those that seek the defilement and destruction of Jehovah’s Theocracy, Zion. Unlike the Nazi-Fascist-religious method of attacking without warning, Jehovah by his obedient witnesses has offered them good counsel: “Be wise now, therefore, 0 ye kings; be instructed, ye judges of the earth. Serve the Lord [Jehovah] with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son [the King of The Theocracy], lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little.” (Ps. 2:10-12) However, the “many nations” of “Christendom” have willfully objected to understanding Jehovah’s counsel.—Prov. 1: 30, 25.
” If they understood God’s counsel, the pope would not be praying for his Nazi-Fascist-religious “new order founded upon moral principles”. The bishops of Germany would not be praying for the dictator and the triumph of the totalitarian armies. The politicians would not be joining with their clergy allies in presumably offering prayer to God for his blessing upon their numerous political-religious schemes, which plans they without consideration of God’s Word have fixed up and which they want God to endorse and back up. “There are many devices in a man’s heart; nevertheless, the counsel of the Lord, that shall stand.” (Prov. 19:20,21) “The Lord bringeth the counsel of the heathen [the nations] to nought; he maketh the devices of the people of none effect. The counsel of the Lord standeth for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all generations.” (Ps. 33:10,11) “Therefore hear ye the counsel of the Lord that he hath taken against Babylon [the nations gone totalitarian like Babylon of old], and his purposes that he hath purposed against the land of the Chaldeans [the religious-totalitarian crowd].” (Jer. 50:45) Jehovah has taken counsel to give the antiTheocracy enemies the worst drubbing they shall ever have had.
18 By the proclamation by His remnant and their companions of and concerning The Theocracy and the day of God’s vengeance Jehovah has gathered his enemies into a conspiracy and united opposition against his Theocratic Government and its witnesses. The two world powers, “the king of the north” and “the king of the south”, may fight each other over world domination, but they are both united in
antagonism to The Theocracy. Both have indicma-tion against the “holy covenant” thereof. (Dan. 11:30, 40) Like “goats”, they have been separated from the “sheep”, who favor The Theocracy. They have been gathered to the unfavorable side of the King who sits upon his glorious throne judging. (Matt. 25:32,35-45) The “day of [God's] preparation” is about up, the final end of Satan's rule is very nigh, the maneuvering of all enemies into the position for their destruction is about done, and. at the time Jehovah gives his last and emphatic warning tidings, the gathering of all the goatish enemies will be complete, immediately before Armageddon is due to begin. They have long trampled down and crushed Jehovah’s faithful people and their Kingdom message. Now their turn comes to be trampled, torn, pounded, mashed, dragged, and beaten, mercilessly, as by the hoofs of a mighty horned beast driven around and around and around on God's threshing-floor.
THRESH!
“Jehovah gives his mighty7 Field Marshal Clirist Jesus the signal to begin the battle, at the day and hour which only He himself has known: “Arise, and thresh, O daughter of Zion: for I will make thine horn iron, and I will make thy hoofs brass; and thou shalt beat in pieces many people; and I will consecrate their gain unto the Lord, and their substance unto the Lord of the whole earth.” (Mic. 4:13) Concerning the Devil’s organization it is written: “For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, The daughter of Babylon is like a threshingfloor [like the harvested sheaves upon it], it is time to thresh her: yet a little while, and the time of her harvest shall come.” (Jer. 51: 33) By authority from the Lord God the remnant and his “other sheep” make advance announcement and warning of the coming threshing upon the enemy, now before it begins.
80 In Scripture the ox is a symbol of power and strength to work with endurance; the horn is a symbol of power to push against the enemy and destroy them. (Ezek. 1:10; Rev. 4:7) Christ Jesus is the Head of the “daughter of Zion” or Theocracy. In the ancient tabernacle sacrifices he is likened to a bullock for God’s altar, but at the time to thresh Satan’s organization his strength against the enemy is likened to that of a mighty ox against the dry grain stalks on the floor. “God brought him forth out of Egypt [the world]; he hath as it were the strength of an unicorn [or wild ox].” (Num. 24: 8) “His horns are like the horns of unicorns: with them he shall push the people together to the ends of the earth.” (Deut. 33:17) “Canst thou bind the unicorn with his band . . . because his strength is great?” (Job 39:10,11) Says God’s anointed King: “All the
120
WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
workers of iniquity shall be scattered; but my horn shalt thou exalt like the horn of an unicorn: I shall be anointed with fresh oil.” (Ps. 92:9,10) “He also exalteth the horn of his people, the praise of all his saints, even of the children of Israel, a people near unto him. Praise ye the Lord.”—Ps. 148:14.
21	Satan’s organization, both visible and invisible parts thereof, presents an appearance of terrible strength. The visible part is pictured as the iron legs and feet of the terrible image seen in the king of Babylon’s dream, whereas the invisible demon powers which bear immediate rule over the earth are pictured as the brass thighs and belly thereof. But the greater and invincible strength of The Theocracy is pictured as The Stone of adamantine hardness, which Stone smites Satan’s idolized organization and grinds to pieces its “iron” and “brass” and other parts, including the gold head, Satan himself. Concerning that Stone it is written: “It shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.” (Dan. 2:31-45) To Christ, Zion’s King in command of God’s heavenly hosts, Jehovah says concerning the threshing of the enemy: “I will make thine horn [to push and gore the enemy to death] iron [tougher and stronger than the material of an ox’s natural horn], and I will make thy hoofs [to bruise the head of Satan the Serpent and all his organization] brass [harder than the horny or tough fibrous material of an oxhoof].”—Mic. 4:13.
22	The enemies have been made the footstool of Christ Jesus, and he shall pound the Devil’s organization good and heavy and thoroughly under foot at Armageddon. “And thou shalt beat in pieces many people [many peoples (Am. Rev. Ver.)].” Such beaten ones are the kings of the earth and their armies and their subjects, all gone totalitarian, and regimented into a combined opposition to the King of kings and Lord of lords. They despise The Theocracy and expect to squish it like a worm. They strive to strike great fear into the remnant and their companions who stand unflinchingly and immovably for The Theocracy. For the comfort of these Jehovah says to his spiritual Israelites: “Fear not, thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel; I will help thee, saith the Lord, and thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel. Behold, I will make thee [to be] a new sharp threshing instrument having teeth: thou shalt thresh the mountains [kingdoms], and beat them small, and shalt make the hills as chaff. Thou shalt fan [winnow] them, and the wind shall carry them away, and the whirlwind shall scatter them: and thou shalt rejoice in the Lord, and shalt glory in the Holy One of Israel.”—Isa. 41:14-16.
25	Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions do not carry on the testimony work for self-gain. The small contributions they receive from those who
accept the printed message they apply in the Lord’s service to the printing of more books and delivery of such to other spiritually hungry ones. Christ Jesus does not fight the battle of Armageddon to seize the enemies’ booty for self-enrichment, but to unselfishly vindicate and hallow Jehovah’s name. Hence as Head of Zion he says: “And I will consecrate their gain unto the Lord, and their substance unto the Lord of the whole earth.”—Mic. 4:13.
24	Satan’s organization was the firstborn rebel organization. Likewise its earthly symbol, Babylon, was the firstborn rebel totalitarian government set up on earth, by Nimrod after the Flood. It cannot be redeemed, but is cursed, and hence assigned to destruction. It is filled with “their substance”, “their ill-gotten gain” (Leeser); “their unrighteous gain” (Rotherham). Such they coveted and gained by plundering the people in the name of and with the blessing of religion. Like the plunder of the accursed city of Jericho, it may not be seized upon for personal glory and selfish gratification. Those like Achan coveting any of it are condemned and destroyed. (Josh. 6:18,19; 7:10-26) The battle of Armageddon is not for self-gain or self-glory of creatures, but is consecrated to the glory of Jehovah, “the Lord of the whole earth.” The fight is for the vindication of His name and the settling of the issue of universal domination in His favor. All spoils of the battle belong to Him by whose invincible power the victory is won. Satan the Devil shall no more be the invisible overlord of the earth, but “the Lord of the whole earth” has appointed Christ Jesus to that place. Thus Jehovah avenges his own elect who have cried out aloud unto him for deliverance and the vindication of his name. (Luke 18: 7, 8) Jehovah’s covenant people are all for the vindication of his name! Unselfishly, and by faith anticipating the execution of his righteous judgment upon the unclean enemy organization, they join with the heavenly hosts in singing alleluias of praise to Jehovah and by Christ Jesus.—Rev. 19:1.
time of war
25	From the time Jehovah’s King was enthroned on Zion down to the casting of Satan the Devil into the bottomless pit at Armageddon is a period of war, both in heaven and in earth. In 1918 Jehovah stopped the World War on earth, and thereby ‘shortened the days of tribulation’. It was for his elect’s sake, that they might proclaim the message of salvation by Jehovah’s Theocratic Government and that ‘some flesh might be saved’ through the battle of Armageddon, which brings the final end on Satan’s organization. The temporary ceasing of hostilities on earth between “the king of the north” and “the king of the south” did not mean for God’s faithful
April 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
121
remnant a time of freedom from assault by Satan and his demons and his dupes on earth. Satan and his demons, exceedingly wroth at being cast out of heaven, intensified the persecution of God’s “woman” and the war upon the “remnant of her seed”. (Rev. 12:13,17) Nevertheless, God’s “strange work” must be carried on. It is a war against entrenched religion and her refuge of lies and her hiding-place of falsehood. In this war Jehovah assigns a part to his devoted remnant, and, later on, their earthly companions. Hence the command to the remnant of Zion’s seed: “Now gather thyself in troops, 0 daughter of troops; he hath laid siege against us; they shall smite the judge of Israel with a rod upon the cheek.” (Mic. 5:1) This means that Zion is a daughter of a Warrior, to wit, Jehovah of hosts (armies), and that the Captain of Zion’s troops is Christ Jesus. (Rev. 19:14,15) Now since his coming to the temple and awakening the sleeping saints these resurrected members of “his body” are all at his disposal in the war, and also all the angels which fought under him in the fight to oust Satan from heaven. (Rev. 12:7-12) Next he organizes the remnant on earth for the fight against demonism and equips them with “the whole armour of God”.— Eph. 6:11.
16 The offensive weapon of the remnant is not carnal, but is “the sword’ of the spirit, which is the word of God”. They fight not with flesh and blood, but with the demons. (Eph. 6:12-18) The gathering and organizing of them in troops was noticeably from 1922 on. Then Jehovah poured out his spirit upon all his remnant in the flesh, and this battalion of Zion’s troops were organized into a unified company for service in the field, to proclaim Jehovah's name and Kingdom and the day of his vengeance against the enemy. Particularly was their organizing as troops marked after the “new name” was revealed and adopted, to wit, “Jehovah’s witnesses.” After receiving that “new name” the organized groups of Kingdom publishers became known as “companies”, as indicated at Psalm 68:11: “The Lord gave the word; great was the company [(Hebrew) tsdba; meaning host, army] of those that published it.” Exactly seven years later, to wit, October 1, 1938, the Theocratic rule of organization was applied to the company of Jehovah’s remnant and their companions. Furthermore, since December 1, 1941, the responsibility of each one of Jehovah’s troops on earth is increased because conditions require the application of God’s order that “every man shall bear his own burden”. (Gal. 6: 5) Now as at no time in the past Jehovah’s visible army moves forward in the war, boldly following their heavenly Leader and Captain, Christ Jesus. They present an unbroken front to the demonized enemy and let neither perse
cution nor death of any in the ranks stop them from pressing the battle to the gates of the stronghold of religion. They are like the irresistible onward-swarming locusts described in Joel 2:4-11, and though small, comparatively, in number, they are wise with heavenly wisdom: “The locusts have no [earthly] king, yet go they forth all of them by bands [gathered together].”—Prov. 30:27.
27 In the days of King Hezekiah of Jerusalem the typical Theocracy underwent a siege. Babylon had then not become the dominant world power, and the king of Assyria was the most prominent and powerful representative of Satan’s visible organization. In the grab for world domination King Sennacherib of Assyria must do away with the typical Theocracy; hence he besieged Jerusalem. Strengthened by Jehovah, King Hezekiah refused to compromise with the devil-religionists, and that night Jehovah’s angel went forth and slew at one stroke 185,000 of the besiegers and forced Sennacherib back to his capital, Nineveh, and to his death. That historic siege and its outcome shall have complete fulfillment in this “time of the end”.
“ The totalitarian world power of Assyria foreshadowed the nations gone totalitarian and contending against Jehovah’s Theocratic Government for world domination on earth. The king of Assyria pictures their invisible ruler, Satan, “the god of this world.” He uses his demon hosts under his chief prince, Gog, to marshal both the rulers of the earth and their regimented peoples against the place of assembly of Jehovah’s troops, called “Armageddon”. The most exposed and vulnerable part is the remnant, together with their valiant companions. Hence the demons and their human dupes make these their target and direct their fire against them. They lay siege against them to wear them out and make them break their covenant with God and their integrity toward him and forsake their uncompromising stand for The Theocracy. Against them the totalitarian religionists set up their “abomination of desolation” in defiance of God’s holy Kingdom. They employ the totalitarian Nazi-Fascist-Roman Catholic dictatorship and its “strong-arm squad”, also organized Catholic Action, and priest-led mobs, and anti-Theocratic legislation, and other illegal, unconstitutional and un-Christian means aimed at making Jehovah’s covenant people yield and deny Jehovah’s supremacy.
” Jehovah’s appointed Judge is Christ Jesus. (John 5:22,27) He came to the temple in 1918 and began judgment at the house of God, which is spiritual Israel. (1 Pet. 4:17) Then he extended his judgment to “Christendom”, which professes to be the house of God, and finally to all nations, dividing the people thereof as “sheep” from the “goats”. (Matt. 25: 31, 32) Christ Jesus, “the judge of Israel,” sends
122	WATCHTOWER.	Brooklyn, N. Y.
forth the remnant to declare the “judgment written” against “Christendom” and the rest of the worldly nations. Jesus warns the anti-Theocratic, totalitarian-religious crowd: “Inasmuch as ye have done it to one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.” But that crowd is out for world domination and they reject Jehovah’s Theocracy and its King and refuse to acknowledge Christ Jesus as their judge. Instead, the rulers “give their kingdom unto the beast”, unto the “abomination of desolation” on which the great whore of religion sits, and with their scepter or rod of power they persecute Jehovah’s witnesses and companions who proclaim the judicial decisions of Christ Jesus. Thus doing unto Christ’s brethren, to silence them, if possible, they show their insulting contempt for Christ and thereby “smite the judge of Israel with a rod upon the cheek”. The record does not state that He turns the other cheek and stops the proclamation of Jehovah’s judgments; nor do the remnant of his body members on earth do so. The blow on the cheek fills them with righteous indignation and stirs up in them greater bitterness against religion and greater zeal in the active worship and service of the Higher Powers, God and Christ.—Ezek. 3:14.
RULER OUT OF BETHLEHEM
30	By the prophecy of Micah Jehovah foretold the earthly birthplace of that “judge of Israel”. That prophecy not only had a miniature fulfillment at the birth of Jesus in Bethlehem nineteen centuries ago, but also has a major and complete fulfillment now in the “time of the end”. “But thou, Beth-lehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting.” (Mic. 5: 2) The names here are significant and identify the organization meant. Jehovah’s organization is the Greater Bethlehem Ephratah, which name means “House of Bread with Fruitfulness”. The typical city being in the tribe of Judah, it was the same as “Beth-lehem-judah” (Ruth 1:1), which name means “The House of Bread with Praise”, that is, praise to Jehovah. God’s capital organization Zion is The House of Bread whereby God supplies abundantly the life-giving spiritual bread by Christ Jesus, greater than Joseph in famine-stricken Egypt. Zion holds forth to the dying people the life-sustaining fruits or truth of God’s kingdom, and Christ Jesus, Zion’s Head, is chief in giving praise to Jehovah. He is the “Lion of the tribe of Juda”, bold in praises.
31	“Judah” meaning “praise”, the “thousands of Judah” picture the “thousand thousands” and “ten thousand times ten thousand” of all the holy angels, cherubim and seraphim in Jehovah’s universal
organization who praise him. (Dan. 7:10) Compared numerically with them, Jehovah’s capital organization Zion is "little”; it is composed of a limited number, Christ Jesus and his “little flock” to whom Jehovah gives the Kingdom. (Luke 12: 32) Their number is exactly 144,000 and One, Christ Jesus being the Head One and the others the members of “his body”, associates with him in The Theocratic Government. Though little, yet out of Zion comes forth unto Jehovah his “ruler in Israel”, whether Satan’s organization likes it or not. Referring to spiritual Israel, including the remnant, it is written: “And so all Israel shall be saved: as it is written, There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob [the remnant].” (Rom. 11:26) In 1914 Jehovah enthroned him on Zion as “ruler in Israel”, and the Government is upon his shoulder. (Isa. 9:6) Nineteen centuries ago he rode into Jerusalem and went to the temple and offered himself as King, which was three and one-half years after his anointing with God’s spirit. A like time after his enthronement, the “ruler in Israel” arrived in 1918 at the greater temple for judgment and ‘came forth’ and appeared, by causing his remnant to discern by the fulfilled prophecies his presence there as judge and ruler.
33	His “goings forth [origin] have been from of old, from everlasting”; and this proves that Christ Jesus is a creation, having a beginning or origin. When on earth he said: “Before Abraham was, I am.” (John 8: 58) “I proceeded forth and came from God; neither came I of myself, but he sent me.” (John 8:42) This shows that long before his human birth in the manger in Bethlehem-judah, he was created, and his life was in due time transferred from his heavenly glory to the womb of a virgin of Judah that he might become “The Son of man”. He calls himself “the beginning of the creation of God”, "the firstborn of every creature.” (Rev. 3:14; Col. 1:15) Hence his creation preceded that of Lucifer. The time of his creation as “The Word of God” being unrevealed, he is “from everlasting” or “from the days of eternity” (Hebrew). This pre-eminence over all other creatures Christ Jesus maintains as the Head of God’s capital Zion.
33	By Jehovah’s determination of the times and due seasons for events, the human birth of Jesus in the typical Bethlehem must be a long time prior to his coming forth from the antitypical House of Bread. For this reason the prophet says: “Therefore will he give them up, until the time that she which travaileth hath brought forth; then the remnant of his brethren shall return unto the children of Israel.” (Mic. 5:3) Ten days after the ascension of Christ Jesus to God’s right hand in heaven came Pentecost
April 15,1942
WATCHTOWER,
123
and the outpouring of the Lord’s spirit upon the disciples. From and after Pentecost Jehovah carried forward the gathering of spiritual Israel, the 144,000 to be united with Christ Jesus on Mount Zion. (Rev. 7:4-8; 14:1,3) These must bear testimony to the coming Kingdom. The birth of that Theocratic Government being a long way off, Jehovah gave his faithful witnesses up to be tested as to their integrity by being buffeted by Satan’s agents, particularly the religionists, imitation Christians, the “tares” whom Satan sowed in overwhelming numbers throughout “Christendom”. (Matt. 13:24-30) It was not yet God's time to make such enemies the footstool of his King Christ Jesus.—Ps. 110:1.
M At the end of the Gentile Times in 1914 the waiting period ran out and promptly God’s “woman”, his universal organization, brought forth the new and acting Ruler, the New Government. Thereafter Zion’s travail of war against the opposing forces of Satan began. “And she brought forth a man child, who was to rule all nations with a rod of iron: and her child was caught up unto God, and to his throne. And there was war in heaven.” (Rev. 12:5,7) “Before she travailed, she brought forth; before her pain came, she was delivered of a man child.” (Isa. 66:7) In 1918, having now come to the temple, the King who is “ruler in Israel” and “judge of Israel” came forth out of the antitypical “Beth-lehem Ephratah”. Then he delivered from the restraining power of Satan’s organization “the remnant of his brethren” yet on earth, who are other children of Zion. These he sanctified or set to doing their part in connection with Jehovah’s “strange work”, and concerning this it is written: “For both he that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one [Jehovah]: for which cause he [Christ Jesus] is not ashamed to call them brethren.” (Heb. 2:11) These returned from their state of restraint, were purged for God’s service, and were made a part of God’s Theocratic organization, “the children of Israel.” The sleeping saints of spiritual Israel had been raised out of death by the Lord in the temple, and thus the returning remnant yet in the flesh on earth became associated with their resurrected brethren of spiritual Israel in the “strange work”. There is now unity of all spiritual Israelites, all of the ‘Tody of Christ”, whether in heaven or on earth. —Eph. 1:10; John 17: 21-23; 1 Thess. 4:16,17.
as Now the majestic King at the temple stands up in his power and feeds his remnant on earth with spiritual nourishment from the House of Bread and Fruitfulness and leads them in singing praises to the great Theocrat, Jehovah. “And he shall stand and feed in the strength of the Lord [Jehovah], in the majesty of the name of the Lord his God; and they shall abide; for now shall he be great unto the
ends of the earth.” (Mic. 5:4) In 1914 and at God’s command to rule in the midst of his enemies he stood up as acting King, one of whose official titles is “Michael”. That name means “Who is like God?” Christ Jesus raises that question in defiance of the contenders for world domination and goes forth to settle it: “And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great prince which standeth for the children of thy people; and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a nation even to that same time: and at that time thy people [the remnant of spiritual Israel] shall be delivered, every one that shall be found written in the book.” (Dan. 12:1) Jehovah sends forth the rod of Christ’s strength out of Zion to rule amidst his enemies (Ps. 110:2), and he appears at the temple as the Chief Shepherd. He spreads a table for the remnant of his “little flock” in the presence of their enemies and feeds them and revives them continually with new strength in Jehovah’s “strange work”. As the Vindicator of his Father’s name he is clothed with excellency, “the majesty of the name of the Lord his God,” and he causes his remnant and their companions to declare Jehovah’s name and purpose throughout all the earth.
“ The remnant having returned to Zion and being strengthened for the fight by food from the hand of her great Shepherd-King, all efforts of the enemy shall fail to dislodge them from the temple where they serve God: “and they shall abide,” faithful. Overcoming all efforts of the totalitarian modern Assyrians to break them loose from The Theocracy, to them the promise shall be fulfilled: “Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my God; and he shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, which is New Jerusalem, which cometh down out of heaven from my God: and I will write upon him my new name.” (Rev. 3:12) Bearing the “new name” with Christ Jesus, they make known his greatness as King and Vindicator by preaching unto the ends of the earth “this gospel of the kingdom” “for a witness unto all nations” before the final end gets here. The meek or teachable persons of good-will toward God, who have waited for a government of righteousness, hail the good news. They hail and salute Jehovah’s enthroned King and ascribe the greatness of the Kingdom unto him, and thus among these “other sheep” of the Lord is he “great unto the ends of the earth”. After Armageddon, the enemies being then cleared out, “he shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the earth.”— Ps. 72:8.
” “And this man shall be the peace [(Rotherham) So shall this one be Prosperity], when the Assyrian
124
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
shall come into our land; and when he shall tread in our palaces, then shall we raise against him seven shepherds, and eight principal men.” (Mic. 5: 5) The demon forces now’ put forth desperate efforts to break up the peace and unity and prosperity that exist within the land or earthly condition of God’s remnant and their companions. Concerning the totalitarian crowd, symbolized by “the Assyrian” from north of the Holy Land, it was prophesied and is now in fulfdlment: “And he shall enter into the countries, and shall overflow and pass over. He shall enter also into the glorious land [the Kingdom interests and privileges on earth of God’s remnant], . . . And he shall plant the tabernacles of his palace between the seas in [against] the glorious holy mountain [the remnant representing the glorious Mount Zion] ; yet he shall come to his end, and none shall help him.” (Dan. 11: 40, 41, 45) This invasion is under the demon leadership of Gog, the chief prince or understudy of Satan, as shown at Ezekiel 38: 8,16. The demon forces and totalitarian crowd even “tread in our palaces”, the abiding-places of Jehovah’s witnesses in peace and prosperity and which represent The Theocracy; as, for example, when the arbitrary religion-inspired forces invaded the branch offices of the Watch Tower Society and closed them down and declared their gospel preaching “illegal” and “subversive to the State”. Do Jehovah’s covenant people then hole up and quit witnessing!
SHEPHERDS, PRINCIPAL MEN
M “Then shall we raise against him seven shepherds, and eight principal men.” Those shepherds know how to fight the totalitarian giant as the shepherd boy David did. Christ Jesus is “the Chief Shepherd”, and his rod is for the protection of his sheep. The nations going totalitarian he shall feed with death and destruction: “Ask of me and let me give nations as thine inheritance, and as thy possession the ends of the earth: thou shalt shepherd them with a sceptre of iron, as a potter’s vessel shait thou dash them in pieces.” (Ps. 2: 8, 9, Roth.; Rev. 12: 5, Roth.) “Seven” represents spiritual completeness, and the “seven shepherds” must represent the complete number of those in the covenant with Christ Jesus for the Kingdom and who overcome religion and are conformed to his image: “And he that overcometh, and keepeth throughout my works, I will give unto him authority over the nations; and he shall shepherd them with a sceptre of iron, as vessels of earthenware are dashed in pieces.” (Rev. 2:26, Roth.) Therefore the besieged and assaulted remnant and their companions make the Greater David, Christ Jesus, their shield and protector against the invading Assyrian. They look for victory to their “Chief Shepherd”, who represents the Great Shep
herd, Jehovah, and they say: “Thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.” (Ps. 23:4) Meantime the remnant continue feeding his “other sheep”.
’’Who are the “eight principal men” raised up! Eight is one more than seven. In the Hebrew, “eight” has the thought of plumpness, as if to denote a surplus above the perfect number “seven”. Quite properly “eight” are raised up, because now is the time when the totalitarian “abomination of desolation” is brought forth, to wit, the symbolic “beast” with the great whore of religion on its back as spiritual guide. Concerning that beast it is prophesied that it makes its appearance after the seventh world power (British-American world co-operation): “And the beast that was, and is not, even he is the eighth, and is of the seven [which turn totalitarian in opposition to The Theocracy], and goeth into perdition.” (Rev. 17:9-ll) Satan’s chief prince, Gog, of the demon land of Magog, is specially the prince controlling that totalitarian “abomination of desolation” beast, and by the religious whore he drives it to the assault against those who represent The Theocratic Government.
40	The “eight principal men” are “eight anointed ones of men” (Hebrew text), or, “eight princes of mankind” (Rotherham). The remnant are still in the flesh as men and have been anointed with the spirit of the Lord to be in line for the Kingdom. (Joel 2:28) Hence the “eight principal men” may mean the complete number of the remnant together with the pre-eminent One, their anointed Head, Christ Jesus, “The Son of man,” he being the Eighth One above the seven or complete number. However, the Scriptures strongly indicate that toward the beginning of Armageddon Christ Jesus, the King-Father, will resurrect from their long sleep of centuries the faithful men of old and will give them life as his children, as perfect men, and these he will “make princes in all the earth”. (Ps. 45:16; Heb. 11:35) He will doubtless bring forth and present to the remnant and their companions these “princes” among men at a time of dire crisis for his covenant people. Such future “princes” died standing up against the demon rule in the times before Christ. They will be delighted to again face the demon forces at Armageddon and see such wiped out. Whether the “eight principal men” means or includes those resurrected faithful men of old remains to be seen. The main point of instruction in this is that the complete number of God’s faithful covenant people on earth boldly face the totalitarian monstrosity and present a united front against such and persistently carry on in the war against religion and the demons and for The Theocracy.
41	Which way does the tide of battle flow! and shall the remnant survive and have work to do on
April 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER,
125
earth after the battle of Armageddon! The Lord gives an indication in the further part of the prophecy, which is written to admonish and comfort us
that we might continue with patient endurance in his “strange work” unto the final end.
(To be continued)
ROOT OF THE WORLD EVIL
CC’ | 'HE silver is mine, and the gold is mine, saith I the Lord of hosts.” (Hag. 2:8) "Which shall men love and worship, the material thing of value, or the great Owner of such thing!
For those who love him the Lord of hosts, whose name is Jehovah, has provided complete refuge, but for no others. These “last days” are strenuous and fraught with great danger, because the climax is at hand. The enemy is bending every effort to accomplish the destruction of those who love and serve the Lord of hosts. Rather than see any human serve Jehovah, Satan the adversary would now destroy the entire human race. His wrath is especially directed against those who bear witness to Jehovah God of hosts, because they are bringing the testimony of the truth to the people in obedience to God’s commandments. The great adversary shall fail in his total war.
What shall befall those who do not love the Lord God of hosts! Note this historical example: Almost all of the nation of Israel turned away from Jehovah God because that people did not love God; and r ecessarily that people as a nation suffered destruction, and the remnant thereof to this day are scattered to the ends of the earth. Likewise the nations called “Christendom” are against Jehovah God because they do not love him; and they shall suffer destruction. (Ps. 9:17) The one thing that the wise persons do and will continue to do is to love God, “whose name alone is JEHOVAH.”—Ps. 83:18.
The great commandment, which is first in time and first in importance, is that the creature must love Jehovah God. This question was once propounded to the Son of God: “Master, which is the great commandment in the law!” The answer of Christ Jesus proves that there is one primary commandment: “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets.” (Matt. 22:36-40) This commandment Jehovah made of paramount importance, and it is emphasized by the wicked challenge flung into the face of Jehovah by Satan the Devil. It was at the time when God had led the Israelites out of Egypt that he gave this commandment to his people, that they must love him if they would live. Then he added: ‘Ye shall not go after other gods, as ye shall be diligent to keep the commandments of the Lord your God.’ (Deut. 6:5-17) Secondary to the great commandment, says Jesus, is: “Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself”; no more and no less. All the law and the prophets depend upon these two commandments, because a failure to keep these would make the keeping of others of no real value.
Often the phrase is used, “We must love God supremely.” That expression is unscriptural, for the reason that there is no qualification or limitation to the love the creature
must have for Jehovah. Love means to be unselfishly and wholly devoted to Jehovah God without qualification or compromise. There can be no division of one’s love, part being given to Jehovah, and part to a creature. If one’s own self stands in his way or interferes with his love for Jehovah, then self must be put on the side. If one’s neighbor or any creature stands in the way of complete devotion to Jehovah, that neighbor or other creature must be put aside. No one can please God who permits love for husband, wife, parents, children, or others to interfere with complete devotion to Jehovah God. No one can have a part in the vindicating of Jehovah’s name unless that person loves Jehovah; and only those who vindicate his name shall live.
The followers of Christ must love their brethren. But how! As one loves himself, answers Jesus. That means to deal justly with your brother, doing good unto him even as you would have him to do good unto you. Jesus thus defined that second commandment. “Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this is the law and the prophets.” (Matt. 7:12) Men often permit selfishness, or love for self, to stand in their way of full devotion to and service to Jehovah. This should no more be permitted than to permit love for any other creature to stand in the way of service to Jehovah. The true disciple of Jesus Christ must take the same course that Jesus took as a man; which was unqualified devotion to the Almighty God. “For whosoever will save his life shall lose it; and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it. For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul [life] ? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul [life]!” (Matt. 16:25,26) “He that loveth his life shall lose it; and he that hateth his life in this world shall keep it unto life eternal.” (John 12:25) These verses show that there can be no words of qualification added to the word love when applied to Jehovah.
These are perilous days, because the end of the world of Satan has come, and the great question of supremacy and domination of the universe must shortly be settled. Only those who love Jehovah God will escape and find a complete refuge under the Almighty’s protection. Those who love God and who are devoted to his Righteous Government know that all things shall work together for their good. (Rom. 8:28) No others know that comforting truth. When one knows he is diligent in obeying God’s commandments, and that he has the approval of Jehovah, the esteem or lack of esteem in which others hold him is wholly immaterial. “That which is highly esteemed among men is abomination in the sight of God.” (Luke 16:15) The reason is this: Satan has undertaken to turn all men against Jehovah, declaring that no man will be wholly faithful and true to Jehovah God under the test applied by Satan. Therefore the receiving of religious devotion or high esteem of creatures is to that extent a support of Satan’s side of the
126
THE WATCHTOWER
controversy. (Luke 6:26) The approval of God is what one must have in order to be safe.
What, now, is the root of the world evil? With divine authority the apostle wrote: “The love of money is a root of all kinds of evil.” (1 Tim. 6:10, Am. Rev. Ver.) Money is an article or medium for the measuring of value or for carrying on merchandise. The merchant or trader is one who trafficks in material things for selfish gain. The definition of the word money cannot be properly limited to the coin of the realm or limited to the thing which is used as a medium of exchange or measure of value. “Money,” within the meaning of the Holy Scriptures, is that which is a measure of personal gain or which brings gain to the person. It may be gold and silver or the approval and honor of men, or the gain of influence and power over others. One who is moved by a desire for selfish gain is avaricious and covetous; which state is contrary to the spirit of God and is the expression of the spirit of the Devil.
Note these examples: Adam the first man was selfish. He did not love God; otherwise he would have obeyed Him. He did not love Eve, because it was his selfish desire to have and retain that which pleased him that induced him to selfishly join her in the transgression; and for that reason he was not deceived. The fact that he disobeyed God’s commandment is conclusive proof of his selfishness or lack of love for Jehovah God, his Maker.—1 Tim. 2:13,14.
The beautiful spirit creature Lucifer did not love Jehovah God. He was selfish, avaricious and covetous. (Jer. 51:13) His selfish desire for personal gain induced him to sin in Eden and to further defy the Almighty God. He had no fear for Jehovah God, and therefore he did not even begin to be wise according to divine wisdom. He challenged Jehovah God to put a man on earth who would remain true to God under adverse conditions, and he wickedly said to Jehovah that man under stress would curse God to his face. Jehovah permitted Satan to try his hand in carrying out his boastful challenge, and his primary purpose in so doing wrs and is the vindication of the holy name of Jehovah before all creatures. All, therefore, who would live must have an opportunity to know Jehovah and prove their integrity toward him.
It was the love for “money’', or that which money represents, that started Satan on his wicked course. Satan began to make merchandise of the human race for his own personal gain, and therefore that was the beginning or root of evil. He foresaw rising from the fountain of perfect man and woman a sea of human creatures, and he determined to use them for his own personal gain; hence he commercialized and trafficked in the human race. When mankind had grown in numbers Satan brooded over that symbolic “sea” of human creatures and brought forth the wicked beastly organization by which he has ruled the human race. In that visible organization he has made prominent three elements, to wit, commerce, religion and politics; and with this organization, all of which is mercantile, Satan has filled the earth with violence.—See Revelation 13:1,2; Ezekiel 28:13,16-18.
All religious organizations of the world are commercial, for the reason that all such organizations are created and carried on for the personal gain of Satan and his dupes and to turn the people away from Jehovah God. Beginning
Brooklyn, N. Y.
with the building of the tower of Babel on the plains of Shinar Satan organized a religion the express purpose of which was selfish gain to Satan and to the people, and in order to turn man away from God. (Gen. 11:1-9) The religion of the world is commercial, for the reason that it is a primary means employed by Satan to traffic in human flesh and blood. Selfishness, or love for self and self-gain, led the people at Shinar into Satan’s trap. From that day until now every religion of the world, regardless of whether called “Christian” or “heathen”, has been organized and carried forward for the selfish gain of creatures, and therefore all such religions are commercial and employed as instruments of Satan. This is supporting proof that “the love of money”, or of selfish gain, is “a root of all evils”. —Am. Rev. Ver., margin.
The desire for selfish gain, or love for money, has caused the earth to be filled with violence. When God created Lucifer and made him the invisible spirit overlord of the perfect man, Lucifer himself was perfect, and that perfection continued until iniquity came into his mind. That iniquity was love for money or selfish gain; and he prosecuted his enterprise by all mercantile and commercial means. God caused his prophet to make a record thereof in these words addressed to that unfaithful cherub: “Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day that thou wast created, till iniquity was found in thee. By the multitude of thy merchandise they have filled the midst of thee with violence, and thou hast sinned; therefore I will cast thee as profane out of the mountain of God; and I will destroy thee, O covering cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire. Thou hast defiled thy sanctuaries by the multitude of thine iniquities, by the iniquity of thy traffic; therefore will I bring forth a fire from the midst of thee, it shall devour thee; and I will bring thee to ashes upon the earth, in the sight of all them that behold thee.” (Ezek. 28:15,16, 18) Instead of love being manifested by Lucifer for Jehovah, selfish gain or the love of “money” moved him.
The “sanctuaries” of Lucifer, both invisible and visible to human eyes, he defiled by his wicked acts induced by his desire for selfish gain. He has trafficked in angels and men, and by so doing he has surrounded himself with and filled his organization with violence and has defamed Jehovah’s name; and all this he has done because of his insatiable desire for personal gain. He is the author of religion, or demonism, which religion is the doing of that which is contrary to the will of God. Christianity is the doing of the will of God as Jesus Christ always does that will and sets us the example.
In the days of the apostles of Jesus Christ no one was called pope, but all Christians who faithfully served God and his beloved Son recognized Christ Jesus as the Head over his church, which church is “his body”. (Eph. 1: 22, 23) Years after the passing away of the apostles there was organized a religion which was falsely labeled “the Christian religion”, and an imperfect man was made the head of that religious organization and was called “pope” or “father of fathers”, contrary to the Scriptures. (Matt. 23:9) Such organization has claimed to be the greatest religious organization ever on earth. The Papal or Roman Catholic religion was not organized nor has it been carried on for the purpose of giving honor and glory to the name
Apkil 15,1942
WATCHTOWER
127
of Jehovah God, but solely for the purpose of selfish gain for creatures, particularly the Hierarchy of Authority. Its leaders boast that its “children” are counted by the hundreds of millions. It counts its numbers and its property which it has as “godliness”. The Papal religion at all times has been and is a commercial instrument of Satan, and has filled the earth with great violence, and this has been done because of its love for money or selfish gain. Its cruel and wicked persecution of others, the loathsome and wicked Inquisition, and the blasphemous boasting of the leaders in that organization are all manifestations of wickedness, violence and extreme selfishness. Its desire and effort to grab the world domination and to rule all nations by means of totalitarian dictators is the cause of the present world bloodshed and the overthrow of democratic nations.
In later years another religious organization came upon the scene, assumed the name of God and Christ, and labeled itself “the Protestant Christian religion”. Regardless of how many sincere men have been and are in that organization, it has never been used to the glory and honor of Jehovah’s name, but always for a selfish purpose or for selfish gain. That selfish desire for personal gain makes all religions and professions of religion to be commercial things. Both the facts and the Scriptures, therefore, show that the religion of the world is a commercial instrument in Satan’s hands to defame Jehovah and turn men away from him. It is therefore demonism.
The spirit of selfishness was apparent in the days of the apostles; and in the present time selfishness is more rampant than ever. Concerning this the apostle wrote: “If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness, he is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strifes of words, whereof cometh envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, perverse dis-putings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is godliness: from such withdraw thyself.” (1 Tim. 6:3-5) The words of the apostle here have applied since written, but apply more strongly now.
In those words the apostle admonishes all who will please God and find complete refuge in him that they must separate themselves from all who are moved by a desire for selfish gain, whether that selfish gain be the accumulation of earthly wealth and power or a gain that comes by the honor, plaudits and approval of men and causes the gainer thereof to shine amongst men. The apostle therefore distinctly points out that those who will receive God’s approval and find in His name a complete refuge must separate themselves from all others that pursue a selfish course; and thus the faithful ones mark themselves as witnesses of Jehovah and as the targets of the enemy.
The inspired apostle negatives positively the claim that personal gain at any time is godliness. Then he adds: “But godliness with contentment is great gain.” (1 Tim. 6:6) “Godliness” means to be entirely and wholly devoted to the cause of the gospel of Jehovah’s kingdom by Christ Jesus, the purpose of which is the vindication of Jehovah’s holy name. If the servant of Jehovah God finds himself devoting himself in obedience to God’s commandment to that which will vindicate the name of the Host High, and that he is doing so unselfishly, and that he is contented
with that which the Lord has given him. such “godliness” is to him great gain, because it is to such that Jehovah promises complete refuge in the time of stress and ultimately a share in the blessings of life everlasting One who seeks these provisions from a selfish viewpoint is not pleasing to God, but one who unselfishly seeks to please God will personally benefit from God's blessing.
What, then, is the root of all the world evil or lawlessness toward God? The inspired writer replies: “For the love of money is the root of all evil; which while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows.” (1 Tim. G. 10) That which will satisfy the desire for personal gam is the root of all evil.
The desire for personal gain is a temptation and a snare, often resulting in destruction. When a man is ealled of the Lord God and assigned to a place in his service the man has received a great favor at the hands of Jehovah God. He is now in a covenant to do the will of God, which means to use his faculties in the service of the Most High. If now he is moved by a selfish desire for greater personal ease for himself or others and if, to realize this desire, he leaves the Lord’s service and engages in a worldly business or enterprise, he walks right into the snare of the enemy, which often causes the one taking this course to be ‘drowned in the sea’. “They that will be rich, fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition.” (1 Tim. 6:9) The “sea” in which such arc drowned means the peoples of earth alienated from God and who bear up and give support to Satan’s organization, Babylon (Rev. 17:1,15, 18); and where anyone of his own volition leaves the Lord's service, when the Lord has assigned him to a place, and then he returns to the commercial pursuits in Satan’s world organization, he is almost certain to be ‘drowned in the sea’. That which lies at the root of all evil and of evil results to those who have once started in the way of serving God is the “love of money”, that is to say, the desire for selfish gain, regardless of what that gain may be. If the truth finds a man with the obligation on his hands of supporting his family by engaging in some commercial pursuit, he is justified in remaining in that position, provided he can do no better to make provision of the things decent and honest for those dependent upon him and offering greater advantage in his direct service of the Lord. (1 Cor. 7:20; Rom. 12 17 ; 1 Tim. 5:8) But if the Lord provides for him and for those dependent upon him and at the same time puts him in a position of service to the Lord, then faithfulness to the Lord would mean that he must remain steadfastly in the sen-ice of the Lord and not take a contrary course to satisfy some selfish desire.
The hands of the servants of Jehovah God cannot remain clean if they touch the unclean thing, that is, Satan’s organization. (Isa. 52:11, 2 Cor. 6:17) There can be nothing in common between the Lord’s people and the enemy organization. Those who maintain their integrity toward Him must remain true and faithful to his name. Their love for him can have no qualification or limitation. They must and will give Jehovah God and his kingdom by Christ Jesus all their love.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
‘DEAD, YET SPEAKETH’
“In McComb, Miss., while I was playing the phonograph, on the front porch, to the lady of the house, her husband was in the back yard overseeing a bunch of colored men at work. Upon hearing the phonograph (not knowing what was going on out front) he hollered: ‘Keep quiet, confound it, listen!’ Some of the men, not hearing him, kept on working. Again he hollered: ‘Keep quiet, d------- it, keep
quiet! I hear Judge Rutherford’s voice—he’s dead! I In ar his voice from heaven.’ Whereupon he fainted, greatly fiightening the men. Upon regaining consciousness he was told about the phonograph.”
WHAT LED HER TO CONTRIBUTE (OKLAHOMA)
“A young woman came to the door, listened attentively to the record, and at the end said, ‘We know about the hard things, the trouble, oppression, etc. We are just over from Germany.’ I pointed to the last chapter in the book Children, ‘Glorious Earth,’ and mentioned the new heavens and new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness, when the Devil will be bound and oppression, evil, etc., will not be permitted. She was interested, but did not take anything. I asked: ‘Did you ever hear of The Watchtower or Jehovah’s witnesses in Germany? or Bible Students?’ Then I said Bib elf or scher, and she knew what it was. ‘Oh, yes!’ she said, ‘we hear lots about Bibelforscher in Germany. They suffer more than any other people because they do not compromise, but always stand up for their belief.’ Then she got a quarter for the book Children. She said it was her last quarter, but they wanted to support all who are fighting against the evil power. She seemed pleased to get the book and Kingdom News.”
NEW’ WORK EFFECTIVE (ENGLAND)
London: “Immediately the new work commenced we started many model studies in this neighborhood, and the Society’s representative instructed us to work these out ‘one way or another’. This has now been finished and the result is eight new publishers, one of whom originally claimed to be an atheist. In the Brentford area we are having opposition from the clergy, who instruct their congregations not to listen to us when we call; but, of course, we know that the Lord’s ‘other sheep’ do not take any notice of these goats.”
Rugby: “Spiritualist lady ‘It’s no use, my dears, we’ve seen each other before.’ Jehovah’s witness: ‘Yes, we remember you. You told us you were a spiritualist.’ Lady: ‘I read your booklets, but I have no use for them, though I believe you are doing a good work.’ ‘We have a record we would like you to hear. It is called “Where Are the Dead?” and “What Is the Soul?” Just hear it, then if we are wrong, there’s your chance to put us right. If we happen to be wrong, we wish to be put right.’ Lady: ‘Come in then. I don’t care who we arc, there’s something we can learn.’ Result: Records played and Children study sheets shown. Further: Model study arranged; much enjoyed.”
Sheffield: “A publisher here met a Catholic lady just before we came up here pioneering, and we have had the pleasure of two model studies with her, her fourth and fifth. Within that period (six weeks in all) she has left the Catholic church and taken her four children away
from the Catholic school. When the priest came three weeks ago (he called for his money), she told him what she thought of him, and that he need not come any more. She said she had joined with Jehovah’s witnesses. ‘What! those Bible students?’ ‘Yes,’ she said. He threw the money back at her and said that if he had had a stick with him he would have thrashed her. He said: ‘And to think that this should happen after I have given my blessing on this house!’ She replied: ‘Yes, and ever since you blessed this house things have got worse and worse.’ Her husband, not a Catholic, is becoming interested, and we have had one model study with him. She attended our regular study last week.”
MAN IN UNIFORM VS. PATRIOTEER
“While magazine street-witnessing on the post-office corner of Tucson, Arizona, I noticed a young man with army uniform on standing near by. I introduced The Watchtower, and to my joy he favored its message: ‘My dad is a Jehovah’s witness and I like to read the literature he sends me.’ After a short discussion I left him and continued the work. A short while later an ugly-looking man passed and cried: ‘Look’t him—standin’ there—unpatriotic—ought to be ..., etc.’ I ignored him and kept about my business, and he hustled into the post office. A minute later he popped out a-huffin and a-puffin. Walking up to me he again began insulting me: Tie’s un-American, unpatriotic, chase him off the street—against the government—’ I asked loudly: ‘Aren’t you feeling well? Are you sick ?’ This remark angered him more, and he continued his father’s work. The army boy was still there, seeing all that was going on. Walking over to him I spoke to him: ‘Say, I wonder what ails him?’ To this our army-boy friend answered, loud enough for others to hear: ‘Oh, he’s just like the rest of them: don’t know what he’s doing.’ The would-be patriot hushed up and, with a surprised look at the army fellow, walked off, panting, fuming, fussing.”
HOW SHE KNEW THE PIONEER WAS COMING
“This territory (Brookhaven, Mississippi) is isolated; no witness has been here for several years. I parked my car in a driveway and got out with my phonograph and bookcase. Just as I was going to knock on the door, a young lady opened it and said: ‘Come in; I have been expecting you.’ I walked in, thinking she was mistaken as to who I was. I set up the phonograph; and when it finished she said: ‘Yes, I will take the book. You are one of Jehovah’s witnesses, aren’t you?’ She contributed 50c for the book and expressed her thanks to me for coming to see her. ‘Now I will tell you how I knew who you were and why I was expecting you. One week ago in a public toilet I found a booklet Where Are the DeadT I picked it up and saw “Jehovah’s witnesses” on it. I was reminded at once of passing through Jackson, Miss., over a year ago and seeing on many store windows signs “Jehovah’s witnesses not wanted”. I thought they were gangsters of some kind. Being curious I read the booklet. It was wonderful. It stated in the booklet that one of Jehovah’s witnesses would call at my home with phonograph and literature. Every day I have prayed that you would come; and in one week my prayer is answered.’ I immediately arranged to come back in the evening and play ‘Children of The King’.”
128
CONTENTS
t
r
141
“New World” Ruler and Associates
141
130
131
131
137
Micah (Part 8) Demonism Ousted Requirements
Kingdom Work


WATCHTOWER



'5£s£?-.


f1! (/.
They shall know that I am Jehovah?
Vol. LXIII Semimonthly
-Ezekiel 35:15.
No. 9

41
MAY 1, 1942
Field Experiences
“Willing Volunteers” Testimony Period ..
“Watchtower” Studies . .
. 144
130
130
'•U
“ ‘Children' Study Questions”. . .. Use Renewal Subscription Blank ..
130
THE WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE O TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
N. H. Knorr, President	W. E. Van AMBUT.cn, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to Ins creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God's law and was sentenced to death ; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH'S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah's organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah's kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that surtive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah's witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of Its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and Its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1 50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, Ga. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian...................... 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian......-....7 Beresford Road, Strathfleid, N. S. W., Australia
South African Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa Please address the Society Ln every cose.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may ha\e The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. T., under the Act of March 3, 1879.
“WILLING VOLUNTEERS” TESTIMONY PERIOD
During the month of June all those wil.mg volunteers who delight to do Jehovah’s will and who Lave made a covenant with the Lord will go forward in the proclamation of the Kingdom message. The “Willing Volunteers” Testimony Period will be devoted to the distribution of the book Children and seven booklets on the contribution of 35c. All servants of the Lord going forward during this campaign will have a good supplv of this literature on hand as they go from place to place, visiting the people of good-will, those who love righteousness. This literature will afford many the opportunity of getting a clearer knowledge of the truth, and they should be given this opportunity during the “V tiling Volunteers” Testimony Period. The usual field-service reports will be made to the company servant if the publisher is associated with a company; the pioneers, direct to the office; and those readers of The Watchtower who have as yet not been in the field-service work, namely, going from door to door with the Kingdom message, may inquire of the Watchtower the address of their nearest company. You will enjoy being associated with them.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of June 7: “Micah” (Part 8), 7 1-24 inclusive. The Watchtower May 1, 1942.
_ Week of June 14: “Micah” (Part 8), 7 25-4S inclusive, The Watchtower May 1, 1942.
“‘CHILDREN’ STUDY QUESTIONS”
The Society has released a new booklet, entitled “ ‘Children’ Study Questions”, which will be a great aid to all publishers of the Kingdom in the conducting of Children studies in the various homes throughout the country. You can get your copy now on contribution of 5c for publication of more of these. Send remittances to 117 Adams Street, Brooklyn, New York. This “Children" Study Questions booklet will help individual readers in their personal study in their own homes. Get a copy now.
USE RENEWAL SUBSCRIPTION BLANK
The blank sent you one month before expiration of your Watchtower subscription should be filled out and returned to the Brooklyn office or to the Branch office in the country where you reside. Servants in the companies, and individuals, when sending in renewals for The Watchtower, should always use these blanks. By fiDing in these renewal blanks you are assured of the continuation of your Watchtower from the time of expiration, and without delay. It will also be a great help if you sign your name uniformly, and note any recent change of address, on the renewal slip.
'VWCH7OWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH'S KINGDOM
No. LXIII	May 1, 1942	No. 9
MICAH
PART 8
"And this man shall be the peace, ichen the Assyrian shall come into our land; and when he shall tread in our palaces, then shall we raise against him seven shepherds, and eight principal men.”—Mic. 5:5.
TEHOVAH is never on the defensive nor ever in I danger of defeat by any foe, singly or combined. J He makes peace for those who take their stand on his side and keep his commandments, and creates evil or calamity and destruction for those who oppose and fight against his righteous Government. (Isa. 45:7) His beloved One, who on earth was called “The Son of man”, is “The Prince of Peace”. At his human birth in Bethlehem the prophetic song of the angels foretold that when his Kingdom should be established God’s peace would be extended through this Prince to men of good-will on earth. Amid the tumult of the world that marks its end He only is the One by whom to gain peace of heart and mind and to for ever enjoy the peaceful earth after the great conflict for universal domination is fought and won to the vindication of Jehovah God.
2	It is God’s will that peace shall exist within the organization or “land” of his covenant people on earth, the spiritual Israelites. It is His decree that unity in serving Jehovah God shall be observed and safeguarded among such in the “land” of spiritual Israel. No one has a right to interfere with their united service. The original “Assyrian” was a demonworshiping, totalitarian world-power. It invaded the land of ancient Israel, thereby furnishing a prophetic picture, that the modern-day Assyrian with religious-totalitarian organization would invade the midst of God’s covenant people and seek to break up their organized and united worship of the only true and living God, “whose name alone is Jehovah.” —Isaiah 36 and 37.
3	The modern invasion is under way, as shown by the notorious persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses, which persecution has scandalized all “Christendom”. The people in so-called “democratic” lands fail to realize that such persecution upon God’s servants by the religionists represents the invasion by the totalitarian “Assyrian” of the rights, privileges and liberties that all freedom-loving peoples want to retain for themselves. The power of the “Assyrian” will increase as the nations of the world all go totalitarian
under the great stress. In the most vital field of all, the worship of God upon which everlasting life depends, there only do Jehovah’s people clad in the armor of God resist the aggressions of the totalitarian-minded ones into the things which must be rendered unto God and which are His. They know that “the wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God” (Ps. 9:17) and that to spread and increase the knowledge of God is for the benefit of the nations. They know that the demons are back of the totalitarian regimentation that makes the people ignore God’s ways; and therefore they battle, not with flesh and blood, but with the power and rule of the demons which would cause the destruction of the nations by opposition to Almighty God. The witnesses of Jehovah maintain their unity of action. Under the leadership of the Good Shepherd, the Principal One of God’s capital organization, they rise up in a united front against the aggressor and hurl back the invader. They resist all forms of demonism, and no more does religion gain a foothold amongst them.
4 Religion has failed, as proved by the facts today, after six thousand years of religion’s practice. Christianity has not failed, and never will. Though now the only true Christians are hated and persecuted of all nations, Christianity is not on the defensive. It is on the offensive against all religion, which is demonism and which has proved the ruin of humankind. The assaults by the modern “Assyrian” upon the Christian witnesses of Jehovah are but the enemy counterattacks, all of which fail to break the integrity of God’s covenant-keeping people. Concerning the offensive action and carrying of the war into the enemy territory Jehovah by his prophet foretold: “And they shall waste the land of Assyria with the sword, and the land of Nimrod in the entrances thereof: thus shall he deliver us from the Assyrian, when he cometh into our land, and when he treadeth within our borders.” (Mic. 5:6) It was the first totalitarian dictator Nimrod that organized religion and built Nineveh, the chief city of Assyria. Hence 131
132
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
the land of Assyria is called “the land of Nimrod” and pictures the nations now going totalitarian.
5 As the religious-totalitarian rule moves on to swallow up the whole world Jehovah bids his faithful witnesses not to fear, but to be bold and courageous in his service: “Therefore thus saith the Lord God of hosts, 0 my people that dwellest in Zion, be not afraid of the Assyrian: he shall smite thee with a rod, and shall lift up his staff against thee, after the manner of Egypt [in Moses’ day]. For yet a very little while, and the indignation [of God against the totalitarians] shall cease, and mine anger, in their destruction.” (Isa. 10:24,25) Though the enemies conspire and confederate together against those who stand up for and proclaim Jehovah’s Theocratic Government, God’s covenant people may make no agreement or confederacy with the “Assyrian" foe of The Theocracy. By his prophet Jehovah specifically warns them against a compromise with the "Assyrian” in the hope of getting help and protection from him at the price of breaking integrity with God. (Isa. 8: 9-13) Jehovah alone is their fear and dread. Rather than compromise, they arise to the attack against religion which is linked with and does business with the totalitarian rule.
0 The faithful servants of Jehovah are provided with the “sword of the spirit, which is the word of God". They wield that sword by proclaiming the truths of God’s Word to those with an ear to hear. Thereby they waste the pastures of religion which the clergy part of “The Assyrian” have enjoyed with regard to such persons as now turn their ear to the Bible truths. They take no part in the literal wasting of the demon rule and organization which is symbolized by “the land of Assyria", “the land of Nimrod.” Jehovah’s executioner, who is the Head of the "seven shepherds” and “eight principal men", does such wasting. He is the “Chief Shepherd” and is the “man child” who is to “shepherd all the nations with a sceptre of iron”. (Rev. 12:5, Rotherham) Quite correctly the Rotherham rendering of Micah 5:6 reads: “Then shall they shepherd the land of Assyria with the sword, and the land of Nimrod in the entrances thereof.” A shepherd is ordinarily a man of peace, but he is also a fierce fighter for his devoted sheep against all marauders, whether beasts or men. Christ the Good Shepherd laid down his life for the sheep, both his “little flock” and also his “other sheep”. (John 10: 11,16) Now enthroned as King of the world and sent forth by Jehovah God to rule in the midst of his enemies, the great Shepherd-King takes the sword against the modern “Assyria". That sword is the destructive forces of the battle of Armageddon, ‘the war of the great day of God the Almighty.’—Rev. 16:14.
' The “land of Assyria” which is wasted by that “sword” represents Satan’s entire organization, visible and invisible. Gog of the land of Magog is Satan’s chief demon prince therein, and all the nations gone totalitarian are the visible part thereof. In Micah’s day Babylon had not yet seized the world dominance but was still subject to Assyria, and hence “Assyria” also stands for Babylon and what Babylon symbolizes. Nimrod founded Babel, or Babylon, and thereafter Nineveh in Assyria, and hence the “land of Nimrod” means the same as “Assyria”. Further, it calls attention to its god, who is Satan. Nimrod, the rebel hunter after Jehovah’s “sheep”, typified Satan the Devil, whom Nimrod worshiped and served. After Nimrod’s death he was deified by his fellow gangsters, and thus they worshiped Satan under the form of Nimrod.—Gen. 10:9-11.
8 The present-day totalitarian “Assyrian” invades “our land” and sets up his religious-dictatorial “abomination of desolation” in the holy place, where it ought not to stand, attempting to crowd out Jehovah’s Theocratic Government and take its place. God’s faithful remnant and their earthly companions brandish the “sword of the spirit” and expose that desolating abomination as a demonic counterfeit of God’s holy Kingdom. They carry the battle to the gates of the religious-totalitarian combine, “in the entrances thereof,” or, “in the gates of its (cities).” (Leeser) The word “entrances” here may also mean something “opened”, that is, “drawn” swords, as at Psalm 55:21; and hence the Rotherham marginal rendering reads: “Shepherd . . . the land of Nimrod with drawn swords.” The swords will not be sheathed until the battle is won and religion is completely killed off. “In the entrances thereof” also means that Christ Jesus will not only destroy the totalitarian rule on earth but also carry the battle into the wicked spirit organization, “the land of Magog.” and there destroy all the demons and Gog their prince and Satan their chief.—Ezek. 39:1-6.
’ The presumptuous assault of the invader proves to be his undoing, just as when his prototype, King Sennacherib and his Assyrian hosts, invaded the Holy Land and assaulted Jerusalem. “Then the angel of the Lord went forth, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred and fourscore and five thousand: and when they [God’s covenant people] arose early in the morning, behold, they [the 185,000 Assyrians] were all dead corpses.” (Isa. 37:36) As long as Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions are bearing testimony to The Theocratic Government as rightful ruler of the world, the earthly powers who are for a totalitarian rule do not feel they can realize “Peace and safety” for themselves and their beastly rule. To silence Jehovah’s servants they ‘come within their land and tread within their
May 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER.
133
borders’ and apparently restrain them, to all surface appearances. Then the great Shepherd-King Christ Jesus and the great Theocrat Jehovah God in their displeasure send emphatic tidings of final warning to the totalitarian world rule. Daniel 11: 44 describes it thus: “But tidings out of the east and out of the north shall trouble him: therefore he shall go forth with great fury to destroy, and utterly to make away many.”
10	Out for the utter destruction of all who stand faithful for The Theocracy, the great “Assyrian” Satan and all his organization make their last desperate assault upon the remnant and the Good Shepherd’s “other sheep”. They shall be pushed out. The drawn swords of Jehovah’s executional forces under the Good Shepherd shall flash and fall and hack the “Assyrian” organization and waste its land, including the invisible demon realm. “Thus shall he deliver us from the Assyrian, when he cometh into our land, and when he treadeth within our borders.” The sure hope for the deliverance of humankind from totalitarian rule under demons is Jehovah’s mighty Shepherd, the Savior of his “sheep”.
11	Since the great “Assyrian” shall fail in his destructive program and since the “remnant” of Jehovah’s kingdom heirs are the principal target of the “Assyrian”, it appears reasonable, and the prophecy indicates strongly, that Jehovah by his Good Shepherd will preserve the remnant of his ‘Tittle flock” through the battle of Armageddon and they shall see the terrific destruction of the “Assyrian” forces down to the last creature thereof. This preservation is not that the remnant of spirit-begotten children of God may live on earth in the flesh during the whole thousand-year reign of Christ Jesus that shall follow. Their stay on earth after Armageddon is merely for a brief time, serving as a vindication of Jehovah’s promise and his almighty power to preserve the faithful in their direst extremity. Along with this remnant Jehovah lovingly and mercifully preserves his “other sheep”, who never forsake God's side and therefore never the side of the faithful remnant. Satan and his hordes may be permitted to kill some during the battle, like David’s loving friend Jonathan, as a proof of their integrity toward God even to the death. Yet Satan shall fail in his all-out wicked endeavor to rid the earth of every righteous servant of Jehovah God. That which they intended upon the righteous, God will return on their own heads.— Ps. 7 :15,16.
12	What shall be the work of the remnant after that battle1? The prophecy beautifully pictures it: “And the remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many people, as dew from the Lord, as the showers upon the grass, that tarrieth not for man, nor waiteth for the sons of men.” (Mic. 5:7) The name of Jacob,
who was also called “Israel”, denotes that the “remnant of Jacob” are the last on earth of the spiritual Israelites, the joint-heirs with Christ Jesus of the promise made long ago to the grandfather of Jacob, Abraham. There shall be a great multitude of Armageddon survivors besides the remnant. a< pictured by Noah's family which survived the destruction of the “old world”, “the world of the ungodly.” These shall be out of the former ‘nations, kindreds, people, and tongues’.—Rev. 7 : 9-17.
13	Armageddon, symbolically represented as the destruction of Satan’s world by fire, will be a scorching time. (2 Pet. 3:7-12) Thereafter the remnant will be retained on earth by the Lord to bring timely refreshment to the “great multitude” of the “other sheep” as symbolized by dew in the morning of that “new world”, “wherein dwelleth righteousness." With the remnant shall be associated in the work the “faithful men of old”, who shall have a "better resurrection” to life as perfect men. They shall be made “princes in all the earth”, the permanent visible representatives of the heavenly Theocracy. (Ps. 45:16; Heb. 11:35,39,40) The Scriptures strongly suggest that they shall be awakened to life and service on earth in the crisis at the beginning of Armageddon, and they shall take their place by the side of the spiritual remnant who are but the temporary representatives on earth of The Theocracy’ in power.
14	“All flesh is grass.” (Isa. 40:6) Now just before Armageddon the wicked spring as the grass (Ps. 92: 7); but after their destruction in that battle, and doubtless in the presence of the remnant as well as the “princes”, Jehovah by Christ Jesus will issue to the “great multitude” the divine mandate to “fill the earth”. (Gen. 9:1,7) They shall marry and reproduce righteous offspring, and then the righteous shall spring as the grass to ever beautify the earth. The remnant during the remainder of their sojourn on earth shall be in the midst of these righteous ones, “as the showers upon the grass, that tarrieth not for man, nor Yvaiteth for the sons of men.” Heavenly refreshment such as dew and showers does not depend upon human creatures. Dew and showers neither wait for the command of men nor can they be detained by men, but must be accepted as God provides. His “doctrine shall drop as the rain, [his] speech shall distil as the dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass”. (Deut. 32:2) ‘Out of Zion [God’s capital organization in heaven] shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem [New Jerusalem, which is above].’ (Mic. 4:2) Doubtless the remnant, together with the “princes”, will be used to further tender to the Lord’s “other sheep” his then “meat in due season”, including the proela
134
WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
mation of the divine mandate to that “great multitude". This will be very exhilarating, like dew and showers from the Lord God upon the parched grass. Already he has turned to the remnant a “pure language’’ or “pure lip’’, with which even now before the fire of Armageddon they are commanded by the Lord to refresh the people of good-will who become the Lord’s “other sheep”. (Zeph. 3: 8, 9) The remnant do not wait or tarry for any of the sons of men in order to get a license or permit or other approval from judges or police chiefs or other public officials to carry the Lord’s refreshment to those thirsting for righteousness and truth.
15	“And the remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles in the midst of many people, as a lion among the beasts of the forest, as a young lion among the flocks of sheep; who, if he go through, both treadeth down, and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver.” (Mic. 5:8) It is now in this day of judgment, and down until the destruction of the wicked opposers at Armageddon, that the remnant must be bold as the lion, “which is strongest among beasts, and turneth not away for any.” (Prov. 30:30) Being approved as God's devoted and faithful servants, they are ‘covered with the robe of righteousness’ as Jehovah’s official witnesses. “The righteous are bold as a lion.” (Prov. 28:1) "In nothing terrified by your adversaries : which is to them an evident token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God.” (Phil. 1: 28) Their loving earthly companions have like devotion to The Theocracy and are likewise bold. They are like the shepherd David’s companions, “whose faces were like the faces of lions.”—1 Chron. 12:8.
16	Both the remnant and their companions follow “the Lion of the tribe of Juda” and work havoc with religion. To the nations now going totalitarian and forgetting God they declare the Lord's warning: “Now consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver.” (Ps. 50:22) Compared with the royal “Lion of the tribe of Juda” the religious-totalitarian crowd are but a dock of sheep for prey. At Armageddon Jehovah will let him loose upon the prey and he will go through them and tear to pieces all those branded with ‘the mark of the beast and his image’, and all the demon herders will not be able to deliver pope, dictators or their regimented subjects.—Isa. 31:4; Rev. 14: 9,10; 13: 16.
17	Further concerning that victory by the Lord's power the prophecy adds: “Thine hand shall be lifted up upon thine adversaries, and all thine enemies shall be cut off.” (Mic. 5: 9) This is addressed particularly to the invisible Captain, Leader and Commander of the remnant, Christ Jesus, in whose hand is all power in heaven and in earth. Now the aggressive "king of the north” continues to “stretch forth his
hand also upon the countries [by means of propaganda, religious ‘fifth column’, sea raiders, suitmarines, airplanes, Catholic Action, etc.) ; and the land of Egypt [meaning the anti-Nazi ‘king of the south’s’ realm] shall not escape.” (Dan. 11:42) That totalitarian-religious aggressor power tries to poke its meddlesome bloody hand within God’s visible organization. It tries to interfere with and break up the organized united action of the remnant and their companions, but even by its concentration camps and dungeons and torture chambers it fails to crack their integrity and prevent their giving further witness by word and example to Jehovah's supremacy. The power of the Lord prevails in them; his strength is made perfect in their weakness. (2 Cor. 12-9) They know that but a short time now and the Lord's almighty hand of power shall prevail over the adversaries and haters of The Theocracy and shall slap them down and cut them off and the Lord's hand shall remain uplifted in victory. “Let thy hand be uplifted against thine adversaries, and all thine enemies shall be cut off.” (Rotherham; Am. Rev. Ver.) “Thine hand shall find out all thine enemies: thy right hand shall find out those that hate thee.”— Ps. 21:8.
DEMONISM OUSTED
18	The deluded people whose necks are still caught in the snare of religion think Jehovah’s witnesses are extreme in discarding everything pertaining to religion and practicing nothing hut pure Christianity. Jehovah is not fanatically extreme. So note what He does, and then judge as to his faithful and obedient witnesses who keep his commandments. “And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord, that I will cut off thy horses out of the midst of thee, and I will destroy thy chariots.” (Mic. 5: 10) We are now in “that day”, which day began with the Lord's coming to the temple for judgment and purging the covenant people of God. It is also called “the day of our Lord Jesus Christ”. In that day the Lord's remnant on earth must “be blameless” by carrying on the “pure worship and undefiled before God and the Father” and without any compromise with religion. (1 Cor. 1:8; Jas. 1:27, Syriac Version) That day leads up to Armageddon. In the face of that battle for the vindication of God’s name what does Jehovah require of his remnant and his “other sheep”! Carnal weapons, as symbolized by horses and chariots? No! “Christendom” now feverishly multiplies such, but the Lord cuts such things off from his covenant people. He has revealed to them that Armageddon is not a fight between “the king of the north” and “the king of the south” nor other divided human interests. It is the final and deciding battle between God’s organization under his King Christ Jesus and Satan’s organization under his
May 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
135
demon prince Gog and including all the nations which become totalitarian and demonized. Hence to his servants Jehovah says: “The battle is not yours, but God's. Ye shall not need to fight in this battle; set yourselves, stand ye still, and see the salvation of the Lord with you.” (2 Chron. 20:15,17) Therefore the remnant do not go down to Egypt, Satan’s world, for help by its fighting equipment. —Isa. 31:1,3.
1B	In the typical setting long ago the twelve tribes of Israel fought against one another under the rival leaderships of Ephraim and Jerusalem. This continued until the Lord purged that people and brought forth a remnant. Now the Lord God has brought forth his spiritual remnant and commands that there be no internal strife or fighting among them, but that all shall be at unity in Christ and fight only against the common foe, the demons and religion. Thus He fulfills his promise: “And I will cut off the chariot from Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem, and the battle bow shall be cut off.” (Zech. 9:10) Now God’s unified people pray for the peace and prosperity of his visible organization, saying: “For my brethren and companions’ sakes, I will now say, Peace be within thee. Because of the house of the Lord our God I will seek thy good.” (Ps. 122:6-9) Any causing disturbance and division among God’s people trying to serve him without distraction show they are not of his house or organization. The Lord duly cuts such off.
20	Jehovah is not an extremist when he further says: “And I will cut off the cities of thy land, and throw down all thy strong holds.” (Mie. 5:11) “Cities” picture organizations. Those that Jehovah cuts off from his Holy Land are not the service organizations of his faithful and wise remnant class. These operate according to his Theocratic rule and in the interest of his Kingdom. When Christ Jesus, having now received the Kingdom, came to the temple in 1918 and began judgment at the house of God he found two classes among those consecrated to God and begotten of His spirit. One class he approved, to wit, those who faithfully sought to keep unity with Him their Head and to look after the interests of their brethren in Christ and to serve them with the Lord’s provided “meat in due season”. Such he brought into the temple and anointed them and made them his “faithful and wise servant”.
21	The other company were self-seeking, selfhonoring, oppressive to their brethren, troublemakers, seducers seeking to draw disciples after themselves, and obstructors to the Lord’s Kingdomproclamation work. Such were in line for the kingdom of God, but the Lord by his angels gathered these undesirables out of his kingdom. He cut them asunder from the Lord’s house and cast them into the
outer darkness to there gnash their teeth with the other religious hypocrites. (Matt. 13:41; 24: 4.>-51) Such cast-out ones established organizations or “cities” of their own to do the Lord's work for him according to their own self-chosen ways, but the Lord cut these off from the “land” of his faithful remnant and threw down all the strongholds of religion that had remained, and thereby purged his remnant. Concerning his action against the “cities” of the “evil servant” class Jehovah says:
22	“If thou shalt hear say in one of thy cities, which the Lord thy God hath given thee to dwell there, saying, Certain men, the children of Belial, are <rone out from among you, and have withdrawn the inhabitants of their city, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which ye have not known; . . . thou shalt surely smite the inhabitants of that city with the edse of the sword, destroying it utterly . . . and it shall be an heap for ever; it shall not be built again. And there shall cleave nought of the cursed thing to thine hand: that the Lord may turn from the fierceness of his anger, and shew thee mercy, and have compassion upon thee, and multiply thee.” (Deut. 13:12-17) Such action must take place prior to Armageddon and preparatory to a cleansed earth. Jehovah establishing that clean condition among those who are to survive Armageddon, then surely that holy condition of devotion to God and his Kingdom will continue on earth after Armageddon. Those privileged to pass through Armageddon into the new condition on earth must now walk with Jehovah God as did Noah before the Flood.—Gen. 6 ■ S. 9.
23	Knowing that religion is of the Devil and is demonism and leads away from the great Giver of life and into destruction, Jehovah purges the remnant of all such. As he has said: “And I will cut off witchcrafts out of thine hand; and thou shalt have no more soothsayers [users of hidden arts (I?o/7i.)]; thy graven images also will I cut off. and thy standing images [pillars] out of the midst of thee; and thou shalt no more worship the work of thine hands: and I will pluck up thy groves [(J»i. Rev. Ver.) thine Asherim] out of the midst of thee; so will I destroy thy cities [thy enemies (margin: and Leeser)].”—Mic. 5:12-14.
24	“Christendom” is polluted through and through with the above forms of demonism or religion. But concerning his remnant of the temple class Jehovah foretold that at the end of the 2,300 days his sanctuary should be cleansed or justified. That time is now here. (Dan. 8:13,14) The Lord Jesus forewarned of the false prophets that would appear at the end of Satan’s world and using witchcrafts by whispering their own unscriptural opinions and predictions. The “soothsayers” are the religious hypocrites pretending to serve God but practicing Satan’s arts
136
THE WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
under cover for self-gain and glory. The “false prophet” mentioned at Revelation 19:20 is that powerful organization that makes an impressive stage-play before the Devil’s abominable totalitarian “beast”. That “prophet” promises a free-people’s world after the conflict, but such prophet is overreached by the demons and proves to be false and joins in setting up a religious-totalitarian “new world order”. Such “false prophet” with his attractive “new order” promises has no influence upon the remnant and their companions; they are wholly for The Theocracy.
23 The graven images and standing images and other works of creatures' hands are cleared from God’s sanctuary. Such are things which were once respected more highly than the pure and selfsufficient Word of God; for example, the supposed symbolisms of the great pyramid of Gizeh; also set forms for going through a manner of worship; “character development” idolatry; undue honors conferred upon men and particularly “elective elders”, made such by the hands of voters raised in an affirmative vote; mapping out God’s work in advance for him by chronologies or time tables, based on the pyramid or other measurements. Now the Devil’s organization has brought forth the “image of the beast” to meet the world emergency and to make it appear that men can bind up this world into a peaceful and enduring arrangement, so making unnecessary and undesirable the kingdom of God. The effort is made to coerce all the people to idolize such “image of the beast”. (Rev. 13:14,15) Jehovah’s devoted remnant and their companions refuse to hail, salute or worship any creature image; they have no gods besides Jehovah.—Ex. 20:3-5.
20	“Groves,” or “Asherim”, of demonism represented the female part of the religious worship and hence pictured Satan’s woman, his unclean demoncontrolled organization which recognizes him as lord and husband. This organization brings forth the clergy, to whom Jesus said: “Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth.” (John 8:44) Worship was carried on under the shadow of the “groves” or “Asherim”. The clergy today are the friends of this world of Satan. To win converts and have the world’s approval, they mix the things of Satan’s organization with the things of God, whereas there is no agreement between such things. (2 Cor. 6:14-16) The clergy carry on their worship under the shadow, approval, permit, license, and protection of the representatives of the organization belonging to the “god of this world”. The remnant have come out from such and touch not the unclean thing. They worship and serve God at his temple and by his
authority and according to his commandment and under his protection and approval. All the “cities”, or organizations of false gods, Jehovah has destroyed from among the remnant. Such “cities”, or “watchers”, encamp against them to ensnare them and thus are a close-girdling and easily-besetting sin: “the sin which doth so easily beset us,” to wit, religion. (Heb. 12:1) Now the remnant worship God in spirit and in truth.
27	All this clearing out of religion from among the remnant and the Lord’s “other sheep” greatly enrages the great “Assyrian” and all the demons and the religionists. Their religious hypocrisy is shown up by contrast, and their religious susceptibilities are shocked. So they are stirred up by the demons to assault the God-fearing remnant and their companions and to wage a war of lies and persecution against them. The religionists, particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy who ride on top, steer the scarletcolored totalitarian “beast” against them to devour those who renounce religion and worship Jehovah God and keep his commandments. (Rev. 17:1-14) This stirs up the anger and fury of Jehovah against the presumptuous enemy. Having cleansed his “sanctuary” class from religion and established the pure worship among his remnant, He will not tolerate the efforts of the totalitarian-religious crowd to reimpose demonism upon his covenant-people who keep their integrity by faithfully resisting all such attempts by the “abomination of desolation”. Hence, as a climax, Jehovah says he will destroy those who refused to be cleansed and who held on to religion: “And I will execute vengeance in anger and fury upon the heathen [the nations], such as they have not heard”; “upon the nations which hearkened not.”—Mic. 5:15; Am. Rev. Ver. and Leeser.
28	Such nations have heard the sound with their ears, but have not heeded that message sounded forth. For more than sixty years and by the greatest publicity campaign in Christian history Jehovah’s witnesses have warned the nations of God’s vengeance coming at Armageddon. So there is no excuse for not having heard. The nations have simply preferred to forget Jehovah God and have objected to hearkening with belief and obedience. Concerning this Jehovah by his prophet foretold: “Behold ye among the heathen [the nations], and regard, and wonder marvellously: for I will work a work [at Armageddon] in your days, which ye will not believe, though it be told you [beforehand].” (Hab. 1:5; Acts 13:40,41) Armageddon will be so furious it will leave all the nations as though they had not been. (Obad. 16) It will be righteous vengeance upon them, because such vengeance means the vindication of Jehovah’s name, which name the nations have reproached by choosing demon-worship and demon
May 1,1942
WATCHTOWER,
137
rule and persecuting those who bore Jehovah’s name and proclaimed his Theocracy by Christ Jesus.
REQUIREMENTS
20	The demons are gathering all nations of the world to Armageddon, and the life of each individual of the peoples is involved. Satan the Devil is the ‘'god of this world” and still has the “power of death”. (Heb. 2:14) He would make the peoples believe that life in peace and happiness is dependent upon his organization and proceeds through and is sustained and protected by his organization. Now that demon organization rapidly nears its final end. In the desperation to either rule or ruin Satan sets up requirements whereby creatures may live under his organization and which requirements they must meet or else be killed. His decree is that none shall survive save those worshiping his beastly organization and having its mark in the forehead or the hand; and he forces regimentation upon the people contrary to the rules of Jehovah.—Rev. 13: 15-17.
30	In reality, Jehovah God is the Fountain of life, and to him salvation belongs. (Pss. 36:9; 3:8) He declares that all who conform to and abide under Satan’s organization shall be destroyed with it at Armageddon by Jehovah’s Executioner. Jehovah through his Word reveals that the only place of safety and preservation unto life throughout the great deluge of Armageddon is the Ark of his organization. All seekers after everlasting life must take refuge in it. His command to his faithful remnant is that they must now aid the refugees of good-will to that only place of security and life, and must make knowm to them Jehovah’s life requirements which they must fulfill while abiding within his place of refuge. Thus there is now a great controversy on concerning effective requirements for life.
31	By his mouthpiece and witnesses Jehovah addresses “Christendom”: “Hear ye now what the Lord saith; Arise, contend thou before the mountains, and let the hills hear thy voice.” (Mic. 6:1) ‘'Christendom” resents these attentions and says, 'Why come to me and continually make me hear the message? I have the Bible, and why don’t you witnesses go to the heathen?' Why? Well, in the type Jehovah spoke to his professed covenant-people Israel, and now he commands “Christendom” to hear, because the heathen have no covenant obligations toward Almighty God whereas “Christendom” claims to be in a covenant to do his will. Hence her claim makes her subject to God’s requirements. “Judgment must begin at the house of God,” is God’s rule. “Christendom” claims to be such house, and must therefore get attention before heathendom. “Christendom” is out to justify her yielding to religion or demonism. Jehovah bids her “contend”, or, “maintain
thy controversy” (Roth.), with him as to whether the Kingdom requirements are excessive or unreasonable, and why destruction should not come upon “Christendom” as well as heathendom at Armageddon. Jehovah further bids her contend in a most public way, “before the mountains, and . . . hills.” The controversy is of vital interest and concern to the lowest and to the highest personages of Satan's visible organization, to pope, dictators, kings, judges, governors, and others whose very highness makes their responsibility greater because of the power and influence they exercise over the peoples and the laws laid upon the people. Instead of taking av ay freedom of speech, press and assembly in connection with the worship of Jehovah God, “Christendom" should play fair and consider the everlasting welfare of her peoples and let them hear both sides of the controversy. Then let the people determine which side is right, and freely act accordingly, thereby fixing each one his own destiny.
32	“Hear ye, 0 mountains, the Lord’s controversy, and ye strong foundations of the earth: for the Lord hath a controversy with his people, and he will plead with Israel.” (Mic. 6:2) Such mountains represent particularly the lofty national governments of “Christendom”, including “the king of the north" and “the king of the south” who now exchange blows over world domination. Jehovah has made such “mountains” to hear the message of His life requirements. Jehovah’s witnesses have by special couriers paid personal visits on the various ruling ones and presented them the printed Resolutions adopted at international assemblies. Like information ha> been mailed to such worldly authorities. It has al-<> been radiocast over great networks of stations. There have been public hearings before federal commissions, Supreme Court and other courts high and low; and also petitions for free worship and open debate, and signed by millions of fair-minded lovers of righteousness. Even the so-called ‘ heathen nations” have been served with notice of Jehovah’s controversy.
33	The bone of contention over which the two “kings” declare they will fight to the last ditch, shot and man is not the main issue. The really serious question is, not which one shall get on top with world domination, but, Shall Jehovah's Theocratic Government exercise universal domination? Of what avail is it if one “king” of “Christendom" temporarily gets on top, if shortly thereafter all “Christendom”, together with heathendom, shall be wiped out at Armageddon for not meeting God's requirements? Hence “Christendom’s” view that Jehovah’s witnesses are wasting time and are a nuisance and serving no vital, essential purpose is upside down. Their proclamation of Jehovah’s Word is the
138
SEe WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
most vital and pressing service from which all peoples can benefit lastingly. The creature's relationship to the Supreme Power and to the Government of ‘‘The Higher Powers” is of greater importance than that to any earthly human organization and it involves the creature’s eternal life and happiness.
31	In Jehovah’s controversy with unfaithful Jerusalem he sent his prophets early and late. So now he sends his anointed witnesses. Not only the lofty ones must hear, but also those who claim to be the foundations of Satan’s visible organization, “ye lasting rocks, the foundations of the earth.” (Roth.) The pope at Vatican City claims to be the rock foundation of spiritual Israel, “the church.” He and all other religious systems of “Christendom” claim to be lasting, enduring when all other things fail, and to be the bottom upon which the civilization of the earthly organization rests. Therefore they insist that provision be made for religion in the world order to be set up after this world war. The pope depends on the Axis powers as his military arm, “the sword of his church,” and all such comrades declare that strong, hierarchic and authoritarian governments are the only solid base for a permanent stable human society, a “new order based on moral principles”. Such religionists, including the Vatican’s pontiff himself, have been notified of Jehovah’s controversy and have been warned that they “shall die’’ 1
35	This controversy with God’s professed ‘people of Israel’, or "Christendom”, may not be dismissed lightly as if having no bearing on the world outcome or on one’s individual hope of life. It is of far-reaching importance to you to know whether “Christendom” has kept faith with God or has broken the covenant she claims with him and is worthy of death and hence doomed. All persons of good-will and who want life must be interested in this controversy, to determine whether to side with “Christendom" or to forsake her. You must know how to avoid the death-dealing snares into which the demons have lured her. Thereby you can steer clear of her shortcomings and covenant-breaking, and so escape sharing her terrible fate at Armageddon. To know what is required of God unto life and how to maintain your integrity toward him, you must listen to His side of the controversy.
36	Jehovah reasons with “Christendom” on the basis on which she claims to operate, to wit, as “his people”: “0 my people, what have I done unto thee? and wherein have I wearied thee? testify against me.” (Mic. 6:3) Jehovah raises the same question by a later prophet. (Jer. 2: 5-8. 31) “Christendom” claims God’s promises in the Bible, but does not render obedience to his law of worship upon which the fulfillment of those promises is based. (Ex. 20:6) Is God, therefore, responsible for her failure to realize
those promises? Concerning the religionists and their political allies who disregard God’s law and brazenly make prayers for his blessing on their plans and methods, Proverbs 28: 9 says : “He that turneth away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer shall be abomination.” (Prov. 15:8) Failing to keep her side of the covenant, “Christendom” cannot receive the blessings promised. Why, then, should she be offended and her religious susceptibilities shocked at having her failure pointed out by Jehovah’s witnesses ? ‘Wily should she get wearied by their persistence in warning her at God’s command and then try to stop such witnesses by mobs, Catholic Action, government bans, and refined persecution carried on under the cloak of legality and “special emergency” laws and measures?
3T It is not unreasonable of Jehovah to keep on sending his witnesses to her. He knows the importance of the matter deserves it. Further, “Christendom” should consider that it shows forth God’s great forbearance and mercy when he serves warning notice before executing his judgment upon her as punishment for not living up to her covenant claims and thereby reproaching God's name. (Jer. 7:25; 2 Chron. 36:15,16) “Testify against me,” says Jehovah ; but the religionists cannot answer on Scriptural grounds of argument. They are confounded by His little ones who quote Scripture showing God's righteousness and blamelessness. What do the so-called “Christian religionists” have against Jehovah ? He is not responsible for the past and present course of the Jews. In fact, such “Christian religionists” with their greater opportunities and responsibilities have done worse to Jehovah God than the natural Jews themselves. In spitefulness, therefore, the religionists testify falsely against Jehovah’s witnesses to discredit them and their message. Persons of goodwill are not wearied by these, but welcome their visits.
•8 Doomed “Christendom” should consider what Jehovah in his faithfulness has done by which she might have been forever blessed. “For I brought thee up out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed thee out of the house of servants; and I sent before thee Moses, Aaron, and Miriam. 0 my people, remember now what Balak king of Moab consulted, and what Balaam the son of Beor answered him [remembered] from Shittim unto Gilgal; that ye may know the righteousness of the Lord.” (Mic. 6:4,5) Jehovah provided the typical passover in Egypt for the deliverance of the Jews, and in due time provided the real thing, “Christ our passover,” “the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world,” and by which comes deliverance from antitypical Egypt, Satan’s world organization. (1 Cor. 5:7; John 1:29) “Christendom” claims to have come out of “Egypt”, but belies her claim by making friendship with the
May 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
139
world, God's enemy. (Jas. 4:4) Jehovah God has again sent his Prophet, the Greater Moses, Christ Jesus, to lead the way out of the world and into the blessings promised to the obedient who hear that Prophet. (Acts 3:22,23; 7:37) With his coming to the temple for judgment Jehovah has sent forth with him Christ's remnant of brethren as fellow witnesses, pictured by Moses’ brother and sister, Aaron and Miriam. (Gal. 3:28; Joel 2:28,29) They declare Jehovah’s name in the antitvpical Egvpt.—Ex. 9:16; 15:20.	'	'
39	Jehovah God never backs up an enemy curse upon those who faithfully serve Him. Balak, the ancient king of Moab, opposed Jehovah’s people and sought to have them cursed and doomed. The prophet Balaam hired himself out to do it. He therefore pictures the ‘‘man of sin” class, including the “evil servant” company and also the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and other clergy of “Christendom”. These hire out to the worldly powers who are out for world domination and therefore oppose The Theocracy and who pay the religionists to curse Jehovah's witnesses for preaching that Theocratic Government. (Numbers 22,23,24; 2 Pet. 2:15,16; Rev. 2:14) Jehovah turned Balaam’s attempted curse into a blessing. Today the curses and misrepresentation of his covenant people by the religionists He makes to work for a witness to the Kingdom and for the good of his faithful witnesses who love him. (Deut. 23: 4, 5; Neh. 13:2; Josh. 24: 9,10) No curses written in God’s Word can with effect be applied against his faithful servants. Religious curses pronounced upon them by pope and like clergy are neither Biblical nor of God, but are demoniacal and are of no avail.
40	To get them “from Shittim unto Gilgal” Jehovah divided the waters of Jordan and led his people across dry-shod. Then from Gilgal as a base he directed the march around Jericho, ending in the utter destruction of that demonized religious stronghold. From that destruction only Rahab and her believing household were saved, picturing how God delivers from "Christendom’s” downfall the “sheep” class of good-will who do good unto his faithful and true witnesses, the remnant brethren of Christ. “Christendom” could have availed herself of covenant privileges with God and experienced like things antitypically, “from Shittim unto Gilgal,” so to speak. Only the “remnant” and their companions like Rahab have been thus led and used and preserved of the Lord. Why not "Christendom”? Because she willfully broke her implied covenant with God. By remembering such facts Jehovah is seen to be not at fault. Faced with such facts “Christendom” must "know the righteousness of the Lord”. He keeps covenant.—Neh. 1:5.
41	Now, with Armageddon immediately before us, it is a matter of life or destruction. Those who would be of the Lord’s "other sheep” that shall compose the “great multitude” of Armageddon survivors and live joyfully on earth forever must find the answer to a very personal question, and very important. 'Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow myself before the high God? shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves of a year old ? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil? shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?”—Mic. 6: 6, 7.
42	How shall now one approach God with acceptance and get in the way of life? The leading religious organization insists it is by the Roman Catholic clergy and their canonized saints. Their latest argument is that mankind must come by way of a "new order founded on moral principles” as approved by the pope. The “Protestant” clergy hang on to the papal apron-strings and for self-protection keep “good neighbor” policy with the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and claim the approach to God is by joining their conflicting religious systems; that to be saved and go to heaven one must be a member thereof. All agree that one must make liberal financial sacrifices to support the clergy and their expensive organizations. They conduct "drives" for money as if to enrich God. Billions of dollars are paid them for masses and prayers for the dead. They disregard God’s law and appointed way and please themselves and then salve their consciences by such so-called “sacrifices”. With such religionists the “evil servant" class line up in opposition to The Theocracy and its witnesses and claim approach to God is by the self-idolatry of "character development” so called.
43	Sacrifices without obedience are bribe tactics and are abominable to God. (Prov. 21: 27; Isa. 1: 11-17) “To obey is better than sacrifice.” (1 Sam. 15.22) A mere material-sacrifice arrangement would favor the rich as against the empty-handed poor. All such “sacrifices” are things outside of the individual himself and can become mere formality, able to be done without one's heart in it and with mental i enervations, as when haters of dictatorship "heil llitlei 1” and salute Hitler’s flag under compulsion. The i eli-gionists make an outward and formal acknowledgment of “transgression” and of "sin of my soul". In the world conflict of 1914-1918 they persecuted conscientious Christians, but their appearance of repentance thereafter did not lead them to accept God’s kingdom proclaimed by his persecuted witnesses. Instead, they hardened their hearts against Jehovah's King and turned to and hailed the League of Nations, the World Court, the Paris Peace Pact
140
WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, X. Y.
of 1928 outlawing war, and other anti-Theocratic schemes. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy had its own scheme for world dominance, to wit, the rebirth of the “Holy Roman Empire” with the help of arbitrary dictators. Again today, as in the Dark Ages, the Hierarchy is exposed as willing to sacrifice millions of her “Catholic population” to gain her selfish ends and also to thereby cause the death of millions of firstborn ones and other children of human mothers, and which children are fighting against the totalitarian dictators that serve the Hierarchy's aims. Honest Catholics who appreciate the benefits of democracy and separation of religion and state should awake to this clergy hypocrisy and listen to God’s requirement for life and blessings. With such religious sacrifice of human flesh and blood in violation of God’s everlasting covenant will he be pleased? —Gen. 9:6,11.
““He hath shewed thee [(Leeser; Rotherham) He hath told thee], 0 man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?” (Mic. 6: 8) Jehovah has told man His requirements; “whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning.” (Rom. 15:4) Xow God has sent his Prophet, the Greater Micah, Christ Jesus, to the temple. Him God uses to make clear the inspired Scriptures and to point out therefrom Jehovah’s requirements. Thus since the Lord’s coming to the temple in 1918 the Scriptures have been especially opened up as never hitherto. To the Christians there have been made clear their true commission from the Lord and their covenant obligations and also the requirements concerning the Lord’s “other sheep” who flee to him for refuge. Then Jehovah anointed his approved remnant and sent them forth in performance of that revealed commission to go up and down “Christendom” and other nations to pass the life-giving information out to all, whether claiming to be Christian or not. As in Micah's day, the man actually in a covenant to do God’s will, and the man professedly so, should be and are most directly concerned about what the Lord requires. However, the Lord's rule is the same toward the earthly ones of good-will who become the Lord’s “other sheep”, even though they are not like “Christendom” in claiming to be spiritual Israelites.
45	The question that the young man asked Jesus is now fitting: ‘What good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life?” (Matt. 19:16-19) Because of inherited sin and imperfection none on earth can now do perfectly; but note God’s Word as to “what is good” to do: “I will praise thy name, 0 Lord, for it is good.” (Ps. 54:6) “It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy name, 0 Most High.” (Ps. 92:1) “Praise ye the
Lord: for it is good to sing praises unto our God: for it is pleasant; and praise is comely.” (Ps. 147 :1) “He that received seed [of Kingdom truth] into the good ground, is he that heareth the word, and under-standeth it; which also beareth fruit, and bringeth forth, some an hundredfold, some sixty, some thirty.” (Matt. 13:23) ‘Well done, thou good and faithful servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things.” (Matt. 25:21; Luke 19:17) “Prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect, will of God.” (Rom. 12:2) The sum of the foregoing is that persons of good-will, the Lord’s “other sheep”, must first receive his truth and devote themselves to the Lord. They must then bear witness to his name and Kingdom, carrying forth the Kingdom fruits to other hungry ones of good-will, and continuing faithful and in integrity in doing God’s expressed good and perfect will.
46	You want life! “And what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly?” Do that which is risht and equal. Do not withhold from the “stranger that is within thy gates” his right, namely, to hear God's life-giving message. Freely thou hast received: rightly then, freely give. Show no partiality or respect of persons. Do not misjudge thy Christian brother or “neighbor”. Let him bear his own burden before the Lord and answer to his own Master, the Lord, who judges him.—Rom. 14:4; Gal. 6:5.
47	“And to love mercy.” This the Lord requires also. “For I desired mercy, and not sacrifice: and the knowledge of God more than burnt offerings.’’ (Hos. 6:6) Be forgiving, forbearing toward the faults and unintentional mistakes of thy brethren, helpfully pointing out to such the right course to take in their difficulty. Sound the Lord’s merciful warning to those about to die at Armageddon if unaided. Make return-visits upon those slow to understand but willing. Warn the honest and sincere against religion. Aid the refugees to find the Lord’s “city of refuge” for protection against God's Executioner at Armageddon and to abide there and keep the rules, within the city bounds, in integrity. Do good unto Jehovah’s witnesses, the “least of these [Christ's] brethren”, and do not take advantage of the war conditions to vent religious spleen on them for keeping God’s law and exposing religion.
48	“And to walk humbly with thy God”; not contrary to him. That means to be not self-willed, but obedient to God’s law and organization instructions. Recognize the true “Higher Powers”. Do not support schemes that exalt creatures and organizations that oppose Jehovah and his universal domination by his Theocracy. Do not think thyself above God’s law and that man’s law is higher than God’s in some cases, especially in some man-made emergency. The
May 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
141
world emergency with Armageddon at the door is the very time to most anxiously keep God’s law and obey him rather than obey desperate men. Only those who thus walk obediently with Jehovah God as Noah
walked with God down to the Flood will have any chance to survive Armageddon and serve him beyond.
(To be continued)
KINGDOM WORK
ATCHTOWEB readers now appreciate the fact that The Theocratic Government is functioning in the earth in so far as those who are consecrated to Jehovah are concerned Both the anointed remnant and the Jonadabs have the privilege, by the Lord’s grace, of participating in bearing the legitimate expenses for carrying forward the Kingdom work. Their contributions made direct to the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, at 124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, N. Y., is assurance to them that the money will be used to the best advantage in advancing the Kingdom interests.
This notice is not a solicitation of money, but a reminder to all who have a desire to support Jehovah’s kingdom that it is well to make advance provision to participate in the work and do so by laying aside a specific sum each week according to the manner in which the Lord prospers them financially. The work of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society is to use the money contributed in the most economical way to make known Jehovah’s name and his kingdom. If informed in advance as to the probable amount that will be contributed during the year by those who are interested, that makes it possible to outline the work and the expense connected therewith accordingly. It is therefore suggested that upon receipt of this issue of
The Watchtoieer you address a post card to the Society and keep a copy thereof as a reminder to yourself as to the amount you have promised and post the card to the Society immediately. Write nothing upon the card except the following:
By the Lord’s grace I hope to be able to contribute to the work of announcing the kingdom of Jehovah during the ensuing year the amount of $......,	which I will remit in such amounts
and at such time as I can find it convenient as the Lord prospers me.
Signed ............................................
Address your card to
Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society Treasurer’s Office
124 Columbia Heights Brooklyn, New York.
Those residing outside of the United States and who desire to participate in contributing to the necessary expense will please address your letters or cards to the Society’s office in the respective country in which you live.
Have in mind our need for guidance by the Lord and present the matter before the throne of heavenly grace that the money contributed may be used to the best advantage to announce the Kingdom.
"NEW WORLD” RULER AND ASSOCIATES
TURNING away from a consideration of the beastly rule of this present unsatisfactory world, it is refreshing to consider the vision of the glorious new world and its majestic ruler, his title and his father, and his position and his associates in office One of those associates, named John, who was favored with the inspired vision thereof, describes it for the benefit of us living at the world's end:
“And I looked, and, lo, a Lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an hundred forty and four thousand, having his Father’s name written in their foreheads. And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder; and I heard the voice of harpers harping with their harps: and they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before the four beasts, and the elders: and no man could learn that song but the hundred and forty and four thousand, which were redeemed from the earth. These are they which were not defiled with women; for they are virgins. These are they which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth. These were redeemed from among men, being the firstfruits unto God and to the Lamb. And in their mouth was found no guile: for they are without fault before the throne of God.”— Rev. 14.1-5.
In the Scriptures “mountain” is a symbol of God’s government or kingdom. The highest part of a mountain is properly called a “hill”. The highest part of God’s
kingdom is the governor or king. Jehovah says. “Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion” (Ps 2:6) Jehovah’s organization is described in His Word under the symbol and name of “Zion”, and it was typified by Mount Zion in Palestine. When David of Bethlehem was made king of the Jews Mount Zion was made the seat of government of the nation. There David built him a house of “cedar wood”, symbolic of the everlasting existence of God's kingdom. That was Jehovah God’s typical Theocratic government.
A thousand years thereafter John in a vision beheld a beautiful mountain It must have been a white mountain, and glorious, because white is symbolic of puritj, and because the Lord is glorious. It was Mount Zion, Gods pure and holy organization, the Kingdom, the Governor of which is pure, holy and undefiled. He is Christ Jesus, the Beloved One of God. The fact that John the apostle saw Mount Zion indicates that God’s kingdom by Christ Jesus was born in A.D. 1914 and that thereafter the servants of God whom John pictured saw that Government and appreciated it as established and functioning, while the enemies thereof are still in existence and fighting o\er world domination. The day comes, and is not far distant, when Mount Zion will be the peace and joy of all that live forever on the earth. (Ps. 48.2) Jehovah loves Zion and the entrance into that organization. (Pss. 78:68; 87:2) Zion is the official dwelling-place of Jehovah God,
142
^He WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
and therefore Zion is pure and holy. (Pss 9:11; 132:13) Out of Zion God shines, because Zion honors the Lord God and magnifies his name.—Pss. 50 -. 2; 135 • 21.
John says he saw a “Eamb” that stood on Mount Zion. The transfiguration scene ‘‘in the holy mount” when that Lamb of God was yet on earth in the flesh seems to refer to the same thing. (2 Pet. 1:17,18) This is “the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world”. (John 1:29) His blood shed at Calvary is for sin atonement of believing humankind, and now the Lamb comes in his glory, clothed with all power and authority, to clean up and remove the sin-stain from those who shall live in the new world. Be it noted that in the book of The Revelation Jesus is called the “Lamb” twenty-eight times, which is more times than of any other name it gives to him. God must have a reason for emphasizing that title. “Lamb” is translated from the Greek word arnion. which, more literally. means “dear lamb” or “lambling”. The evident purpose of the title is to remind all creation that God is the Great Shepherd and that Jesus is the dearest one of God’s great flock. Jesus said: “Jehovah is my shepherd.” (Ps. 23:1, A. li. T.) The one standing on Mount Zion, therefore, is definitely identified as Christ Jesus, the glorious King, the promised Seed—Gen. 22:8. IS.
Jesus took his position on Mount Zion in 1914. John’s vision suggests of Him that, standing there, Jesus now ‘sees of the travail of his soul' in fulfillment of the words spoken by God's prophet (Isa. 53-11. 12), and that he is filled with satisfaction and joy because the time has come to vindicate his Father's name. (Jer. 11:19. 20 , Ps. 110: 2-6) Thirty-five centuries ago a lamb of the flock was slain in Egypt and its blood was used as the basis for the law covenant which God made with the Israelites in Egypt and later confirmed at Mount Sinai on their way to the Holy Land. Likewise, the blood of Jesus, the Lamb of God slain on earth, is the basic sacrifice for the “new covenant”, of which Jesus is the Mediator and which is made on earth and ratified on coming to the true Mount Zion (Heb. 12 24) He is the greatest as well as the most loved of all God's creation, and concerning his dominion it is written - “And thou, 0 tower of the flock, the strong hold of the daughter of Zion, unto thee shall it come, e\en the first dominion, the kingdom shall come to the daughter of Jerusalem.” —Mic. 4: S.
His kingdom was born or began in 1914, before the travail of the “war in heaven” came upon Zion. “Before she travailed, she brought forth, before her pain came, she was delivered of a man child [the new-born Government!.” (Isa. 66:7) “Unto us a son [the Son of God] is given, and the government shall be upon his shoulder.” (Isa. 9.6,7) This is true because he is God’s dear Lamb and anointed King now upon his throne. The law, or rule of action that shall govern the new heavens and new earth, goes forth from Mount Zion. (Isa. 2:3) Not in Rome, but in Zion. God’s organization, the dear Lamb of God is laid as the Chief Corner Stone, God’s Anointed King, and he is the sanctuary for the children or members of Zion. (Isa. 2S-. 16; S 14) Such members of Zion constitute the church and are “living stones” built up on him (1 Pet. 2:6-8) He is also laid as a stumbling stone for his enemies, who stumble over him as the world’s Rightful Ruler.
Symbolically speaking, the church is “the Lamb’s wife’’, and after his coming to the temple for judgment it was time to tell her as a child of Zion, that she might rejoice over that fact: ‘Rejoice greatly, 0 daughter of Zion; and shout for joy; for behold, thy King cometh unto thee. He shall speak peace to the nations; and his dominion shall be throughout all the earth.’ (Zech. 9:9,10) The church is the “daughter of Zion”. It is Zion (God’s organization) that gives birth to her children who constitute members of God’s kingdom. Concerning such children it is written: “For as soon as Zion travailed [the travail came upon her in 1917 and 1918], she brought forth her children.”— Isa. 66:8.
Zion having now been built up, and her children having been brought forth, the Lord’s servant class or God's people on earth represented by the apostle John is given a vision of what has taken place. Therefore John adds concerning the Lamb: “And with him an hundred and forty and four thousand, having his Father’s name written in their foreheads.” (Rev. 14:1) This prophetic picture could not be fulfilled until the faithful Christians who had slept in death awaiting the Lord's return had been resurrected out of death to life in the spirit and the judgment at the temple had begun with the “house of God” and the remnant thereof yet on earth had been approved and brought into the temple condition and illuminated by the lightnings of Jehovah, his flashes of truth. Being brought forth as God's children begotten and anointed of his spirit and thus acknowledged by him, these would have his name in their foreheads. They would have an intelligent appreciation of the fact that they were God’s children, and, with the name in their foreheads, they are easily identified as children of God. The John or servant class, now in the temple, can see and appreciate the beautiful tableau, the first part of which appears to be Christ the glorious King and also his body members in God's organization. Those who are the children have begun and continue to sing Jehovah's praises and rejoice: “And Jehovah will reign over them in mount Zion from henceforth even for ever.”—Mic 4.7, A I? V
The number that stood with the Lamb on Mount Zion is the same as that of those who were “scaled” of the spiritual twelve tribes of Israel, to wit, 144,000 (Rev. 7: 4) God had promised to -write upon his faithful ones Ins name. (See Revelation 3:12.) These are shown in the tableau as having received his name written in their foreheads. These are they that have escaped from the snare of the enemy’s organization Babylon; as it is written: “But upon mount Zion shall be deliverance [shall be they that escape (marginal reading)], and there shall be holiness; . . . And saviours shall come up on mount Zion to judge the mount of Esau [Satan’s religious organization] ; and the kingdom shall be the Lord’s.” (Obad. 17-21) Under the power and influence of the demons the attempt is now being made to compel all creatures on earth to worship the “beast”, Satan’s visible organization, but upon the foreheads of those marked with their Father Jehovah’s name there is no room for the “name” or the “number” of the “beast”. Instead, there appears upon them the name of honor, reverence and praise to Jehovah and to his King. They are wholly devoted to the Lord.
Gathered unto the Lord, that is, into a unity with him,
May 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
143
his people are now out of Babylon and it is a time for them to rejoice and sing; and this they do. (Ps 126:1; Isa 52:7,8) It is the time also for God’s wrath to begin against that enemy organization Babylon. Therefore it is written ■ “The Lord hath brought forth our righteousness: come, and let us declare in Zion the work of the Lord our God . . . For his device is against Babylon, to destroy it; because it is the vengeance of the Lord, the vengeance of his temple. And I will render unto Babylon, and to all the inhabitants of Chaldea [Babylonia], all their evil that they have done in Zion in your sight, saith the Lord, As Babylon hath caused the slain of Israel to fall, so at Babylon shall fall the slain of all the earth.” (Jcr. 51:10,11, 24, 49) The time has now come to declare “the day of vengeance of our God”, and those of the organization of the Lord must declare it.—Isa. 61:2.
There is service to be done. Some who were favored with the knowledge of God’s truth and who covenanted to do his will became ''wear: in well doing” and they have concluded that all they need to do is to manifest outwardly a “sweet character”, meet together and have what they call “fellowship’’, and then wait to be taken to heaven. They deceive themselves and are deceived. Jehovah, however, gathers his faithful people into Zion for service. He has visited the nations to take out of them a “people for his name”, and those taken out must be his witnesses to sing forth his praises. (See Acts 15:14; 1 Peter 2:9; Isaiah 43:10,12.) Therefore the apostle John, representing the servant class, hears “a voice from heaven, as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder; and I heard the voice of harpers harping with their harps”.— Rev. 14:2.
The American Revised Version renders this part of the text, “the voice which I heard was as the voice of harpers.” The picture shows that the members of Zion can not and do not keep still. They cannot, because “in his temple doth every one speak of his glory”. (Ps 29:9) Being in the temple, they must sing forth Jehovah’s praise. ‘Where there are those who claim to be followers of Christ and who are using the “soft pedal” concerning Satan’s organization, or who insist on keeping still and ignoring the fact that Satan has an organization, such is conclusive proof that they are not of God’s capital organization Zion, whatever else might be their position Let no one who has entered into a covenant with the Lord be deceived into remaining quiet and inactive. This Revelation picture and many corroborating texts show that God’s temple elass must be active to the ven- end.
John heard the “voice from heaven, as the voice of many waters”, and this portends a downpour of God’s blessings “When he uttereth his voice there is a multitude of waters in the heavens, ... he maketh lightnings for rain.” (Jer 10: 13, margin) In that the voice was “as the voice of a great thunder”, it symbolically says that it is a message of God being proclaimed, which message is a rebuke to those who reproach his name. (Pss. 104:7; 18:6,7,13) But to those who love God it is a sound of refreshing truth announcing to them that God’s kingdom is come, and the time to rejoice and sing. The temple being now open, the time is come for the installation of tlie sacred singers and harpists who shall engage in sing
ing the praises of Jehovah God. Such service was employed in the typical house of the Lord. In the typical temple of ancient times King David set aside certain musicians, "v. Iio should prophesy with harps . . . for song in the house of the Lord.” (1 Chron. 25:1,3.6) In that temple semcc the singers, selected from the tribe of Levi, were caused to sing and to play upon the harp. (2 Chron 5 12,13) Thus God foreshadowed that when he gathered his spiritual Israelites into the temple they should sing forth his praises. The time of joy has arrived, and Christ Jesus at the temple, as the great Judge, says to those whom he approves: “Enter thou into the joy of thy lord.” (Matt 25:21) The approved spiritual Israelites enter the temple, and their songs and their harps sound with praise to the great Jehovah and to his King Christ Jesus.
“And they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before the four beasts, and the elders: and no man could learn that song but the hundred and forty and four thousand, which were redeemed from the earth ” (Rev. 14:3) In the Biblical record the earliest sinning is mentioned in Job 38:7. There the Lamb, the Beloved One of God. and who bears the title of “The Morning Star”, employed song to the praise of Jehovah. Thus is fixed the rule that must govern those of Zion now. The sonn which the apostle John heard sounds new, and therefore it would indicate that Jehovah’s servant class would have a change in their witness work from that of Elijah to that foreshadowed by Elisha, the latter being a service attended with no fear but with great joy. It is the love of God that prompts them to sendee, and the love such as Chi 1st has is that which constrains them and holds them together. These, possessed of such love, fear not the eneim or his organization, but boldly sing forth the praises of the great Eternal One.—1 John 4:17,18.
The remnant of Jehovah's anointed witnesses now on earth are enabled by God's grace to see and appreciate the fact that Jehovah's Elect Sen-ant is Christ Jesus and the faithful members of his body, and that these God has selected and installed as his sweet singers in the temple, to perform other purposes to which he assigns them. (Isa. 42:1; (Matt. 12:15-18) To these arc committed the interests of God's kingdom, and the obligation is laid upon them to make known God's purposes to the rulers and to the peoples of the earth. Since the building up of Zion, or from and after 1918, Jehovah has appeared m his aloiy, and by his lightnings has revealed himself and his organization and his purposes to Ins people as never before He has made clear to his people many prophecies that have been fulfilled, and now he gives them a gleam of other things that arc shortly to be fulfilled The time has come for them to sing, and they do “sing unto the Lord a new song, and his praise from the end of the earth”.—Isa. 42:9,10.
At the human birth of Jesus nineteen hundred years ago the angelic hosts sang to the praise of Jchoxah God, whose Son they announced as the Savior of the world Now the King in glory stands upon Mount Zion with all power and authority to rule and bless, and all of God's organization join in the new song. The angels in heaven and the remnant on earth sing before the throne the praises of the Most High.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
LONDON ASSEMBLY (BY AN OBSERVER)
“Londoners are a peculiar people and love their London in spite of its mean dwellings and its grubby ugliness. So with the news of the Assembly, many a London pioneer serving his ‘zone’ in some far-away spot cast longing eyes toward the Metropolis. London is getting famous for its assemblies, and this one was to be held at the London Palladium at Oxford Circus, probably the most famous music hall in the world. Tickets of admission were printed and were sparingly handed out to the London units and those in the immediate vicinity. The Palladium, large as it is, will seat only 2,500, and the Lord’s ‘other sheep’ are fast coming in. Persons of good-will and model-study people were eagerly visited and invited to attend this assembly. Coaches and buses are no longer available for private hire as on previous occasions, due to further petrol restrictions; but, no matter, as The Palladium is right in the center of the West End of London, served by a network of underground railways, everyone attending had excellent traveling facilities regardless of from which point of the compass they came.
“The title of the Assembly was ‘Integrity’, as it was held on the opening day of the great world-wide ‘Integrity’ Testimony Period (February). Came the day, and with it four inches of overnight snow and still snowing hard without the possibility of a break. Well, the integrity test is on No need to worry about not filling the theater. Snow won't stop those who are determined. And it didn't! The assembly was due to start at 2: 30. By one o’clock there was a queue waiting in the snow outside, over 100 yards long. At 1:30 p.m. the doors opened and the eager publishers were ushered into a wonderfully comfortable and heated auditorium. The Theocratic orchesLa, a remnant of the pride of the Leicester Assembly last September, but nevertheless highly efficient, regaled us with light music while settling ourselves comfortably in the seats. Then the loved voice of Judge Rutherford was heard reproducing those fatherly and so human words he had to say to 15.000 ‘children of the King’ assembled at St. Louis, Mo. Memories—a flickering sadness just for a moment, followed by a confident j’oyousness with the realization that Brother Rutherford was more with us today than ever before.
“The opening song 'Come, Ye That Love the Lord’, and then the Watch Tower’s representative, Mr. Gill, from ‘Down Under’. We had all heard of his arrival in this country from New Zealand and were eager to hear what he had to tell about our Father's business in those far-away parts, particularly as the work had there been banned. How thrilled we were to hear of how our brethren in the name of the Lord challenged the ruling powers, ‘Do you allow Christians to assemble together for song, prayer and Scripture study? Answer Yes or No.” We have a feeling that this forthright dealing and ‘Answer Yes or No’ will be heard nearer to home in the near future. What a thrill it is to hear of Jehovah’s watchful care over his people and how so surely the Lord ‘has the enemy in derision’. The news that the Japanese had only been allowed to overrun those lands of the Pacific after the Lord’s witness work had been completed was received with a great ovation.
“Next Jesse Hemery, who has seen the Lord’s work in
London progress over 54 years, gave us 'timely counsel. First a few words about the newspaper reports regarding the death of Judge Rutherford. A fearless declaration to the world that its revilings will be recompensed by the Lord in due time, and once again the declaration of the Lord’s purpose to have his ‘strange work’ brought to a conclusion only in his due time. A reminder of the words ‘Millions Now Living Will Never Die’, and that the Lord’s people have not lost their faith in that great promise. Not a slogan, but a fact! Brother Hemery also announced the election of Nathan H. Knorr as the Society’s new president. Then counsel on Psalms 23 and 27: ‘The Lord’s people shall not want.’ That we know, whether in spiritual food, presidency or otherwise, the Lord will provide. We hax e not yet entered the ‘valley of the shadow1, but the Lord will be with his people during the dark days ahead, and the Good Shepherd will care for his Father’s sheep.
“The London Branch servant, A. D Schroeder, then followed with some poignant remarks addressed to the people of good-will nowT associating themselves with the Theocratic organization. Our individual responsibility before the Lord was put quite clearly, and the steps outlined which must be undertaken by every seeker of righteousnes-, before one becomes a trusted servant of the Lord An invitation was given to persons of good-will to now take a stand and prove their integrity along with Jehovah s witnesses. Just before closing a resolution was passed to send a cable of greetings to Brother Knorr, our new president. The cable dispatched read as follows: ‘Greetings and hearty co-operation sent you as president from 2,500 London Assembly Sunday.’ Surely our heavenly Father will richly bless Brother Knorr in his new appointment. And so ended another memorable day of happy assembly as a body of the Lord’s people. Too soon the minutes fled by . . Now every minute, thought and action must be harnessed for The Theocracy. Only in this way can we keep the demons at bay and maintain our integrity, by diligently keeping God’s commandments and serving God, and not man, and thus remaining ‘blameless in the day of our Lord’.’’
A TEST OF INTEGRITY (CALIFORNIA)
“On Saturday, February 14, as one magazine publisher took her place on the street in Mount Shasta, two Legionnaires in full regalia took their stand on either side of the witness. Shortly thereafter a fellow passing by on the other side of the street hollered over at the Legionnaires, ‘Where's your magazines, boys? Better get out your magazines there!’ Another passer-by further embarrassed them by observing, ‘Nice-looking girl you got there, boys’’ The ‘boys’ stuck it out for about an hour, and immediately after they left the good-will people began to manifest themselves. One who made it plain that he had observed the whole incident came up and said, ‘Well, you’ve been standing on the street here a long time, little lady. I’m going to take one of those magazines [handing the witness a dollar], and just keep the change.’ [It was used to further advance the Kingdom work.] . . . This afternoon a carload of about eight high-school students stopped by and got a magazine to investigate for themselves One of them opened the magazine and began reading it to the others as they drove away. It seems the younger generation are thinking for themselves.’-
144
WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street -	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
N. H Knorr, President	W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to evei lasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam's wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $100; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1 50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British.................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian................. 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian.......... 7	Beresford Road, Strathfleld, N. S W., Australia
South African .........-......Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year Is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y.t
under the Act of March 3, 1879.
“WILLING VOLUNTEERS” TESTIMONY PERIOD
During the month of June all those willing volunteers who delight to do Jehovah’s will and who have made a covenant with the Lord will go forward in the proclamation of the Kingdom message. The '‘Willing Volunteers” Testimony Period will be devoted to the distribution of the book Children and seven booklets on the contribution of 35c. All servants of the Lord going forward during this campaign will have a good supply of this literature on hand as they go from place to place, visiting the people of good-will, those who love righteousness. This literature will afford many the opportunity of getting a clearer knowledge of the truth, and they should be given this opportunity during the “Willing Volunteers” Testimony Period. The usual field-service reports will be made to the company servant if the publisher is associated with a company; the pioneers, direct to the office; and those readers of The Watchtower who have as yet not been in the field-service work, namely, going from door to door with the Kingdom message, may inquire of the Watchtower the address of their nearest company. You will enjoy being associated with them.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of June 21: “Micah” (Part 9), fl 1-18 inclusive, The Watchtower May 15, 1942.
Week of June 28: “Micah” (Part 9), fl 19-35 inclusive, The Watchtower May 15, 1942.
“ ‘CHILDREN’ STUDY QUESTIONS”
The Society has released a new booklet, entitled “ ‘Children’ Study Questions”, which will be a great aid to all publishers of the Kingdom in the conducting of Children studies in the various homes throughout the country. You can get your copy now on contribution of 5c for publication of more of these. Send remittances to 117 Adams Street, Brooklyn, New York. This “Children” Study Questions booklet will help individual readers in their personal study in their own homes. Get a copy now
“WATCHTOWER” QUESTIONS
Repeated requests are received from individuals that The Watchtower publish questions on the leading article of each issue for use of study classes. Such questions were published over a period of years, but were discontinued with the beginning of 1939 because not conducing to the best results, particularly on the part of study conductors. December 1, 1938, The Watc/i-tower gave instructions on the best method of studying the magazine. The study conductor is responsible to carefully study the lesson before the meeting. However, all attendants at the study should likewise study the lesson m advance, and they have the privilege to submit questions in writing on the study paragraphs to the study conductor sufficiently in advance for him to compile these and frame the final set of questions on the (Continued on page 159)
Size WCHTOWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM
No. LXIII	May 15, 1942	No 10
MICAH
PART 9
what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, humbly with thy God?"—Mic. 6:8.
"He hath shewed thee, 0 man, and to love mercy, and to walk
"JEHOVAH is the great and perfect Teacher. His I instruction is always good and beneficial; for he is goodness, and to know him is of the greatest benefit. His perfect justice does not require him to provide rescue for the condemned, but in his mercy, which is his loving-kindness toward such, he gives timely and sufficient warning against the impending world disaster. He plainly points out the reason therefor, and to those who would escape he shows what is good in his sight and what he requires to win his approval and merciful protection and his deliverance from destruction with the doomed world. The creature that desires life and who enters into a covenant or agreement to do Jehovah’s will binds himself to fulfill God’s requirements. Jehovah God is no respecter of persons. Every creature on earth that desires to get into the way of life must expect to face the same requirements and to follow the same rule of action. Willing obedience and faithfulness are required in doing the will of the great Lifegiver. The creature must deal with justice and in the love of mercy toward others, especially those in the way of life with him. He must walk obedient to God’s expressed will and not abandon God’s side for the world’s. Thus he maintains his relationship with God. The joyful fulfilling of God’s requirements leads to endless life amid blessings unspeakable. The refusal or failure to carry out his requirements leads to death and loss of everything.
2 Religion has substituted for God’s requirements the rule and moral standards of men who depart from and ignore God’s law. Religion has therefore blinded men to God’s requirements. Look at the religious world today, particularly the “civilized” part thereof called “Christendom”. Then answer as to what religion has done for humankind. “Christendom” has taken the name of God and of his Christ and lays claim to his promised blessings. She thereby puts herself in an implied covenant and, in consequence, makes herself responsible to God’s requirements of one that bears his name. The course of those unfaithful to the covenant with God, and the
condition that results from their going over to religion, are the same in this modern world just as in the ancient world before Christ. Why? Because religion is demonism and the demons use like methods with like results always, and those demons are most active now, as they were in the days of Noah before the world disaster. Jehovah foreknew exactly the present-day state of “Christendom”. She has gone the same way as the two capital cities of the divided Jewish nation, Jerusalem and Samaria. Jehovah God has preserved a faithful record in detail of the conditions that doomed both cities, and by this means he has foretold the conditions existing within “Christendom” at the end of the world, where we now are. That record was preserved for our admonition and profit. A close study thereof shows the wisdom of now keeping the divine requirements. The Bible record is not mere dry ancient history, but bears importantly on us today.
3 “The Lord’s voice crieth unto the city, and the man of wisdom shall see thy name: hear ye the rod, and who hath appointed it.” So reads the record at Micah 6: 9. In Micah’s day the “city” was Jerusalem, and possibly also Samaria, the rival capital; but Jerusalem remained the last to be dealt with. As capitals these two cities represented the entire nation, the twelve tribes of Israel. That they had gone religious and despised the Lord’s requirements note God’s description of them by his prophet. The religionists heard Micah prophesying, but it was not a man’s voice, not Micah’s voice, that they heard. It was Jehovah’s voice crying, because it was his inspired message. Now in this day of crisis upon “Christendom” Jehovah’s voice again cries to that “city” or religious organization which claims the name of Christ. Again it is not the “voice” of creatures, not the voicing of human opinions by Jehovah’s witnesses, that “Christendom” hears, but these cry out to her what the voice of the Lord has said in his Word. “Christendom” is now on judgment, because the Lord has come to his temple and is present as Judge, as symbolized by the “ark of his 147
148
SEe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
testament [covenant]”. He makes his voice or message to lie heard, as symbolically foretold at Revelation 11:19: “And the temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was seen in his temple the ark of his testament: and there were lightnings, and voices [judgment messages], and thunderings, and an earthquake, and great hail.” Never in history was there such a loud and widespread cry of His voice. This cry was made through his faithful witnesses and their devoted companions. These published Jehovah’s name and advertised his Kingdom under Christ and declared his righteous judgments and requirements, and this by the greatest publicity campaign by means of hundreds of millions of copies of Kingdom publications, by radio, by sound-amplification machines and recorded speeches, by public addresses and conventions, by petitions for free speech and worship circulated among and signed by millions of good-will persons, by house-to-house visitation of the people and by conducting Bible studies in their homes; and by all other possible means approved by the Lord God.
* As one of many instances : On Sunday, March 25, 1934, Jehovah's witnesses arranged to broadcast over a chain of 151 radio stations the vital speech “World Control”, from the convention auditorium at Los Angeles, California. Immediately thereafter the same speaker delivered the further speech on “Requirements”, the same being carried over 55 of those stations and heard by simultaneous gatherings of God's people from coast to coast. Then the speech “Requirements” was recorded on sound-records for reproducing by transcription machines and was repeatedly played the world over both on regular radio programs and in the meeting-places of God's people. More recently, in August. 1941, at the Theocratic Assembly in St. Louis, Missouri, the topmost attendance at which was over 115,000, mainly persons of good-will, the most vital speech on the Lord’s requirements was delivered, to wit, on the subject “Integrity”. This speech was instantaneously recorded as the speaker talked and is now being daily reproduced on phonographs run in the private homes and public halls throughout the land. You may read that speech “Integrity” in the August 15, 1941, issue of The Watchtower, which issue was circulated by the hundreds of thousands of copies in many languages.
5 “And the man of wisdom shall see thy name.” The better rendering of this according to the original text is: ‘The Lord’s voice crieth unto the city, with that which is essential for him who sees thy name.’ (See Rotherham translation.) In 1931 the Lord God revealed to his covenant people the “new name” which his own mouth had called upon them, to wit, "Jehovah’s witnesses.” (Isa. 62:2; 43:10,12; Rev.
2:17) Their consistent course of action and their message prove they are just that, witnesses to Jehovah’s name. As a result the eyes of many honest ones hitherto blinded by religion see Jehovah's name and that it stands for his righteous purpose toward creatures. They see that his name has been made despicable and reproached by religion, not alone by the Jews’ religion but even more so by "Christian religion”, so called; which proves that religion is not Christian, for Christ Jesus upheld the honor of hi.-Father Jehovah’s name. They see that His purpose is to make a glorious name for himself by the destruction of all those that bring reproach upon his name by their religion, including “Christendom” and also the Devil himself. By this destruction at the battle of Armageddon God shall completely clear or vindicate his name and settle the outstanding issue of uxm:R-sal domination to the everlasting glory of his holy name.
9 Seeing these things concerning Jehovah’s name makes it clear that what is most essential for the person of good-will who gets sight of this in God’s Word is to devote himself to Jehovah God through Christ Jesus, the Vindicator of Jehovah’s name, and then to take Jehovah’s side in the great issue. There he must abide in integrity or blamelessness by faithfully witnessing to God's name and purpose unto the end and never compromising with religion, which is on the opposing side of the issue. Thus such favored ones get the wisdom, understanding, counsel, comfort and support which is “essential” to meet the Lord’s requirements and hold fast their integrity toward him, and this also shall be with safety to them at the battle of Armageddon. The faithful remnant of Jehovah’s covenant people were, by his grace, first to see Jehovah’s name, especially from 1925 on. Shortly thereafter this magazine, in its issue of January 1,1926, came forth with the principal article on “Who Will Honor Jehovah?” making prominent God's purpose from of old to make a name for himself at Armageddon. Thereafter with greater zeal and effort the remnant went up and down all the nations of earth declaring his name, thereby proving themselves Jehovah’s witnesses. The meek or teachable ones saw that name and hailed it in hope of deliverance. “Unto thee, 0 God, do we give thanks, unto thee do we give thanks: for that thy name is near [to be seen], thy wondrous works declare.” (Ps. 75:1) Those who hold onto religion never “see”, or “regard”, that name until it is vindicated in their destruction.
“THE ROD”
'When Jehovah’s typical nation of Israel forsook his commandments and went in the way of the surrounding nations that practiced religion or demon
May 15,1942
Slie WATCHTOWER
149
ism, Jehovah used as a rod of punishment King Nebuchadnezzar, the conqueror of Assyria; and Jerusalem was destroyed. “0 Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their hand is mine indignation. I will send him [Nebuchadnezzar] against an hypocritical nation [unfaithful Israel], and against the people of my wrath will I give him a charge, to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the streets.” (Isa. 10:5,6,11) Who now is “the rod” of today concerning whom “the Lord’s voice crieth, . . . Hear ye the rod, and who hath appointed it”?
8	Those who hear and heed the Lord's voice crying out through the world's din see that Jehovah’s “rod” of his anger and indignation against “Christendom” is his Elect Servant, Christ Jesus. When that Servant was on earth and was transfigured on the mountaintop in the presence of his disciples Jehovah’s voice was heard from heaven, saying: “This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him.” (Matt. 17: 5) When Jehovah enthroned him as King in 1914 and proceeded to make Christ’s enemies his footstool, Jehovah then fulfilled His promise: “Jehovah will send forth the rod of thy strength out of Zion: Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies.” (Ps. 110:1, 2, A.R.F.) Therefore Jehovah is the One who has appointed The Rod, and that for the vindication of His name upon “Christendom”, which has defamed that name. “He that chastiseth the heathen, shall not he correct [‘Christendom,’ which claims covenant-relationship with God]?” (Ps. 94:10) Inasmuch as Jehovah has appointed “the rod”, he will surely use it for his purpose. Chastisement cannot be escaped by the covenant-breakers even though “Christendom”, particularly her Roman Catholic Hierarchy, thinks and claims she has a “covenant with death” and is at “agreement with hell” and can escape correction. (Isa. 28:14-18) She will not survive her drubbing at Armageddon.
9	By his prophet Micah Jehovah had just declared what is good and what he requires of man. Consider now what Almighty God uncovers in “Christendom” and honestly judge whether she meets his requirements or deserves “the rod”. “A false balance is abomination to the Lord: but a just weight is his delight.” (Prov. 11:1) “Are there yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked, and the scant measure that is abominable?” (Mic. 6:10) That this is true of “Christendom” the great accumulations of ill-gotten wealth testify. Not only is such true of the powerful commercial traffickers, and also of the Nazi and Fascist dictators, but it is notably true of the religious organization and its “rich men”, especially the Hierarchy with headquarters at Vatican City. These religionists are the chief of “the wicked”. Theirs are “treasures of wickedness”
because they profess to know and to communicate with God, and at the same time they turn theii back-on his Word, oppose his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, denounce and persecute His witne->e< preaching the Bible, and commercialize their relmmn and fleece the religious public. In this wickedness sho justifies herself, as did Ephraim of old.—Iios. 12:7,8.
10	The clergy have accepted their hire from their congregations and have pretended to hand out the full measure of God's message, but actually have taken away the vital things from his Word and the people have received “scant measure" as a result and are starving spiritually. The pile that the-e “rich men” have heaped up has now about reached its peak, and the Lord bids them now “weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you. ... Ye have heaped treasure together for the last days"; and the last days are here. (Jas. 5:1-6) Before they retire from business, shortly, the religionists hope to clean up on Jehovah’s witnesses who expose fraudulent religious dealings. When “the king of the north" and “the king of the south” pool their interests in a totalitarian world-combine, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy will not fail to get astride that “-carlet coloured beast”. She will ride it in a total chaige against Jehovah's servants to rob them of everything and safeguard her treasures of wickedness The coming peace conference under her dominance will make no allowance whatsoever for Jehovah’s witnesses after this conflict for world domination. (Rev. 17 :1-6) The totalitarian dictators and politicians who cry for “more religion” plan on retaining the religious money-changers in the temple after that conflict.
11	“Christendom” has long had the Bible and should know and should have taught God's standard of exchange of goods, to wit: “Thou shalt not have in thy bag divers weights, a great and a small. Thou shalt not have in thine house divers measures, a great [for yourself] and a small [for your customer]. But thou shalt have a perfect and just weight, a perfect and just measure shalt thou have; . . . For all that do such things, and all that do unriuhteou-k, are an abomination unto the Lord thy God." (Deut. 25:13-16) In view of that law to hi« covenant pimple Jehovah asks concerning “Christendom": “Shall I count them pure with the wicked balances, and with the bag of deceitful weights’” (Alic. 6:11) Doubledealing is abominable to Jehovah God. It has ever been true that the religious shepherds make the commercial traffickers the respected “principal of the flock”, that they might share their commercial loot. The people complain that the political clement have double-crossed them and not given them a square deal. But the worst double-dealing lum been and is the duplicity and hypocrisy of the religion- leaders,
150
WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
including the “evil servant” class whom the Lord casts out into the company of such religionists. In Scripture the balances are a symbol of scarcity. Scarcity has come upon the world since the symbolic four horsemen began their ride in A. D. 1914, and requiring the measuring out and rationing of the scanty supplies to the people. (Rev. 6: 5, 6) Xow all the world is faced with shortage and famine, and rationing has begun in all the nations and will increase. Price control is being established, and ceilings are attempted to be fixed and applied to prices of labor and goods. But not so with religion! Its dishonesty and its fraudulent charges for prayers and masses for those supposed to be in “Purgatory”, and other like religious services, continue uncontrolled, and the reproaches upon Jehovah’s name and his Theocracy continue to be heaped up. Is that what the Lord has shown to be good ? Is that the doing justly, showing mercy, and walking humbly with God which he requires of man claiming to be in a covenant with God for His blessings?
12	“For the rich men thereof are full of violence, and the inhabitants thereof have spoken lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their mouth.” (Mic. 6: 12) This is a true picture of “Christendom” this very day, and that after fifteen or more centuries of religion, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy having existed unbroken and in control all through those centuries. In fear of what they see coming, the religious leaders and their political and commercial allies turn attention away from religion's disgraceful failure and brazenly they say that religion is the only remedy and cure-all and is what the world needs; whereas the world has never been without it in plenty. The clergy as professed representatives of God set the example for their allies and the religious public. Such clergy follow in the steps of their religious forerunners in Jesus’ day, the Pharisees, to whom Jesus said: "Ye cannot serve God and mammon.” “And the Pharisees, who were lovers of money, heard all these things; and they scoffed at him. And he said unto them, Ye are they that justify yourselves in the si a lit of men : but God knoweth your hearts : for that which is exalted among men is an abomination in the sight of God." (Luke 16: 13-15, Arn. Het. Per.) The clergy justify the religious racket, their allies exalt it, but God abominates it. Therefore now God’s sheep must cut connections completely from all religious shepherds and their folds.
13	The history of the labor movement down till today throws a glaring light on the rich men as “full of violence”, and they have not hesitated to provoke violent and bloody wars between nations to gain commercial advantage and supremacy. Religious history shows up the clergy “rich men” as being "lull of violence'’, even to excelling the commercial traf
fickers. The clergy have incited their dupes to violence against the innocent and have justified the violent and condemned the innocent victims. Particularly was this made manifest in the year 1940 and thereafter by the mobs either led or incited by the Roman Catholic clergy, and by other forms of violent persecution against Jehovah's witnesses because these obey God’s commandments and proclaim the truth which opens the eyes of the victimized people to the money-making schemes and oppression by religion. Public servants and officers of the law fail to keep their oath of office to uphold and to apply the law to protect the innocent, peaceful, and lawabiding citizens from violent assault and injury. Hence Jehovah’s witnesses under the religious persecution cry out in the words of an earlier Jehovah’s witness, the psalmist: “False witnesses are risen up against me, and such as breathe out cruelty.” (Ps. 27:12) “Forget not the congregation of thy poor for ever. Have respect unto the covenant [promising protection and deliverance] : for the dark places of the earth are full of the habitations of cruelty.” (Ps. 74:19,20) (Also Habakkuk 1:2-4) And concerning “Christendom’s” condition Jehovah's inspired servant says prophetically: “The rod [of power of the rulers] hath blossomed; pride hath budded. Violence is risen up into a rod of wickedness. . . . Make a chain; for the land is full of bloody crimes, and the city is full of violence.” (Ezek. 7: 10, 11, 23; 8:17) As reported in Der Deutsche Weg (“The German Way”) of May 29, 1938, the pope's clergy in Germany stirred up the Catholic dictator Hitler. In fulfillment of his Concordat with the pope, Hitler forbade the existence of Jehovah's witnes-es and dissolved their organization and confiscated their literature; and to this the Roman Catholic priest of Berlin who published the report adds, “Bravo I” Then he deplores that the American government has not followed the example of that violent religious-totalitarian dictator in a like violation of democracy and liberty of worship. (See Face the Facts, Appendix, pages 60, 61.)
14	Micah foretold: “And the inhabitants thereof have spoken lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their mouth.” Informed and honest commentators on the condition of religious “Christendom” state baldly that never was the word and contract of man in his dealings with his fellow man more undependable and lightly respected and easily scrapped. Concerning the two rival powers in the scramble for world domination at the “time of the end” Daniel 11:27 foretold: “And both these kings’ hearts shall be to do mischief, and they shall speak lies at one table; but it shall not prosper: for yet the end shall be at the time appointed.” These two world powers sit at the table of the 'father of lies’, trying to deceive each
May 15,1942
S’THE WATCHTOWER
151
other, but especially the people. (John 8:44; 1 Cor. 10:21) Their biggest and chief lie is their denying that God’s appointed ‘'times of the Gentiles” ended in 1914, and that Jehovah God and Christ Jesus are “the Higher Powers”, and that Jehovah’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus has begun and is the rightful rule of the earth. Therefore they carry on their desperate struggle for total domination of the earth. The responsibility for this general lying and deceit Almighty God fixes upon the clergy of all denominations in “Christendom”, saying: “For both prophet and priest are profane [hypocritical]; yea, in my house have I found their wickedness, saith the Lord. I have seen also in the prophets of Jerusalem [type of ‘Christendom’] an horrible thing: they commit adultery [with the world], and walk in lies: they strengthen also the hands of evil doers, that none doth return from his wickedness: . . . But if they had stood in my counsel, and had caused my people to hear my words, then they should have turned them from their evil way, and from the evil of their doings.”-—Jer. 23:11,14, 22.
15	Such lying and deceit may not and does not exist now among Jehovah’s remnant of witnesses and their companions whom He has delivered from the power of religion. To them he has, since 1918, turned a “pure language”, or “pure lip”, the message of Kingdom truth, “that they may all call upon [publish] the name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent.” (Zeph. 3:9) His command to them is: “These are the things that ye shall do: Speak ye every man the truth to his neighbour; execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates: and let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his neighbour; and love no false oath: for all these are things that I hate, saith the Lord.” (Zech. 8:16,17; Eph. 4:25) They must speak abroad the truth about Jehovah’s name and his Righteous Government under Christ. (Zeph. 3:13) To counteract this the clergy and other religionists resort further to lies and deceit in the religious and secular newspapers, over the radio, in the propaganda, in the courts of law, and in their cathedrals and other religious meeting-places. They grossly misrepresent those who bear Jehovah’s name not in vain and who show forth his praises. The religious persecutors draw nigh to God with flattering lips, but their worship is ceremonial and formal, with hearts far removed from God. Immediately after such deceitful formality, they go forth and speak of safeguarding liberty of speech and religious worship and protecting the people in their inalienable rights, and at the same time they scheme and use their influence with politicians and legislators. By these they get laws put through or misapplied to stop Jehovah’s witnesses speaking the truth to their neighbors having hearing ears.
16	The time for lies to end has come, because by the lies Jehovah’s name has long been reproached. That stainless name must now be set forth and made known in truth. The deceitful tongue has wagged long enough and done its damage. It has been a fire, and “is set on fire by Gehenna”, by destruction, and to cause the destruction of the blameless. The Roman Catholic Hierarchy have “made lies [their] refuge, and under falsehood have [they] hid [themselves]”, and now God’s time is here to unmask them before he blots them out. (Jas. 3:6,8, Am. Rev. Ver.; Isa. 28:15,17) To “Christendom” he says: “Therefore also will I make thee sick in smiting thee, in making thee desolate because of thy sins.” (Mic. 6:13) Rotherham reads: “Moreover also I have made thee sick with smiting thee.” This smiting is different from the woes which Satan brings upon the people in his great wrath. Such calamities and great suffering Satan and his demons cause to make the people bitter and hopeless and to make them curse God and deny the Only One who can deliver them from destruction at Armageddon.—Rev. 12:12,13,17.
17	Ancient Egypt denied to Jehovah’s chosen people the right and freedom to worship Him to the full extent that he commanded. The Devil religionists were stubborn and tried to keep the Israelites slaves to religion. Jehovah warned that he would smite them with plagues unless they let his people go and serve him. Fully warned by Jehovah’s prophet Moses, and therefore fully responsible for their course of opposition, Pharaoh and Egypt were smitten with ten plagues, and Jehovah’s judgment was executed upon all the demon gods of Egypt. Thereafter He destroyed the armies of the demon-worshipers in the Red sea. Those ten plagues were typical. They pictured the declaration today of Jehovah’s judgments against religion, his “strange work”, and the destruction thereafter of the religious organization, and which is his “strange act”. The first nine plagues are delivered against “Christendom” by his courageous witnesses under Christ Jesus, as pictured by Aaron acting as mouthpiece for his brother Moses in the presence of Pharaoh. This declaration of Jehovah’s judgments and of his coming day of vengeance has made “Christendom” in particular very “sick” from the smiting. Many of the tormented religionists would like to die rather than feel further the torment caused by the Lord’s judgments exposing religion. (Rev. 9:6) Instead of repenting in their sickness, they have blasphemed God and made attempts on the lives and property of his servants. —Rev. 16: 9-11, 21.
18	In the “battle of that great day of God Almighty” God will make “Christendom” sick unto death by administering the final smiting of which she has been amply warned; and she shall die. Jehovah makes
152
SEe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
her desolate ‘diecause of [her] sins”. These sins are not due to human weakness and sinful inclination inherited from Adam, but are unpardonable violations of her covenant-obligations toward God. Note her “presumptuous sins”. In spite of the great educational campaign by Jehovah’s servants advertising the Kingdom which began in 1914, “Christendom” has rejected and stumbled over The Stone, God’s anointed King, laid in Zion. In preference to God’s Righteous Government she sets up and commits idolatry with “the image of the beast”, a federated world under demon rule and commonly called a “League of Nations”. Whether the original League of 1920 is meant, or the proposed “new League of Nations” under totalitarian-religious dictators, both are of the same origin, “the god of this world.” Her choosing of the continued rule of God’s enemies, and that after the announcement of God’s kingdom and the warning of his vengeance for taking such contrary course, this constitutes the “transgression of desolation”. (Dan. 8:13) The desolation wrought by such a course may be plainly seen in the train of events following such transgression and leading up to the present conflict between “the king of the north” and “the king of the south”.
19	Following up her choice of further demon rule “Christendom” has manifested great indignation “against the holy covenant”, to wit, The Theocracy promised in God’s unbreakable covenant. As a result Jehovah’s devoted people who are in the “covenant for the Kingdom” and who represent its interests on earth are hated and persecuted by all the so-called “Christian nations”. (Ps. 89:20-37; Luke 22:28-30; Isa. 55 : 3, 4) Choosing the rule of political states with arbitrary dictators in preference to God’s Theocratic rule by Christ Jesus, “Christendom” has exalted the state above God. More and more she encroaches upon the “pure worship” of God in spirit and in truth and regiments the people and threatens them with penalties if they do not worship the “beast”. The purpose of the “image of the beast”, which image is also branded “the abomination of desolation”, is to desolate faith in and support of God’s kingdom and thereby to destroy the earthly interests of his kingdom. The purpose of the demons in this is to cause the desolating of the earth of her entire population at Armageddon and so prevent any from surviving and going over to the “new world” under God’s established kingdom. “Christendom” must herself be desolated at Armageddon. As she thought to do unto The Theocratic Government and its witnesses, so the like must and will be done unto her. (Deut. 19:19) God’s judgments declared already show her to be a desolation. The facts show her to be a dry, waste desolation as far as offering any relief to the people is concerned. All she actually
has yet is outward show and a loud string of talk, self-praise and misleading optimism about her ability to “come back”. She is astonished that God does not help her and has not fulfilled the widely advertised purpose of the pope’s “Holy Year” of 1933 nor answered her multiplied prayers for peace and prosperity. Those who are meek or teachable toward God see her inability, failure and hopelessness. They abandon her before her complete desolation comes, and they turn to Jehovah God and his kingdom, for which they have long prayed.
20	How true concerning “Christendom” the further words of the prophet: “Thou shalt eat, but not be satisfied; and thy casting down shall be in the midst of thee; and thou shalt take hold, but shalt not deliver; and that which thou deliverest will I give up to the sword”! (Mic. 6:14) This denotes food scarcity and drought, and that not merely through any unconstitutional AAA measure paying farmers to plow under their crops and kill off their pigs, and like things. “Christendom” refuses Jehovah’s message proclaimed by his witnesses, and therefore has no other place to eat than at “the table of devils [demons]”. She feeds on religion and cries for more of it, but the Bible remains a closed book to her. The spiritual, political and economic palaver and provender that she dishes up does not satisfy the craving of any honest person who loves truth and righteousness. Among God’s covenant people there is an abundance of spiritual food, which Jehovah provides from his unfolding Word, and they eat and rejoice and pass out the food to the hungry persons of good-will. On the religionists, however, has come to pass God’s warning prophecy: “Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, my servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry: behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty: behold, my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed: behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for vexation of spirit.”—Isa. 65:13-15.
21	“And thy casting down [(Am. Rev. Ver.) thy humiliation] shall be in the midst of thee.” This means more than simply that “Christendom” shall “be shrunk with hunger within thee” (Rotherham), or, that “what thou hast eaten shall bend thee down” (Leeser), and that her empty stomach will “gape” within her. It means internal disagreement within her organization, one section of the ruling factors turning against the other, resulting in a mutual casting down of themselves. That the clergy or religious element will be first to be cast down by its presentday allies, politics and commerce, is pictured at Revelation 17. That picture shows the religion-ridden beast and its ten horns turning on its rider, the great harlot that mingles the things of God with the things
May 15, 1942
WATCHTOWER.
153
of demon rule, and then destroying her. Her table of religious delicacies finally does not satisfy them or meet their needs and they recognize the religious organization as hypocritical. (Isa. 28:8) As far as the people of good-will themselves are concerned, they have cast down religion and killed its influence and power over them. Like the eunuchs that cast the demon-worshiping Queen Jezebel out of the window at Captain Jehu's command, so these people who Avere once religion's dupes and slavishly pampered her now let her drop to meet the fate foretold in Jehovah’s judgment against the hypocritical religious organization.-—2 Ki. 9: 30-37; Rev. 2: 20-23.
22	“And thou shalt remove, but shalt not carry away safe.” (Eng. Rev. Ver.) Now “Christendom” has brought forth the “abomination of desolation” foretold by the prophet Daniel and Christ Jesus, and “the king of the south” and “the king of the north” have set it up “in the holy place” as a substitute to crowd out Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ Jesus. It is a sure evidence of the nearness of Armageddon, and Jesus warns those wanting to escape to immediately flee to the “mountains”, to wit, Jehovah God and Christ his King, for safety. Those who are on the “housetop”, the high places of the religious organization, must come down and flee to escape its destruction. They must not attempt to enter in and carry off anything of religion with them. (Matt. 24:15-18) Religion is a hobble to the feet, an easily-besetting sin, and it will hinder anyone in taking his flight to safety to make it in time before Armageddon. “Remember Lot’s wife.” (Heb. 12:1; Luke 17: 32, 33) “Christendom” at no time takes Jesus' advice. She likes high honors of men too much to come down from her high place. When the worst comes and destruction stares her religionists in the face, they will try to escape and carry off some of her selfish things which she has used in reproaching God’s name. They hope to set such down in a place of safety, but they shall deliver nothing, not even their own lives. The totalitarian dictators and other rulers have their escapes planned and have finances hidden away in supposedly safe places to continue living selfishly after making their getaways. The great religious ruler at Vatican City will not be so successful in making his escape as he did in 1848. Although he started the Axis powers on their course and still backs them, he wants to save something of advantage out of any possible failure of his scheme for world domination. He is willing to compromise with the anti-Axis forces should they gain military victory. While so doing he can try to shield his totalitarian puppets against total ruin and undoing.
23	All proposed reforms and reorganization of the world by men trying to carry over some of the present world organization to a “new world order”
“founded on moral principles” will fail to save “Christendom” from the Lord’s sword at Armageddon. “And that which thou deliverest will I give up to the sword,” says the Lord. Already the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and other religionists see signs of the end for them and are busy trying to deliver or “set in safety” their religion and the clergy system and control of the religious population. They have caused local and state lawmaking bodies to enact anti-Nazi and anti-Hate laws and other measures safeguarding religion; they have established antiCommunist schools, and secret orders, such as Knights of Columbus, also Holy Name societies of religionists employed in departments of public service. They have captured key positions in the publicservice and protective departments of government, judgeships, movie censorship boards, public education, etc. Religionists of “the king of the south” still try to preserve the League of Nations, excuse its failure, and clamor for its revival after the Avar. The Axis powers, desiring to re-establish the old “Holy Roman Empire”, secede from that League and found one of their oavu, a “new League of Nations”, that “new order” so fervently desired by the Hierarchy which operates out of Vatican City. The political and commercial elements will carry religion safely through this present conflict and enable her thereafter to cry “Peace and Safety!” They shall never carry her alive through Armageddon, but will turn upon her and destroy her when God exposes her to them at Armageddon.
24	Concerning the endeavors to escape Avith something selfish the following prophetic words may have some reference to airplanes and bombproof underground shelters and undersea craft. Such, hoAvever, will be of no real protection when Jehovah begins Armageddon. Hence the scripture seems to have a still deeper meaning: "I will slay the last of them [religionists and allies] Avith the sAvord: he that fleeth of them shall not flee away, and he that escapeth of them shall not be delivered. Though they dig into hell [by claiming a non-aggression pact or ‘agreement with hell’, the grave, and a covenant safeguarding them from death], thence shall mine hand take them [to execute my judgments upon them]; though they climb up to heaven [by claiming to have the keys of heaven, and also saints in heaven to pray and intercede for them with Christ Jesus, Jehovah’s Executioner], thence will I bring them down; and though they hide themselves [in the jungle-groAvn clefts] in the top of [Mount] Carmel [throwing up a hypocritical camouflage and hiding behind a great mountain of lies as a refuge], I will search [the lofty hiding-place of falsehood] and take them out thence; and though they be hid from my sight [as they think] in the bottom of the sea [the sea picturing the peoples
154
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
alienated from God and bearing up Satan’s ships of commercial gain; under the cover of claiming to protect the people’s interests the religionists persecute Jehovah’s witnesses and also frame laws mischievously against them, presumably to shield the sea of humankind against religious intolerance, Communism, shocked sensibilities, etc.], thence will I command the serpent [symbolizing evil or disastrous calamity], and he shall bite them: and though they go into captivity before their enemies [thus prolonging their lives a little further to make a deathbed repentance], thence will I command the sword [Jehovah’s Executioner, Christ Jesus], and it shall slay them.” (Amos 9:1-4) Religion will not provide them a way of escape. Jehovah sees through every subterfuge of the religionists. They shall not outlive Armageddon nor have an existence during the thousandyear reign of Christ Jesus, who delivers only those who worship God in spirit and in truth.
25	‘‘Thou shalt sow, but thou shalt not reap.” (Micah 6:15) The crop expected is not reaped. Vatican strategy plants its priestly “fifth column” in all the lands, and puts members of the ‘‘Catholic population” into controlling positions in governments and organizations, especially in democratic and constitutional nations. They expect by the cultivation of Catholic totalitarian dictators to reap a ‘‘new order” and thereby to change the course of history for a thousand years to come; but it shall not be so. Blight shall smite their plantings, because they are not of God’s planting. (Matt. 15:13) As to their vain and boisterous schemes, “they have sown the wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind” of destruction at Armageddon. God will change the course of human history for the eternity to come. None of “Christendom’s” political and religious schemes shall succeed.
26	“Thou shalt tread the olives, but thou shalt not anoint thee with oil.” Oil is provided to make man’s face to shine. (Ps. 104: 15) Those who seek to take over the direction of the world, particularly of “Christendom”, and who are responsible for the present world stress, hope to squeeze out therefrom that which will result in prosperity for them and make their faces to shine with optimism and sleekness. In the Scriptures the olive tree is used as a symbol of God’s spiritual organization united with him by the terms of the “new covenant". That covenant has as its purpose to bring forth a “people for His name”. This symbolic “olive tree” is rooted in Jehovah's promise to set up a government in the hands of The Seed of Abraham, which Seed is Christ Jesus. With him are associated the people for Jehovah’s name brought forth according to the new covenant. (Rom. 11:17-27; Jer. 31:31-34) “Christendom,” particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, purposes to establish the counterfeit kingdom by their “new
order” and to occupy all places as branches in a false “olive tree”. She has brought forth only a people opposed to Jehovah’s name and defaming it. She shall never fatten and anoint and soothe herself with what her pressure squeezes out of the people. Instead of “the oil of joy”, she shall have mourning unto death. In glorious contrast, Jehovah has anointed Christ Jesus with the “oil of gladness” above his fellows, and his kingdom shall prosper.—Isa. 61: 3: Pss. 45:7; 92:10.
27	“And [thou shalt tread] sweet wine, but shalt not drink [the] wine.” Wine it is “that maketh glad the heart of man”. (Ps. 104:15) It is a symbol of the joy of the Lord due to the kingdom which vindicates Jehovah’s name. At his receiving the Kingdom and coming to the temple the Lord Jesus drinks this fruit of the vine “new” with his faithful followers by sharing together in the vindication of God’s name. “Christendom’s” wine is that of the “vine of the earth”, Satan’s counterfeit kingdom. That counterfeit is therefore the “abomination that maketh desolate”, attempting to take and occupy the place of God’s kingdom. It is the totalitarian-religious “scarlet coloured beast”, and to it eventually all ruling factors of the earth shall “give their power and strength". By this they expect to keep themselves in power as religious and political rulers, the religious on top. and to drink the wine of the joy of their lord, “the god of this world.” (Rev. 17:13) Therefore they oppose the proclamation of God’s kingdom by Christ Jesus, and they “eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of violence” against Jehovah's servants who announce that kingdom as the risrhtful government of mankind that lives. Concerning: the religious-political would-be rulers of the world, ‘ these shall make war with the Lamb [of God], and the Lamb shall overcome them: for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings: and they that arc with him ai e called, and chosen, and faithful.” (Rev. 17:14) The religionists gave their kingdom unto the “beast ’. but shall drink no joy of any lasting kingdom of then-own nor any joy of God’s kingdom.—Rev. 17 : 17.
28	Jehovah discloses the reason for “Christendom’s” failure: “For the statutes of Omri are kept, and all the works of the house of Ahab, and ye walk in their counsels; that I should make thee a desolation, and the inhabitants thereof an hissing: therefore ye shall bear the reproach of my people.” (Mic. 6: 16) Omri, king of the northern kingdom of the ten tribes of Israel, was the father of King Ahab. Omri followed the idolatrous calf-worship which Jeroboam had set up in Israel. Omri bought the hill Samaria and built the city of Samaria thereon as his capital. The calfworship then became known as “the sin of Samaria”, because her king was responsible for such religious practice of pretending to give honor to God through
May Io, 1942
THE WATCHTOWER
loo
the worship of creatures, but which image-making and worship God’s commandment absolutely forbids. (Amos 8:14; Ex. 20:3-5) '‘Christendom” keeps the statutes of Omri by practicing the modern style of calf-worship, by pretending to worship God and Christ through forms of creature-worship, through hero-worship, worship of the state, the idolizing of religious organizations and clergy, worship of the anti-Theocratic '‘beast”, and suchlike. Omri’s son Ahab did worse than his father. He made the devilworshiper Jezebel his queen and set up Baal-worship in Samaria. That worship represented the honoring and giving service to the organization of which Satan the Devil is Baal or lord. Jehovah used Captain Jehu to cut off all of Ahab’s house, including Jezebel. Today ‘'Christendom” keeps all the works of the house of Ahab; she makes friends with Satan’s organization and renders it service and support and worship, thereby making herself the enemy of Jehovah God. (Jas. 4:4) The Lord God therefore uses his Executioner, the Greater Jehu, who at Armageddon shall kill all those who do the works of Ahab’s house, demon-worship, devilism.
29	Before executing the Baal-worshipers, Jehu gathered them together and made them identify themselves by donning the vestments of Baalism. Now, by walking in the counsels of Omri and Ahab, the religionists and their allies and hangers-on in “Christendom” oppose Jehovah’s Theocracy under Christ. They maliciously persecute those who worship Jehovah God in spirit and truth, and thus don the vestments of identification marking them for slaughter by the Greater Jehu in earth’s final tribulation. Jonadab refused to walk in the counsels of Omri and Ahab, but took his stand with Jehu against religion. He was therefore spared and witnessed the destruction of the religionists. Now the Greater Jehu is at the temple and due to act! Those who do not discard the vestments of religion shall shortly be slaughtered with ‘‘Christendom”. Jehovah’s witnesses must sound the warning in the interests of those ‘feeling after God, if haply they might find him’. Only those who follow the course of Jonadab and thus become "Jonadabs” shall escape destruction.— 2 Ki. 10:13-2S; Jer. 35:19.
30	“Christendom’s” desolation at Armageddon will involve religion, and hence such is an astonishment to all wearing the vestments of religion or Baalism and branded with the “mark of the beast”. All those destroyed by Jehovah’s “strange act” will be hissed at in contempt and loathing by those who survive and live, Jehovah's faithful remnant and the “Jonadabs'’. (Isa. 66: 24) The organizers, rulers, operators, supporters and hangers-on of "Christendom” hypocritically affect to be God’s people and Christ’s followers; and therefore they shall bear the reproach
of the hypocrites who are rebellious and disloyal toward God. They brought reproach upon Jehovah’s name; now their own everlasting reproach comes. Because of their opportunities and claims they are more reprehensible, hence more low-down, mean, contemptible, and disgraceful than the out-and-out heathen or pagans. This proves that it is a very responsible thing to claim to be a Christian and then prove false to the claim and so bring reproach upon God’s holy name, taking it in vain. Only in the way of integrity toward God is there certainty of approval, blessing, deliverance and life, under a successful government, The Theocracy.
FURTHER DISCLOSURE
31	Christ Jesus foretold the persecution of Jehovah’s covenant people from and after A.D. 1914 as one of the visible proofs of the end of Satan’s uninterrupted rule and the beginning of God’s kingdom under Christ. Coinciding exactly with Jesus’ prophetic words concerning the “time of the end” are the words of Micah in chapter seven. The prophet was a witness of Jehovah and therefore represented Jehovah’s remnant of witnesses now. He expresses the feelings of these just before the ingathering of the Lord’s “other sheep”, the “Jonadabs”, begins, and when Jehovah’s consecrated ones seemed all forsaken, and their work was apparently permanently stopped. “Woe is me! for I am as when they have gathered the summer fruits, as the grapegleanings of the vintage: there is no cluster to eat: my soul desired the firstripe fruit.” (Mic. 7 :1) The Devil and his agents, principally the religious leaders, brought great woe upon Jehovah's servants during the opportunity created for them by the emergency of the World War of 1914-1918. As a consequence of the hatred and persecution by all nations, and also by the unfaithfulness and betrayals of those company-ing with them, Jehovah's people became very reduced in numbers, very few, and scattered here and there, like fruits overlooked here and there and left for the poor of the land to glean and get the benefit thereof. (Lev. 19:9,10; 23:22; Deut. 24:19-22) Added to that, the Lord came to the temple for judgment in 1918 and gathered out from his consecrated ones the “evil servant” class of “workers of iniquity”, leaving only a small faithful remnant. (Matt. 13:41; 24:45-51) But a remnant must be left for the benefit of the Lord's “other sheep’’, those poor in spirit and who needed the help of the remnant faithful to God and bearing the fruits of his kingdom.—Matt. 21: 43.
32	There then appeared to be no “cluster" of God’s people left or in sight except the remnant, the Micah class. This was foreshadowed by the prophet Elijah when he fled before Jezebel and said to Jehovah God: “The children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant,
156
SEe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, X. Y.
thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword: and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it away.” (1 Ki. 19:14) Then the Lord revealed to him that there were others of a remnant besides himself, and told him to go and anoint Jehu king and also to anoint Elisha “to be prophet in thy room [or steady’. (1 Ki. 19:15-18) With the Lord’s coming to the temple in 1918 the work pictured by Elijah's activities came to an end and was taken away as by a war-chariot of fire and in a whirlwind. Thereafter the Lord God revived the remnant in his service as his witnesses, and added others, and the Elisha work of testifying boldly to Jehovah's name and kingdom proceeded. In the midst of the tribulation back there the faithful ones did not foresee the further work to be done as foreshadowed by Elisha. That work to be done with a double portion of the Lord’s spirit is likened to the desirable “firstripe fig” (Am. Rev. Ver.). The afflicted and restrained Micah class desired to be released and to further serve the Lord on earth in whatever service might be pleasing to him. Hence they said in effect: “My soul desireth the first-ripe fig.” In other words, they desired the Elisha work of God’s remnant to begin. Hungry to eat that meat which is to do the Lord's will, they yearned for the new season of receiving and bearing forth the fruits of Jehovah's kingdom to the peoples.—John 4: 32, 34.
33	Further describing the condition of “Christendom" immediately before the end of the Elijah work, God's prophet continues: “The good man is perished out of the earth: and there is none upright among men: they all lie in wait for blood; they hunt every man his brother with a net." (Mic. 7: 2) The Rotherham rendering of this is: "Perished is the man of lovingkmdness out of the earth." This same expression is applied at Psalm 50:5 to those devoted to doing God's will and who have made a covenant with Him by sacrifice. In the visible earthly part of Satan’s organization there were no men of loving-kindness, no “godly man”, but all nations hated Jehovah’s “men of lovingkindness” because these declared the name of Christ as earth’s Rightful Ruler and King. Their work of testimony was foreshadowed by both the prophet Elijah and the prophet John the Baptist. Hence that work is symbolized in Revelation as God's "two witnesses”. Such two witnesses the nations of "Christendom” killed. Until God revived his work of witness or Elisha work, those “two witnesses” lay dead in “Christendom's” street for a testimony against her, and the demon-controlled religionists heaped great reproach and suffering upon Jehovah’s faithful covenant people. (Rev. 11: 7-10) Some were killed and shed their blood. The others were hunted to hinder and stop their open and free worship which is to serve Jehovah God and his kingdom. In this
hunt the persecutors were joined and aided by the “evil servant” class, who turned upon their spiritual brethren and smote them and handed them over into the enemy hands for punishment and restraint. The net, skillfully and craftily concealed, was spread to catch Jehovah’s servants who refused to discontinue his service. If these could be made to for ever forsake the Lord's work and so violate their covenant, it would cause their destruction. Jesus corroborated Micah’s prophecy, saying of that time: “And then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another, and shall hate one another. And because iniquity shall abound, the love of manv shall wax cold.”— Matt. 24:10,12.	'
34	Be it observed that the nations which profess to be “Christian” committed such acts against genuine Christians who served God according to his commandments. Certainly there was no Christian loving-kindness about that. Officials high in the affairs and authority of those nations are exposed as bearing a heavy responsibility before God for conniving or winking at such violation of their implied covenant with God as professed Christians. Says the prophet: “That they may do evil with both hands earnestly, the prince asketh, and the judge asketh for a reward; and the great man, he uttereth his mischievous desire: so they wrap it up. The best of them is as a brier; the most upright is sharper than a thorn hedge: the day of thy watchmen and thy visitation cometh; now shall be their perplexity.” (Mic. 7 : 3, 4) Jesus foretold that his faithful followers at the end of Satan’s world would be brought before rulers (princes) and councils (courts) for a testimony against such. (Mark 13:9) Had it been worldly criminals that “Christendom’s” officials were obliged to deal with, no principle would have been violated in penalizing them for their activities. But it was innocent, inoffensive, God-fearing and law-abiding Christians that the religionists condemned, punished and persecuted with official approval and backing. They thus condemned the just and justified the wicked persecutors for reward. (Prov. 17:15; Isa. 5: 23: Ex. 23: 6-8) In this anti-Christian persecution religionists of all denominations worked together with one another and with public officials; as described by the prophet: “Thus they weave it together” (Am. Rev. Per.); “and so do they make a network of wrong” (Leeser). (Nah. 1:10) They are like briers and thorns on cursed ground, to tear, scratch and injure Jehovah's faithful servants. From such religionists the people cannot gather the fruits of God’s kingdom.—Luke 6:44; Matt. 7:16; Heb. 6:7,8; Ezek. 2:6,7.
35	Such things they did at the beginning of the “time of the end”. It is not strange that under increased demon-influence the religionists commit worse things
May 15,1942
WATCHTOWER-
157
now immediately preceding Armageddon. (Luke 23:31; 2 Tim. 3:12,13) “Christendom” has closed her ears to the warning cries of God’s “watchman” class. She has appointed her own watchmen to care for the people’s interests, placing their eternal interests under the clergy’s care. Now God’s visitation of destruction upon her at Armageddon draws near, and the nations are in the greatest distress, and that
with increasing perplexity. (Luke 21:25) All such are the sure signs of the final, end as foretold, and Jehovah’s faithful witnesses and their companions lift up their heads and rejoice. They sing all the more loudly His praises, because the deliverance of all God’s righteous servants draws nigh.—Luke 21: 28, Diaglott.
(To be continued)
ENDURING RICHES
POVERTY of the people of the world is increasing. For centuries the greatest religious system in “Christendom” has been heaping up material riches and worldly treasures, and her priestly representatives parade before the public in lace and gold and precious jewels. From the past there come ringing the words which are specifically directed to this Laodicean period and its religionists . “Thou sayest, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing; and knowest not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked.” (Rev 3.17) Not for long now shall that religious organization be “arrayed in purple and scarlet colour, and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls”. Wait just a little while, until those symbolized by the “ten horns” and the “beast” turn upon the religious organization which has committed spiritual adultery with them: “These shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. For God hath put in their hearts to fulfill his will.” (Rev. 17:4,16,17) Certainly the proverb says in truth: “Riches profit not in the day of wrath: but righteousness delivereth from death.”—Prov. 11: 4.
Such are not the durable riches. Do you sincerely desire to be rich and very happy? If yes, a knowledge of how to gain riches and how to enjoy the same is of the greatest importance to you. If you are kept in ignorance of the true way and you permit yourself to rely upon and be guided by the opinion of imperfect man and by religion, you can never gain the riches that will bring you peace and lasting happiness. Every person who will learn the right way, and who will then continue diligently to follow that right way, is absolutely certain in time to possess great riches and all attending blessings. The right way is not to be found in religion and human schemes. He who would be truly rich must earnestly seek to gain a knowledge of the Great Giver of every good gift and every perfect gift, namely, Jehovah God, and his great treasure house.
Almost always the false riches, consisting of money, houses and lands, acquired by selfish means at cost to others and thereafter used selfishly are used for the oppression of other persons. In this present time a few men own or possess almost all the money, houses and lands, and the great mass of humankind suffer in need of the very necessities for their daily living. Riches thus selfishly acquired and wrongfully used the Holy Scriptures describe as “filthy lucre”, and mark the religious leaders as notorious for this. (1 Pet. 5:2) Selfish men love the power that a great amount of money gives them, and for that reason it
is written in the Scriptures that “the love of money is the root of all evil”. (1 Tim. 6:10) The evil is not in the money, but money results in evil because of the love of gain and of the power that money brings to the one that possesses and wrongfully uses it. If one honestly obtains money and properly uses it in a righteous cause to the glory of God, that money does not result in evil, but in good.—2 Cor. 9:6-11.
The few men who possess the wealth of the material things of the earth at the present time are not truly happy. In almost all cases such men are proud, haughty, severe, unkind and extremely selfish. While possessing much more than they need, they are always fearful of losing what they possess. The money of the ultrarich is often used to oppress others, and men who thus use it appear to be proud that they have such power. Concerning them the Lord God says: “Therefore pride compasseth them about as a chain; violence covereth them as a garment. Their eyes stand out with fatness; they have more than heart could wish. They are corrupt, and speak wickedly concerning oppression: they speak loftily. They set their mouth against the heavens, and their tongue walketh through the earth. And they say, How doth God know? and is there knowledge in the Most High? Behold, these are the ungodly, who prosper in the world; they increase in riches.”—Ps. 73: 6-9,11,12.
Now perilous times have come, exactly as God’s Word foretold they would come; and this is due to the fact that we are in the “last days”, when men have become treaty-breakers or covenant-breakers and unfaithful and seek to exalt themselves at the expense of both the rich and the poor. (2 Tim. 3:1-4) Those who possess much material riches now and who try to take advantage of the present world turmoil and emergency to make more riches, and the others who are trying to grab the riches of others, are both moved by a selfish desire ; and, pursuing that course, they are certain to be sorely disappointed within a very short time. “Trust not in oppression, and become not vain in robbery; if riches increase, set not your heart upon them.” (Ps. 62:10) “He that trusteth in his [material] riches shall fall.” (Prov. 11:28) “As the partridge sitteth on eggs, and hatcheth them not; so he that getteth riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a fool.”—Jer. 17:11.
Such a person becomes a fool for the reason that he makes selfish gain, otherwise called “money”, his god and relies on the power and protection that his money might bring to him. He disregards God and true wisdom and by his course of action proves that he is a fool. As the Scriptures
158
STie WATCHTOWER,
declare: “The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God.” (Ps. 14: 1) By pursuing such a course of action he discloses his motive, which is here represented by “his heart'', and in harmony with this he in effect says that he is a fool. By disregarding God’s provision made for man, and by pursuing a selfish course, man becomes entirely blind to his best interests. The multitudes of people on earth have gone practically crazy by reason of their insatiable desire to acquire material wealth. Such false riches endure but a short time Jian dies, and that is the end of his riches which he has acquired in the wrong way. The day of God's wrath, “the battle of that great day of God Almighty,” and known as Armageddon, is at hand. “Treasures of wickedness profit nothing: but righteousness delivcreth from death. The Lord will not suffer the soul of the righteous to famish: but he casteth away the substance of the wicked.” (Prov. 10.2,3) “Wilt thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for riches certainly make themselves wings; they fly away, as an eagle toward heaven.” (Prov. 23:5) That applies to what is termed “false riches”.
It is essential to your life and happiness to understand the clear distinction between false and true riches. Only in the Bible is there to be found that clear distinction and contrast. Jehovah God is truly rich far beyond the imagination of humankind. All things belong to Jehovah God - “The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof. the world, and they that dwell therein.”' (Ps. 24. 1) Here the word “world" means that which is both in earth and in heaven, that is. both the things seen and the things unseen by human eyes “In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.” (Gen 1:1) “Thou art worthy, 0 Lord, to receive glory and honour and power, for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they arc and were created ” (Rev. 4:11) To learn of the true riches we must go to the fountainhead of such riches.
The Son of God, Christ Jesus, is exceedingly rich. The name originally given him, as set forth in the Scriptures, is The Word of God, that is, the Logos of God. or One whom Jehovah God uses to announce and to put into execution his commandments. The Word or Logos was the beginning of Jehovah's creation. (Rev 3-14) Thereafter Jehovah God employed the Logos (his Word) as his active agent in the creation of all other things John 1 1 reads "In the beginning was the Word [Logos], and the Word [Logos] was with God, and the Word [Logos] was God ” The literal and correct translation, by the Emphatic Diagloit (in its interlinear reading), is- “In a beginning was the Word, and the Word was with the God, and a god was the Word.” That means that Jehovah God is the great First Cause, without beginning and without end. and is therefore “the God”; and that the beginning of his creation v.as the Logos or Word, who is “a god”, that is. a mighty one. When Jehovah God sent his Beloved One, the Word, to earth, he was given the name "Jesus”; and when anointed with God’s spirit he became Jesus Christ. Jesus said: “Jly Father is greater than I.” (John 14: 2S) Jehovah God is the Father; Christ Jesus is the Son. Ephesians 3:9 declares Jehovah God the Father “created all things by Jesus Christ”, his Son Concerning Christ Jesus, the Word, it is further written: “For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth,
Brooklyn, N. Y, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers; all things were created by him, and for him: and he is before all things, and by him all things consist.”—Col. 1:16,17.
Throughout the universe Jehovah God, the Supreme One, holds the domination, which domination Satan the Devil has challenged, but which domination shall be established beyond dispute in the settlement of this primary issue at Armageddon. Jehovah God has a universal organization All things that are done by Him are done in order and in full harmony with his universal organization. That organization of Jehovah consists of the Word, or Logos, and of cherubim and seraphim and angels, and of others, and over all is the great Almighty God. Out of his universal organization Jehovah God takes certain ones that are in harmony with him and builds them up into his capital organization, of which capital organization Christ Jesus, the anointed King, is the Head. The capital organization of Jehovah he specifically uses to carry out his purposes That organization is otherwise spoken of in the Scriptures as “the kingdom”. It is his Theocratic Government.
The earth God created for the human creature God created the first man, whom He called Adam Thon God created a woman, and she was called Eve This man and woman were given the power from Jehovah God to reproduce their kind, that is to say, to cause conception and birth of children. The first man and his wife were during their perfection a part of Jehovah's universal organization, that is, they were in the earthly or visible part thereof under the supervision of an invisible overlord, the anointed cherub Lucifer. They were in Eden, a place of perfection and beauty. To man God had announced his law, and man was told that the penalty for the violation of God's law is death The manner in which man violated God's law would not be material. The crime would consist in the violation of His law in any manner, and the penalty thereof was death, not eternal torment. (Gen. 2:17) God did not require of man a great thing, but required of him the small thing of declining to partake of certain fruit. The man yielded to the desire for selfish gain and willfully violated God's law, and therefore Atas justly sentenced to death and was expelled from God's universal organization
After a long period of time, during which time the organism of Adam was degenerating, the man died. At and i’lom the time of his creation man was rich until he became a sinner, and then he lost all things. (Gen 3:17-24) The wrongful act of Adam m breaking God’s law, together with the wrongful acts of the other creatures involved m that wicked transaction, to wit, unfaithful Lucifer and Eve, brought great reproach upon the holy name of the Creator, Jehovah. Would Jehovah God take the necessary action to clear and vindicate his holy name before all creatures of the universe? Yes; that at once became his purpose, and that is where his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus comes in.
The name “Almighty God” specifically applies to the Eternal One as the great First Cause and the Creator of all things created His name “Jehovah” particularly means his purpose toward his creatures. At the time of the disobedience and fall of Adam and Ins expulsion from the universal organization of God the great Creator there in
May 13,1942
WATCHTOWER,
159
covered or cryptic language announced his purpose to bring into existence his capital organization, or kingdom, which in due time, and shortly now, shall destroy all lawless ones and establish righteousness in the earth as in heaven; and that all this will be to the vindication of Jehovah's name. —See Genesis 3 :15 ; 12: 2, 3; 22:16-18.
‘■God is love.” (1 John 4:16) That means that he is wholly unselfish and that all things are done by him unselfishly The vindication of his name in the mind of creatures does not add anything to Jehovah. What creatures think of the Almighty Creator is of no profit to the Creator. God has announced his purpose to vindicate his name, and that vindication will afford his creatures full and complete opportunity to gam great riches at the hands of the Creator. God is not “trying to save creatures”, but he affords his creatures the opportunity to avail themselves of the salvation which he has provided. He is the source and fountain of all riches; and for man to have and to enjoy such riches man must know God and know of his provision to gain the desired and true riches. Jehovah makes it possible for all his intelligent creatures to receive riches at his hand.
Man was created for the earth and in order that he might have and enjoy the fullness of the riches of the earth. The perfect man in Eden, therefore, was rich, and such riches he might have possessed forever had he continued obedient to his Creator. By his disobedience to God’s law, and that before man had exercised his power to bring children into the earth, not only Adam lost everything for hnnself, but his children were bom sinners, imperfect, and without the right to live. “By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men. for that all have sinned.” (Rom. 5:12) Now, it is written plainly that Jehovah God created man for the earth and the earth for man: “I have made the earth, and created man upon it: I, even my hands, have stretched out the heaxens, and all their host have I commanded. For thus saith the Loud that created the heavens, God himself that formed the earth and made it; he hath established it, he created it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited; I am the Lord, and there is none else ”—Isa. 45:12,18.
The purpose of Jehovah cannot fail, but must be accomplished Concerning this it is written: “I have spoken it, 1 will also bring it to pass; I have purposed it, I will also do it.” (Isa. 46 11) "My word . . shall not return unto me void , but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it.” (Isa. 55: 11) Jehovah would not permit anything to prevent him from carrying out his purpose. God does not change; neither does his law change. (Mal. 3-6) He does not reverse his own judgment or sentence or determination Seeing, then, that all men, by reason of Adam’s sin, were born imperfect and without the right to live, men who are the offspring of Adam could never gain the true and desired riches by their own efforts. The written Word of God indicates the means or instrument by which the great Source of riches will make
(Continued from page 146)
lesson There should be but one question on each paragraph, even if the points of the paragraph require that the question be a compound one, that is, of several parts. At the study meeting the conductor should have one to read the questions on the paragraphs in their order, and another who reads well to read the paragraphs. Those desiring to answer the question
obedient and faithful men for ever rich: “For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich.” (2 Cor. 8:9) This scripture in a few words states how it is possible for a man to obtain true riches, which is the greatest desire of all sane creatures. Conceived in sin and shapen in iniquity, and alienated from Jehovah God and under the power of sin and absolutely certain of death, all human creatures come into the world in a state of abject poverty. A small percent of the human race, at a loss to their fellow creatures, become rich in the material things of the earth; but these covetous ones miss the true riches, and their false riches thus obtained avail them nothing in the end. Note Psalm 49:6-12. There is stated the condition of the imperfect human race, entirely helpless and with no ability to gain that which is so greatly desired.
When covetousness led to the crime of rebellion against God and to the death of humankind Jehovah there expressed his purpose to bring forth a “seed” of his “woman'’ (his universal organization), and which “seed” would regenerate with life all those who under the test of obedience prove their integrity toward God. (Gen. 3:15) That Seed is Christ Jesus, and associated with him shall be all his faithful followers whom he takes into the covenant for the heavenly kingdom. Each one of this royal house proves his integrity toward Jehovah God and then enters into the riehes of immortality and is for ever with the Lord Christ Jesus in The Theocratic Government. (Rex- 20 4.6) A remnant of these are yet on the earth in the flesh, and xvhen these are persecuted by the religionists and their totalitarian, dictatorial allies and are banned, mobbed, put in bonds and despoiled of their property and liberty and even of their lives, they fulfill the words of the apostle “For ye had compassion of me in my bonds, and took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knoxving in yourselxes that ye have in heaven a better and an enduring svbstxnce Cast not axvay therefore your confidence, xvhich hath great recompence of rexvard.”—Heb. 10 34,35.
God has declared that he made man for the earth and the earth for obedient man Under the Kingdom, or Theocracy, the earth is certain to be the everlasting home of those noxv living on earth who are of good-xxill toward God and his Kingdom and xvho take their stand for his Theocratic Government and prove their intcgr.ty tow aid him. They are in line for God’s promise that, b\ seeking Jehovah and righteousness and meekness, thej max be hid in the day of Ins anger at Armageddon (See Zephaniah 2:3) Such are the “other sheep" of the Lord and shall form the “great multitude" under the Kingdom that '-hall receive and carry out God's mandate to them to be fruitful and multiply and fill the cleansed earth with a righteous race. (Gen. 1: 28 ; 9 1,7} The faithful ones shall live ex er-lastingly and enjoy all the riches of the earth, because God has so promised.—John 8 51, 11. 26.
as read should so indicate by raising the hand. It is not necessary for the conductor to offer his own comment on each paragraph, if the ansxvers given cover the substance thereof At the close of the discussion the paragraph should be read as the sum-up Then the next paragraph should be taken up; and so on to the end of the study hour. The conductor should control the comments so that the meeting will be an hour in length
FIELD EXPERIENCES
AFTER THE FOURTH ATTEMPT
“I approached a home I recalled being to at least three times previously and not being able to interest the lady of the house in the Kingdom message one bit. After explaining to her some of the contents of the book Children and telling what joy and comfort it gave me when reading it, she accepted the message after a few minutes’ hesitation. On my making the first back-call and answering a few questions she said: ‘I would like to tell you why I took the book. . . . I remembered you were here four times before and I would not take even a Kingdom News. Now that you came again I realized there must be somethin" in back of your work or you would not call so many times, so thought I would investigate for myself. I haven't read all of the book yet, but what I have read contains many things I never knew could be printed in any of your literature.’ ”—Pennsylvania.
“Do not miss a house' I called four times at a house at the far end of my territon', but no one was ever home. On my fifth call a lady opened the door and said, ‘Are you one of Jehovah’s witnesses?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘Then come in; I have heard of the book Children and want it.’ Result: I placed Children and Comfort All That Mourn, took an order for the Yearbook and a year's subscription for the magazine, and arranged for a model study in her home. I was indeed glad I continued the hunt and found a ‘sheep’.”—California.
PIONEER IN TORQUAY, DEVON, ENGLAND
“We pioneers called on a young married person while on the ‘new work’ and, after playing the recordin", were invited to come back the following Tuesday night. On this occasion the mother, an evacuee, was present and we learned that they were Roman Catholic. A large crucifix adorned the kitehen wall. The following Tuesday the mother was again present, but was missing the third week Enquiring where she was our young friend said: ‘She can't stand the way you expose the Hierarchy, so she has taken one of your booklets to the priest and is going to have you put out of town.’ Our friend then told us she had for some time been dissatisfied with the Catholic church and a few weeks before we called she asked the Lord to show her the truth. She is now rejoicing in the Lord and has taken a firm stand for The Theocracy despite the fact that the priest has paid her a visit. On that occasion she asked him why the priests took money for prayers for the dead, and he blushed and muttered that it said somewhere in the Bible that ‘a man was worthy of his hire . She then handed him her new Bible (which she had never read herself until a few weeks ago) and asked him to give her one scripture proving ‘Purgatory’, to which the priest replied: ‘I can't do that now; but if you will come down to the church the nuns will show you plenty of books on that.’ Until she was sixteen our friend was in a convent, and she has many unhappy experiences to relate.”
DURING THE “WATCHTOWER” CAMPAIGN (IOWA)
“Upon my first call the instructor's wife, upon being invited to subscribe for The Watchtower, said: ‘Watchtower? Never heard of it! You see, we're from Georgia.’ ‘Oh yes, but The Watchtower is to be found in every state in the Union and, in fact, in one form or another in
practically every country of the world,’ said I. ‘Can you send the magazine elsewhere and allow me to keep the premium [the book Children] of your offer? I'd like my mother to have the magazine, as she teaches a Sunday School class.’ ‘Yes, I can do that, but I don't like to see you miss out on the magazine yourself, because it is the one channel the Lord uses to keep his covenant people currently informed.’ ‘I don't know what my husband will say, but I know he won’t fuss.’ Thereupon she produced a $20 bill, which I could not change. So she trusted me to take the bill to be changed at a store a couple of blocks away. Upon returning with the money, she said: ‘I'll take three, one for myself, one for my mother, and one for my husband’s mother. I’ll take them each for one year onh. as we can always get our subscriptions renewed ’ . .In the meantime my mother placed Children with a Mrs. N and then placed another copy with a young lady in a nearby business establishment who turned out to be Miss N„ the lady’s daughter. Being informed that her mother had already got the book, Miss N. said: ‘That's all right, we'll have two then. I am interested in looking into this, as I have to make up my mind whether or not to join the Catholic church before St. Patrick’s Day.’ ”
EPISODES IN THE NEW WORK
“We are having a wonderful time here telling the Kingdom message. We are going around the city for the third time noiv. The first time around made the demonized clergy so mad they ran to the district attorney and tried to have us put out of the city; but he told them he had read the books and they had better go home and make some books as good as these are and put them in the hands of the people. That was a sad disappointment to the clergy.” —Maryland.
“I hold an assignment of three small territories at present. I had just completed one of them in the rather superficial manner in which the work had been earned on, and had placed three Children therein Upon receiving the new instructions from the Lord I immediately covered it again and, although*! still have a few homes to call upon, placed twenty-two more Children and two Spanish books I found many"of good-will and am carrying on a Chddien study. Obeying the Lord's instructions certainly brings results.”—California.
NO HOOK IN IT (MICHIGAN)
“By noting down the reception at each home, whether good or otherwise, I am more able to cope with the situation the next call. In the five territories held by me I have eight Children studies going, with the highest attendance of seven in one home. These people are overwhelmed at the fact that we call to assist them in Bible study, and this without any charge or obligation. In one home where I am nowconducting a study the lady’s husband remarked to her: ‘Listen, they don't do this for nothing; you'll get hooked for plenty.’ This lady made a test of this and offered the publisher $1.00, which was refused; but she was told she could contribute for some literature if she desired same, and this she did. When she related this to her husband, stating that we didn’t want their money, he was dum-founded.”
160
THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street •	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
N. H. Knorr, President	W. E. Van Ambubgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God's law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are bom sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH'S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it Is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God's kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord's next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to ‘‘fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed In the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for Its utterances. It Is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It Is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but Invites careful and critical examination of Its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not Indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ...................34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian__________7 Beresford Road, Strathfleld. N. S. W., Australia
South African Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere stndents of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watch, tower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. y,, under the Act of March S, 1879.
“WILLING VOLUNTEERS” TESTIMONY PERIOD
During the month of June all those willing volunteers who delight to do Jehovah’s will and who have made a covenant with the Lord will go forward in the proclamation of the Kingdom message. The “Willing Volunteers” Testimony Period will be devoted to the distribution of the book Children and seven booklets on the contribution of 35c All servants of the Lord going forward during this campaign will have a good supply of this literature on hand as they go from place to place, visiting the people of good-will, those who loie righteousness. This literature will afford many the opportunity of getting a clearer knowledge of the truth, and they should be given this opportunity during the “Willing Volunteers” Testimony Period. The usual field-service reports will be made to the company servant if the publisher is associated with a company; the pioneers, direct to the office; and those readers of The Watchtower who have as yet not been in the field-service work, namely, going from door to door with the Kingdom message, may inquire of the Watchtower the address of their nearest company. You will enjoy being associated with them.
"WATCHTOWER" STUDIES
Week of July 5: “Micah” (Part 10), fl 1-21 inclusive, The Watchtower June 1, 1942.
Week of July 12: “Micah” (Part 10), fl 22-42 inclusive, The Watchtower June 1, 1942.
“‘CHILDREN’ STUDY QUESTIONS”
The Society has released a new booklet, entitled “ ‘Children’ Study Questions”, which will be a great aid to all publishers of the Kingdom in the conducting of Children studies in the various homes throughout the country. You can get your copy now on contribution of 5c for publication of more of these. Send remittances to 117 Adams Street, Brooklyn, New York. This “Children” Study Questions booklet will help individual readers in their personal study in their own homes. Get a copy now.
“JEHOVAH’S SERVANTS DEFENDED”
The release of this valuable booklet was a feature of the St Louis Assembly last summer. The Assembly received it with great appreciation and thankfulness. It has been received in like manner by thousands who are interested in, if not also participating in, the fight which Jehovah’s covenant people are putting up in the exercise of the God-given and Constitutionally guaranteed freedoms, to wit, of assembly and of publication and of open speech in the worship of Almighty God and in proclaiming the joyful news of his Theocratic Government. In this booklet you will find the expressed rulings of the highest courts of the United States in support of Jehovah’s witnesses and m defense of their rights and liberties in His service. The 32 pages of this important documentary matter are enclosed in a neat and strong cover. It is 5c a copy, mailed postage prepaid.
JfeWffCHTOWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH'S KINGDOM
No. LXIII	June 1, 1942	No 11
MI(
PAD
“Rejoice not against me, 0 mine enemy: when I fall be a light unto
TEHOVAH turns the tables upon his own enemies I and hence upon the enemies of those who worthily J bear his name. The great enemy rebelled against Jehovah God, and challenged His power, and put the question of universal domination in dispute. Turning perfect man in Eden into like rebellion against the great Theocratic Ruler, Satan, whose name means “opposer”, began building his organization of rebel creatures, and man became involved in with the issue of domination of the universe. The great opposer also drew many angels into the rebellion. With them he built up his invisible part of the organization under himself as their prince and god. To confuse and deceive creatures Satan called his organization “Babil”, or “Babylon”, meaning “gate of god”, that is, the mimic god, who enviously says: “I will ascend above the heights of the clouds: I will be like the Most High.” (Isa. 14:14) From its very beginning the organization Babylon was under Satan, its lord and master, and has been the enemy of Jehovah’s faithful creatures. For a full and time-tested proof of the great issue God Almighty has permitted Satan and his organization visible and invisible to remain till the final showdown of opposing strengths, Jehovah’s strength against and over that of the combined enemy.
2 The closing chapter of Micah’s prophecy points to the proof that the showdown matching of power is very near. Those who stand in awe and fear of the vast strength and power of Babylon, Satan’s organization, and who therefore worship and serve it and who now proudly ask, Who is like this creature? and who can fight against it? are in for the strangest surprise. (Rev. 13:4) At various times in the past God has permitted the enemy organization to apparently triumph over his covenant people upon whom his name is called. This he has allowed for a test of the integrity and devotion to him of his name-people, and also that the hypocritical enemy might have opportunity to cast aside their cloak of religion and show what is in their hearts and expose themselves as hating Jehovah God and his Christ
: ah
T 10
I shall arise; ichen I sit in darkness, the Lord shall me."—Mic. 7:8.
and his servants and witnesses. On this wise the enemy mark themselves as servants of the Devil and fit for destruction when Jehovah shows his power over Satan and over Babylon at the battle of Armageddon.—Ex. 9:16.
’ The most recent seeming triumph of the enemy organization over Jehovah’s servants was during the first world war, 1914-1918. At the instigation of the religionists of great “Babylon” the enemy made a vicious and unwarranted assault upon the faithful worshipers of Jehovah and publishers of his kingdom under Christ. It looked like the finish of them and their work, as prophetically expressed in Micah’s words, chapter seven, verses one to four. For a time the enemy were on top. Then the Lord turned the tables on them; and his prophet comments: “The day of thy watchmen [religionists] and thy visitation cometh; now shall be their perplexity.” (Mic. 7: 4) This visitation is from the Lord God. It began when he sent his great Messenger, Christ Jesus, for judgment. (Mal. 3:1-4) It is not a visitation of favor from God, but of his contrary judgment, which “judgment written” is first declared by his witnesses as process-servers and thereafter executed upon the doomed.
‘ The rulers and the people have made the clergy the watchmen over their spiritual interests. Such watchmen, being not of God’s appointment, have failed to see the sword of judgment about to fall at Armageddon and have not warned the people. Like the priests of the city of Anathoth, near Jerusalem, who objected to the prophet Jeremiah’s preaching of destruction coming upon the religious organization, so the modern-day “watchmen” oppose the proclamation by Jehovah’s witnesses of the “day of vengeance of our God”. “Prophesy ye not, say they to them that prophesy.” (Mic. 2:6) To the watchmen of “Christendom” those who proclaim God’s judgments reply in the words of Jeremiah: “0 Lord of hosts, that judgest righteously, that triest the reins and the heart, let me see thy vengeance on them; for unto thee have I revealed my cause. There
164
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
fore thus saith the Lord of the men of Anathoth [religious clergy] that seek thy life, saying, Prophesy not in the name of the Lord, that thou die not by our hand: therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, Behold, I will punish them; the young men shall die by the sword, their sons and their daughters shall die by famine; and there shall be no remnant of them, for I will bring evil [disaster] upon the men of Anathoth, even the year of their visitation.”— Jer. 11:20-23.
s “Now shall be their perplexity.” Jesus confirmed that statement of Micah. He prophesied that one of the unmistakable proofs that we are in the “time of the end” of Satan’s organization Babylon would be what is seen by all since the first world war: “upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity.” (Luke 21: 25) True, the nations are in great perplexity over the failure of their schemes for world order, peace and prosperity; but the thing chiefly meant by the prophecy is their perplexity at the turning of the tables. This God did by reviving his devoted remnant of witnesses whom the enemy organization had thought they had finished off in 1918. God sent them forth thereafter to declare the establishment of his Kingdom and also his judgment message against the nations that hate and forget God. Jehovah’s judgment message of doom upon Babylon appears before their vision and perplexes them, like King Belshazzar of typical Babylon, when he saw the hand from the Lord that “wrote over against the candlestick upon the plaister of the wall of the king’s palace . . . MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN.” “Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting.” (Dan. 5: 5-9, 25-28) Jehovah God uses his faithful ones like Daniel to make known to the perplexed nations the Lord God’s own interpretation of the modern handwriting on the wall.
6 The religious rulers and their congregations in “Christendom” stumbled over The Stone in Zion, to wit. Christ Jesus, whom Jehovah enthroned as Rightful Ruler of the world in 1914. Jehovah’s refusal on that account to answer their prayers for peace and plenty and, besides that, the increasing bold proclamation by his witnesses of his vengeance to be executed at Armageddon fill the religionists with perplexity and dismay at this “evident token of perdition” for them. (Isa. 8:14,15; Rom. 9:32,33; Phil. 1: 28) The perplexity of the situation is increased for them because the remnant and their companions, obedient to God’s command, will not be bulldozed by official threats into silence, but keep on coming continually and always stronger, and the enemy refuse to recognize God’s commission and command to these his witnesses. Only by using totalitarian methods to suppress the preachers of God’s kingdom and vengeance do they feel that they shall
solve their perplexity and at length be able to cry “Peace and safety!” (1 Thess. 5:3) Then Jehovah will turn the tables on them, to stay turned.
BETRAYAL OF CONFIDENCE
* The Lord’s servants are in the world or enemy’s country, but are not of it, and hence are surrounded with spying enemies, scheming damage to the things of Jehovah God and his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. The interests of that righteous government or kingdom have been committed to God's “faithful and wise servant”, his devoted remnant under Christ Jesus their Head. (Matt. 24:45-47) This is a position of great trust, and they must anxiously safeguard those “goods” or Kingdom interests against the destructive enemy; for they must give account to Jehovah God and his King. “For we shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ.” (Rom. 14:4,10) The enemy are everywhere about and use “fifth column” ways to get in among or next to those having a trust from God and to spy and gather information to use against Jehovah’s organization. This is true now, and it was true during those perilous times of the assault on Jehovah’s covenant people at the climax of the first world war. Concerning the safe and proper course then Jehovah by his prophet says to them: “Trust ye not in a friend, put ye not confidence in a guide; keep the doors of thy mouth from her that lieth in thy bosom.” —Mic. 7:5.
•Jehovah God is the real Friend, who loves his tried and tested ones all the time; and Christ Jesus likewise proved his friendship by laying down his life for God’s friends. (Prov. 17:17; 18:24; John 15:12,13) There are, however, those who claim to be friends of God, and hence friends of His people, but are false. They commit spiritual adultery with the world, and so make themselves the enemies of God. Such are like the three apparent friends who got next to Job and plagued him with their presence, adding to his torments by their false accusations against his innocence and blamelessness, and they endeavored to make him curse God and break his integrity toward Jehovah. Such untrustworthy friends include the religious clergy, who stirred up the persecution and arrests during the World War; also the “elective elders” of the congregations who would rule as bosses; and the “evil servant” class who were in line for the “kingdom of heaven” but who prove slothful and unfaithful toward the Kingdom interests and smite the faithful brethren and seek honors, protection and favors from the worldly powers. (Job 2:11; 16: 20; 19:14,19, 21) Those who love and care for the Lord’s interests may not trust such ones with any information. The record shows they have betrayed their brethren.
’ Religion is a snare that traps one into disobedi
June 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER,
165
ence to God. Those who practice or act as leaders in religion are not safe guides, but blind guides leading the blind. Back there they used their influence -with the rulers to stop the witness work, and they have not repented of this course, and are not guides in whom to put confidence. The pope puts out feelers now in this world crisis to act as the spiritual guide of the world. The clergy of other religions call him a “good neighbor” and follow his lead; but those with eyes opened by the enlightening Word of God see that that ruler of Vatican City continues to guide his dupes direct toward the ditch of destruction.
10	God’s Word states the wise rule: “I said, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue: I will keep my mouth with a bridle, while the wicked is before me.” (Ps. 39:1) That the greatest caution must be taken, the prophet emphasizes: “Keep the doors of thy mouth from her that lieth in thy bosom.” That refers to anyone who is in a close and tender relationship, like that of a wife. Suchlike make loud professions of love for the creature from whom they hope to wheedle out information; but they do not keep God’s commandments or do his witness work, thereby showing love for the creature rather than for God. “For they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly; and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple.” (Rom. 16:17,18) Such ones are like Ezekiel’s wife, for whom Ezekiel was commanded to make no signs of mourning when she was cut off from life by God’s judgment executed against her. (Ezek. 24:15-25) Further such ones are like Delilah, the Philistine woman whom Samson loved and whose lap she let him make his pillow. This intimacy she encouraged in order to learn the secret of his strength and cripple him for the war against religion. (Judg. 16: 4-21) God’s Word warns to leave such ones, who profess to be His people, and “go from them”. Why? “For they be all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men. And they bend their tongues like their bow for lies; but they are not valiant for the truth upon the earth: for they proceed from evil to evil, and they know not me, saith the Lord. Take ye heed every one of his neighbour, and trust ye not in any brother: for every brother will utterly supplant, and every neighbour will walk with slanders. And they will deceive every one his neighbour, and will not speak the truth: they have taught their tongue to speak lies, and weary themselves to commit iniquity. Thine habitation is in the midst of deceit; through deceit they refuse to know me, saith the Lord.”—Jer. 9:2-6.
11	In these final days even more so than in 1918, and now when “evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived” (2 Tim. 3:13), each one who really loves God and The Theocracy will carefully and constantly safe
guard the interests of God’s work and of his brethren who are “labourers together with God”. (1 Cor. 3:9; 2 Cor. 6:1) A slip by one betraying vital information to the enemy not merely affects the careless, loose-speeched one, but also endangers the organization. Let not your tongue bring you within or under the power of any agent of Satan and his demons. For aid, comfort and heart-to-heart fellowship do not rely on any human relationships and companionships, but lean wholly upon Jehovah and Christ, showing devotion to them wholly independent of any earthly creature. Look to Jehovah through our “advocate with the Father”, who is Christ Jesus, and have intimacy and fellowship with his faithful organization, Zion. Human affection between creatures, which is generally passion according to the flesh, is no basis for one to place confidence respecting the Lord’s Kingdom interests in another earthly creature not in covenant with Him and not meeting his requirements. This was proved by many examples during the days of 1914-1918, as especially foreshadowed by Delilah when she betrayed Samson into the hands of the enemies of the typical Theocracy. Concerning that dangerous situation the prophecy correctly says:
” “For the son dishonoureth the father, the daughter riseth up against her mother, the daughterin-law against her mother-in-law; a man’s enemies are the men of his own house.” (Mic. 7; 6) Having no love or fear of Jehovah or devotion to The Theocratic Government, they do not consider close earthly relationship as obligating them to protect the confidence of relatives serving Almighty God. This serious warning is repeated by Christ Jesus, and he applies it specifically to the end of Satan’s uninterrupted rule and the coming of the Lord to his temple. “Blessed are those servants, whom the lord, when he cometh, shall find watching: verily I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them. . . . Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on earth? I tell you, Nay; but rather division: for from henceforth there shall be five in one house divided, three against two, and two against three. The father shall be divided against the son, and the son against the father; the mother against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother; the mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law, and the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.” (Luke 12:37-53) "And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake; but he that endureth to the end shall be saved. . . . And a man’s foes shall be they of his own household. He that loveth
166
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
father or mother more than me is not worthy of me.” (Matt. 10: 21, 22, 34-37) Concerning the false spiritual brethren, not to speak of earthly relationships, at the end of Satan’s world, Jesus further prophesied: “And then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another, and shall hate one another.” (Matt. 24:10) Such traitors to the greatest, most glorious cause in the universe, and just at the time when it is about to triumph over all foes, the Lord Jesus by his angels clears out of God’s sanctuary. However, the demons are now more active than ever and the “evil servant” class and other religionists are still hanging around with malicious designs against the interests of The Theocracy. Hence none of those who shall prove faithful unto the final end will relax their vigilance against the subtle enemy. Creaturelove will not entice them into carelessness. They will love Jehovah God with all they have.—Matt. 26:41; Deut. 6:4,5; 1 John 5:3.
1J All those in covenant relationship with Jehovah today must see to it that the proper information is meted out to their fellow-workers of The Theocracy at the proper time. We must have faith in our brethren who have shown their steadfastness and their faith by their works. Lines of communication have been cut off to many parts of the earth, but the meat in due season and the organization instructions do get through eventually. When these instructions are received the information contained therein should go to those of The Theocracy, and not to persons who have not proved their devotion to the Lord by their service. The Lord has committed unto the faithful servants the interests of his kingdom, and when these interests of the Kingdom fall into your hand for their advancement, use wisdom in the dissemination of these truths and instructions. Trust your faithful brethren. You that receive the information, be sure that you ‘sin not with your tongue’ in disseminating it to others, and, above all, ‘keep your mouth with a bridle when the wicked are before you.’ (See Philippians 2: 19-22.)
” “Therefore I will look unto the Lord [(Am. Rev. Ver.) But as for me, in Jehovah will I keep watch {margin)] ; I will wait for the God of my salvation; my God will hear me.” (Mic. 7: 7) Thus, human relationships proving untrustworthy, and human agencies of relief proving to be under demon control, the faithful remnant in 1918 were obliged to look unto Jehovah and keep watching his leadings. They must continue to do so at present and until Armageddon clears out all traitors and false friends of the world. Jehovah never betrays the confidence and trust of those who rely on him. To look unto and keep watching him, however, does not mean to let our powers and faculties lie idle and unused. It means to keep on fighting for The Theocracy and for our right and
liberty to proclaim that Government. It means to use all the legal means still at our disposal for the gaining of and defense of freedom of worship. But, over and above the legal provisions or qualifications, it means always to ask for and be guided by and to use the ‘wisdom which cometh down from above’ and which the Lord God gives liberally to all his covenant people that ask for it in faith. (Acts 25:9-11; Jas. 3:17; 1:5, 6) He will then direct the issue or way of escape.—1 Cor. 10:13, Emphatic Diaglott translation.
“ “Salvation belongeth unto [Jehovah]” (Ps. 3:8), and the faithful remnant were made to know that He is “the God of my salvation”. To test out the faithfulness of his covenant people under the discipline of persecution and deprivation of liberty Jehovah has often seemingly delayed, but never really so, the deliverance of his people from the enemy’s restraining power. The test is whether they will ‘go down to Egypt for help’ and compromise with the enemy to secure a release, or relief, or a permit to witness, or immunity from violent attacks. The ones keeping their proper relationship to the Lord make no deals with the enemy, but continue to keep trust with and to obey God. Then their deliverance, when it comes, will be the Lord’s salvation and will prove Jehovah’s promise true. Keeping on working to the full use of all circumstances about them, they can afford to wait for his salvation, fully assured that it will come. Meantime they continue their fervent prayers to the great Savior, Jehovah.
“ “My God will hear me.” This shows that the devoted remnant were praying to Him during the affliction. The situation for them looked hopeless outwardly, and the enemy’s triumph looked complete; but Jehovah God heard the prayer of his afflicted ones. Their petition was not selfish, but that the reproach upon God’s name and cause might be removed. They prayed, not for peace between “the king of the north” and “the king of the south” then at war, but that the way might be opened for the Lord’s witness work to go on and that all obstacles and restrictions might be surmounted and overcome, and that they might prove their sincerity and love toward God and his kingdom by having a part in that further service for the honor of his name. Such prayer the Lord noted and answered. “From heaven did the Lord behold the earth; to hear the groaning of the prisoner [in antitypical Babylon], to loose those that are appointed to death; to declare the name of the Lord in Zion, and his praise in Jerusalem.” (Ps. 102:19-21) “The Lord looseth the prisoners.” (Ps. 146:7) Their prayer was: “Bring my soul out of prison, that I may praise thy name: the righteous shall compass me about; for thou shalt deal bountifully with me.”—Ps. 142: 7.
June 1,1942	3£e WATCHTOWER.	167
” Jehovah sent his executioner, King Cyrus, against ancient Babylon to deliver His faithful remnant from its power and send them back to Jerusalem to rebuild the temple on Zion. In A.D. 1918 he sent the Greater Cyrus, Christ Jesus, to the temple for judgment. Thereafter he stopped the World War with the release of his chosen or elect remnant in view. By thus cutting the time of tribulation in the middle, which tribulation began on Satan’s organization in 1914 and which must and will be renewed by the Lord at Armageddon, Jehovah God shortened “those days” of tribulation. “And except that the Lord had shortened those days, no flesh should be saved: but for the elect’s sake, whom he hath chosen, he hath shortened the days.” (Mark 13:20; Matt. 24: 22) In this present interim before Armageddon the faithful remnant, joined now by a multitude of joyful companions, offer themselves as “willing volunteers” for the work which must be fullv carried out to its completion before that battle. —Ps. 110:3.
ARISE
18 God’s organization Zion, speaking for the afflicted remnant thereof in 1918, said to Babylon, the great rival organization, which was holding the fallen remnant in captivity: “Bejoice not against me, 0 mine enemy: when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me.” (Mic. 7:8) “Enemy” here is in the female gender in the Hebrew, showing that it applies to Satan’s “woman”, his organization Babylon, which brings forth the 'seed of the Serpent’. (Gen. 3:15) At verse 10 Micah further identifies the enemy as Babylon, saying: “Then she that is mine enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover her.”
19 On earth is the visible part of “Babylon”, foremost in which are the nations calling themselves “Christian”. “Christendom” is nothing else, however, than a modernizing of ancient demon-worshiping Babylon, and operating under the cloak of religion deceivingly called “Christian religion”. In 1918 it was the religionists that particularly rejoiced, the “man of sin” company. Such were foreshadowed by Edom (Idumea) and Mount Seir, who rejoiced at the fall of God’s typical covenant people into the power of typical Babylon: “As thou didst rejoice at the inheritance of the house of Israel, because it was desolate, so will I do unto thee: thou shalt be desolate, 0 mount Seir, and all Idumea, even all of it; and they shall know that I am the Lord [Jehovah].” (Ezek. 35:15) ‘Tn the day that thou stoodest on the other side, in the day that the strangers carried away captive his forces, and foreigners entered into his gates, and cast lots upon Jerusalem, even thou wast as one of them. But thou shouldest not have looked on the day of thy brother
in the day that he became a stranger; neither shouldest thou have rejoiced over the children of Judah in the day of their destruction; neither shouldest thou have spoken proudly in the day of [their] distress.” (Obad. 11,12) Revelation 11:10 further pictures the malicious glee of the religionists at their stopping the work of Jehovah’s “two witnesses” in 1918: “And they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to another; because these two prophets tormented them that dwelt on the earth.”
50 “When I fall, I shall arise.” The remnant of Zion did not fall away from Jehovah and his organization, neither was their falling due to stumbling over Christ Jesus reigning as King from 1914 on. On the contrary, He is “the stone of stumbling” over which “Christendom” stumbles to her destruction. (Isa. 8:14,15; Rom. 9 : 32,33) God’s consecrated ones were overwhelmed by the enemy and fell into their power and were forcibly restrained, the religionists making false accusation and using the disturbed world conditions as a subterfuge to stop the “Elijah work” of Jehovah’s servants. There the modern Philistines sheared the Samson class of their locks and weakened their strength to serve God boldly and freely. But Samson’s locks grew again and he rose again in Jehovah’s service to his greatest exploit against religion. Likewise by devoting themselves to keeping of the covenant-obligations upon their heads, as symbolized by Samson’s regrown hair, and by being blinded to all else than God’s “strange work” against religion, the faithful remnant arose, in the strength of Christ their Head. Jehovah delivered them from restraint, particularly the restraint due to fear of men and fear of worldly ruling organizations, and he commanded them to arise to his service, the “Elisha work”, with courage and boldness.— Judg. 16:22-30.
81 Concerning this the prophetic Word of God says: “The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord; and he delighteth in his way. Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down: for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand.” (Ps. 37: 23, 24) “The Lord upholdeth all that fall, and raiseth up all those that be bowed down.” (Ps. 145:14) True repentance is not shown by keeping lying idly on the ground and mourning over sins for which the Lord’s forgiveness has been asked and assured. It is shown by getting up, taking the course marked out by the Lord, and busying oneself in the one thing of doing His work. “Shake thyself from the dust; arise, and sit down, O Jerusalem: loose thyself from the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion.” (Isa. 52: 2) "Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the
168
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
people: but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee.” (Isa. 60:1,2) ‘Tor a just man falleth seven times [a complete number of times down till the end of the enemy’s power], and riseth up again: but the wicked shall fall into mischief. Rejoice not [0 enemy Babylon] when thine enemy [the hated remnant] falleth, and let not thine heart be glad when he stumbleth; lest the Lord see it, and it displease him, and he turn awray his wrath [his discipline, chastening] from him [as Jehovah did toward the remnant in 1918].” (Prov. 24:16-18) The seventh and last fall of Jehovah’s “just” ones will be when the witness work of his remnant and their companions shall shortly be closed down in every land on earth and the enemy jubilantly begin to cry “Peace and safety!” Then, suddenly, the wicked enemy shall themselves fall into the “mischief’ that the Lord prepares for them, his “strange act” at Armageddon. Then the faithful remnant and the Lord’s “other sheep” shall arise, never to be downed again; and the great enemy organization, Babylon, shall fall, never to rise again. (Rev. 18:21) The tables will be turned upon her by the Lord.—Ezek. 11: 2-7; Esther 7:10.
22 Further describing the Lord’s deliverance of his remnant from and after 1918 Jehovah’s witness Micah says: “When I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me.” The darkness is that into which the enemy organization casts Jehovah’s servants, the gloomy condition of captivity and restraint, such as Samson experienced in the Philistine dungeon. During their dark experience and condition in enemy hands at the time of the Lord’s coming to the temple the consecrated ones are described as “such as sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, being bound in affliction and iron”. (Ps. 107:10) For the time also there was darkness in their minds as to the understanding of why God’s enemies should be permitted apparently to triumph over them while honestly and diligently seeking to do his will. (Hab. 1:13-17) Hence those in covenant relationship with the Lord prayed: “Have respect unto the covenant: for the dark places of the earth are full of the habitations of cruelty.”—Ps. 74: 20.
25 “God is light, and in him is no darkness at all.” (1 John 1:5) His covenant people had yielded to fear of men and were guilty of iniquity of lip in failing to ‘offer the calves of their lips' in the sacrifice of praise to God and to his kingdom. (Heb. 13:15; Hos. 14:2) In God’s displeasure and for their chastisement he had permitted them to fall under the enemy organization Babylon. Now noting their repentance of heart and their prayerful resolves to serve him if given further privileges, and noting also their unbreakable cleaving unto Jehovah, he turned his brightening favor upon this remnant of Zion. By
his Judge at the temple he ordered them delivered, and the enemy were obliged to yield. “He brought them out of darkness and the shadow of death, and brake their bands in sunder.” (Ps. 107:14) He enlightened their teachable minds as to their commission on earth to be a “people for his name”. Then he sent them forth to reflect upon others that light which he shone upon them by Christ Jesus, who is at the temple and reflecting the glory of Jehovah God"—2 Cor. 3:17,18.
24 Now the delivered remnant know the truth of Psalm 112:4: “Unto the upright there ariseth light in the darkness: he is gracious, and full of compassion, and righteous.” Psalm 18:28: ‘Tor thou wilt light my candle; the Lord my God will enlighten my darkness.” Now the remnant, together with their companions at their side, say: “The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid?” (Ps. 27:1) The Lord brings them unto his organization Zion and assures them that, continually abiding there unto the end, never shall they come into darkness again: “Thy sun shall no more go down; neither shall thy moon withdraw itself: for the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended.” (Isa. 60: 2, 20) “The city [the new Jerusalem, in which the remnant have their citizenship] had no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it: for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb [of God] is the light thereof.”—Rev. 21: 23.
22 In A.D. 33 the Lord Jesus came to the prophetic temple at Jerusalem, cleansed it, and shortly thereafter was betrayed unto his enemies, the religionists. His disciples all forsook him and fled. After his resurrection from the dead Jesus regathered them. This correctly fulfilled the prophecies. It also foretold that at the time of the Lord’s coming to the spiritual temple in 1918 he would find a displeasing state of affairs among the consecrated. Concerning this the prophecy said: “Thou wast angry with me.” (Isa. 12:1) “Woe is me! for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean lips [due to failure to boldly preach the Kingdom], and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips.” (Isa. 6: 5) Whereat Jehovah says: “I was but a little displeased [with you], and they [the persecutors] helped forward the affliction.” (Zech. 1:12,15) Realizing their failure to keep their vital covenant obligations, and duly repenting thereof, the remnant said: “I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause and execute judgment for me: he will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness.”—Mic. 7: 9.
*’ The Lord’s “indignation” here mentioned is not his indignation at Armageddon, which is against all
June 1,1942	3THE WATCHT0WEFL	169
the nations that helped forward the affliction upon his covenant people and still do. (Isa. 34:1-5; Zeph. 3:8) It is his chastening upon his people for their iniquity of lip in not carrying on the bold publication of the Kingdom under the affliction by the persecutor nations. To bear such indignation means to endure such righteous chastisement without taking offense or rebelling against the Lord, knowing that “if ye endure chastening, God deale th with you as with sons; for what son is he whom the father chasteneth not!” Such chastening was for their profit, that they might be “partakers of his holiness”, complete devotion to righteousness without any compromise with the enemy. (Heb. 12: 7,10) Jehovah deals with his covenant people as an organization. His chastening comes upon the organization, and the innocent must likewise endure the wholesome chastening. Remember how Daniel and his three companions were carried off captive to Babylon with the other Israelites that had come short of their covenant. Daniel did not excuse himself from the sin of his people, nor did he receive an earlier deliverance from Babylonish captivity, but waited upon God’s deliverance of all the remnant of His organization. (Dan. 9:4-19) The purpose is to purge out the undesirable ones who are without integrity toward God. Jehovah now has a chastened and purged organization maintaining integrity toward him.
’T In 1918 the consecrated ones as an organized company had sinned, and the finger of blame is not to be pointed at individuals. Such sin was due to the soils of religion upon the garments of their identification as God’s covenant people. It was due also to fleeing from Satan’s threatening “woman”, pictured by that woman Jezebel who threatened Elijah after his destructive work against religion, and caused him temporarily to drop the Lord’s public work and to flee into the wilderness. Such sin was due to looking upon the worldly powers of Satan’s organization as being “ordained of God” to be the “higher powers” with authority to dictate concerning the Lord’s work. Hence the consecrated, out of fear, neglected the public worship of the Lord, which worship is the declaring of his name and the preaching of his “gospel of the kingdom” and proclaiming of his vengeance. This failure made them “of unclean lips”. After their repentance the Lord God by his Messenger at the temple purged away such iniquity of lip and reinstated them in His service. (Isa. 6:6,7) Thenceforth they offered themselves joyfully as willing volunteers and in the beauty of holiness or absolute devotion to the Lord. With profit such willing volunteers now ponder over what constituted that iniquity of lip which makes unclean, and they consider what led to such a state of uncleanness in God’s sight. The faithful are determined that never
again shall they yield to the fear of men and hole up and stop preaching His word. They are determined to exercise only the “fear of the Lord [which] is clean”. (Ps. 19:9) They purpose to and do obey Him rather than men and will courageously face and endure the punishment at enemy hands for being Jehovah’s faithful and true witnesses unto the end. They are resolved to hold fast their integrity to Him.
PLEAD
” While under the Lord’s indignation the remnant carried out their determination to hold fast and wait upon him “until he plead my cause”. This pleading was against the enemy organization, the nations which oppressed and helped forward the affliction of Jehovah’s consecrated. Such pleading Jehovah did by causing them to stop their war and by rebuking the religionists through the release of his people from bondage and restraint. Jehovah with action answered the prayer: “Judge me, 0 God, and plead my cause against an ungodly nation: 0 deliver me from the deceitful and unjust man.” (Ps. 43:1) "Consider mine affliction, and deliver me; for I do not forget thy law. Plead my cause, and deliver me: quicken me according to thy word. Many are my persecutors and mine enemies; yet do I not decline from thy testimonies.”—Ps. 119:153,154,157.
” Let God’s covenant people always bear in mind that as long as they are faithful to him and his name which they bear, and as long as they carry out his commission to them, their cause is God’s own cause. They may pray: “Arise, 0 God, plead thine own cause: remember how the foolish man reproacheth thee daily. Forget not the voice of thine enemies: the tumult of those that rise up against thee increaseth daily.” (Ps. 74:22,23) “The children of Israel and the children of Judah were oppressed together, and all that took them captives held them fast; they refused to let them go. Their Redeemer is strong; the Lord of hosts is his name; he shall thoroughly plead their cause, that he may give rest to the land [his organization], and disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon.” (Jer. 50: 33, 34) “The violence done to me and to my flesh be upon Babylon, shall the inhabitant of Zion say; and, My blood upon the inhabitants of Chaldea, shall Jerusalem say. Therefore thus saith the Lord: Behold, I will plead thy cause, and take vengeance for thee; and I will dry up her sea [the world population upon which the great whore Babylon sits], and make her springs [of religion’s poison waters] dry. And Babylon shall become heaps.” (Jer. 51: 35-37) Let public officials pause and consider the above truths before yielding to the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and other religionists and before afflicting God’s faithful servants and thereby violating God’s command to the rulers: “Touch not mine
170	THE WATCHTOWER.	Brooklyn, N. Y.
anointed, and do my prophets no harm.” (Ps. 105:13-15) Jehovah will plead against such violators at Armageddon with violent destruction upon them.
” 'TJntil he plead my cause and execute judgment for me.” This judgment Jehovah began executing in 1919. The judgment had begun at the “house of God” at the Lord’s coming to the temple in the spring of 1918. Those professing to be of God’s house but whom the judging process showed to be of the “evil servant” class were cut asunder from God’s organization. “Christendom,” particularly the religious leaders thereof, had denounced Jehovah’s covenant people as false prophets, as wresting the Scriptures, as cursed of God and headed for a “hell of torment”. Now at the temple judgment Jehovah by Christ adjudged his purged remnant as approved of Him although not approved of men. He constituted them his “faithful and wise servant” and committed to them the Kingdom interests and made them his witnesses. As his approved official witnesses Jehovah “covered [them] -with the robe of righteousness”. (Isa. 61:10; Mal. 3: 1-4) Then in 1919 he released them from the bonds of the Devil’s crowd and sent them out into his service with the “testimony of Jesus Christ” and to declare the “judgment written” against the oppressors. This greatly amazed the self-righteous religionists. It was an open token of God’s disapproval and rejection of them, much to their chagrin. Thenceforth they could do nothing but weep and wail and gnash upon Jehovah’s faithful remnant with their teeth. This reversing of the enemy’s action is the doing of Jehovah, “which executeth judgment for the oppressed.” (Ps. 146:7) He has vindicated his word, that “Zion shall be redeemed with judgment, and her converts [or returning ones; the remnant] with righteousness”. (Isa. 1: 27) “He will bring me forth to the light,” adds Micah. It is the light of God’s favor, that light of liberty due to the fear of God and to freedom from fear of man; also the light of the lightning flashes of his truth from his written Word and shining forth from his temple. (Rev. 11:19) Jehovah openly displays his witnesses to the light of open and public inspection as a “people for his name". What the Lord tells them in the temple in secret, which is dark to the enemy, that they boldly speak in the light; and what they hear from the Lord in their ears, which are turned to his Word, that they preach openly, publicly, as upon the housetops. (Matt. 10:27,28) This they do because they fear only God, the All-powerful One.
,l “And I shall behold his righteousness.” Jehovah’s great act of righteousness is the vindication of his name by his Righteous Government, The Theocracy. This act Jehovah will do at Armageddon. The remnant delivered and brought forth into the light now behold these truths through the revelation
of his Word, and they look forward jubilantly to actually witnessing God’s act in that final battle, which Jehovah will win over all enemies. There his judgments will be executed in righteousness against them. The remnant also behold his righteousness in all his faithful dealings with them in complete fulfillment of his word of promise. Being covered with his robe of righteousness, they say: “He leadeth me in the paths of righteousness for his name's sake.” (Ps. 23: 3) “The Lord hath brought forth our righteousness: come, and let us declare in Zion the work of the Lord our God.” (Jer. 51:10) To them Jehovah has given “beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness; that they might be called trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified.” (Isa. 61: 3) The enemy continue to reproach and persecute them as unrighteous, but the Lord says to the remnant; “Every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord; and their righteousness is of me, saith the Lord.” (Isa. 54:17) The latter end of the remnant and their companions who continue faithful in their integrity shall be litre that of Job, whose latter end was more blessed than his beginning: “also the Lord gave Job twice as much as he had before.” (Job 42:10,12) All this vindicates Jehovah’s word and name.
” “Then she that is mine enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover her which said unto me, Where is the Lord thy God1 mine eyes shall behold her: now shall she be trodden down as the mire of the streets.” (Mic. 7 :10) During the sorrow of 1914-1918 the religionists justified themselves before the people and promised that there would be a great spiritual revival after and as a result of the world war. The war stopped, and they were put to the proof. The Protestants began their Interchurch World Movement and other revival schemes, and the Catholic sect’s head began and spread Catholic Action throughout the world. The promised spiritual revival of “Christendom” never came, proving that the Lord God was not with them. What Dm come was the greatest activity and increase of Jehovah’s witnesses, whom the enemy thought they had knocked out permanently. There came the widest and most intensive declaration of Jehovah’s name and kingdom by his witnesses that the world has ever known. This is as Jehovah God foretold at Exodus 9:16. Next, and shortly, will follow the showing of His almighty power over Satan the Devil and all his organization, Babylon. Since 1918 the “strange work” of Jehovah God by his witnesses shows his approval upon his remnant and his acceptance and use of them. It likewise covers the enemy organization with shame.
June 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER.
171
During the war time when she was on top she taunted Jehovah’s servants and said: “Where is the Lord [Jehovah] thy God?” Now let her say it! The tables have been turned!
” Concerning the righteous acts of Jehovah’s witnesses in his “strange work” he says: “And the Gentiles [the persecutor nations] shall see thy righteousness, and all kings thy glory: and thou shalt be called by a new name, which the mouth of the Lord shall name.” (Isa. 62: 2) That God-given “new name” is, to wit, “Jehovah’s witnesses.” (Isa. 44:8; 43:10,12) The Kingdom’s publication by these to the ends of the earth is a proof of Jehovah’s power and of his deliverance of them from Babylon: “The Lord hath made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the nations ; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our God.” (Isa. 52:10) Armageddon will be a still greater demonstration of power and deliverance. Concerning the work of His remnant and their companions in dispensing God’s Word to the poor in spirit or teachable ones, the Lord says: “A good man sheweth favour, and lendeth [the Kingdom message]: he will guide his affairs with discretion. He hath dispersed [God’s truth], he hath given to the poor; his righteousness endureth for ever: his horn shall be exalted with honour. The wicked shall see it, and be grieved; he shall gnash with his teeth, and melt away; the desire of the wicked shall perish.” (Ps. 112: 5,9,10) “Shew me a token for good; that they which hate me may see it, and be ashamed; because thou, Lord, hast holpen me, and comforted me.”— Ps. 86:17.
“ Being put to embarrassment and confusion by Jehovah’s blessing upon his “strange work” through his witnesses, the Babylonish religionists put up the howl of hurt “religious susceptibilities”. At the straightforward declaration of Jehovah’s judgments against religion they raise the hue and cry of ‘Intolerance !" and the need of religious unity. They try to shield themselves by forcing the passage of unconstitutional “anti-ridicule” laws. Great is their shame now because of God’s declared message which shows forth the two opposing organizations and which exposes the Devil’s organization and its religious and political and commercial elements. At Armageddon, however, shame shall smother them. Concerning them God's Word prescribes this prayer for his covenant people to say: “Fill their faces with shame; that they may seek thy name, 0 Lord. Let them be confounded and troubled for ever; yea, let them be put to shame [at not being God’s favorites, not being right, not being supreme, and not being on the winning side], and perish: that men may know that thou, whose name alone is JEHOVAH, art the Most High over all the earth.”—Ps. 83:16-18; also Pss. 109:26-28; 71:13; 6:10.
” That the primary issue before all creation is world domination is proved by the enemy organization’s taunt. In the type Babylon made war upon the typical Theocracy, overthrew the unfaithful religious organization, also took captive the remnant faithful to the Theocracy and then reproached their God, saying, “Where is the Lord thy God ?” In other words, Who is supreme now, your God, Jehovah, or our god, Satan the Devil? The same taunt was hurled at the faithful remnant while in the power of the modern-day Babylonians, in 1918. This is why Jehovah must act for his name’s sake. He gave effective answer in delivering and releasing his remnant and thereafter giving through them the most far-reaching testimony to his name, and that, too, in the teeth of the greatest persecution and opposition. Such has been to the end that the enemy might be warned that at Armageddon it will be Jehovah that smites them in proof of his supremacy as the Almighty God. This has enraged the demons and their earthly dupes.
*6 By means of Catholic Action, and particularly by totalitarian-religious dictators, the enemy seek to take away the democratic freedoms of all nations and to crush Jehovah’s witnesses in all lands. In the countries which have been swallowed up by the anti-Theocratic “abomination of desolation” and where they have gotten the persons of Jehovah’s faithful witnesses in their power they brutally torment them, and say, “Where is Jehovah your God?” Even in the land called “the land of the free and the home of the brave” un-American mobs engineered by Catholic priests and their dupes have assaulted the witnesses engaged in Christian activities and have ridiculed them with the sneering question: ‘Where is your Jehovah? Let him help you now!” A judge in an eastern court raged at the Christians haled before him for obedience to Jehovah God, and said: “I am Jehovah here!” The power of the totalitarian-religious gangsters and sympathizers spreads and the persecutions upon the faithful witnesses increase, and the scripture describes their experience: “As with a sword in my bones, mine enemies reproach me; while they sav daily unto me, Where is thy God?”—Ps. 42:10. '	’
11 In the minds of the remnant and the Lord's “other sheep” there is no question as to how the issue will be settled. They have God’s word for it, and they know they shall see the desire of their eyes in the vindication of Jehovah’s name by the destruction of all who reproach it. (Ps. 92:11) “Mine eyes shall behold her: now shall she be trodden down as the mire of the streets,” says Micah. By the revelation of the prophecies they now see Babylon, of which “Christendom” is the chief visible part, as Satan’s organization. “Christendom” has tried to mask her identity and ensnare the peoples, but God’s Word
172
SEe WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
has exposed her and now all persons of good-will toward God hehold her to he what she actually is. The nations of “Christendom” have gathered round about God’s organization Zion as represented by the remnant of her on the earth, and they say: “Let her be defiled, and let our eye look upon Zion.” (Mie. 4:11) But as “Christendom” has designed to do unto God’s organization, so it has happened to her and she stands shown up. (Deut. 19:19) Satan's organization which she outstandingly represents on earth was pictured in Israel’s history by the wicked Jezebel who persecuted Jehovah’s witnesses, his prophets. Then Jehovah raised up Captain Jehu as his executioner. At Jehu’s command the haggish old devilworshiper Jezebel was dropped from her lofty window and trampled under the hoofs of Jehu’s horses and devoured by the carrion-eating dogs. As the prophet Elijah had foretold: “In the portion of [the city of] Jezreel shall dogs eat the flesh of Jezebel: and the carcase of Jezebel shall be as dung upon the face of the field in the portion of Jezreel; so that they shall not say, This is Jezebel.” (2 Ki. 9: 30-37) Likewise shall “Christendom”, and all of the enemy organization of Babylon, be debased to the lowest and trodden under the hosts of Jehovah's organization, and no memorial shall be left of the vile, shameful thing.
DECREE
” The Jewish remnant that returned from Babylon to Jerusalem in 536 B.C. rebuilt the temple on Zion and later also the walls of the city, but under conditions of difficulty that required the defense of themselves against the enemy while at work. (Isa. 44: 28; Neh. 2:17 to 6:15; Ezra 9: 9) This pictured a like remnant of God’s present-day covenant people from and after 1918 returning to the service of his organization, engaging in his temple work, building up the interests of his Theocratic organization, and defending and safeguarding such against the enemy to this day. Nehemiah’s words ring in their ears: “Be not ye afraid of them: remember the Lord which is great and terrible, and fight for your brethren.” (Neh. 4:14) Concerning this time, therefore, Jehovah by his prophet says: “In the day that thy walls are to be built, in that day shall the decree be far removed.” (Mic. 7:11) The “decree” here specified may mean several things. The religionists have decreed that the kings rule by divine right, and that the political powers, including the dictators of totalitarian Germany, Italy and Spain, are the “higher powers". (Rom. 13:1) This unscriptural decree the religionists have applied against Jehovah’s servants to frighten them into stopping their worship of God at the command of demonized rulers. Since 1918 Jehovah has given his people the spiritual understanding of this vital subject. Thereby the power of
the enemy’s baseless decree has been far removed from them and they obey Jehovah God and Christ Jesus as the only “Higher Powers” rather than man, and they let no such invalid decree of men stop their worship of God.
” At Zephaniah 2: 2, 3 Jehovah warns of his decree of destruction against all not gathering themselves to him for refuge: “Before the decree bring forth, before the day pass as the chaff, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you, before the day of the Lord’s anger come upon you. Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of the earth, which have wrought his judgment; seek righteousness, seek meekness: it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lord’s anger.” Zion is Jehovah's approved organization upon which his name is called. The remnant thereof is yet on earth, and the multitude of their companions, the Lord’s “other sheep”, flee from religion and take refuge under God’s capital organization, The Theocracy. Both remnant and “other sheep” shall be hid from the expression of Jehovah’s fierce and consuming anger at Armageddon. His decree of destruction will not be directed at them. Its execution will be upon the peoples and nations who are “far removed” from his Theocracy in that they are opposed to it.
40	As one term of the Christian’s commission at the end of the world Jehovah by Christ Jesus issued the decree: “This gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come.” (Matt. 24:14) The remnant and their zealous companions willingly volunteer for this service. Since 1918 they have preached this Kingdom gospel everywhere on earth, including lands outside “Christendom”. Thus Jehovah’s decree has applied and been carried out in lands “far removed”. It must not be and it has not been confined to within the assembly halls of Jehovah’s covenant people, but has been carried forth abroad, far and wide.
41	Other renderings of the text are: “On that day far away shall be thy boundary” (Rotherham'); “In that day shall the bound be afar off.” (Variorum, margin) That is to say, Jehovah’s visible part of his organization on earth, together with the “strangers within her gates” who are companions of the remnant, shall increase in numbers and spread out in her realm of activity. Their boundary or bound shall not be limited, but shall be pushed out to the ends of the earth in order that all those seeking life under God’s Kingdom may be brought into the place of refuge and preservation before Jehovah's decree against his foes is executed. Therefore his organization Zion, which had seemed to be barren of children before the birth of the Kingdom, in 1914, is now called upon to sing and cry aloud for joy. Why! Because of the increase of the children of her organization and of their earthly companions: “For more are the children
June 1,1942
WATCHTOWER-
173
of the desolate [hitherto desolate Zion] than the children of the married wife, saith the Lord. Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thine habitations: spare not, lengthen thy cords [guy ropes], and strengthen thy stakes [tent pins in the ground]: for thou shalt break forth on the right hand and on the left; and thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles [the Lord’s 'other sheep’ from all nations], and make the desolate cities to be inhabited.” (Isa. 54:1-3) “Measure Jerusalem [the restored remnant thereof on earth], to see what is the breadth thereof, and what is the length thereof . . . Jerusalem shall be inhabited as towns without walls for the multitude of men and cattle therein.” —Zech. 2:2, 4; 1:17.
42	In all lands the demon enemy organization desperately fights to prevent this increase of Jehovah’s organization. Nevertheless, even in the totalitariancontrolled lands the faithful witnesses continue to carry on against great obstacles and dangers. In the lands yet open for the work there is the final ingathering to be done of those who must turn to the Lord to be sheltered from the great whirlwind of Armageddon. For the comfort and strengthening of those willingly volunteering for the final work in these perilous times Jehovah says: “Fear not; for I am with thee: I will bring thy seed from the east, and gather thee from the west: I will say to the north, Give up; and to the south, Keep not back: bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth; even every one that is called by my name; for I have created him [to bear my name] for my glory, I have formed him; yea, I have made him. . . . Ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord . . . This people have I formed for myself; they shall shew forth my praise.”—Isa. 43: 5-10, 21.
(To be concluded)
SAFETY DURING WORLD EMERGENCY
IN THIS year 1942 all nations are in the grip of fear.
In every nation there is internal distress and disturbance. Many think that armsd conflict involving all nations of the earth is just at the threshold; and hence all nations are attempting to fortify themselves against such an emergency. Is there any way to escape to a place of safety 1 Only those who believe, understand and confidently rely upon God and his "Word know what is soon to come to pass. Sincere persons are anxious to know how and whence salvation may come.
The word “salvation” means deliverance from impending disaster, and the finding of refuge in a place of complete safety. Because the greatest tribulation ever to befall the world is just at the door an unexampled emergency confronts all the peoples of the earth. There are certain universal rules which are unchangeable and which disclose the cause of the impending disaster and also point to the only means of escape and safety. To become acquainted with those rules will result beneficially to those who give heed thereto. Both profane and sacred history furnish an abundance of proof that about 4,000 years ago the world fell under the overwhelming disaster of the flood and a few persons were saved. Since then from tune to time other emergencies have arisen; but the greatest one of all is yet to come, and concerning that emergency the evidence is indisputable. Those who will now examine and weigh such evidence with unbiased mind will see that action must be taken immediately by those who may hope to escape to the place of safety.—See Matthew 24:14-19.
All persons of good-will and who desire to see righteousness prevail readily recognize that the great Creator is the Almighty God, “whose name alone is JEHOVAH” (Ps. 83:18), and that the Bible is a sacred record of the truth, which the Almighty God has caused to be kept for the aid of those who love that which is right. For the express purpose of telling the truth and being a witness for Jehovah, Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of the Almighty
God, came into the world (John 18: 37) He bore testimony to God’s universal and unchangeable rules above mentioned which all men should learn for their own good He made known the cause of disasters that befall men and nations, and plainly set forth the only means of escape to safety and complete salvation. He told of the flood of Noah's day and said that the wicked conditions that immediately preceded that deluge of waters would again exist throughout the earth, and which conditions would be proof that the greatest of all disasters was quicklv to follow —Matt 24:37-39.	*
Christ Jesus is the greatest of all prophets and was prefigured by Moses. (See Acts 3:20-23.) Uis prophecies must all come true, because he is the spokesman of Almighty God who tells of the purpose of Jehovah, whose purposes never fail to be carried out. (Isa 46 11,55 11) 'When we observe conditions that have come to pass about which Jesus prophesied, and see that the phvsical facts well known to us exactlv fit the prophecy, then we are sure that it is the time for the fulfillment of the prophecy and that these events have come to pass for that very purpose Jesus prophesied concerning the conditions now existing in the world, and which conditions immediately precede and lead up to the greatest of all disasters that the world can ever have. He foretold the first world war. which began in 1914 and was suddenly stopped in 1918 He stated that such war would be accompanied or quickly followed b\ famine, pestilence, and great disturbances in the earth, and that such would be the beginning of sorrows immediately preceding the great disaster soon to befall the world (Matt. 24:7) He prophesied that following the “war in heaven” described at Revelation 12:7-12 and accompanied by the World War on earth many woes would come upon the nations of the earth; and the facts show a fulfillment of that prophecy. He foretold that following the World War his true followers, who are witnesses for Jehovah, must go amongst the people and tell them the cause of these
174
3Ee WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
disturbances and inform them emphatically that the kingdom of heaven is at hand. For more than twenty years now that prophecy has been in course of fulfillment.
Christ Jesus further prophesied that the anti-Theocracy “abomination of desolation” would appear in the earth, and the Scriptures make it clear that such abomination is the combination or combined effort of the religious, political and commercial elements of “Christendom” to arbitrarily rule the peoples of the earth and take away all their liberties and make them serfs. That prophecy is now being fulfilled; and in this connection and for the benefit of all persons of good-will Jesus added that, ‘when you see the abomination of desolation standing where it ought not to stand, then flee to the mountains,’ that is, to God’s organization, the only place of safety, (Mark 13:14, Matt. 24:15,16) And why flee then 1 Jesus answers: “For then shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be.” (Matt. 24:21) Concerning that great tribulation Jeremiah 25: 33 prophesies: “And the slain of the Lord shall be at that day from one end of the earth even unto the other end of the earth; they shall not be lamented, neither gathered, nor buried; they shall be dung upon the ground.” Such prophecies now in course of fulfillment show that there is impending an emergency such as never before confronted the world.
It was long ago foretold: “Darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people” (Isa. 60:2) There never was a time in the history of the world when there was such great ignorance generally concerning God’s purpose as set forth in the Bible, and particularly amongst religionists. The people of good-will toward God are just within reeent years coming into the light of a new day and these, being enlightened, see before them the great emergency. They see the mad waters of the river of humanity alienated from God rushing, like the Jordan river, downward to be swallowed up m the “Dead sea”, that is, the turbulent and uncontrollable conditions just ahead. They have a vision of the greatest catastrophe ever known, while all the other people, who are not of good-will, are totally ignorant of what is just ahead. The flood of waters or deluge in the days of Noah was a prophetic picture foretelling this very time and concerning which Jesus prophesied ; “And as it was in the days of No'e, so shall it be also in the days of the Son of man. They did eat, they drank, they married wives, they were given in marriage, until the day that No'e entered into the ark, and the flood came, and destroyed them all.”—Luke 17:26,27.
What will be the result to those not of good-will? and what is the possible means of escape? With the emergency aforementioned the whole world is now faced. What is done must be done quickly, and only those persons of good-will toward Jehovah God will give heed to the warning and act quickly and find the place of safety.
Humankind could have escaped falling into such a world emergency and period of destruction. God created the earth for man, and then created perfect man and woman and put them on the earth to inhabit it. (Isa. 45:12,18) To the perfect human pair God issued his mandate to “be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth”. (Gen. 1: 28, Rotherham) God made Lucifer a spirit creature
or invisible overlord of the world, including perfect man. (Ezek. 28:14,15) At that time all creation in heaven and earth gave honor to Jehovah God, and that properly so, because every creature owes the privilege of life to the Almighty God. The exception to this rule was Lucifer, who began to covet what he was not entitled to, namely, the honor and praise that was rightfully bestowed upon the Almighty God.
Lucifer rebelled against God and attempted to set himself up as God’s equal, and in this rebellion he led away from the path of righteousness both angels and men, and Adam found himself involved in that rebellion. The name Lucifer Jehovah God then changed to that of Satan, which means “adversary”; and to Dragon, which means “devour-er”; and to Serpent, which means “deceiver” , and to Devil, which means “slanderer”. Since then that great rebel has been known by the four names, Dragon, Satan, Old Serpent, and the Devil. (Rev. 20: 2) The Devil then defied God and challenged him to put on the earth men who would prove faithful and loyal to God, and at the same time Satan declared he could cause all men to curse God to His face (Job 2:4-6) That wicked challenge of the Devil raised the question as to who is supreme and who shall exercise universal domination. If Satan could cause all men to curse God, that would prove Satan at least the equal of Jehovah God, if not his superior. God would have all creation to hear and see the proof, that there could nexer be a real doubt as to who is the supreme one. God had entered the judgment of death against Satan, but, instead of destroying him immediately, God deferred the execution of that judgment and accepted the challenge of Satan in order to give Satan full opportunity to make proof of his boastful challenge. Therefore God said to the wicked one • “But for this cause have I allowed thee to remain, in order to show thee my power.” (Ex. 9- 16, Leeser'i Thus it is seen that God announced his purpose to give Satan the rebel a full and free opportunity to prove his challenge and that in due time the day of final reckoning must come, and that when that day arrives God would first cause his name to be declared in all the earth and then he would exhibit his supreme power against his adversary, the Devil
Adam and Eve, because of the sin of rebellion, were also sentenced to death, but God permitted them to live for a season that they might bring forth children Thex could never fulfill the divine mandate to fill the earth xvith a righteous race of people, because they xvere sinners, but they could exercise the function of producing their own species, even though they were imperfect. All of their children were hence born in sin and shapen in laxx lessness, and for that reason all such must in due time die. (Ps. 51 5, Rom. 5:12) Emphasizing the issue of supremacy God gaxe his word of promise that in his due time he would send to the world a Savior who would purchase the human raee or offspring of Adam and that he xvould provide a means whereby those so purchased might be saved and receive life everlasting. That would mean that all of the offspring of Adam who escape and who are saved must comply with Jehovah’s rules and must maintain their integrity toxvard God, and all so doing would be a vindication of Jehovah’s name; and that of itself would prove Satan a liar.
God did not deprive Satan of overlordship of the world,
June 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER.
173
but permitted him to continue in that position in order that he might have a free hand to carry out his wicked challenge, if possible. Thereafter when Jesus was on the earth Satan was the invisible prince or overlord of the world, and Jesus spoke of Satan as “the prince of this world”. (John 12:31; 14:30) Satan well knew that if God should set up a kingdom on earth, with Christ Jesus as the King and invisible overlord, that would mean Satan’s rulership must end and his execution must take place. Satan therefore determined to exercise everything within his power to defeat God’s purpose. The kingdom of heaven, with Christ Jesus as King, is the deadly foe of Satan and of his advocates. While Jesus was on the earth the Devil and his religious agents continuously attempted to kill Jesus, and finally succeeded in having him wrongfully convicted of treason and causing his death on the tree. God suffered Jesus to thus be put to death, knowing that he would raise Jesus out of death as a spirit creature and place him at the head of his kingdom and that this would be accomplished in his own good time and to his own glory.
Jesus had told his disciples that he must go away and receive the kingdom and that then he would return and take unto himself his faithful disciples who should be associated with him in his kingdom. (John 14-1-3; Luke 22:28-30) Within three days after his laying down his life God raised Jesus out of death, and he was clothed with full power and authority in heaven and earth; and in forty days thereafter he ascended into heaven, and he was then the King of the world, the duly anointed and commissioned Ruler, whose right it is to rule. (Matt 28:18; Phil. 2: 9-11; Acts 2: 32-36) Thereafter the faithful apostles of Jesus Christ continued to look for his second coming and his kingdom, about which he had informed them and which he stated to them would take place at the end of Satan’s world.
All the true followers of Christ Jesus for centuries have likewise looked for and hoped for the coming of that kingdom under the Lord Jesus Christ. So keenly interested in his coming and his kingdom were the apostles that they propounded to Jesus this question, shortly before his death: “What shall be the sign [evidence] of thy coming. and of the end of the world [that is, the end of Satan’s uninterrupted rule]?” (Matt. 24:3) In response to that question Jesus said that the first evidence discernible by men would be the world war, in which nation would rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. That came to pass in A.D. 1914. Jesus said that the war would be quickly followed by famine and pestilence and earthquakes ; and everyone knows that these things did quickly follow the World War. Then Jesus said to his disciples: ‘When you see the abomination that maketh desolate standing where it ought not to stand [that is, claiming the right and authority to rule the world], then flee to the kingdom.' (Matt. 24:15,16; Mark 13:14) That has also come to pass at the present time, in this, that a few men, called dictators, and the great religious system of the world together claim the right to rule and regiment the people and take away their liberties and to rule the world in the place and stead of Christ the King. Furthermore Jesus said that great woes would come upon the peoples of the earth because of the activities of the Devil to thwart
God’s purpose. (Rev. 12:12) All the world is now experiencing woes such as never before have afflicted the nations, and these woes have come with increasing force since the end of the first world war, in 1918.
As further evidence of his invisible presence in the spirit as King of the new world and also as evidence of the end of Satan’s uninterrupted rule, Jesus said: “There shall be . . . upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity; the sea [meaning the peoples alienated from God] and the waves [the radical, disturbing elements thereof made mad by the present conditions] roaring [causing much trouble] ; men’s hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth.”—Luke 21:25, 26.
Exactly those conditions now prevail upon the earth, as every observing person well knows. During all the time of the existing conditions aforementioned, evidencing Christ’s presence and the end of Satan’s uninterrupted rule, Jesus declares and commands to his faithful remnant of anointed followers: “And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end [the final end] come.”—Matt. 24:14.
It follows that those who love God and Christ must obey this commandment. In obedience thereto a little company of Christian people made up of men and women who are’known as “Jehovah’s witnesses” have been and are still continuing to go about the country preaching the good news of the kingdom of God. This preaching of the gospel must continue until the great threatening emergency comes to a elimax. When this preaching of the good news of the Kingdom is completed, and it shortly will be, according to all indications, what shall follow? The final end of Satan’s ruling organization, and that amidst the greatest trouble of all time: “For then shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be.”—Matt. 24: 21.
That great tribulation is the battle of Armageddon, which conflict is also called “the battle of that great day of God Almighty”. (Rev. 16:14-16) It is the battle of Almighty God because in it he will finally and for ever settle the question at issue as to who is supreme and whether God can carry out his announced purpose by his Theocratic Government under Christ Jesus or not. That great battle will result in the complete destruction of every trace of Satan’s supporters and organization, both invisible and visible. The demon rule of the world shall for ever end
Armageddon having ended with victory for Jehovah and his Theocracy, the righteous rule shall prevail everywhere in the universe, including our earth. Gradually the earth will be brought to a condition of Edenic paradise, because such is the promise of Almighty God, who made the earth to be inhabited by righteous men. Gradually the earth will be filled with righteous people by means of the survivors of Armageddon who now see the emergency ahead and who flee from the religious-totalitarian organization of the world and take refuge under God’s kingdom or Theocracy and trust in Him for salvation. Such “great multitude” of Armageddon survivors shall be favored with the privilege of carrying out the divine mandate to “multiply and fill the earth” with their offspring, born in righteousness and unto life under a perfect, righteous government.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
PIONEERING IN CUPAR, FIFE CO., SCOTLAND
“After sitting inside a barber's shop for a few minutes I spied the price list—lOd. for a haircut. I thought this a bit stiff, and was prepared to leave, but decided to sit still. A few minutes elapsed, and a polite ‘Good evening’ from a young girl who serves in the shop. On seeing my magazine bag on the seat she asked if I was finished for the day and what did I actually do. I briefly explained, producing Salvation and Theocracy. ‘Oh, I have that red book,’ she said, ‘but I will take the small one.’ I then proceeded to introduce the model-study work and arranged for a model study. Our conversation was heard by those in the shop (four), including the barber. The mention of ‘Jeho'vah’s witnesses’ resulted in some meaning glances going round. Seeing this I walked over to the barber, who was shaving a gent. I explained how we had been much misrepresented by the press, and told him of the Theocratic rule. He seemed impressed, and started asking questions. After a few explanations he admitted: ‘This Theocracy is all right!’ I made the bold suggestion that I had the lecture recording ‘Government and Peace’ (Parts 1-4) with me and if he cared I would play them for him right there. He agreed; so on went ‘Government and Peace’ in the barber’s shop. He even left his clients in order that he could follow it in the booklet. By this time he seemed quite excited. Others in the shop were drawn into the conversation, and, needless to say, none had a better government than The Theocracy. I was getting my hair cut by this time. The barber told the girl not to use the electric clippers, as he could not hear all. My hair cut and the model study arranged, I was about to leave, when they asked if I had had tea, and they offered a cup, which I gladly accepted. I was ushered into a little cubicle where the girl was also having tea; so I kept on witnessing to her. Just as we had finished our tea in rushed the barber: ‘Play these records to this man!’ and to the newcomer he said: ‘These are Jehovah’s witnesses, who have been greatly misrepresented. Just you listen to this Theocracy! It’s all right!’ On went ‘Government and Peace’ again. Of course, there were many questions and queer ideas, but I think I made things clear. The girl and the barber were arguing as to who should listen and who should attend to the customers All this ended in an attendance of eight, Salvation placed, a model study arranged, and three hours’ witnessing in a barber’s shop. I think this is the finest opportunity I have had of making known Jehovah’s King and kingdom.”
GROWING INTEREST IN THEOCRACY (MASS.)
“Here in our assignment it continues and was given quite an impetus when ‘Father’ Currie himself showed up three weeks ago at our little room where we hold a public Children study. Nineteen Catholics (many had attended mass that morning) were sitting with their books, and I as chairman was just starting the meeting, when the door opened and there stood ‘Father’ Currie, arrogant and bold. He would not remove his hat and looked the gathering over carefully. At his side stood one of the ‘principal of the flock’, a prominent Portuguese businessman, a sort of bellwether. I asked: ‘What is your business, sir!’ Answer: ‘I am looking to see if any of my Catholic people are
here.’ My reply was: ‘There are none here, sir; what you see are some of the “other sheep” class, and they belong to the Lord, and not to you or me.’ I realized that these ‘sheep’ must not be disturbed by any ‘dog”, and a ‘dumb’ one at that; so up I got and went to the door and outside. Currie refused to talk and went to his car with his companion, and I went back and quieted the ‘sheep’ and proceeded to our study. The next day I took along a fellow witness and went to the rectory and spent three-quarters of an hour in his study. I made it plain that he was entirely out of order, had violated our constitutional rights in attempting to intimidate those attending a peaceable assembly, that he lacked even common courtesy in failing to remove his hat, and that if anything even remotely resembling his act occurred again I would take it up with the attorney general’s office. His hands shook; he made feeble reply that he would tell his people what he wished. I heartily agreed that such was his privilege, but warned him that overt acts committed were quite another matter. I outlined the usual technique of the Roman Hierarchy during its 1500 years of existence and suggested that he flee from the devilish system before he died with it. I suggested that, since nearly all his parishioners had Children, he do so too. He has it now, as well as The Watchtower, Consolation, booklet, etc. The following week he was seen to spend much time interviewing the people, also the owner of our little hall (a Catholic). We also spent the week among these honest but perplexed Catholics.
“The reaction was good to see. Remarks like this were frequent: ‘What a nerve he had!’ The result was that our attendance nearly doubled the following Sunday: 33 in attendance. We also went to see Currie’s companion and followed the same procedure there. We found the man’s wife devoted to the Lord . . . This episode was the principal topic of conversation for some time among these good Portuguese people. Thereafter one of our back-calls got up her courage, and came to a meeting a week ago. During the following week the priest came to her house to give flioly communion’ to the elderly mother, who was blind. The priest was informed they would dispense with his services from that date forward. Amazed, he asked: ‘What are you reading!’ Children was brought out. He got one look, put on his hat, and out he went!”
GIVING REAL “BEAUTY FOR ASHES” (SEATTLE)
“This witness is a beauty operator and owns her own little shop. She has a radio there, and in the little room back of the shop she has a radio broadcaster. Whenever she is giving a permanent wave she transmits the recorded lectures, mostly ‘Comfort All That Mourn’. She keeps a file of- all her customers concerning their hair-do, so she just writes on each card what lecture she played for that customer and the literature she placed. She has a file of over six hundred names since last April. I might add that it has not hurt her business in the least. She has more customers than she can handle, and those that do not like the talks just do not come back. If a witness happens to be witnessing from house to house anywhere in the district of her shop, the ladies that answer the doors say: ‘Oh, I heard those talks at the beauty shop!’ ”
nt
THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE b TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street -	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
N. H. Knorr, President	W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of Hie to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of Ins creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God's law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief OfEcer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah's organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare Ins purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon Ills throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah's kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord's next great act is the destruction of Satan's organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid In such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public Instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but Invites careful and critical examination of its contents In the light of the Scriptures. It docs not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, tl 00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1 50; Great Britain. Australasia, and South Africa, Gs. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank DrafL Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittance, should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances trom countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn oihie, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British 34 Craven Terrace, London, W 2, England
Canadian____________.......40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian___________ 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African __________________Boston House. Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this Journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or ndrersity are unable to pay the subscription price may have rhe TVatch-toicer free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting It. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year Is required by the postal regulations.
X’oflce to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Chance of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label witbin one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. T., under the Act of March S, ISIS.
“WILLING VOLUNTEERS” TESTIMONY PERIOD
During the month of June all those willing volunteers who delight to do Jehovah's will and who hare made a covenant with the Lord will go forward in the proclamation of the Kingdom message The “Willing Volunteers” Testimony Period will be devoted to the distribution of the book Children and seven booklets on the contribution of 35e. All servants of the Lord going forward during this campaign will have a good supply of this literature on hand as they go from place to place, visiting the people of good-will, those who love righteousness. This literature will afford many the opportunity of getting a clearer knowledge of the truth, and they should be given this opportunity during the “Willing Volunteers” Testimony Period The usual field-service reports will be made to the company servant if the publisher is associated with a company; the pioneers, direct to the office, and those readers of The Watchtower who have as yet not been in the field-service work, namely, going from door to door with the Kingdom message, may inquire of the Watchtower the address of their nearest company. You will enjoy being associated with them.
“WATCHTOWER" STUDIES
Week of July 19- “Micah” (Part 11), U 1-18 inclusive, The Watchtower June 15, 1942.
Week of July 26: "Micah” (Part 11), 19-36 inclusive, The Watchtower June 15, 1942.
“ ‘CHILDREN’ STUDY QUESTIONS”
The Society has released a new booklet, entitled “ ‘Children’ Study Questions”, which will be a great aid to all publishers ot the Kingdom in the conducting of Children studies in the various homes throughout the country. You can get your copy now on contribution of 5c for publication of more of these Send remittances to 117 Adams Street, Brooklyn, New York This “Children’ Study Questions booklet will help individual readers tn their personal study m their own homes Get a copy now
“JEHOVAH’S SERVANTS DEFENDED”
The release of this valuable booklet wns a feature of the St Louis Assembly last summer. The Assembly received it with great appreciation and thankfulness. It has been received in like manner by thousands who are interested in, if not also participating in, the fight which Jehovah’s covenant people are putting up in the exercise of the God-given and Constitutionally guaranteed freedoms, to wit, of assembly and of publication and of open speech in the worship of Almighty God and in proclaiming the joyful news of his Theocratic Government. In this booklet you will find the expressed rulings of the highest courts of the United States in support of Jehovah’s witnesses and in defense of their rights and liberties in His service. The 32 pages of this important documentary matter are enclosed in a neat and strong cover. It is 5c a copy, mailed postage prepaid.
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH'S KINGDOM
No. LXIII	June 15, 1942	No 12
MICAH
PART 11
it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people, uhich shall be left, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and f10m Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea.”—Isa. 11:11.
T EHOVAH is interested in a remnant of people I and promises to do great things for them, while J the world looks on. Can you afford to be uninterested just because a remnant is small and seemingly of no importance? Those who are wise and who measure the real value of things do well to consider with lively interest this remnant. Not that those of the remnant are important in themselves, but it is because they are Jehovah’s “remnant of his people” and he deals with them differently from his manner of action toward all the nations and peoples of the world. By the consideration of these things now in the days of great combat between “the king of the north” and "the king of the south” over world domination, and by not letting the turn of such combat take your attention off the all-important things, great truths are learned which mean peace, comfort, joy, life and security, if followed. The term “remnant” points to something greater of which the remnant are but a part remaining visible on the earth. What is significant is that the remnant are part of or are in line for Almighty God’s organization Zion. Zion occupies the place as capital over all God’s universal organization, and which capital is his Righteous Government called “The Theocracy’’. It is in the great “day of Jehovah”, beginning in A.D. 1914, that Hi:- Theocratic Government under its King Christ Jesus comes to the fore and takes power. From then on all other governments must wane in power and finally disappear. At the same time, however, Jehovah does great things for the remnant on earth who represent that Theocracy. Hence it is of exceeding value and importance to watch the movements of the remnant under Jehovah’s direction. Why? Because such are visible proofs to the eye that the heavenly Theocracy has come into power and rules. All must submit themselves and render allegiance to it, if they would live for ever.
2 From the fateful day in Eden when perfect man willfully rebelled by disobedience against the Theocratic rule of his Maker, Satan the Devil has known
of Jehovah’s purpose then expressed to set up The Theocratic Government in the hands of The Seed, His Christ, whom Jehovah would bring forth from his “woman” or universal organization. (Gen. 3:15) Satan failed in his murderous efforts to destroy that Seed and also those followers in Christ's footsteps who have already proved their faithfulness unto death and who are now associated with him in the heavenly glory of The Theocracy. The great Theo-crat Jehovah has designated 144,000 as the full number to be united with the King Christ Jesus in The Theocracy in the heavens. The full number thereof have not yet been transferred from earth to the invisible heavens. A remnant are yet on earth to visibly represent and make known The Theocracy and its immediate acts which now affect the life and destiny of all individuals, organizations and nations of the world.
’For that reason Satan the Devil hates the remnant even as he hates their Leader and King Christ Jesus. The “remnant” are the Israelites after the spirit. They are made up of those who have consecrated their lives to Jehovah God through faith in the Savior Christ Jesus, and whom God has justified to life and begotten of his spirit to be his sons. Out of all those in “Christendom” professing covenant relationship with God these continue to keep their covenant with him and to be faithful to His kingdom. Satan tried to destroy and prevent the organizing of the remnant for the service on earth of The Theocracy. At the beginning of that Government in this “day of Jehovah” Satan stirred up the world war (1914-1918) waged by “the king of the north” on the reactionary side and “the king of the south” on the progressive, democratic side. Using such conflict as an excuse, Satan by his religious agents on earth stopped the Kingdom proclamation by God’s consecrated ones and caused them to be scattered, disorganized, and restrained in all lands of “Christendom”. This included the nations composing “the king of the north” (pictured bv ancient Assyria north of
i?»
180
SEe WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Palestine) and those nations composing “the king of the south-’ (pictured by Egypt, which land is now allied with Britain and America).
‘ The great enemy of Tun Theocracy has been foiled in his efforts to prevent the unifying and organizing of Jehovah’s remnant for Theocratic service. Again the Almighty God has made good his word and proved the truth thereof by bringing to pass Micah’s prophecy in our time, to wit: “In that day [the day of Jehovah, beginning 1914] also he [the remnant] shall come even to thee from Assyria, and from the fortified cities, and from the fortress even to the river, and from sea to sea. and from mountain to mountain.” (Mic. 7: 12) It is the remnant that comes from all these scattered places from and after A.D. 1918, when the armistice was declared between “the king of the north” and “the king of the south”. Their coming means that Zion, God’s capital organization, has been built up, for it is unto Zion that the remnant comes for service. “For Jehovah hath, built up Zion ; he hath appeared in his glory. He hath regarded the prayer of the destitute [remnant], and hath not despised their prayer. This shall be written for the generation to come; and a people which shall be created shall praise Jehovah.” (Ps. 102: 1G-18, Am. Rev. Ver.) “And the ransomed [remnant] of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs, and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall (lee away.” (Isa. 35:10) The nations making up the "king of the north” combine had part in the scattering of those making up the remnant; but the Lord God has delivered them from the power of that “king”, the religious part of which combine has its headquarters at Vatican City, Italy.
5 It is no new thing that is seen being carried on today by “the king of the north”, to wit, the transfer of whole populations of states or provinces away to distant and separated parts in order to have the exclusive use and control of the territory of such states or provinces. Assyria and its successor in power, Babylon, did that very thing six centuries before Christ. They desolated the land of Israel and transplanted the Israelite inhabitants afar off to the heathen lands of the conquerors to be the slaves of the “master race”. That ancient world power of Assyria, and thereafter Babylon, was the instrument of the Devil. His purpose in removing the Israelites far off from their own borders and dispersing them was to wipe out the typical Theocracy over the Jews and to prevent their ever reorganizing again. Thereby the Devil established himself as “the god of this world”. He boasted that he had proved his power in the great issue between himself and Jehovah God, of universal domination. The Devil received a setback when Jehovah overturned Babylon and brought back
the remnant of faithful Jews to his Holy Land and rebuilt the temple and also the city of Jerusalem and surrounded her with strong walls of protection. Then that remnant, as a pattern of the remnant of spiritual Israelites today, sang: “Jehovah hath done great things for us, whereof we are glad.” (Ps. 126: 3, -l»i Rev. Ver.) Today in the sight of this modern world Jehovah has repeated this performance of supremacy over the enemy Satan and his world organization. Since 1918 Jehovah has brought forth the remnant to be a “people for his name”.—Acts 15: 14.
’ “And from the fortified cities” the remnant comes also. From “the cities of Mazor”, reads the Jewish Leeser translation. Since the name “Egypt”, or Miznaim (Hebrew), is derived from “Mazor", the Rotherham and American Revised Version renderings read: “And from the cities of Egypt.” Tins agrees with the fact that in 1918 the lands of "the king of the south”, which includes the United States, took the final action in scattering Jehovah’s consecrated servants who were proclaiming the coming of His kingdom under Christ. The expression "fortified cities” marks that as a time of the world being armed for war, followed by merely an armistice or temporary laying down of arms, as is proved by the physical facts of 1942. Jehovah again demonstrated his power over the “god of this world” and stopped the world conflict in 1918. He removed all bariiers to the regathering of his devoted ones and the organizing of his remnant. He sent them forth as his witnesses before the tribulation breaks again at Armageddon and the final end of the nations comes. This ‘shortening of the days of tribulation for the sake of His elect’ is meant in the following prophecy (Isa. 11: 15,16): “And the Lord shall utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea [as a barrier] ; and with his mighty wind shall he shake his hand over the river, and shall smite it in the seven streams, and make men go over dry-shod. And there shall be an highway for the remnant of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria; like as it was to Israel in the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt.”
T “And from the fortress even to the river.” “And from Mazor” (Leeser); “yea. from Egypt” (Rotherham) ; “and from Egypt even to the River” (Jni. Rev. Per.). The river here meant is the river Euphrates, upon which both Assyria and Babylon were situated. It was mentioned in God’s promise to Abraham, to wit: “In the same day, the Lord made a covenant with Abram, saying, Unto thy seed have I given this land, from the river of Egypt [Miznaim] unto the great river, the river Euphrates.” (Gen. 15: 18) That great river was used as a symbol of the “peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues” upon which the great “whore”, Babylon, Satan’s organization, sits in control and is borne up by such peoples
June 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
181
alienated from Jehovah God. (Rev. 17 :1,15) Beside that great symbolical river have been held God’s consecrated spirit-begotten ones whom he frees from the oppressive power of the “great whore” sitting on those waters. Then He calls them to be his messagebearers to the nations. This was pictured in the symbols of Revelation when it was commanded to “the sixth angel which had the trumpet, Loose the four angels [messengers] which are bound in the great river Euphrates. And the four angels were loosed”. (Rev. 9:14,15) At the same time the corresponding prophecy began to be fulfilled: “And the sixth angel poured out his vial upon the great river Euphrates; and the water thereof was dried up, that the wav of the kings of the east might be prepared.” —Rev.' 16: 12.
5 The drying up of Euphrates’ water is accomplished by turning the people having good-will toward God away from flowing to the support of Babylon and her religious organization. That the “four angels” symbolizing the remnant had been loosed from Babylon's power and were now messengers of his Kingdom is marked by the fact: In 1927, in Toronto, Canada, an international assembly of thousands of Christians, Jehovah’s witnesses, from many countries was held. On the closing day thereof the speech “Freedom for the Peoples” was delivered to the visible audience and also to millions in an invisible audience by a network of 53 radio stations, the greatest radio chain till then. Thereafter that message of freedom was printed and published by the millions of copies, and was instrumental in freeing many and turning them aside from Babylon and her religion and unto the truth, which truth “shall make you free”. Those freed were not only of the remnant class, but also of persons of good-will who devote themselves to God and his Kingdom and become the Lord’s “other sheep”. Whence come they?
8 “From sea to sea, and from mountain to mountain,” says Micah. This means the seven seas, together with their multitude of isles. (Ps. 97:1; Isa. 42:12; 11:11; 51:5) Jehovah’s work by his remnant of anointed witnesses has had as wide a sweep as that. Now for some time the people of good-will have been leaving the “sea” of peoples which are alienated from God and subject to Satan’s unclean organization: and the numbers coming to Zion are increasing. This has come under the notice of both “the king of the north” and “the king of the south”. Daniel 11:45 foretells the desperate action shortly that all nations going totalitarian will take to hold persons of good-will away from The Theocracy, symbolized by Mount Zion: “And he [the totalitarian combine] shall plant the tabernacles of his palace between the seas [and] the glorious holy mountain; yet he shall come to his end, and none
shall help him.” (Young's translation) Jehovah also gathers his “sheep” from the mountains which are the backbone of Satan's visible earthly organization. To those mountains the people are taught by the clergy to look for protection and safety and a stable world. By Jehovah's Theocratic message widely proclaimed by his remnant he opens the eyes of his “other sheep” to see the truth: “Truly in vain is salvation hoped for from the hills, and from the multitude of mountains ; truly in the Lord [Jehovah] our God is the salvation of Israel.” (Jer. 3: 23) These “other sheep” have been scattered by the false shepherds over all these “mountains” or ruling powers of the world. (Ezek. 34:6) After those who are yet scattered the Lord God sends his witnesses as hunters to do a thorough searching work, to locate the strayed and misled ones that desire to come into the fold under the protection of his Theocracy, Mount Zion, and its King, Christ Jesus, the Good Shepherd. “And after will I send for many hunters, and they shall hunt them from every mountain, and from every hill, and out of the holes of the rocks. For mine eyes are upon all their ways.”—Jer. 16: 16,17.
10 In connection with the gathering of the sheep the Lord says: “Notwithstanding, the land shall be desolate because of them that dwell therein, for the fruit of their doings.” (Mic. 7 : 13) Whose land? If it refers to the earthly condition of Jehovah's servants during the affliction of 1914-1918, then the marginal reading of the text is the correct one: “After that it hath been desolate” ; that is, after that the remnant shall come to Zion from Assyria, Egypt, etc. Their desolate condition due to the enemy action is refei red to at verse 9 of the chapter, where the remnant says : “I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause and execute judgment for me.” (See the preceding article, Part 10, of this series.) The indignation of the Lord against the remnant passed by 1922. and. though now sorely persecuted by the enemy, never again shall the remnant be desolated by them.
” Other translations make the word “land” to applj to “the earth” outside of the condition occupied by the remnant and their companions which is “the holy land". Since this is so, it concerns and should interest all peoples. “Yet shall the land be desolate” (din. Kev. Ver.); “While the land (of the nations) shall be made desolate because of its inhabitants, for the fruit of their doings.” (Leeser) This includes particularly “Christendom”, and shows the sharp difference between her condition and that of the remnant. The remnant bear the fruits God puts into their hands, the fruits of the Kingdom, the life-giving truths thereof, and which the remnant have borne to the dying peoples by word of mouth, by printed page, by recorded speech and sound equipment, by radio,
182
5THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
and by all means of publication and distribution. The remnant's condition has been and is a fruitful one, whereby Jehovah God and his Theocratic Government have been glorified. (John 15:8) “Christendom’s” fruit is anti-Theocracy and has developed into the political-religious counterfeit for God’s Kingdom, to wit, “the abomination of desolation.” “Their doings” are all for the world domination by “both these kings” aforenamed, and are in opposition to The Theocracy, and they hatefully persecute those witnessing to that Righteous Government. “Christendom,” contrary to her claim to be God’s kingdom, has not brought forth fruit unto God, but is like the deceitful fig tree which Christ Jesus cursed and which thereafter withered in death. “Be not deceived: God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.” (Gal. 6: 7) “Christendom” claiming to be God's, it is inescapable that her reward should be according to her works judged according to whether her works are for or against His Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. (Rev. 22:12) To her Jehovah says: “I will punish you according to the fruit of your doings.” (Jer. 21:14) “Say ye to the righteous, that it shall be well with him: for they shall eat the fruit of their doings. Woe unto the wicked! it shall be ill with him: for the reward of his hands shall be given him.” (Isa. 3:10,11) “Christendom" is desolate, without fruit unto God now. The Kingdom interests have been taken away from her, and at Armageddon she shall be completely desolated, destroyed.
theocratic rule
12 The prophecy then voices the prayer of the remnant that God’s rule be put into operation among his organized people on earth. His rule is not “popular rule”, but is Theocratic rule. “Feed thy people [(Rotherham) Shepherd thou thy people] with thy rod, the flock of thine heritage, which dwell solitarily in the wood, in the midst of Carmel: let them feed in Bashan and Gilead, as in the days of old." (Mic. 7: 14) This request for feeding and shepherding is addressed not to the religious clergy, who speak of their congregations as “my flock”, nor to “elective elders” over companies of the consecrated, but to the Great Shepherd, Jehovah. (Ps. 23:1) “Know ye that the Lord he is God: it is he that hath made us, and not we ourselves: we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.” (Ps. 100:3) Jehovah’s “rod” is his Mighty One, Christ Jesus, “the Chief Shepherd.” He has now come to the temple and judges first “the house of God” and thereafter all the nations, the people of which he divides as “sheep” and “goats”. (1 Pet. 5: 4; 4: 17 ; Matt. 25: 31, 32) His “rod of iron” is reserved for the anti-Theocratic nations, to dash them to shivers; but as for the remnant of Jehovah’s “little flock” it is written: “Thy rod and thy staff
they comfort me.” (Ps. 23:4) Concerning Jehovah's “Rod”, the One who majestically represents God’s authority, it is prophesied: “He shall stand, and shall feed his flock in the strength of Jehovah, in the majesty of the name of Jehovah his God: and they shall abide; for now shall he be great unto the ends of the earth.”—Mic. 5: 4, Am. Rev. Ver.
15 Hence it is positively assured the remnant: “For the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous; lest the righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity.” (Ps. 125: 3) The ‘“king of the north's” religious crow’d wmuld like to get in by the use of “fifth column” dupes, but the angels watch the entrances to God’s spiritual temple and Holy City, (Ezek. 40: 9,10; Rev. 21:12, 27) The wicked may try the rod of regimentation, but Jehovah's covenant people who have given him their word will not modify the routine of their lives and change from God’s work and way and conform to the totalitarian way. They continue to do the one thing stated in the Lord's commission to them, to preach this Kingdom gospel The wicked may persecute, but that docs not affect the internal order of the organization, nor break up the unity of spirit and purpose and action, nor stop the submission and obedience to “the Higher Powers", God and Christ Jesus. Only the Lord's “rod” stays placed. The “elective elders” have been cleared out from “being lords over God’s heritage”. (1 Pet. 5:3) The faithful remnant and companions put forth theii hand to no iniquity, but only to God's prescribed v ork.
14 The firstfruits belong unto God. His “little flock” are a “kind of firstfruits of his creatures”. “These were redeemed from among men, being the firstfruits unto God and to the Lamb.” (Jas. 1:18; Rev. 14:4) This flock is therefore God’s “heritage". It is a serious thing, therefore, for Satan’s organization Babylon to try to destroy Jehovah's heritage and prevent Him from having it for his use and purpose. It is his Theocracy under Christ Jesus Concerning Babylon of the land of the Chaldeans Jehovah says: “Chaldea shall be a spoil: all that spoil her shall be satisfied, saith the Lord. Because ye wrere glad, because ye rejoiced, O ye destroxers of mine heritage.” (Jer. 50:10-13) Let the persecutor nations be advised that Jehovah “will also gather all nations, and will bring them down into the valley of Jehoshaphat, and will plead with them there for my people and for my heritage Israel, whom thex have scattered among the nations, and parted my land”. (Joel 3:1, 2) “They break in pieces thy people, O Lord, and afflict thine heritage.”—Ps. 94: 5.
111 The prophet describes the singular condition of Jehovah’s covenant people during the affliction of 1918: “the flock of thine heritage, which dwell solitarily in the wood, in the midst of Carmel.” “Carmel' means a planted “field (garden, orchard, vineyard
June 15,1942	SEe WATCHTOWER.
or park)” and is elsewhere translated “fruitful (plentiful) field”. Hence Rotherham renders the text: “Dwell thou alone a jungle in the midst of a fruitful field.” (See Isaiah 37:24, margin.) Round about the then unregulated, disorganized condition of God’s consecrated ones the Devil’s organization seemed to bloom and be fruitful with success and prosperity. But such is merely the forerunner of its destruction: “When the wicked spring as the grass, and when all the v orkers of iniquity do flourish, it is that they shall be destroyed for ever.” (Ps. 92: 7) Now, opposite to that former condition under God’s indignation, the prophetic prayer says: “Let them feed in Bashan and Gilead, as in the days of old.”
16 Bashan and Gilead lay east of the Jordan and were occupied by the tribes of Reuben and Gad, and the half-tribe of Manasseh, because being excellent sections of the Holy Land for flocks and cattle. (Deut. 3:12,13; Num. 32:1,1G, 33) The prophet speaks of Jehovah’s remnant as a “flock”, “the flock of thine heritage,” and here therefore he fittingly mentions only the sheep-raising regions. But those two regions, Bashan and Gilead, being part of the Holy Land, stand representatively for the whole of it. For God's flock to be freed from Babylon and placed at liberty m God’s organization “as in the days of old” means as in the days when Christ Jesus and the apostles were still alive and active on earth. Then they freely and boldly preached throughout the land, “The kingdom of heaven is at hand!” Then the Good Shepherd personally led and fed the “little flock". However, the prophecy may also mean as during the forty-year period prior to 1918 known as the “Elijah period” because foreshadowed by the prophet Elijah's activities against the priests and prophets of religion. During that “Elijah period” Jehovah’s Messenger was preparing the way for the Lord's coming to the temple for judgment. (Mal. 3:1-4) Letting the restored remnant feed thus means a great spread of the Kingdom witness work “in all the world for a witness unto all nations”. (Matt. 24:14) For years the Lord's visible instrument for directing the witness, to wit, the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, had forty branches in key cities throughout the world. That was before Catholic dictator Hitler’s blitzkrieg got under way destroying democratic rights and liberties and fighting The Theocracy. But Hitler and his Axis partners of the totalitarianreligious “abomination of desolation” have not been able to prevent portions from the Great Shepherd’s table from going to his faithful sheep even in the Axis-dominated lands, and they continue to give the witness to the Kingdom according to the way that the Lord has arranged. Consequently there also the Lord's “other sheep” continue to be gathered.
” The Lord responds to the prayer of the remnant: “According to the days of thy coming [forth] out of the land of Egypt will I shew unto him marvellous things.” (Mic. 7 :15) This statement of Jehovah himself shows that the ten plagues upon Egypt, the Jews’ passover there, their deliverance from that house of bondage, the crossing of the Red sea and the engulfing of the pursuing Egyptian chariots and armies were typical, that is, prophetic patterns of far grander things to come to pass in this “day of Jehovah”, when He makes a name for himself and vindicates it. The prophet Moses back there foreshadowed Jehovah's great Prophet, Christ Jesus, to whom the covenant people of God must now hearken or else be destroyed. That Greater Moses has come to the temple, and the judgment is on. The choice is set before creatures, Obey, and live; fail or refuse to obey, and die!—Deut. 18:15-18; Acts 3:22,23; 7 : 37 ; Deut. 30:15,19.
18 By the hand of that Greater Moses Jehovah commands and leads his people forth into liberty from antitypicai Egypt, Satan's world. The preliminary nine plagues upon Egypt correspond with the judgment message from the Lord God expo-ing Satan's world and its official elements, and that “strange work” by Jehovah through the Greater Moses and the remnant of his brethren on earth has been going on since A.D. 1922. Then also the plagues foretold in Revelation 16 began to be poured out particularly on “Christendom”. The tenth plague, the destruction of the firstborn of antitypical Egypt, is a visible part of Jehovah’s "strange act”. It will strike them at the battle of Armageddon. The Lord God used his remnant under Christ and their companions to perforin a part in the “strange work” of pouring out the preliminary plagues, and thereafter in His due time he has opened their eyes to understand the significance and how they had a part in the fulfilling of prophecy. Thereby he has shown unto them "marvellous things”. By his revealed prophecies they see by faith his marvellous “strange act’ at Armageddon to the eternal glory and vindication of his name. Then they shall sing as did the Israelites standing delivered on the other side of the Red sea. They shall see the salvation of Jehovah.-— Ex. 15:1-21; 14:13.
18 “The nations shall see and be confounded [(.4»i, Rev. Ver.) The nations shall see and be ashamed] at all their might: they shall lay their hand upon their mouth, their ears shall be deaf.” (Mic. 7 : 1G) The might and valor of Jehovah’s remnant in his “strange work”, which is destructive to religion, has been seen by all the nations, particularly “Christendom”, and they have been put to shame by such zeal for Jehovah. The religionists do not have the zeal that is peculiar to the Lord’s house and they are forced to admit that
184
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
fact. (Ps. 69: 9) Concerning Jehovah’s anointed remnant and their companions carrying on the Kingdom proclamation under stiff opposition and demoniacal persecution the prophecy said aforetime: '‘But the people that do know their God shall be strong, and do exploits.” (Dan. 11: 32) Their strength and might are in Jehovah and his King, and they are valorous and courageous because of the backing of those "Higher Powers”. During the enforced restraint upon Jehovah's covenant people in 1918 the religionists of all the nations opened their mouths wide in selfcredit for the seeming triumph, and in bragging, and in praise to the "god of this world”. Jehovah’s delivery of his people and thereafter using them to declare his name and kingdom throughout all nations where they had been persecuted and suppressed completely surprised the cocky religionists. It silenced their boasts and self-congratulations. They were terrified. (Rev. 11:10-12) "If thou hast done foolishly in lifting up thyself, or if thou hast thought evil, lay thine hand upon thy mouth.” (Prov. 30:32) "The righteous shall see it, and rejoice: and all iniquity shall stop her mouth." (Ps. 107:42) Let this not be understood to mean, however, that the enemy have ceased to reproach Jehovah God and to misrepresent, slander, falsely accuse, and taunt his faithful witnesses and their companions in service. In wild desperation the enemy indulge in that more viciously than ever. The Lord shall stop their wagging tongues in due time. At Armageddon “their tongue shall consume away in their mouth".—Zech. 14:12.
20 "Their ears shall be silent.” (Rotheiham) Their ears itched to hear self-praise and good reports of progress in keeping Jehovah’s people under and out of action; but have now been deafened by the turn of events due to the Lord. Much as their ears have been tickled by hearing self-praise and flattery over past successes against the publishers of Jehovah's kingdom by Christ Jesus, now their ears are closed to such because the witness work moves on in spite of mobs, mischief framed by law, violent Catholic Action, and other forms of persecution and opposition. Their honors with the world count for nothing as long as Jehovah’s witnesses are loose and active; as the newly-honored Amalekite Haman said of Jehovah's faithful witness Mordecai: “Yet all this availeth me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting’at the king’s gate." (Esther 5:13) The ears of the modern Haman class and their allies have already been deafened by the success of Jehovah's "strange work”, but His "strange act” against them is just ahead, at Armageddon. Then the booming of God’s supernatural artillery, the pealing of his wartrumpets, the victory shouts of the hosts of heaven as they sweep forward conquering all opposers, will deafen the enemies’ ears. In confusion they shall be
deaf to commands from their own superior officers and employers. At the terrific demonstration of Jehovah’s power used in war action the religious, commercial and political elements and their supporters will be both deaf and dumb with amazement, uncanny fear, shame and bitter disappointment at their final defeat. Compare Habakkuk 3:9-16.
11 “They shall lick the dust like a serpent, they shall move out of their holes like worms of the earth: they shall be afraid of the Lord our God, ami shall fear because of thee.” (Mic. 7 :17) They are the “seed” of the Serpent that strike behind the back and at the heel. There is no food in dust, but it repie«ent> the low, dry, worthless things, without life. Licking the dust means their debasement to the level of the devilish enemy of God sentenced by Jehovah God to destruction under the heel of The Seed of God s “woman”. (Gen. 3:14,15) “Dust shall be the serpent < meat.” (Isa. 65:25) "They that dwell in the wildei-ness shall bow before him [The Seed, Jehovah’s Vindicator-King]; and his enemies shall lick the dust.” (Ps. 72: 9) Concerning their groveling humiliation Jehovah taunts those who belittle him and reproach his name: “Hide thee in the dust, for fear of the Lord [Jehovah], and for the glory of hm majesty. The lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed dov n : and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that dav. Isa. 2:10,11.	'
22 In disdain of the Lord's provision for safe-} at Armageddon the religionists and fellow rulei< of “Christendom” with much self-conceited reliance on their wisdom and ability to defend themselves >ay “AVe have made a covenant with death, ami with hell are we at agreement; when the overfiovnig scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us. for we have made lies our refuge, and undei falsehood have we hid ourselves.” (Isa. 28 :14.15) Jehovah is he that “sitteth upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers" (Isa. 40 221, and of the scornful enemy he says - "Like crawling things of the earth they shall come trembling out of their close places [their fastnesses].” (.lai Re;. Ver.; Rotherham) Before their destruction they shall be openly disgraced before the eyes of righteous, God-fearing creatures in heaven and earth and shall drag their bellies on the ground like vermin Xo more such bold, stiff fronts and hurling defiance at Jehovah and his law in order to make an awe-inspiring impression upon creatures who are ensnared by the fear and reverence of men. Instead, now, they will exhibit cowardly, craven fear because of being proved liars, hypocrites, breakers of God’s law, now called to account before the Supreme Court of the universe. Their refuge of lies and their hiding-place of falsehood, their claimed agreement with hell (pit or
June 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
185
grave), and all their hidden strongholds in Satan’s visible earthly organization they will find to be no effective place in which to hole up from execution. They shall have to squirm and wriggle out therefrom and to grovel and wipe up the dust with their gawdy, jewel-bedecked religious vestments and official robes, and their bellies like King Eglon's scraping the ground. With the terror of exposed crooks they will look upon the manifestation of Jehovah’s power and glory in battle fire against them. (Isa. 28:17-21) Their hoar heads shall not go down to Gehenna in peace. Conscious of their present power and dignity they have treated Jehovah’s servants with as little consideration as to worms, but now to his witnesses whose integrity is not broken by such reproach Jehovah says: “Fear not, thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel; I will help thee, saith the Loud, and thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel.” (Isa. 41:14) These face Armageddon with joyful expectation.
53	When the prophecy says of the foes of The Theocracy, "They shall come with fear [in dread] unto Jehovah our God” (.4m. Rev. Ver.; Leeser), it does not mean their repentance. It is impossible to convert these willing opposers and their hangers-on that they might be spared and preserved from execution at the great Battle. Their ‘ fear” then is not the beginning of wisdom and of life-giving knowledge for them. It is their dread due to being at last brought to know that Jehovah is God Almighty and that it is He whom they fought and at whose hand they must now die and perish like beasts. Their fear is what Jehovah by his demonstration, his "strange act”, compels them to manifest. He breaks their stubborn pride and disdain, their stiff, unbending backs, and then lets his faithful servants put their feet upon the necks of these as they bite the bitter dust in death. They will be forced to see the vindication of Jehovah’s name and the proof of his supremacy and universal domination, and be compelled to admit such before their destruction. “As I live, saith the Lord, every knee shall bow to me. and every tongue shall confess to God.” (Rom 14:11) "I have sworn by myself, the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, That unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear.” (Isa. 45: 23) Those doing so unwillingly shall perish. Longing for such vindication of Jehovah's name and word, the lovers of The Theocracy pray: "Make thy name known to thine adversaries, that the nations may tremble at thy presence!”— Isa. 64:2.
CONSIDER
24	Samuel was one of the faithful prophets of old who testified concerning the establishment of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government. His return to life to
be one of the “princes” in the “new earth” shall shortly be brought to pass by God's power. At a critical time Samuel stood firm for The Theocracy and exhorted the covenant people of God to a course of faithfulness and holding fast their integrity toward Jehovah. Said he: “Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth with all your heart: for consider how great things he hath done for you.” (1 Sam. 12:24) At this late date and so near the final end Jehovah's anointed remnant and their companions should carefully consider, and all other interested persons of good-will should consider, what great things the Lord God has done for those who have taken their stand on the side of his kingdom and held fast thereto with integrity and fulfilled their covenant obligations to him. Consider especially what great things he has done since 1925, when the) discerned Jehovah's purpose to make a name for himself and they determined thenceforth to honor Jehovah’s name and to declare it through all the earth. Since then, how Jehovah has unfolded to their wondering gaze the prophecies "written aforetime” showing just how he will make this everlasting name for himself and vindicate it!—Isa. 63:12: 1 Chron. 17 : 20. 21.
25	All such great things thus far Jehovah has done to his faithful remnant and his "other sheep ’ for his name’s sake, to the honor of which name they are devoted. The issue is universal domination, to be established in vindication of God’s name. That is proved by Micah, who represents Jehovah’s witnesses and who says: “AVho is a God like unto thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and passeth by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retaineth not his anger for ever, because he delighteth in mercy.” (Mic. 7:18) This expresses the heart attitude of Jehovah’s remnant of spiritual Israel today with the history of his dealings with them since the setting up of his Theocracy in 1914 to be considered and its meaning to be studied. Satan, the "god of this world”, is enraged at the established Theocracy. He is out to effect the destruction of even his own demon crowd and all his devotees on earth when he himself goes down at Armageddon. “Rule or ruin,” is his merciless purpose. He shows no mercy to any, but brings great woes upon the peoples of earth to make them all curse God and turn away from his place of refuge and thereby lose all divine protection during the “battle of that great day of God Almighty”. To the direct contrary, Jehovah in his mercy to the remnant of his elect ones shortened the tribulation in 1918. He did this that these might be recovered from their iniquity of lip and the uncleanness of the fear of men and might serve him anew as his witnesses and thereby receive salvation from God. Proving God’s mercy Christ Jesus said: “For then shall be great tribula
186
SEe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
tion [beginning upon Satan’s organization with the ‘war in heaven’ and his being cast out], such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be. And except those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved: but for the elect’s sake those days shall be shortened.”— Matt. 24:21.22.
26	The Devil having been cast out and down to the earth, Christ Jesus did not press the “war in heaven” further to the immediate destruction then of Satan and all his organization, demon and human, but has permitted him to remain. At Armageddon, and at the signal from the great Commander-in-Chief Jehovah, he will renew the battle and bring the final end of the tribulation upon all the enemy crowd visible and invisible. During this shortening of the days in the middle of the tribulation period Jehovah sends forth his remnant, whose iniquity he has pardoned. These, having received such great mercy, show mercy to others in danger of destruction. They publish to all having hearing ears Jehovah’s kingdom message of salvation, warning the ones in danger to flee from religion and to seek refuge under His Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus. “Forasmuch as there is none like unto thee, 0 Lord: thou art great, and thy name is great in might. Who would not fear thee. 0 King of nations [that is, the “holy nation’ and the nations composed of the ‘great multitude’]?”—Jer. 10:6,7.
27	All the physical facts since 1918 considered, it is manifest that “Christendom’’ has committed and continues to commit unpardonable sin against Jehovah and his Theocracy. On the other hand, He has pardoned the iniquity of his repentant servants and passed over the transgression of the “remnant of his heritage’’, reinstating them in his service, anointing them, equipping them with his message of salvation and of vengeance, calling them by the “new name”, “Jehovah’s witnesses,” and then sending them forth as such to the performance of his “strange work” against religion. Concerning their restoration from Babylon to the Holy Land of his organization and service Jehovah said aforetime: “And I will bring Israel again to his habitation, and he shall feed on Carmel and Bashan, and his soul shall be satisfied upon mount Ephraim and Gilead. In those days, and in that time, saith the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found: for I will pardon them whom I reserve [the godly remnant of spiritual Israelites].” (Jer. 50:18-20) This pardon is according to the terms of Jehovah’s new covenant, which he inaugurated toward his “people for his name” in 1918: “Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah; . . . for I
will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more.” (Jer. 31:31-34) “And so all Israel [including the remnant] shall be saved: as it is written, There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness [religion] from Jacob [surnamed Israel] : for this is my covenant unto them, when I shall take away their sins.” (Rom. 11:26,27) The rule Jehovah announces in this day of judgment at the temple is: “But if the wicked will turn from all his sins that he hath committed, . . . all his transgressions that he hath committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him: in his righteousness that he hath done he shall live.”—Ezek. 18: 21-2S.
28	What if Jehovah had retained his anger and displeasure against his consecrated ones who yielded to the enemy organization in 1918 to the neglect of the work God assigned them? Had he retained his anger till Armageddon those consecrated ones in the flesh would not have been saved, but destroyed. Concerning the remnant who turned to him confessing their failure and offering themselves as willing volunteers for his work yet to be done on earth, “he hath not held fast perpetually his anger.” (Rotheikam) As to the bold and public service to Jehovah’s name that followed, the Lord said concerning the restored remnant : “And in that day thou shalt say, 0 Lord, I will praise thee: though thou wast angry with me. thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortedst me.” (Isa. 12:1) This the Supreme Judge has done “because he delighteth in mercy”, that is, toward those repentant and with purified hearts. “For One who delighteth in lovingkindness is he!” (Rother-Jtani) The remnant, and now also their beloved companions, can of actual experience say: “The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy. He will not always chide; neither will he keep his anger [at his servants under discipline] for ever. He hath not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities. For as the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him.” (Ps. 103:8-11) “With the merciful [toward the spiritually hungry people of good-will] thou wilt shew thyself merciful.”— Pss. 18:25; 103:17,18.
29	The creature is not important, but all such mercy Jehovah displays for his own name’s sake. His name has long been reproached by the Devil, who charges that Jehovah cannot put a man on earth who will hold fast his blamelessness and faultlessness toward God under assault and test by the Devil. By such the adversary seeks to cause the fall of Jehovah’s servants and thus give cause and occasion for all God’s enemies to reproach God and doubt his supreme power. (Ezek. 36: 21-24) It is a mercy to his faithful servants for Jehovah to destroy the wicked. “Thou, therefore, O Lord God of hosts, the God of Israel,
June 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
1S7
awake to visit all the heathen [the nations forgetting God] : be not merciful to any wicked transgressors.” ‘‘And of thy mercy cut off mine enemies, and destroy all them that afflict my soul: for I am thy servant.” (Pss. 59:5; 143:12) Jehovah is merciful to those who are determined not to turn again to foolishness of this world but to be faithful to the end. Such prayed in 1918: “AVilt thou not revive us again, that thy people may rejoice in thee? Shew us thy mercy, 0 Lord, and grant us thy salvation. I will hear what God the Lord will speak: for he will speak peace [of forgiveness] unto his people, and to his saints: but let them not turn again to folly.”—Ps. 85:6-8.
30	The prophetic words have been brought to pass upon the faithful consecrated ones from and after 1918: “He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us; he will subdue our iniquities: and thou wilt cast all their sins into the depths of the sea.” (Mic. 7: 19) To “turn again” means repetition or renewal; hence the text is also rendered: “He will again have compassion upon us” (Rotherham); “he will again have mercy on us” (Leeser). “He will tread our iniquities under foot.” (dm. Ret. Ver.) In his compassion Jehovah again did as in the time of old toward the remnant of natural Israel, and this time he delivered the spiritual remnant from Babylon. Their iniquities he trod under foot as though enemies. Such he did by the purging power of the truth. “By mercy and truth iniquity is purged: and by the fear of the Lord [and not of creatures] men depart from evil.” (Prov. 16:6) Upon those approved at the temple judgment Jehovah poured out a “double portion” of Elijah’s spirit, which was as a purifying ‘ live coal”, ‘taken by the angel with the tongs from off the altar.’ (Isa. 6: 6, 7 ; 2 Ki. 2:9, 10) This treading down meant also the subduing of those in the congregation who promote iniquity or lawlessness toward God’s work. Thereby Jehovah caused a separating-out of the “workers of iniquity”, the “evil servant” class: “And I will purge out from among you the rebels, and them that transgress against me: I will bring them forth out of the country where they sojourn, and they shall not enter [with the remnant] into the land of Israel; and ye shall know that I am the Lord [Jehovah].” (Ezek. 20:38; Matt. 13:41) When such of the “evil servant” class tried to get in the way of the Lord’s work, the faithful remnant trod right over them and went ahead, and the four wheels of Jehovah’s great “chariot” or organization rolled on irresistibly over all of Satan’s human scotch-blocks.—Ezekiel 1.
31	The “sins” that are drowned in the depths of the sea are not those which are due to inheriting weakness and frailty from the sinner Adam, but were those of failing to do the things that the Christian is commissioned to do, and hence the coming short in
the fulfillment of his covenant obligations toward God. Such “sins” the consecrated were guilty of in 1918 and for a short time thereafter, due to fear of men and being overreached by the enemy organization which was mistakenly considered as “the Highei Powers”. The prophet Isaiah, as a prototype, confessed to suchlike sins, and then the Lord m liis loving-kindness purged him. The “depths of the sea” serves to show the submerging of “all their miis' without any trace left, out of sight and beyond recovery of the deepest-going deep-sea divers. The enemy accuser cannot bring them up before God to condemn the faithful remnant to His face. Those sms are beyond recovery just as much as Babylon will be when Jehovah’s mighty angel lifts her up from her entrenched position and hurls her “like a great millstone, . . . into the sea. saying. Thus with violence shall that great city Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all". (Rev. 18:21) The remnant can assuredly say: “As far as the east is from the west, so far hath he removed our transgressions from us." (Ps. 103:12) According to the terms of the new covenant Jehovah says: 'And I will remember their sin no more.” (Jer. 31: 34: lleb 8:12) Therefore the members of the Lord's faithful remnant put from among them all religious tilings of belief and practice, and that beyond recovery, just as the Lord God has done with their sins.
TRUTH AND MERCY
32	The truth of the greatest importance in the Bible, and which God sets foremost therein, is that concerning his kingdom, The Theocracy. This is so because it is that capital organization of Jehovah which vindicates his name and destroys all opponents to his universal domination as the Supreme Ruler Jehovah God is the great Theocrat, the Father and Creator of The Theocratic Government. Of Him the patriarch Abraham was a “friend”. Hence Abraham was used as a type of Jehovah God. God’s firstborn and only begotten Son he gave to be the King of that promised Theocratic Government That beloved Son entered into the covenant of sacrifice and was faithful therein toward his God and Father, even unto the death. Therefore Christ Jesus win foreshadowed by Abraham's son Isaac, whom Abraham offered in figure in sacrifice to Jehovah. God Isaac w’as thereby used to picture The Seed or Theocratic King whom Jehovah mentioned in his covenant with Abraham: “And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed: because thou hast obeyed my voice.” (Gen. 22.18) Isaac had twin sons. Jehovah chose the younger, Jacob by name, who was faithful to God, and to him Jehovah renewed the promise concerning the coming Theocratic Government and The Seed who rules therein. Therefore Jacob pictures
188
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
not merely Christ Jesus The Seed, but also th'e brethren of Christ Jesus associated with him in the Theocratic Rule, and concerning these brethren he says: “Behold I and the children which God hath given me.” (Heb. 2:13; Isa. 8:18) By these three faithful men, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, therefore, is pictured that Theocracy whose universal domination shall be for ever.
“ Jehovah was not obliged to do it. It was out of his loving-kindness, hence his mercy, that he made provision for this wonderful Government that shall extend God’s mercy to sinful creatures on earth who desire to come into harmony with him that they might live and use their lives eternally to the glory of the great "Father of mercies and the God of all comfort”. Therefore Jehovah said to Abraham concerning The Seed of the promise: “So [by faith and obedience] shall all the nations of the earth bless themselves in thy seed.” (Gen. 22:18, Rotherham) “Thy seed, which is Christ.” (Gal. 3:16) Those whose destiny is involved in the promise as heirs thereof, and all others of good-will who desire the fulfillment of God’s promise, may be fully assured of the truth and faithfulness of his promise. Jehovah swore thereto with an oath by the greatest and highest personage in the universe, His own self.—Heb. 6:13-20.
34	With unwavering confidence, therefore, Jehovah's inspired prophet said: "Thou wilt perform the truth to Jacob [the Christ, Hoad and body], and the mercy to Abraham, which thou hast sworn unto our fathers from the days of old.” (Mic. 7 : 20) Abraham, Jacob and the other faithful men of old are not yet brought back from the dead in a "better resurrection" ; they are not yet made “princes in all the earth” under that Theocratic Government, but the truth and mercy God expressed to Jacob and Abraham he has fulfilled. The oath with which he swore to the fathers of Christ Jesus from the days of old Jehovah God has kept inviolate. His mercy, truth and faithfulness are upheld and shall shortly at Armageddon be completely vindicated.
35	The Theocratic Government is here, it having begun with Jehovah's enthronement of the King thereof in A.D. 1914. Since his coming to the temple and being presented as King to all the universe, including the earth, there are now associated with him the faithful followers that finished their earthly course faithfully and who at his coming were raised, being changed from human to spirit, and given 'glory, honor and immortality'. (1 Cor. 15:51-54;
Rom. 2:7) Yet on earth for God’s purpose there remain the faithful remnant who are in line to be of that Greater Jacob’s body members, The Complete Christ of which Jesus is the Head. They serve on. awaiting also their change in Jehovah’s due time. “Thou wilt show faithfulness unto Jacob” (Leeser) ; “Thou wilt grant the faithfulness to Jacob.” (Rotherham) That, therefore, and let it be known to all. the persons of good-will and the persecutors alike, is the reason for Jehovah’s merciful and faithful dealings with his devoted remnant in this day of our Lord Jesus Christ. “0 ye seed of Abraham his servant, ye children of Jacob his chosen. He is the Lord our God; his judgments are in all the earth. He hath remembered his covenant for ever, the word which he commanded to a thousand generations: . . . He suffeied no man to do them wrong; yea. he reproved kings for their sakes; saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm.” (Ps. 105: 6-15) Jehovah’s reproof has for some time now been administered to the “kings”, both “of the north" and "of the south”, and also the ruling factors of all the world. The continued persecution upon Jehovah’s anointed ones and their inseparable companions shows that the religious-political factors and their supporters have hardened their necks. They “shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy”.—Prov. 29:1.
36	Not for very much longer shall the people mourn because such stiff-necked wicked ones bear rule. The glorious day of the triumph of Jehovah’s Theocrxcy by his Seed, Christ Jesus, is at hand, and then, "m hen the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice.” (Prov. 29: 2) The rejoicing has already begun among those enlightened by God’s prophecy and who with the eye of faith see Jehovah's Righteous Kingdom begun. Their rejoicing shall never end. It shall reach its height of jubilation at the smashing grand climax of the “battle of that great day of God Almighty’, Armageddon. Therefore let the remnant and their devoted companions not (linch under inciea-ing opposition, reproach and persecution Let them continue to move on in unbreakable unity, fighting shoulder to shoulder against the enemies of Jehovah and his King. Let their heart’s affection be fixed immovably upon The Theocracy, and let the love of Christ hold them faithful to their covenant with Jehovah God unto the end, all for the vindication of his glorious and holy name. Blessed be that name for evermore!
(Conclusion)
Jehovah reigneth; he ts clothed with majesty; Jehovah is clothed with strength; he hath girded himself therewith: the world also ts established, that it cannot be moved. Thy throne ts established of old: thou art from everlasting. Thy testimonies are very sure: holiness becometh thy house, 0 Jehovah, for evermore.
—Psalm 93 :1, 2,5, A. R. V.
HID DURING THE INDIGNATION
FOR our day it was providently written “Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee, hide thyself as it were for a little moment, until the indignation be overpast. For, behold, the Lord cometh out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: the earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her slain.’’—Isa. 26:20. 21.
Manifestly this prophecy does not refer to the resurrection of the dead, but to the fact that the Lord God will lay bare the bloody record of Satan’s visible organization, particularly the totalitarian-religious powers of aggression, and will call universal attention to the fact, as well as take note thereof himself, and will bring the guilty ones to account. Xo more can the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and other clergy of the totalitarian lands hide their hypocrisy by declaring the bloody acts of the aggressors a “crusade” asainst ungodliness and for Christianity.
The prophecy is proof that the clergy who have taken ti e name of the Lord God and misrepresented him are a part of the Devil's organization Jehovah comes out of his place to express his indignation against the evildoers, and, at Isaiah 27: 1, immediately following the above-quoted prophecy, it is said "In that day the Lord, with his sore, and great, and strong sword, shall punish leviathan the piercing serpent [the gliding, fleeing or elusive monster (marginal reading A.R V. and Roth.)], even leviathan that crooked serpent, and he shall slay the dragon that is in the sea.”
The leviathan is a monster in the sea, and clearly pictures the “red dragon”, the Devil's organization (Compare Rec elation 12 9, 20:2.) The entire organization of Satan has been elusive, even to the point where the people have been made to believe that there is no Devil, and many who claim to be of Christ have been unable to detect or see the Devil’s organization. What part of his organization, therefore, is the most elusive ? Undoubtedly the ecclesiastical or icligioiis clement, made up of the clergy and "principal of the flock”.
When Jesus was on the earth he referred to the clergy, calling tlicm a “generation of ripers” or serpents. This shows that these are the seed of the Serpent, Satan, and are a part of his wicked organization They are the chief instruments used in persecuting the faithful witnesses of J choc ah who are followers of Christ Jesus “They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent; adders’ poison is under their lips.” (Ps. 140.3) From the time that they are hatched out of the theological schools they are active members of the wicked organization “The wicked are estranged from the womb; they go astray as soon as they be born, speaking lies. Their poison is like the poison of a serpent; they are like the deaf adder that stoppeth her ear.” (Ps. 5S: 3, 4) That element of Satan’s organization, deaf to cries of righteousness and truth, unceasingly fire their venomous darts at the faithful witnesses of God and his Theocratic Government. At the same time they glide among the people, exalting their own virtues, falsely claiming to represent God.
These have glided about amongst the unsuspecting peoples of earth, alienated from God and which are represented by “the sea”. One moment they appear to represent God, and the next they openly advocate the work of the enemy. One
189
moment with honeyed and sanctimonious words upon their lips they pose as reformers, and the next with bitter words they strike out against those who are humbly trying to represent God and his Righteous Government Well are thc\ illustrated by the sea-monster that rises to the surface and quickly disappears. Great numbers of people have been held in the prison-house of Babylon (Satan’s organization) bj reason of the iniquity, the seducthe and elusive methods of the clergy. Gliding among the people, they dash up a spraj to blind the people to the fact that there is a Devil or that he has an organization or that the Devil is their enemy They organize and operate their seductive and fraudulent system of religion and misname it "Christianity” and give suck or nourishment to those whom they have entrapped As it is written : “Even the sea monsters draw out the breast, they give suck to their young ones: the daughter of my people is become cruel, like the ostriches in the wilderness " (Lam. 4:3) They teach those whom they draw into their systems cruelty and urge them to use cruelty acainst followers of Christ by resorting to all manner of \ valence
Referring again to Isaiah’s prophecy which says that “m that day the Lord, with his sore, and great, and strong sword" shall punish the Devil’s organization. Christ Jesus is the great Priest of the Most High God of "the order of Melchizcdek”. He is Jehovah's arm and His sword, fitrura-tixcly speaking. One of his titles is “The Word of God' (Rev. 19:13) He is the Sword of Jehovah and is the Arm that Jehovah bares to make war with the enemy (Jci 47 G) When the due time arrives for God to go forth to the battle he whets his Sword and sends his great Priest forth to lead the fight at Armageddon. Concerning that time it is written “If I whet my glittering sword [the lightning of m\ sword (margin) ], and my hand take hold on judgment, 1 will render vengeance to mine adversaries, and will recompense them that hate me I will make mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall devour flesh, with the blood of the slain and the captives, from the head of the leaders of the enemy.”—Deut 32 41, 42. Ani Rei For
The lightnings of God proceed from and through his Word, “the sword of the Spirit.” (Eph G. 17) Therefore at the time Jehovah whets his "glittering Sword" his lightnings flash, illuminating the minds of his anointed, niakn.-known God's purposes concerning them, and exposing the position and the action of the enemy The truth and light that God sheds upon his Word today is strong supporting e\idence that we are in “that day” when the forces are gathering for Armageddon These truths encourage and strengthen the mind and heart of His people
God's lightnings flash from the clouds of his presence and now disclose to those in his temple the monstious and hideous organization of Satan the Devil. They see that the gliding and elusive and cruel organization, pictured b> the leviathan and by the hissing adder, shoot out their bitter words against the little company of faithful ones and thereby incite the mob, pictured by the waves of the sea, to lash against and seek to overwhelm the remnant of Jchoiah’s witnesses. The faithful see the serpent part of the DcmI's organization again secretly attempt to induce the execution of the law to arrest and imprison those who dare give testimony to the good news of God’s kingdom They mark the arrogance, hatred and cruelty of the combined elements
190
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
of the enemy’s organization moving against them because they insist on obeying the commandments of Jehovah God.
As the hideous and unsightly monster Goliath terrorized the Israelites upon the field of battle, even so the monstrosity and fiendishness of the enemy's organization now strikes terror into the mind and heart of every one who has but little faith. Not so, however, with those who are clad with the divine armor and who are strong in the Lord and in the power of his might. These know that they are imperfect and would quickly fall at the hands of the enemy, but their trust is absolute in the Lord. For their encouragement and for their full assurance in this hour of peril in the time of God’s wrath Jehovah speaks to them through his prophet and says: “Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee: hide thyself as it were for a little moment, until the indignation be overpast.”
Now the enlightened and informed are on the alert, watching for the sign for the beginning of Armageddon and putting their confidence wholly in the Lord. That “sign” is certain to be made manifest soon, and the sign clearly will be: “When they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction cometh upon them” (1 Thess. 5:3) When this sign for the beginning of Armageddon clearly appears, mav it not be that then the above promise of Jehoiah to His people will be fulfilled in completeness? However, the promise has a measure of application now.
It was in A.D 1918 that the Lord brought his people into the temple condition. It has been since then that they’ have engaged in the great witness work and the enemy’ organization has constantly increased in its expressed hatred against them. It is written: "When the wicked rise [since 1918], men hide themselves” (Prov. 23:28) Speaking to his followers Jesus quoted the identical words of Isaiah 2G. 20, to wit: "Enter into thine inner chamber, and having shut thy door” then pray unto thy Father who is in secret. —Matt. 6 • 6, Am. Rev. Vcr.
On one occasion the prophet Elisha “went in therefore, and shut the door upon them twain, and prayed unto the Lord”. (2 Ki. 4-33) The faithful of the church or bride of Christ are represented as saying. “The king hath brought me into his [inner] chambers" (S of Sol 1 4) Those who arc brought into that place of safety say unto the Almighty’ God: "Thou art my hiding place and my shield. I hope in thy word.” (Ps. 119:114) The command to Jehovah’s people to hide themselves in the inner chambers could not apply prior to the Lord's coming to the temple in 1918 The surrounding part of the prophecy shows that it is “in that day'’ of God’s indignation that the place of safety is provided; and, since we are entering that great and terrible day, the place of safety must now be available
The inner chambers or place of safety is provided for and made known to those who are pictured at Isaiah 61: 10 as receiving “the robe of righteousness” since the coming of the Lord to his temple. Those who, upon taking account of them, were at that time found faithful were granted the “garments of salvation”. Since then many others who have become the Lord’s “other sheep” join themselves as "companions” to the anointed remnant and take refuge under God’s kingdom or Theocracy for safety and protection. Not all who claim to be in the “present truth” are in this condition of security. Those who have not seen the “light
nings” of the Lord since his setting up of the temple condition do not even see that there is such thing as a place of security’ or safety. They have not seen or appreciated the fact and power of the Devil’s organization. Some even say that too much has been said about the Devil’s organization and too much said against religion. It is manifest that if one does not see the Devil’s organization he does not see and appreciate God’s organization Such see no real meaning in the names by which the great Creator reveals himself and they do not appreciate what is meant by the "secret place of the Most High”. (Ps. 91:1, 2) To the remnant and their companions “the name of the Lord is a strong tower; the righteous runneth into it, and is safe”.—Prov. 18 10
Jehovah God says to his people: 'Hide thyself for a little moment until the indignation be overpast.’ Manifestly this “little moment” is at most the “short time” that the Devil knows that he has left to prepare for and to fight the battle of Armageddon, as stated at Rei elation 12 12, but the “moment” may particularly apply to the short and suddenly ended time from and after the appearance of the “sign” of “Peace and safety!” until Armageddon begins and is fought and the Lord does a short work thereof in righteousness. During that brief “moment” the totalitarian crowd symbolized as “the king of the north” will be terrified at the tidings and will go forth with fury to destroy and to make away with all Jehovah’s people (Dan 11:441 Particularly since being east out of heaven with his demons the Devil’s organization has gone forth and made war against the Lord’s remnant and threatens them with immediate destruction. For the encouragement of the remnant and their companions at that time it is written • “Therefore thus saith the Lord God of hosts, 0 my people that dwellest in Zion, be not afraid of the Assyrian [totalitarian crowd under Satan] : he shall smite thee with a rod. and shall lift up his staff against thee, after the manner of Egypt For yet a very little while, and the indignation shall cease, and mine anger, in their destruction ”— Isa 10:24.25
The Lord God declares that his righteous indignation shall be expressed against Satan's organization Through his prophet (Zeph. 3 ■ 8) he states: “Therefore wait ye upon me, saith the Lord, until the day that I rise up to the prey , for my determination is to gather the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce anger: for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy ”
After the Lord God gathers his people into the place of safety he speaks to the visible earthly part of the Devil’s organization, saying. “Hear, all ye people , hearken, O earth, and all that therein is: and let the Lord God be witness against you, the Lord from his holy temple For, behold, the Lord cometh forth out of his place, and will come down, and tread upon the high places of the earth.” (Mic 1: 2, 3) Thus God expresses his determination to reveal himself to the peoples of earth at Armageddon, and to do so he comes out of his place (Zion) and manifests his power in the sight of all.
That the day of his wrath will be one of great trouble for all that dwell upon the earth, and which will make his name known to all, is made certain by his sure Word: “Behold, the name of Jehovah cometh from far, burning
June 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER,
191
with his anger. and in thick rising smoke: his lips are full of indignation, and his tongue is as a devouring fire, and his breath is as an overflowing stream, that reaeheth even unto the neck, to sift the nations with the sieve of destruction. and a bridle that causcth to err shall be in the jaws of the peoples.” (Isa. 30.27,28, Am. Rev. I'er.) In that day of God's expressed wrath no part of Satan's organization will be able to stand; as it is written: “At his wrath the earth shall tremble, and the nations shall not be able to abide his indignation.”—Jer. 10 10.
The legions of the enemy shall melt before the onward and victorious march of Jehovah's Arm : “Thou didst march through the land m indignation, thou didst thresh the [nations] in anger” fllab 3: 12) His fury is a consuming fire and the strongholds of the enemy shall fall at his approach “Who can stand before his indignation’ and who can abide in the fierceness of his anger? his fury is [loured out like fire, and the rocks are thrown down by l.im ”—Nah. 1 6.
The enemy organization will make a ferocious attack against God's organization, and many, as shown by Jeremiah's piophecy. shall fall, but the remnant and their companions shall be saved because they are in the secret place of the Most High - “He that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty.” (Ps 91 1) With confidence and in full assurance they sing out: “For in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion: in the secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me , he shall set me up upon a rock.”—Ps 27.5.
While now in their hiding-place will Jehovah's people be idle? Not by any means No one can remain idle and remain in the remnant class in the temple or with the Lord’s • other sheep" in His “eity of refuge”. Hiding in the secret place of the Most High does not mean that those there will be out of view of the enemy or fearful that the enemy might see their movements. On the contrary, they will be xery active and their cup of joy will be overflowing. Concerning this it is written. “Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies- thou anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over.”—Ps 23:5.
Daily the loyal servants of Jehovah see the evidences that their faithfulness in testifying to His name is sore and grievous upon the members of Satan’s organization. The faithful remnant go forth fearlessly singing the honor of Jehovah’s name What is the effect? Paul the apostle says, ..nd we see it is true: ‘Your fearlessness is unto the enemy a sure token of impending destruction’—Phil. 1.28, Weymouth.
Note again the words of the prophet ‘Jehovah with ins sore, and great, and strong sword, shall punish leviathan ' Christ Jesus is Jehovah’s great and strong Sword, and the anointed remnant of the members of Christ's body are Jehovah’s ‘sore sword’ and are sore and grievous to the enemy. Nothing galls the clergy and their allies more than the faithfulness of God’s remnant and their companions in giving the testimony. As the Lord Jesus was represented by Gideon whom Jehovah raised up to rout the Midianite hosts, so Gideon's little company of three hundred soldiers leprcsented the remnant of the Lord at this time. As the light flashed from the lamps of the little army of Gideon as they surrounded the Midianite eamp by night, and then
the members thereof shouted victory and terrified the Midianites thereby, even so in the day of God's wrath his lightnings flash exposing the position of the enemy and revealing their confusion, while the remnant with joy shout ‘The sword of Jehovah and of his Anointed.’ (Judg. 7.20) God has whetted his lightning Sword and orders him to the great conflict, while the faithful remnant and their steadfast and constant companions sing forth the praises of Jehovah and his King.
United in the holy cause of righteousness and faithfully representing the Kingdom interests, dwelling together in the secret place of the Most High, and diligently doing what is within their power, by God's grace the remnant together with their companions are invulnerable to the attacks of the enemy. Christ Jesus, the Faithful and True, clothed with absolute authority and girded for war, is leading Ins forces on to the conflict His faithful followers in tins day of judgment are blending their voices in harmonious cadences as they joyfully follow in the footsteps of the great Master; and as they go they are shouting, ‘The sword of Jehovah and of his Anointed I’
God’s mighty organization, with Jehovah himself riding upon the highest heavens, shall march on in the conflict to full and complete victory. As it is written "And the Lord shall be seen over them, and his arrow shall go fmth as the lightning: and the Lord God shall blow the trumpet, and shall go with whirlwinds of the south.”—Zech 9 14.
In the vision Isaiah pictures the people of God brought into the secret place of the Most High Then he shows Jehovah coming forth, out from his organization Zion, to make himself known to the nations of the earth He shows Christ the King and Executive Officer of Jehovah. His unsheathed and glittering Sword, leading the armies of righteousness against the enemy, he records the command of Jehovah that His servants shall sing forth his praises by being his witnesses and telling the people that Jehovah is God. He shows that the righteous kingdom of Jehovah is here and that the Kingdom shall relieve the peoples of their burdens and bring everlasting blessings
Then the prophet readies a climax in his eloquence to the praise of Jehovah God Down through the corridors of long periods of suffering, and on to the opening new vol Id of light and peace, he points He tells the remnant what all the loyal and faithful ones must do and that those who joyfully obey God's commandments, and trust m him, snail be kept in complete peace His words thrill and encouiage the remnant because to them he says: “In that dax shall this song be sung in the land of Judah We haxe a strong city [organization], salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks [complete fortress and defense]” Haxmg fully assured the members of the Lord's organization yet on earth, he cries out to them "Open ye the gates, that the righteous nation which keepeth the truth may enter in Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee: because he trusteth in thee. Trust ye in the Lord for ever: for in the Lord JEHOVAH is exerlastmg strength.” (Isa. 26:1-4) On the remnant and their companions march, with God's banner of love over them and knowing that victory is soon and certain, because henceforth and for evermore the great name of Jehovah shall be exalted.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
READY TO SPRING INTO ACTION (NEW HAMPSHIRE)
“A week ago, while I was doing magazine street-work a man passed. I could detect that his eyes and ears were strained to take in everything he could catch without his being noticed. He must have been attracted to what he heard, because he passed me three more times in the same attitude, and as he reached the next publisher up the street he stopped and took a copy of The Watchtower. This Saturday he came up to me and asked: ‘What’s in that book with the blue cover [Children] ? is it along the same lines as The Watchtower? I got one last week, and it’s just exactly right. It's the first thing I’ve ever found that sounded exactly right. I’ve always contended that no one had found the right religion yet, and now I know the reason: there's no such a thing” I explained the subscription offer. He said he would subscribe, but could not just then, but would like to have the book; and that he would come back and contribute the balance for the subscription. He gave me his name and address and left. Next morning, remembering that The Watchtower admonishes us that the hunters must be ’ready to spring into action’, I decided to spring onto him right away So I packed the recorded lecture ‘Children of The King’ into my phonograph and got busy. He was a most surpnsed-looking person when he saw me, took to the idea of listening to the lecture right away, and so did his sheep-like wife. Believe me when I tell you that I have never found any who got greater enjoyment out of hearing ‘Children of The King’. His mother, also sheep-like, joined in and the three literally ate it up. The wife explained to me that everything was going around like a merry-go-round She sees something must be done, and quickly, if they would have anything to anchor to. From all appearances I will have a Children study there after next week, as then they want to hear ‘Comfort All That Mourn' The four miles I had to walk back home seemed less than a block. To add to my joy, the little lady whom I mentioned in my last letter came to the Watchtower study and stayed till 10 p. m. asking questions about service, etc She tells me her two children have not given her a moment's rest in their anxiety to know about the Kingdom since my last call She has them and three other adults lined up for the Children study, making six m all, and we have not even started it yet, it begins this Wednesday.’’
RE GIRLS IN THE CARAVAN SQUAD (ENGLAND)
“I left Newcastle-on-Tyne last Tuesday, not knowing the address of my sister Peggy in Melton Mowbray I had promised to see her on my way to Luton So all I could do was to send her a telegram, saying when I would arrive, and addressing it to ‘Miss P F., The Caravans, Jehovah’s witnesses, Melton Mowbray’, and trusting it would find her. As the squad had been there only two days I was most doubtful whether it would find her. However, at 7 : 30 p. m. Peggy met me at the station. She was thrilled as to how the telegram had reached her. My companion Mildred was shopping in town at 11:30 a. m. and left her bike outside the shop. When she came out, a telegraph boy was standing holding her bike. ‘Are you Jehovah’s witnesses?’ he asked. Mildred, surprised, said. ‘How did you know?’ (She was
not wearing her magazine bag.) The boy replied: ‘Well, this telegram came into the office, and we did not know who Miss P. F. was or where 'The Caravans’ were—never heard of them; but the postmistress told me to go out and look for people wearing Watch tower bags, but I couldn’t see anyone. I then saw your bicycle.’ ‘But,’ interrupted Mildred, ‘how did you know it was my bicycle?' ‘Well, you are the only people that carry gramophones, aren't you ?’ Mildred was thrilled to be known already in the little town . so the three of us promptly gathered outside Woolworth's and did pavement witnessing. Now everyone knows Jehovah’s witnesses in Melton Mowbray!’’
NOT ACKNOWLEDGING FATHER OR MOTHER (DEL’T. 33:9)
“Recently I was on the street corner with the latest Consolation magazine with the heading ‘Japan Inspired by the Devil’. Curious, the people often asked me ‘Are you Chinese or Filipino?’ I replied: ‘No, I am a Jap1 So I know this is the truth and a good warning for you ’ I placed fourteen Watchtower and Consolation the last two weeks.”
INFLUENCE OF CHILDREN (WASHINGTON STATE)
“Today, while I was calling from door to door a lady said: ‘You were here before and I told jou I was not interested in your message’ I replied: ‘Does that still hold good’’ Lady: ‘Definitely, yes” I then turned to leave for the next house, when two little boys ages 7 and S met me on the lawn and wanted to know what I had and what I was doing. So I played them the recording ‘Children’, showed them all the pictures in the book Childien and explained its contents. I then showed them the little booklets and told them if they would be sure and read them they could each have one. They made their choices, and one of the boys, jumping up, ran into the house (from which I had just come) bubbling over with enthusiasm, showing his mother what I had given him and telling her of Children. The lady called baek to me ‘Say, would you mmd letting me see that book’ I have been watching the performance through the window, and I have never been able to get my little son to listen to me while I tell him about the Bible. But he seems to be much interested in this book you have. Will you sell me one’’ I explained to her how she might obtain the book and study it with her Bible.”
STREET MAGAZINE-WORK EPISODE
New Jersey: “I was on the street corner of L---- on
a bitter-eold Saturday night with magazines A Presbyterian minister came along, glanced my way, and went on past to the corner, where he stopped for a eouple of minutes Then he came back slowly and said ‘What did you say’’ I told him, ‘Watchtower’ and ‘Consolation’ Said he: ‘How much?’ I replied that if he wished to contribute file cents each it was his privilege. He took both. He stood looking me in the face a full minute and then said: ‘Aren't you terribly cold?’ I replied: ‘Oh, it’s never too cold to serve the Lord and bring the truth to the people.’ He looked surprised and replied in a thin voice: ‘I guess you’re right ’ He went up the street carrying the magazines so all could see them; and many did.”
192
THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
N. H. Knorr, President________W. E. Van Am burgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” • Isaiah 54:13,
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, Is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are bom sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus Is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord's next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS Journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed In the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah's witnesses and al] people of good wilt It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid In such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public Instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for Its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It Is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but Invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $150; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African	.________Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid tlie needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers' Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Chance of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. T., under the Act of March S, 1879.
“COMFORT” TESTIMONY PERIOD
To Jehovah’s witnesses the month of August is known as the “Comfort” Testimony Period During these 31 days a special effort will be made on the part of Jehovah’s witnesses to comfort as many people as they possibly can with the truths as set forth in the Word of Jehovah God. To aid those who love righteousness the book Children along with the booklet Hope will be offered to the people on a contribution of 25c These two publications set forth a message which shows there is something worth while living for. Those persons who trust in Jehovah’s kingdom and know that this is the only hope for the world will proclaim the message contained in these publications and make them available to as many persons as they can possibly meet during August. “Comfort” Testimony Period will be a blessing to all those who share in the preaching of the gospel. Make your report of activity to your local company servant, or if you are not associated with a company, make your report direct to the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society. In a world of distress and perplexity all readers of The Watchtower will agree that comfort to those that mourn is important at this time. Aid those who love righteousness with the message and information you already possess.
"‘CHILDREN’ STUDY QUESTIONS”
The Society has released a new booklet, entitled “ ‘Children’ Study Questions”, which will be a great aid to all publishers of
the Kingdom in the conducting of Children studies in the various homes throughout the country. You can get your copy now on contribution of 5c’ for publication of more of these Send remittances to 117 Adams Street, Brooklyn, New York This “Children" Study Questions booklet will help individual readers in their personal study in their own homes. Get a copy now
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of August 2: “Song-Call to Action,” 1-21 inclusive, The Watchtower July 1, 1942.
Week of August 9: “Song-Call to Action,” 22-45 inclusive, The Watchtower July 1, 1942.
USE RENEWAL SUBSCRIPTION BLANK
The blank sent you one month before expiration of your Watchtower subscription should be filled out and returned to the Brooklyn office or to the Branch office in the country where you reside. Servants in the companies, and individuals, when sending in renewals for The Watchtower, should always use these blanks By filling in these renewal blanks you are assured of the continuation of your Watchtower from the time of expiration, and without delay. It will also be a great help if you sign your name uniformly, and note any recent change of address, on the renewal slip.
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
No. LXIII	July 1, 1942	No. 13
SONG-CALL TO ACTION
"Jehovah, even Jehovah, is my strength and song.”—Isa. 12:2, Am. Rev. Ver.
JEHOVAH is the most glorious theme of all songs. He is deserving to be praised in joyful, grateful song by all his intelligent creation that lives. All creatures in his likeness he endowed with the power and ability to sing his praises as the heart expression of their adoration and devotion to him as the perfect sum of all righteousness and goodness. When he laid the foundation of the earth his two princely spirit creatures designated as “the morning stars” poured out their exultation in song of praise to the great Creator, and all the spirit sons of God approved and shouted out of sheer joy. At the human birth of Jehovah’s Son, whose birth was a step toward the future creation of new heavens and a new earth, the host of angelic sons of God appeared to the shepherds and let them hear their harmonious voices praising Jehovah and saying in unison: “Glory in the highest unto God! and on earth peace, among men of goodwill.” (Job 38: 4-7; Luke 2:13,14, Rotherham) After his warlike victory over ancient Egypt at the Red sea, Jehovah’s prophet Moses led His delivered people in the song: “I will sing unto Jehovah, for he hath triumphed gloriously: the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea. Jehovah is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation: this is my God, and I will praise him; my father’s God, and I will exalt him. Jehovah is a man of war: Jehovah is his name.” (Ex. 15:1-3, Am. Rev. Ver.) That song celebrated the war in vindication of Jehovah’s name and word and all-power.
2 Since A.D. 1914 is the day of battle and war, beginning with the first “war in heaven” and culminating shortly in the universal war that involves heaven and earth and commonly called “the battle of Armageddon”. Everlasting peace to the universe can never come until that battle has been fought, and Jehovah of hosts again triumphs gloriously as he did at the Red sea. The words of the song of praise to Jehovah that shall then be sung by those who witness his victory and live have probably not been written as yet. But those having faith in his sure victory may sing now. In fact, Jehovah, the great Composer of song and praise, long ago inspired songs to be written and to be reserved for this very day of
battle and war, and which songs must be sung by his singers now, before the final battle for universal domination. The basic theme of all these songs is the same, namely, the vindication of Jehovah’s name by his Warrior nation, The Theocratic Government under Christ Jesus, and the vindication of his indisputable right to the domination of the universe.
8 The present-time “jazz-song” world does not enjoy and join in such songs, but tries to drown out the message thereof with its deafening blare of propaganda. It tries to silence the singers and to prevent any “men of good-will” from catching up and learning the songs of vindication and of life in a new world sustained by Jehovah’s Theocracy. All the religionists complain at the singing and bring down the wrath and power of the governments of this world upon the singers by calling the songs “seditious” and “subversive” and “disturbing to religious peace and the unity of religion and politics”.
* Under the circumstances, with the whole world ranged up against The Theocracy and despising the name of Jehovah, it requires great courage to sing the songs as the Composer thereof commands. What cares the enemy that the mourning people who are being regimented into a totalitarian new order are comforted and filled with hope by hearing the songs! The enemy only gets madder and feels tormented to desperation and gathers his political, judicial, commercial, military and religious forces together against the little band of singers and steadily eloses in upon them to finally strangle them to keep quiet. Shall the enemy fully stifle the songs of victory in praise of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government? Regardless of the determined effort made to that end, the thing of immediate concern now is that the divine Composer commands his trained ones to sing on and to march ahead, faces to the foe, and singing as they march.
’ The songs were prepared for this day of battle and war, and they must be sung by God’s devoted servants; else he would make the very stones to sing out, that the prophecy of his Word might be vindicated. Not with carnal weapons, nor depending upon Charging horses, nor trusting in the sturdy, seasoned
1»5
196
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
legs drilled by totalitarian masters, do Jehovah’s servants tramp forward in offensive action against the enemies of The Theocracy, but solely clad in heavenly “armour of God” and singing the songs He has put in their mouths. (Eph. 6:11-18) The correctness of this manner of march was foreshadowed in the time of crisis during the days of Jehovah’s typical Theocracy, the capital of which was the holy city of Jerusalem. At that capital city the great Theocrat’s anointed king, Jehoshaphat, sat upon the throne of Jehovah, w’hich throne King David had once occupied. (1 Chron. 29: 23) The political, commercial and religious elements of the anti-Theocratic world, namely, the nations of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, had conspired and federated against Jehovah and his anointed king, and they stormed to the attack upon the city. Jehoshaphat’s name means “Jehovah-vindicated”. Warned of the coming attack, King Jehoshaphat assembled all the nation of Judeans to Jerusalem. He gathered them to Jehovah’s temple on Mount Zion and there prayed for divine help and deliverance, that the Theocracy might be preserved and Jehovah’s name might be vindicated.
8	Then came Jehovah’s instructions by the lips of one of his trained temple singers, a Levite of the musical family of Asaph. The command was, not to hole up and take a stationary defense position, but to march to the offense, undismayed and fearless of the combined enemy of superior numbers and military equipment. The battle was to be Jehovah's, and likewise the victory. In order that the faith and integrity of his covenant people might be tested and demonstrated, Jehovah did not order horse-mounted warriors or horse-drawn chariots or hardened shocktroops strong of leg to take the lead in the aggressive action. Under heavenly guidance Jehovah’s anointed king put the chief emphasis upon declaring God’s name throughout the earth before Jehovah showed his power over the enemy and vindicated his name. “And when he had taken counsel with the people [(Hebrew) And when he had given counsel unto the people], he appointed them that should sing unto Jehovah, and give praise in holy array, as they went out before the army, and say, Give thanks unto Jehovah ; for his lovingkindness endureth for ever.”— 2 Chron. 20: 21, A. R. V.; Roth.
T That was contrary to proved and tested military strategy of the world, but it is Jehovah’s way for his Theocratic people, who are not of this world but are in a covenant with him. It is the way of heavenly wisdom. Jerusalem’s gates swung open early in the morning, and with the temple Levite singers courageously to the fore Jehovah’s covenant people marched forth, men, women and children, to witness Jehovah’s “strange act”. All the marchers took up the song. Afar off the battle began. The invisible hosts of Jeho
vah God must have enjoyed fighting against God’s enemies to the accompaniment of sacred song extolling the name of Jehovah, which name those enemies had reproached. “And when they began to sing and to praise, Jehovah set liers-in-wait against the children of Ammon, Moab, and mount Seir, that were come against Judah; and they were smitten. For the children of Ammon and Moab stood up against the inhabitants of mount Seir, utterly to slay and destroy them: and when they had made an end of the inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to destroy another. And when Judah came to the watch-tower of the wilderness, they looked upon the multitude; and, behold, they were dead bodies fallen to the earth, and there were none that escaped.” (2 Chron. 20:22-24, A. R. V.) That strange deliverance of Jehovah’s covenant people happened as a type or prophetic pattern. The account thereof was preserved in the Bible record for the guidance and comfort of Jehovah’s covenant people living here in the end of the world. So it is authoritatively stated at 1 Corinthians 10:11 (marginal reading).
PROPHETIC SONGS
’ Among the divinely inspired songs that must be sung while the rival world powers grapple together in the total war for world domination is Psalm 147 found in the Bible’s Book of Psalms. In the ancient days before the invention of printing, and when the handwritten copies of the sacred writings were few and possessed mainly by Jehovah’s servants at the temple, these psalms were actually sung at His holy temple on Mount Zion by the Levites assigned to that duty there. Jehovah’s people of Israel, whose covenant with him obligated them to regularly attend the feasts of the Lord at his temple, heard the psalms sung and joined in responses of “Amen” thereto. They thereby became familiar with the psalms of Jehovah as well as other portions of God’s written Word which were read to them at the temple. Those psalms were not mere loose expressions of feeling such as distinguish this so-called “jazz age”, nor were they a mere throwing together of a lot of thoughts at random just to make a rhyme. The Psalms were based upou historical facts which were typical. Therefore those inspired songs were prophetic of things to come in connection with Jehovah’s Theocratic Government under Christ and with its marvelous work of vindicating his name and clearing out all objectors to Jehovah’s universal domination. Jehovah’s anointed King of that Theocracy himself speaks of the prophetic value and purpose of the Psalms. When the experiences of religious persecution, and death on the tree and resurrection from the dead had been fulfilled in him, Christ Jesus met with his faithful disciples and said unto them: “These are the words
July 1,1942
WATCHTOWER,
197
which I spake unto you, while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled, which were written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the psalms, concerning me.” (Luke 24 : 44) That the disciples thereafter understood all the Psalms to be prophetic is proved in the record at Acts 1:20; 4: 25-28; 13: 32, 33; Hebrews 1: 8-13; 10: 5-13. When studied as a prophecy concerning The Theocracy and its establishment in power, and when compared with the well-known events since A.D. 1914, Psalm 147 fills us with awe, wonder and delight.
HALLELUJAH!
9	Christ Jesus is the One anointed of Jehovah’s spirit of power to serve as his King of The Theocracy. Jehovah also seats with Christ Jesus in the throne of that Theocratic kingdom the obedient ones from among men who enter into a covenant as did their Leader and Head Christ Jesus to do God’s will and who thereafter follow in his footsteps and do God’s will, and not the world’s will, faithfully unto the death. Such ones, being begotten of God’s spirit as his sons and then anointed as his witnesses and assigned to a place in the ‘■'body of Christ”, are taken into the covenant with Christ Jesus for the Kingdom or Theocracy. These must die in faith and faithful that they may receive the crown of life immortal in the spirit with Christ the King. These must overcome the world as he did that he may grant them to sit with him in his heavenly throne as he also overcame and sat down with his Father Jehovah in His throne. If they suffer for being witnesses to The Theocratic Government, they shall reign with him therein. It is to these members of the “body of Christ” that Psalm 147 is addressed, particularly to the remnant of those members who are yet on earth to publish God’s name and Theocracy.
10	“Praise ye Jehovah; for it is good to sing praises unto our God; for it is pleasant, and praise is comely.” (Ps. 147:1, A.R.V.) Note the expression with which this Psalm opens. In the original Hebrew it is “Hallelu Jah”, the name “Jah” being the shortened form for “Jehovah”. Therefore this is one of the eighteen “Hallelujah” Psalms, so called, which open with this rousing exhortation. It is no mere “jazz song” expression or wild “religious revival” camp-meeting outburst, but is an inspired call to action in praising Jehovah to one another and to all the nations, particularly the teachable ones thereof. The anointed remnant here addressed are by their anointing with God’s spirit of power commissioned to be his witnesses, witnesses to his honor and praise and not to his reproach. By their consecration of themselves to do God’s will, even when that will conflicts with dictatorial men, and also because they are taken by Jehovah into the covenant to serve him,
they become the servants or ministers of God. By reason, further, of their anointing from him to preach His gospel or good news of the Kingdom they become Jehovah God’s ordained ministers of the gospel. From the binding obligation and responsibility to act as his ordained ministers there can never be any withdrawal, nor may they ever feel that after a period of work and because of advancing years they have done their share in God’s service and they may retire to ease and inactivity and enjoy a pension. Paul the apostle speaks of himself as “Paul the aged”. When so speaking he was not retired on a pension to let others do the work, but was a prisoner in chains at Rome for having kept on preaching and witnessing from house to house in obedience to his divine commission.—Philem. 9,10.
11	To quit preaching and being a witness, because of persecution or for any other selfish reason, this side of Armageddon’s fight means to be unfaithful to one’s ordination or commission and is a breaking of one’s covenant to do God’s will. By so doing one does not fulfill that term of the commission, “Praise ye Jehovah,” but brings reproach upon his name and denies him. Death is the penalty.
12	The “praises unto our God” are written in His Word. They are beneficial, and point the hearers or readers to the only Source of life and blessing and of a righteous and perfect government. Those praises strengthen the faith, and lead one to a trust in Him who alone can give protection and deliverance. Those praises reveal the One who is the Supreme Power and who is to be obeyed and worshiped. Those praises to Him bar the giving of praise to creatures or demons or men and the fearing and heiling and worshiping of such creatures, which course leads to destruction. Hence it is of the highest good to sing praises to Jehovah God in fulfillment of one’s obligations as his ordained minister. Nothing could be more vital to the people in this time of “distress of nations with perplexity”, when the world is faced with utter destruction. The faithful servants of Jehovah will be on the alert against being entrapped into any other view of the matter. They will refuse to break their covenant vows and to yield to the world’s pressure to make them cease from praising Him.
13	It is Jehovah God, by his King of The Theocracy, who commands his ordained ministers, “Praise ye Jehovah.” The anointed remnant, who are espoused to Christ Jesus to be of his heavenly bride, obey. They praise Jehovah publicly by spreading his message abroad and thus letting others hear who have a hearing ear. The teachable ones who love righteousness and that which is for their highest good do hear. They show good-will toward Jehovah God and his Theocratic Government. In proof of their good-will and devotion they too consecrate
198
Slk WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
themselves to Jehovah God by faith in Christ Jesus. Thus they also become God’s ministers or servants, with hope of everlasting life on earth under the Kingdom. What must they do now? That which is “good”, namely, praise Jehovah, just as the remnant of Christ’s bride do. The same terms of the commission or ordination apply to them as to the remnant. Hence it is written: “And the Spirit [Christ Jesus] and the bride say, Come. And let him that heareth say, Come. And let him that is athirst come: and whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.” (Rev. 22:17) All of such who discern and appreciate their commission from Jehovah God through Christ and who seriously apply themselves to being Jehovah’s witness as their God-ordained life-work find it is a delightful work of ministry. All the reproaches and persecutions and hardships at the hands of the religionists cannot take away from the real pleasantness of praising Jehovah and his desirable Government to those who hunger and thirst after righteousness. They experience personally how comely it is to praise the Most High God and his King of The Theocracy rather than to make a name for oneself or to praise creatures and organizations of this world.
THE THEOCRACY HERE!
14	“Jehovah doth build up Jerusalem; he gathereth together the outcasts of Israel.” (Ps. 147: 2, A. R. I7.) This indicates that this Psalm was written after the seventy years of desolation of the typical city of Jerusalem and after the faithful remnant were released from captivity to Babylon. They returned to the site of the holy city and rebuilt the temple and also the city and its walls and hung the city gates thereon. That Jerusalem was the “city of the great King”, said Jesus. (Matt. 5: 35) This marks the time of the grand fulfillment of this “Hallelujah” Psalm as after A.D. 1914. That year the seven “times of the Gentiles”, which began with Babylon’s overthrow of Jerusalem in 606 B.C., ran out, and there the “time of the end” for the Gentile powers in control of the earth began. At the beginning of those seven Gentile times the typical Theocracy at Jerusalem was overthrown and taken away. At the end of those Gentile times, in 1914, the real Theocracy began, when the great King of Eternity, Jehovah God, bade his anointed Son at his right hand to start the exercise of his power as King of The Theocracy. That Theocracy is Jehovah’s capital organization, where he makes his official residence. It is therefore the “city of the great King”, typified by Jerusalem of old.
18 The Theocratic Government under Christ Jesus is the “new heavens” and is “the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband”. (Rev. 21:1, 2, 9,10) Satan’s organization, which is called
“Babylon”, had its headquarters in heaven till 1914. The New Jerusalem, then built up, immediately began war upon the enemies in heaven, and Satan and his demons fought back against the new Government, The Theocracy, but prevailed not and were thrust down to the vicinity of the earth, whipped. What a fall for Babylon! and what a cause for praise to Jehovah! As it is written: “And after these things I heard a great voice of much people in heaven, saying, Alleluia; Salvation, and glory, and honour, and power, unto the Lord our God: for true and righteous are his judgments: for he hath judged the great whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and hath avenged the blood of his servants at her hand. And again they said, Alleluia.”—Rev. 19:1-3; 12:1-13.
18 The Theocracy is Jehovah’s capital organization over the entire universe. All creatures that would enjoy everlasting life and peace must take their stand on the side of that Theocratic capital and be gathered unto it. To prevent this the Devil stirred up the anger of the nations against the new Government in the very year of its birth, A.D. 1914, and the World War broke out. It was the Devil’s scheme to militarize the world and use that condition to scatter Jehovah’s organized servants, the spiritual Israelites, and to prevent all announcement of the building up of Jehovah’s capital organization and thereby prevent the gathering of any creatures on earth unto or under that divine government. Jehovah’s servants of spiritual Israel were hated of all nations at war and were cast out from their organized condition of serving Him and the interests of his kingdom. Their hearts were broken at the disorganizing of the work by the religious and political agents of Great Babylon and at all the reproaches that were heaped on God’s name. They suffered great hurt and wounds by violent mistreatment, by betrayals of false brethren and by the cruel misrepresentations published about them by the modern-day Babylonians, particularly those of so-called “Christendom”; which things were intended to damage them beyond all future recovery in the eyes of all.
,T Then for His name’s sake, and for the sake of his elect ones of his “holy nation”, Jehovah suddenly-sent his King and Messenger to the temple, in 1918, and stopped the World War shortly thereafter that same year. (Matt. 24:7-13,21,22) With Jehovah’s mighty Messenger, Christ Jesus, at the temple as Kang of the new world, who now in heaven or in earth could possibly hinder Jehovah’s message of the Kingdom, or Theocracy, from going to all nations of the habitable earth in fulfillment of the prophecy at Matthew 24:14? No one.
18 Because of throwing the great Babylon down from its heavenly seat the King Christ Jesus was like
July 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER,
199
Cyrus the king of Persia, who released the remnant of Israel from Babylon and sent them back to Jerusalem to engage in the temple work. (Isa. 45:1,13) Immediately after the halt of the World War Jehovah began gathering the faithful remnant of the “outcasts of [spiritual] Israel” to His Theocratic King at the temple. “He healeth the broken in heart, and bindeth up their wounds.” (Ps. 147: 3) This Jehovah did in freeing them from Babylon’s restraint, particularly from the religious fear of creatures and of what they might do to a servant of the Lord for faithfully witnessing for Him. Jehovah revealed to them that he had a further work for them and that his King is at the temple and the time for everlasting rejoicing has come because it is the day for the vindication of Jehovah’s name before all creation. Then Jehovah by his King poured out his spirit upon the faithful remnant yet in the flesh. He sent them out as his official witnesses to all the nations. He brought them into his Theocratic organization, and willingly they submitted themselves to Jehovah and his King as “The Higher Powers”.
” “He counteth the number of the stars; he calleth them all by their names.” (Ps. 147 : 4, A. R. I7.) This shows the time as being the night of Satan’s world, the period when “the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people”. (Isa. 60:1, 2) In the dark period is when Jehovah’s stellar bodies rise and shine and declare God’s glory to God-fearing persons on earth. Christ Jesus is Jehovah’s Chief Star, “the bright and morning star,” the foretold “Star out of Jacob”. (Rev. 22:16; Num. 24:17) The remnant of his body members must likewise shine, reflecting his light of the Kingdom, and they do so in obedience to God’s command, and turn many to God’s righteous Government. “And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever.” (Dan.12:3) God counts thenumber of these stars who shine with Christ Jesus in the firmament of the new heavens, and he numbers them as 144,000. No more faithful ones than this shall be exalted to heavenly glory.—Rev. 7:4-8; 14:1,3; Luke 12: 32.
M The names which the persecutors under demon influence call these of the ‘star’ class to condemn and misrepresent them do not matter; only the name which the Creator Jehovah calls them matters. He promised that the time would come when he would call these symbolic “stars” by a new name which his own mouth would name. That name was hidden away in his holy Word. Christ Jesus first officially receives that new name, but he also promised to share it with all the members of his “body”, including the “feet of him”, or the remnant yet on earth after his coming to the temple. To the overcoming remnant he gives a pledge of the new name, like a “white stone, and in
the stone a new name written”, and he further says: “I will write upon him the name of my God [Jehovah], and the name of the city of my God [to identify them as citizens of that capital organization], which is new Jerusalem, which cometh down out of heaven from my God: and I will w’rite upon him mv new name.”—Isa. 62: 2; Rev. 2:17; 3:12; Isa. 43:10,12; 44:8.
11 In 1931, after a “work-day” of twelve years of faithful activity in the vineyard of God’s service, the remnant were rewarded with the revelation of their new name, namely, “Jehovah’s witnesses.” Thereafter they joined in the great “Hallelujah” chorus with Christ Jesus, “The Faithful and True Witness,” as never in the years previous. Increasing numbers of persons of good-will heard the joyful sound and took their stand for Jehovah and his Chief Witness and they joined in and swelled the “Hallelujah” song, blending their voices in perfect unity with the remnant of spiritual Israel. These become the Lord’s “other sheep”. They know from God’s Word that the chief work and calling of the remnant is to give a witness to Jehovah in vindication of His name, and that this “one thing” the remnant must do. There are not two things, including a different commission for the “other sheep”. Hence nothing these dear “sheep” could do could take pre-eminence over what is the ordained chief work of the remnant, and therefore the “other sheep” must be the active companions of the remnant in doing the “one thing” of bearing witness to the truth concerning Jehovah and his Kingdom. Thus these “other sheep” become witnesses for Him, on the same wise that the faithful men before Christ’s death, from John the Baptist all the way back to Abel, were the never-quitting witnesses for Jehovah.
SUPREME POWER
” “Great is our Lord, and of great power: his understanding is infinite”; or, “of his understanding there is no number.” (Ps. 147 :5; •margin) The number of things which He understands perfectly is as infinite as his universal creation, because he created all good things for his intelligent purposes. He is therefore the Lord and Master, the Supreme One. In contradiction of the Devil, who ordains himself to seek universal domination and who also ordains the political-religious organization on earth to seek “world domination”, the Lord God Jehovah has ordained himself and his Theocratic King, Christ Jesus, to be “The Higher Powers”. (Rom. 13:1-4) Jehovah’s ordination of power alone shall stand the supreme test. He says: “I am Jehovah, that is my name; and my glory will I not give to another, neither my praise unto graven images.” (Isa. 42:8, A. R. V.) His King warns all the covenant people of God to be subject
200
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
to the Supreme One of the Higher Powers, saying: “For Jehovah your God, he is God of gods, and Lord of lords, the great God, the mighty, and the terrible, who regardeth not persons, nor taketh reward.” (Deut. 10:17, A. R. 7.) His covenant people, therefore, place first importance upon Jehovah’s commands and obey him rather than worldly men. They hail Him as “great”.
” In obeying Jehovah’s commandment to be his constant witnesses they are “strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might”. (Acts 5:29; Eph. 6:10) Though oftentimes they do not understand the meaning of all the difficulties they meet up with in his service, yet they trust him without question. They are persuaded that his infinite understanding grasps every detail of his “strange work” in which they are having a part. He understands every part of his organization of his witnesses on earth, understands all their perplexities, understands all their trials and sufferings at enemy hands, and knows how to handle them wisely and competently for his name’s sake and its vindication. There is nothing that the enemy attempt or do that He does not understand, even before their wicked plans are completed. As his courageous servants push ahead against nasty interferences concertedly springing up in all quarters, and as they carefully and anxiously look to what can be done to keep on going, Jehovah God has never failed to guide them and to outmaneuver their enemies with His perfect understanding and attention to the bewildering mix-up of details. His work must go through.
24 Jehovah sets the meek in contrast with the wicked. “Jehovah upholdeth the meek: he bringeth the wicked down to the ground.” (Ps. 147: 6, A. R. 7.) The wicked proceed upon the theory that God helps those who help themselves, and they set out to grab at world domination and at religious monopoly and other things unauthorized by Jehovah and in willful opposition to his Theocracy in the face of warning by his meek ones. They therefore ignore the stop signals. They violently trample over the meek to attain their goal, in complete disregard of the righteous laws of the land and the rights and liberties of the meek or teachable ones who look to God and Christ Jesus as their Teachers and who do what they are taught from God’s Word. By self-assumptions and by the help of religion the wicked exalt themselves to positions of power and authority in defiance of Jehovah and his anointed King, even to declaring it illegal to bear the “new name" from God and to preach Jehovah’s Theocracy. But under this crushing world-pressure Jehovah’s everlasting arms hold up his meek and obedient servants, and these trample under foot the opposition of the wicked and carry on as His ordained ministers of the gospel. Christ Jesus,
who is the Meekest of God’s meek ones, already has cast Satan out of heaven and down to the ground and has him and his demon and human agents under his soles as his footstool. At Armageddon He will twist his heel upon them all as upon a viper. Jehovah’s servants will walk over the places where these wicked ones once were.
KEEP SINGING
’’“Sing unto Jehovah with thanksgiving; sing praises upon the harp unto our God.” (Ps. 147:7, A. R. 7.) Religious leaders and their allies in public affairs work against the good of the people when they frame mischief by law to prevent the keeping of this commandment of the Most High God. “It is a good thing to give thanks unto Jehovah, and to sing praises unto thy name, O Most High; to show forth thy lovingkindness in the morning [as by house-to-house calls with the message], and thy faithfulness every night [as by back-calls on the interested meek persons], with an instrument of ten strings, and with the psaltery [sound equipment to accompany the message given by the lips]; with a solemn sound upon the harp. For thou, Jehovah, hast made me glad through thy work [in which I am privileged to have an active personal part] : I will triumph [over the combined enemy opposition] in the works of thy hands.”—Ps. 92:1-4, A. R. V.
“Here “the harp” symbolizes God’s Word as written in the Bible. The singing or declaration of the message by the voices .of Jehovah’s servants must be in tune and harmony with this foundation-toned Word, The Holy Scriptures. In parts of the earth where the enemies of The Theocracy have officially and judicially declared Jehovah’s good work outlawed and taken away the literature explaining the Scriptures, and in other parts where the upset world conditions have made it impossible to get supplies of literature, there Jehovah’s covenant-keeping servants continue as true Christians to preach as the apostle Paul did (Acts 20:20), and using just the Bible itself, either carried with them or already in the homes of the people they visit. They must keep singing praise to Jehovah God.
” ‘Wlio covereth the heavens with clouds, who pre-pareth rain for the earth, who maketh grass to grow upon the mountains.” (Ps. 147:8, A. R. 7.) Those clouds denote Jehovah’s presence by his representative Messenger, Christ Jesus, just as His pillar of cloud by which he guided the children of Israel forty years through the wilderness symbolized Jehovah’s invisible presence with and his protection over his covenant people by His mighty messenger or angel whom he sent before the marching Israelites. His mightiest Angel or Messenger has come to the temple for judgment. He is present with blessings and pro
July 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
201
tection for the faithful remnant who pass the judgment and for the loving “other sheep” who do good to the remnant and wThom the King at the temple places on his right side of favor and mercy.
18	The heavenly King of The Theocracy constitutes the “new heavens” in power since A.D. 1914, and the blessings of Jehovah God come down therefrom like refreshing rain upon his faithful servants in the earth, the remnant and their companions. These have had their eyes opened by God’s Word to see the anti-Theocratic, totalitarian “abomination of desolation” standing up in place of and as a substitute for God’s kingdom. Therefore they have fled from all parts inside and outside of “Christendom” and taken refuge at the “mountains”, the Great Rock Jehovah and the Foundation Rock Christ Jesus, The Higher Powers. (Matt. 24:15-18) There all those who seek meekness and righteousness grow and flourish like the grass, increasing to a multitude without number, and they shall not be cut down by Jehovah’s Executioner of the wicked in the “battle of that great day of God Almighty”.
” All living creation is dependent upon Jehovah’s providence. “He giveth to the beast his food, and to the young ravens which cry.” (Ps. 147 : 9) When Job was suffering greatly from an incurable affliction and being condemned and persecuted by pious religionists before all the public, Jehovah strengthened Job’s faith in God’s concern for him and unfailing provision for him by pointing to the divine care for the brute beasts away out in the wilderness. Then He asked Job: “Who provideth for the raven his prey, when his young ones cry unto God, and wander for lack of food!” (Job 38:41, A. R. 7.) Many who are free and unencumbered, like those wild beasts and birds, and who could devote their entire time to the direct service of The Theocracy in the field, fail or refuse to take advantage of that blessed opportunity. Their excuse is the fear that they will not be taken care of by the Lord while so engaged as pioneers in daily and continuously praising him in obedience to His wise command. As answer to such an excuse the psalmist, and also the man without where to lay his head, Christ Jesus, pointed to the beasts and birds. If God sees to it that the helpless little ravens in the nest, which birds God’s own law classifies as unclean, are fed, will he not also faithfully provide lodging, food and raiment for one in a covenant with Him and who with lips clean of fear of man obediently carries out God’s commandments and glorifies him! The raven was the first creature to go forth from the ark and to stay out and trust to Jehovah God to provide for it in the earth cleansed by the Flood. (Gen. 8:6,7) “Consider the ravens: for they neither sow nor reap; which neither have storehouse nor barn; and God feedeth them: how much more
are ye better than the fowls!” (Luke 12: 24) Ask the hard-working pioneers; they will tell you. Neither does Jehovah fail to provide the spiritual food from his table to his servants who maintain their integrity right in the lair of the terrible totalitarian “beast”. By ways as strange as by the ravens which fed Elijah, Jehovah gets his spiritual food through to those who are determined to keep their integrity toward him and his Government even if threatened to starve physically for it as punishment.
80	The totalitarian powers put their trust in speedy vehicles of destruction and glorify the toughened limbs of their tramping hordes that goose-step to the attack on democratic principles and liberties, and on the free and open service of Jehovah God. While this crushing of God-given rights and God-ordained service goes on, the cardinals and other members of the Hierarchy bestow their blessings and pray to God to show his pleasure and grant military victory to these totalitarian aggressors. Will their being clergymen with skirts and crucifixes and split hats induce Almighty God to change his position on the matter and answer their prayers and high-low masses? The Provider for the weak, innocent young ravens answers: “He delighteth not in the strength of the horse: he taketh no pleasure in the legs of a man. Jehovah taketh pleasure in them that fear him, in those that hope in his lovingkindness.”—Ps. 147 :10,11, A. R. V.
81	Said Jesus when a man on earth: “Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.” (Matt. 10: 28) In such fear of God Jesus prayed in the garden of Gethsemane while the traitor Judas led “a great multitude, with swords and staves, from the chief priests and elders of the people”, to arrest him and drag him to his death. (Matt. 26: 3G-48) Jesus feared to displease Jehovah, his heavenly Father, and he taught and himself illustrated obedience to God rather than to men. Hence to him there came the Father’s voice from heaven: “This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him.” (Matt. 17 : 5) His faithful remnant and his “other sheep” will therefore wisely do what he tells them to do; “because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps.” (1 Pet. 2:21) Following his example is the way to have the divine pleasure taken in one, and hence to receive the loving-kindness of God. The Lord God may permit his faithful and true witnesses to suffer long and keenly as in the case of Job. If, however, they refuse to be frightened off from his service by the “strength of the horse” and the “legs of a man”, be they even the two iron ‘flegs” of that terrible image described by Daniel (chapter two), God will in his well-ordered time show them his
202
STe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
mercy as he did to Job for keeping his integrity. "Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord; that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy.” (Jas. 5:11) Jehovah never disappoints the hope of those who sound forth His praises and leave the fighting and deliverance to him at Armageddon.
ORGANIZED PRAISE
” “Glorify, O Jerusalem, the Lord: praise thy God, 0 Zion.” (Ps. 147:12, Leeser’s translation) Here, both “Jerusalem” and “Zion” picture the capital organization of Jehovah, The Theocracy under Christ the King. Concerning him Jehovah says to all the rulers of this world who have set themselves against Jehovah and his Anointed: “Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion.” (Ps. 2:1-6) Who shall stand with Jehovah’s King on that “hill” or Government which is devoted to righteousness T The Revelation (14:1,3) answers: “And I looked, and, lo, a Lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an hundred forty and four thousand, having his Father’s name written in their foreheads. And they sung as it were a new song before the throne [of Jehovah God], and before the four beasts, and the elders: and no man could learn that song but the hundred and forty and four thousand, which were redeemed from the earth.”
” The remnant on earth are gathered into unity with the Lamb of God at Mount Zion. The “other sheep”, who also follow that Lamb, take refuge under that capital organization in submission to The Higher Powers. They are like the non-Israelite Nethinim who returned with the remnant from Babylon to Jerusalem and took up service of assistance to God’s ministers at the temple on Mount Zion. (Ezra 2:43,58,70; 7:7; 8:17,20; Neh. 7:73; 10:28,29) The command to “glorify” and “praise” Jehovah God is addressed to “Jerusalem” and “Zion”, that is, to the entire organization as one. This, therefore, is a call to action to the faithful remnant together with their zealous earthly companions, the Lord’s “other sheep”, to serve the Lord God in an organized manner, that is, as one united organization dedicated to the praise and glorifying of the Great Theocrat.
’* Why should these unite to “glorify Jehovah” and “praise thy God”, and be courageous and fearless about doing so! The good and undeniable reason is: “For he hath strengthened the bars of thy gates; he hath blessed thy children within thee. He maketh peace in thy borders; he filleth thee with the finest of the wheat [or, the fat of wheat (margin)].” (Ps. 147:13,14, A. R. F.) This is cause for the whole Theocratic organization in heaven and earth to rejoice, both the children of Zion who were sleeping in death and who were raised to life in the spirit at
the Lord’s coming to the temple in 1918, and also the “remnant of her seed” who are yet alive and remain on the earth; and both parts do rejoice together. And the invisible part with Christ Jesus on Mount Zion join with him in assisting the visible part or remnant in glorifying Jehovah and praising the only true and living God, in whose name they walk from henceforth, even for evermore.
” No battering ram of the enemy organization can crash in those barred gates of Zion and Jerusalem. That Theocracy is the strongest organization in the universe. Hence there only is the place of salvation for the remnant of Zion’s children. The Nethinim or “other sheep” must flee to it and take refuge under it before the battle of Armageddon begins for. the execution of all those who have not lined up on the side of Zion. Those that persecute the remnant and their companions because they take their stand for Zion and Jerusalem only cause themselves unnecessary troubles and hang a weighty stone about their necks: “Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling unto all the people round about, when they shall be in the siege both against Judah, and against Jerusalem. And in that day will I make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people: all that burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the earth be gathered together against it.” (Zech. 12: 2, 3) Let such remember what happened in one night to King Sennacherib’s 185,000 Assyrians that besieged Jerusalem.—Isa. 37: 33-38.
’• Amid all their persecutions for bearing and praising the name of Jehovah God, Zion’s “remnant of her seed” and their earthly companions are blessed above all other creatures on earth. (Matt. 5:10-12) There is no peace and unity in the world, in any worldly nation; for Satan’s house is divided against itself in the contest for world domination. But among those who are separate from the world and in covenant relationship with Jehovah and serving him according to his Theocratic rule there is peace. They pray for this peace to continue among them. (Ps. 122: 6-9) In peace they do the Lord’s work together. Their fighting is only against the demons. (Eph. 6:12) They mark all who cause divisions and disturbances, and avoid them as not being of God’s Theocratic organization. (Rom. 16:17,18) Gathered about the Lord’s table in the presence of their enemies, they feed upon the fullness of the “fat of wheat”, that is, the choicest life-sustaining truths of God’s Word concerning his Theocratic Government under Christ.
“HIS STRANGE WORK”
” ‘Tie sendeth forth his commandment upon earth: his word runneth very swiftly." (Ps. 147:15) Out from Zion goes forth God’s law to his remnant and
July 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
203
their companions on earth, and likewise to them goes forth his word of doctrine from Jerusalem. (Mic. 4:2) His specific command to them is to declare his name throughout all the earth and to publish the Kingdom gospel to all nations. He provides them with the understanding of his Word to that end. This work of publication and of education of the people of good-will must be done before the final end of Satan’s war-riddled organization. The time is limited, very short now, because that disastrous end is so close. Therefore the work must be pressed daily with all one's heart, mind, soul and strength, because it must be done quickly. To the accomplishment of this Jehovah has provided his Theocratic arrangement for his organized people. During the past twenty years he has equipped them with his revealed Word in print in the form of books, booklets, magazines, tracts and leaflets, also with sound equipment on wheels and portable, such as phonograph, and with vehicles of transportation, and with radio transmitters and land wires for telephonic carriage of speeches, and with loudspeakers and public-address systems. By these means, and with a small band of lively, fearless Kingdom publishers permeated with the zeal for Jehovah, God's word has indeed run very swiftly and encircled the world since 1918. It continues to run. Hundreds of millions of pieces of literature have been distributed from house to house, in over eighty languages; 1941 was the greatest year, of the most tremendous distribution in a single year to date. Millions are reading. “Let them read.” Hundreds of millions have heard and other millions yet hear by means of radio and by portable and mobile sound equipment.
35 To religious “Christendom” it is a “strange work”, and she objects thereto. The demons now try to regiment the work off the earth and to regiment all the people against it and all the publishers out of it. God's Word will continue to run swiftly until the purpose for which he has sent it forth is accomplished. (Isa. 55: 10,11) What is that purpose? This: to publish God's name and Theocracy world-wide; to serve all, rulers and common people alike, with clear warning; and to point the meek persons of good-will to the way of escape to the mountains of safety, Zion and Jerusalem. There is no time to delay flight. The abomination that maketh desolate” has appeared. Says the King of The Theocracy to the refugees: "But pray ye that your flight be not in the winter, neither on the sabbath day: for then shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be.” (Matt. 24:20.21) The winter is the time of Jehovah’s “strange act” of the great fight of Armageddon, and it follows immediately after the swift running of Jehovah’s Word, “his strange work.” Concerning his “strange act” of the Armageddon “winter” Psalm
147 :16,17, A. R. V., says: “He giveth snow like wool; he scattereth the hoar-frost like ashes. He casteth forth his ice like morsels: who can stand before his cold!”
“HIS STRANGE ACT"
'* Jehovah’s remnant of anointed witnesses and their companions are now’ undergoing experiences like those of Job. Out of the midst of the storm Jehovah spoke to Job of all His mighty works and asked Job: “Hast thou entered into the treasures of the snow! or hast thou seen the treasures of the hail, which I have reserved against the time of trouble, against the day of battle and war!” (Job 38: 22, 23) The Job class shall enter into an understanding of those secrets w’hen Jehovah performs his act of vindicating his name at Armageddon. There these phenomena shall operate to God’s praise: “Praise Jehovah from the earth, ye sea-monsters, and all deeps; fire and hail, snow and vapor; stormy wind, fulfilling his w’ord.”—Ps. 148: 7, 8, A. It. V.
40	Then Jehovah will “be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may . . . bring to pass his act, his strange act”. (Isa. 28: 21) At Gibeon Jehovah fought for his covenant people Israel and pitched down from the skies huge hailstones upon the five anti-Theo-cratic kings and their combined armies: “they were more which died with hailstones than they whom the children of Israel slew with the sword.” And the very sun and moon appeared to stand still that day. Thereby also, besides vindicating his name, Jehovah delivered the people of good-w’ill w’ho were bottled up in Gibeon and threatened with death by the besieging enemies of God. (Josh. 10:9-14) The antitypical downpour of frozen destruction is yet due at Armageddon. Immediately after the Lord God sends his emphatic warning out of the north and troubles the totalitarian-world combine (Dan. 11:44), then the religionists of “Christendom” will say, as long foretold: “The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and we are not saved.” (Jer. 8:20) Then “his cold” will begin to set in, and they will seek refuge. There the biggest lie behind which the religious-political opposers of Jehovah’s Theocracy will hide for their protection is the “abomination of desolation”, which world organization they declare is the kingdom of God that they want and the real thing is not needed. Taking refuge in this organized lie will not avail at the time of the big fight. Warns Jehovah: “Judgment also will I lay to the line, and righteousness to the plummet; and the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow the hiding place.”—Isa. 28: 17.
41	In the winter months during the period of God’s “strange work” his witnesses have pressed on with the Kingdom message, thus losing no time. (Prov.
204
SEe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
31: 21) Also his King and the armies of heaven know how to fight in the cold of Armageddon’s battle as pictured in the exploit of King David’s fellow warrior: “And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a valiant man, of Kabzeel, who had done many acts, he slew two lionlike men of Moab: he went down also and slew a lion in the midst of a pit in time of snow.” (2 Sam. 23: 20) Describing God’s “strange work” and the winter action of destruction immediately following, Psalm 68:11,12,14 reads: “The Lord gave the word; great was the company of those that published it. Kings of armies did flee apace: and she that tarried at home divided the spoil. When the Almighty scattered kings in it, it was white as snow in [Mount] Salmon.” The cold of God’s judgment without mercy comes out of the north. It will be executed at that tribulation of Armageddon against the wicked who have shown no mercy to Jehovah’s Kingdom publishers on earth. Of such opposers of his Theocracy and reproachers of His name, “who can stand before his cold?” Not one. (Job 37:6-10) Those foreseeing this evil to come shortly, should be wise, like the ant, and make provision now to come out of the cold into the warmth of God's refuge.— Prov. 6:6; 30:25.
*2 Only those in and under God’s Theocratic organization during that battle shall weather the destructive cold of that terrible winter of Armageddon, and see the fair Kingdom weather that follows thereafter at Jehovah’s command. “He sendeth out his word, and melteth them: he causeth his wind [invisible power] to blow, and the waters flow.” (Ps. 147:18) It will be as when the waters of the world deluge had finished their destruction of the ungodly who filled the earth with debauchery and violence: “God remembered Noah, and every living thing, and all the cattle that was with him in the ark: and God made a wind to pass over the earth; and the waters asswaged.” (Gen. S: 1) Then Noah and his companions came forth into the cleansed earth.
*’ So too after the winter of Armageddon the remnant and their companions will come forth from their protected place under God’s hiding and enter into the glorious season of the Kingdom in its undisputed power over earth. (Job 37: 22-24) Pointing to the events of our time since 1914 Jesus said: “Behold the fig tree, and all the trees; when they now shoot forth, ye see and know of your own selves that summer is now nigh at hand. So likewise ye, when ye see these things come to pass, know ye that the kingdom of God is nigh at hand. Verily I say unto you, This generation [including the remnant] shall not pass away till
all be fulfilled.” (Luke 21:29-32) Then all that live on earth shall be cheered with the warmth of God’s mercy through his reigning King. Peace shall flow like a mighty river everlasting, and righteousness shall be multiplied on the earth like the waves of the sea, and His blessings shall drop like gentle rain. —Isa. 48:18; Ps. 72:6,7.
FAVOR AND RESPONSIBILITY
“To whom is Jehovah God now showing these things of his Word, and to whom is he giving his ordinances and regulations to publish that word swiftly abroad 1 “He showeth his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his ordinances unto Israel. He hath not dealt so with any nation; and as for his ordinances, they have not known them. Praise ye Jehovah.” (Ps. 147:19,20, A.R.V.; and Roth.) The nations of “Christendom” are like Esau and have sold their claimed birthright for a mess of pottage for their bellies. Contrariwise, like Jacob, the remnant of spiritual Israel have received the approval of Jehovah and obtained the spiritual portion. For his faithfulness and integrity Jehovah gave Jacob the new name of “Israel”, meaning “wrestling with God”, that is, holding fast to Jehovah God and his Theocracy in the time of peril until one’s integrity is proved and the blessing obtained.—Gen. 32: 20-28.
“ This showing of the glories of his Word and of what he requires of his covenant people, that is, his statutes, judgments, ordinances and regulations, places a tremendous responsibility upon those of Jehovah’s “holy nation” and their companions, who share their blessings and the accompanying responsibilities. This outstanding favor Jehovah bestows upon them for his name’s sake, which name must be declared throughout the earth before he shows liis power over Satan and his organization in the showdown fight. There must be no slowdown; his word must yet run swiftly, for that is the statute and ordinance which his devoted people must obey. The nations of “Christendom” know not His word and Theocratic regulations, and will continue to oppose and persecute in proud, stubborn resistance till Armageddon’s winter freezes them into everlasting inaction. Well foreknowing this stiff opposition to His word and its swift bearers, and well aware of his exclusive mercies and favors to the remnant and their companions out of all nations, the Lord God commands as his closing word: “Hallelujah!” that is, “Praise ye Jehovah!” It is his urgent call to his favored ones to action. The faithful spring to the response.
For Jehovah giveth wisdom; out of his mouth cometh knowledge and understanding: he layeth up sound wisdom for the upright; he w a shield to them that walk «n integrity; that he may guard the paths of justice, and preserve the way of his satnts.
—Proverbs 2: 6-8, A. R. V.
EVERYTHING FOR THE ISSUE
THE issue is universal domination, or, more broadly stated, Who is supreme, and who shall rule the universe, Jehovah God or Satan! That issue will be decided in vindication of the name of Jehovah. Since this is to be accomplished by The Theocracy, or God’s kingdom under Christ Jesus, the Kingdom is the great doctrine of the Bible. There is the cost of self-denial to pay for any creature on earth to have a share in the vindication of Jehovah’s name. (Matt. 16: 24) Those who have a desire to participate in the vindication of His name, whether as members of The Theocracy or as faithful subjects thereof, should study carefully the Theocratic Scriptures, that they may walk worthily before the Lord God. What the world calls “character development” could never alone bring to any creature Jehovah’s approval which means life to that creature. Those who serve Him and receive his approval therefor must do much more than merely lead a course of chastity and cleanliness. Their being chaste and clean is for a higher purpose than for mere respectability; it is for the purpose of being proper instruments in God’s service in behalf of the great issue. Those consecrated to God’s will must do more than merely exercise chastity and cleanliness. They must see to it that their every faculty, in the best of condition possible, is devoted to God and his kingdom.
No compromise can be approved; no neutrality, nor middle course. “What concord hath Christ with Belial! or what part hath he that believeth with an infidel! And what agreement hath the temple of God with idols! for ye are the temple of the living God; as God hath said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty.”—2 Cor. 6:15-18.
This means that the members of the “body of Christ” and also his “other sheep” must be entirely separate from Satan’s organization and those who support that wicked organization, and must devote themselves unselfishly to God and his kingdom. Have any of the servants of Jehovah, then, a reason for saying they do not need to observe the rules of common decency! Could anyone for a moment conclude that by following a course of decency and chastity and cleanliness, such is the course of self-denial and meets all the requirements of those who gain everlasting life and serve for the vindication of God’s name! Certainly not!
Referring to God’s promises of receiving those who touch not the unclean thing as his children separate from the world, the apostle adds: “Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.” (2 Cor. 7:1) Any filthiness, whether it be of the flesh or of the spirit, is abominable in His sight. Cleanliness of the flesh and spirit is the very opposite of filthiness, and means that the creature must be clean in body and in mind and use the natural faculties with which he is endowed to the glory of God. Having taken his position on the side of Jehovah in the great issue, and having been granted by Jehovah the great privilege of being associated
203
with his Theocratic organization, he must deport himself in keeping with that holy organization.
The armies of “the king of the north” and of “the king of the south”, and the religious organizations with them, are seeing to it that those fighting for world domination are amply supplied with tobacco. The Encyclopedia Britannica (Vol. 26) says: “As the continent of America was opened up and explored, it became evident that the consumption of tobacco, especially by smoking, was a universal and immemorial usage, in many cases bound up with the most SIGNIFICANT AND SOLEMN TRIBAL CEREMONIES.” That means the use of that herb was associated with demonism, to bring its dupes under the power of the demons. Is the use of tobacco, then, clean or filthy within the meaning of the Scriptures! The use of tobacco is extremely filthy, regardless of the form in which it is used. It befouls the body and dulls the mental faculties. It makes the user offensive to those with whom he comes in contact, and works great injury to the user and is a dishonor to God and Christ. The use of tobacco has greatly demoralized the human race. It creates an appetite for other impure and filthy things. Under no condition is the use of tobacco approved by God’s "Word, although not mentioned by name.
It, therefore, does not seem consistent for anyone of God’s organization or those who have been privileged by His grace to enter the “cities of refuge”, to use tobacco. No one using tobacco is permitted to remain at Bethel home.
The Lord has been pleased to use Timothy to depict conditions in His visible organization at the present time. In 1 Timothy 4:12 we read, “Be thou an example of the believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity” ; and in Romans 13 : 9,10 the apostle Paul clearly defines what constitutes the fulfilling of the law, emphasizing the fact that love worketh no ill to his neighbor. These scriptures bring forcibly to the attention of the Lord's people that those who are proper representatives of the Lord and the Lord’s organization must be examples to the believers and of the believers; that they must follow a course of action that will work no ill to their neighbor.
For these reasons those appointed to represent the Society as special or general pioneer publishers or as servants in the various company organizations are required to refrain from the use of tobacco in any form. If anyone using tobacco is recommended and appointed to serve in a special capacity and this fact is unknown to the Society, such person should inform the Society that he feels it necessary’ to use tobacco and therefore withdraws from the assigned position. Those who persist in the use of the harmful weed cannot be considered as proper examples in word, in charity, in spirit, in faith, or in purity, and by their course of action the example they are setting forth works ill to their neighbor. They are rebelling against a reasonable requirement of the Lord’s organization. As a consequence, according to the apostle’s reasoning in the thirteenth chapter of Romans, these people do not have love and the spirit of the Lord is not fulfilled in them, because they are walking after the flesh and not after the spirit.—Rom. 8:1.
To be sure, the Society has no power or authority or desire to say that a person who wishes to use tobacco may
206
WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
not do so. Nor can it say, “You may not witness for the Kingdom.” But it can say who are its appointed representatives. Each one must decide whether he or she wishes to be in or out of line for privileges of service. The Society is committed first, last and all the time to the Lord’s side of every issue, and in this question must insist that those who are appointed as direct representatives of the Society in any capacity must refrain from the use of tobacco in all its forms. Those who represent the Lord and his kingdom must be clear of mind and avoid all things that would interfere with their Kingdom service.
“Perfecting holiness in the fear of God.” (2 Cor. 7:1) How may one accomplish that thing? Holiness means an unqualified devotion to Jehovah. In the language of the Scriptures that means to be blind to everything except God’s service. “Who is blind, but my servant? or deaf, as my messenger that I sent? who is blind as he that is perfect, and blind as the Lord’s servant?” (Isa. 42:19) The servant must at all times strive to do what is pleasing to the heavenly Father, and never qualify that course of action because of the fear of man or in order to receive the approval of man. “The fear of man bringeth a snare.” (Prov. 29:25) The approval of God is all-important. “In the fear of God” means deporting oneself in the manner that will please Jehovah; and to determine what that manner is he must learn it from the Scriptures. He fears lest he should fail to receive God’s approval. “The fear of the Lord is to hate evil: pride, and arrogancy, and the evil way, and the froward mouth, do I hate.”—Prov. 8:13.
“Evil” is that which works injury. No person is justified in working injury to himself, and certainly it is wrong to work injury to another. The use of such a poisonous weed as tobacco works injury both to the user and to those who are in contact with the user. This is particularly true with regard to smoking tobacco. If a man chooses to injure himself by the use of tobacco, no one has the right to say he shall not use it, but certainly no person has the right to blow tobacco smoke into the nostrils of another person. The habit of tobacco smoking is one of the most selfish that is exercised by human creatures; and, being selfish, it is the very opposite of love. The smoker fails to give any consideration to the rights and privileges of others about, to whom tobacco may be offensive. There is every reason against the use of tobacco; there is not one reason that supports its use. Surely, then, no Christian who is serving God could have an honest and sincere desire at any time to use the filthy weed. By doing so he is working injury, hence doing evil, and is following “the evil way”. These things God declares he hates. The fact that Jehovah hates that which works evil, coupled with the fact that tobacco does work evil, is conclusive proof that tobacco is the Devil’s weed employed for the purpose of demoralizing human creatures, particularly in the “time of the end”. The use of tobacco having originated with demonism, it should be expected that the “prince of the demons” would introduce its use into “Christendom” by religionists and popularize it there among religious practitioners. The contaminating influence thereof has spread to all parts of the earth. Imagine the “great multitude” of Armageddon survivors, under the righteous rule of the visible “princes in all the
earth”, with cigarettes in their lips and trying to carry out the divine mandate to fill the earth with a healthy-blooded, righteous race!
MORALITY
What is said concerning tobacco likewise applies to all things that tend to demoralize the creature. Any course of action that is filthy or unclean should be avoided by those who represent Jehovah. Some have foolishly tried to read into the Watchtower publications that which they do not contain, in order to find a justification for a wrongful course taken by them. Some have unwisely concluded that if they were engaged in the house-to-house witness work they could pursue with freedom from punishment any course their appetites might call for. One should remember that merely engaging in the witness work is not all that is required. The apostle Paul said he had “taught you publicly, and from house to house” (Acts 20:20), but he further said: “But I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection; lest that by any means, when i have preached to others, I myself should be a castaway ” (1 Cor. 9: 27) Those engaged in the field service, therefore, should be pure and clean in their relations with any creatures; they should be kind, dignified, and employ proper language. It is wholly inconsistent for a representative of the Lord to carry a chip on his shoulder and walk up to a person and say: ‘You are of the Devil’s organization.” That is not the prerogative of Jehovah’s witnesses Our business is to comfort all that mourn and to present the truth from God’s Word in contrast with the wickedness of the Devil’s organization, and then let each decide for himself to which he belongs.
Concerning marriage, there seem to be some who have Entirely misconstrued what the Scriptures say about it and what has been published in the Watchtower publications. Persons who enter into a contractual relationship must first be qualified to make such a contract. If a man has a wife or the woman has a husband, then, of course, such are not qualified to make a further contract with another. The Scriptures provide that the marital relationship may be severed under certain conditions. (Deut. 24:1-4 ; Matt 5:31,32) When the relationship is duly severed, the innocent party is’ qualified to enter into a new contract. Marriage presupposes that the parties thereto are Scnp-turally and legally qualified to marry.
A marriage in the sight of God, therefore, may be properly defined as a contract or agreement entered into between man and woman to become husband and wife, and by the full performance by both parties of the terms of that contract. A legal marriage is properly defined as a contract entered into between man and woman to become husband and wife and then to have a ceremony performed in the presence of witnesses by one legally authorized to solemnize marriages. Such ceremonies comply with the law of the land, and it is proper to observe and obey the law where the law of the land does not directly conflict with God’s law. Since the law of God does not prohibit the performance of ceremonies, and the law of the land provides that they shall be performed by a third person, the ceremony by some such officiating person is lawful and proper. It is therefore seen that a ceremony performed by a justice
July 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER,
207
of the peace, a magistrate, a judge of a court of records, or other judicial officer authorized to do so, is just as effective and binding as that performed by any priest or clergyman. The fee charged by the clergyman is often exorbitant and works a hardship on the poor. The marriage relationship is too sacred a thing to depend upon a few words spoken by an imperfect man, whether he be a priest or a judicial officer. It is also too sacred to be annulled by the whim, decree or opinion of some officer of the law.
Concerning the marital relationship the Lord Jesus said: “Have ye not read, that he which made them at the beginning, made them male and female, and said, For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife: and they twain shall be one flesh ? Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder. They say unto him, Why did Moses then command to give a writing of divorcement, and to put her away [Deut. 24:1,2] ? He saith unto them, Moses, because of the hardness of your hearts, suffered you to put away your wives: but from the beginning it was not so. And I say unto you, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be for fornication, and shall marry another, committeth adultery: and whoso marrieth her which is put away doth commit adultery.” (Matt. 19:4-9) See 1 Corinthians 7:1-15.
INTOXICANTS
The use of wine is authorized by the Scriptures, but the use of it must be in moderation. To use wine in moderation is manifestly proper; otherwise the Lord would not have caused to be recorded in his Word, with his approval, instances of its use by his faithful servants There is a wide distinction between the moderate use of wine and the use of tobacco in any form. The latter is not approved under any condition, whereas wine is frequently spoken of with approval in the Word of God—Ps. 104:15.
Moderation in all things is the proper and Scriptural course. (Prov. 25:28) An immoderate eater is a glutton. A drunkard and a glutton are placed in the same class, and both are disapproved by the Lord. (Prov. 23:21; Deut. 21: 20) The Scriptural admonition is to take “a little wine for thy stomach’s sake”, but one who is suited for service in God's organization is “not given to much wine”. (1 Tim. 5: 23; 3 : 8) If one finds he cannot take a moderate amount of wine for his well-being, then he should avoid it altogether. If it works injury to himself or to any other person, then it should not be used.
In harmony with what is here said it is written: “Be not among winebibbers; among riotous eaters of flesh: for the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty; and drowsiness shall clothe a man with rags.” (Prov. 23 : 20, 21) Manifestly Jesus used wine and ate food, and that furnished an excuse for the Pharisees to charge Jesus with being a winebibber and glutton and a friend of publicans and sinners. Concerning this matter Jesus himself said: “The Son of man came eating and drinking [not mere water, of course], and they say, Behold a man gluttonous, and a winebibber, a friend of publicans and sinners. But wisdom [also as to eating and drinking] is justified of her children.” (Matt. 11:19) Of course, the Pharisees charged him with excesses, but falsely, because Jesus always does right.
Prohibitionists quote Proverbs 23:31: “Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it giveth his colour in the cup, when it moveth itself aright.” Rotherham’s translation of this text reads: “Do not look on wine when it becometh red, when it giveth in the cup its sparkle, glideth down smoothly.” Some have insisted that this text means that no one should ever look at wine; but that is an unreasonable construction of the scripture. Wine made from certain grapes is red at all times and does not change its color. When a man, however, has drunk wine to excess he begins to see “red”. What this text really means is: Do not look on wine to use it when you see red, that is, when everything looks red to you. When it looks red to you, and slides down easily, then it is time to let it alone; you have had enough or too much. Do not tarry longer at it. —Isa. 5:11; Prov. 23 : 30.
When one is engaged in the Lord’s service, strong drink in any form should be avoided. To those who served in the priest’s office God gave such commandment in these words: “Do not drink wine nor strong drink, thou, nor thy sons with thee, when ye go into the tabernacle of the congregation, lest ye die: it shall be a statute for ever throughout your generations; and that ye may put difference between holy and unholy, and between unclean and clean.” (Lev. 10:9,10) Here the clear inference is that it was not improper to drink wine moderately when not serving in the tabernacle. At feasts the Israelites were commanded to bring certain offerings unto the Lord, and “the drink offering thereof shall be of wine [not unfermented grape juice]”. (Lev. 23:13) When one is engaged in God’s service he should avoid wine and other intoxicating drinks. That is not the proper time for such things.
To decide the proper course, bear this in mind: The time has come to settle the primary issue and vindicate Jehovah’s name. He has graciously accepted the consecrating ones into his service and made them his witnesses and representatives of The Theocracy. The course of action pursued by such, then, must be in keeping with his Word, and such, therefore, must avoid and shun improper, unelean and unchaste things.
The witnesses of Jehovah should deport themselves in keeping with his righteous Theocracy under Christ, which shall settle the issue to the vindication of Jehovah Let no one be so unwise as to think he can pursue any kind of loose course merely because he knows that humans cannot be expected to bring themselves to perfection in the flesh. The fact that he is imperfect does not mean he should not war at all times against the imperfections so as the better to serve the Lord. (1 John 2:6; Eph. 5:14-18) This is the “evil day”. Satan and his agents are using and will continue to use every possible means to cause Jehovah’s witnesses to deflect, turn away from the proper course, break their integrity toward God, and thus be not found “blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ”. (1 Cor. 1:8) It is therefore needful for each one to be watchful and to hold oneself strictly within the rules laid down by the Scriptures. Jehovah’s covenant people are in a real fight, and now they must maintain their integrity toward Him by faithfully representing him, perfecting holiness (perfect devotion to righteousness) in the fear of God.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
"LET THEM READ” (IDAHO)
"While calling back on Children book obtainers with the special Watchtower campaign offer, I called at the home of a 79-year-old Catholic gentleman. The following conversation ensued. Jehovah’s witness: T have an important announcement on this phonograph record; I should like to play it for you.’ Mr. T----: ‘I haven’t got a bit of use
for a phonograph and I don’t want to hear it. But that blue book [Children] you left here was the most enlightening thing I have ever seen: I have gone to [Catholic] church for forty years three times every Sunday and it took that book to show me what I was going to.’ Witness: ‘This phonograph recording speaks of the same things that the book tells about.’ Mr. T---: “Well, come on in and
play it for me, then.’ After hearing the record ‘Instruction’ he immediately took the book Religion and a year’s subscription for The Watchtower. Then he told me this: ‘Since you were here last I have read this book Children nine times clear through and get more good from it each time.’ This shows the importance of calling on all Children obtainers with the Watchtower offer. Let them read!”
IN THE BASTION OF DEMOCRACY, ENGLAND
“I was cycling through Fareham, wearing my Watchtower magazine bag, when someone in the street called out to me to come back for a moment. I went back and recognized an air-raid warden with whom I had previously had several talks. It seems he had read the newspaper reports about Louisa Hercock’s imprisonment and was really mad about the false statements made about Jehovah’s witnesses. He asked me for the true facts of the case. I was able to give him a witness and he was thrilled about it all. He said: ‘It’s a pity there are not a few more people like you about. Let me give you something towards your work.’ I took out my sample Watchtower, explaining its mission, etc. I told him he would receive a copy every fortnight in return for the money he had given me. He said he would be glad to have any more literature I could obtain for him, so that he could pass it on to his friends. This newspaper publicity is finding the ‘sheep’ as well as the ‘goats’.”—Portsmouth.
‘‘We visited an old couple once a week. The woman was blind and we used to read The Watchtower aloud and as far as possible hold a model study. Later they were removed to an institution. We followed them so that we could continue with the reading. This resulted in a Children book study being held in the ward. The attendance increased until they banned it. The institution has now been converted into an infirmary, and a number of people from Hull have been evacuated there. We have called on some of these and obtained a Watchtower subscription and started several model studies. One old lady of 91 is looking forward to being young in the Kingdom. Her knowledge of the Bible is wonderful. She had read Children, Deliverance, Salvation, Religion and Creation, and we keep her supplied with The Watchtower. Recently a small group of us were doing pavement witnessing, when an army officer came up and asked whether we had any of ‘Rutherford’s tracts’. He said he had been on the lookout for the Watchtower bags for some time, but had not seen any about. He was seeking the truth. He obtained a Watchtower and model study booklet.”—British pioneer.
BEFORE THE FALL OF RANGOON, BURMA
"Thank you [Gloucester company, England] for your great kindness in supplying the Rangoon company with the much-needed food. I am sure the company will appreciate this effort on your part and will praise Jehovah God for making it possible for us out here to get His message. At present I am 500 miles away from Rangoon, but will be going back for leave next week. The copies of Enemies, Religion, and Theocracy you sent out are the only ones in Burma, and you can just imagine the eagerness of everyone to get hold of one of them. The Australian pioneers went to Chungking, China, and now the Burma government will not allow tiem to return until after the war. We miss them very much, and yet in their absence we get along, with the studies, back-calls and witnessing with Bibles. Anything coming from America gets burnt. We must carry on singing our victory song and never give in to the demons. Jehovah is our strength, shield and buckler, and in Him we trust.”
OBEYING GOD IN MISSISSIPPI
“Sunday morning the county sheriff, a deputy and a paid ‘patriot’ came to our trailer to take us to jail because someone reported we were ‘overthrowing the government’. They would have jailed us except that the man on whose place we’re staying told them they had better investigate first because he had seen nothing wrong with our literature and lectures. After they had looked over the “Law-abiding' pamphlet and the booklets God and the State and Exposing Fifth Column, the sheriff was satisfied, but the paid ‘patriot’ wanted to take our lectures and phonographs home to play. We told him they were in use every day but if he would sit down we’d run some lectures for him. That didn’t suit him. When he found the sheriff was not going to arrest us he told us to stop putting out the literature, for, although he knew we were sincere and innocent of wrongdoing, the people who wrote and published it had an entirely different motive and had put just enough enticing things in it to cover up their real purpose. Whereupon he was informed that in that case he was getting the eart before the horse in coming to us. And besides, there were people all over the world distributing this literature, and surely not all of them eould be fools. The sheriff asked us to leave so he wouldn’t have to arrest us. He said the town (Wiggins) was all stirred up and we’d have trouble if we stayed. We stated our firm intentions of staying, by the Lord’s grace. The man on whose place we’re living watched, and, after thinking it over, became so indignant that he went to the sheriff’s home and gave him a good witness and reminded him of Matthew 18:6 concerning the millstone. Next day we went to the courthouse to show the sheriff some similar cases that had been won and tried to play him a lecture He was very reasonable, but in a few minutes the prosecuting attorney came in. He bellowed around and left after shouting we had no brains. Later the sheriff warned us again to leave the county so he wouldn’t have to arrest us, saying that the prosecuting attorney was bent on running us out and hinted at the new law passed by the state. We again informed him of our intention to stay. . . . A man of good-will told the sheriff and prosecuting attorney that if they put us in jail he was there with bond to get us out. They haven’t put us in. Not yet!”
208
THE WATCHTOWER-
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street -	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
officers
N. H. Knorr, President________W. E. Van Ambukgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.’* - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with ail power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death In order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH'S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it Is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth" with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible Instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It Is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It Is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It Is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not Indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yeart.-v Subscription Price
United Statzs, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foezign. $1 50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6». American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made tn the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian_________________40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian.......... 7	Beresford Road, Stratbfield. N. S. W., Australia
South African Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several lanpuapes.J
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year la required by the postal regulations.
Kotice to Suhscnhers.- Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. 7., under the Act of March S, ISIS.
“COMFORT” TESTIMONY PERIOD
To Jehovah’s witnesses the month of August is known as the “Comfort" Testimony Period. During these 31 days a special effort will be made on the part of Jehovah’s witnesses to comfort as many people as they possibly can with the truths as set forth in the Word of Jehovah God. To aid those who love righteousness the book Children along with the booklet Hope will be offered to the people on a contribution of 25c. These two publications set forth a message which shows there is something worth while living for. Those persons who trust in Jehovah’s kingdom and know that this is the only hope for the world will proclaim the message contained in these publications and make them available to as many persons as they can possibly meet during August. “Comfort” Testimony Period will be a blessing to all those who share in the preaching of the gospel. Make your report of activity to your local company servant, or if you are not associated with a company, report direct to the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of August 16: “Defeat of Persecution,” fl 1-14 inclusive, The Watchtower July 15, 1942.
Week of August 23: “Defeat of Persecution," fl 15-27 inclusive, The Watchtower July 15, 1942.
Week of August 30: “Defeat of Persecution,” fl 28-40 inclusive, The Watchtower July 15, 1942.
“CONSOLATION”
Do you find enlightenment and joy in reading The Watch-towerf Then you are certain to find enjoyment and profit in reading its companion magazine, Consolation, put out by the same publishers. With many thousands Consolation serves a vital and important need in building them up in faith, hope and courage in these days of spreading infidelity, hopelessness and fear, and thus brings its readers solid comfort. It does not, of course, take the place of The Watchtower, which is devoted exclusively to Bible study and instruction. Consolation actually complements this magazine by publishing true-to-fact, uncensored news concerning world conditions and happenings which the commcicial publications fear and refuse to print but which the trusting public should learn so as to be warned of the operations and purposes of deadly enemies, and so be able to free oneself from their power and influence and thus avoid disaster. Consolation further publishes in each issue several pages of unusual reports on the strange work and experiences of those throughout the world who are announcing to men of good-will the ideal government which the great “God of all comfort” is now setting up for the relief and blessing of all faithful and obedient humankind. Consolation is a 32-page magazine, published every other Wednesday. A year’s subscription, of 26 issues, is just $1.00 in the United States, or $1.25 abroad. Forward your subscription to Watchtower, H7 Adams St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
WfflCHTOWER.
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH'S KINGDOM
No. LXIII	July 15,1942	No. 14
DEFEAT OF PERSECUTION
"Therefore they that were scattered abroad went every where preaching the word"—Acts 8:4.
TEHOVAH has "with great long-suffering endured I the activity of persecutors for several thousands J of years. The persecution on earth has ever been directed at one and the same class: those who down through all that stretch of years have upheld the honor of His name, worshiped him and pointed to the coming of his promised government of righteousness. It has always been the unrighteous who have persecuted the righteous, and in all cases the persecutors have been religionists. Religion was organized for that very purpose. It provides a seemingly worthy reason for the persecutors to carry on their wicked pursuit of Jehovah’s righteous ones to cause them pain, loss, reproach and death, in order to turn them out of the way of righteousness and godliness. To “persecute” means to “pursue persistently in a manner to injure, grieve and afflict; and to beset one with cruelty or malignity for holding to the pure and faithful worship of Jehovah God”. Religion screens the hateful heart back of the persecution by the claim that religion is the proper mode of worship of God and hence alone has the right and warrant from God to exist without opposition, criticism or investigation. Multitudes have been deceived by that claim and been made persecutors, verily thinking that they have been doing God a service thereby.—John 16:1,2.
2 Back of the religionists in doggedly harassing those who love and obey Jehovah God and who advocate for his government is the great persecutor, who schemes for an “opposition government”. He is the mighty prince of the organization of demons and is the author of religion, which is demonism. His legions of wicked spirits he has used without letup ever since he began his program of persecution in the days of Abel. There has been one set purpose behind the persecution, namely, to bring the name of Jehovah into contempt and reproach; to make it unpleasant and painful to serve and obey him; to prevent the setting up of the Government of Righteousness; and to turn all creatures away from it and its Creator.
* That Government means glory and vindication to the name of its Author and Builder. It means the blessing of all those subject to it with life in perfect
health, peace and prosperity, without end. The great question which must be determined under the stress of persecution is, therefore: Which government shall rule, Jehovah’s or the persecutor’s? Tied in with that question is the secondary question: Can Jehovah hold or retain in his universal organization any creature in unbreakable integrity if exposed to persecution by the enemy organization ? Those who endure the persecution unto the end and keep integrity have a part in the vindication of God’s name. Everlasting blessings go along with that privilege, because Jehovah honors those who honor his name. (1 Sam. 2:30) These great questions that must be settled were brought to the fore in the prophetic drama of Job, whose name means “hated, harassed, persecuted”. Under demon persecution he maintained his integrity toward Jehovah God. Those who do not maintain their integrity lend support to the persecutor’s argument and shall share a like fate with him, that is, everlasting destruction.
* It is no dishonor or disgrace, therefore, to undergo persecution for the sake of Jehovah’s name. Although painful, it is no reason for sorrow, because it is for the sake of the grandest cause in the universe, namely, Jehovah’s Theocratic Government, which shall set his name in its rightful place of glory and praise before all the universe. No one who advocates for that mighty Government can escape persecution from those that work for the opposition government. Christ Jesus was anointed with Jehovah’s spirit of power to be His chief witness and the King of the promised Government. He doomed the wicked purpose behind all the persecution to failure when he said to his followers: “In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world.” (John 16:33) Concerning the favored position of those who endure such tribulation he said: “Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness’ sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so tu
212	THE WATCHTOWER,	Brooklyn, N. Y.
persecuted they the prophets which were before you.” —Matt. 5:10-12.
! When one thus suffers as the target of reviling, and evil false charges, and other forms of persecution, it is a proof that such one is on the side of righteousness for which Jehovah’s glorious Government stands. The reward to such faithful one is “great... in heaven”, because the Rewarder of faith and faithfulness is in heaven. The reward which He bestows is sure and unfading and infinitely greater than any selfish rewards that all the enemy organization on earth could bestow upon anyone yielding to its persecution. All the faithful prophets which were before Christ Jesus underwent persecution, and the apostle of the Lord writes that it was because they were witnesses, witnesses for Jehovah. (Heb. 11:1-40; 12:1) Christ Jesus was and is Jehovah's greatest prophet, greater even than Moses, and he is the One whom Jehovah has “given ... for a witness to the people, a leader and commander to the people”. (Isa. 55:4) He died because standing faithfully for the Government of truth and righteousness and in opposition to the rebellious opposition government. This proved him worthy of the reward of “the first resurrection” from the dead, and of the rightful title, “The Faithful and True Witness.” (Col. 1:18; Rev. 1: 5; 3: 14; 19: 11) He showed himself no mere man’s witness, but God’s chief “Government witness”. As such he clearly marked out what is the primary thing to which to bear witness when he acknowledged on trial his appointment to be the King of that Government and added: “My kingdom is not of this world: ... To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth. Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice.” (John 18: 36, 37) Those who hear his voice and repeat what he says must therefore take up his witness and testify to the same Theocratic Government as he confessed, and which Government he refused to renounce under persecution to the death. Thereby these obedient and faithful witnesses become of the same class of “blessed” ones whom God mentions with honor in his Word, including those persecuted prophets of old and, chief of all, Christ Jesus, the King of The Theocracy.
’ Religionists of different creeds have fallen to the subtle “good neighbor” policy gotten up by the Hierarchy of Vatican City, for self-protection. Before that they persecuted one another. Such persecution endured for religion is, however, not “for righteousness’ sake”, because religion, which indulges in persecution, is not righteous. All religions, though fighting and differing among themselves, unite together in friendship with this world and in opposition to Jehovah’s Righteous Government under his Anointed King. When religious organizations are curbed for
meddling in the politics and public affairs of this world’s governments, that is not persecution for righteousness’ sake, but for busybodying. (1 Pet. 4:15) Only that which comes because of advocating and pointing the people to Jehovah’s Government that vindicates His name is the persecution “for righteousness’ sake” and for the suffering of which the reward is great in heaven. Righteousness is the purpose of that Government. Christ Jesus so indicated when he said: “But be seeking first the kingdom and its righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you.” (Matt. 6:33, Rotherham’s translation) “For the kingdom of God is not eating and drinking, but righteousness and peace and joy in the holy spirit.” (Rom. 14:17, Am. Rev. Ver.) Those who hate “iniquity” or lawlessness toward God and who come out for the righteousness of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government are anointed to be fellows with his God-like Son in that kingdom: “But unto the Son he saith, Thy throne, 0 God. is for ever and ever: a sceptre of righteousness is the sceptre of thy kingdom: thou hast loved righteousness, and hated iniquity; therefore God even thy God [Jehovah], hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.”—Heb. 1: 8, 9.
T Said the righteous King: “If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you. If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you. Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept my saying, they will keep yours also. But all these things will they do unto you for my name’s sake, because they know not him [Jehovah God] that sent me. He that hateth me hateth my Father [Jehovah] also.” (John 15:18-21, 23) What was the “world” that hated and persecuted Christ Jesus? Not the publicans, harlots, sinners and men of the street who came to Jesus; neither the “common people” with weaknesses inherited from sinner Adam, for “the common people heard him gladly”. (Matt. 11:19; 21:31,32; Mark 12: 37) It was Satan the Devil and the demons of whom he is prince, and also the official element of Satan’s visible organization, particularly the priests and other religious clergy. Those religious leaders led the blinded people to cry, “Crucify him, crucify him,” and, “We have no king but Caesar.” (John 19:6,15) This proves beyond all contradiction that religion is not of God nor of Christ, and hence not righteous. It is demonism and is opposed to God and his Kingdom or Theocracy under Christ. Religion is therefore a part of this world and is the Devil’s chief instrument in persecution. History to date establishes that.
July 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER,
213
CONDUCT UNDER PERSECUTION
’ On occasions the dark purposes of the religious persecutors caused Jesus to proceed quietly and alone, for a time, until God’s appointed time for him to come forth boldly. (Matt. 12:14-16; John 7 :1-10; 11:54; 12; 36) He did not recklessly tempt the Lord God, but acted with wisdom equaling the serpent’s and with the harmlessness of a dove. (Matt. 10:16) The final assault upon Jesus by religionists scattered his disciples from him. It drove them for a short period “underground”. They met behind closed doors; or they gathered in an isolated mountain in Galilee. (John 20; 19, 26; Matt. 28:10,16-18) The feast day of Pentecost came. Then Jehovah God, by the spectacular pouring out of his spirit upon the faithful apostles and the others assembled in an upper room in Jerusalem, forced or brought forth his devoted servants into the public eye. Then a tremendous witness was given, in many languages, beginning that very day. The work of witnessing from house to house, as Jesus had instructed his disciples to do, was brought to the attention of the three thousand souls that were baptized and added to the company of servants of Jehovah God. (Matt. 10:12-14; Luke 10: 5-7 ; 19: 5-9) “And they, continuing daily with one accord in the temple, and breaking [spiritual] bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart, praising God, and having favour with all the people [whose homes they visited]. And the Lord added to the church daily.” —Acts 2: 41-47.
’ The clergy of the “Jews’ religion” claimed for themselves the right to teach the people. They did not believe the meaning of Jesus’ judgment words to them: “Therefore say I unto you, The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits [the revealed mature truths] thereof.” (Matt. 21:43,23,45) Hence those clergymen had no ordination from God to preach. Neither did the Lord God by his spirit put into their hands the fruits or revealed truths of the Kingdom to bear them forth to the common people. From and after Pentecost and its outpouring of God’s spirit the faithful witnesses of Jehovah had something that the religious clergy did not have; they had the spiritual ordination from Jehovah God himself. Hence the fruits of the Kingdom were put in their hands to bear them forth and hold them out to the people who were willing and anxious to take them and feed upon them. To receive this ordination the witnesses were not first required to attend the theological school or seminary at Jerusalem and sit at the feet of the great professor of religion, Gamaliel, “Doctor of Laws.” (Acts 5: 34; 22: 3) To the contrary, members of the faculty of that theological school and also students attending it persecuted those who were anointed with
Jehovah’s spirit and who were thereby ordained of Him to preach and be Jehovah’s ministers of the gospel. (Acts 7:1,54-58; 9:1-3; Gal. 1:13,23; Acts 22:3) The religious priesthood and clergy felt that their territory was being invaded and their flocks were being broken up. They complained that their vested interests were being damaged by these Christians who publicly witnessed for Jehovah without ordination by the clergy.
10	Unable otherwise to prevent the Christians from witnessing publicly and from house to house, the religious leaders raised a persecution against those Jehovah’s witnesses. "Why? The record shows the key grievance nursed by the religionists: “And as they spake unto the people, the priests, and the captain of the temple, and the Sadducees, came upon them, being grieved that they taught the people, and preached through Jesus the resurrection from the dead.” (Acts 4:1,2) Jehovah's witnesses were therefore haled before the high court composed of the high priest, rulers, elders and scribes. What finding did that court make as to training to fit the disciples to bear witness as God's ordained ministers to the people? The record answers: “Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant men, they marvelled; and they took knowledge of them, that they had been with Jesus”; with Jesus, a man whom the theological school had condemned as illiterate. (Acts 4:13; John 7:15) After giving a fearless and faithful witness to that court, Jehovah’s witnesses were released, also being threatened “that they speak henceforth to no man in this name”. To that threat of persecution Jehovah’s witnesses replied: “Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye. For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard.”— Acts 4:19, 20.
11	When those disciples returned to the company of Jehovah’s witnesses and made report of the trial, the whole company saw in these experiences the fulfillment of prophecy, and they prayed: “And now, Lord, behold their threatenings: and grant unto thy servants that with all boldness they may speak thy word, by stretching forth thine hand to heal; and that signs and wonders may be done by the name of thy holy child Jesus. And when they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were assembled together; and they were all filled with the holy [spirit], and they spake the word of God with boldness.” (Acts 4:17-31) Persecution had now begun upon them without the visible presence of their Leader, Christ Jesus, in their midst. Instead of scattering them in confusion and fear, this unified them and stirred them to greater boldness, even as it required boldness to continue preaching. (2 Thess. 1:3,4) Also they “put on
214
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
more steam” in the witness work. The official persecution that continued upon them thereafter did not embarass them into inactivity nor frighten them into a failure to carry out their ordination to preach. They considered it no disgrace to keep on witnessing under official disapproval: “And they departed from the presence of the council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his name. And daily in the temple, and in every house, they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ.” (Acts 5:41, 42) Persecution there met a signal defeat, when Jehovah’s witnesses declared: “We ought to obey God rather than men.” On they went with the regular public and house-to-house witnessing.
12	When the persecution took on the very ugly form of great violence, Stephen, the so-called “first Christian martyr”, was stoned to death; the religious gestapo invaded the Christian homes and dragged off the servants of Jehovah to prison. The high clergy of religion approved this and granted letters of authority to the persecutors. (Acts 9:1,2) This caused a forcible scattering of God’s faithful witnesses. But did it crush the witness work and narrow it down to a few secret meeting-places of the witnesses? The record shows how the persecution defeated its own ends and how all others of Jehovah’s witnesses in the future should carry on when subjected to like violent action and scattering. “And Saul [of the theological school] was consenting unto his death. And at that time there was a great persecution against the church which was at Jerusalem; and they were all scattered abroad throughout the regions of Judsea and Samaria, except the apostles. . . . Therefore they that were scattered abroad went every where preaching the word. Then Philip went down to the city of Samaria, and preached Christ unto them.”—Acts 8:1-5; 11:19-21.
15 Note that the visible headquarters (the apostles) kept together, by the Lord’s grace and protection, but that the scattering of others of Jehovah’s witnesses caused only a spreading of the witness to parts not reached before. The scattered ones took joyfully the spoiling of their goods. (Heb. 10:34) They realized that wherever God’s providence permitted them to be scattered they must there be true to His commission to them as His witnesses, “preaching the word.” These faithful ones were not like those described in Jesus’ parable of the sower, some of whose seed fell upon stony places: “He that received the seed into stony places, the same is he that heareth the word, and anon with joy receiveth it: yet hath he not root in himself, but dure th for a while; for when tribulation or persecution ariseth because of the word [preached], by and by he is offended.” (Matt. 13: 20,21) Being thus scattered, each individual was obliged to “bear his own burden”. However,
each faithful individual the Lord used to accomplish an effective witness, as in the case of Philip, who aforetime had been one of seven chosen men assigned to special duties at Jerusalem.
“ Philip, being driven away from the apostles, went to a class of people despised and avoided by the religionists; he went to the Samaritans. At their chief city he gave a mighty witness, “preaching the things concerning the kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus Christ.” (Acts 8:5-12) Though without the electrified and rapid-transit means of communication of modern days, the scattered witnesses of the Lord God managed, by secret, underground means, to keep in touch with the visible headquarters at Jerusalem. Thus it was that Philip got word through, and two of the apostles from headquarters, Peter and John, went up to Samaria to further organize the company of believers of that city and to equip them to give a more effective witness. Through the apostles the Lord imparted the spirit to the Samaritan believers. Philip did not return to headquarters with the apostles, but kept on going in the field, witnessing on the highway to Queen Candace’s Ethiopian eunuch and baptizing him. Then under the spirit’s leading he proceeded to the Philistine city of Ashdod (Azotus); “and passing through, he preached in all the cities, till he came to Ctesarea.” (Acts 8:14-40) In that city Philip brought up his family “in the nurture and admonition of the Lord”. His children became, like himself, witnesses for Jehovah and his King: “the same man had four daughters, virgins, which did prophesy.” (Acts 21:8,9) The first wave of persecution dispersed the Christian witnesses of Jehovah, but the early church survived and increased. The intended destructive effects thereof did not materialize, but a wider witness and the growth of the church resulted. Jehovah God helped his faithful witnesses overcome then; he can likewise help and bless them under like conditions now.
CLIMAX OF PERSECUTION
15 Jesus foretold that the persecution would reach a climax at the end of the world, where we have been since A. D. 1914. It was the so-called “Christian" nations that began the World War that year. Jesus detailed the events that positively show that the “time of the end” for Satan’s world began in 1914. Jesus showed that one of the strong evidences of the end would be the persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses: “For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom: and there shall be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes, in divers places. All these are the beginning of sorrows. Then shall they deliver you [witnesses of Jehovah] up to be afflicted, and shall kill you: and ye shall be hated of all nations for my name’s sake. . . . But he [the remnant] that
July 15,1942
5THE WATCHTOWER
215
shall endure unto the end [at Armageddon], the same shall be saved. And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached [in spite of the persecution] in all the world for a witness unto all nations: and then shall the end [the final end at Armageddon] come.5'— Matt. 24:7-14.
” Only a small remnant of his anointed followers or body members would be upon the earth at that time, to give the final warning and Kingdom witness to the world. That these would be subjected to the fire of persecution from the demon organization Christ Jesus showed symbolically in The Revelation, chapter twelve. He pointed out that the “gospel of the kingdom”, that is, the proclamation of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government under Christ, would be the real reason for the persecution. The beginning of operation of that Government is symbolized as the birth of a “man child” by God’s “woman” (his universal organization Zion). Since that new Government is God’s capital organization, it must exercise universal domination in God’s name over all. At its birth the opposition government conducted by Satan the Devil in heaven must get out and be pushed down to the place where at last it and all its backers shall be destroyed, namely, the earth. “And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him.” (Rev. 12:7-9) That “man child” Government must do more than this clearing out of the demons; it must dash all nations on earth to pieces as with a “rod of iron”, iron symbolizing the warfare of Armageddon.—Rev. 12:5; 2: 25-27.
17 What action did the humiliated demon organization then take! “When the dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he persecuted the woman which brought forth the man child. And the dragon was wroth with the woman, and went to make war with the remnant [on earth] of her seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.” (Rev. 12:13,17) Do the remnant of Christ’s body members give in to the persecution by the dragon organization! Do they disobey the commandments stated by God in the terms of their commission and discontinue giving the testimony, 'which testimony Christ Jesus shares with them! Do they withdraw from the testimony work because of the false accusations hurled against them of being “seditious”, “subversive,” “illegally operating,” “a potential danger to the state,” and suchlike! To the contrary, God’s faithful remnant will overcome and keep on with the testimony. “And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven, Now is come salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ: for the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and night.
And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb [Jesus Christ], and by the [preached] word of their testimony; and they loved not their lives unto the death.” (Rev. 12:10,11) They maintain their integrity in God’s service though it may cost them their lives; they stop not till death.
” The persecution is due to the great issue of world domination. It is part of the Devil’s program of action for snatching out of God’s hands, if possible, the domination of the universe, thus becoming “like the Most High”, supreme. This would mean eliminating Jehovah God, and either the coming over of His organization to Satan or its destruction. Herein the Devil will fail ingloriously. Remember that the question related to that primary issue of universal domination is, Can Jehovah God retain in service in His organization any creatures who are exposed to the bitter persecution of the dragon organization! This related question applies not only to the anointed remnant of God’s “little flock”, but equally as much to their earthly companions in service, the Lord’s “other sheep”, whom He is now gathering into his fold. (John 10:10,16) Both the remnant and these “other sheep” have the honored opportunity of deciding this question to God's glory and Satan's rebuff. The faithful will do so.
” The prophecy is reaching a climax of fulfillment. Since the Devil with his demons was cast down from heaven the persecution has burst forth and increased from year to year. Not a nation on earth where it has not raged, and the worst persecutor has been “Christendom”, her name notwithstanding. In all the nations the target thereof has always been the same class, Jehovah’s •witnesses, comprising both the remnant and their companions. This shows that the persecution is all directed from a central powerhouse, or headquarters, to wit, the demons. It also shows that, no matter in what nation they are found, Jehovah’s witnesses are not of this world of which the nations are a part; wherefore all nations hate them. Religion is the same demonism today as it was in Jesus’ day. Religion is still a part of this world and is the spiritual adviser of the visible part of Satan’s organization. Therefore it is the prime promoter and is back of the persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses now. The very people who attend the religious organizations do not have to be told this; they know.
10 Immediately after the Nazi dictator signed his concordat with “Christendom’s” chief religious organization, Vatican City, in July, 1933, the persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses in Nazi-Fascist lands blazed. Why! Because, following the example of Jesus and his apostles, they were witnessing to God’s Righteous Government publicly and from house to house and so instructing many honest people. The religious “fifth column” agents of the
216
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Vatican had been planted in positions of official favor and popularity and judicial and police power, and by these agents the persecution has been carried into lands long the bulwarks of democracy and of free worship of God. But neither by such demonized harassment nor by flattering promises have the faithful who understand the issue and who love The Theocracy been coerced into unfaithfulness to their commission as Jehovah’s witnesses. The prophecy has well stated it: “And they that understand among the people shall instruct many; yet they shall fall by the sword, and by flame, by captivity, and by spoil, many days. Now when they shall fall, they shall be holpen with a little help: but many shall cleave to them with flatteries. And some of them of understanding shall fall, to try them, and to purge, and to make them white, even to the time of the [final] end: because it is yet for a time appointed.”—Dan. 11:33-35.
“ One of the darkest pages in American history was written in 1940, when the Roman Catholic Hierarchy in America, on instructions from Vatican City, set out to grab the American government in that year and to amend, change or blot out the United States Constitution. Craftily they timed it so that, when the Nazis were sweeping over Continental Europe with lightning war against republics and democratic countries, the Hierarchy launched their most vicious persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses who were exposing the joint Nazi-Hierarchy plot for world domination. In forty-four states out of forty-eight of the Union brutal mob violence by the offspring and dupes of that religious organization raged. Local and national police power appeared helpless, indifferent, or fearful of organized religious power back of the terrible atrocities committed against Jehovah’s witnesses. These, however, held faithful to The Theocratic Government and to their commission to represent it. Alas for the Vatican! the blitzkrieg of her Nazi concordat-partner failed to take Britain’s island fortress by storm, and the Hierarchy’s plans to synchronize their capture of the American citadel of democracy with Nazi-Fascism’s conquest of all Europe and of Protestantism’s stronghold of Britain proved premature and miscarried. In support of the above a quotation is made from The Church Gazette, published in Rushden, Northamptonshire, England, and dated March, 1942:
Southern Ireland is predominantly Roman Catholic and is the only part of the British Empire which did not respond when the Mother Country was assailed.
Northern Ireland was keen to have conscription, but the opposition from the Roman Catholics in Northern Ireland prevented this being done.
In Canada, it is notorious that it is Roman Catholic Quebec which has been, and is, fighting and opposing con
scription in that country. (See The Times’ leading article, 2nd February, 1942.) While, in 1939, Ontario voted 78-0 in favour of support to Britain if the crisis led to war, nine French Roman Catholic Societies of Quebec sent a joint telegram to Premier King saying: “The entire population of Quebec (i. e., the French R. C. population) absolutely opposed to Canada’s participation in foreign War.” Hence, now, to salvage something of the conquests for the totalitarian aggressors the religious head of Vatican City radiocasts a plea for peace between totalitarian rulers and democratic nations, on May 13, 1942. The United Nations refused to alter their plans to suit him.
” God’s Word sets it down as truth that the persecution of His witnesses will not cease until the religious organization and its demon-backers are destroyed. Hence, though the Vatican’s plans for world conquest in 1940 got the shock of an unexpected setback that very year, the infliction of pain, cruelty, loss of liberty and rights and property, and other un-Christian injustices upon Jehovah’s inoffensive servants continues. The state of Mississippi stands as a flagrant example of a political organization being maneuvered by religious agents of Vatican City into a course of fighting against God, a course which honest-hearted lovers of democracy in that state do not approve. Those who have the welfare of the people of America at heart are concerned for good cause. They realize that if the fight to maintain freedom to publish the truth, freedom to speak what is comforting and beneficial to fellow Americans, freedom to assemble for open discussion and study of what is to the highest interest and everlasting welfare, and freedom to worship God according to the commandments and instructions in his Holy Word, is lost, then all is lost. “The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God.” —Ps. 9:17.
” In other lands boasting of democracy the same religious organization of persecution has used the state of world turmoil as the big chance to vent its spleen and to remove a serious obstacle to its wicked scheme for world domination by dictators. It has caused such lands to declare it a crime to bear the name of Jesus’ Father, Jehovah, yes, to declare it “illegal” to do what God Jehovah commands, namely, to follow Jesus’ example and be a witness for His Father and to preach The Theocratic Government for which Jesus taught his disciples to pray to His Father: ‘Thy kingdom come; thy will be done in earth as it is done in heaven.’ The ostensible reason for so-called “Christian” nations to take this anti-Christ action are the same false charges as the religious leaders brought before the political ruler of Rome against Jesus to have him nailed to a post and have
July 15,1942	fEe WATCHTOWER,	217
his witnessing for Jehovah and His Theocracy stopped by murder.
THEOCRATIC COUNSEL
” No one can Scripturally decree that for faithful Christians under these spreading conditions of persecution to do what Christ Jesus says to do under such conditions is criminal, illegal, and anti-government toward God Almighty, the Father of our Lord and King Christ Jesus. Such a course is obedience to The Higher Powers and leads to life. In some localities violent opposition has gone to such lengths, and all with official approval and without due police protection, that it has there become impossible to Jehovah’s servants to carry on their commissioned work. What shall such do? Jesus foretold such opposition and gave this instruction: “And ye shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake; but he that endureth to the end shall be saved. But when they persecute you in this city, flee ye into another: for verily I say unto you, Ye shall not have gone over the cities of Israel, till the Son of man be come.”—Matt. 10:22,23.
” Be it observed that the servants of the Lord are already in the city when the persecution arises. They did not hesitate to go to the city because of the threat of persecution. If assigned that territory for witnessing to the Kingdom and if sent thither by the Lord’s organization, they go there and face the carrying out of the threat. The apostle Paul was repeatedly warned that to go to Jerusalem meant for him to be mobbed and bound hand and foot and delivered over to the Godless; but, recognizing it to be the Lord’s will to go, he went, not just to run into trouble, but to prove his integrity and to be a witness for Jehovah and his King. (Acts 20:16,22-24; 21: 4,10-14) This faithfulness of Paul opened up to him the greatest privileges of witnessing before rulers, including the imperial ruler of the world power, Rome. Faithfulness opens up the way to many privileges of this kind, in fulfillment of Jesus’ own words. (Mark 13:9) It is for a testimony against such official rulers.
28 Where, now, faithful witnesses have gone to their territory and begun the work in a city or locality, and where, besides the persecution, the opposition becomes so organized and all-embracing that it is impossible to further witness there publicly and from house to house, then it is time to consider Jesus’ instruction. From 1922 on, particularly from 1931 down to 1941, the official ruling elements, political, commercial, judicial, military, and religious, of “Christendom” and of heathendom have been warned by all the means of reaching them with the witness, so that they are now without excuse for opposing the Kingdom. If these elements now do not choose to do good to the brethren on earth of “the Son of man”
who sits upon the throne of glory, attended by all his holy angels, then they willfully put themselves in the group whom the Lord classifies as “goats”. By intelligent refusal or failure to take a positive stand in favor of and in support of the King on His throne, they show they are against Him. The King said: “He that is not with me is against me; and he that gath-ereth not with me scattereth.” (Matt. 12: 30) He is now gathering to his right side of favor his “sheep”, the ones who take positive action to the help and support of the “remnant” because these represent the King and preach his Kingdom. The remnant are “gathering with" the Lord; but the officials who refuse to aid the remnant and their companions in the gathering of the Lord’s “other sheep”, and who interfere with or do not protect these Christians in their right to do this gathering work, such officials are “scattering”. They are against Christ, that is, anti-Christ, because against His gathering.
27 Christ Jesus stated the rule clearly when Saul, who later became Paul the apostle, was persecuting the Christians. The Lord stopped him on the way to a new field of persecution and said: “Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?” Saul asked: ‘"Who art thou, Lord?” and the reply was: “I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest: it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.” (Acts 9:4,5) According to the same rule, to those who do good to the persecuted ones suffering hunger, thirst, nakedness, and imprisonment for the testimony they give Jesus says: “Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.”—Matt. 25:40.
28 Jehovah God has now’ called the attention of his commissioned servants to the fact that now is the time to hunt for his “other sheep” wherever they have been scattered, and to comfort them as commanded: “Comfort all that mourn.” (Isa. 61:2) If therefore the “goats” conspire and rise up en masse in a city and locality and make it impossible to keep on giving the witness there in an open and general w’ay, then to spend further time upon them would be to no avail. Seek the Lord’s “other sheep”, the mourning ones needing comfort, outside of such goatpen. It is the individual burden of every servant of the Lord to consider where and when it is the occasion and time to apply the Lord’s instruction, “Flee ye into another [city or locality].” In that connection the Lord mentioned ‘going over the cities’, thereby meaning that there is other territory to be reached and covered. Therefore the servant should proceed where the door is still open and there is a possibility of “other sheep” to be hunted and found.
28 This is not a running away in fear; for right after giving instruction to take the above course Jesus added: “Fear them not therefore:... fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the
218
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.” (Matt. 10:26-28) It is not running away from a mere threat of violence, but is a turning away from an unworthy city or some section of a city as one would from an unworthy house and leaving it to its destiny: “And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye depart out of that house or city, shake off the dust of your feet. Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for that city.” (Matt. 10:14,15) The blood spilled at Armageddon rests upon the heads of the opposers.
” The going away is not simply to escape persecution, because now there is no place where one can avoid persecution; but it is a following of the Lord’s leading and going where more work can be done. If it were a case of trying to avoid persecution, then the witness would quit the work altogether and not take up the same work in another city or place with the sure and certain possibility of meeting like persecution there. As it is written: “This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come. . . . what persecutions I endured: but out of them all the Lord delivered me. Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.” (2 Tim. 3:1,11,12) If there are any “sheep” known to be in the city where the “goats” forcibly prevent the public and house-to-house activity, then back-calls can be made directly upon such “sheep” to strengthen and encourage and feed them.—Acts 9: 22-30; 13: 50-52; 14:19, 20.
“ This strategic move is far different from that of the prophet Urijah, who was a contemporary of the prophet Jeremiah, but who took the course opposite to that of Jeremiah. Urijah was sent to prophesy against the land of Judah and its capital, Jerusalem. When he had delivered the warning sufficiently to attract public notice King Jehoiakim and his officers “sought to put him to death; but when Urijah heard it, he was afraid, and fled, and went into Egypt.” In his terror he fled out of his assigned territory altogether and quit the witness work by taking refuge in the land where Jehovah God had ordered his covenant people never to return, namely, Egypt, symbol of Satan’s world. Therefore Jehovah did not protect Urijah as he did his prophet Jeremiah, but permitted Urijah to be caught by his enemies in the enemy organization, dragged back to the territory he had abandoned, and executed. (Jer. 26:20-23) True, the prophet Elijah fled from before the wicked Queen Jezebel, but he fled to the mountain of God, Horeb, for meditation and communion with him. When the Lord set before him further work to do in the land of his religious persecutors, Elijah went back and did it faithfully until being taken away.
“Jeremiah was sent to deliver the warning message in the temple at Jerusalem. While so engaged he was seized by the mob at the instigation of the religious clergy. Then Jeremiah warned the court that heard his case that they would bring innocent blood upon themselves if they killed him for the message he proclaimed at God’s command. Therefore the Lord protected him against the bloodthirsty religious harassers. He never forsook the Lord’s assignment of territory to him. He continued carrying on in the land of Judah, and the Lord spared him to see the vindication of Jehovah’s name, the fulfillment of God’s prophecies by the mouth of Jeremiah, and the overthrow of his religious persecutors. Jeremiah always warned against going down to Egypt, even after Jerusalem was destroyed and the few people that were left in the desolated land became panickv. —.Jer. 42:1-22; 43:1-13.
“ When one quits the service as a witness in order to escape the wicked actions of the opposers of The Theocracy, he is fleeing like Urijah down to Egypt, that is, Satan’s world; for there are only two organizations. If any are ashamed to confess the Lord's Theocratic organization, and thuswise deny it, then they cannot have the protection of the Great Theo-crat and his Theocratic King, but are seeking protection from the world, which world can withhold injury if anyone lines up with it and obeys it instead of God. This has been demonstrated in lands where the totalitarian dictators have taken control and outlawed the witness work. Those who in fear have quit witnessing and renounced The Theocracy’s protection have been punished by the totalitarian authorities or have earned their contempt. Others trust in Jehovah’s protection and continue witnessing with discretion, alertness, patience, and courage, and the Lord protects and uses them in reaching the “other sheep”. In Canada, the city, provincial and mounted police give the organization of the “evil servant” class a “completely clean sheet” to operate, and assure them of protection. On the other hand, the Dominion Government outlaws Jehovah’s witnesses; nevertheless the Christians faithful to their commission continue on preaching the Theocratic message as the apostle Paul did, and Almighty God protects them and the “hunt” for the “other sheep” continues and they are still being gathered there. Those who, like Jeremiah, are apprehended while actively performing their Christian commission and consigned to prison, dungeon, or concentration camp, are not forsaken by the Lord, not if keeping their integrity toward him although they suffer the agonies of Job for their devotion and faithfulness. The Scriptures give good promise that there are those of that number whom He will preserve alive and will deliver
July 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
219
when he destroys “Christendom” at Armageddon. They shall survive, but all their persecutors and prison-keepers will be destroyed, down to the last man. This was foreshadowed in Jeremiah’s own case.—Jeremiah, chapters 39 and 40.
“In so-called “democratic” lands the intolerant, malicious religious forces have prevailed upon the political element to officially decree Jehovah’s organization not licensed or authorized to operate, and the acting as one of Jehovah’s witnesses to be an “illegal” act punishable with fine and imprisonment. This antiGod move by dupes of religion in such lands does not in any wise cancel or nullify the covenant of Christians there to do Jehovah God’s will as Christ Jesus gives the example. It does not blot out or make null and void the commission which God lays upon his consecrated servants to declare His name throughout all the earth and to preach the good tidings of his Righteous Government and to comfort all that mourn. This commission is binding upon them until the end, and therefore they will follow the apostolic course to “obey God rather than men”. They will continue, and they do continue, to preach as Christians, even if obliged to do this individually and with merely the Bible. Because the legal corporation which acted locally as their servant has been dissolved by official decree, that does not release God’s covenant people from acting individually as ministers of the gospel, following the method of preaching that Jesus and his apostles used. The bearing of the Lord’s name not in vain is by acting according to the commission from him rather than by merely labeling oneself and introducing oneself by the “new name” which Jehovah’s mouth has named. Religionists label themselves by the name “Christian”, but are not such in action. “Tea, a man may say, Thou hast faith, and I have works: shew me thy faith without thy works, and I will shew thee my faith by my works.”—Jas. 2:18.
35 The Lord Jesus Christ, the King of The Theocracy, is Jehovah’s liaison (unifying) officer between all his followers. If all these act in harmony with his instructions as set out in his Father’s Word, and which instructions he has taught them from the temple, then, even if scattered bodily by enemy action, yet they will all be doing the same thing. They will be acting, not as a legal organization dissolved by political law, but as God’s organization, which organization no human or demon power can dissolve or stop functioning. The bond of unity of this organization leaps all space and distance and man-made barriers; it constrains or holds together the scattered ones in a unity of purpose and action. Identical devotion to The Theocracy is the tie, the spirit of God in his servants is the moving power, and the message is God’s.—Eph. 2:13,14; Col. 3:14,15; 2 Cor. 5:13-15.
“ It is time for all worldly governments to face this fact, whether it pleases them or not: As in the case of the great scattering of the Christians in the days of the apostles, so now. The scattered ones will go “every where preaching the word”, every one of them knowing the instructions to him from the Lord and every one of them understanding full well the Lord’s command: “Let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another. For every man shall bear his own burden.” (Gal. 6:4,5) The persecution and scattering puts each one on his individual own, to make manifest his individual choice and determination to do God’s will independently of what any or all other humans may or may not do. And as it was in the apostolic days, the Lord God by his angels frustrates the enemies and contrives to get communications through and to keep his faithful active servants in touch with “the Lord’s table” and his servant thereat. These faithful ones know the issues involved. They know it means their destruction to be unfaithful to their commission, thereby supporting the Devil's side of the issue. The remnant and the “other sheep” will uphold God’s side of the issue. No political government on earth, not to speak of Satan’s entire organization or world, will succeed by the faithful remnant and “other sheep” in proving that Jehovah cannot put to the test creatures who under persecution by Satan’s organization will faithfully abide in God’s organization, so maintaining their integrity. Let worldly governments face that fact, and know that they must bear the full responsibility for what they do to try to injure God’s organization and drive his consecrated witnesses out of it. On Sunday, October 7, 1934, the Hitler Government at Berlin, Germany, was warned by hundreds of cabled and special delivery messages from assembled companies of Jehovah’s witnesses all over the world, in this identic message, which we quote: “Hitler Government, Berlin, Germany: Your ill-treatment of Jehovah’s witnesses shocks all good people of earth and dishonors God's name. Refrain from further persecuting Jehovah’s witnesses; otherwise God will destroy you and your national party.”—1 Cor. 3:17, marginal reading.
3T Worldly governments, in dealing with Jehovah’s faithful witnesses, are being forced to learn that they are coping with those in whom Almighty God has put the spirit of unbreakable love for The Theocracy as expressed at Romans 8: 31, 35-39: “If God be for us, who can be against us! Who shall separate us from the love of Christ! shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword! As it is written, For thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter. Nay, in all these things we are more than
220
Sfte WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
conquerors, through him that loved us. For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor [political] powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God [the Great Theocrat], which is in Christ Jesus our Lord [the King of The Theocracy].” Such ones ‘more than conquer’ because, besides gaining a personal triumph over the aims of the enemy, they serve for the vindication of Jehovah’s name and foil the Devil’s plot to use them in support of his challenge.
” The wicked purpose back of persecution will be defeated, proving Satan a liar. The persecutions yet to come may crowd Jehovah's witnesses sorely; they may cause them perplexity as to what way to take; they may cause them to be pursued by political, military, judicial, newspaper, and commercial allies of religion; they may cause them to be cast down in the public eye and deprived of legal and constitutional equality with citizens of the world. Yet such persecutions will never wipe out Jehovah's witnesses, nor distress them into desperation and cause them to take the compromising course where God will abandon and deny them as unfaithful. Not in their own strength and power can they bear up under the persecution, and hold fast the treasure of the ministry as ambassadors of The Theocracy and witnesses of the Most High. They are in frail flesh, in earthly vessels, and hence it must be Jehovah’s great power in and through them that must excel and surpass the power of those assailing their integrity. The members of the “body of Christ” live for no other purpose than to follow the same course as Jesus in bearing witness to Jehovah’s name and kingdom. As expressed by the apostle: “Howbeit we have this treasure [ministry] in earthen vessels, that the surpassing greatness of the power may be of God, and not from ourselves; on every side pressed hard, but not hemmed in; without a way, but not without a by-way; pursued [persecuted], but not abandoned; thrown down, but not destroyed; at all times the [enemy’s] putting to death of Jesus in our body bearing about, in order that the life also of Jesus in our body may be made manifest; for evermore we, the living, unto death are being delivered for Jesus’ sake, in order that the life also of Jesus may be made manifest in our mortal flesh.”—2 Cor.4:1,7-12,Rotherham; 12:9,10.
DELIVERANCE AND RETRIBUTION
” The “wolves” frame mischief by law in order to prey upon Jehovah’s “sheep” and provide a legal excuse and saving of face for their unjust and violent course. (Matt. 10:16) They try to trap Jehovah’s “sheep” into a course of compromise, fornication with the world, where He will reject and destroy them. The persecutors, though, shall fall into the trap and themselves be destroyed by Jehovah’s Executioner. They simply prepare destruction for themselves. (Pss. 35:3-8; 7:1-13; 119:84-86,157,161) Their plea of defending religion will not justify their hatred and opposition to Jehovah and troubling his witnesses: “Seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you; . . . when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord.”—2 Thess. 1: 6-9; Gal. 5:10; Ps. 69: 26,28.
*° In the fiery furnace of persecution Jehovah’s witnesses, like Jeremiah, pray to Him: “0 Lord, thou knowest: remember me, and visit me, and revenge me of my persecutors; take me not away in thy long-suffering: know that for th}* sake I have suffered rebuke.” Jehovah God gives his trusting ones the assurance that the persecution shall fail and that they shall share in His vindication, saying: “I will make thee unto this people [persecutors] a fenced brazen wall; and they shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee; for I am with thee to save thee, and to deliver thee, saith the Lord. And I will deliver thee out of the hand of the wicked, and I will redeem thee out of the hand of the terrible.” (Jer. 15:15, 20, 21) And that God’s retributive action in for ever settling the account with the persecutors will be primarily to settle the issue of his universal domination, the inspired prayer at Psalm 83:15-18 petitions God: “So persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm. Fill their faces with shame; that they [the righteous] may seek thy name, O Lord. Let them be confounded and troubled for ever; yea, let them be put to shame, and perish: that men may know that thou, whose name alone is JEHOVAH, art the Most High over all the earth.”
Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you: but rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of Chnst's sufferings; that, when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy. If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you: on their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorified.—1 Peter 4:12-14.
DISSENTERS FOR RIGHTEOUSNESS
ON Monday, as is regular, but this day exceptionally a week later than the usual time for adjournment, June 8, 1942, the nine men were seated in solemn session upon the bench of the Supreme Court of the United States. The courtroom was packed that afternoon. First, an opinion concerning Wages and Hours was disposed of; and then the entire courtroom assumed a solemn air. Expectant, all waited to hear the opinion of moment, one touching upon the most precious right of free men in a democracy as guaranteed by the Constitution and its Bill of Rights, the right to worship Almighty God according to one’s conscience as enlightened by the Word of Jehovah God.
Solemnity befitted the occasion. When obliged to render a decision affecting the liberty of His consecrated witnesses to worship the Most High God, it is the Supreme Court that is on trial, before the bar of the Supreme Judge of the universe, rather than the witnesses concerning whom the majority of the Supreme Court essays to express a final opinion. In framing the opinion about to be pronounced, did the Court realize that awful fact? Did it care ?—Psalm 2:1-12.
The question of which the Court tries to relieve itself is, in substance, Can the secular state classify the printed message of God’s Kingdom as peddlers’ wares and tax its distribution by those who are commanded by God’s supreme law to bear witness to his kingdom under Christ? The justice from the state of Kentucky begins delivering the opinion on the three related cases of Jehovah’s witnesses under appeal. Which way the fateful decision for this land of the Constitution shall fall becomes clear suddenly when the justice reads: “One man, with views contrary to the rest of his compatriots, is entitled to the privilege of expressing his ideas by speech or broadside to anyone willing to listen or to read. . . . But that hearing may be limited by action of the proper legislative body to times, places and methods for the enlightenment of the community which, in view of existing social and economic conditions, are not at odds with the preservation of peace and good order. This means that the proponents of ideas cannot determine entirely for themselves the time and place and manner for the diffusion of knowledge or for their evangelism, any more than the civil authorities may hamper or suppress the public dissemination of facts and principles by the people.”
Let it here be known that Jehovah's witnesses are not the “proponents of ideas”, but are proclaimers, preachers, of the revealed Word of God, which Word is the truth. (John 17:17) Let it be known also that Jehovah’s witnesses have not determined, nor can any man or legislative or judicial body determine, “for themselves the time and place and manner for the diffusion of knowledge or for their evangelism.” It is the Great Lawgiver, Jehovah God, who has determined that and stated it expressly in his Word. It is the Son of God, who is always in harmony with the supreme law of his Father, that set the method and manner of diffusing the knowledge of God by himself going and also instructing his disciples to go preaching from house to house. He also designated the time as after the World War, when, after mentioning it, he added: “And
221
this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations: and then shall the end come.” (Matt. 24: 7,14) For this preaching, so he declared to his followers who keep this commandment, “ye shall be hated of all nations for my name’s sake.” (Vs. 9) Surely the clergy are not hated for such cause.
Because Jehovah’s witnesses dissent from the course of action taken by the religious clergy and boldly stand up for Jehovah’s Righteous Government by preaching it from house to house throughout every city and village of the United States and all other nations, the clergy stir up great hatred of them among lawmakers, judges and politicians and law-enforcement officers. The orders in council and decrees banning and prohibiting Jehovah’s witnesses entirely in the lands of religious dictators and in other lands where the Hierarchy of the most totalitarian religious system on earth hold power and influence are too well known. In this ‘fland of the free” there is still some hesitation to practically destroy the Constitution by an outright decree banning Jehovah’s witnesses. The dupes and agents of the religious Hierarchy resort to more subtle and sly means to halt the Christ-like and apostolic way of preaching the Kingdom gospel. How? Under the guise of taxation laws locally enacted but wrongly applied to Jehovah’s covenant people who keep his commandments to go and preach to the people. Such laws indeed properly apply to the sale and peddling of ordinary articles of merchandise, but have been wrongly construed by the enemies of the truth to cover the preaching activities of Jehovah’s witnesses, under the false claim that such activities constitute “peddling” and “selling” because contributions of money are made by some of the many who accept the printed Kingdom message
During recent years illegal convictions under such local ordinances have occurred in every state in the Union, and from which convictions hundreds of Jehovah’s witnesses have appealed. Many intermediate courts have rightly held that such ordinances are not applicable to the gospel preaching done by Jehovah’s witnesses by word of mouth and printed page. In the case of Cincinnati versus Mosier, 22 N. E. 2d 418, the Ohio Court of Appeals, speaking of one such ordinance applied against this Jehovah’s witness, said: “On the other hand, it is apparent that it can have no more application to the defendant for the act charged in the affidavit than it could if it were attempted to apply it for an act performed outside the State, county or city.”
The Georgia Court of Appeals in Thomas vs. Atlanta, 1 S. E. 2d 598, also says: “We do not think it is the duty of an ordained minister of the gospel to register his business with the city. Neither is it peddling for sueh minister to go into homes and play a victrola or to preaeh therein or to sell or distribute literature dealing with his faith if the owner of such home does not object.”
Many other state courts of highest rank have also held that such laws taxing and licensing peddlers cannot be properly applied to Jehovah’s witnesses, and have repeatedly set aside the convictions of these.1 When such laws
lSee Semansky es. Stark, 199 So. 129 (La. Sup. Ct.); State vs. Meredith, 15 S. E. 2d 678 (S. C. Sup. Ct.).
222	THE WATCHTOWER	Brooklyn, N. T.
have been wrongfully applied, the highest state courts have in most instances held them unconstitutional. *
A different course of action was taken by the highest courts in the states of Alabama, Arizona, and Arkansas, where the validity of such laws were ruled upon as applying to Jehovah’s witnesses’ circulating the printed message. In due time these cases were brought before the United States Supreme Court for review. They were properly and fully argued and briefs thereof w’ere submitted by counsel for Jehovah’s witnesses. The Scriptural and legal reasons and arguments were presented showing that the state courts in these cases had taken a seat in the throne of iniquity and God could not approve their mischief against His cause: “Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee, which frameth mischief by a law!”—Ps. 94:20.
FREE SPEECH TO BE CONTROLLED
On the said Monday, June 8, five justices, the majority of the U. S. Supreme Court, knowingly or unknowingly, joined in the religious conspiracy to “get” Jehovah’s witnesses. They affirmed the state-court judgments of conviction and held the license tax laws were applicable and not unconstitutional. There the highest tribunal of America ended its career as the last bulwark of American liberties and broke down the Constitution. The train of events that are sure to follow will show that those justices let in the unseen demons and their visible dupes, the Fascists, the antiliberty, anti-Jehovah, anti-Theocracy, religious elements to rampage and overrun the states in the effort, the vain effort, we say, to stop Jehovah’s Kingdom message.
The gist of the Supreme Court decision is that if, due to enemies of the truth, a minister of the gospel is tagged as a peddler by the state, he can be treated and convicted as such and denied his constitutional rights, despite the fact that he is not a peddler. The Court also holds that freedom of v rship by distribution of Bible literature means that the person exercising the right must give it away free of charge; and that, if contributions of money are received in return for the literature distributed, such constitutes and is selling, which makes the one exercising his constitutional rights subject to conviction and treatment as a criminal for his failure to procure a license tax from the officials of the state and city as a condition precedent to engaging in such activity. The Supreme Court in this holding is clearly wrong. It has committed a mistake which has led the nation into totalitarian practice and forgetting of Jehovah God; with what end in sight! “The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God.”—Ps. 9:17.
The Court has made void the words of the Constitution, but, by God’s grace, they cannot make void the Word of God, regardless of how hard they try. Nor will they succeed
’See South Holland vs. Stein, 26 N. E. 2d 868; Reid vs. Brookville, 39 Fed. Supp. 30; Douglas vs. Jeannette, 39 Fed. Supp. 32; State vs. Woodruff, 2 So. 2d 577; Commonwealth vs. Reid, 20 A. 2d 841; State vs. Greaves, 22 A. 2d 497; Borchert vs. Ranger et al., 42 Fed. Supp. 577; Blue Island vs. Kozul, 41 N. E. 2d 515; McConkey vs. City of Fredericksburg, 19 S. E. 2d 682; Donley vs. Colorado Springs, 40 Fed. Supp. 15; and many other cases, too numerous to mention.
in stopping Jehovah’s witnesses, as some may think; because these are His ordained preachers, have His backing, and obey His supreme commands. (Matt. 24:14) Instead of destroying them, the Court has destroyed the Constitution and liberties of Americans. Lovers of liberty arc protesting, loudly.
DISSENTERS GIVE RIGHTEOUS OPINION
Four right-thinking justices, members of the Court, filed dissenting opinions also protesting against the majority decision. Taking the lead among these dissenters was Chief Justice Stone, gratefully remembered as the lone dissenter in the Flag case of 1940. He was joined in his opinion by Justices Black, Douglas and Murphy. Justice Murphy also filed a separate opinion stating his objection to the position taken by the majority. Justices Black and Douglas joined in this opinion also. So cogent, logical, forceful and righteous are the dissenting opinions that The Watchtower considers it appropriate to quote from them. Among other things, Mr. Chief Justice Stone said:
The case presents in its baldest form the question whether the freedoms which the Constitution purports to safeguard can be completely subjected to uncontrolled administrative action . . . That purpose cannot rightly be defeated by so transparent a subterfuge as the pronouncement that, while a license may not be required if its award is contingent upon the whim of an administrative officer, it may be if its retention and the enjoyment of the privilege which it purports to give is wholly contingent upon his whim. ... As appears by stipulation or undisputed testimony, the defendants are Jehovah’s witnesses, engaged in spreading their religious doctrines in conformity to the teachings of St. Matthew, Matt. 10:11-14 and 24:14, by going from city to city, from village to village, and house to house, to proclaim them. After asking and receiving permission from the householder, they play to him phonograph records and tender to him books or pamphlets advocating their religious views. For the latter they ask payment of a nominal amount, two to five cents for the pamphlets and twenty-five cents for books, as a contribution to the religious cause which they seek to advance. But they distribute the pamphlets, and sometimes the books, gratis when the householder is unwilling or unable to pay for them. The literature is published for such distribution by non-profit charitable corporations organized by Jehovah’s witnesses. The funds collected are used for the support of the religious movement and no one derives a profit from the publication and distribution of the literature. . . . Few would deny that a license tar laid specifically on the privilege of disseminating ideas would infringe the right of free speech. . . . The First Amendment prohibits all laws abridging freedom of press and religion, not merely some laws or all except tax laws. It is true that the constitutional guaranties of freedom of press and religion, like the commerce clause, make no distinction between fixed-sum taxes and other kinds. But that fact affords no excuse to courts, whose duty it is to enforce those guaranties, to close their eyes to the characteristics of a tax which render it destructive of freedom of press and religion. ... It seems fairly obvious that if the present taxes, laid in small communities upon peripatetic religious propagandists, are to be sustained, a way has been found for the effective suppression of speech and press and religion despite constitutional guaranties. The very taxes now before us are better adapted to that end than were the stamp taxes which so successfully curtailed the dissemination of ideas by eighteenth century newspapers and pamphleteers, and which were a moving cause of the American Revolution. ... In its potency as a prior restraint on publication the flat license tax falls short only of outright
July 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
223
censorship or suppression. The more humble and needy the cause, the more effective is the suppression.
Mr. Justice Murphy said, in part:
When a statute is challenged as impinging on freedom of speech, freedom of the press, or freedom of worship, those historic privileges which are so essential to our political welfare and spiritual progress, it is the duty of this Court to subject such legislation to examination, in the light of the evidence adduced, to determine whether it is so drawn as not to impair the substance of those cherished freedoms in reaching its objective. . . . And the protection of the Constitution must be extended to all, not only to those whose views accord with prevailing thought but also to dissident minorities who energetically spread their beliefs. ... It is not disputed that petitioners, Jehovah’s witnesses, were ordained ministers preaching the gospel, as they understood it, through the streets and from house to house, orally and by playing religious records with the consent of the householder, and by distributing books and pamphlets setting forth the tenets of their faith. It does not appear that their motives were commercial, but only that they were evangelizing their faith as they saw it. . . . The testimony of ten clergymen of Opelika that they distributed free religious literature in their churches, the cost of which was defrayed by voluntary contribution, and that they had never been forced to pay any license fee, was also excluded. . . . There is no suggestion in any of these three cases that petitioners were perpetrating a fraud, that they were demeaning themselves in an obnoxious manner, that their activities created any public disturbance or inconvenience, that private rights were contravened, or that the literature distributed was offensive to morals or created any “clear and present danger” to organized society . . . With so few potential purchasers it would take a gifted evangelist, indeed, in view of the antagonism generally encountered by Jehovah’s witnesses, to sell enough tracts at prices ranging from Sve to twenty-five cents to gross enough to pay the tax. . . . But whatever the amount, the taxes are in reality taxes upon the dissemination of religious ideas, a dissemination earned on by the distribution of religious literature for rebgious reasons alone and not for personal profit. . . . Liberty of circulation is the very lifeblood of a free press . . . and taxes on the circulation of ideas have a long history of misuse against freedom of thought. ... We need not shut our eyes to the possibility that use may again be made of such taxes, either by discrimination in enforcement or otherwise, to suppress the unpalatable views of militant minonties such as Jehovah’s witnesses. . . . Freedom of speech, freedom of press, and freedom of religion all have a double aspect—freedom of thought and freedom of action. Freedom to think is absolute of its own nature; the most tyrannical government is powerless to control the inward workings of the mind. But even an aggressive mind is of no missionary value unless there is freedom of action, freedom to communicate its message to others by speech and writing. ... It matters not that petitioners asked contributions for their literature. Freedom of speech and freedom of the press cannot and must not mean freedom only for those who can distribute their broadsides without charge. There may be others with messages more vital but purses less full, who must seek some reimbursement for their outlay or else forego passing on their ideas. . . . Important as free speech and a free press are to a free government and a free citizenry, there is a right even more dear to many individuals—the right to worship their Maker according to their needs and the dictates of their souls and to carry their message or their gospel to every living creature. These ordinances infringe that right, which is also protected by the Fourteenth Amendment. . . . While perhaps not so orthodox as the oral sermon, the use of religious books is an old, recognized and effective mode of worship and means of proselytizing. For this petitioners
were taxed. The mind rebels at the thought that a minister of any of the old established churches could be made to pay fees to the community before entering the pulpit. These taxes on petitioners’ effort to preach the “news of the Kingdom” should be struck down because they burden petitioners’ right to worship the Deity in their own fashion and to spread the gospel as they understand it. . . . One need only read the decisions of this and other courts in the past few years to see the unpopularity of Jehovah’s witnesses and the difficulties put in their path because of their religious beliefs. An arresting parallel exists between the troubles of Jehovah’s witnesses and the struggles of various dissentient groups in the American colonies for religious liberty which culminated in the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom, the Northwest Ordinance of 1787 and the First Amendment. In most of the colonies there was an established church, and the way of the dissenter was hard. All sects, including Quaker, Methodist, Baptist, Episcopalian, Separatist, Rogerine, and Catholic, suffered. Many of the non-conforming ministers were itinerants, and measures were adopted to curb their unwanted activities. The books of certain denommations were banned.
Liberty of conscience is too full of meaning for the individuals in this nation to permit taxation to prohibit or substantially impair the spread of religious ideas, even though they are controversial and run counter to the established notions of a community. If this Court is to err in evaluating claims that freedom of speech, freedom of the press, and freedom of religion have been invaded, far better that it err m being overprotective of these precious rights.
JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES FOLLOW HIGHER RULING
It is manifest that some members of the Supreme Court have no respect for The Higher Powers, Jehovah God and Christ his King, and hence despise and oppose the Theocratic message. This has caused them to stultify their high office, lose their judicial balance, and sear their consciences in their stubborn efforts to find some way to halt Jehovah’s witnesses. The final outcome will show they have erred, and that in the face of due warning. Their efforts are vain. Until Jehovah’s “strange work” is finished, no man or group of men can stop His witnesses from obeying His commission and command to them to proclaim His Kingdom message, because Jehovah Most High is their Lawgiver and Guide and Protector. Christ Jesus is their Leader, Counselor and Battle-fighter. Jehovah has promised to guide the meek or teachable in judgment and to preserve and deliver the faithful. He has forewarned them that “they shall fight against thee”, but has also promised the faithful that “they shall not prevail against thee”. It will yet further be demonstrated that Jehovah’s witnesses trust not in any human document of guarantees or bill of rights, nor in any political government, nor in any worldly institution or official. Their trust is entirely in The Higher Powers, God and Christ. As Hitler and the Roman Catholic Hierarchy have failed to stop Jehovah’s witnesses on the continent of Europe, likewise the anti-Theocracy forces in America shall fail, and thereafter miserably be destroyed.
Jehovah’s witnesses both appreciate and have fought for the righteous principles of the Constitution, but now the Supreme Court by its attempt to judge their Kingdom publication off the field has gravely hurt the American public by making null and inoperative the one vital guarantee to democracy and liberty, namely, the Constitution.
224
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Jehovah’s witnesses have not lost His favor and His work by reason of the Court’s decision, but the people of the nation have lost much. There is nothing now to keep the Constitution from being thrown to the ash-can; what has befallen an unpopular minority is certain soon to overtake all the people. The Bill of Rights is now a scrap of paper.
THREE MEMBERS SEE A WRONG WAS DONE
In 1940, at the oral argument before the Supreme Court and in behalf of the Gobitis (Flag) case, Judge Rutherford’s final words were: “God save this honorable court from committing an error that will lead this people of the United States into a totalitarian class and destroy all the liberties guaranteed by the Constitution.” Contrary to this warning, the Supreme Court in deciding that case slipped and fell deep into the pit of error and of eventual destruction because ruling against Jehovah’s law as obeyed by his witnesses. Each further step the Court has taken in that direction has carried it so far from the fundamentals of liberty that it is now difficult to recover. Three members of the Court have recognized their serious mistake in the light of the ferocious persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses that has disgraced America ever since. Mr. Justice Black, speaking for Mr. Justice Murphy and Mr. Justice Douglas and himself, said:
The opinion of the Court sanctions a device which in our opinion suppresses or tends to suppress the free exercise of a religion practiced by a minority group. This is but another step in the direction which Minersville School District vs Gobitis, 310 U. S. 5S6, took against the same religious minority and is the logical extension of the principles upon which that decision rested. Since we joined in the opinion in the Gobitis case, we think this is an appropriate occasion to state that we now believe that it was also wrongly decided. Certainly our democratic form of government functioning under the historic Bill of Rights has a high responsibility to accommodate itself to the religious views of minorities however unpopular and unorthodox those views may be. The First Amendment does not put the nght freely to exercise religion in a subordinate position. We fear, however, that the opinions in this and in the Gobitis case do exactly that.
The only way that the people of the nation can escape God’s wrath and receive his protection from destruction at the battle of Armageddon is to turn toward The Theocracy and recognize Jehovah’s supremacy in the field of law and obey Him rather than men. Should the rest of the Supreme Court follow the above judges in retracting the Gobitis case it would be a step with benefit to themselves and the people.
CHOOSE WHOM YOU WILL SERVE
Officials of many cities and municipalities have, like buzzards, been impatiently waiting for the majority decision of the Supreme Court on the license tax ordinance in relation to Jehovah’s witnesses. It is to be expected that some cities and municipalities will promptly press home the majority opinion with lusty glee. Let such not blind themselves to this fact: that, if the administrative and judicial officers of some cities thus follow the majority opinion, they will don the garments of identification with that majority and show themselves fit for annihilation by Jehovah’s great Executioner at Armageddon, which final battle is very near. God’s prophecies foretold such conduct
of persecutors as due to immediately precede the final end of all nations, and, instead of being discouraged, Jehovah’s servants lift up their heads with inward rejoicing at this additional evidence that “your deliverance draweth nigh The faithful remnant will be privileged to fill up the sufferings left behind for members of the body of Christ. They will, together with their companions, bear the same reproaches and afflictions as borne by Him and will with him have a privileged part in proving the Devil a liar as to integrity of God’s servants.
Other towns, cities, villages and hamlets, guided by wiser counsels, will not enforce such laws even if on their statute books, but will stand for the Constitution and righteousness and avoid fighting against God. The majority opinion, likely to give a comforting sop to the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and other religionists whose nuns and agents go from house to house with religious odds and ends, recognizes this matter of voluntariness of action, in these words: 'It may well be that the wisdom of American communities will persuade them to permit the poor and weak to draw support from the petty sales of religious books without contributing anything for the privilege of using the streets and conveniences of the municipality.”
The majority opinion does not amount to a general law applicable throughout the entire United States. Although many cities have such ordinances, they have not yet applied them and may not do so in the future. They are not obliged to do so under the majority decision. Under the minority opinion such application is held to be unconstitutional. It is therefore left up to each city, town or village to determine which course it will take. It may be that even the local state courts will hold sueh ordinances not applicable to preaching the gospel, as did several state courts in cases cited in Notes 1 and 2 above.
The continued faithful obedience of Jehovah’s witnesses to their commission from Him everywhere throughout the land will put all communities to the test. Until the arrests in each city or locality have reached such proportions and the continued repetition thereof has been threatened against Jehovah’s servants, they follow the words and example of their Leader Christ Jesus and his apostles to push the battle to the gate, to plunge Ehud’s dagger in till the fat covers the hilt, always trusting in the Lord. His Word admonishes them not to discontinue work for mere threats, but to put the responsibility squarely upon each city, including officials and people, on this issue, to wit: Will such city line up with that unrighteous, unlawful, and unconstitutional majority decision by arresting the faithful witnesses for keeping on preaching from house to house by God-given right!
When persecution begins in the form of arrests in a city under the type of local ordinance requiring a license for “selling” literature and “peddling” within the city, first then Jehovah’s obedient witnesses will wisely act by prayerfully considering the things set out as fitting and timely in the foregoing article, “Defeat of Persecution.” Such persecuted ones will act according thereto, on all occasions using the spirit of a sound mind in the proper bearing each one of his own burden, by God’s grace and guidance. Fear not to be a dissenter for righteousness as was Jehovah’s Son Christ Jesus on earth.
THE WATCHTOWER
PVBUSHED SEMIMONTHLY Bt
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S.A.
OFFICERS
N. H. Knorr, President	W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.’’ - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, Is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ In glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon It; that man willfully disobeyed God's law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death In order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it Is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will bear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth mn come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun: that the I.ord's next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race
ITS MISSION
HIS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible Instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but Invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge In controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United Statzs, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $150; Great Britain. Australasia, and South Africa, Gs. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British 34 Craven Terrace. London, W.2, England
Canadian 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian__________7 Beresford Road. Strathfield, N. 3. W , Australia
South African Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society Ln every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may bate The lYotch-totcer tree upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We lire glad to thus aid tlie needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers- Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one moorli A renewal blank (carrving notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of diarch S, 1879.
“COMFORT” TESTIMONY PERIOD
To Jehovah’s witnesses the month of August is known as the “Comfort” Testimony Penod Diumg these 31 days a special effort will be made on the part of J ehoy ah’s witnesses to comfort as many people as they possibly can with the truths as set forth in the Word of Jehovah God To aid those who love righteousness the book Children along with the booklet Hope will be offered to the people on a contribution of 25c. These two publications set forth a message which shows there is something worth while living for. Those persons who trust in Jehovah’s kingdom and know that this is the only hope for the world will proclaim the message con tamed in these publications and make them available to as many persons as they can possibly meet during August. “Comfort” Testimony Period will be a blessing to all those who share in the preaching of the gospel Make your report of activit y to your local company servant, or if you are not associated with a company, report direct to the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of September 6: “Atonement for the New World” (Part 1), fl 1-21 inclusive, The Watchtower August 1, 1542.
Week of September 13: “Atonement for the New World” (Part 1), fl 22-42 inclusive, The Watchtower August 1, 1942.
NEW EDITION OF “THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT”
There has always been a steady demand for the Greek and English “New Testament” known as “The Emphatic Diaglott” The old edition became exhausted some months ago, and a new has been in preparation meanwhile. The desirable features of the Diaglott are many.
The actual Greek in which the “New Testament” was originally written is given according to the well-known and highly-respected Griesbaeh recension. Then in footnotes variation^ according to the Alexandrine and Vatican (No. 1209) manuscript-, are given, two of the very oldest manuscripts in existence.
The Diaglott also contains a useful and valuable alphabetical appendix in the back, which is practically a compact Bible dictionary containing helpful features not found in other dictionaries of the Bible.
The binding is beautiful blue leatherette, and flexible. The paper is of good quality, and the type is clear. The size is 44’ by 71“ by 1*, which is convenient for handling.
The new edition of the Diaglott will be off the press by the time yon read this announcement, and will then be ready for distribution. The cost is $2 per copy.
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM
No. LXIII	August 1, 1942	No. 15
ATONEMENT FOR THE NEW WORLD
PART 1
We have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: and he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world.”—1 John 2:1,2.
JEHOVAH’S purpose to build a new world is about to be fulfilled. This is cause for all lovers of righteousness, truth and liberty to rejoice. All such, honestly examining the Creator’s promises and descriptions and acts concerning that new world, are led to love it. That is like Jehovah God. He too loves it and has proved his love for it. “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.” In those words, at John 3:1G, the Son explained why he was on the earth as a perfect man, preaching the coming establishment of a new world under a new government, “the kingdom of heaven.” This spells the doom of the present world now in the throes of “distress of nations, with perplexity”. The year 1914, remembered by men as the year of the outbreak of the World War, marked the turning point for the affairs of the universe. By the political, military and religious maneuvers of the nations since then they now stand at the “place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon”, and all Bible prophecy and world events combine to prove that the great battle at that “place” is very soon to be joined. No mere international or capitalist-labor or Catholic-Protestant war will that be, but a war between worlds, with the kingdom of heaven of the new world fighting to victory on the right side against the demons and wicked men of “this present evil world” on the side of defeat and destruction. The “new heavens” and “new earth” of God’s unforgettable promise shall thereafter hold sway and shall endure forever to the unfading glory of Jehovah and to the blessing of all lovers of the new world.
1	It is of God’s great mercy that he has not completely wiped out the human race ere now for all its unrighteousness which stains every page of its history. Sober-thinking men ought to tremble at the thought that he will wipe out all the worldly nations at the impending Armageddon fight and thereby at last, after a wait of six thousand years, vindicate his name
and lus almighty power for righteousness and truth. Only human creatures who now set their love and confidence and hopes on the new world of God's creation and who immovably take their stand for it and publicly confess thereto will be spared to enter into its joys, privileges and blessings. Now is the destiny-making time, the time to decide whether to work for the preservation of this wicked world, with certain disappointment in the end, or to serve the interests and prove oneself worthy of the new world with its endless joys that will outweigh all the sufferings for righteousness endured at present. God in his loving-kindness has made all needed provision whereby men who have been born of the sinner-race may’ escape the condemnation of death due to sin and may qualify for everlasting life, some in the “new heavens” of that new world, and a far larger number on a purified earth under those new heavens. Such provision of God is through his only begotten Son, who qualified to be the King of the new world and King of all who live in that world without end. This is the wonderful meaning of the truth contained in the words: “We have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: and he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world.”—1 John 2:1, 2.
’ Those words of comfort were addressed under inspiration directly to those who will be associated with God’s anointed King in the “new heavens”. They also hold out glorious hope for all men who love truth and who turn from sin and desire to do right on the earth under new heavenly government, The Theocratic Government. Such men of good-will toward God and his kingdom strive to do right to the best of their ability now and according to God’s standard of truth and righteousness. To such “men of goodwill” God extends peace on earth through his King. None of those who now turn to the new world and who advertise it to others can at present do perfectly. Hence they need the help of the “advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous”. “Advocate”
228
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
means helper. All men descended from Adam have been “shapen in iniquity, and in sin did [their] mother conceive [them]”, and this through no choice of their own. (Ps. 51:5) Sin entered into the world before the birth of the first child of Adam and Eve. That was in Eden, when Adam chose to follow his wife in transgression of God's law, which transgression brought the penalty of death.—Gen. 2:17.
‘ Eve acted just as selfishly and willfully as her husband. In fact, she ran ahead of her earthly head Adam and showed insubordination, and hence Eve, although deceived by the subtle serpent, was inexcusable and “was in the transgression”. (1 Tim. 2:11,13,14) God made promise in their hearing concerning “childbearing”, that is, concerning God’s “woman” who should bear the Seed that should crush the Serpent’s head. Only this holds out any hope for those of Adam and Eve’s offspring who turn from the Serpent and its deceptions and turn to the Seed who delivers from the power of the Serpent. (Gen. 3:15; 1 Tim. 2:15) Thus it came about that “by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men [by human birth and inheritance], for that all have sinned”.— Rom. 5:12.
5	Being conceived in sin and shaped in iniquity, Adam’s offspring are imperfect as well as sinners and hence under the condemnation of death and have no right to human life. They have no claim upon God and God owes nothing to them; rather by God’s long-suffering and mercy they enjoy what conscious existence they have on earth. At death they return to the dust, to a state of non-existence. No hope of future living again would be possible for any of them excepting for God’s providing of a sin-offering, a “propitiation” for sins, for those willing to accept the benefits of it on God’s terms. The principal term upon which they receive the good effects of that sin-offering or propitiation is that they must forever be for a vindication of God’s name in contradiction of the infamous reproaches that the Serpent has brought upon God’s blameless name. “Propitiation” means that thing which makes propitious, favorable, that is to say, the thing which removes the reason for God to condemn the creature and which therefore brings the creature into the mercy, favor and loving-kindness of God. “The wages of sin is death”; and sin is charged against all men by inheritance from their first father, Adam. The propitiation removes the charge of sin as the cause of condemnation to death from all who avail themselves of the propitiation, and is the sin-offering.
•The first man on earth, Adam, was perfect, because he was the creation of God, and, as for God, “liis work is perfect.” (Deut. 32:4) God made Adam in His likeness, that is, possessed of a suitable
measure of wisdom, justice, love and power. He made Adam in His image, that is, as God’s visible representative on earth. (Gen. 1:26,28) Jehovah is a “God of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he”. There was no iniquity or injustice or unrighteousness in his creation Adam, because Jehovah God is not the source or author of such.
T As such perfect creature, Adam had the right to life in his perfection. His Creator stated that Adam could possess that right forever by continued obedience to Theocratic law, that is, the law of his God. As long as Adam thus continued in perfect obedience to his Maker and Sustainer Adam was a part of the universal organization of God and was the visible or earthly part thereof. Adam’s wife, Eve, being likewise the creation of God, was also perfect, as was Adam. Both were acquainted with God’s law and both were intelligently under test to prove their worthiness either of everlasting life or of being cut off from life without any hope or promise of recovery. Their choice as manifested by their course of action thenceforth must determine their everlasting destiny. They chose death. In their case God could not reverse his law or recall it. For God to do so would make his judgment and his law and his word unreliable, and creatures throughout the universe would have grounds for believing that the life of a mere creature is more to God than his own word, and that creatures could willfully sin against God and yet have the hope of universal salvation by God’s reversal of his own penalty for the sin of willful sinners. It was the Serpent, Satan, who promised universal salvation, by persuading Eve that despite her willful sin against God she would be saved, and she could enjoy sin against God and also enjoy salvation.
•Jehovah God vindicated his own law and turned Adam and Eve to destruction before a “day” or period of one thousand years passed. (Gen. 2:17) He instantly withdrew from them the right to life, and left them to die amid the thorns and thistles outside Eden. He permitted them to reproduce their kind and rear children, and this God did for his name’s sake. To these children he let the information be handed down that God would in due time produce a Seed by his “woman”, and which Seed would destroy the Serpent, who by deception had brought sin and death on them. It is the father who gives or transmits life, through the mother, who supplies the organism to the creature bom. Adam, having forfeited the right to life for himself, could not transmit that right to his imperfect, sin-cursed offspring. It was therefore the right to life as a perfect human creature that he parted with both for himself and for his offspring by Eve. Adam and Eve, having been directly on trial and failing therein, could never
August 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER-
229
recapture that right. However, their offspring had not been personally on trial to determine their destiny, and could take advantage of whatever merciful provision God might choose to make in harmony with his justice and out of love for a new world and in vindication of his word and name.
’ If any of Adam’s offspring did not by faith choose to take advantage of God’s arrangement for life in the new world, such ones would be the losers. God will have the new world of his love, regardless of who refuses to seek life in it, and he will vindicate his name by the Theocratic Government of that new world. Certainly no creature born in sin, and hence under condemnation of death, could gain life in the new world if he did not choose the Builder thereof and also its King. To that effect it is written: “And this is the record, that God hath given to us eternal life, and this life is in tris Son. He that hath the Son hath life; and he that hath not the Son of God hath not life.” (1 John 5:11,12) “The Father . . . hath given all things into his hand. He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life: and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him.”—John 3:35,36.
10	Sin and the condemnation due to it rested as a disability’ upon Adam’s descendants. In order that such of them as turn to God in faith and obedience might have the way opened to gain and enjoy life in the new w’orld, that disability must be lifted and removed. God alone could do that, by furnishing a sin-offering to make atonement for the sins of those wanting to come into harmony with him. The “sin-offering'’ is the victim, whose offering is made necessary by sin, and which sin-offering is of such value and power as to be able to cancel or wipe out the effect of the sin.
11	The word “atonement” is used in God’s law by Moses and in the writings of Christ’s apostles. It has the basic thought of “cover” and “exchange”; that is, the thing exchanged or applied instead of another thing must exactly cover, correspond with or duplicate that other thing. The English word “atonement” is derived from the expression “at one”, and has the Bible meaning. The thing which makes satisfaction for another thing that is lost or forfeited must be “at one” with or cover, coincide with and be exactly equivalent to that other thing. This, therefore, shows what must be required in the “sin-offering”-. It must correspond perfectly, without overlapping or without shortcoming, with the thing for which it atones or makes just satisfaction. Only by atonement through such a sin-offering could favor be restored to one who is under a natural disability before God. Therefore the one who is offered as the victim or sin-offering is the “propitiation” or the thing which makes God favorable to the one hitherto
disabled and under God’s wrath and condemnation by birth. It was God’s love of the new world and of those who meet his requirements for living in it that moved God to furnish the means of propitiation. “Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins.”—1 John 4:10.
MIRACULOUS PROVISION
11	How could God’s only begotten Son become the sin-offering to propitiate for sins? Certainly not by remaining in his original condition. God his Father is spirit, the Supreme One, invisible to man and almighty’ in power. When Almighty God Jehovah brought his first-born son into existence, that only begotten Son was like his Creator-Father, a spirit or heavenly person, higher than man and more powerful. 'Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature.” (Col. 1:15) As such the only begotten Son was perfect in mind and organism and possessed the right to everlasting life in heaven in association and communion with his Father and his God, Jehovah.
” The Lord God made this first-born, only begotten Son his ‘Word”, or mouthpiece and executive, toward all creatures that should thereafter be created. Jehovah used this Word thenceforth in the creation of all things animate and inanimate, ineluding angels and men. This Word of God (John 1:1-3) was therefore higher than angels, and, since man was made “a little lower than the angels”, he was far higher than man. Adam had been made a perfect man, and when he sinned he lost for himself the right to life in absolute human perfection. God made this earth not in vain; “lie formed it to be inhabited” by perfect men. (Isa. 45:12,18) Adam forfeited that right for all his descendants. For any of his offspring to come into enjoyment of that right a sin-offering must be provided with the exact value-content of a perfect human life together with the right thereto. The life of the Word of God in heaven was not of equal value with that, but far more excellent. Hence it was not suitable for a sin-offering. Note now the wisdom and power and justice and love of Jehovah God, in meeting his own exact law, namely, “Life shall go for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.”—Deut. 19: 21.
14 Instantly that sin had entered into that first world by Satan’s rebellion and Adam’s transgression, Jehovah God purposed to build a new world of which man on the earth should be a part, and which new world would be governed by a new heavenly government, The Theocracy’, under his only begotten Son. His Son would be the Seed of God’s “woman” entrusted with the honor of vindicating God’s name by destroying sin from the universe, and all prac-
230
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
ticers thereof, including Satan, “that old Serpent, which is the Devil.” That Son or Word of God was the highest one in God’s universal organization, and the Lord God had used him in the creation of all the rest of God’s universal organization. (Col. 1:15-18) Thus God’s only begotten Son occupied a special relationship with his Father toward that universal organization, namely, that of joint-creator thereof with God.
16 It is written: “Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world.” (Acts 15:18) “Declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure.” (Isa. 46:10) Jehovah God purposed that the government of the promised new world should be cut out of his universal organization as its “mother” and should be made the capital organization over and above his entire universal organization. Also his only begotten Son should be the anointed King in such capital organization. The great Organizer of this new government also purposed that there should be associated with his Son in the capital organization a body of 144,000 faithful members over whom Iris Son would be the Head. All these together, the 144,000 and One, should compose Jehovah’s royal family of heaven.
18 Tliis great privilege, however, was not to be gained without cost to the Son, namely, the cost of absolute and complete obedience to his Father under the most severe test. The Son had from the very beginning of his life been obedient to Jehovah his Father, but now he must be perfected in his obedience in order to qualify for the glorious position immediately next to the Most High God. This obedience must be perfected by holding faithful and true under the greatest suffering at the hands of the organization of the great Serpent, who is at enmity with the Seed of God’s “woman”. In agreement with this it is written as to God’s method: “For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto [heavenly] glory, to make the captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings.” (Heb. 2:10) The Son must be willing to exchange all he had and undergo even the deprivation of life itself, in order that he might fully demonstrate his obedience to Jehovah God and his love for Him and his Theocratic Government of the new world. In brief, the Son must be “faithful unto death”, and must trust his Father to use liis almighty power to raise his Son out of death as a reward of his Son’s perfect obedience and faithfulness. Hence the Son said: “Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and
I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father.”—John 10:17,18.
17	The great adversary challenges Jehovah’s universal domination. He raised the question of doubt that Almighty God is able to produce any creatures of perfect integrity who, if exposed to assault b\ the Devil and his organization, would continue to acknowledge God’s universal domination and to abide in his universal organization. God’s only begotten Son, by proving his devotion and obedience perfect under suffering, would supply a complete and lasting answer to that question and prove the Devil a false accuser. At the earth, where Satan was the invisible overlord of fallen man, that question had been raised by the Devil in connection with man. Therefore it must be that God’s Son undergo the thorough test of his obedience, devotion and integrity on the earth. He must become a man and undergo the loss of life itself in order to provide the perfect answer to the question in vindication of his Father’s name and word. Laying down his life in obedience to God would, however, not mean the loss of his right to life; rather it would prove his worthiness to resume his life with his Father in heavenly glory and to be ‘clothed upon with immortality’ as a reward and to sit down with his Father in His throne, there to reign as King of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government. Secondly, by laying down his life and putting aside the humanity he had assumed he would provide the sin-offering. Thereby he would open the way for devoted men and women to be redeemed from among humankind and to be given a change to heavenly life, to be associated with their Redeemer and Head in the kingdom of heaven, The Theocracy.
18	At God’s chosen time he revealed this purpose, which was before that a hidden mystery, to be hi> beloved Son. Joyful at the opportunity to be the vindicator of his Father’s name, the Son gladh accepted his Father's will for him and agreed to do it. The same love his Father had for the new world was manifested by the Son. God was willing to irive his beloved Son to be the governmental Head of that new world. The Son was willing to give his all for the privilege of clearing the Father's name of all reproaches from the adversary. This giving of his all Jesus pictured in two parables, saying: “Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hid in a field; the which when a man hath found, he hideth, and for joy thereof goeth and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field. Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchantman, seeking goodly pearls; who, when he had found one pearl of great price, went and sold all that he had, and bought it.” (Matt. 13:44-46) The “field” which the Son bought at the cost of his all was Jehovah’s universal organization, in the creation of which he had been a colaborer
August 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER.
231
with God his Father. (John 17:10; Heb. 1:2) The “treasure” hidden therein, and the “one pearl of great price”, was and is the “kingdom of heaven”, the government of the new world. It included the privilege of being the Head thereof and to have associated with him in his throne 144,000 redeemed from among men. Thus in the selling of all he had the Son laid aside his life and glory in heaven and became a perfect man, poor in comparison.
” The laying aside of heavenly life and glory was not a part of the sin-offering. “The law of the Lord is perfect,” and it provided that like should go for like. The sin-offering must therefore have a value exactly equal to that which was lost or forfeited by the perfect man Adam. (Ps. 19:7; Lev. 24:20,21; Ex. 21: 23-25) The sin-offering in man’s behalf must be a ransom of exactly corresponding price or value. The spirit life and glory of which the Son divested himself to become the “man Christ Jesus” was far higher and of far greater value and worth than anything the perfect man in Eden possessed and enjoyed. Hence the Son’s emptying himself of this heavenly power and position was not part of the sin-offering, but was part of his proving perfect obedience to his Father. It was in order that he might become a perfect man and maintain his integrity toward his Father under the crucial test and thereby provide Jehovah’s complete answer to Satan’s lie. This would be for the vindication of Jehovah’s name and would prove the Son to be worthy to be Head of Jehovah’s capital organization and as such the Vindicator of God's name. Thus viewed, the chief purpose of God’s beloved Son in becoming a perfect man was, not to provide redemption for humankind, but to bear witness to Jehovah’s name and new government and to vindicate His name.—John 18: 37, 36.
What, then, is the “sin-offering”? It is the perfect Victim that provides propitiation for the sins of all those of Adam’s descendants who are eventually redeemed or delivered from sin and death. When God’s fullness of time was come his heavenly Son divested himself of all above and Jehovah God his Father transferred his life to the womb of a virgin of the tribe of Judah. Hence this virgin was a descendant of Abraham, who was called “the friend of God”. She was also a descendant of David, the anointed king of Israel. Jehovah had declared to Abraham His unconditional covenant to set up The Theocratic Government and that the seed of Abraham should rule therein, and that in Abraham’s seed all men who will may bless themselves by faith and obedience. Thereafter, with Abraham’s descendant David, Jehovah made the covenant for the Kingdom and declared in this covenant that of the seed of David God would set the Ruler upon the throne of
the promised Theocratic Government.—Gen. 12:3; 22:18; 2 Sam. 7 :12-16; Ps. 89: 20-37.
21 Jehovah further promised that the future Ruler would be born at Bethlehem in the tribe of Judah. (Mic. 5:2) In keeping with all his promises God’s Son was miraculously conceived and born by the virgin at Bethlehem; “concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed of David according to the flesh; and declared to be the Son of God with power.” (Rom. 1: 3,4) His human birth was not an incarnation making him part man and part spirit person. No; but in this transfer of his life to the virgin’s womb Jehovah’s God-like Son divested himself of everything spirit and heavenly and became a man. His serving as the “sin-offering” absolutely required this. (Phil. 2:5-8) “And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father,) full of grace and truth.” (John 1:14) As a man his name was called “Jesus”.
PERFECT
Being born of an imperfect woman descended from Adam, was Jesus perfect in the flesh? or was it possible for him to have the right to perfect human life and at the same time not have a perfect human body? Job had reference to a child’s father when he asked the question: “Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one.” (Job 14:4) But Jesus did not have an unclean father, as his life was not from Adam, but direct from God, the Holy One.
** It should not be necessary’ to discuss this question. As early as 1897 the Watchtower publications (Volume Five of Studies in the Scriptures) referred to it in these words: “Of the two false but popular theories one claims that our Lord Jesus was the Almighty God, Jehovah, who merely garbed himself in human flesh, without really having actual sensibility’ of humanity’s trials, temptations and environments. The other theory claims that he was a sinful man, partaker of the blemishes of our race, just as others, but more successful than others in combatting and resisting the motions of sin. . . . Since this was the divine program—that our Lord should not only be the Redeemer of the world, but also a pattern for the ‘brethren’ who would be his joint-heirs,— therefore, in carrying out this divine program it was fitting that he should in all his trials and experiences be ‘made like unto his brethren’. Tie was tempted in all points like as we are, yet without sin.’ (Heb. 4:15) It will be noticed that this statement is not that our Lord was tempted in all points like as the world is tempted, but like as we, his followers, are tempted. He was not tempted along the lines of depraved appetites for sinful things, received by heredity, from an earthly parentage; but being holy,
232	THE WATCHTOWER.	Brooklyn, N. Y.
harmless, undefiled and separate from sinners, he was tempted along the same lines as his followers • • . ”—The At-one-ment Between God and Man, pages 107,109,110.
’* The Scriptures do not state that God’s Word was made imperfect flesh; nor do the Scriptures say God’s Son was made in sinful flesh, filled with inherited weaknesses. Romans 8:4 (Weymouth’s translation) states: ‘For what was impossible to the Law— thwarted as it was by human frailty—God effected. Sending His own Son in the form of sinful humanity to deal with sin, God pronounced sentence upon sin in human nature; in order that in our case the requirement of the Law might be fully met.’ Jesus’ body was real flesh, but not sinful or imperfect; it was merely in the “likeness of sinful flesh”. Jesus was in the likeness of other men whose power of existence was transmitted from the sinner Adam; but Jesus was not exactly such as other men are, because only his mother was human and God was his Father. Because of Jesus’ likeness to other men, the religionists accused him of being born of fornication, not recognizing God as Jesus’ Father. Jesus “made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men [children of Adam]: and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross”. —Phil. 2:7,8.
25 The argument is raised that Jesus had the right to human life, but was born imperfect, with the human frailties of sinful men, just so he might in himself personally experience what it felt like to have such frailties to fight against and overcome, in order that he might be able to sympathize fully with humankind as their High Priest. Such argument magnifies the creature man. It overlooks the primary purpose for which Jesus was sent to earth to become man. The real issue was not how it felt to be a man imperfect and sinful in tendency and how hard it was for such an imperfect, sin-laden creature to fight and overcome the weakness of the flesh. It was not sympathy for sinful man and the need therefore to taste their frailties that brought God’s Son to earth. The question that was linked to the issue of God’s universal domination and which must be settled was: Adam as a perfect man had failed to resist the Devil and his temptation. Could Jehovah, then, put his Son as a perfect man on earth, subject him to the temptations and sufferings at the hands of Satan and his demons, and still have Jesus maintain his integrity absolutely flawless and not be forced out of God’s organization? Would Jesus show perfectness of obedience under such experience of temptation and suffering, even unto death, and thereby vindicate his Father’s word and name? Would he be faithful and
true as a witness for Jehovah and his Theocracy under the reproaches and oppositions by the enemy?
10 By his faithful course which led to his death on the tree Jesus answered that principal question at issue to the honor and vindication of his Father. The matter of being frail, infirm and imperfect as sinful humans are was not involved or required for the settlement of the issue at all. Jesus healed of their sickness and diseases those that came to him in faith, and this at the cost of virtue which went out from him. Thus he partook of the infirmities of men and women of faith and showed his feeling for and loving-kindness toward them. (Mark 5: 30: Luke 6:19; 8: 46) This was in fulfillment of the prophecy, at Isaiah 53:4. It would have been impossible if he had himself been filled with frailties and infirmities and imperfections in his own flesh. (Matt. 8:16,17) The inspired writer cites a proof of perfection in the flesh by this example: “If any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man, and able also to bridle the whole body.” (Jas. 3:2) To prove Jesus’ perfection the divine testimony is: “Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps: who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth: who, when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not; but committed himself to him that judgeth righteously: who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we, being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness: by whose stripes ye were healed.” (1 Pet. 2:21-24) To his religious accusers Jesus said: “Which of you convinceth me of sin? And if I say the truth, why do ye not believe me? He that is of God heareth God’s words: ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God.”—John 8: 46, 47.
2T It is inconsistent to say Jesus could be imperfect in the flesh but could have the right to everlasting life because of the perfect integrity of his heart toward God. The ancient record truly does say that “Noah was a just man, and perfect in his generations”; and that God commanded Abraham, “Walk before me, and be thou perfect”; and that God said that Job was a “perfect and an upright man”. (Gen. 6:9; 17:1; Job 1:1,8; 2:3) But the perfection in the sense there meant did not of itself entitle them to the right to perfect human life. Their receiving the right to life depends upon the sin-offering of Jesus applied in their behalf. This proves that Jesus had more than mere perfection of heart integrity as those faithful men had it. Jesus had perfection of flesh, of human organism, and because of this he was able to ptovide the sin-offering. Concerning the animal offered as a typical offering upon God’s altar Jehovah’s law required: “It shall be perfect to be accepted; there shall be no blemish therein.” (Lev. 22: 21) This does not refer to perfect heart integrity,
August 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
233
for a dumb brute has none; it refers to its physical condition. All this has forceful meaning when taken in connection with Jesus’ words: “I am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.”—John 6:51.
” Jesus’ fitness to be the sin-offering required his perfection in the flesh together with the right to human life in such a perfect human body. As it is written: “For he hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.” (2 Cor. 5:21) It is the sin-offering that makes atonement. That means it supplies the perfect satisfaction and coverage for that which was lost or forfeited and which it is the desire to buy back or recover. This is according to God’s perfect law that like shall go for like in absolute justice. Adam was created with a perfect human organism, and he had the right to human life in such an organism. By willful transgression of God's published law Adam lost both these valuable things for himself and his offspring. Therefore Adam died. God’s justice was perfectly satisfied in his death and shall forever be satisfied therein, and the sentence upon Adam shall never be reversed, for the great Judge, Jehovah God, changes not.
29	Adam’s offspring by Eve were not born of an innocent woman, for she was “in the transgression” and hence under the same sentence with him. Their children were born imperfect, and dying, and perforce under God’s wrath and condemnation. In due time all must perish for ever, unless God made provision for those having faith and obedience to live in the new world. For the human perfection and the right to human life to be recovered for them a sin-offering must be presented to God in their behalf. None of Adam’s offspring possessed the values to fit them to provide the sin-offering. In loving-kindness and for his name’s sake God did so. To provide the exact equivalent of what Adam had forfeited by sin, it was necessary that Jesus divest himself of his heavenly position and powers and become a perfect man, possessed of the right to human life. This Jesus did. Moreover he must lay down these human things of value and for ever part with them by presenting them to the great Life-giver Jehovah. Then the Lord God could justly bestow such valuable things upon all or as many of Adam’s offspring as would please God and prove worthy thereof by faith and obedience toward Him and his High Priest Christ Jesus. So it is written: “But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels, for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honour: that he by the grace of God should taste death for every man.” —Heb. 2:9.
SPIRIT-BEGETTING
” Jesus as a boy was a perfect child, with a perfect child’s mind. Hence he sought information at God’s temple in Jerusalem. To his earthly caretakers he there said: “How is it that ye sought met wist ye not that I must be about my Father’s business!” (Luke 2:42-49) When he grew to perfect manhood, arriving at the age of thirty years, he was released from all subjection to his human homekeepers and he applied himself directly and exclusively to his heavenly Father’s business. He consecrated himself to Jehovah God to do his will. In public symbol of this consecration to be dead to his own will as a man and to be alive to God’s will as God’s servant, Jesus submitted to baptism, being totally immersed beneath Jordan’s waters by John the Baptist. Immediately thereafter the revelation of his heavenly Father’s will came to him; figuratively, “the heavens were opened unto him.” God expressed his acceptance of the consecration by the pouring out of his spirit upon Jesus, the descent of the spirit being accompanied by that heavenly symbol of peace, the dove. (Matt. 3:13-17) There for the first time Jesus was announced to human ears as the Son of God: “And, lo, a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased.” That meant that Jesus’ condition was altered again from what it was at the time of his human birth. How!
31	Jehovah’s will was that Jesus should lay down his life to vindicate liis Father’s name by proving faithful under suffering even unto the death. Thereby he would come to the perfection of his obedience toward God and would overcome Satan’s world and so would prove worthy to sit down with his heavenly Father in his celestial throne. (Rev. 3: 21) He must suffer in order to reign thereafter. Hence Jehovah in his prophecy gave the promise that when Jesus should thus die faithful to Him he would not leave Jesus’ soul in hell (Sheol, the death condition), but would raise him out of death on the third day unto life evermore. (Ps. 16:10; Acts 2: 23-32) This’meant that Jesus would return to life in the spirit with his Father in heaven.
32	Moreover, and in a secondary order, it was Jehovah’s will that Jesus should at the same time offer his perfect human life as a sacrifice, to serve the purpose of a sin-offering, that faithful men might have the way opened to gain life in the new world. (John 14: 6) Thereby Jesus would become Jehovah’s High Priest to offer sacrifice for the sins of the people. Also by holding fast his integrity under crucial suffering unto the death on the tree he would prove worthy to become God’s Tiigh priest after the order of Melchizedek’, that is, a high priest upon a royal throne, a king-priest like Melchizedek of old.
234
THE WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
(Heb. 3:1; 5:1-6; 7:1-17; Ps. 110:4) Therefore when Jehovah God accepted Jesus’ consecration at Jordan the heavenly Father took Jesus into the covenant by sacrifice. (Ps. 50:5) That covenant was made beyond repeal or recall. Hence when Jehovah accepted Jesus for sacrifice, Jesus was as good as dead as a perfect man. Immediately thereupon the great Life-giver begot Jesus by his almighty invisible power to life in the spirit, and Jesus became the spiritual Son of God, having the right to life in the spirit. For this new reason Jehovah acknowledged Jesus as his Son who was and is well-pleasing to his heavenly Father. Jesus was still in the perfect body of flesh, but he was nonetheless a “new creature”, because by his Father’s begetting of him by the spirit Jesus now had right to life in the spirit with the sure and certain hope to “ascend up where he was before”. (2 Cor. 5:17; John 6:62) When he should in due time ascend up there, then he would present at the throne of God the value of his human sacrifice as a ransom for every man that believes in Jehovah God and in his provision for life through Christ Jesus.
’’Having begotten Jesus by the spirit, Jehovah God also took him into the covenant for the Kingdom or Theocracy and anointed him with the spirit of power to be the King thereof. There God’s Son became Christ Jesus, that is, the Anointed Jesus, Christ meaning “Anointed”, and Jesus meaning “Savior”. That Jesus was then anointed or commissioned to be the Theocratic King is evidenced during Jesus’ temptation thereafter in the wilderness, when the Devil showed Jesus all the kingdoms of this world and offered them to Jesus for his worship of the Devil. Jesus turned down the offer flatly and held to the worship of Jehovah. (Matt. 4:1-10) In fulfillment of his commission to announce the Theocratic Government of the new world to men, Jesus, as soon as he came forth from the wilderness, began to teach and preach, “Repent: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.”—Matt. 4:17.
Jesus then by this preaching began to gather about him the first ones of the 144,000 who were to be joined with him in his kingdom. When he ascended up on high after finishing his earthly course, he did not immediately begin the active operation of that heavenly kingdom over men. It was not then God’s time for Satan’s world to be ousted and destroyed. Hence Jehovah God bade his Son, Jesus Christ our Lord, to await the due time to act against the enemy world. <fBut this man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God; from henceforth expecting [awaiting] till his enemies be made his footstool.”—Heb. 10:12,13.
“ Ten days after his ascension to heaven came the day of Pentecost, and the faithful disciples of Christ
Jesus who had like him consecrated themselves to God were assembled together in Jerusalem. There Jehovah God by Christ Jesus poured out his spirit upon them, begetting them of the spirit and also anointing them as his commissioned witnesses and putting them in line for a place in the government of the new world with their Head Christ Jesus. (Acts 2) From then on Jehovah God by these anointed witnesses has continued the proclamation of his kingdom under Christ. Thereby he has been selecting out from the worldly nations others to complete the number of 141,000 to be united with Jehovah’s King in The Theocratic Government. (Acts 15:14-18; Rom. 11:11, 25) All these must hear the Kingdom gospel, must exercise faith in Jehovah as God and in Christ Jesus as his King and must accept of the benefits of his sin-offering for humankind. They must prove their faith by making a complete consecration of themselves through Christ to do God’s will. Then they must follow carefully in his footsteps and be faithful and true witnesses to God and his kingdom as Jesus was. If God is pleased to take them into the covenant by sacrifice, he jus'i-fies them for that purpose on the basis of the merits of Jesus’ sin-offering. He then accepts them to be sacrificed and begets them with the spirit of his power to be his spiritual children. (Rom. 5:1; 8: 1; Jas. 1:18) These follow Jesus’ example and publicly symbolize their consecration to God by being baptized in water.—Acts 2: 37-41.
” If these consecrated ones in the covenant by sacrifice prove faithful under test, Jehovah God baptizes them into the “body of Christ" and anoints them as members thereof with his spirit and brings them into the covenant of faithfulness for the Kingdom of God. (Rom. 6: 3-5) They must be baptized in the likeness of Jesus’ death in order to share m his resurrection unto life in the spirit. They must sul’fei with him if they would reign with him in the Kingdom. They must be perfected in obedience under suffering and prove their integritv toward God under the crucial test, in order to be associated with Christ Jesus in the vindication of his Father’s name. (Matt. 20:22,23; 2 Tim. 2:11,12) When the Lord comes in his kingdom and comes to his temple for judgment of those worthy and those unworthy to enter into the new world, the faithful body members are united with the Lord Jesus Christ in the Kingdom. Those body members that slept in death are awakened at his coming and made like him in the “first resurrection”. The remnant of body members yet alive on earth are engaged in giving a faithful witness concerning the Kingdom unto all nations for a testimony. They must finish their earthly course faithful unto death in completion of their covenant by sacrifice. Then they are given an instantaneous
August 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
235
resurrection-change, to be made like him and to see him as he now is in divine glory. (1 Cor. 15: 50-54;
1 John 3:1,2) Christ Jesus and all these who participate with him in the “first resurrection” constitute together the “new heavens” which Jehovah God promised to create for the new world.—Rev. 20:4, G; 21:1; 2 Pet. 3:13.
“THE WHOLE WORLD”
*T Christ Jesus is the propitiation for sins not only of those associated with him in the “new’ heavens”, but also of the “whole world”. This would include the “other sheep”. These the Lord is now’ gathering, and to them he extends the hope of surviving the battle of Armageddon and thereafter living upon the earth, forever enjoying righteousness and peace and prosperity under the “new’ heavens”. Since this is the period of the “covenant by sacrifice”, the “other sheep”, who shall remain forever on the earth, will not be justified until after Armageddon, to carry out the divine mandate to multiply and fill the cleansed earth with their righteous offspring. That “w’hole world”, wherein righteousness shall reign, will include also those faithful men who occupied the relation of earthly fathers to Christ Jesus and who died faithful prior to Christ’s ascension to heaven and selection of the “kingdom of heaven” class. Because his propitiation for sins includes those faithful ones of old, they shall receive life from him as their father in a “better resurrection”. Hence they shall become the children of “The Everlasting Father”, and he will make them “princes in all the earth”. As such they shall rule as the visible representatives of the “new heavens” and shall constitute the “new earth” or visible ruling organization over men that live on the literal earth.—Ps. 45:16; Isa. 32:1; Heb. 11:35-40.
’’ Furthermore, that “whole world” for which Christ Jesus is the propitiation for sins would include those who have “done evil" because of birth in sin and w’ho have died, but who have not perished because of practicing willful rebellion and wickedness against God. Such ones sleep in the graves, and shall be remembered when the One who is the propitiation for sins calls forth all such in the general earthly resurrection under the Kingdom. They shall have a “resurrection of judgment” if they avail themselves of the propitiation and then devote themselves to Jehovah God and obey his Theocratic Rule.— John 5:28, 29.
WHO HAS PART IN THE SIN-OFFERING T
”It is thus seen that the spiritual class of the Lord’s followers who reign with him in the “new heavens” are first to receive the benefits of the propitiation, from Pentecost forward. The others who
shall live as perfect human creatures on the earth in the new world receive the benefits thereof under the established Kingdom or Theocratic Government. Since A. D. 1914 that Government has been in operation for the bringing of Jehovah’s glorious purpose to a grand climax in vindication of Iris name and word. Since 144,000 are to be finally associated with him in that Government of Righteousness, and since these have been justified and taken into the covenant of sacrifice with Christ and must carry it out faithful unto death, do these have part with Christ Jesus in the sin-offering 1
40	During the World War, which marked the “beginning of sorrows” for the old world now facing its final end, the newspapers published the statements of certain religious preachers that the men who fell in death in the line of duty to their earthly country had a part in the sacrifice of Christ and therefore had an immediate passport into heaven. As ’part of the sacrifice of Christ’ the preachers meant that the fallen ones bestowed benefits like Christ’s on the rest of humankind that survived them. For hundreds of years, particularly since the sixth century, Roman Catholic popes and priests have been celebrating the so-called “mass”, whereby they claim to call down Christ Jesus from heaven and to sacrifice him anew under the forms of bread and wine upon their religious altars. So doing, each priest is understood to have an indispensable part in passing on or releasing further benefits of Christ’s sacrifice to those contributing money for the mass and those assisting at the mass.
41	In answer to the question here raised the following quotation is made from the book Salvation, published in 1939: “It has been repeatedly said that the church, that is, the glorified members of the body of Christ, by reason of their sacrifice, have a part in the sin offering; and in support of that theory the following scripture is offered: ’Then shall he kill the goat of the sin offering, that is for the people, and bring his blood within the vail, and do with that blood as he did with the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle it upon the mercy seat, and before the mercy seat.’ (Leviticus 16:15) Neither the foregoing nor any other scripture sustains the conclusion that the body members of Christ have any part in the sin offering. It is the lifeblood of the man Jesus alone that is the valuable thing, the purchase price, and which price is presented and paid over as a sin offering.”—Page 197, fl 1,2.
*' Because this is the day of the vindication of Jehovah’s name, and the subject of the sin-offering is inseparably related therewith, The Watchtower in its next two issues will take up a verse-by-verse examination of Leviticus, chapter sixteen, above quoted from, concerning the typical day of atone-
236	fEe WATCHTOWER,	Brooklyn, N. Y.
ment for Israel. In the meantime prepare for the was a shadow of good things to come for those who study thereof by reading and becoming familiar seek the new world.—Heb. 10:1.
with the features of that typical atonement day. It	(To j>e continued)
SINGING IN THE
IT WAS a time of crisis when the Lord Jesus Christ ate his last passover with his faithful apostles and set the memorial of his death as ‘the Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world”. Nevertheless, when he had finished speaking to them about God’s kingdom, symbolized by Mount Zion, it is written, “when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives.”— Matt. 26:30.
Those faithful apostles were only the first of the company of 144,000 who follow Christ’s steps faithfully unto death and who shall therefore reign with him in his heavenly kingdom, the Mount Zion. At the end of Satan’s rule, the time of the world’s great crisis, this company is visualized as singing without fear of men or governments the praises of Jehovah God and his Righteous Government for such of humankind as obey God. “And I looked, and, lo, a Lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an hundred forty and four thousand, having his Father’s name written in their foreheads. And they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before the four beasts, and the elders: and no man could learn that song but the hundred and forty and four thousand, which were redeemed from the earth.”—Rev. 14:1,3.
The singers have The Throne, and not who they are, in mind. They are not the important ones. It is Jehovah and his King, whose praise they sing. In the grand chorus the 144,000 are singing “before the four beasts”, that is, in the presence and hearing of Jehovah’s universal organization, four-square, perfect, symbolized by four living creatures. Thus they are made a “theater ... to angels, and to men”. (1 Cor. 4:9, margin) Even the “prisoners” of the enemy organization Babylon are hearing the song and are being loosed by the Lord God. The 144,000, including the remnant on earth, sing to each other and sing to all who love Jehovah God; they lift up a standard for the people and point them to God’s kingdom. (Isa. 62:10-12) They bring good tidings of great joy; they publish peace and say unto those of Zion, “Thy God reigneth”; they see eye to eye the wonders of God’s purposes, and together they lift up the voice and sing. (Isa. 52: 7-9) All those who by reason of growth and maturity are “elders” in Christ and who have been raised out of death in the first resurrection likewise hear the song. All who are of the 144,000 must sing now, and they do sing. The singing in the hearing of all of God’s organization implies that the remnant on earth must now be singing as their theme God’s supremacy in the throne, in order that his word and his name might be made known and in due time fully vindicated.
“No man could learn that song but the hundred and forty and four thousand.” This means that no one aside from God’s anointed can appreciate and join the invisible members of God’s organization in the song of joy. One must appreciate a thing in order to really rejoice therein.
WORLD’S CRISIS
Anciently in the temple at Jerusalem only the Levites were trained and allowed to sing in the temple service. (1 Chron. 6:31,32; Neh. 12:46,47) From the Levites the priests were taken, and these are the singers. Not everyone who can make a noise would be chosen to sing before the King Only highly trained voices would be given that privilege. No one could ever learn the song except God’s anointed who shall be God’s royal family. The Hebrew word “learn” means “accustom oneself to”. And so it is that practice, and much of it, is required; and constancy in the work of witnessing to Jehovah’s name and kingdom is a thing essential. Only those who do the required practice are pictured in this group of singers. That explains why there is a remnant that really earnestly and faithfully docs the work of making the word and name of Jehovah known. And they must learn the text of that song, and the harmony ; and this they do by making use of the “meat in due season”, which by the grace of God is provided for the remnant. That “meat in due season” is the illumination and publication of his Word of truth from time to time. That textbook of song is “sealed” to the earthly learned and the religionists and to the “old men”, who are dreamers and prefer to snore rather than to sing with enthusiasm. (Joel 2:2S) The persons of good-will who become the earthly companions of the remnant become familiar with the theme of that “new song” sung officially by the remnant, and they sound it forth to others who are pleased to hear (Rev 22:17) The faithful are rejoicing, and they pray for success and prosperity from the Lord as they sing. (Ps 118:24,25) They say: “Give me understanding, that I may learn thy commandments.”—Ps. 119:73.
To his children of the royal family the Lord God gives instruction, and the same rule applies to their earthly companions, the Lord’s “other sheep” , to wit: “A wise man will hear, and will increase learning; and a man of understanding shall attain unto wise counsels" (Prov. 1:5) “Give instruction to a wise man, and he will be yet w iser • teach a just man, and he will increase in learning.” (Prov 9:9) It is therefore the wise that understand and giie praise to the Lord God and that delight in his service, “the wicked shall do wickedly: and none of the wicked shall understand; but the -wise shall understand” (Dan 12:10) Further, it is written: “The sweetness of the lips increaseth learning. The heart of the wise teacheth (or, maketh wise] his mouth, and addeth learning to his lips ” (Prov. 16:21,23) The wise are they that hear the commandments of the Lord and hasten to obey them They use their lips in obedience to God’s commandments and learn to sing that “new song”, the song of the new world, the “new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness”.—2 Pet. 3:13.
Concerning the 144,000 it is written that they were “redeemed from the earth”. (Rev. 14: 3) The last members of these are yet on the earth singing the song. This faithful
August 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
237
remnant are “redeemed” through the love of God and by the blood of “The Lamb”, Christ Jesus. They are literally separated from the earth, being “in the world, but not of it”, and in due time they, having finished their earthly course and service, shall be taken from the earth to be forever with the Lord in the heavens of the new world. “They shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years.”—Rev. 20:6.
The faithful remnant are further identified and described in the vision (Bev. 14: 4, 5) : “These are they which were not defiled with women; for they are virgins. These are they which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth. These were redeemed from among men, being the firstfruits unto God and to the Lamb. And in their mouth was found no guile: for they are without fault before the throne of God.” How are they not “defiled with women”? The “women” here referred to must be dissolute women, which symbolically represent the “god of this world” and are in his service. In the Bible the term applies to the religious systems that practice deceit and draw men away from Jehovah God. Here, however, the term “women” means much more than that. It represents the devilish influence, sly, deceitful and seductive, that tries to induce those who are begotten of God’s spirit to violate his law either positively or negatively. That means either to refuse to keep and perform God’s commandments or to neglect to do so. Sometimes a legal earthly wife of a consecrated man may cause him such defilement, or the husband may exercise the same influence to cause the wife to refrain from serving the Lord. As stated at Luke 14 20 concerning those invited to come to the Lord: “And another said, I have married a wife, and therefore I cannot come.”
Also literal mothers, sisters and daughters, and others, are used by the great adversary to draw consecrated ones away from God’s service. “If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple.” (Luke 14:26) One who is in a covenant to do God’s will must love Jehovah God with all his heart. That does not mean he is to do injury to anyone, but, with him, to please God is that of first importance. The Scriptures explain that the wrongful influence is due to the fact that, to quote 1 Corinthians 7 : 29, 33, “he that is married careth for the things that are of the world, how he may please his wife,” and hence manifests love for his wife rather than for the Lord and his kingdom. Therefore the advice is given: “The time is short: it remaineth, that both they that have wives be as though they had none.” Earthly relatives often induce one to divide his affections with ‘things of this world’, which pertains to Satan’s organization, by giving less consideration to God’s service and his kingdom. Such relatives argue that one should not make himself foolish and obnoxious to the world, but should show the proper honor to the world and to the men and institutions of the world. Thus they are led to worship or give honor to the Devil’s organization and are defiled. The faithful remnant must be absolutely and completely separated from Satan’s organization. They stand out boldly as God’s witnesses.
In ancient time dissolute women were attached to the heathen temples. The unfaithful prophet Balaam suggested to King Balak, who wanted to demoralize the Israelites, that he employ such immoral women to entice God’s covenant people and to ‘call the people to the sacrifices of their demon god’. Balak had some success-: “and the people did eat, and bowed down to their gods.” (See Numbers 25:1-6.) The counsel of Balaam thus caused the children of Israel to commit trespass against Jehovah God in the “matter of Peor” (a devilish worship with lewd rites). Thus Balaam instructed Balak to cast a stumblingstone before the Israelites, to eat the things sacrificed to idols and to commit fornication. Revelation 2:14 mentions this incident, and declares that those who compromise with the Devil’s organization, thereby committing spiritual adultery, are an abomination to Jehovah God.
The faithful hundred and forty-four thousand singers are described as “wise virgins” that are separated and devoted in singleness of life and purpose to God. The apostle Paul was anxious to safeguard them, “that I may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ.” (2 Cor. 11:2) Their eye is single to one thing; and that is, faithful service to the Lord amid the world’s crisis. They “follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth” and delight to walk in his footsteps. (1 Pet. 2:21; Rev. 14:4) The account states that these “were redeemed from among men, being the firstfruits unto [the Lord]”. Their presentation to the Lord was foreshadowed by the “two wave loaves” presented by Israel’s high priest on the day of Pentecost, fifty days after the offering of the first-ripe sheaf of grain. As to those “two wave loaves”, “they are the firstfruits unto the Lord.” (Lev. 23:17) Hence Pentecost was called “the feast of harvest, the firstfruits of thy labours”. (Ex. 23: 16) On Pentecost of A. D. 33, fifty days after Christ’s resurrection, there was a fulfillment of that prophetic picture in a miniature way. But in 1918, at the coming of the Lord to the great spiritual temple for judgment of the ehureh and of the nations, that feast of the firstfruits was fulfilled in a complete way by the resurrection of the faithful ones asleep in death and by the gathering of the remnant of the 144,000 to the condition of unity with the Lord at Mount Zion. The 144,000 is a very small number compared with the billions that shall live forever on earth under God’s kingdom, and are therefore spoken of as the “firstfruits unto God and to the Lamb”.
These are without guile or lies, and “are without fault before the throne”. (Rev. 14:5) They “walk in the light”, and hence enter into the heavenly city. They are not false Christs, that is, false anointed ones, but are true to their anointing or commission to be Jehovah’s witnesses. They do not turn the truth into a lie by worshiping the creature instead of the Creator. (See 1 John 1:7; Revelation 22:14; 21: 27; Matthew 24: 24; Romans 1: 23, 25.) They do not honor men; but they worship and serve and obey God, and do not lie when they say that they “know him”. The remnant shall not do iniquity or speak lies. (1 John 2:4; Zeph. 3:13) They do not add anything to God’s Word, lest they be found liars thereby. (Prov. 30:6) “A faithful witness will not lie,” and the remnant must continue as faithful witnesses.—Prov. 14:5.
238
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Jehovah predestinated not the individual creatures, but that those he selects for his service and kingdom shall be faultless as to their love and devotion to Him. (Eph. 1:4) They devote themselves to God and endeavor to carry out his will so “that the ministry be not blamed”, and in this endeavor they shine as “the light of the world”. (2 Cor. 6:3; PhiL 2:15,16) God keeps them by his power and in due time the remnant yet on earth shall finish their
course here and shall have their instantaneous change in the “first resurrection” and be presented “faultless before the presence of his glory”. (Jude 24) As the number of this faithful remnant on earth decreases, the number of their beloved companions who shall abide on earth forever in peace and happiness increases to a great multitude. These now join with the remnant in the joyful song of praise to Jehovah God and his kingdom by Christ.
RIGHT ACTION AND GOVERNMENT
FROM the beginning the great First Cause knew his purposes. In perfect wisdom he declared his purposes, and there can be no successful hindering to the carrying out of his purposes. One of his great purposes is to establish a government of righteousness on the earth. After affording creatures ample opportunity to feel the iron hand of the cruel oppressor and to mark the oft-repeated hypocritical human plans for reform and relief, then he will reveal to all his government which shall dash to pieces all wickedness. In his government there shall be no vacillating or uncertain policies. There shall be no oppressors, fraudulent politicians, or hypocritical teachers or judges. His government must be righteous, equitable, and true, and will claim and have the absolute confidence of all honest creatures. His own zeal will accomplish his righteous purposes. —Isa. 9:7.
He is the Most High God. (Ps. 91:1) To those who give their unqualified allegiance to him he is complete and absolute security. He is a sanctuary for those whom he has taken into a covenant with him to do his will. •‘Thy way, O God, is in the sanctuary: who is so great a God as our God?” (Ps. 77 : 13) In Ins due time all governments, powers and principalities will be made to know that thev are beneath him and subject to his disposition He will exercise his unlimited power, not for selfishness, but for the good of those who obey him forever.
One who serves Almightv God and keeps covenant with him well knows that in this day God’s servant is in constant danger of the religionists and totalitarians and that without the protection furnished from God he could not stand He fully realizes that the agents of the “god of this world”, Satan, are seeking the destruction of servants of Jehovah and his government. With confidence such servants look up to the Most High God and say ■ “But thou. 0 Lord, art a shield for me; my glory, and the lifter up of mine head.” (Ps. 3:3) They realize that Jehovah God is their Protector. They have complete confidence that God will vindicate his own name in his own due time and will deliver those who love him. Being unselfishly devoted to the great Theocrat, they cannot keep back the song of praise to him and his Theocracy.
The prophecy foretold that when Jehovah’s servants were restrained by the governments of this Babylonish world they would pray to Him: “Take away al) iniquity, and receive us graciously: so will we render the calves of our lips.” (Hos. 14:2) The servant of God now realizes that he must watch his way and walk circumspectly that he may do that which is lawful and right in the sight of his God. He prays that he may not be found lawless to
God, but be found loyal, true and faithful. Then with confidence he can ask that God will graciously receive him. That relationship truly existing, he will render unto his God the calves of his lips. It is with the lips that we give praise. Strength is in the calves of the legs. Therefore the calves of the lips represent the strength of the lips (Heb 13:15) That means that if, worldly governments to the contrary, the servant of Jehovah has divine approval he has entered into the “joy of the Lord” and is therefore giving the strength of his song of praise unto his God
It is written: “Where there is no vision, the people perish” (Prov. 29:18) No one who is “taught of God” now has any good reason for being in darkness. The disobedient religionists, however, will not have a vision of the truth. Those who decline to see the truth as God gives it to has people must of necessity fall. Jehovah is causing his “lightnings” to flash from the temple to his faithful witnesses The faithful arc privileged to have a vision of his pui poses. It is no mirage that thev now see They see the truth as God reveals it, and understand it and rejoice in the increasing light on the Bible and give to God its Author all the glory thereof.
On an occasion the Israelites of old were in the wildei-ness without water They were in distress Then God caused Moses to smite the flinty rock with his rod. and water gushed forth abundantly, thus God manifested his pre-'ence with his people Therefore Psalm 114:7,8 says “Tremble, thou earth at the presence of the Lord, at the presence ot the God of Jacob ; which turned the rock into a standing water, the flint into a fountain of waters ” In the wilderness of the world where there is great thirst for truth God is now manifesting his presence He has caused his truth to gush forth through his organization for the benefit of those who are devoted to him. Seeing the manifestation of his presence and his loving provision, Jehovah’s faithful witnesses sing forth his praises.
Some who claim to have given themselves to the Lord God reproach their fellow Christians for speaking in strong terms against the hypocritical clergy of “Christendom” The Scriptures make it clear that those religionists are the children of the Devil, who is God’s enemy. The clergy are the enemies of God. therefore, because they bring reproach upon his name. God’s enemies must be made the enemies of his servants. The true child of God regards his Father’s enemy as his own enemy. Being wholly on the Lord’s side, the true servants of God hate iniquity and the workers of iniquity and those that speak against Jehovah God. “Do not I hate them, 0 Lord [Jehovah], that hate thee? and am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee?”
August 1,1942
WATCHTOWER,
239
CPs. 139:21) No one can consistently sing the praises of Jehovah God and his government and at the same time even passively show favor or honor to the enemy. Any reproach upon the name of Jehovah God is a dart of poison shot against his servants and witnesses.
Concerning rebellion and favoring the enemy it is written : ‘‘Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry. Because thou hast rejected the word of the Lord, he hath also rejected thee from being king.” (1 Sam 15.23) Witchcraft is here mentioned that God's servants may profit. Witchcraft means going over to the enemy for counsel; while rebellion means taking a course of action against God’s will. Stubbornness in accepting Jehovah’s will is as reprehensible as idolatry because it is selfishly holding out against God’s will. God is gracious to those who try to serve him. He is now making the way plain to those who desire to glorify his name. Such are not expecting or desiring the approval of any of God’s enemies They have taken their stand on the side of Jehovah and his Theocracy and they sing His praises. Any attempt,
therefore, to make peace with the religionists, who are the sons of Satan, means to consort with the enemy and to practice witchcraft and rebellion. That means unfaithfulness to Jehovah the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
At the hands of Moses Jehovah gave his covenant people his commandments. Then Moses said: "And it shall be our righteousness, if we observe to do all these commandments before the Lord our God, as he hath commanded us.” (Deut. G: 25) Righteousness means more than merely keeping God’s law. True righteousness is having the approval of God, which approval results to those who do His will out of a pure heart. The servant of God is not righteous merely because he has been brought into God’s organization through Christ Jesus He must prove his devotion to God and obey his commandments out of a pure heart and by so doing receive God’s approval. If he is found diligent in thus doing he will be found singing unto the Most High God. That constitutes right action, though it be contrary to the standards and laws of worldly governments.
THEOCRATIC ASSEMBLY
WAR is no time to forget God That is the very purpose of the demon-driven totalitarian Nazi-Fascist hordes tn their violent drive through all nations for the seizure of world domination, namely, to turn the people in bitterness against God Such result would be more disastrous to the people than the physical damage and loss wreaked upon them by the wicked aggressors. In these faith-trying times comes the solemn warning from the inspired Word of Almighty God: “The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God.”—Psalm 9 17.
Mow, more than at any time in past history, persons who seek life, peace and happiness should turn to God Almighty and make special efforts to gam a knowledge of his purpose, his works and his will. In this darkest period of the world the Most High God and his promised Government of Righteousness shine forth as a light. There is joy in light, and “light is sown for the righteous”. We are in the most significant time of all human existence. Events of world-changing importance and power are at hand. It is a tune for individual decision, on which hangs one’s destiny for a life of everlasting joy and blessing or for everlasting death. There is universal need, therefore, for light and understanding to give each one guidance. The day long foreseen and described by inspired prophets m glowing terms is at hand. It is therefore also a time to assemble together to unitedly study together the will of God that we may do it and have his blessing and protection in the destructive time yet ahead. “Not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as the manner of some is, but exhorting one another: and so much the more as ye see the day approaching” —Hebrews 10 : 25.
In spite of disrupted world conditions an unusual opportunity for assembly for those interested in the new world of righteousness now presents itself. Jehovah God has always kept his people informed as to what he would have them do. He is very merciful toward all persons of good-will who are feeling after him, if haply they might find him. Assembly with those who are his people is a certain way to find him. Readers of The Watchtower know that the Lord has used the occasions of the conventions or assemblies of his people to inform them concerning his immediate purposes. In these perilous times it seems pleasing to Jehovah that his witnesses and persons of good-will assemble this year and make
plans for further activity, so that more persons of good-will may be comforted. There is undoubtedly much work yet to be done in behalf of those hungering and thirsting after righteousness and who do not find it in religion. As the times become more distressing and the opportunity of witnessing to the Kingdom becomes shorter, all those who have entered into a covenant with God Almighty should seek ways and means to further advance the interests of the Kingdom and thereby set forth the only hope of humankind To tins end the Theocratic Assembly has been arranged for 1942, on the dates September IS, 19 and 20.
So as to make it convenient to all Watchtower readers, this general gathering will assemble simultaneously in 53 different cities throughout the United States, besides simultaneous assemblies in foreign countries, if possible. Arrangements are being made to tie all these American cities together by direct wire communication By having the assemblies scattered throughout all of the country, it will be possible for more of al! interested persons to attend m these days when it is difficult to travel long distances.
The abnormal conditions make it all the moie advisable that every person who loves righteousness and a righteous government should plan now, so that his arrangements may be completed for attending one of the 53 assemblies that will be announced later Nothing could be more important than the assembly and association of Christian people together m these days of stress and perplexity, when men’s hearts are failing them for fear of the things that are coming upon the world. The violent conflict for world domination is now gripping the nations and absorbing the attention, but those who are acquainted with Jehovah’s purpose and prophecies know the outcome thereof. Such ones have the only hope for the people who desire righteousness.
All persons who are seeking the promised new world, “wherein dwelleth righteousness,” will not alone plan to attend, but will also pray to Almighty God, with whom all things are possible, that his blessing will be upon this Assembly. Ask in prayer that he will guide all arrangements, to the end that his name may be honored and magnified. The Assembly is the provision of the great Theocrat. Honor his invitation with your presence, if possible. Plan now to spend three full days, Friday, Saturday and Sunday, September 18, 19 and 20, at a convention city.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
IN NEUTRAL EIRE
“Undoubtedly this country (Eire; 93 percent Roman Catholic), where religion has such a stronghold, is one of the Devil’s chief strongholds, but the ‘old boy’ is not having things all his own way, and some of the ‘other sheep’ in this city (Dublin) are escaping out of his clutches. I should like to tell of a whole family consisting of father, mother and four children, whose ages range from seven to thirteen years, their grandmother and also a friend, taking their stand for The Theocracy. One day on the house-to-house witness work I was invited inside by a lady, who took a book and was exceedingly kind. She told me her husband was very interested in the Bible but was dissatisfied with his own interpretation of the Scriptures. I arranged to call back the following Friday evening. I found he was more than interested. As the precious truths contained in the Bible were opened up his joy knew no bounds. He told me that an understanding of God’s purpose and a vision of the full establishment of the Kingdom had transformed his whole outlook on life and, instead of being in despair regarding the future, he was now happy and overjoyed at the prospect before him. He volunteered to distribute The Watchtower on the magazine routes and later participated in the Sunday morning field service. Sometimes his wife, her mother and a friend who came to visit them would join in the studies, but it was thought desirable that a pioneer sister should conduct a study for the benefit of these ladies. This was arranged, find now all three have taken their stand for The Theocracy. With the exception of the grandmother, the whole family and the friend attended the Belfast Theocratic assembly [1941] and there the three adults were immersed. This convention greatly encouraged them, and since then the four children have regularly participated in the witness work.”
THE PIONEER GIRLS IN BOLSOVER, DERBYSHIRE
“Their presence soon made the district sit up and take notice. The demons soon got busy, working through evil-minded persons. They were turned out of their lodgings and the little meeting-room they had obtained was also taken from them. They immediately took a room at a public house, but after a few weeks the public house was boycotted by its patrons; so this room had to be vacated The girls got a furnished cottage at 10/- per week, and were there for three months. Mischief was then started and they were given notice to leave. When the Society’s representative visited them he was able to conduct model studies with two ‘special’ policemen, and both of these have opened their homes for regular meetings and have become regular and keen associates. They and their wives are expected to take a firm stand for the truth and they have befriended the three pioneers. The adversary soon got busy again, and one of the girls. Sister Scott, was removed from her place of service and sent to prison because she refused to give up her God-given work and accept state service. She was given a two months’ sentence. Considerable publicity resulted, and the people began to take sides more than ever. Many people have identified themselves as friends. A local farmer and his wife with whom model studies were conducted said that the girls must go and live with them, and there they are now with plenty of friends and plenty to eat. Blessings have been showered upon them in the Lord’s
providence. True people have become attached to them, and the prospects of a healthy company are favorable."
UNCOVERED IN SCOTLAND
“The office sent us some outlying Watchtower subscription slips. We called on one of them. This lady never saw a Jehovah’s witness before, but had received a IVatchtoicer from a neighboring farm. She enjoyed it so much that she sent in a subscription. She spoke of it as if she was one of Jehovah’s -witnesses. She is now going each week to another farm farther into the country and having a Watchtower study with the lady there. We then called on the lady who had passed on The Watchtower and found she had all the books and had sent to America for The Watchtower and Consolation. She had not seen any of Jehovah’s witnesses for more than five years, but had been witnessing herself, out in the wilds of Scotland. She and her daughter had gone to the cottages and farms round about with the booklets they had.”
AFTER THE TRIAL, WELLSTON, OHIO
“I had been standing on the street corner about an hour, when I decided to rest on a railing a half block back. It was the Saturday following my trial in which I was fined $25 and costs for ringing doorbells. A large number of townsfolk attended the trial. As I rested I heard someone shout, ‘Hi, you! come on and get on the job. I want one of those magazines.’ As I gave it to him he said: ‘I don’t believe in your d-religion, but there must
be something to it if this town had to go to all that trouble to try to stop it. I was at your trial the other day, and you sure got a dirty deal.’ He talked more, so I got his name and address and arranged to make a back-call. As he walked down the street he began telling everyone about it, showing them the magazine. I always find it best not to talk too much on the street corner, but arrange to call at their homes and let the phonograph do the talking,”
EDUCATIONAL WORK IN NORTH CAROLINA
“When I found her several years ago in the country she knew the least about everything of any person I ever met. Honestly, she did not even know she lived in North Carolina, had never been to school but three months in her life, and could neither read nor write. She had a burning desire to know the Lord and get understanding of the truth. She would sit as near my phonograph as she could and try to take in every word, but it was so hard for her to get the meaning. Then she did hard farm labor in the field to obtain the literature. Still she could not read it. I decided to spend quite a lot of time with her and teach her, and so I did. I made ABC’s for her to copy until she learned to write. She learned to read when I gave her a phonograph and records, which she could play over and over and follow the words in the booklets. I also began taking her to the Watchtower study and Salvation book study. When she began to get a little understanding she did not wait to be invited out in the service, but asked to be given a little territory near her home in the country. She would walk for miles and miles. When the special publisher work began, she at once set her goal at 175 hours and 50 back-calls. Then, when she got her questionnaire from the Society, was she happy 1”
240
ii ll fc: its

IB

: *
w

* '
<&,

£
ifc.
ir


■s:

£
&
£
1
-1

S’
I;
$
1
■a
1‘



vjt

32
>.
F. - '
WE8Ws
-Ira#
‘J
i,1
■J

ISSgiSSES

3§



.41


m
£
') -I I'
LiJ
f
/
,‘7 t\
!~1
I
II
15
}

it

$
"They shall know that I am Jehovah?
-Eiekiel 35.15.
Vol. LXIII Semimonthly
AUGUST 15, 1942
V
No. 16
CONTENTS
Atonement for the New World (Part 2) .......................
Hopeful Shadows ..............
Atonement Day ................
The Tabernacle................
Bullock of the Sin-Offering .
Righteous ....................
“Goats for a Sin Offering” ...
Lord’s Goat and Scapegoat ...
“Propitiation for Our Sins” .
Sprinkling of Blood .........
Singing Till God’s “Strange Act' Theocratic Assembly,
September 18, 19 and 20 ...
Field Experiences ..............
“Comfort” Testimony Period.....
“Watchtower” Studies ...........
“The Emphatic Diaglott” .......
.243 .243 .244 .245 .246 . 247 .247 ..249 .. 251
.252 ...253
254
256
242
242
242
111
-J
f.

Mi

ft
IS
i £
THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street -	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
N. H. Knorr, President	W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Iraiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man. created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and Is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare bis purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear,
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God's kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to "fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
HIS Journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It Is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1 On; Canada and Miscellineo'-s roRETCN.
Great Britain, Ausm.it asia. and South Armc 1. os. American remr-tances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bink Draft Canadian, British. South African and Australasian remntam ■i should be made direct lo die respective branch offices. Remittances frmj countries other than those mentioned may be made to U.e Brooklyn oux.e, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Omens
British_____________________ 34 Craven Terrace, London, W 2, England
Canadian ................. 40 limn Avenue, Toronto 3 Ontario, Camila
Australasian.......... 7	Beresford Road, Strathfield, N'. S W , Australia
South African Boston House, Cape Town, bouth Africa
Picasa address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
Ail sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating tho reason for so requesting 1L IVe are giad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Chance of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. F., under the Act of March 5, 1879.
“COMFORT” TESTIMONY PERIOD
To Jehovah’s witnesses the month of August is known as the “Comfort” Testimony Period During these 31 days a special effort will be made on the part of Jehovah’s witnesses to comfort as many people as they possibly can with the truths as set forth in the Word of Jehovah God. To aid those who love righteousness the book Children along with the booklet Hope will be offered to the people on a contribution of 25c These two publications set forth a message which shows there is something worth while living for. Those persons who trust in Jehovah’s kingdom and know that this is the only hope for the world will proclaim the message contained in these publications and make them available to as many persons as they can possibly meet during August. “Comfort” Testimony Period will be a blessing to all those who share in the preaching of the gospel Make your report of activity to your local company servant, or if you are not associated with a company, report direct to the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of September 20: “Atonement for the New World” (Part 2), J] 1-26 inclusive, The Watchtower August 15, 1942.
Week of September 27: “Atonement for the New World” (Part 2), 27-52 inclusive, The Watchtower August 15, 1942.
NEW EDITION OF "THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT"
There has always been a steady demand for the Greek and English “New Testament” known as “The Emphatic Diaglotl” The old edition became exhausted some months ago, and a new has been in preparation meanwhile. The desirable features of the Diaglott are many.
The actual Greek in which the “New Testament” was originally written is given according to the well-known and highly-respected Gnesbach recension. Then in footnotes variations according to the Alexandrine and Vatican (No. 1209) manuscripts are given, two of the very oldest manuscripts in existence
The Diaglott also contains a useful and valuable alphabetical appendix in the back, which is practically a compact Bible dictionary containing helpful features not found in other dictionaries of the Bible.
The binding is beautiful blue leatherette, and flexible. The paper is of good quality, and the type is clear. The size is 4J’ by 7i" by 1", which is convenient for handling.
The new edition of the Diaglott is now ready for distribution. The cost is $2 per copy.
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
No. LXIII
August 15, 1942
No 16
ATONEMENT FOR THE NEW WORLD
PART 2
"We hare an advocate icith the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: and he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world."—1 John 2:1,2.
JEHOVAH makes provision that those who are not satisfied with their condition in this present evil world may live in the new world which He creates. This he makes possible by the great atonement. Jehovah is the Author of the atonement. The atonement, when understood, at once exalts and establishes respect for His justice. Atonement demonstrates his so great love for the new world. That world will be a “world without end”. This means it will be a world without sin, and hence a world without that which is the “wages of sin”, namely, death. In the new world death will be wiped out from this earth, and man and woman will live here in righteousness and peace, without fear of harm from man, beast, or devil, without fear of poverty, and without fear of even death.
2 The Supreme Court of all creation has ruled what sin is: “Sin is the transgression of the law”; meaning, the law of Jehovah, the Supreme Judge. “All unrighteousness is sin: and there is a sin not unto death.” (1 John 3: 4; 5: 17) All the human race is in sin; it was born so, because its first parents loved neither God nor their unborn offspring but selfishly violated the perfect law of their Creator. From their original sin has stemmed all the unrighteousness that fills the earth today, and the pleasure in and inclination unto sin have gained strength with each new generation born. Only God Almighty can check it. Only he can provide the way and means for deliverance from it and the curse of death. The impending battle of Armageddon brings destruction to those who refuse or are indifferent to God’s way and means of deliverance and who prefer to enjoy or yield to sin in this world. It will be a sudden and decided check in the progress of sin. That battle will signify a deliverance from willful practicers of unrighteousness for those who accept God’s way and means and who desire to live in the new world, the world of righteousness. That battle will vindicate the name of Jehovah God and is therefore a prime necessity; it will be a showing of His invincible
power over the mighty one back of all human practice of sin, Satan the Devil: and it will mean a chaining and the abyss of restraint for that vicked one.—Rev. 20:1-3.
’The mere destruction of the willfully wicked would still leave the disability of inborn imperfection and sin upon men desiring righteousness. Their imperfection and sin make them naturally the enemies of God, because he cannot approve such things. Therefore, for his name's sake, which stands for justice and righteousness, and for the help and avail of lovers of righteousness that such might live forever, Jehovah God arranged for atonement by a sin-offering. Helpless man born of the rebel Adam could not make atonement, even by dying on a thousand battlefields, and hence it lay with Jehovah to make atonement by his perfect and only begotten Pon, who became the “man Christ Jesus”. It has been said that God does not love the sin but loves the sinner. That is not Scripturally true. God's love is for the new world of righteousness, and only those who desire and avail themselves of God’s provision to live in that righteous world God brings under his love. Such love of the world of righteousness God commends as a requirement for sinners who seek liberty and life. “But God commendeth his love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. Much more then, being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. For if, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. And not only so, but we also joy in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement.”—Rom. 5:8-11.
HOPEFUL SHADOWS
* Centuries before the great Giver of every good and perfect gift provided the atonement he made prophetic shadows which faithfully outlined the substance of good things to come for men who believe 2U
244
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
and obey Jehovah God. These “shadows’’ must bfe according to God’s law, which is just and perfect, and not according to religion or human imaginations. Hence he gave the law according to which these •‘shadows’’ were made for the comfort and hope of lovers of life in righteousness. Such law he gave to Israel, which people he brought into a covenant with himself by his prophet Moses as the mediator between God and man. This proves that only those who enter into a covenant with God to do his will and who thereafter do it will enjoy the good things foreshadowed. The shadow is not the real thing or image which casts the shadow. The shadow passes, but the body casting it remains and provides the real and lasting good effects.
5	The inspired apostle to whom Jehovah God revealed the hidden meaning of the “shadows” writes: "For the law, having a shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of the things, can never with those sacrifices which they offered year by year continually make the comers thereunto perfect.” (Ileb. 10:1) "Let no man therefore judge yon in meat, or in drink, or in lespeet of an holyday, or of the new moon, or of the sabbath days: which are a shadow of things to come: but the body is of Christ." (Col. 2: 16,17) Since the real atonement is by God's Son Christ Jesus, the same inspired writer shows to those who were once under the typical law the real purpose back of it, saying: “We were kept under the law, shut up unto the faith which should afterwards be revealed. Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith. But after that faith is come, we are no longer under a schoolmaster.” (Gal. 3:23-25) The shadow passes, because it is fulfilled by the reality.
6	The nation of Israel, of whom the prophet Moses was a member, was brought under the law which commanded these prophetic "shadows" or types to be performed regularly by living actors. (Ps. 147 :19, 20) Prior thereto the Israelites were cruelly oppressed while residing in the land of Egypt. Likewise those who come into relationship with God by devoting themselves to him through Christ to do God's will have been oppressed by this present evil world, symbolized by Eg\pt. God raised up unto his oppressed people a deliverer, Moses, who foreshadowed God’s great Warrior at the battle of Armageddon, Christ Jesus.
’ Leading up to their deliverance from the worldly organization of Egypt Jehovah God by Moses commanded the Israelites to sacrifice the passover lamb and to feast thereon. This foreshadowed that prior to the great deliverance at Armageddon by the destruction of Satan’s world God would provide the atonement by the real sacrifice, “the Lamb of God,”
who takes away the sin of those who will live in the new world. (John 1:29,36) The typical passover lamb slain in Egypt took the place of God’s mediator for Israel, namely, Moses, and Moses himself foreshadowed or typified Christ Jesus. The slaying of that passover lamb was the beginning of God’s lawcovenant with Israel, because by the lifeblood of that sacrifice the covenant was made valid, binding and operative. (Heb. 9:16,17) This pictured that no human creature can enter into a covenant with God to do His will except through the atonement which God provides in liis Son, “the Lamb of God." After the first passover sacrifice and feast came Israel's deliverance by the destruction of Egypt’s firstborn. Quickly thereafter came the destruction of Pharaoh’s armies and chariots by Jehovah’s strange act at the Red sea. Both destructions upon Egypt pictured destruction of both visible and invisible parts of Satan's world, both wicked men and demons.— Exodus, chapters twelve to fifteen.
ATONEMENT DAY
* In the third month, after the Israelites under Moses safely crossed the Red sea out of Egypt, they reached the base of Mount Sinai in Arabia. There Jehovah God confirmed the covenant he had made with them in Egypt and gave to them the larger statement of his typical law, including the ten commandments. The dedication of that law covenant is briefly described at Hebrews 9:16-22: “For where a covenant exists, the death of that which has ratified it is necessary to be produced; because a covenant is firm over dead victims, since it is never valid when that which ratifies it is alive. Hence not even the first [law covenant] has been instituted without blood. For every commandment in the law having been spoken by Moses to all the people, taking the blood of bullocks and of goats, with water, and scarlet wool, and hyssop, he sprinkled both the book [of the law] itself, and all the people, saying, ’This is the blood of the covenant which God enjoined on you.’ And he in like manner sprinkled with the blood the tabernacle also, and all the utensils of the public service. And, according to the law, almost all things are purified by blood, and without an effusion of blood no forgiveness takes place.” (Emphatic Diaglott translation) This illustrated the need of atonement by a propitiation for sins or a sin-offering.
* Those animal sacrifices were only shadows of the real sin-offering God would provide in his due time. The animal victims being lower than man and of less value than a man’s life, the offering of the blood of these animal sacrifices could not take away human sin. They were merely pictorial of the true. Hence those sacrifices needed to be repeated after fresh commission of sins; and God so arranged for this.
August Io, 1942
5THE WATCHTOWER.
243
“For it is not possible that the blood of bulls and of goats should take away sins.” (Heb. 10:1-4) The blood of bulls and goats was offered at the dedication of the law covenant at Mount Sinai, and God commanded the offering to be repeated each year on a national day of atonement in the seventh month of the year, and on the tenth day of the month. (Lev. 16:29-31) On that day, during which da}’ they abstained from all personal works, the people of the nation showed their repentance for sins committed during the past year, and confessed them. They sought forgiveness for such, and acknowledged their need of a sin-offering outside of themselves. Thus they kept their minds turned toward the future sin-offering that God would provide.
10	Encamped at the base of the “mountain of God” from which he delivered the law by Moses, the Israelites together with the mixed multitude that accompanied them out of Egypt pictured all those for whom atonement is made and who avail themselves thereof and who shall live in the new world. Jehovah God took Israel out of the world to be his people, and hence they were to be no longer any part of this present world. God said to them: “You only have I known of all the families of the earth.” (Amos 3: 2) They were under a Theocratic rule, because Jehovah the great Theocrat was their lawgiver. Moses their mediator was the official servant of Jehovah in their behalf. Unto Moses they had been baptized in the Red sea and in the cloud which overshadowed and guided them in their journeys. (1 Cor. 10:1, 2) Moses therefore acted as a type of Christ Jesus, God's King of the Theocratic Government of the new world.
11	Jehovah God chose Moses' tribe, the tribe of Levi, to be his official servants at his sanctuary. He made Moses' brother, Aaron, who had been Moses’ mouthpiece before Pharaoh of Egypt, to be His high priest and the sons of Aaron to be underpriests. Therefore Aaron the high priest also represented the Head of Jehovah's Theocracy, Christ Jesus, but in the capacity of God’s High Priest. The rest of the house of which Aaron was a member or trilies-man. namely, the tribe of Levi, pictured the 144,000 members of the “body of Christ”, who are to be associated with Christ Jesus in The Theocracy. “They shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years.” (Rev. 20:6) They constitute the Theocratic royal family of Jehovah, of which family or house of sons Christ Jesus is the Head. (Heb. 3:1-6) From this standpoint, therefore, and viewed in relationship to the tribe of Levi, the remainder of the twelve tribes of Israel pictured all the people on earth whose sins are atoned for and who live on earth after Armageddon under The Theocratic Government.
THE TABERNACLE
” The typical day of atonement was observed each year at the sanctuary which Jehovah God had Moses make. It was exactly according to the pattern which God supplied, because the sanctuary was a shadow of larger realities, to be made manifest later on. The
sanctuary was a tent or tabernacle, the door of which faced toward the east. It was divided into two rooms or compartments by a beautiful veil. The doorway of the sanctuary was also covered by a hanging called “the door”. By this door one entered into the first and larger compartment, called “the holy” and which was illuminated by a golden candlestick with seven lamps. The underprie-ts were allowed by God’s law to enter and perforin service in this compartment, “the holy.” It would be death for them to pass beyond the "vail” and enter into the smaller compartment, -which was called "the most holy” or “holiest of all”.
13	In the Holiest was the sacred ark of the covenant. This was a gold-covered chest containing the tables of the ten commandments and other sacred articles, and which was covered by a gold lid surmounted by a gold cherub at each end. Both cherubs with upstretched wings looked down toward the golden lid or “mercy seat”. In an illuminated cloud between these cherubim Jehovah God manifested his presence above the mercy seat. Into this Most Holy and into the presence of God Most Holy only the high priest could come, on the day of atonement, and he must first bring in the golden censer with him and burn the holy incense thereon before offering the
246
SKe WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
atonement. “And the Lord said unto Moses, Speak unto Aaron thy brother, and that he come not at all times into the holy place within the vail before the mercy seat, which is upon the ark, that he die not: for I will appear in the cloud upon the mercy seat.”—Lev. 16:2; Heb. 9:1-8.
14	The sanctuary stood in the western half of the sacred court. The court was screened off and separated from the territory outside by a hanging of linen curtains round about. The place of entry into the court was at the east, and this opening was covered over by a hanging called “the gate”. On the day of atonement the people of Israel who were not Levites were forbidden to enter that court, but the hangings of the “gate'’ were raised and they were permitted to see from a distance what went on in the court. The court itself was a rectangular area. 150 feet long by 75 feet broad. In the eastern half of the court there stood the brazen altar, midway between the “gate” of the court and the “door” of the tabernacle; and between the altar and the “door” was stationed a laver, where the priests washed in connection with the tabernacle services.
15	The court was where the animal sacrifices were slain, and the animals were therefore brought through the ’‘gate” and into the court and sacrificed at the north side of the altar. In front of the altar, or on the east side thereof, was where the ashes of the sacrifice were deposited. Accordingly the court pictured the place of sacrifice, this earth. As respects the sacrificial victim itself, the court pictured the condition of justification before God. the condition where the one sacrificed is just or right with God and hence acceptable to be offered as a sacrifice to God. The most holy of the sanctuary, however, represented heaven itself: “for Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands [of men], which [places] are the figures of the true; but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us.”—Heb. 9: 24.
16	The site of the court was selected, at the foot of Mount Sinai, and on the first day of the first year after Israel’s coming out of Egypt the tabernacle was erected. Outside, round about the four sides of the court, the Levites pitched their tents, with Moses and the priestly family of his brother Aaron the high priest located on the east side, in front of the gate of the court. At a respectful distance beyond the location of the Levites the other tribes of Israel and the mixed multitude with them pitched tent, and constituted the “camp”. Beyond these tribes was what was called “without the camp”. It pictured the condition of the world, the condition of those who do not take advantage of the sin-atonement, but who continue under the wrath of God and who lie in the wicked one, the Devil, and w’ho therefore perish.—1 John 5:19; John 3:35,36.
lT Those who are interested in enjoying life by God’s grace in the new world of righteousness will now follow with interest what Jehovah God ordained to be done on the typical day of atonement and which accurately foreshadows the providing and presenting and application of the sin-offering. The instructions which God gave through his Theocratic representative Moses were enacted by living actors, and a failure to perform them accurately would have meant death to the one who did not appreciate the Theocratic rule and do as instructed. The realities to be foreshadowed were too important to be treated with careless indifference and to be pictured incompletely and inexactly. It is an aw’ful thought, also, that if there had been carelessness and imperfect performance of the antitypical realities by Jehovah s great High Priest, the vindication of Jehovah’s name and word would have failed and all would have been lost for all humankind.
BULLOCK OF THE SIN-OFFERING
IS Speaking with reference to the most holy, that is, “the holy place within the vail,” representing the heaven of God’s presence, Jehovah gave this order for the day of atonement: “Thus shall Aaron come into the holy place: with a young bullock for a sin offering, and a ram for a burnt offering.” (Lev. 16: 3) This determines the time when the antitypical or real day of atonement by the true high priest began. It began in A.D. 29, when Christ Jesus came of independent age as a perfect man and presented himself in consecration for the complete service of Jehovah God and was baptized in Jordan river. God took Jesus into the covenant with Himself and Jesu> there became Jehovah’s High Priest for the offering of the atonement sacrifice.
l# For centuries down till then, ever since the first atonement day in the wilderness of Sinai, animal sacrifices had been offered, but without power and value to actually remove the disability of human sin. Had sin really been taken away for ever, there would have been but one sacrificial victim. Hence in the typical picture numerous sacrificial victims were needed, because none of them actually canceled sin; they merely foreshadowed the real Sacrifice to come. Therefore Jesus consecrated himself to take up the things pertaining to the new world; as it is written: “For it is not possible that the blood of bulls and of goats should take away sins. Wherefore, when he cometh into the world, he saith, Sacrifice and offering thou wouldest not, but a body [a perfect human body] hast thou prepared me. In burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin thou hast had no pleasure: then said I [Jesus], Lo, I come (in the volume of the book it is written of me) to do thy will, 0 God. By the which will we are sanctified,
August 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER,
247
through the offering of the [perfect human] body of Jesus Christ once for all. And every [Aaronic] priest standeth daily ministering, and offering oftentimes the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins: but this man [Jesus], after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God.”—Heb. 10:4-7,10-13.
” Aaron foreshadowed Christ Jesus in the capacity of sacrificing High Priest of Jehovah God, whereas the “'young bullock” for a sin-offering pictured “the body of Jesus Christ” as a perfect man. As such he was the exact equal of Adam in his perfection in Eden and possessed the right to life as a man on earth. Only thus could Jesus Christ have the wherewithal to present a sacrifice of sufficient value or merit to recapture for Adam’s offspring that which Adam’s transgression had lost for them. By this sacrifice of himself Christ Jesus could cancel or undo the effects of Adam’s sin toward humankind and, as it were, wash away their sins in his blood. In the type, Aaron’s “ram for a burnt offering” also pictured the man Jesus, but from a different standpoint in the picture, as will be shown later. Compare the ram that was substituted for Isaac, when God provided it for Abraham to sacrifice instead of his son. (Gen. 22:13,14) It is not stated from where Aaron procured the bullock for the sin-offering. This agrees with the fact that the life-right of the man Jesus was from God his Father, whereas his fleshly nature was from the human race.
RIGHTEOUS
21	Aaron as a man was imperfect and sinful by nature, and hence unlike the One whom he foreshadowed. Properly Jehovah gave this order: “He shall put on the holy linen coat, and he shall have the linen breeches upon his flesh, and shall be girded with a linen girdle, and with the linen mitre shall he be attired: these are holy garments; therefore shall he wash his flesh in water, and so put them on.” (Lev. 16:4) This the imperfect man Aaron must carefully do in order to picture the absolute righteousness of the greater High Priest, Christ Jesus. Concerning the saints who are his underpriests it is symbolically written that they should be “arrayed in fine linen, clean and white: for the fine linen is the righteousness of saints”. (Rev. 19:8) He loves righteousness and hates iniquity. He is crowned with righteousness and is subject to the God of righteousness, Jehovah. He girds himself to serve the cause of righteousness, which is the vindication of Jehovah’s name. There was no nakedness of unrighteousness about him, nor uncleanness or imperfection or frailty in the flesh: “Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for
them. For such an high priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens.”—Heb. 7 ; 25, 26.
“GOATS FOR A SIN OFFERING”
22	The complete picture of atonement could not be made with just the bullock and the accompanying ram, and hence the additional order was given to high priest Aaron: “And he shall take of the congregation of the children of Israel two kids of the goats for a sin offering, and one ram for a burnt offering.” (Lev. 16: 5) In this chapter the expression “sin offering” translates the one original Hebrew word (khattawth), which primarily means just “sin”. It is translated first as “sin” in the Bible, at Genesis 4:7. In the majority of cases in the Bible it is translated “sin”. But when, as in Leviticus 16, the Hebrew word is applied to a victim for sacrifice, it has the meaning of “sin-offering”, that is, a victim offered for sin. Whom, then, do these “two kids of the goats for a sin offering” picture! Do they signify that the sin-offering by Jesus alone was incomplete and that he needed the assistance of other servants of God in either supplying or applying the benefits of the sin-offering to those who come under the atonement? God is his own Interpreter; and note what his Word says.
“ The animal victims in the typical atonement, either singly or all put together, were not equal in value to a perfect man, which perfect man was given dominion over the lower animal creation. Hence the bullock and two goats could not be spoken of as a “ransom” or exactly corresponding price for the nation of Israel, but were merely pictorial sin-offerings. However, in the real atonement for human sin the victim offered is and must be the ransom, the redemptive price, the means of deliverance which corresponds perfectly with the thing that is to be released or recaptured. Hence in the real atonement service the sin-offering is synonymous with ransom. Only in Christ Jesus did Jehovah God provide the ransom. Christ Jesus ‘gave himself a ransom for many’ (Matt. 20: 28); “the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin” (1 John 1:7); he has “washed us from our sins in his own blood” (Rev. 1:5); “there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time.” (1 Tim. 2:5,6) Therefore Christ Jesus is alone in the sin-offering. When he presents the merit or value thereof in the presence of Jehovah God in heaven, he needs no assistance of others.
24	In proof that Christ Jesus is exclusive in the sin-offering, and that the “goats for a sin offering” do not deny but rather substantiate this, note the testimony of God’s inspired witnesses. Hebrews
248
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
9:11,12 testifies: “Christ being come an high priest of good things to come, by a greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this building; neither by the blood of goats and calves, but by his own blood, he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption.” This directly refers to Leviticus 16 and to the bullock and goats for the sin-offering. In their case Aaron the high priest entered into the most holy at least twice to approach the mercy seat with blood of two animals separately.
25	That did not picture that Christ Jesus, Jehovah’s High Priest, makes two sin-atoning entries into the heavenly presence of Jehovah God, such two entries being separated from each other by the time space of about 1,900 years, and with a sin-offering each time. Hebrews 9: 12 quoted above states that Christ Jesus already had entered, and that he entered “once”, with no repetition being required, neither any duplication. Christ's entry is definitely a past event. His presentation of the value of his human lifeblood does not wait to be completed by any duplication at the death of the last faithful member of the “body of Christ". Hence Hebrews 9:12 speaks of Christ the High Priest as “having obtained eternal redemption". He could obtain nothing more by trying to go in again. Fui therinore, with what would he go in or be obliged to go in so as to complete the “eternal redemption"’
26	Therefore the two “goats for a sin offering” may not be interpreted to symbolize an other and different victim for sacrifice aside from the “man Christ Jesus". The Lord’s goat which was selected from the two goats does not symbolize or foreshadow the body of the 144.000 members of the church of which Christ Jesus is Head. Christ Jesus must alone be the antitypical Lord’s goat, as will be shown in the further treatment below. In the ancient day of atonement two “goats for a sin offering’’ were required in order to present a twofold picture which could not be drawn or enacted with just one goat. However, in the reality the twofold picture is completely fulfilled in the one sin-offering or sin-atoning victim, Jesus. The second goat, which was made the “scapegoat”, provided important features of the typical picture and was therefore auxiliary or complementary to the Lord’s goat.
22	Hebrews 9: 16-22, quoted above (11 8), refers to the dedication or inauguration of God’s law covenant with the nation of Israel at the Mount of God. It mentions two sets of sacrifices as completing the ratification of the covenant. But neither does this prove that the true sin-offering is more than one Victim. The law covenant there dedicated foreshadowed the new covenant which Jehovah God makes with Christ Jesus and the members of “his
body”, the spiritual Israelites. That new covenant was made valid or operative by the blood of the Mediator thereof, Christ Jesus, on the day he died, the passover day of A.D. 33. The blood of Christ's footstep followers, the church, did nothing toward making valid that new covenant toward them. That being so, then the fact that Moses sprinkled the book of the law covenant and then the people with the blood of both bullocks and goats is no proof that the church of Christ’s body members form a part of the sin-offering. The same is true with respect to the sprinkling of blood upon the tabernacle and its vessels and utensils, which occurred when the tabernacle was set up and put in service about nine months after the dedication of the law covenant at Mount Sinai.
2’ Hebrews 9: 22 reads: “And almost all things are by the law purged with blood; and without shedding of blood is no remission.” Such being so, then those animals whose blood was used for cleansing and removing sin could not picture others besides Jesus himself, not even the members of “his body’’. The blood of Christ, being applied first to these body members from Pentecost on, does not and can not do double duty, first cleansing them and then afterwards, through them, cleansing those who will live on earth in the new world. "What share in Christ’s blood his body members come in for cleanses only them. Their personal share cannot be used over and applied to someone else. Each and every one who Lives in the new world, whether in or outside the “body of Christ”, is, if he meets the requirements, entitled to come under the cleansing and remission of sin by Christ’s blood. He cannot release it and pass it on down to someone else and thus make it do double duty.—John 3:35,36.
22 Hebrews 7:27 states that Christ Jesus did not need to do like the typical high priests, repeatedly offer up sacrifice once a year on the atonement day without fail, offering up first sacrifice for their own sins by a bullock and then sacrifice for the people by the Lord’s goat; “for this he did once, when be offered up himself.” What he did once, 1900 years ago, in offering up himself needs no supplementary sacrifice of his church. Thus Hebrews 7:27 is plain in its teaching that Jesus’ one operation accomplished what two kinds of sacrifices were required to complete in the type of old.
50	Hebrews 13:10-12 is addressed to the spiritual Israelites, Christ’s “body”, and reads: 'We have an altar whereof they have no right to eat which serve the tabernacle. [No part of the sin-offering at the tabernacle was eaten, but everything was disposed of otherwise.] For the bodies of those beasts, whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by the high priest for sin, are burned without the camp. Wherefore
August 13,1942
THE WATCHTOWER,
249
Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people with Iris own blood, suffered without the gate.” Be it noted that Jesus sanctifies with “his own blood”, and not by his suffering of reproaches and persecution. The next verse (Heb. 13:13) then admonishes the members of Christ’s body: “Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach.” These themselves must first be sanctified with Christ’s blood, and thereafter they go forth, not to sanctify others with their blood, but to bear Christ’s reproach. Their going “without the camp” to do this does not make them the antitypical Lord's goat. The bearing of his reproach does not atone for sin, but the shedding of the blood of the Perfect One, “the man Christ Jesus,” does so. (Heb. 9:22) In the type, the world in sin and wickedness was pictured as “without the camp”; and in the next verse (Heb. 13: 14) God's Word shows that Christ's body members bear reproach outside the camp because they are not of this world, but of the world of righteousness which is to come according to God’s promise: “For here have we no continuing city, but we seek one to come.” They seek God’s capital organization, The Theocracy, and hence they take their stand with the reproached Christ Jesus in this present world, “without the camp.” Hence the next verse (Heb. 13: 15) adds: “By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name.” They do not offer up a sacrifice for a sin-offering, because Christ Jesus did that himself once.
31	Aaron took the two “goats for a sin offering” from the congregation of the children of Israel. This pictures that all redeemed humankind who shall live forever on the perfect earth look to Christ Jesus as Jehovah’s great Executive Officer or High Priest to provide and perform the act of sin-atonement for them, and they are willing to do what is required of them to receive the benefit of sin-atonement. Furthermore, whereas Jesus’ liferight was from Jehovah his Father, his body of flesh was provided through humankind that was in a covenant with God; Jesus was “made of a woman, made under the law”. (Gal. 4:4) Both goats served “for a sin offering” the same as did the bullock. Therefore they pictured the One whom Jehovah God used to provide atonement, atonement not only for the 144,000 who are first redeemed from among men and who are to be made “priests of God and of Christ”, but also for humans who will inhabit the earth in the new world. The fact also that just the one individual, the high priest, applied the blood of both the bullock and the Lord’s goat binds together these two victims. It shows they foreshadowed in fact just one sacrifice in the fulfillment, but that this sacrifice brings benefit to two distinct classes, (1) the antitypical Levite
class under Christ Jesus their High Priest and Head, and (2) those who gain everlasting life on earth under the “new heavens”.
32	The “ram for a burnt offering” that accompanied the two goats pictured the same as the ram that went with the bullock. The burnt offering with all its parts complete was offered up by fire on the altar. It was used to show that the sin-offering previously offered was pleasing to God and that he accepted it and made it available.
33	The man serving as the anointed high priest was necessarily the chief member of the tribe of Levi. He was representative of it and responsible for the entire tribe. Therefore the instructions read: “And Aaron shall offer his bullock of the sin offering, wluch is for himself, and make an atonement for himself, and for his house.” (Lev. 16:6) Aaron, being naturally a sinful man, himself needed personal sin-atonement by the shedding of blood. Christ Jesus the true High Priest was perfect in organism and sinless; and hence, to properly picture Jesus’ condition and qualification to offer sin-atonement, Aaron must personally be cleansed and atoned for by the bullock’s blood.
34	In Egypt God had passed over all of Israel’s firstborn and spared them from execution. By an exchange for them Jehovah God redeemed or bought out from all the tribes of Israel the tribe of Levi, that is, Aaron’s house. Therefore sin-atonement was made first for the Levites, in advance of and separate from that for the rest of the nation of Israel. The Levites picture the “church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven”, and who have therefore a “heavenly calling”, to live and reign with Christ Jesus in his heavenly throne. (Heb. 12:23; 3 :1) These are the antitypical Levites, who were “redeemed from among men”, “redeemed from the earth.” (Rev. 14:3,4) Since the creation of the “new heavens” is first, these members of Christ's body are the first to receive the benefits of Jesus’ sin-offering, from Pentecost of A.D. 33 onward. It is that they might be justified by faith and taken into the “covenant by sacrifice”, and then be begotten of God’s spnit and anointed to a place in the “body of Christ” with hope of life eventually in heaven. The “feet of him”, that is, the remnant or last members of his “body”, are yet on earth and, in order to share in “his resurrection” and live in the spirit, they must fulfill their covenant by sacrifice in death with him.
LORD’S GOAT AND SCAPEGOAT
*’ Before the typical bullock was slain the Lord’s goat and the scapegoat were selected. “And he shall take the two goats, and present them before the Lord at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.” (Lev. 16:7) Those two goats had been brought within
250
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
the court, inside the gate of the court, and which was the prescribed place for sacrifice to Jehovah. (Lev. 17:3-6) The presentation here pictured Jesus' presenting himself before the Lord God at the time that he yielded himself to be baptized by John the Baptist in Jordan's stream. The presenting of himself was not to devils or demons, such as the Devil desired of Jesus in the mount of temptation. (Lev. 17:5-7; Matt. 4:8-10) It was to Jehovah God, and in the antitypical court or acceptable human condition for sacrifice. As the linen hangings round about the court of the tabernacle separated it from the camp outside, so the great Sacrificial Victim was “separate from sinners”, all the offspring of Adam being sinners at that time, in contrast with Jesus’ absolute perfection in the flesh and his absolute righteousness.
36	“And Aaron shall cast lots upon the two goats; one lot for the Lord, and the other lot for the scapegoat.” (Lev. 16:8) Either goat, therefore, might be “for the Lord”. This showed that both goats were equal, but that two were needed to illustrate a twofold purpose in one sacrifice. It showed that they both foreshadowed but one sacrifice that would be able to accomplish that combined purpose. Aaron could not kill the Lord’s goat and at the same time preserve the same goat alive to play another part of the wonderful picture. Hence two goats were taken, of equal value and opportunity, and Aaron’s making no direct personal choice, but casting lots over them, showed the unity and equal rating of both goats. It also showed that he recognized the Theocratic rule of God and there was no self-will or self-choice on the high priest’s part. He was fully submissive to the will, choice, and direction of the Lord God as to what and how many things should be done in connection with the sin-atonement in behalf of humankind. Herein Christ Jesus, the High Priest of the Most High God, is marked as serving a double purpose at the same time when on earth.
37	The one purpose of vital importance and benefit to men seeking life is next described: “And Aaron shall bring the goat upon which the Lord's lot fell, and offer him for a sin offering.” (Lev. 16.9) In the high priest’s bullock Christ Jesus was pictured as offering himself in behalf of the spiritual house of Levi, the class redeemed from among men and begotten as God’s spiritual children and anointed to be a “royal priesthood” under their Head Christ Jesus. (1 Pet. 2:9) In the Lord’s goat the same Jesus is pictured as offering the value of his human life and his right to life as a perfect man in behalf of those pictured by the other tribes of Israel together with all the strangers that took their stand for the typical Theocracy and submitted to its God-given laws. These tribes of the “camp”, together with the
‘strangers sojourning among them’, pictured those reconciled to God by Christ and who are blessed with life on earth.
’• As to that other purpose, which is connected with the vindication of Jehovah’s name, note the picture: “But the goat, on which the lot fell to be the scapegoat [(or, literally, according to the Hebrew) fell for Azazel], shall be presented alive before the Lord, to make an atonement with him, and to let him go for a scapegoat into the wilderness.” (Lev. 16:10) It is repeated, that Aaron could not kill the Lord’s goat and also present him alive before the Lord for “Azazel”. This physical impossibility in the “shadow” picture made necessary the use of two like goats of equal opportunity. How, then, was it accomplished in the fulfillment? In this manner: Jesus consecrated himself to do God’s will, as symbolized by his burial in baptism beneath Jordan’s wave. Jesus was then dead sacrificially as man’s Redeemer, but his perfect flesh was not then immediately and actually put to death. Further, upon coming up out of the water, Jesus, upon whom God’s spirit now descended, was henceforth spiritual, a “new creature”, using yet for a time the organism of flesh. This was in order that he might use the human body for the other and more trialsome purpose of Jehovah God.—2 Cor. 5: 17.
” Rotherham’s translation reads: “The goat over which came up the lot for Azazel shall he cause to stand alive before Jehovah to put a propitiatory-covering over him [to make atonement for him (Am. Rev. Ver.)], to send him away.” This was not accomplished in the type by the sacrifice of the bullock. God’s Word distinctly says that the bullock was offered for the high priest’s house, hut not for the goats or for the people of the camp or congregation. Therefore the atonement for this “alive” goat must issue or derive from the blood of the Lord’s goat which had just been killed for a sin-offering “The life of the flesh is in the blood.” (Lev. 17: 11) The blood value, which is the life value of the slain Lord’s goat, is thus transferred to the live goat which is “for Azazel”. Hence, though not slain, this live goat bears upon it a sin-atoning merit, a value of life. The fact that this live goat is presented before Jehovah shows He recognizes this transfer of merit or sin-atoning power. Thus the live goat, by virtue of the death of an animal of its own kind, both (1) carries life-merit for sin-atonement, and also (2) can be used to make a further picture to foreshadow the course of Jesus.
40	To begin with, both goats were equal, both unblemished and both acceptable for sacrifice without an atonement to be made over either of them The lot cast merely decided which goat was actually to be killed as the Lord’s goat. Hence, together, the two goats beautifully pictured the “man Christ Jesus”,
August 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
251
unblemished, possessing life-merit that could be freed in behalf of others, while at the same time he was able, while in the days of his flesh, to serve a purpose respecting “Azazel”. That purpose was to answer Satan’s challenge.
41	The “goat for Azazel” was not unclean. Had it not stood an equal chance with the other goat to be “for the Lord” as a sacrifice? Nor did Aaron’s confessing down upon its head the iniquity and transgressions of Israel render this live goat unclean; and Aaron’s washing and changing his clothes thereafter did not mean the goat was unclean.
42	But this “Azazel”: Was he an evil demon, in the other side of the controversy between Jehovah God and His great adversary? The Hebrew scholar Gesenius states that “the name Azazel is also used by the Arabs for an evil demon”. The Greek Septua-gint (LXX) Version, translated centuries before Christ, translates “Azazel” as “apopompaios”, meaning “averter”. This “averter” is one who turns aside mischief or punishment if he is appeased or compromised with, but he punishes the one who refuses to please and satisfy his demands.
43	The live goat being sent out “into the wilderness”, it is evident that Azazel is out there, and hence outside of the Theocratic camp of Jehovah's people for whom the atonement is made. Out there, “the whole world lieth in the evil one” (1 John 5: 19, Am. Rev. Ver.), and it is not unreasonable to believe “Azazel” is the “prince of the demons” and that the demons are out there with him in the “wilderness” apart from the camp of those traveling toward the new world. It was from the wilderness that Satan raised up a “great wind” that demolished the house and slew all of Job’s children feasting therein. (Job 1:19) The wilderness was a place of crucial temptation for the Israelites while trekking to Canaan. (Ezek. 20:10-36; Ps. 95: 8) The Lord's “voice” cries out in that wilderness to give warning of wrath to come upon the nations. (Isa. 40.3) Jesus himself was led into the wilderness to be tempted of the Devil. (Matt. 4:1-11; Luke 4:1-13) And Satan the ruler of his organization “Babylon” has made the world condition into a wilderness. (Isa. 14:4-17) But how is the goat for Azazel “let go into the wilderness”? The next Watchtower issue will show.
"PROPITIATION FOR OUR SINS”
44	“And Aaron shall bring the bullock of the sin offering which [bullock] is for himself, and shall make an atonement for himself, and for his house, and shall kill the bullock of the sin offering which is for himself.” (Lev. 16:11) The unblemished bullock foreshadowed the sacrifice of the “Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus”. (Heb.
3:1) In terms of money a bullock is more valuable than a goat, but here the bullock made atonement for a smaller group than did the Lord’s goat. The bullock was offered for but one tribe of Israel, that of Levi, which tribe was chosen out and had a closer standing to Jehovah. It also directly served as fulltime ministers of God, the Levites having no inheritance in the land with the rest of Israel. If this Levite tribe was to render service to God in behalf of the rest of Israel, the right order was to make atonement first for the Levites, including the priests, and so make them qualified and fit for tabernacle service
45	Likewise as to the antitypical Levites. They are the spiritual sons begotten of God’s spirit and are in line for his royal house over which Christ Jesus is the Head Son. These are a “kind of firstfnuts of his creatures” (Jas. 1:18), and hence are first to have applied to them Jesus’ atoning sacrifice and are thereby “bought with a price", first, from among all other men. (Bev. 5: 9,10; 14 :1-4; 1 Cor. 6:20:7 23 ; Acts 20:28) Let it be observed that Aaron did not do this atoning work with the bullock in order that thereafter the Lord’s goat might be made acceptable and sacrificed. This proves that the Lord’.- goat does not picture anyone for whom propitiation must first be made, but the Lord's goat and its mate, the "capegoat, also picture Jesus. The atoning power of the bullock had no effect upon the Lord's goat as if to provide the way for its sacrifice. Both bullock and goat pictured one and the same sacrifice, that of God’s only begotten Son. Hence the earlier sacrifice of the bullock for the entire house of Levi sl owed (1) that Jesus’ sacrifice is first used as the basis for making a new covenant with God to take the place of the old law covenant of Israel, and also (21 that the spiritual Israelites who are brought into this new covenant must first be redeemed by Christ's blood and purged from their sins and so be “justified by his blood”. (Rom.’5: 9; Matt. 26:28; Heb 9.14,15; 8:6) The purpose of the new covenant is to ‘take out a people for God’s name’.
46	The killing of the antitypical bullock was effected at the time of Jesus’ baptism in symbol of his consecration to God’s service, when Jehovah God took Jesus into the covenant by sacrifice. Jesus was thenceforth counted dead as a man and alive as a spirit-begotten Son in whom God is well pleased. Observe, now, the prophetic pattern of what should follow: “And he [Aaron] shall take a censer full of burning coals of fire from off the altar [in the court] before the Lord, and his hands full of sweet incense beaten small, and bring it within the vail.” (Lev. 16:12) As to the twofold use of a censer of fiery coals with incense see Revelation 8:3-6. The fiery coals which Aaron took in the golden censer into the
252
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Most Holy symbolized the live, active zeal of Christ Jesus, which burned for his Father’s house and was also destructive of religion that reproached God’s name. (Heb. 9:4; John 2:13-17) The carrying of the sweet incense with the fiery coals within the veil into the Holiest of all pictured Jesus’ course on earth in behalf of God’s house and against religion in order that Jehovah in heaven might be well pleased as by fragrance.
" “And he shall put the incense upon the fire before the Lord, that the cloud of the incense may cover the mercy seat that is upon the testimony, that he die not.” (Lev. 16:13) This action preceded the sprinkling of blood for the sin-atonement. Hence it pictured Christ Jesus pleasing his God and Father by zealously maintaining his integrity for the vindication of Jehovah’s name. This shows that the vindication of God's name is more important than and takes precedence over the sacrifice for the redemption of human creatures.
18 Jehovah’s enemies and reproachers stink in his nostrils. Jesus' course of action coupled with his fiery zeal for righteousness produced a sweet odor unto Jehovah. Doing this in the face of religious opposition and persecution required prayers to God to accompany Jesus’ offering of spiritual incense. ‘Who in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared [(literally) was heard for his godly fear]; though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered.” (Heb. 5:7,8; Am. Rev. Ver.) (Note Luke 1: 9,10; Psalm 141: 3; Revelation 8: 3, 4.) Such obedience under suffering vindicated God’s name and was as a “sweet incense” to Him. This Jesus must render “that he die not” as High Priest. The danger was not that of mere dying with a resurrection to follow; the extreme danger was that of failing and being destroyed. Which would it be for Jesus, a death in faithfulness with hope of resurrection or a death in failure and meaning annihilation? Had not Jesus proved faithful and vindicated his Father's name his destruction would have meant failure to ransom humankind.
SPRINKLING OP BLOOD
19 “And he shall take of the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle it with his finger upon the mercy seat eastward; and before the mercy seat shall he sprinkle of the blood with his finger seven times.” (Lev. 16:14) Christ Jesus fulfilled this picture by shedding his blood and thereafter being resurrected from the dead as a divine spirit and ascending to heaven itself, into Jehovah’s presence amidst the cherubim.
The blood symbolized the right to earthly life. Says God: “The life of the flesh is in the blood: and I have given it to you upon the altar, to make an atonement for your souls: for it is the blood that maketh an atonement for the soul.” (Lev. 17:11,14) The right to life as a perfect man Jesus had not forfeited through sin. With the merit of his human sacrifice the risen High Priest Christ Jesus appeared in the presence of God in heaven’s Holiest of all.
80 The tabernacle door being to the east, Aaron approached the ark of the covenant and its mercy seat from eastward. Young’s translation of Leviticus 16:14 says that Aaron “sprinkled with his finger at the front of the mercy-seat eastward; even at the front of the mercy-seat he doth sprinkle seven times of the blood with his finger”. He made no sign of a criminal’s cross with the blood. At the mercy seat he presented the blood, because Jehovah stated: “I will appear in the cloud upon the mercy seat.” The high priest stood to the east or before the mercy seat and sprinkled the blood. It is quite unlikely that he sprinkled it right onto the mercy seat, right onto God’s symbolic throne between the two golden cherubim. At the foot of the throne, the ground before the mercy seat, seems to be the appropriate, unofficious place to apply the blood of the earthly victim.
41 Sprinkling seven times showed a complete presentation of the merit of the victim’s life. Hence it proves that in the antitypical fulfillment there would be no need of presenting anew the life-merit of Christ Jesus in heaven after 1900 years, after the death of the “feet” members of the “body of Christ”. Nineteen centuries ago Christ Jesus completed the full transaction in heaven at his ascension and appearance “in the presence of God for us”. There he made the purchase of that which was lost for Adam’s offspring, and so he gave up the possession of what he presented and he took over that which he redeemed.
65 This further proves that the Lord's goat did not and could not picture a sacrificial victim besides the “man Christ Jesus”. That goat, therefore, did not picture the members of the “body of Christ”, and they are no part of the sin-offering and provide no part of the atonement for the new world. It is impossible for them to do so; neither are they needed. Their service is wholly for the vindication of Jehovah’s name, and not as sin-bearers and sin-removers. This will appear more clearly from the study of the remainder of the atonement-day service in the next succeeding issue of The Watchtower. “The gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.” —Rom. 6: 23.
(To b« continued)
SINGING TILL GOD’S "STRANGE ACT”
THE time is at hand when the God of Righteousness will break the oppressor, destroy the oppression, and set the people of good-will free. By the exercise of its superhuman power God’s Government of Righteousness, his Theocracy, will come down out of heaven, adorned with beauty and glory, and take full control of earth's affairs.
The release and blessing of the lovers of righteousness must be preceded by the expressing of God’s wrath against unrighteousness. Now the day of Jehovah’s indignation is at hand. It is to be a fierce and terrible day. Before lasting peace settles down for ever on the earth and righteousness has full sway there is God's “strange work” followed immediately by his “strange act” that must be done. Concerning sueh it is written: “For the Lord shall rise up as in mount Perazim, he shall be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work; and bring to pass his act, his strange aet. Now, therefore, be ye not mockers.”—Isa. 28:21,22.
The “strange work” Jehovah God now carries on by his faithful witnesses throughout the earth, which God-ordaincd “work” of witnessing is “strange” to religionists and to judges of “Christendom”. The “strange act” to follow at once upon the end of the “strange work” must be something that God did not reveal to his prophets. Manifestly it is the “act of God”, and therefore from heaven, and not a work that man, that is, his witnesses, will do That “strange aet” of Jehovah is foreshadowed by what came to pass at the valley of Gibeon. as Ills “strange work" was foreshadowed by that which took plaee prior thereto at Mount Perazim. Isaiah’s prophecy refers thereto. The important city of Gibeon had made peace with Jehovah’s Theocratic nation, the Israelites, under Joshua. Because of that peace arrangement the kings of five other cities united their forces to make battle against the city of Gibeon. Joshua went to the rescue of Gibeon and fought the enemy with success. “Joshua” means the same as “Jesus”. (Heb. 4:8, margin; Acts 7:45) As Joshua pursued them “the Lord cast down great stones from heaven upon them” and slew the enemy. It was at that battle that Joshua prayed to God that the sun and the moon might stand still. God heard and strangely complied with that request. It is written: “And there was no day like that before it, or after it, tnat the Lord hearkened unto the voice of a man: for the Lord fought for Israel.” —Josh. 10:14.
Jehovah God gave the victory to Joshua. It may therefore be concluded that the battle of Armageddon, God’s “strange act”, is foreshadowed by Joshua’s experience at Gibeon. Joshua wanted the sun and moon to stand still that he might see how to pursue the enemy and fight them. Joshua represents Jehovah’s King of The Theocracy, Christ Jesus. At the battle of Gibeon the Israelites slew some of the enemy by the sword, but God slew by far the greater number with the hailstones or chunks of ice which he threw down from heaven. (Josh. 10:11) The occasion was a phenomenal one. It was a manifestation of divine power.
Mount Perazim is associated with King David of Jehovah’s typical Theocracy. There David with God’s help defeated the demon-worshiping Philistines and burned up their religious images. The Philistines returned and spread
themselves in the valley for another fight David was anxious to attack the enemy, but God determined otherw ise Jehovah told David to “fetch a compass behind them" and to eome up from the rear. lie told David to wait for the attack until he heard a “sound of a going in the tops of the mulberry trees” and that then he should bestir himself Why! “For then shall the Lord go out before thee, to smite the host of the Pliilistines.” (2 Sam. 5:20-25) David did as he was commanded. It was the victory of Jehovah David pictured Christ, and he pursued the enemy from Gibeon to Gazer to destroy them.
The “strange act”, foreshadowed by Jehovah’s act at Gibeon in both Joshua's and David’s days, therefore has reference to the exhibition of divine power against Jehovah’s enemies at Armageddon. This act will seem “strange” to all the peoples on earth who oppose Jehovah’s Theocratic Government, particularly to the religious leaders of “Christendom”. Hence the prophet Isaiah adds: “Now, therefore, be ye not moekers, lest your bands be made strong; for I have heard from the Lord God of hosts a consumption, even determined upon the whole earth Give ye ear, and hear my voice, hearken, and hear mv speech.” —Isa. 28.22,23.	‘
Jehovah's witnesses will put forth their utmost efforts to give the witness to all nations, and many may scoff and call them foolish. Many of the scoffers are those who claim to be children of God. The true and faithful witnesses of Jehovah will hear and heed and stand firm on IIis side Never would it be possible for Jehovah’s witnesses on earth to bind the Devil and overthrow his wicked organization. Almighty God, Jehovah, must and will do that. But his witnesses must and will sing to the glory of the Lord, and when, shortly, they see his “strange aet” in progress they will burst forth in song afresh.
With the power of the enemy broken by that “strange act”, the shackles will fall away from the arms of all the survivors of the battle of Armageddon, including not only God’s anointed remnant but also a “great multitude” of persons of good-will, his “other sheep”. Concerning all these it will then be true- “And it shall be said in that day, Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us. this is-the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation.”—Isa 25 9
Christ Jesus has always been the delight of his heavenly Father. He has always rejoiced in the love of the great God. But since Lucifer rebelled and became Satan and cast great reproach and ignominy on the great and good name of his Father there has been a longing in the mind and heart of his beloved Son to accomplish some specific work. That he might see his Father’s name magnified Jesus left the courts of heaven, became a man and died an ignominious death. God raised him out of death and exalted him above all others in heaven and clothed him with great honor, glory and power. Yet there was something that Jesus longed to see accomplished, and that was the destruction of the enemy and his wicked organization, and Jehovah’s name placed in the proper position before all creatures that live. At his ascension to heaven Jesus’ Father said to him: ‘Sit thou at my right hand and await my due time, until I make thine enemies thy footstool.’ God's 253
234
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N.Y.
due time for action against the enemy came in A.D. 1914, the year of the World War, then Jehovah said to his beloved Son : ‘Go forth out of Zion with the rod of authority and rule in the midst of thine enemies.’—Ps. 110:1,2.
There “war in heaven” began and the enemy Satan was expelled from heaven, and all his demons with him, and restrained to the vicinity of this earth. Then Jesus came to the great spiritual temple of God for judgment, to raise to life in the spirit those dead Christians who had been adjudged “faithful unto death” and to make them “living stones" in the temple where God dwells by his spirit of power. Then the examination of Jehovah’s covenant people yet on earth began, as foretold • “The time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God.” (1 Pet. 4: 17) Those consecrated ones whom the Judge at the temple found faithfully caring for the interests of the great and righteous Government, The Theocracy, which interests or “talents” had been committed into their hands, even to them the Lord said - “Enter thou into the joy of thy lord” (Matt 25-21) The joy of the Lord Jesus is the vindication of his Father's name. Such has been the longing desire of Christ He has begun that work of vindication as his Father's Chief Executive Officer. He will finish it gloriously and to the glory of his Father at Armageddon He joyfully sings the praises of his Father and calls upon every member of the temple class to do so.—Ps 29 9.
Those who have entered into the joy of the Lord are wholly and completely on his side He is their King, and Jehovah is their God, and unto them they sing, and to none other They refuse to sing any song that would be pleasing to the enemy or any part of the Babylonish world organization The example set by the Israelites of old God caused to be recorded that it might serve as a guide to his witnesses now The Isiaelites were in Babylon as captives The Babvlomans called upon them to sing a song of Zion for their entertainment In substance they said to the Israelites: ‘Forget your past and come and be
one of us and let us be at peace Sing your songs for us.’ The Israelites replied: ‘No, we will not sing our songs for you.’ Said they to Jehovah’s Theocratic organization “If I forget thee, 0 Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning. If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy.”—Ps. 137 : 5, 6.
Even so now the Babylonish world systems attempt to hinder the work of Jehovah God by various means, and one method is to invite God’s people to be at peace with them in a “good-neighbor policy” and to sing their songs for them. Certain consecrated ones that have not passed the temple judgment and that make up the “evil servant" class speak to Jehovah’s faithful witnesses- ‘Why not be more considerate with the clergy of Babylon? Go easy with them. You might help them Why not be at pence with them and sing your songs for them?’ Jehovah’s faithful covenant people respond: ‘No, I will sing praise to my God. If I do not continue faithful to my God, and sing his praises only, then let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth and be silent.’
Jehovah’s faithful servants, the remnant and their companions, the “other sheep”, know no such thing as compromise with the enemy. With a face of adamant they are set on Jehovah’s side. In him they trust and arc at rest and peace. (Isa. 26:3) Songs of contentment and joy and praise flow from their lips On all occasions they bear testimony and continue in personal witnessing t<, his holy name and in comforting all that mourn Despite persecution by the enemy, thev know thev are safe from all evil to their everlasting welfare.—Ps 121 7, 8
Let this time of greatest persecution upon Jehovah's covenant people be a time of effort to give the strongest witness yet delivered to His glory and to His name Let no one of his witnesses slack the hand Continuing in harmony with Jehovah, these will be at peace with one another, thev will continue to see eve to eye and togither they will lift up their voices tn song of joyful praise
THEOCRATIC ASSEMBLY, SEPTEMBER. 18, 19 AND 20
JEHOVAH, in his loving-kindness and in the direction of his Theocratic organization, admonishes his people that they should not forsake the assembling of themselves together, but that they should at this time be exhorting one another because they see the day approaching This is the admonition set forth in Hebrews 10 25.
Having in mind the rich blessings the Lord has poured upon his people in times past when they have come together in such assemblies, we may look forward with confidence to this assembly of Jehovah’s servants, feeling sure that he has something in store for us all that we may be comforted in this day of great trial and distress and, above all, be prepared to go ahead in greater activity, all to the honor of Jehovah’s name. There are thousands of persons of goodwill who are not as yet associated with the company organizations of Jehovah’s witnesses but who, if informed of this convention, will be glad to attend and see how the Lord’s organization works. All publishers of the Kingdom should
in every wav possible aid these newlj interested persons tn attend one of the convention cities listed
The assembly this year will be for a period of three dav s Friday, Saturday and Sunday, September 18, 19 and 20, the key city being Cleveland, Ohio All should set aside these three days for meeting together with those of like precious faith, devoting as much tune to the field service in the various convention cities as they possibly can. There will be much advertising to do relative to the public meeting, which will be addressed by the president of the Society. The subject of his speech is “PEACE — Can It Last?” The whole world today is talking peace and already those in authority are drawing up peace plans to be put into effect at the close of the war. What has the Bible to say on this subject? The people of good-will with whom you have associated yourselves in the past year will be anxious to know, too. Bring them to one of the conventions. “Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth with all your heart ■ for consider how great things he hath done for you.”-l Sam. 12:24.
August 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
ROOMING
Everyone attending the assembly should arrange for rooms for at least Friday and Saturday nights. If you wish to have a room for Sunday night too, this will be available. Those who wish to stay in the convention city for a longer period should make request accordingly. There is set out below the rooming committee address for each of the convention cities where arrangements have been completed for the assembly There are a few cities listed without a committee address because the final contract has not been drawn up for that assembly point, but the next issue of The Watchtower will give the rooming committee address in these particular cities Each person should look over this list of convention cities carefullv and decide which convention he is going to attend, and then write to the Watchtower rooming committee, setting out the detailed information, so that they can reserve rooms for you
In writing for accommodations it will greatly help the rooming committee if you will state the following:
Name, street, city, state or province, nationality; white or colored, date you expect to arrive in the convention city ; date you will leave; kind of accommodations you desire— residence or hotel; number of rooms required; number of persons m party; number of married couples; number of single men , number of single women , single or double beds.
State definitely the amount you want to pay per person per day. Good accommodations can usually be had at “5c per person per day in rooming houses, two or more in a room. One in a room, $1 00 and up. In almost all sections of the city there will be some accommodations for 50c a person
255
per day in rooming houses. Charges in hotels will vary Brethren should state definitely what they desire to pay if they request hotel accommodations. First-class hotels usually have rates as follows:
Single rooms with bath, $2.50 and $3.00 per day;
Double rooms (two in a room; with bath, double bed, $3.50 and $4 00 per day.
Those wishing hotel accommodations at lower rates will please make their request in writing to the com cntion looming committee, and they will do the best they can to accommodate you at the rates you request.
If you obtain your rooms in advance your assignment will be mailed to you It will then not be necessary to report to the rooming assignment booth at the convention on your arrival, but you can go direct to your accommodations. The hotel or people operating the rooming house where you are to stay will be notified by the convention committee that you are coming, and will be told how long you will stay and the date that you expect to arrive Your co-operation in obtaining rooms through the looming committee will greatly aid the committee and will be conducive to less confusion. All persons making arrangements to attend the convention should have their requests m to the convention committee not later than September 1, with the exception of the few cities where no addresses are here given The next Watchtower will announce these addresses, and as soon as you receive your magazine you will please write immediately to those points.
The next issue of The Watchtower thereafter (September 15) will announce the convention auditoriums and the addresses.
ADDRESSES OF ROOMING COMMITTEES
In each instance the address will be Watchtower Conxention Committee. Committee addresses arc as follows:
CLEVELAND. OHIO 2315 FrankLn Blvd.
OTHER CITIES TO BE TIED IN:
ALABAMA c/o Fraternal Hall
22134 3rd A\e. 2s . Birmingham
1407 St Stephens Hoad. Mobile
ARIZONA 1110 N 16th St , Phoenix
ARKANSAS 1004 W Seventh St Little Rock
CALIFORNIA
Room 318 Rowell Bldg Fresno 2412 Edgewater Terrace, Los Angeles San Francisco (see next issue)
COLORADO 2572 Chase St, Denver
FLORIDA
Jacksonville isee next issue) IHOVs Franklin St , Tampa
KENTUCKY 4320 S Fust bl. Louisville
LOUISIANA Baton Rouge (bee next issue)
MAINE Augusta (see next issue)
MARYLAND Baltimore isee next Issue)
MICHIGAN 19182 Coventry. Detroit
MINNESOTA Box 2 New Duluth
1434 Wellesley Ave. St Paul
MISSOURI Room 207 Studio Bldg . 9th Ac Locust St . Kansas City
MONTANA 2112 4th Ave >\o , Great Falls
GEORGIA Atlanta (see next issue)
NEBRASKA Lincoln (see next Issue)
OKLAHOMA
217 W Washington St, Oklahoma City
OREGON
Klamath Falls (see next i««?ue) 25 N W 18th St. Portland
RHODE ISLAND 847 >- Mam St, Providence
SOUTH CAROLINA P O Box 585, charleston
SOUTH DAKOTA Deadwood isee text issue) Sioux Falls (see next issue)
TENNESSEE 1122 Steuart St. Knoxville 259 Court Ave , Memphis
TEXAS
4811’^ Bryan St Dallas 2601 E Yandell Blvd El Pa^o
2005 Brentwood, Houston 134 Devine St, San Antonio
UTAH
338 W 1st St S . Salt Lake City
IDAHO
NEW MEXICO Box 683, Albuquerque
VIRGINIA 809 E Franklin St . Richmond
Boise (see next issue)
ILLINOIS 4905 W Erie St Chicago 501 W. Miller. Springfield
NEW YORK
9A Dudley Hgts . Albany 785 Riverside Dr. Johnson City
545 Elmwood Ave . Buffalo
117 Adams St. Brooklyn
WASHINGTON 2343 N 55th St., Seattle 412 S Snerman. Spokane
WEST VIRGINIA
224 Morrison Bldg 815 Quamer St , Charleston
IOWA 1821 45th St , Des Moines
KANSAS 349*4 Riverview, WlchltM
NORTH CAROLINA 404H W Trade St , Charlotte
NORTH DAKOTA Fargo (see next issue)
WISCONSIN Madison (see next issue)
CUBA Teresa Blanco 207, Havana
FIELD EXPERIENCES
PIONEER TRIP TO MANZANAR EVACUfiE CAMP
“We approached the gate of the Reception Center, a city of 10,000 inhabitants which sprang from desert wastes in sixty days. The gate was barred by a challenging army rifle in the hands of a guard. This member of the military police gave us the regulations of the place, strict indeed, and passed us on to the commanding officer. We found these officers fine, kindly men, one of whom had observed the depredations done by our enemies at Salinas, Calif. He could not understand why Christian people should be maligned by those who profess to be good Americans. The officer of the day met us and gave us the regulations regarding religious work there, in the hands of four men, including a priest and a ‘Church of Christ’ man. The book Children and booklet Hope were accepted by this officer. In finding persons of good-will and Kingdom publishers inside the Reception Center the Lord’s favor was so evident that it could not be mistaken. In our witnessing we found a publisher who had met a good-will person in the Center, and that gave us a lead. Two publishers, carpenters who had worked on the construction, said English books were the thing, as all the population under forty years of age read English. We find this is true, but that most of the younger generation also read their native tongue. Then eame names and addresses of two evacuees from the South, and we were set to carry the Kingdom message to the Center the very next Wisitors’ Day'. Having written the two addresses previously, we approached the gate the second time. Presenting the names and addresses we were passed to the Japanese Center police, one of whom accompanied us to the police headquarters where our ear was inspected and all packages for the Center were inspected and OK’d. This data and the names of persons we expected to visit were taken to the chief of police, an American. The captain in charge inquired as to our intentions and how we intended to distribute the books and the price we expected to take for them. lie was informed the packages were for free distribution and that one carton was to be donated to the library. This pleased him, but he said they had no way of translating the foreign language books at the Center; samples would be sent to the Bureau of Investigation at Washington, D. C., for inspection and would later be released to those for whom intended. We told him the FBI had already investigated and approved of our work. The captain and the Japanese police treated us kindly and invited us to call at the Center again. Next a scout car was sent to find our friends and bring them to in front of the headquarters where we could converse with them. Tension, and nervous strain! the processes seemed slow, but rigid care and strict observance of rules must be maintained, as very necessary. While waiting, we observed that everything is orderly. These Japanese people are of quiet and polite demeanor, with some good-natured chafing, but for the most part seeming happy and contented. . . . Finally our friends arrived, pleased to be in touch again with the Kingdom message. Joy born of service and unity of purpose seemed to lie in all hearts as we bid our friends farewell till we should meet again. Results of our call are, 1 Watchtower subscription, 172 bound books, 493 booklets, and a hundred Kingdom News, placed in the Center.”
TIMELY USE OF THE PLEDGE
“This experience shows the importance of having memorized the ‘Pledge to Jehovah’ found on page 28 of the booklet God and the State. The magazine publisher asks: ‘Good evening, sir, have you had your latest copy of The Watchtower f Man seated in the auto: ‘No, I don't believe I care for it.’ Publisher: ‘Have you ever read The Watchtower’ "No.’ Won see The Watchtower explains the present-day events in the light of Bible prophecy ' Man ■ ‘That may be true, but I don’t want it; you don’t salute the flag.’ Publisher: ‘No, but “I respect the flag of the United States and acknowledge it as a symbol of freedom and justice to all”.’ “You do?’ ‘Certainly Not only that, but “I have pledged my unqualified allegiance and devotion to Jehovah, the almighty God, and to his KINGDOM, FOR WHICH JESUS COMMANDS ALL C1IR1STLANS TO pray”.’ ‘Well, I didn’t know that!’ ‘And furthermore, as one of Jehovah’s witnesses, “I pledge alleglance and OBEDIENCE TO ALL THE LAWS OF THE UNITED STATES WHICH AKE CONSISTENT WITH God’s LAW AS SET FORTH IN THE Bible.” Now what honest, sincere, and law-abiding person can find objection to that pledge!’ Man: “I’m sure I can’t I’m going to take that magazine and find out what is m it for myself.’ ”
CATHOLIC INTEREST IN HULL (ENGLAND)
“When we explained we had come to discuss some Bible questions, Mr. P-----asked us in. Would we mind his
inviting his brother in, who lived not far away? We said we would be pleased for anyone else to attend We had brought the ‘Exposed’ lecture recordings with us Imagine our surprise to learn they were all Catholics. We had four in attendance at our first study, and real interest Tbei stated they had never read a Bible before but would accept what was in it as proof, and this they did One stated he had bowed to the priest when he spoke to him, but now, after hearing these things explained, he thought the priest should be made to bow to him for deceiving him for so long! The following week we went. There was an attendance of seven, all Catholics. We took the study, and then asked if they had any further questions on what we had discussed. One said he could see why the newspapers were lying about us, for it was to prevent the people from getting the truth. We told them of our experiences on the work (we find this a good way to quickly place the issue before all good-will interest). We had been in a ‘select’ part of Hull. One spoke up and said he would like to have been with us, as ‘he would have told them something'. His brother then spoke up and said that this was the truth and you cannot force it on anyone and if thev do not want it it is best to pass on. It was wonderful to us to hear this discussion on service between these two brothers in front of the others in the room. These two have been passing out booklets and telling others about the studies and inviting them to the home. Also they have been arranging other calls for us. Yesterday we went to the third study, and the house was packed, eleven being in attendance, and again all Catholics. Four are coming to our meetings, and all are coming to the Children study arranged to start next Wednesday evening. . . . Will the local priest be feeling the heat?”
256
■,Y£AP.EMV.W/7NE55£5,.5A<rrtJEtiaVAti,THATI AMGODr--l-.a.43;|Z;
THE WATCHTOWER-
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street	•	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
N. II. Knorr, President	W. E. Van Amburgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taudht of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God. is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man. created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God's law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH'S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah's organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun: that the Lord's next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to "fill the earth” with a righteous race.
"THE WISE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The month of October is known by Jehovah's witnesses as “The Wise” Testimony Period. During that month the servants of Jehovah will put forth an extraordinary effort to magnify the name of the Lord and to advertise his kingdom in the earth It is good to serve the Lord and to aid others, and those persons who are wise will put forth every effort to aid those who love righteousness to seek the truth In Proverbs, chapter 8. verse 31 onward, this thought is brought to our attention. “Hear instruction, and be wise, and refuse it not. Blessed is the man that heareth me, . . . for whoso tindeth me findeth life, and shall obtain favour of the Lord.” During “The Wise” Testimony Period Jehovah’s witnesses will offer to the people the book Children and the booklet Hope, on a contribution of 25c, so that the people of good-will may receive instruction and be wise. All persons who love righteousness and want to help others find the way to life and learn of Jehovah’s kingdom will share in the witness work during this penod If you are not already associated with a company of Jehovah’s witnesses and would like to be, write to Watchtower, 117 Adams St., Brooklyn, N. Y., and we will get you in touch with the nearest company, so you may share with these servants of the Lord in the proclamation of the Kingdom. In these perplexing tunes the wise man will seek the Lord and share his knowledge with others, so “that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God”.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for Its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, 1100; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign. $150; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, Os American rem.t-tances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, British. South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittarces from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ____________________ 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian .......—........ 40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian.......... 7	Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S W , Australia
South African ________________Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear tn several languages.}
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, noverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price rnaj have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each >ear is required by the postal regulations
Notice to Subscribers- Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. T., under the Act of March 3, 1875
NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING
Pursuant to the provision of law and the charter of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, notice is hereby given that the annual busmess meeting of the said Society will be held at Pittsburgh. North Side (formerly Allegheny), Pennsylvania, at ten o’clock am , Thursday, October 1, 1942, at which the usual annual business will be transacted.
1942 THEOCRATIC ASSEMBLY
The Theocratic Assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses for this year will be held on the three days September IS to 20 inclusive While simultaneous conventions will be held in various parts of the earth, it is expected to have at least 53 joint conventions :n the United States, m as many cities, and all gatherings being tied m by land wires with the key assembly at Cleveland, Ohio The program of events and speeches will therefore be identical for all gatherings, and hence all will share equally at the Lord’s bounteous table. Every reader of The Watchtower is cordially invited to attend at one of these cities, from Friday the first day clear through to Sunday night, but at least the public address, Sundav afternoon, “Peace—Can It Lastt” Our next issue of the Watchtower will give the list of cities and the locations of the places of gathering. This announcement is made that you may have ample time to make all due preparation to attend and gam the sure and (Continued on page 271)
aeWfCTITOWER.
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM
No. LXIII
September 1, 1942
No 17
ATONEMENT FOR THE NEW WORLD
PAKT 3
"We have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: and he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the uhole world.”—1 John 2:1,2.
JEHOVAH anointed his beloved Son to be the High Priest who makes atonement that obedient men may live in the new world and never die. The foundation of that new world has been laid, and the full establishment of that world of righteousness is sure and it shall be a “'world without end”. What politicians, world-trade traffickers, scientists, militarists, and religionists may try to set up on earth after this war for world domination will not rest upon the only Foundation that Jehovah has laid. Hence their setup will be no part of the new world for which Jehovah’s High Priest has made atonement. For such fundamental reasons man's postwar arrangement will not survive the battle of Armageddon. The “Tattle of that great day of God Almighty” will break out suddenly upon the postwar builders when they think they can cry out, “Peace and safety!” (1 Thess. 5:3) Those presuming to erect a man-made thing to dominate all the earth in the place of The Theocracy which Almighty God Jehovah has purposed to now rule shall meet “sudden destruction”. Upon the sure Foundation which Jehovah the great Theocrat has laid shall arise in glory the new world, consisting of “new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness”. (2 Pet. 3:13) Only those who range themselves on the side of Jehovah's Theocracy and who seek the atonement through its High Priest will survive to see the new world and rejoice evermore.
2 The atonement which removes the sin of those who will be blessed with everlasting life was foreshadowed in the day of atonement which Jehovah’s law through the prophet Moses ordained to be observed once each year in Israel. The atonement on that day was made by God’s anointed high priest and was by him presented at the mercy seat in the Most Holy of the sacred tabernacle. There Jehovah God’s presence was represented by the miraculous cloud which appeared above and between the two golden cherubim on the mercy seat. The mercy seat was the lid of the gold-covered ark. This chest contained the two tables of stone whereon were inscribed the ten commandments, and which represented God's covenant with the twelve tribes of Israel.
3	The high priest entered the Most Holy and first burned incense on a golden censer. Thereaftei he took the blood of the bullock, which had been killed outside in the court, and sprinkled seven times with the blood immediately in front of the mercy seat. Thereby the high priest made atonement for all his house, that is, for the tribe of Levi, of which lie was a member. The bullock for the sin-offering pictured the great Victim in whom alone is the power of sm-atonement and whose blood cleanses from inherited sin. It pictured “the man Christ Jesus”. As God's High Priest he gave himself a ‘"ransom for many”, even as many as should obey God and believe on his Son as the Redeemer. (Alatt. 20: 28) He is the anointed Head of Jehovah’s Theocracy of the new world. With him in that heavenly Theocratic Government are to be associated 144,000 who constitute the “body of Christ”, of which Christ Jesus is the Head. Therefore the sprinkling of the blood of the bullock at the mercy seat pictured the atonement for the sins of such members of the “body of Christ”, his church. —Lev. 16: 3-14.
4	It is Jehovah's gracious will and purpose, not only that the church of 144,000 members shall live and reign with Christ Jesus in the “new heavens”, but that faithful men shall forever inhabit the earth in human perfection after the “battle of that great day of God Almighty” has cleansed the earth of all the wicked and disobedient. Since 1918 Jehovah God has been gathering together others besides the 144,000 members of his “little flock”, there being now only a remnant of members of that “little flock” yet on earth and serving as his anointed witnesses and ambassadors of the new world. The remnant have received of the atonement and will shortly finish their earthly course and have part in the “first resurrection”. Thus they wall be transferred to heavenly scenes of activity with Jehovah’s glorious High 259
260
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Priest Christ Jesus, who also reigns as King of The Theocracy.
5	Those others whom the Lord God is at present gathering are his "other sheep'’. If they continue obedient and faithful to him they may be safely hid during the battle of Armageddon and shall form the “great multitude'’ of survivors who will inhabit the cleansed earth, bring forth righteous offspring and fill the earth with a righteous race. To receive life under such blessed conditions these “other sheep-’

must accept and receive of the atonement made for the new world and must prove their worthiness thereof by lovingly consecrating themselves to Jehovah God by Christ Jesus to forever do the divine will. Such “other sheep” will for the above reasons be specially interested in the next features of ancient Israel's atonement day.
“FOR THE SINS OF THE WHOLE WORLD”
6	Before sprinkling the bullock's blood for the sin-offering Aaron the high priest had presented two unblemished goats before Jehovah God at the door of the tabernacle. While they stood there in the court before the door the high priest cast lots and selected one goat for the Lord and the other goat “for Azazel”, this latter goat being commonly called “the scapegoat”. The account of the atonement proceedings now reads: “Then shall he kill the goat of the sin offering, that is for the people, and bring his blood within the vail, and do with that blood as he did with the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle it upon the mercy seat, and before the mercy seat.” (Lev. 16:15)
This goat was the victim which provided sin-atonement ‘‘for the people”, that is, for the camp of the Israelites and the strangers sojourning among them, all of whom were encamped at a distance round about the court of the tabernacle. Hence this goat pictured the same great Sin-Offering as the bullock pictured, namely, “the man Christ Jesus.” The goats were supplied by the nation of Israel, which reminds one that Christ Jesus was born an Israelite according to the flesh and that faithful men and women were eager to be in the line of the forefathers who would produce the promised Messiah, the Christ. To make atonement, he partook of the same nature as those whom he ransoms, and he said: “My flesh ... I will give for the life of the world.”—John 6: 51.
T However, why was the goat offered as a sin-offering besides the bullock? Not to picture that there would be two sin-offerings in the realities, but it was because the bullock did not cover the nation of Israel in general; it atoned only for the select tribe of Levi, picturing the 144,000 of the “body of Christ”. The other tribes, the people of Israel in general, together with the alien sojourners among them, pictured those outside the “little flock”, to which flock God gi\es the kingdom of heaven. (Luke 12: 32) They pictured those outside the “body of Christ” but who have faith in and apply for the redemption by the High Priest Christ Jesus and who inherit life on earth under the Kingdom, The Theocracy. Christ’s sacrifice does not stop with redeeming only those who become members of “his body”. The merit of his sacrifice avails for and extends to the Lord's “other sheep” now being gathered into the one fold of the Lord, and also to their offspring who shall be brought forth after Armageddon under the Kingdom in fulfillment of the divine mandate. These “other sheep” do not sacrifice the right to earthly life but have hope to live on earth as humans forever. They consecrate themselves to Jehovah now and are baptized, but they are not “justified”-as are the members of the "little flock”. Justification now is for the purpose that the “little flock” may be taken into the covenant by sacrifice and may for ever sacrifice their right to human life which they received by justification through Christ Jesus. Hence in the type the sin-atonement is pictured as being made first for them by-the bullock.—Rom. 5:1,9,11.
9	Christ’s sacrifice also atones for the faithful men of old who shall soon come to life by a “better resurrection” and be made The Theocracy’s visible representatives on earth, being made “princes in all the earth” as children of the great King-Father, Christ Jesus. (Ps. 45: 16) Besides those faithful men of old there are others in the graves who have “done evil” by reason of inherited sin. That these might share in the benefits of the sin-atonement Christ
September 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
261
Jesus shall utter his voice and call them forth in due time “unto the resurrection of judgment”. (John 3:28,29, Am. Rev. Ver.) By faithful obedience to The Theocratic Government and maintaining their integrity under the test of judgment, these shall “obtain that world, and the resurrection from the dead”. They shall live forever in that world without end, the world of righteousness. (Luke 20: 35, 36) Hence the apostle John, who was one of the “little flock”, wrote to others of the Kingdom class: “We have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: and he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world.” (1 John 2:1,2) Hence, in the atonement-day type, what the typical bullock left to be accomplished the Lord's goat must be used to accomplish, namely, make atonement for the camp of Israel and the sojourning strangers, all of whom pictured those whose life blessings will be on earth in the new world.
’ Note that the blood of the Lord’s goat was carried into the Most Holy of God’s presence by the one high priest, and that the high priest used this blood in exactly the same manner as that of the bullock. This is further proof that the goat's blood represents the sacrificed life of the one Victim, Christ Jesus, the same as does the blood of the bullock sacrificed for the high priest's house.
10	But what is signified by the sprinkling of the goat’s blood after that of the bullock? This, namely, that the application of power and value of the Sin-Offering, “the man Christ Jesus,” to those who serve Jehovah God forever on earth under the Kingdom is secondary in order. It follows after Jehovah has redeemed His royal family of sons “from among men” to be “heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ” in the heavenly kingdom. The faithful witnesses and prophets who lived and died before the entrance of the High Priest Christ Jesus with the value of his human sacrifice into God’s presence in the Most Holy of heaven extended from Abel to John the Baptist. These could not then get any redemptive benefit from a sacrifice that had not yet in their time been offered to Jehovah. They were first in time, but in comparing them with the members of the “body of Christ” as to the benefits of the real sin-atonement, ‘the first shall be last, and the last shall be first.’ They could not be “made perfect” before the members of Christ’s body have been made up and brought into unity with their High Priest at the temple. (Matt. 11:11; Heb. 11: 39,40) Hence it was also that the Lord's “other sheep” of the present time first began to be gathered after the great High Priest came to the temple in 1918 and assembled the remnant of his body members into unity there under the Theocratic rule.—Mal. 3:1-4; 1 Thess. 4:13-17; 2 Thess. 2:1.
COMPLETE ATONEMENT
” Not all the blood of the bullock and Lord's goat was sprinkled before God’s mercy seat by the high priest. The high priest used the remainder of the blood to apply elsewhere. “And he shall make an atonement for the holy place, because of the unclean-ness of the children of Israel, and because of their transgressions in all their sins: and so shall he do for the tabernacle of the congregation, that remain-eth among them in the midst of their uncleanness." (Lev. 16:16) That tabernacle symbolized the “greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this building”; its features were “patterns of things in the heavens”, as stated at Hebrews 9:11,12, 21-24. The purifying of them with the cleansing blood was done to show that Jehovah's entire arrangement for atonement for the new world is pure, holy and righteous, free from sin, by virtue of the work of Jehovah’s High Priest. The sacrifice of the members of Christ's “body” could accomplish no such effect as here pictured; only the blood of the great Sin-Offering, Christ Jesus, could do it. After Christ Jesus got through personally with his official duties, the true “holy place” and “tabernacle' could not be made more clean, sacred, or holy by anything that those of his church could do or add.
12	His exclusiveness in the sin-offering is further shown: “And there shall be no man in the tabernacle of the congregation when he goeth in to make an atonement in the holy place, until he come out. and have made an atonement for himself, and for his household [by the bullock], and for all the congregation of Israel [by the Lord's goat]." (Lev. 16-17) The whole work rests upon Christ Jesus, and he did a complete job, unassisted by any other creature (“man”). At this point Aaron the high priest pictures Christ Jesus alone, and not the composite Christ, that is, Jesus the Head and the dim eh his body. He is “the High Priest of our profession". (Heb. 3:1) This demonstrates once more that the Lord’s goat could not represent the church or body of The Christ, but that the goat equally with the bullock foreshadowed Jesus’ all-sufficient sacnfice. which makes full propitiation. “Who needcth not daily [each atonement day], as those high priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins [bi the bullock], and then for the people's [by the Lord's goat]: for this he did once, when he offered up himself.”—Heb. 7 : 26, 27.
” The typical picture continues: “And he shall go out unto the altar [in the court] that is before the Lord, and make an atonement for it; and shall take of the blood of the bullock, and of the blood or the goat, and put it upon the horns of the altar round about. And he shall sprinkle of the blood upon it with his finger seven times, and cleanse it, and hallow
262
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
it from the uncleanness of the children of Israel.” (Lev. 16:18.19) It is here seen that the blood of both bullock and goat is treated as one blood, being poured together, proving both victims symbolize the one great Sin-Offering of Jesus. Bear in mind, also, that the “altar” on which the Savior was offered existed before ever the church did, for He is the Foundation of the church. The “altar” of the great Sacrifice was clean before Pentecost, when first the church was begotten of God and his spirit was poured out on all the consecrated ones thereof in the flesh. Hence that “altar" was clean and holy from the beginning, as much so as the typical altar whose horns of power were cleansed with the blood of the bullock and goat. As to the purity of God’s “altar" note the following:
14	“And almost all things are by the law purged with blood; and without shedding of blood is no remission. It was therefore necessary that the [tabernacle] patterns of things in the heavens should be purified with these [sacrifices of animals] ; but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these. For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are the [symbolic] figures of the true [realities]; but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us. . . . now once in the end of the world [that is. in the climax of the typical period, the end of the tabernacle-arrangement period] hath he appeared, to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself.” (Heb. 9: 22-26) How impossible, then, for politicians, and the pope and his Hierarchy', and commercial traffickers and scientists to build a clean new world as they propose!
15	In the type long ago the tabernacle and related things needed cleansing evidently because of God’s rule at Exodus 20: 25: “And if thou wilt make me an altar of stone, thou shalt not build it of hewn stone: for if thou lift up thy tool upon it. thou hast polluted it.” Men who served in connection with that tabernacle were naturally imperfect and sinful; besides which it was situated amidst an unclean people. The pictorial tabernacle had to be cleansed, therefore, in order for sin-atonement by animals to be made acceptably to God Most Holy. More so must the antitypical realities be pure, clean, and undefiled, that the true and perfect sacrifice might be offered to Him by Christ Jesus in approved manner. Hence the purifying of the tabernacle and related things with blood of the sin-offering victims was done to produce a ty’pical condition that illustrated the absolutely pure and sinless condition of Jehovah’s real arrangement to atone for man’s sin and for the vindication of God’s name.
“THE SCAPEGOAT”
18 Certainly Jehovah’s royal High Priest, Christ Jesus, did not have to wait till the end of 1900 years
and till after his reign began, in A.D. 1914. before he made an end or could make an end of the reconciling w’ork in the “holy place”, heaven itself, in the presence of God. As a fact, the true “holy place" is God’s place of official residence, and hence it was clean and fit for Christ’s high priestly work right from the start thereof. This original clean condition, never defiled, was foreshadowed by the tabernacle condition after high priest Aaron got through reconciling the holy place with blood. Also Hebrews 7: 24-28 testifies that Christ Jesus, the everlasting High Priest, who is “consecrated for evermore”, was holy, harmless, undefiled and separate from sinners from the beginning of his sacrificial activity. God’s “altar” for Jesus’ sacrifice was never built or defiled by sinful human hands and was clean and acceptable for use. Its cleanness was not dependent upon any moral cleansing or sanctification that any or all of Christ’s followers could impart. Hence what is next described as taking place does not picture something due to be fulfilled after the operations of The Theocratic Government began in A.D. 1914.
17 Leviticus 16: 20 reads: “And when he hath made an end of reconciling the holy place, and the tabernacle of the congregation, and the altar, he shall bring the live goat.” That was the goat upon which the lot fell “for the scapegoat”, or, “for Azazel." (Verse 8, marginal reading) Its companion, the “goat for a sin offering”, had been slain and its atoning blood presented at the mercy seat in the Most Holy. Hence this “live goat” had atoning merit resting upon it and hence power to bear away sins. This fact is shown at verse 10: “But the goat over which came up the lot for Azazel shall he cause to stand alive before Jehovah, to put a propitiatory-covering over him, to send him away unto Azazel, towards the desert.” (Rotherham’s translation) This goat with atoning merit upon it therefore pictures Jesus.
” In the fulfillment on the real atonement day such “live goat” was brought by the 30-year-old Jesus Christ immediately after he consecrated to do Jehovah’s will and symbolized his consecration by being immersed in Jordan’s waters by John the Baptist. In submitting to water baptism Jesus performed his first act of obedience in carrying out the consecration he had just made. John had been baptizing sinners unto repentance, and to any onlooking Jews Jesus’ baptism might have suggested the thought: “Here is another sinner needing forgiveness and cleansing, and he comes from Nazareth, too.” Thus Jesus was not only like the “live goat”, but also like the Lord’s goat sacrificed. At that baptism Jehovah took Jesus into the covenant of sacrifice and accepted his humanity as slain, like the Lord’s goat slain at the north side of the altar. Then the Lord God manifested his acceptance and approval by sending down
September 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER-
263
his holy spirit or invisible power upon Jesus, the spirit's descent being accompanied by a manifestation of a dove which John the Baptist’s eyes were opened to see, to thereby identifv Jesus as Christ. —John 1: 31-34.	'
’’Jesus, having been approved as acceptable for sacrifice on God's holy ‘‘altar”, had now been slain as the antitypical Lord’s goat by being taken into the covenant of sacrifice. Christ Jesus must thereafter be dealt with as the antitypical “scapegoat” or “goat for Azazel”, the “live goat”. Jesus was still alive in the fleshly organism or human body, but he was now a “new creature”, having just been begotten by Jehovah's invisible power to spiritual life and brought forth or acknowledged by bis heavenly Father, whose voice was heard from heaven, saying: “This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.” Being still sinless in the flesh, he yet held the right to perfect human life. Until he laid down liis flesh in death he must henceforth prove his obedience perfect toward God; he must maintain liis integrity toward Jehovah in defiance of and in disproof of Satan’s false charges to God about those in God’s organization. Thus, although Jesus as the antitypical Lord's goat was humanly dead, he was at the same time alive as the antitypical “live goat" over which an atonement had been made. Jesus’ human body in which he did his Father's will perfectly had been quickened or empowered by God’s animating power or spirit to serve Him faithfully unto death.
20	“And Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of the live goat, and confess over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their transgressions in all their sins, putting them upon the head of the goat, and shall send him away by the hand of a fit man into the wilderness.” (Lev. 16: 21) Aaron pictured Christ Jesus as High Priest. Like Aaron, Jesus, with both hands or with all his powers, took hold on God's work assigned to him and worked together with God as His servant and instrument. Almighty God used the hands (powers) of his Elect Servant to carry out the divine purpose respecting the true “live goat” which was “for Azazel”.
21	The confession of sins upon the live goat’s head did no't mean to say that Jesus substituted for Adam and took Adam's place. God’s sentence upon Adam and Eve cannot be reversed. The sins here put upon the goat's head were not sins of wickedness and rebellion, such as that of Adam in Eden, because such sins cannot be atoned for nor be borne away by someone other than the wicked, rebellious sinner himself. The sins, iniquities and transgressions of Israel here confessed were of the same kind as those of the tribe of Levi, Aaron’s house, for which the bullock’s blood atoned. They were sins and transgressions due to heredity from fallen Adam. Concerning the “live
goat” which had failed to be the Lord's goat by the draw of a lot God’s law applied: “It shall be perfect to be accepted; there shall be no blemish therein.” (Lev. 22: 21) Jesus in the flesh was perfect and without blemish, like that “live goat”, yet he humbled himself to appear as a sinner, that he might be sacrificed to relieve believing men of sin and wash away their sin in his own blood. He “made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men: and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.” (Phil. 2:7,8) “God, sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh.” “Who was delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our justification.” (Rom. 8:3; 4: 25) “Be ye reconciled to God. For he hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.”—2 Cor. 5; 20, 21.
22	In this way the true “live goat”, Christ Jesus, was made to appear as a sinner and thus be subject to reproach. In the wilderness of temptation Satan raised the question as to whether Jesus was the Son of God, and thereafter he caused Jesus to be reproached as a sinner, winebibber, blasphemer, bedeviled Samaritan, and seditionist. Christ Jesus subjected himself to be thus charged and treated. He never practiced religion in order to appear self-righteous and to thereby escape such false charges of sin. According to the popular religious standards of Satan's clergy crowd: “He hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him. He is despised and rejected of men ; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief; and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised, and we [blinded bi religion] esteemed him not. Surely he hath borne our gi let's, and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem kun stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted.” Iloweier, the actual truth was: “But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed. All we. like sheep, have gone astray; we have [due to religious shepherds] turned every one to his own way; and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all.”—Isa. 53: 2-6.
“FIT MAN”
25	The “live goat” for Azazel was to be sent into the wilderness. Doubtless an underpriest in the court would conduct this goat from its position before the door of the tabernacle, at least to the gate of the court, where he could turn the goat over to someone free to take it beyond the camp of Israel. The hand of man had been needed to guide it into the
2G4
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
court and to the tabernacle door, and now an intelligent creature was again needed because the dumb animal did not know where it was meant to go and it needed a man under Theocratic instructions to guide it to its destination. In the fulfillment of the picture Christ Jesus as the “live goat" needed no hand of any man or class of men to lead, guide or drag him. He was filled with the holy spirit of Jehovah, and he studied God's will and of his own intelligent choice lie acted in harmony with that will.
“Fit man" means, literally, '‘timely man" or “man of due season". After Jesus' baptism it was God's due time for Christ Jesus to carry out the “live goat” picture. It being Jehovah’s time, Christ Jesus willingly and submissively betook himself whithersoever God's spirit led him according to the supreme will. After the descent of the spirit upon the baptized Jesus, "then was Jesus led up of the spirit into the wilderness, to be tempted of the devil." (Matt. 4:1) Mark 1:12,13 reads: “And immediately the spirit dnveth him into the wilderness. And he was there in the wilderness forty days, tempted of Satan; and was with the wild beasts." Luke 4:1,2 corroborates this: "Jesus, being full of the holy [spirit], returned from Jordan, and was led by the spirit into the wilderness, being forty days tempted of the devil." After those days he was still suidcd in all things by Jehovah's spirit or invisible power.—Matt. 12:18,28; Luke 4:14, IS.
25	The sins of the world lying in the wicked one Satan were not the sms that were put upon the head of the "live goat", but the sins were of those who had come into relationship with Jehovah God, namely, the camp of Israel, together with the strangers sojourning among them. The camp had provided this “goat", even as Jesus was born of the covenant people of God, and his nature was man’s, human, but his life and life-right were from God his Father. The Israelites and strangers must have felt great relief as they saw the "live aoat" led out of the camp ami into the unknown. They must have thought: “There go our transgressions and sins. Now we are relieved of such disability in the sight of Jehovah God and can serve him henceforth." Only because the other goat, the Lord's goat, had been slain as a sin-offering for Israel, only therefore could the sins of God's covenant people be transferred from them and laid upon the head of the “live goat", that this goat might bear the transgressions away beyond recovery. This illustrates Christ Jesus serving as the Sin-Bearer, according as it is written: “And he bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors." (Isa. 53:12) Also John the Baptist testified of Jesus after His baptism: “Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world!" that
is, the sin of those who shall inherit life in the new-world, the world of righteousness.—John 1:29.36; 3:36.
“FOR AZAZEL"
26 By the “live goat” the iniquities of God’s covenant people were borne to a “land not inhabited", or (marginal reading), “a land of separation"; or (literally), “a land cut off,” that is, cut off from human habitation or human communities. This is not saying that there was no invisible spirit demon or host of demons out there. Doubtless out in the land beyond human habitation was where the “live goat" in reality became the “goat for Azazel". There is where the real trial and hardship came upon the “live goat". The name “Azazel" (Greek: apopompaios; Sender away) is understood to mean “Averter", or one who turns aside abuse and punishment if you please him. Hence the name designates Satan, who is opposed to sin-atonement. Because the goat bore away the sins of Israel Satan and his demons could not look favorably upon or deal kindly with it. Satan wanted men to abide in sin, unreconciled, and to perish likc himself. He was against any agent for the removal of sin. This bears out that Jesus’ real conflict was with Satan and his demon hosts. By Jesus as the “live goat" the question had to be settled on this point: Could Jehovah's High Priest be exposed to Satan’s test and yet maintain his innocence, blamelessness, and sinless state and thereby prove His worthiness to be God’s servant to lift the reproaches from Jehovah’s name and to relieve believing humankind of their sins due to inheritance from Adam ?
2T Christ Jesus was uncompromising toward this world. He followed no appeasement policy with it or its god, Satan or Azazel. The Devil got no satisfaction or co-operation from Jesus. Hence, instead of turning away persecution and reproach and punishment, Satan made that holy One his chief target and resorted to punishing Jesus for his faithfulness and unbreakable integrity toward Jehovah God. By punishment undeserved at the hands of religionists the Devil tried to force Jesus to sin and fail of continuing worthy to be Sin-Bearer for believers. The Devil was out to prove his boast of being able to corrupt and turn aside every one of Jehovah’s servants under the test and so force them to quit Jehovah because Jehovah did not shield them from persecution and reproach but permitted the test.
28 “Azazel,” the Devil, directly tempted Jesus during the forty days in the wilderness. He also used visible creatures, men, religious men, and particularly their leaders, the clergy. These punished Jesus in every way for his faithfulness and unswerving devotion to Jehovah, The Theocracy, and the truth, and for Jesus’ hatred of religion and of all iniquity. Those religionists claimed to be able to remove the
September 1,1942
WATCHTOWER,
265
sin? and transgressions of the people by religion, like Roman Catholic priests in the confession box. Indignantly the clergy scouted any true sin-bearer, such as Jesus. So doing, they served “Azazel". They were actually fighting against the people's highest good, the relieving of the people of their sins according to God’s way, the only way. In so doing they actually tried to keep all the people in sin and bring about the people's destruction by Jehovah's Executioner. By such conduct the human opposers and persecutors of Jesus as the real “live goat’’ debased themselves to the level of wild beasts of the wilderness that have no understanding and that perish. Of suchlike it is written: “Man being in [worldly] honour abideth not: he is like the beasts that perish.” "Man that is in honour [with Azazel and his world], and understandeth not. is like the beasts that perish.” (Ps. 49:12,20) The true “live goat" does not bear away the wicked sms of such ones. For the three and one-half years of his witness work Jesus as “goat” was, in effect, in the wilderness, surrounded by Azazel and his demon hosts and wild human beasts. Serpents and vipers crawl in the wilderness, and Jesus called the religious clergy a breed, nest, or generation of such crawling things.—Matt. 23 : 33; Ezek. 2:6.
25 With this live goat went away the sins and iniquities, transgressions and sins of God's covenant people, never to revert back or to be borne back to His people and charged against them again. Likely the “goat for Azazel” died a violent death, because Satan got no satisfaction out of it but hated vhat it symbolized. Likewise Jesus faithfully endured the hardships and the assaults of demons and men in the antitypical wilderness. He refused to turn back from the service God assigned to him as Sin-Bearer, or even look back. (Luke 9 : 62; Heb. 10: 38, 39) Because he did not break covenant, turn back and so leave humankind without hope in sin under Satan’s organization, Christ Jesus died, apparently forsaken of God. and hoisted on a tree at the violent hands of beastly dupes of “Azazel” and his demons.
30	Therefore Jehovah lets the sins of those who shall inherit the new world be dismissed without requiring of them the penalty of everlasting death for their sins, because they repent and convert or turn to Jehovah and his Theocracy under Christ. Such sins become as if swallowed up in a solitary wilderness. All this is because of what has been done in fulfillment of the double picture of the sacrificed Lord’s goat and the sin-bearing “goat for Azazel”. Rejoice in the following testimony of the Scriptures on this! “He hath not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities. For as the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him. As far as the east
is from the west, so far hath he removed our transgressions from us.” (Ps. 103:10-12) “He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us: he will subdue our iniquities: and thou wilt cast all their sins into the depths of the sea.” (Mic. 7:19) “For by one offering he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified. Whereof the holy [spirit] also is a witness to us: for after that he had said before, This is the covenant that I will make with them after those days, saith the Lord; I will put my laws into their hearts, and in their minds will I write them; then he said, And their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. Now where remission of these [sins and iniquities, by the sacrifice of the real bullock and Lord's goat] is. there is no more offering for sin."—Heb. 10:14-18, marginal reading; Jer. 31: 34.
CORROBORATION
31	God’s use of the “live goat’’ with the Lord's goat may correspond in meaning with the manner of cleansing the Israelite who was healed of leprosy or cleansing an entire house that was healed of that plague. Note how the procedure makes use of two corresponding creatures to effect one result: “And the priest shall go forth out of the camp; and the priest shall look, and, behold, if the plague of leprosv be healed in the leper, then shall the priest command to take for him that is to be cleansed two birds alive and clean, and cedar wood, and scarlet, and hyssop • and the priest shall command that one of the birds be killed in an earthen vessel [to catch the blood] over running water [hence not from a stagnant, stale, dead pool, but living water, to be mixed with the bird's blood].” That bird corresponds with the slain Lord's goat.—Lev. 14:1-5.
32	“As for the living bird, he shall take it, and the cedar wood, and the scarlet, and the hyssop, and shall dip them and the living bird in the blood of the bird that was killed over the running water.” As in the case of the “live goat” for Azazel, this dipping symbolized that the value of the life of the killed bird was transferred to the living bird, the living bird being already clean to begin with. Thereby power was conveyed to the living bird to offset sin and its penalty in others and so carry it off. Vsmg the bird's blood in the earthen vessel, the priest “shall sprinkle upon him that is to be cleansed from the leprosy seven times [perfectly, completely], and shall pronounce him clean, and shall let the living bird [stained with the blood in which it was dipped] loose into the open field.” That would be outside the camp, where all this took place. The bird was let fly away into the unknown, and God's priest pronounced the healed Israelite clean unto God, due to the blood sprinkled upon him and due to his faith in and obedience to this law and rule of Jehovah. “And he that
2GG
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
is to be cleansed shall wash his clothes, and shave off all his hair, and wash himself in water, that he may be clean; and after that he shall come into the camp, and shall tarry abroad out of his tent seven days."—Lev. 14: 3-8.
” Leviticus 14: 49-55 describes a like procedure for cleansing an Israelite's house that was infected with the plague, and says : “And he shall cleanse the house with the blood of the bird, and with the running water, and with the living bird, and with the cedar wood, and with the hyssop, and with the scarlet; but he shall let go the living bird out of the city [where the house was located] into the open fields, and make an atonement for the house: and it shall be clean.”
34	The leper had not been charged with personal sin as the cause of his leprosy. Hence no sins were confessed over the live bird, but it was dipped in sin-atoning blood. This action made it appear as if the living bird was sinful and needed remission of sins by shedding of blood. (1 John 1:7; Rev. 1:5) This shows that the uncleanness of the leper or the leprous house was imputed to the living bird. Also the leper becomes clean unto God because blood of the killed bird mingled with water symbolizing divine truth is sprinkled a perfect number of times upon the healed leper. The flying of the living bird away to unknown and trackless regions pictures the bearing away of the sinful uncleanness of the repentant one into oblivion. beyond human knowledge, never to be encountered again or brought to mind.
35	Likewise Jesus, bearing the power and value of his human blood, ascended (flew) up to heaven to cancel the sin of believers. Jehovah will never again charge death-dealing sin against such faithful ones. Without his knowledge not even a sparrow falls to the ground (Matt. 10: 29), and he, of course, knows the location of the living, blood-stained bird. However, he looks upon it as an offset to the human sinfulness, and hence will not remember the uncleanness against the healed one any more. Jehovah lets the uncleanness of the believers be carried away by the One that bears the power of the blood, which blood cleanses from the deadly uncleanness. That One is Christ Jesus. His shed blood has cleansing power or value and he himself takes upon him the obligation of those who shall live in the new world.
36	Jesus' atoning sacrifice was again pictured eight days later by the lamb for the sin-offering which was offered for the healed leper “that is to be cleansed from his uncleanness”. In the case of a poor person, a bird (a turtledove or a pigeon) might be used instead of the lamb. (Lev. 14:10,19,21-23) After this provision the healed Israelite was declared clean before God and fit and worthy to be admitted back among the people of God. Only those of men who have faith and submit to like cleansing by the
real atoning Sacrifice shall be admitted into and live in the new world as clean before Jehovah God.
ACCEPTANCE
3	T “And Aaron shall come into the tabernacle of the congregation, and shall put off the linen garments which he put on when he went into the holy place, and shall leave them there: and he shall wash his flesh with water in the holy place, and put on his garments, and come forth, and offer his burnt offering, and the burnt offering of the people, and make an atonement for himself, and for the people.” (Lev. 16:23,24) Likewise Christ Jesus the High Priest having been resurrected from the dead an immortal, divine spirit creature in the “express image of the Father’s person”, he comes no more in the flesh; the sacrifice for human sins is for ever accomplished. “Christ, being raised from the dead, dieth no more: death hath no more dominion over him. For in that he died, he died unto sin [as a sin-offering] once: but in that he liveth, he liveth unto God.” (Heb. 1:3: Rom. 6: 9,10) Like the high priest after being bathed in water, Christ Jesus came through his sin-atoning work on earth as High Priest clean, pure, holy, and with integrity maintained toward God. Xow in resurrection glory he is for ever like Israel's high priest with sacrificial garments put aside and clothed with the garments of glory and beauty. (Ex. 28.2.40) “Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many; and unto them that look for him shall he appear [in Kingdom glory] the second time, without sin [sin-offering], unto salvation.”—Heb. 9:28; 1:9; 2 Pet. 1:16-18.
SB The offerings of the rams which Aaron burned upon the altar in the court were “an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour [(literally) of a savour of rest] unto the Lord”. (Lev. 1:9, 13, 17; 8:21) They signified Jehovah's acceptance of the sin-offennu. Had Aaron not sacrificed the sin-offering and presented the blood thereof in an acceptable manner, he would not have lived to perform these burnt offerings. Hence such offerings manifested God’s acceptance of the atonement for sin, because the high priest is still fully devoted to Jehovah and renders obedient service to him joyfully. God’s glory rested upon such high priest, and now rests upon Jesus in heaven.
”“‘And the fat of the sin offering shall he burn upon the altar.” (Lev. 16: 25) This was "for a sweet savour unto the Lord”, and because “all the fat is the Lord’s”. (Lev. 4: 31; 3:16) The warm zeal, devotion and strength of Jehovah's sin-atoning One likewise belongs fully to Jehovah and is given to Him by his High Priest.—Deut. 6:5.
40	“And he that let go the goat for the scapegoat [for Azazel] shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward come into the camp.”
September 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER,
2G7
(Lev. 16:26) Such bathing was nothing more than the high priest himself had to do, which high priest pictured Christ Jesus. Since this man guiding the scapegoat pictured God’s holy spirit acting upon Christ Jesus, the man’s bathing would picture that Jehovah’s spirit is holy and clean and it moved Jesus in holiness.
41	Regarding sin-offerings God's law was: “And the skin of the bullock, and all his flesh, with his head, and with his legs, and his inwards, and his dung, even the whole bullock shall he carry forth without the camp unto a clean place, where the ashes are poured out, and burn him on the wood with fire: where the ashes are poured out shall he be burnt.” “And no sin offering, whereof any of the blood is brought into the tabernacle of the congregation, to reconcile withal in the holy place, shall be eaten: it shall be burnt in the fire.” (Lev. 4:11,12; 6:30) Thus the carcasses of the sin-offerings were disposed of on the yearly atonement day: “And the bullock for the sin offering, and the goat for the sin offering, whose blood was brought in to make atonement in the holy place, shall one carry forth without the camp; and they shall burn in the fire their skins, and their flesh, and their dung.” (Lev. 16:27) The burning was in a clean place. When Christ Jesus suffered on earth, being tried as by fire, he was always in a clean place or condition. However, the burning outside the camp of Israel pictured his suffering reproach as if he was not part of God's organization, but outside of it. The including of the animals’ dung and hides in with the burning made it a burning not of a “sweet savour”. This unsavory burning of remains of the bullock and Lord's goat fills in the picture which was left incomplete when the scapegoat was released in the wilderness and disappeared from our observation of its experiences there. The burning of the sin-offerings’ remains pictured Christ’s suffering for his integrity and faithfulness. So this burning completes the whole picture of suffering reproaches faithfully unto death. The burning of the carcasses of the sin-offering victims and the release of the “live goat” in the wilderness were both “without the camp”.
42	“And he that burneth them shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward he shall come into the camp.” (Lev. 16: 28) His bathing was not different from that of the high priest after dealing with the sin-offerings and the scapegoat; and, besides, he was doing this crematory service for and instead of the high priest himself. Christ Jesus, under the leading of God’s spirit, which is clean and holy, voluntarily went into the reproaches and into being “made as the filth of the world, and ... the off scouring of all things”. (1 Cor. 4:13) He was not dragged unwilling to this burning. (Rom. 15: 3) In
this he was an example to all his followers, and therefore the apostle writes: “For the bodies of those beasts, whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by the high priest for sin, are burned without the camp. Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the gate [of Jerusalem and its temple; in Satan s world). Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach.”—Heb. 13:11-13.
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE NEW WORLD
43	The Theocratic law sets forth the requirements for those benefiting by the atonement and gaming life in the new world. “And this shall be a statute for ever unto you, that in the seventh month, on the tenth day of the month, ye shall afflict your souls, and do no work at all, whether it be one of your own country, or a stranger that sojourneth among you.” (Lev. 16:29) Laying aside their tegular work and activities in the camp on that day of atonement bespoke that no creature aside from the King of the new world, Jehovah's High Priest, either contributes anything to or participates in the sin-offering that atones for the sin of those who live in the Theocratic world. The real atonement day is past. It occupied the time from Jesus’ consecration and baptism and until he died, rose again, ascended and appeared before the great mercy seat of Jehovah God in the Holiest of all places in the universe and completed the atonement. Since then, particularly from Pentecost forward, faithful men and women on earth, beginning with the faithful apostles and their fellow disciples of Christ, have been receiving of the benefit of that atonement and being reconciled to God. It is therefore impossible for other creatures to add anything to what the great High Priest has done or to serve as channels, conveyors or instruments to pass on the benefits of his sin-atonement to others.
44	The self-affliction of Israel on the atonement day emphasizes this requirement, namely: That, whereas we creatures have no part in the sin-atonement, we must nevertheless show the full repentance and the godly sorrow over sin and must be converted from this unclean old world and turn unto Jehovah and his Theocratic Government of the world of nght-eousness. We must abstain from slavish work done for selfish gain or to establish our own righteousness and worthiness for everlasting life, a thing impossible for sin-born man. The remnant of the members of Christ's “body” and their companions, the Lord's “other sheep”, will not waste time trying to do such a thing, thereby deceiving themselves into such an anti-Christ effort. They will do as the great High Priest Christ Jesus left them the example to do. Instead of trying to get the world’s approval and appear respectable to it, they will abandon Satan’s
268
THE WATCHTOWER,
organization and go forth unto Christ Jesus “without the camp” and bear Christ’s reproach in the wilderness of this world by being witnesses for Jehovah and his kingdom.
45	All praise to Jehovah’s High Priest for sin-atonement: “For on that day shall the priest make an atonement for you, to cleanse you, that ye may be clean from all your sins before the Lord. It shall be a sabbath of rest unto you, and ye shall afflict your souls by a statute for ever. . . . And this shall be an everlasting statute unto you, to make an atonement for the children of Israel, for all their sins, once a year. And he did as the Lord commanded Moses.” (Lev. 16:30-34) Christ Jesus, the Lord's Chief Priest, has done so, alone, by God’s grace. No man accompanied him to heaven with the merit of his human sin-offering, neither the thief who died alongside Jesus on the tree, nor any others before or after him. Till then none such had been begotten of the spirit of God and the way into the heavenly Most Holy had not been opened up to any from among humankind. (Heb. 9:7,8; John 3:13; 7:39; 2 Tim. 1:10) The typical sacrifices needed to be re
Brooklyn, N. Y.
peated each year on the typical atonement day because they were merely of animals whose blood could not take away sin. Christ’s sin-offering, however, is the ransom and is the all-sufficient propitiation that needs no repeating. The good effects of his sin-atonement continue for ever, and all creatures that accept and prove worthy of the benefits thereof shall live in the new world.
46	Jehovah’s “high priest after the order of Mel-chizedek” has come to reign, and not for any representing of his sin-offering. (Ps. 110:1-4; Heb. 7 :1-21; 5: 5, 6) He has done the required work, and all other creatures having hope of cleansing and redemption and deliverance must observe the “sabbath of rest” in Him and in what he has worked for them. (Matt. 12:5,6; Heb. 4:1-11) The great atonement day, long ago foreshadowed with Israel’s Theocracy, glorifies and makes prominent, not earthly creatures, but the great Author of atonement for the new world, Jehovah God, and his glorious High Priest thereof, Christ Jesus. “Thanks be unto God for his unspeakable gift.”—2 Cor. 9:15.
TRIUMPH BY WHOSE WORKS?
AMID the sounding of praises of those who distinguish themselves in mortal combat there is a danger for man to become brutish. How? By forgetting and falling to sing the praises of the Creator. "It is a good thing to give thanks unto Jehovah, and to sing praises unto thy name, 0 Most High, to show forth thy lovingkindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness every night. With an instrument of ten strings, and with the psaltery, with a solemn sound upon the harp. For thou. Jehovah, hast made me glad through thy work I will triumph in the works of thy hands. How great are thy works. 0 Jehovah' Thy thoughts are very deep A brutish man knoweth not; neither doth a fool understand this"—Ps. 92: 1-G, Ain Rev Ver.
Surely these words of the prophecy cannot be understood as referring to so-called "heatnen nations” or the people who never knew God. In the first instance they were addressed to native Israelites, and at the present they apply to the professed Christians and to those who have not been faithful to their covenant to do God's will. A “fool” is one void of common sense (and is sometimes called a “fathead”), who foolishly goes contrary to God’s law. He refuses reproof and thinks it smart to hide his hatred with lying lips, to justify his course against the hated ones: “He that hideth hatred with lying lips, and he that uttereth a slander, is a fool.” (Prov. 10: 18) He is a perverse creature, morally bad.
In all nations Jehovah’s witnesses have fulfilled upon them Jesus’ prophecy concerning being “hated of all men for my name's sake”. (Matt. 10:22) In certain countries the Watch Tower Society has been declared illegal. Those who oppose the Society and its work do not understand and
cannot appreciate the wonderful Bible truths it publishes As one translator (Rotherham) of Psalm 92.6 renders this text: “A man that is brutish cannot get to know, and a dullard cannot understand this.” The leaders among those who oppose the Lord’s work now carried on have become brutish, and’others foolishly follow these blind leaders, and none of them understand the truth Worse, those who have once had a measure of the truth and then oppose the work the Lord is doing by the Society become entirely blind to the truth that God is giving his people at the present time Continuing in that course such are the enemies of God, because no one can knowingly oppose the work of the Lord without being opposed to the Lord himself. In the day of Jesus on earth there was a union of those who opposed him and who together took counsel for his death There are manv things coming to pass at the present time to indicate that the opposers of the Lord's work are trying to unite and will unite in their efforts to destroy God's message and his work on the earth. They will not succeed
Through the centuries past wicked men have gone on practically unhindered. There is a fixed period of time within which God permits such without interference That time has come to an end and the workers of iniquity will be cleared out. To that effect Psalm 92-7 reads. “When the wicked spring as the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity do flourish, it is that they shall be destroyed for ever.” This seems clearly to foretell a combination of wicked men, and their organization, which Satan will use against God’s people and against His work. In the past the servants of the Lord have been ill-used and have suffered much at the hands of some wicked men, but according to Psalm 92 there comes a time when many workers of iniquity are
September 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER,
2G9
agreed upon one thing and that thing is the opposition to the work of Jehovah's people on earth
In spite of the global war now devastating the earth Jchoxah God through Christ his King sends out his message of the Kingdom as never before in lands fighting the totalitarian monstrosity. The religious clergy as a unit are opposing this work and using all their power in an attempt to stop it. Those who have once had some truth, and who now oppose, find aid and allies in the clergy and the principal of their flock As Judas made an alliance with the clergy, it is to be expected that his counterpart will do likewise now.
But these things do not at all disturb those who love and serie God New courage and strength is given his faithful remnant by the knowledge that they are the Lord's anointed ones or commissioned witnesses, and that he has gathered them together unto himself, and that they are in tne ‘’secret place of the Most High” and under the special care of Jehovah. and that to their side he is gathering an unnumbered multitude of persons of good-will who present themsehes as companions m God's service The tact that the experiences of the anointed remnant fit the prophecy is proof that it has reference to them. When the physical i..<-ts appear clearly before them, then it can be truly said. ‘This is what was spoken by the prophet of God ’ They see the lawless increasing and the workers of iniquity blossoming. and at the same time they see the Lord s special protection for the faithful Add to this the further testimony of the apostle Paul, at 1 Corinthians 10:11, that whatso-exer v.as written aforetime was written for the comfort of the true followers of Christ, and these prophecies afford further assurance to the people of Jehovah God that he Mill furnish all the needed protection for them
Therefore, instead of their being discouraged or even disturbed by the arising of the enemy like the grass in the springtime, God's prophet speaks for them words of confidence and all the faitliful with one accord sing m defiance of the springing wicked ones: “They shall be destroyed for ever. But thou, 0 Jehovah, art on high for cxermore For, lo, thine enemies, 0 Jehovah, for, lo, thine enemies shall perish , all the workers of iniquity shall be scattered But my horn hast thou exalted like the horn of the xxild-ox: I am anointed with fresh oil ”—Ps. 92.7-10, Am Zi'cv Ter
Much is written in the Scriptures concerning anointing, and it appears that there are two specific things to Minch the Mord anointing applies First, when God selects a servant and assigns him to an office and to perform a specific M’ork, God anoints such servant, as in the cases of Israel's high priest, and David, Elisha, captain Jehu, and others Such is an authoritative designation to office The anointing Mith oil is symbolic thereof. The anointing carries with it the authority to act in God's name As a counterpart of the anointing of the high priest Aaron to priestly service in the tabernacle is the anointing of Jesus with the spirit of Jehovah and to be the executive officer of the Most High.
There is also an anointing mentioned in the Scriptures that means refreshment, and it is this latter anointing that is meant in Psalm 92:10. Such anointing gives refreshment and a greater ability to serve the Lord. It means the lifting up and encouraging of the servant by the Lord to go for-xxard M’ith reneM-ed zeal. Bearing upon this point the apostle James wrote concerning those xvho are spiritually sick and
discouraged: “Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the church . and let them pray over him, anointing him Muth oil in the name of the Lord and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgixen him ’’ (Jas. 5:14,15) The Lord thus uses faithful men in the church to aid and comfort others
In like manner the prophet xvrote, in Psalm 23.5: “Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies ; thou anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over" This anointing does not refer to the anointing to office, but does shoM- indirectly that one previously anointed to office or service is noxx- being refreshed that he max- more efficiently perform the duties of service in the office to which he has been appointed.
At the present time the anointed remnant and their devoted companions, and none other, are united in faith Lope and joyful service These have continuous refreshment from the Lord and may be sure that the Lord Mill continue to keep his people refreshed and m full xigor for his xv'.tncss M’orK. It is not numbers that gixes strength, therefore the enemy may increase in numbers far more rapidlv than the number of “other sheep" noM’ being gathered to the side of the diminishing remnant, but these latter Mill eiow stronger in the Lord The strength is in the Lord, and He will accomplish his purpose and continue to pioxide all needed strength and refreshment to his servants
God has his OM’n channel or means of earn ma forward his purposes, and will make known his truth to his people as it is due to be understood. The continued revealmen*. of his xvill comes to his consecrated ones through his chosen channel, and it may properly be likened unto a continuous floM- of cool and refreshing xvaters. The more apt illustration is that of refreshing oil poured upon the head It is Jehovah through Christ Jesus who thus comforts Ins anointed and who gives the refreshing libation Such blessings he nixes to those xvho love him and who joyfully serie his righteous cause For a like reason He said to Ins beloved Son “Thou lovest righteousness, and hatest xxickedness, therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee M’ith the oil of gladness aboxe thy felloxvs " (Ps 45:7) The “servant" class has alreadx received a like anointing or refreshment because it i^ a part of the ’servant in whom Jehovah delights' and for mIiopi lie shows his special care
Note that Psalm 92.10 (A It 1’ ) saxs- “I am anointed with fresh oil", meaning that God has given Ins serxants some new refieshing blessing and which is a token of the love and care Jehovah has and exercises toward his faithful people. The anointed "seivant'’ class is God's special choice, and none can have this faxor xvithout reccixing the anointing to an official place in his organization It is therefore the anointed class that in time of need continuous!} receives the anointing with fresh oil that makes glad the heart; that is to say, this class is specially cared for and refreshed by the Lord himself; and the Lord's “other sheep", as the faithful companions of the remnant, share the grand refreshment. Engaged m the joyful service of God and his kingdom all these knoxx- that opposition cannot hinder such xvork, but that God's work xvill continue to go forxvard until it is finally completed and until he has accomplished his purposes through Christ. So the remnant
270
3Te WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
now say, ‘As a wild ox confidently lifts his head and enters the fray, feeling strength in the power of his horns, sb now with full faith and confidence the faithful continue to press the battle to the gate and know that victory shall be the result because their strength is in the Lord and nothing can defeat his power.’ The Devil’s organization cannot stop such an army, because the Lord Jesus Christ is leading and Jehovah’s banner of love and unlimited power is over the "servant'’ and the servants are marching to victory.
In extension of that outlook of triumph Psalm 92.11 reads: “Mine eye also shall see my desire on mine enemies; and mine ears shall hear my desire of the wicked that rise up azainst me.” This cannot mean a malicious desire of any of Jehovah’s people to have a personal spleen satisfied azainst the enemy. The desire is to see God’s enemies destroyed. and the prayer is that God’s name may be completely vindicated
Upon every side the faithful see the foes of the truth working in opposition to the Lord, but their activity in no wise disturbs the faithful, because these fully appreciate the fact that if they have set their love upon Jehovah, God will shield and protect them from all harm. He gives to them the full assurance in his Word that he will preserve all them that love him. Undisturbed they therefore gaze upon their watchful foes and continue to hold fast their own integrity toward God and move forward in the work which the Lord God has assigned to them, delivering the testimony of Jesus Christ uith joy and gladness The remnant is re
freshed and lifted up by the reassuring words of Psalm 91:9-11: “Because thou hast made the Lord [Jehovah], which is my refuge, even the Most High, thy habitation, there shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling. For he shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.”
Knowing that the time is at hand when the name and word of the great Jehovah will be vindicated, the remnant together with their beloved companions stand forth and joyfully sing in unison: “Jehovah hath become king, in majesty hath he clothed himself. Jehovah hath clothed himself, with strength hath he girded himself. surely he hath adjusted the world, it shall not be shaken. Established is thy throne from of old, from age-past time art thou. The streams have lifted up, 0 Jehovah, the streams have lifted up their voice, the streams lift up their crashing: bej ond the voices of many waters, more majestic than the breakers of the sea, majestic on high is Jehovah. Thy testimonies are confirmed with might, to thy house befitting is holiness, 0 Jehovah! to length of days.” (Psalm 93, Rotherham) Jehovah God has become King, because he has taken up and is exercising his power and authority by and through his glorious Son, Christ Jesus. The day of iniquity must now come to an end, because God has declared as much. Satan's organization must now be cleared out from the universe, that righteousness may fill its place, to the unfading vindication of Jehovah’s name. In the righteous works of His hands shall all his faithful and obedient servants triumph
NO COME-BACK FOR RELIGION
XIIRIST EXDOM’S'’ loss for ever of her greatest I opportunity is strikingly illustrated in the ex-penence of Shebna. once the treasurer and scribe of King Hezekiah. Eliakim, a contemporary of Shebna, was then placed in a position of responsibility over the household of the king of God's typical Theocracy. The meaning of the names seems to throw light upon the matter under consideration Every name given by the Lord God in his Word appears to have a deep meaning “Shebna" is defined by some as meaning growth and tender youth. Another defines it as meaning one “who rests himself". Both of these meanings seem to apply, to indicate one who rests in himself and not in Jehovah God, therefore one who is proud and self-centered and selfish, and who is active like a growing youth in behalf of self. "Eliakim" means “whom God will raise up or ordain, establish, strengthen and help”.
Shebna for a time held the most responsible position in King Hezekiah’s house, being prefect of the palace. It was the custom of the nobles of the kingdom of Judah to hew out for themselves sepulchers Shebna evidently was a foreigner, but, marking the course taken by the nobles and exalted ones and feeling his own importance and being proud and ambitious to shine, he did the same thing for himself as the natives. Jehovah God sent his prophet Isaiah, who denounced Shebna, telling him that he would be demoted and disgraced and that God would raise up Eliakim in his stead to fill the important office.
Isaiah 22:15-19 reads: “Thus saith the Lord God of hosts, Go, get thee unto this treasurer, even unto Shebna,
which is over the house, and say, What hast thou here? and whom hast thou here, that thou hast hewed thee out a sepulchre here, as he that heweth him out a sepulchre on high, and that graveth an habitation for himself in a rock? Behold, the Lord will carry thee away with a mighty captivity, and will surely cover thee. He will surely violently turn and toss thee like a ball into a large country: there shalt thou die, and there the chariots of thy glory shall be the shame of thy lord’s house. And I will drive thee from thy station, and from thy state shall he pull thee down.”
Shebna, like the religious leaders of today, thought he was in a secure place. He felt his importance and that the king largely depended upon him But he was disgraced by being demoted. In contrast with that, the prophet says. “And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will call my servant Eliakim, the son of Ililkiah. and I will clothe him with thy robe, and strengthen him with thy girdle, and I will commit thy government into his hand . and he shall be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to the house of Judah. And the key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder; so he shall open, and none shall shut; and he shall shut, and none shall open And I will fasten him as a nail in a sure place; and he shall be for a glorious throne to his father’s house And they shall hang upon him all the glory of his father’s house, the offspring and the issue, all vessels of small quantity, from the vessels of cups, even to all the vessels of flagons In that day, saith the Lord of hosts, shall the nail that is fastened in the sure place be removed, and be cut down, and fall,
September 1,1942
fEe WATCHTOWER,
271
and the burden that was upon it shall be cut off: for the Lord hath spoken it ”—Isa. 22: 20-25.
The putting down of Shebna and raising up of Eliakim occurred shortly before Sennacherib king of Assyria assaulted Jerusalem. Shebna seems clearly to represent religionists, professed Christians, who are not really unselfishly devoted to the Lord but seek their own selfish interests. They seek to enrieh themselves and believe their position is secure and they are certain of the Kingdom. They think it their chief purpose and business now to get into the Kingdom ■'because God needs them’ and that they shall go down to the grave in peace. This particularly represents those of the denominational religious systems and consecrated ones outside thereof who have manifested the same selfish spirit Because of their pride and selfishness and self-exaltation they are eut down They are tossed away, the prophet says, "like a ball” into a wide plaee and are carried away by the winds of Armageddon.
Eliakim was the son of Hilkiah, the latter's name meaning "portion of Jehovah”. Eliakim therefore fitly illustrates the faithful remnant yet on earth of the members of Christ's body and who constitute God’s “faithful and wise servant” under Christ their Head and who are Jehovah's witnesses. Isaiah 22:21-24 stated that Eliakim should be clothed with a robe, which shows divine approval; he should be strengthened with a girdle, showing him to be an approved servant of Jehovah, and the government should be committed into his hands, showing that the Kingdom interests on earth are placed in the hands of this "servant” class. The key of David's house is laid upon his shoulder.
Hezekiah being a successor to King David, it may be presumed that he demoted Shebna and elevated Eliakim to the position of trust and honor. King Hezekiah pictures the enthroned Christ Jesus who as King and Priest of the Most High God abases the class represented by Shebna and exalts the ones represented by Eliakim. This applies from and after the Lord's coming to the temple for judgment in 1918, and concerning whom it is written: “These things saith he that is holy, he that is true, he that hath the key of David, he that openeth, and no man shutteth ; and shutteth, and no man openeth.”—Rev. 3: 7.
The change of stewardship made by King Hezekiah uas in preparation for the approaching crisis which was to take place at the time of the attack of Sennacherib against Jerusalem. Sennacherib pictures the Devil with his organization in an assault upon Jehovah’s covenant people after the Lord’s coming to the temple and when
(Continued from page 258)
certain blessings the Lord has in store for all those who come m faith and with a desire to serve Hun according to truth and righteousness.
Following are Rooming Committee addresses m addition to those in our last issue:
CALIFORNIA
2230 Union St., San Francisco
GEORGIA
% T. Y. VanSant, Sr., 203 Spring St. N.W., Atlanta
1718 Gilmore St., Waycross
IDAHO
41S North Wardwell, Degan Addition, Emmett, (instead of Boise) MARYLAND
1308 Eutaw Place, Baltimore
he puts down the unfaithful and bestows his favor upon the faithful servants.
It would seem that the key of the house of David represents the opportunities and responsibilities with regard to the house of the Greater David, to wit, Christ Jesus, the King of Jehovah’s Theocracy. Having become the heir of God's everlasting eovenant with David. Christ Jesus, of course, eomes into possession of the “key” to lay it iipon the shoulder of the one who should meet Jehovah’s approval The Scriptures show that when the Lord came to his temple for judgment the approved class received the “robe of righteousness” (Isa. 61.10), and to the “faithful and wise servant” class were committed the opportunities of being witnesses for Jehovah and to his "other sheep".
The Lord Jesus used the key of David to open up to the servant class, pictured by Eliakim, the door to Kingdom privileges of God's everlasting covenant with David. He "openeth, and no man shutteth”, and what he shuts no man can open. Immediately following 191S, u hen the Lord came to his temple, “organized religion" of “Christendom” repudiated Jehovah God and his King and was cast away. Likewise with the "evil servant” class. Their “nail” was thought to be secure, but was cut down b> the Lord and all Kingdom privileges were dropped and taken away from them. There was fulfilled more eomplvteh the rule stated by Jesus that the ‘kingdom should be taken from them and given to those bringing forth its fruits' This transfer of office and opportunities took place before the great assault of totalitarian powers upon Gods oisrani-zation as pictured by Sennacherib marching against Jerusalem. Thus it precedes the battle of Armageddon
Of the faithful “remnant” class under their Head Christ Jesus Jehovah says, as of Eliakim: “I will fasten him as a nail m a sure place.” This does not mean mciely the individuals, but every one who abides faithfully in the remnant unto the end. collectively All the vessels of truth are committed into the hands of the faithful servant class The great privilege is laid upon this class Therefore the tremendous responsibility and privilege that is gnen to those of the temple class and who are of the sen ant class at this time In the language of the prophet, these, as long as they remain faithful to Jehovah. God, must be witnesses following in the steps of Him whom (.od has given “for a witness to the people, a leader and commander to the people". (Isa 55:4) These on earth, theiifoie. must under Christ take the lead in directing the people of good-will, the Lords “other sheep", into the waj that God has prepared for the salvation of humankind
NEBRASKA
2442 S 15th St , Lincoln
OREGON
201 East Mam St , Klamath Falls SOUTH DAKOTA Box 153, Deadwood Box 902, Mitchell, (instead of Sioux Falls) WISCONSIN
2661 E. Washington Ave., Madison
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of October 4: “Atonement for the New World” (Part 3), fl 1-22 inclusive. The Watchtower September 1, 1942
Week of October 11: “Atonement for the New World” (Part 3), fl 23-46 inclusive, The Watchtower September 1, 1942.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
SWISS MEET IN THEOCRATIC ASSEMBLY
Flash by cable to the president of Watch Tower, Brooklyn, N.Y.. April 5: “Over three thousand Swiss friends assembled Theocratic Convention. Zurich. Psalm twenty-three, verse five. Book Children released; wonderful in our eyes. Resolution voted. Heartiest greetings. United with you in Kingdom work. [Signed] Jehovah’s witnesses in Switzerland.”
Further information was given later by letter as follows: “That this general convention could be held in the most beautiful and most distinguished building of the city of Zurich was wonderful in our eyes; and it must also be said that this assembly of God’s people in Switzerland was not only the biggest, but also the most blessed held up to this time. True, there have formerly been large general conventions in Switzerland^ but none counted an attendance exceeding 3,000 as this year, and this multitude was made up exclusively of Swiss brethren and companions. Surely the clearest evidence that the ‘great multitude’ is manifesting itself also in this country.
“The preparations already for this convention were visibly blessed of the Lord; for everything proceeded without the slightest friction, both as regards the authorities and the management of the eonvennon building and as to the hotel owners. A few days before the assembly the preparatory work was completed and we were as children awaiting in suppressed excitement the moment for the great event to arrive. And see, nearly 2,000 brethren arrived already on the first, and by Sunday the number had steadily increased to far above 3.000' Surprise followed upon surprise : a 32-page report on your general convention in St. Louis and that in England. then the chief discourse on Daniel, chapter eleven [the Watchtower article on ‘Demon Rule Ending', Part Seven] , the release of the book Children on Sunday morn me, which, aroused unspeakable joy, and finally a series of films showing the works of our Lord, followed by a Resolution worded in unequivocal language.
“If a dark spot in this Theocratic general assembly could be found, it is that this manifestation was controlled by the police. However, we rather had to expect this, considering the measures which Switzerland has taken, as well as on account of the general political situation. And, after all, it was to be welcomed, that thus on the occasion of such an outstanding event the officials of the authorities once got a thorough opportunity of making our acquaintance. The functionaries who had this special duty were able to learn once for all that we are neither Communists nor Nazis, nor Fascists, nor members of the notorious "fifth column’’, as our opponents in this country have claimed, but rather that we are positive, active Christians Nevertheless we thought it right to file a protest against this surveillance with the police authorities in Zurich; for Christian assemblies are not subject to authorization.
“Children's day. The fact that the book Children was being printed and was to be released at the general convention was not known outside of headquarters. From cloth purchased in the past for binding other books of Judge Rutherford, we had a stock of nine colors sufficient for 30,000 bound volumes, and this we used for the book Children. Our artist was commissioned to prepare placards in these nine colors demonstrating Children. On the stage were
nine tables, and upon a signal eighteen brothers marched by twos into the great hall, one carrying a placard and a second provided with a supply of Children matching the placard in color. This procession aroused powerful applause, and now the children, to the number of 406, were permitted to come upon the stage and receive as a present the book in their favorite color. Before this I was privileged to address the children as well as the parents in accordance with what is said in the book itself and in the Watchtower article ‘Noah’s Day\ This scene was really marvelous, and many tears of joy flowed.
“The following is the result of the witnessing done during the Zurich convention: Over 1,200 publishers, during two and a half hours, distributed 21,961 booklets; an achievement hardly ever before reached.
“resolution
“Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions assembled in the Convention Building, Zurich, from 3d to 5th April, 1942, to the number of about 3,000 persons, hereby issue the following Declaration: . . . ‘Jehovah’s witnesses recognize the divine commission bestowed upon them . . In that Jehovah’s witnesses (formerly Bible Students) in Switzerland have now since the dawn of the new century carried out this double commission in faithful obedience to God and Christ Jesus, they have been maliciously slandered by their opposers and blamed as enemies of the people and their general welfare. Jesus said in advance, in Matthew 10:18: “And ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them and the Gentiles.” Jehovah’s witnesses and their friends arc fully aware that Catholic Action have made it their unchangeable goal to close down the work of the witnesses of God. for they have declared: “The fight goes on till we have accomplished our purpose: the ban and dissolution of the European headquarters of Jehovah’s witnesses (Bible Students) in Berne.” (Swiss Press Correspondence, August 1, 1940) Let Catholic Action be informed that in lending their hand to such an act, they do the same as did the scribes and Pharisees 1900 years ago against Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of God: “ ... it is expedient for us, that one man should die for the people, and that the whole nation perish not.” (John 11:49,50) Applied to our time - “Better clear out Jehovah's witnesses, who continually trouble our rest by their so-called ‘proclamation’, than that eventually a whole people take up this message and our influence exercised through religion be lost.” Whatever our opponents may intend to do, and in whatever measure they may succeed in injuring God’s faithful people, nothing will be allowed to happen but what the righteous God may permit to prove the integrity and faithfulness of his people towards Him. (Romans 8:31) Therefore Jehovah’s witnesses know not the fear of man, but they do fear through breach of faithfulness to incur the disapproval of the only true God and thus to forfeit eternal life, . . . Should censorship not permit the publication of this Resolution we would take the liberty of sending a copy direct to all the authorities of Switzerland.’ This Resolution was reported unanimously approved. Censorship did not permit publication of the paragraph of the Resolution after the quotation from Swiss Press Correspondence." t12
THE WATCHTOWER.
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street -	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
N. H. Knorr, President________W, E. Van Amburgh, Secretary
"And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to bls creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos Is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death In order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus Is the Chief Officer thereof and Is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege It Is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act Is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
“THE WISE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The month of October is known by Jehovah’s witnesses as “The Wise” Testimony Period During that month the servants of Jehovah will put forth an extiaordmary effort to magnify the name of the Lord and to advertise his kingdom m the earth It is good to serve the Lord and to aid others, and those persons who are wise will put forth every effort to aid those who loie righteousness to seek the truth. In Proverbs, chapter 8, verse 31 onward, this thought is brought to our attention, “Hear instruction, and be wise, and refuse it not. Blessed is the man that hearetb me, . . . for whoso findeth me findeth life, and shall obtain favour of the Lord.” During “The Wise” Testimony Period Jehovah’s witnesses will offer to the people the book Children and the booklet Hope, on a contribution of 25c, so that the people of good-will may receive instruction and be wise. All persons who love righteousness and want to help others find the way to life and learn of Jehovah’s kingdom will share in the witness work during this period. If you are not already associated with a company of Jehovah’s witnesses and would like to be, write to Watchtower, 117 Adams St., Brooklyn, N. Y., and we will get you in touch with the nearest company, so you may share with these servants of the Lord in the proclamation of the Kingdom. In these perplexing times the wise man will seek the Lord and share his knowledge with others, so “that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God”.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction In the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Forxion, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Atrica, 8*. American remittance* should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British. South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be mad* to the Brooklyn office, hut by International Postal Money Order only.
Fobckin Omcxs
British  34 Craven Terrace. London, W.2, England Canadian 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian__________7 Beresford Road. Strathfield. N. S. TV., Australia
Sosth African Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Pleas* address th* Society in every case.
(Translations of Me journal appear in saoerol lonpucpe* J
AU sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may bare The Watchtower free upon written application to the publlsbera, made once each year, stating th* reason for so requesting IL we are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of s new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) wLU be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter «t ths poet oJJIce at Brooklyn, N. T., under the Act of March 1. ISIS.
NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING
Pursuant to the provision of law and the charter of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, notice is hereby given that the annual business meeting of the said Society will be held at Pittsburgh. North Side (formerly Allegheny), Pennsylvania, at ten o’clock a. m., Thursday, October 1, 1942, at which the usual annual business will be transacted.
ADDITIONAL ADDRESSES OF ROOMING COMMITTEES
In each instance the address will be Watchtower Convention Committee. Committee addresses are as follows:
FLORIDA
Jacksonville (See Waycross, Go.)
LOUISIANA
621 Foster St., Baton Rouge
MAINE
48 Arsenal St., Augusta
NORTH DAKOTA
% Martin Lahren, 1311 - 1st St. S. W., Mandan (instead of Fargo) “WATCHTOWER" STUDIES
Week of October 18: “Assembly unto the Kingdom,” fl 1-22 inclusive. The Watchtower September 15, 1942.
Week of October 25' “Assembly unto the Kingdom,” fl 23-47 inclusive, The Watchtower September 15, 1942.
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
No. LXin
September 15, 1942
No. 18
ASSEMBLY UNTO THE KINGDOM
"But you have approached to Zion, a mountain and city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem; and to myriads of angels, a full assembly; and, to a congregation of firstborn, having been enrolled in the heavens."—Heb. 12:22,23, Emphatic Diaglott translation.
TEHOVAH calls for the assembly unto the great I Government that shall rule the world in righteous-
J ness. Lovers of righteousness are responding to the call and assembling unto that Government of Righteousness. All creatures, whether political systems, religious organizations, or individuals, who try to interfere with and to prevent that assembly do so at their peril. Jehovah’s Righteous Government is likened to a great mountain of glorious majesty and of holiness unto Him. "Great is Jehovah, and greatly to be praised, in the city of our God, in his holy mountain. Beautiful in elevation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion, on the sides of the north, the city of the great King. God hath made himself known in her palaces for a refuge. For, lo, the kings assembled themselves, they passed by together.” (Ps. 48:1-4, Am. Rev. Ver.) Jehovah foretold the presumptuous efforts of kings, political and religious and using totalitarian methods and regimentation, to block the assembly of the righteous to the great mountain of his Government. Warning of the fate such totalitarian combine will surely meet, the divine prophecy says: ‘‘And he shall plant the tabernacles of his palace between the seas [and] the glorious holy mountain; yet he shall come to his end, and none shall help him.” (Daniel 11:45, Young’s) The assembly at the mountain shall be held. Jehovah’s call and invitation shall not go forth in vain.
1 In this critical year all the nations of the earth are caught in the overflowing current of a conflict for world domination. One nation after another has been sucked or swept in contrary to its wish. Whither the increasing current will carry them they cannot surely tell. Those who frame the policy for the nation, and who combine with others to frame the policy for the future of the whole world, can only hope for the success of their plans, and that such will be the best for the people that survive. No one questions their sincerity, and the true Christian will not interfere with their plans. But the worldly
policy-makers with their dreams of their kind of world before their vision cannot for certain know whether they can attain them and make them a permanent reality. They and all must admit that the future lies with God. “There are many devices in a man’s heart; but the counsel of Jehovah, that shall stand.” (Prov. 19:21, Am. Rev. Ver.) It is different now’ with the nations than before A. D. 1914. That year the times of the Gentiles or nations ran out. There the time for their self-determination without interference from God ended. His decisions as to what should take place on earth from and after that year were long ago made. His decisions as to the future shall stand, and they shall be executed. Therefore those who look not to man but to God and who pray for His will to be done know for an absolute certainty that his purpose as laid out in his Word, the Bible, shall be accomplished without failure in the least detail. They are lifted up above the world current and are going whither he leads them. They know where they are going, and that is, to the Kingdom of God, the Government of the Theocratic new world. They have heard the invitation of the Almighty Theocratic Ruler, and they respond and assemble unto His Government. He bids them to invite others to come along.— Isa. 2: 2,3.
* Those who prefer the schemes and the promises of mere men put themselves in the way of the assembly and seek to break it up. They are fighting against God, and to Him they shall finally have to answer. The time for settlement of accounts is very near, and there is no escape for a single opposer of Jehovah God and his Theocratic Government. The advice to the religious opposers still stands good: “For if this counsel or this work be of men, it will come to nought: but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it; lest haply ye be found even to fight against God." (Acts 5:38,39) But that is not all. It is not merely a question of refraining from interfering and directly fighting against God. That will not save one 275
276	THE WATCHTOWER,	Brooklyn, N. Y.
or cause one to be spared. It is a question of joining in the assembly and positively taking the side of the sure Government of the new world. There is no neutrality.
* Those who are indifferent to The Theocratic Government and making no decision are passive resisters to it, and they give comfort and aid thereby to the enemies of the Government. The King of The Theocracy is the One who stated the strict, unbending rule: “He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad.” (Matt. 12:30) The time for indecision is past. The King spews out the lukewarm ones. (Rev. 3:16) Those who do not join the assembly unto the Kingdom of God simply do not believe his Word. They do not consider his invitation worth the acknowledging, and they thereby do not honor him or fear him or love his righteousness. If they are not found in the assembly, they must share the fate of all others outside who are actively fighting Jehovah’s Theocracy of everlasting life and peace. The flood of Noah’s day caught all those outside the ark.—Matt. 24: 37-39.
’ A man may say, “But I do not like the name of Jehovah.” That may be because the person loves this world of unrighteousness and selfish pleasure and hates the righteousness for which the name of Jehovah stands. Or it may be that, because the religions of “Christendom” have misrepresented and reproached the name of Jehovah, the person does not know the truth about Jehovah to love him. It is of Jehovah that the scripture speaks when it says: “He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love. In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him.” (1 John 4: 8, 9) Mighty Pharaoh of ancient Egypt did not like the name of Jehovah, from the very first that the name and the purpose for which it stood were announced to Pharaoh by Jehovah’s witnesses, Moses and Aaron. The time had come for the name of God Almighty to be declared throughout all the land, because it was the time for the assembly unto the great mountain outside of Egypt and which mountain symbolized the Kingdom of God. If Pharaoh put himself in the wTay of that assembly, then Jehovah God would show his power over Pharaoh and over Satan, who was backing Pharaoh in opposition to Jehovah and any movement of the people to His side. That show of power became necessary, and it foreshadowed accurately the course of events in these last days of the world symbolized by Egypt.
• Through his witness Moses Jehovah God revealed his purpose to Moses’ people, the children of Israel. He extended to them his gracious invitation to assemble to his mountain symbolizing his Theocratic Government and there to worship and serve him. If
the governmental and religious authorities of Egypt would co-operate with the Israelites in getting to the place of worship and service it would be of benefit to the people of Egypt and would spare them much vexation, sorrow and loss. But did those authorities do so!
r Jehovah's people, the Israelites, were in Egypt, but they were not a part of that world organization. The Egyptians were very religious and worshiped demons. Therefore they hated Jehovah’s people, and in this they set the pattern of action for religionists to this very day. They set themselves up as the “master race” and reduced the condition of Jehovah's people to slaves, heaping all manner of unjust burdens upon them and framing mischief against them by laws of state. They denied their right to serve Jehovah God rather than Egypt, and they denied them the liberty to do so. God had set the time as exactly four hundred years from the time of Ishmael’s afflicting of their forefather Isaac that the Israelites should be permitted to suffer affliction: “And also that nation, whom they shall serve, will I judge: and afterward shall they come out with great substance.” (Gen. 15:13,14) That four-hundredth year was now ending, and the time was at hand for Jehovah’s people to freely worship him. The time was at hand for them to assemble to Jehovah’s holy mountain for his service.
* Jehovah sent word to the ruling authorities of Egypt concerning his requirements upon his chosen people, notifying Pharaoh by Moses and his brother Aaron. “And they said, The God of the Hebrews hath met with us: let us go, we pray thee, three days’ journey into the wilderness, and sacrifice unto Jehovah our God, lest he fall upon us with pestilence, or with the sword.” (Ex. 5:3, Am. Rev. Ver.) But Pharaoh put the interests of the political-religious state up above Jehovah God, and barred the “three days’ journey into the wilderness” for sacrifice to God. He insisted that Jehovah’s people must compromise and worship in Egypt subject to state regulation and contrary to God’s requirements. (Ex. 8:25-28) The threat of the Egyptians’ stoning and mobbing Jehovah’s people did not concern the state ruler. The chief of government repeatedly promised action, but always yielded to the pressure of the priests and practitioners of religion and kept up the interference with the assembly unto Jehovah’s service. He sought to deprive them of the means to worship and serve the Lord God, and at length threatened God’s witness Moses with death.—Ex. 10:24-29.
• Final warning was given to the state, but was not heeded. The fight of that totalitarian world power of Egypt against Jehovah proved disastrous to it. Jehovah showed his supremacy over that political
September 15,1942
WATCHTOWER.
277
power and its god Satan. Its firstborn, the future hope of that world power, Jehovah slew; and its six hundred chariots and other armed might he swallowed up in the depths of the Red sea while they were in hot pursuit of Jehovah’s servants marching to liberty. Jehovah there made a name for himself, and the assembly of his redeemed ones unto the mountain of God went through.—2 Sam. 7: 23,24.
10	Roman Catholics, Protestants, and Jews today may belittle, reproach, ignore and treat with contempt the name of Jehovah, but that does not deny the existence to this day and forever of Jehovah. Couple with his eternal existence the fact that he changes not. (Mal. 3: 6) His course of conduct toward the religionists and politicians of Egypt shows forth his unchanging rule of action toward those who take themselves so seriously as to oppose that upon which the name of Jehovah is called. Of still more serious concern is this fact: Jehovah’s own inspired witness, the apostle Paul, writes that what befell Egypt in its opposition to the assembly of Jehovah’s chosen people was typical and would find fulfillment upon a world-wide scale in the “time of the end” of the world, where we have been since 1914. Mark his words: “Now all these things happened unto them for types: and they are written for our admonition upon whom the ends of the world are come.” (1 Cor. 10:11, marginal reading) Both the political and religious rulers of ancient Egypt and also the common people who backed them up in the fight against Jehovah were caught in the national disaster that struck them at the hand of Jehovah, whom they scorned. Therefore let rulers and peoples today be sure of this one thing: that as they put up like resistance to the great assembly unto the Kingdom of God, they must expect to come upon them, with strange suddenness shortly, and without a loophole of escape, a catastrophe like Egypt’s, but of such proportions as to make Egypt’s beating very light in comparison. Jehovah God shall not be mocked without consequences.—Gal. 6:7.
TYPICAL ASSEMBLY
11	Its being thirty hundred years in the past does not lessen for us the great present-day meaning of circumstances and events that went with the typical assembly to the mountain of God. A comparison of such with the events on earth since 1914 only serves to prove that the time is here for the assembly and that it has been in progress particularly since 1918 and is steadily approaching a climax, and will reach it right soon. Certainly nothing could be of greater importance to the person desiring eternal life and righteousness than to consider these things in the light of Jehovah’s Word, the Bible. Those who engross themselves in the lofty-looking programs
and schemes of men of the world mimic Pharaoh’s challenge, saying: “Who is Jehovah, that I should hearken unto his voice to let Israel go?” All such shall shortly find themselves hopelessly entrapped in a course that means their destruction with all nations of the world. Those who act meekly and wisely and who join in and help others into the gathering to The Theocratic Government shall survive and go free.
” In the third month after the Israelites were delivered from bondage in Egypt they reached the base of Mount Sinai and encamped before the mountain of God, the appointed place of assembly. (Ex. 3:1,11,12; 19:1,2) Jehovah had made the law’ covenant with the Israelites in Egypt over the blood of the passover lamb which was sprinkled upon the entrances of their homes, and this covenant he now dedicated, inaugurated or confirmed toward the Israelites, using the prophet Moses as his mediator toward Israel. Through Moses Jehovah said to them: “Now therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for all the earth is mine: and ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy’ nation.” (Ex. 19:5,6) Then Moses notified Israel of the coming manifestation of God’s presence on the third day thereafter: “Be ready against the third day: for the third day Jehovah will come down in the sight of all the people upon mount Sinai. And thou shalt set bounds unto the people round about, saying, Take heed to yourselves, that ye go not up into the mount, or touch the border of it: whosoever toucheth the mount shall be surely’ put to death: no hand shall touch him, but he shall surely be stoned, or shot through; whether it be beast or man, he shall not live: when the trumpet soundeth long, they shall come up to the mount.”—Ex. 19:11-13, Am. Rev. Ver.
15 Those w’ords of dire warning apply to the antitypical or real things in these momentous times; and yet religionists, politicians and judges of “Christendom” make bold to touch in hostility that which is synnbolized by the holy “mountain of God”. They even attempt to pollute that “holy place” w’ith the new human order for which they are fighting that it shall forever dominate the earth. Under examination, religion will be found to be responsible for this.
14 With the terrific events and conditions since 1914 looming large before us and demanding an explanation, the record of the typical happenings at the “mountain of God” is read with tense interest. “And Moses went down from the mount unto the people, and sanctified the people; and they washed their garments. And he said unto the people, Be ready against the third day: come not near a woman. And
278
5THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
it came to pass on the third day, when it was morning, that there were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice of a trumpet exceeding loud; and all the people that were in the camp trembled. And Moses brought forth the people out of the camp to meet God; and they stood at the nether part of the mount. And mount Sinai, the whole of it, smoked, because Jehovah descended upon it in fire; and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly. And when the voice of the trumpet waxed louder and louder, Moses spake, and God answered him by a voice. And Jehovah came down upon mount Sinai, to the top of the mount: and Jehovah called Moses to the top of the mount; and Moses went up.” “And all the people perceived the thunderings, and the lightnings, and the voice of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking: and when the people saw it, they trembled, and stood afar off. And they said unto Moses, Speak thou with us, and we will hear; but let not God speak with us, lest we die. And Moses said unto the people, Fear not: for God is come to prove you, and that his fear may be before you, that ye sin not. And the people stood afar off, and Moses drew near unto the thick darkness where God was.”—Ex. 19:14-20; 20:18-21, Am. Rev.Ver.
15 On that spectacular occasion the “mountain of God” became the official seat of the great Lawgiver Jehovah. Through his mediator Moses He gave the Theocratic law of the “ten commandments” and the related statutes and ordinances. That law placed Jehovah God first. It commanded those who enter a covenant with God to put and keep Jehovah first and above all: “Thou shalt have no other gods before me. Thou shalt not make unto thee a graven image, nor any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth: thou shalt not bow down thyself unto them, nor serve them; for I Jehovah thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, upon the third and upon the fourth generation of them that hate me, and showing lovingkindness unto thousands of them that love me and keep my commandments. Thou shalt not take the name of Jehovah thy God in vain; for Jehovah will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.” (Ex. 20:1-7, Am. Rev. Ver.) The rmchanging principles of these commandments concerning the worship of Jehovah are restated in the writings of Christ’s apostles as applying to Christians.
14 Today under the spreading influence of totalitarianism, which is demonism, the supremacy of Almighty God’s law is being challenged by the highest courts of “Christendom”, and faithful Christians who abide by Jehovah God’s law as
supreme and binding in their lives at all times and everywhere are punished for holding fast their integrity to the Most High God. And the religious leaders of “Christendom” applaud this. “Christendom” pretends to be in the solemn covenant with Almighty God to obey his commandments, but she has broken every one of them flagrantly, and has therefore taken God’s name in vain. The calamitous outcome which came upon her prototype, unfaithful Israel, who broke her covenant with God, makes certain the sore evil to come upon “Christendom”, which is under greater responsibility.
ANGELS
1T Moses as mediator between Jehovah God and Israel was a type of a Greater One to come. (Deut. 18:15-18) God so testified to Moses by his angel at Mount Sinai when the people asked that Moses speak to them instead of God. “This is that Moses, which said unto the children of Israel, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear. This is he, that was in the church in the wilderness with the angel which spake to him in the mount Sina, and with our fathers; who received the lively oracles to give unto us.” (Acts 7: 37,38) The Greater One foreshadowed by Moses is the promised Seed of Abraham, Christ Jesus, Jehovah’s King of The Theocracy. “Wherefore then serveth the law! It was added because of transgressions, till the seed should come to whom the promise was made; and it [the law covenant] was ordained by angels, in the hand of a mediator.” (Gal. 3:18,19) The religious leaders killed that promised Seed when here in the flesh, and therefore the faithful witness Stephen said to them: “Ye do always resist the holy [spirit] : as your fathers did, so do ye. Who have received the law by the disposition of angels, and have not kept it.”—Acts 7 : 51, 53.
“ Israel’s modern counterpart, “Christendom,” has received God’s law as given through his Greater Mediator, Christ Jesus, but her religious and political powers fight over world domination and reject the great salvation offered by the Greater Moses. To her therefore apply the words of stern warning: "For if the word spoken by angels was stedfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompence of reward; how shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation; which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him; God also bearing them witness, both with signs and wonders, and with divers miracles, and gifts of the holy [spirit], according to his own will! For unto the angels hath he not put in subjection the world to come, whereof we speak.” (Heb. 2:2-5) Jehovah God has ordained the inhabitants of the world of righteousness to be
September 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER.
279
subject to his King of The Theocracy, made higher than angels. (Heb. 1:4-14) To him all must assemble for salvation; “unto him shall the gathering of the people be.”—Gen. 49:10.
PLACE OF ASSEMBLY
’’It is no mere imagination that the events at Mount Sinai at the dedication of the old law covenant were prophetic of more awe-inspiring things to come in this period of history. Those events it is of surpassing importance for life-seekers to study intently today for counsel and guidance. This is not the interpretation of The Watchtower, but of Jehovah God himself by a faithful apostle of Jesus Christ, at Hebrews, chapter twelve. More serious are the times now than at Mount Sinai three millenniums ago. The responsibility upon individuals, organizations and nations is greater far. The course of those who took a fatal and disastrous course in ancient times is warned against in God’s Word of admonition and should be avoided by the vase.
10 “Christendom” claims to be Christ’s kingdom, and that she will spread the kingdom of God throughout the world. She, and particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, claims to have a monopoly of rights on this undertaking. “Christendom,” however, under the religious lead of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy' with headquarters at Vatican City, has gone after the satisfaction of her belly, selfishness. She has tried to gain the world and its kingdom, which Christ Jesus in the mountain of temptation refused at Satan’s hands. That is why “Christendom” today is a house divided against itself in a total war; and over what? Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ? No, but over world domination; concerning which world God’s apostle writes: “The friendship of the world is enmity with God; whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world is the enemy of God.” (Jas. 4:4) Hence God has doomed “Christendom” to destruction at Armageddon, and all the pope’s prayers for peace and all his blessings upon the world, and all postwar attempts at religious revival, will not persuade God to repent and turn from his unchangeable decision and purpose.—1 Sam. 15: 29.
21	“Christendom’s” selfish worldly course proves she has no rights in the kingdom of God. She commits spiritual fornication with this world and is profane. She opposes and persecutes those who join the assembly unto the Kingdom. Therefore she has gone in the way of Esau, who despised The Theocracy and sold away his claim on the birthright for a mess of pottage. “Christendom” has not heeded the warning at Hebrews 12:16,17: "Lest there be any fornicator, or profane person like Esau, who for the sake of one meal yielded up his own firstborn rights; for ye know that afterwards, when he even wished to
inherit the blessing, he was rejected; for place of repentance found he none [in his divinely directed father Isaac], even though with tears he diligently sought it.” (Rotherham’s translation) There is therefore no hope of salvation by means of “Christendom”; God’s judgment is upon her unto destruction. Salvation is alone by his Kingdom, symbolized by Mount Zion. “And saviours shall come up on mount Zion to judge the mount of Esau; and the kingdom shall be Jehovah’s.” (Obad. 21, Am. Rev. Ver.) The choice must now be made by all, whether to drift along with “Christendom” tow’ard her proposed new order or to assemble unto Jehovah’s glorious Mount Zion, his Theocracy by Christ Jesus. Why so? The inspired answer from the great Theocrat Jehovah follows.
“ “For you have not approached to a mountain, touched and scorched with fire, and to a thick cloud, and to darkness, and to tempest, and to a sound of a trumpet, and to a voice of commands, the hearers of which entreated that not another word should be added to them; (for they could not endure the injunction, Tf even a beast should touch the mountain it shall be stoned’; and so terrible was the scene that Moses said, T exceedingly fear and tremble.’)” (Heb 12:18-21, Emphatic Diaglott) It was the Israelites according to the flesh that approached to such a mountain, namely, Mount Sinai, when God dedicated the law covenant with that nation and declared the Theocratic requirements for divine approval and preservation and blessing. That situation was serious enough, calling for great anxiety and carefulness, with “fear and trembling”, to keep the commandments of Jehovah God and carry out the covenant with him. But here, in the letter to the Hebrews, the apostle is addressing those who are foreshadowed by those Israelites according to the flesh. The apostle is addressing those who are Hebrews or Israelites according to the spirit, new creatures, “the Israel of God” in the new covenant with him. (Rom. 2: 28, 29; Gal. 6:15,16; Phil. 3:3; Col. 2:11) “Christendom” pretends to be such, but her telltale fruits and works disprove her pretensions and show her to be a religious counterfeit.
22	The apostle’s words at Hebrews, chapter twelve, are specifically directed to the remnant of the spiritual Israelites on earth in these the “last days”, because it was in A. D. 1914 that God’s holy “mountain” of his kingdom was established. It is the Mount Zion, upon which he set his anointed King of the new world, Christ Jesus. (Ps. 2:6) Of this mountain it is written: “And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord’s house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills: and all nations shall flow unto it. And many people shall go and say, Come
280
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will -walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.” (Isa. 2: 2, 3) In fulfillment of this prophecy not only the remnant of the “little flock” of spiritual Israel assemble unto the mountain of his Righteous Government, but also the “other sheep” of the Lord whom Christ Jesus, “the Good Shepherd,” now gathers from out of all nations.— Luke 12:32; John 10:10,16.
This agrees with the fact that when the natural Israelites assembled at Sinai on the typical occasion, there came along with them a “mixed multitude” forsaking worldly Egypt with Jehovah’s covenant nation and assembling with them at the “mountain of God”. (Ex. 12:38; Num. 11: 4) These are the ones meant by “the stranger that is within thy gates” mentioned in the ten commandments there given. (Ex. 20:10) Such “strangers” or “other sheep” are not spiritual Israelites, but are persons of good-will with hopes of everlasting blessings on earth under God’s kingdom and who become the faithful companions of the remnant of spiritual Israel since A.D. 1918.
” Why is the world in the most critical time of all history? and why therefore are the remnant and their companions, the “other sheep”, in a position so very serious that they must exercise the greatest caution to take the right course in obedience to the Theocratic rule? The apostle addresses them with the answer: “But you have approached to Zion, a mountain and city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem; and to myriads of angels, a full assembly; and to a congregation of firstborn, having been enrolled in the heavens: and to a Judge who is God of all; and to spirits of the righteous made perfect: and to a Mediator of a new covenant, Jesus; and to a blood of sprinkling speaking something better than Abel.”—Heb. 12: 22-24, Diaglott.
” This means that we have reached the established kingdom of God. The events on earth fulfilling the apostle’s words that immediately follow the above quotation prove it beyond all denial. In A. D. 1914 The Theocratic Government of the new world was born, and since then Jehovah has held the nations of earth in derision and says to them: “Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion.” (Ps. 2:1-6) Therefore mount Zion represents the official Theocratic residence of Jehovah, the only true and living God. Let Vatican City, who calls Rome “The Eternal City” and who persecutes Jehovah’s witnesses and palms herself off on the nations as God’s chosen favorite, take the rebuff of Jehovah God in this declaration, namely: “For the Lord hath chosen Zion; he hath desired it for his habitation. This is
my rest for ever: here will I dwell; for I have desired it.”—Ps. 132:13,14.
” Those who seek God, Christianity, life and peace assemble unto the Theocratic Mount Zion rather than to that political-religious city on the Tiber river, the heart of totalitarian Fascism. Let the Vatican observe that the name of Jehovah’s heavenly Theocratic Government under Christ is not “the heavenly Rome”, even though Rome’s armies did destroy the earthly Jerusalem in A. D. 70, which was many years before the apostle John wrote the description of the heavenly city of God in The Revelation or Apocalypse. Rome has no part in anything heavenly. The name which the God of the new world gives his heavenly Theocracy is "the heavenly Jerusalem”. Rome has ever meant war and oppression; the name “Jerusalem” means “possession of peace”. In the typical Jerusalem of ancient time the temple was built upon Mount Zion in Jerusalem and there Jehovah’s presence was represented in the Most Holy of the temple. Therefore Mount Zion and the heavenly Jerusalem both symbolize Jehovah’s divine city or organization, The Theocratic Government; but Zion pictures it as being the capital organization of God’s universe, while Jerusalem pictures it as the heavenly organization of perfect order, peace, unity and prosperity, and always successful to the vindication of Jehovah’s name.
“ In A. D. 1914 the “times of the Gentiles”, that is, the times of the nations of the world of which Satan the Devil is god, ended, and Satan’s period of rule uninterrupted by Jehovah God expired. The great interruption or end came by Jehovah’s establishment of the Righteous Government, the heavenly Theocracy, and His empowering it to act at once according to the will of God and against the plans of all enemies. The birth of that Theocratic Government of the living God affected all the universe, because The Theocracy is the capital organization thereof. Its coming into control and proceeding to act was therefore an occasion of universal interest and one of great joy and importance to all the holy angels of God’s universe. Jehovah’s firstborn and only begotten Son Christ Jesus is the Chief of that Government of the new world. His installation as King thereof in 1914 affected the angels of God as described at Hebrews 1:6: “And when he again bringeth in the firstborn into the world he saith, And let all the angels of God worship him.”— Am. Rev. Ver.
” Therefore in 1914 all the holy angels assembled, that is, took their stand on the side of that capital organization and its anointed Head, and pledged their everlasting and undying allegiance and service unto him. There was thus a “full assembly” of them, and it was a time of the greatest joy thus far in
September 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
281
universal history because the long-promised Theocratic Government that will vindicate Jehovah’s holy name before all creation had now begun to function with its King upon the throne. The apostle Paul in the original text of Hebrews 12:22,23 used the word “panegyris” in that connection, and which word means “mass assembly” or “gathering of all”, and from which word the English word “panegyric” is derived. It means a high and most important occasion. Therefore one emphatic translation renders the text: “Unto myriads of messengers in high festival.” (Rotherham) Concerning those faithful messengers the King foretold, saying; “When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him [for him and on his side], then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory.”—Matt. 25:31.
50 The allegiance of the angels to the newly installed King, Jehovah’s God-like Son whose official title in heaven is “Michael”, was immediately put to the test. After the birth of The Theocratic Government from the womb of God’s universal organization, or “woman”, the “war in heaven” was begun against the demon organization that had long been tolerated in heaven. The holy angels proved they were with and for Jehovah’s installed King, and they fought under this “Michael” against that frightful dragon organization. It was ousted from heaven and thrust down to the vicinity of the earth. Therefore the abased Devil is mad and brings all manner of woes upon the nations of earth. It is a time of woe for the earth and sea, but a time of rejoicing for those in the heavens. The victory of the New Government at its birth is a sure guarantee of its victory over Satan’s entire organization at Armageddon in vindication of Jehovah’s name.—Kev. 12:12.
“FIRSTBORN"
31 In the ancient days Jehovah’s temple stood on Mount Zion in Jerusalem. Three and one-half years after Jesus was anointed with God’s spirit at Jordan he rode amid the acclamation of a great multitude into Jerusalem and came to the temple and cleansed it. Correspondingly, after the birth of the New Government and the cleansing of the heavens by the ousting of Satan and his demons, Jehovah’s great Messenger and King turned his attention to the spiritual temple of God. Christ Jesus as King and High Priest of God is the chief comer stone of that temple. All his faithful body members, the “little flock”, are made “living stones” of that temple, and in it Jehovah dwells by his spirit of divine power. In 1918, in fulfillment of the prophecy at Malachi 3:1-4, Jehovah’s Messenger or Deputy Officer came to the temple; that is, he directed his attention thereto and took action respecting it. A bodily coming
was not necessary, as his "all power” in heaven and in earth extends whithersoever he directs it.
“ The majority of the temple class were, at his coming, sleeping in death in the graves; only a remnant of those in line for the temple were yet alive on earth. The sleeping temple members He raised from death and exalted them to heaven, in contrast with Satan and his demons, who had been cast down from it. He gathered them to him on Mount Zion. Then he judged the remnant on earth, purged them, and brought them into a unity with him and into his service at the temple even while they yet continue on earth as publishers of the good news of the Kingdom unto all nations. All these, the resurrected temple members and the approved remnant on earth, constitute the true church, “the assembly of firstborn ones enrolled in the heavens.” (Rotherham) They are begotten of God’s spirit unto a heavenly life, to be associated with Jehovah’s firstborn Son Christ Jesus in the heavenly kingdom. To them it is written: “Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth that we should be a kind of firstfruits of his creatures.” (Jas. 1:18) All religious organizations on earth reject these witnesses of Jehovah, because such witnesses of Almighty God have abandoned all religion for Christianity. Though religion casts out their names as evil, their names are enrolled in heaven as members of the true church, which church numbers only 144,000 members.—Rev. 7 : 4-8.
” The resurrected temple members and the remnant being all gathered unto the Lamb of God at the temple, the glorious picture at Revelation 14:1-4 is now fulfilled: “And I looked, and lo, a Lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an hundred forty and four thousand, having his Father’s name written in their foreheads... . These are they which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth. These were redeemed from among men, being the firstfruits unto God and to the Lamb.” It is unto this assembling of the “church of the firstborn” that we have come since 1918. Let us therefore not be shaken from our firm position for The Theocratic Government.— 2 Thess. 2:1,2.
JUDGMENT
“After his coming to the temple Christ Jesus begins judgment: “The time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God.” (1 Pet. 4:17) Jehovah has committed all judgment into the hands of his devoted Son, who has power also to execute God’s judgment. Therefore by his Son as his representative at the temple Jehovah is “God the Judge of all”, and before his seat all, both men and nations, must appear. (Rom. 14:10; 2 Cor. 5:10) After the remnant are judged at the temple, Jehovah’s King and Judge proceeds to the judgment of all the nations On earth. That judgment is now on. The persecution
SEe WATCHTOWER.	Bwokot.n.y.
of Jehovah’s witnesses, and the dividing of the people of the nations into classes, the sheeplike ones in favor of Jehovah’s Theocracy and the goatlike ones in opposition to it, these things are certain visible proofs that the judgment of the nations is on. The “sheep” are gathered to the right side of “Mount Zion” on which reigns the King. Being assembled on that side of favor and approval, the faithful “sheep” are the companions of the remnant and shall enjoy the King’s blessings and protection and preservation unto life everlasting on earth. The “goats” at the left and in opposition to “Mount Zion” meet utter destruction in the fire of Armageddon.—Matt. 25: 31-46.
” The spirits of all creatures are being judged, which creatures are being shown to be either of a faithful spirit toward God and his Kingdom gospel or of an unfaithful and opposing spirit toward God and his gospel purpose. Therefore among other notable things unto which we have come or approached the apostle mentions “the spirits of righteous ones made perfect”. (Heb. 12:23, Rotherham) These righteous ones made perfect are the spirit-begotten remnant of the “little flock”, who are approved at the temple judgment and anointed to be Jehovah’s witnesses and hence covered over with his “robe of righteousness” and “garments of salvation”. (Isa. 61:1,10) These must be perfected in their integrity and in their spirit of obedience and devotion toward God, just as it was necessary for Jesus to ‘learn obedience and be made perfect in this by the things he suffered’.—Heb. 2:10; 5:8.
’* Hence the remnant are now severely disciplined by the suffering of reproach and persecution, and to them the apostle’s words apply: “The fathers of our flesh we used to have as administrators of discipline, and we used to pay deference: shall we not much rather submit ourselves to the Father of our spirits and live!” (Heb. 12:9, Rotherham) They must therefore strictly conform to Jehovah’s “gospel scheme” or “gospel purpose and procedure”. As an example to us Christ Jesus conformed to it and kept his integrity and he was justified in spirit or declared of God to be perfectly right in his spirit toward God his Father. Concerning this it is written: “And without controversy great is the mystery of godliness [(Strong’s Concordance) the mystery of the gospel scheme]; He who was manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of angels [after his resurrection and ascension to heaven], preached among the nations [after the pouring out of the spirit at Pentecost], believed on in the world [by those forsaking this world], received up in glory [at the birth of The Theocratic Government in 1914]." (1 Tim. 3:16, Am. Rev. Ver.) The “captain of our salvation” was perfected in obedience to God by suffering.
Likewise must the “righteous ones” of the remnant who have the Lord’s spirit be thus perfected before they finish their earthly course and experience their resurrection change to glory, honor and immortality with Christ Jesus in the heavenly Theocracy. They must come to that perfecting, and the apostle’s words give assurance that they shalL
NEW COVENANT INAUGURATED
” When the Israelites of old and their multitude of companions came to Mount Sinai the law covenant was inaugurated and dedicated toward them through Moses as mediator. Thereby the Israelites became a people upon whom Jehovah’s name was called. Christ Jesus is "the mediator of a new covenant”. His lifeblood he shed at his first coming to make that covenant valid or operative toward those of his body members, the “little flock”. (Matt. 26:28) At his coming to the temple in 1918 he inaugurated or dedicated that new covenant toward the approved remnant whom he assembled to himself at the temple. How! The purpose of the new covenant was and is to ‘take out from all the nations of the earth a people for Jehovah’s name’, with a view to the vindication of His name. (Acts 15:14) That name must be declared throughout the earth by his witnesses before he shows his power over Satan’s entire organization in the battle of Armageddon. That battle is, by all signs and prophecies, very near at hand. It will burst upon the nations suddenly, like an unexpected thief in the dead of night. Hence Jehovah’s name and the purpose for which it stands must be declared by his remnant now, from and after the Lord’s coming to the temple and before the outbreak of “the battle of that great day of God Almighty”.
” When the Lord came to the temple Jehovah’s consecrated people on earth had yielded to fear of men and were lax and delinquent toward their obligations to praise Him and proclaim his established Kingdom. Jehovah was therefore angry toward them for their failure. To continue in this disapproved condition would have meant their destruction at the hands of Jehovah's Executioner at Armageddon. For his name’s sake, however, and in his infinite loving-kindness, Jehovah had mercy upon the consecrated ones of faithful heart and spirit who were anxious to resume his service. The blood which validated the new covenant was still available and of power to cleanse them. In the far past the blood of Abel was spilled upon the ground by a religionist and it cried to God for vengeance upon the slayer. The blood of the new covenant calls for mercy upon the ones who repent and turn from coming short of their obligations toward God. Therefore Jesus’ blood is the "blood of sprinkling, that
September 15,1942	THE WATCHTOWER
283
speaketh better things than that of Abel”. That blood was foreshadowed by the blood of sacrificial victims that Moses sprinkled upon the people when dedicating the old law covenant at Mount Sinai. Therefore, at Mount Zion, Jehovah by his Mediator Christ Jesus sprinkled the sin-purging blood of the new covenant upon the faithful remnant and cleansed them, and thus again brought them into proper relationship with that covenant
” In keeping with the purpose of that covenant to bring forth a people for his name Jehovah poured out his spirit upon the remnant in the flesh and made them his official witnesses. He called them by the “new name”, that is, “Jehovah’s witnesses,” and sent them forth as such to publish his name throughout all the earth before Armageddon. This the remnant under the new covenant are doing, and will continue to do unto the final end.
“REFUSE NOT"
40	Seeing that we have come to the things described above, what then? We cannot now go in the course of the world. Amid the violent conflict between “the king of the north” and “the king of the south” all the religionists of “Christendom” are excusing themselves from strict obedience to God. They are finding deceptive excuses to justify themselves for breaking their implied covenant with God. With high-sounding phrases and slogans and catchwords they try to deceive also the remnant and their companions. (Matt. 24:24) To whom shall we listen? “Beware lest ye excuse yourselves from him that speaketh: for if they [the Jews] escaped not who excused themselves from him who on earth was warning, how much less shall we who from him that warneth from the heavens do turn ourselves away?”— Heb. 12: 25, Rotherham.
41	At verse 19, describing events at Mount Sinai, the apostle mentions “a trumpet’s peal, and a sound of things spoken: from which they who heard excused themselves”. (Roth.) To us, who have entered into a covenant to do Jehovah’s will, it would mean destruction were we to follow “Christendom’s” course and excuse ourselves from fulfilling the Theocratic law and rules which Jehovah by his Greater Moses speaks from Mount Zion, The Theocratic Government. Shall we obey God or totalitarian-Fascist statesmen? There will be no escaping complete destruction for those who reject God and obey men. (Acts 5:29) We have come to that “full assembly” of myriads of holy angels. These will act with Christ the King as executioners of the disobedient at Armageddon.
41	The shaking at Mount Sinai due to the presence of Jehovah’s mighty angel there was local; but all of Satan’s world is shaking now. It is the voice
of the living God, Jehovah, which is responsible. ‘Whose voice then shook the earth: but now he hath promised, saying, Yet once more I shake not the earth only, but also heaven. And this word, Yet once more, signifieth the removing of those things that are shaken, as of things that are made, that those things which cannot be shaken may remain.” (Heb. 12:26,27) The fearful shaking at Mount Sinai was actual, but was also prophetic of a larger shaking, the shaking of Satan’s world with its “heavens and the earth, which are now.”—2 Pet. 3:7.
“ With the setting of Jehovah’s King on Mount Zion of The Theocracy in 1914 the shaking began. The “war in heaven” shook the invisible part of the enemy organization, Satan and his demons, down from the heavenly position to the vicinity of this earth. That shake-down is only preparatory to the complete removal of those Satanic heavens in the climax of the shaking at the battle of Armageddon. “For thus saith the Lord of hosts: Yet once, it is a little W’hile, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land; and I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come: and I will fill this house [the temple of The Theocracy] with glory, saith the Lord of hosts.”— Hag. 2: 6, 7.
“ The “earth”, or visible part of Satan’s world organization, is also shaken. The shaking out of heaven which the “god of this world” has undergone has filled him with raging madness and he brings woe upon humankind to blind and embitter them against God and to turn them away from assembling to the Kingdom of God. (Rev. 12:7-12) But the voice of Jehovah from Mount Zion is also heard by the “earth” and the “nations” thereof, and by its “sea” of restless humanity alienated from God, and by its “dry land”, the totalitarian ruling organization which tries to remain stable and hold back the peoples.—Luke 21: 25, 26.
<s By such visible parts of Satan’s world organization Jehovah’s “voice” is heard in his message of the Kingdom and of the day of his vengeance which Jehovah’s remnant and their companions proclaim. This so terrifies the elements of the “earth” that they shake with wrath and rise up in bitter persecution in all nations against Jehovah’s Kingdom publishers. They are further shaken by the fearlessness in the face of all adversaries as displayed by Jehovah’s witnesses, who obey God’s word of command and keep coming with his message of the new world, like an irresistible swarm of locusts that darkens the heavens for the multitude thereof. (Phil. 1:28; Joel 2:6-11) Soon the rulers of the “earth” will yield to demon pressure and take drastic action against Jehovah’s witnesses and try to quiet their own ■shakiness and will cry “Peace and safety!” Then
284
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
“tidings out of the east and out of the north” shall cause them to quake worse than ever. (Dan. 11:44) They shall be shaken into their final all-out action against Jehovah God and his Kingdom, only to run into Armageddon’s shaking. In that universal war, beyond power of human imagination to picture in its horror and magnitude, Satan’s “heavens” and ‘earth” and “sea” shall be shaken so terribly and mightily that they will vanish into invisible vibrations and dissolve into disorganization.—Ps. 46: 6-9; Ezek. 38.
RESOLVED, SINCE THESE THINGS BE SO
“ “Wherefore, we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear: for our God is a consuming fire.” (Heb. 12:28,29) “May we hold fast the favor, through which we may serve God acceptably” (Emphatic Diaglott); “let us have gratitude, whereby we may be rendering divine service well-pleasingly unto God, with reverence and awe; for even our God is a consuming fire.” (Rotherham; Am. Rev. Ver., margin) Great favor has been bestowed upon us to have revealed to us Jehovah’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus and to be
privileged to devote ourselves to Jehovah and to assemble unto His Kingdom. That Righteous Government of the new world shall not disappoint or fail us; it is here, and “it shall stand for ever”. (Dan. 2:44) May we therefore never forsake it or keep silent about it. Keeping confidence in it and standing immovably by it at Armageddon, we shall not be shaken and removed while the terrific shaking of the Devil’s wicked “heavens” and “earth” tears them to pieces.—Ps. 46:1-3.
" To our enemies who hate The Theocracy let our awe-inspiring God be a “consuming fire” at Armageddon. But as for us, let us with fear and trembling seek to find further grace in his sight, continuing during hot persecution to do personal witnessing for Him. Let us with great gratitude continue to serve him in the manner acceptable to him, though not acceptable to this world. “Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering; (for he is faithful that promised;) and let us consider one another to provoke unto love and to good works: not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as the manner of some is; but exhorting one another: and so much the more, as ye see the day approaching.”—Heb. 10: 23-25.
WHO MUST CONTROL THE EARTH?
IN THE day of his triumphal ride into the city of Jerusalem to present himself as King of the new world, Christ Jesus, God’s anointed One, quoted from the Eighth Psalm. The Psalm must therefore be something more than a mere poetic statement of the glory of God and his work of creation seen by men. The Eighth Psalm is ascribed to David, the shepherd boy who became king, and who foreshadowed Christ Jesus. No psalms or songs were composed by David until after his anointing as God's choice for the kingdom.
God’s anointed speaks and says: “When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers; the moon and the stars, which thou hast ordained; what is man, that thou are mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him?” (Psalm 8, verses 3,4) This clearly refers to the physical heavens a portion of which are visible to the eye of man. Men who know not God think themselves and other men are great, and they give honor and glory to men and to the work of man’s hands. Only the servant of Almighty God Jehovah can appreciate the insignificance of man as compared with the Most High God, the Creator. Both the Scriptures and the facts show that it is the anointed of God speaking these words: “What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him? For thou hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honour. Thou madest him to have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou hast put all things under his feet: all sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field; the fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea, and whatsoever passeth through the paths of the seas.”—Vss. 4-8.
At the time of the garden of Eden God did not put all things under the perfect man Adam and did not give him dominion over all things. He has, however, put all things under Christ Jesus. Therefore the words of the prophet David, namely, “the man,” must mean Christ Jesus. The apostle Paul, at Hebrews 2:5-9, quotes the psalmist’s words and applies them to Christ Jesus, saying: “For not unto angels did he [Jehovah God] subject the inhabited earth to come, whereof we speak But one hath somewhere testified, saying, What is man, that thou art mindful of him? or the son of man, that thou visitest him? Thou madest him a little lower than the angels, thou crownedst him with glory and honor, and didst set him over the works of thy hands. . . . For in that he subjected all things unto him, he left nothing that is not subject to him. But now we see not yet all things subjected to him. But we behold him who hath been made a little lower than the angels, even Jesus, because of the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor, that by the grace of God he should taste of death for every' man ” (Am. Rev. Ver., margin) Here the apostle says, in substance, that God made Jesus a little lower than the angels and crowned him with glory and honor as the greatest of all men, that he might prove his integrity in vindication of God’s name and be also the Redeemer of humankind; and God gave him dominion over all the things of the heaven and the earth. God did not crown Adam with glory and honor, and God will not make man ruler of the earth. The psalmist David spoke the words of this prophecy, and he spoke not for himself, nor of and concerning Adam. Being a prophet he spoke of Christ Jesus.—Ps. 16:10; Acts 2: 27-30.
September 15,1942	WATCHTOWER.
285
“The Son of the man” is one of the titles that properly belongs to Jesus. He applied this title to himself after he was anointed to be the King. (Matt. 13:41; 24:27-30; 25:31; John 6:62; 3:13) The first time the term “son of man” is applied to any specific creature is when it appears in Psalm 8. The expression is found in the book of Job, but only in a general descriptive sense. “The man Christ Jesus” became the owner of everything that Adam might have possessed had Adam remained in harmony with God; but those things would have been confined to the earth. Christ Jesus became owner of all things, both in heaven and in earth Concerning him it is written that God has anointed him heir over all things and put all things under him. (See Hebrews 1:2 and Philippians 2:10,11.) Not only did Jesus become the owner of everything that Adam might have possessed, but by the covenant that Jehovah God made with him he became the owner of all creation in heaven and in earth and under the earth, which includes the lower animals and man. It is true that the great multitude of survivors of the battle of Armageddon will have a position superior to the lower animals and that these animals will be subject to the great multitude that lives forever on earth; yet such “men of good-will” will themselves be subject to the heavenly King, Christ Jesus, who is the real owner of all things. Regenerated man on earth will not be a ruler of other men. He will be glad to have everlasting life on earth and the blessings incident thereto, but there is nothing to indicate he will rule his fellow man. The resurrected faithful men of old, from Abel to John the Baptist, who will become children of “the Everlasting Father”, will be made “princes in all the earth”, but they shall be simply the visible representatives of Jehovah’s King of The Theocratic Government, Christ Jesus.—Ps. 45:16, Isa. 9:6.
God made a covenant with the man Christ Jesus for the Kingdom, which covenant carries with it the rulership over all things. By the grace of God Jesus invited his disciples to have a part with him in that covenant. God’s expressed purpose is to make all the faithful disciples or followers the members of the glorified body of Christ whose title is “The Man” because of having redeemed all that which the perfect man Adam forfeited through sin of rebellion. (Phil. 3:20,21; 1 Cor. 15:47) It is those consecrated followers taken into the Kingdom covenant with Christ Jesus whom Paul means when he says: “God . . . will render to every man according to his deeds: to them who, by patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory and honour and immortality, eternal life.” (Rom. 2:5-7; Eph. 4:13) Those in the covenant with God for the Kingdom and who are his anointed saints have the specific promise that if they suffer with Christ Jesus and continue faithful to the end they shall be heirs of God and joint-heirs with Christ Jesus, who is the heir of all things.—Rom. 8:16,17; 2 Tim. 2:11,12.
God visits his faithful creatures for their good. This is to be understood, when the psalmist says. “What is man . . . ! and the son of man, that thou visitest him!” The Scriptures show that God did visit his beloved Son and favored him with honor and glory above all creation and made him the Vindicator of Jehovah's name and the Redeemer of man. Then the apostle shows that God’s
purpose is to bring many sons to glory under the Head and Captain of their salvation, Christ Jesus. These he visits and takes out of the world for His name’s sake, making them a “people for his name”. (See Hebrews 1: 9; 2: 9-11; Acts 15: 14-16.) Concerning their relationship to the “man Christ Jesus” it is written: “The first man [Adam] is of the earth, earthy; the second man [Christ Jesus] is the Lord from heaven. As is the earthy’, such are they also that are earthy: and as is the heavenly [Christ Jesus], such are they also that are heavenly. And as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly. Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God; neither doth corruption inherit incorruption.” (1 Cor. 15:47-50) It is the man Christ Jesus under whom God has put all things, and all things, God himself excepted, must be subjected to Christ Jesus; as it is written: “For he hath put all things under his feet. But when he saith, All things are put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted which did put all things under him.” (1 Cor. 15:27) The proof is therefore conclusive that the words of Psalm Eight, “What is man ... and the son of man ... 1” do not refer to Adam and his posterity, but do apply to Christ, into whose body God brings the faithful disciples by adoption, making them joint-heirs with Jesus Christ.
The glory and honor mentioned by the psalmist does not refer to perfect manhood of regenerated man under the Kingdom, but does refer to the glory and honor which Jehovah confers upon Christ Jesus. It is Christ Jesus and the members of his body whom God makes His elect servant, putting His spirit upon that elect servant and delighting His soul in him. Further speaking of that servant, God says, at Isaiah 42:1-8: “I am Jehovah, that is my name; and my glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven images.” (Am. Rev. Ver.) Manifestly the meaning is that Jehovah stands alone and besides Him there is none; that he has appointed Christ Jesus his great servant and graciously makes others the members of the body of Christ; and that to The Christ He gives glory, honor and immortality, which glory' and honor he will not give to any other. The glory here mentioned by Psalm Eight clearly means the glory of God's “man” who stands for the honor of Jehovah’s name.
Referring again to the words of the psalmist at verses three and four, as first herein quoted: The language seems properly to apply to Christ Jesus speaking at the time he entered into the covenant with Jehovah for the Kingdom and for all things in heaven and in earth. When the Lord came to the temple in 1918, after which coming the correct understanding of the prophecies began to be revealed to the temple class on earth, there began to be revealed to them a better understanding of this Psalm. From that time on it appears that the language of verses three and four are the expression of the faithful remnant on earth speaking for themselves. It must always be kept in mind that the Eighth Psalm is a part of the Scriptures, and that it, like all other scriptures, was written for the purpose, not of telling about perfect man in Eden or under the Kingdom, but for the comforting and encouraging of the true church now on earth in these last days. The quoting arid applying of the Psalm in the writings of the apostle
286
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Paul supports the conclusion that Jesus had the words thereof before him when he spake as at Matthew 28:18.
In verse two the psalmist says: “Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast thou ordained strength, because of thine enemies; that thou mightest still the enemy and the avenger.” When Jesus rode into the city of Jerusalem in triumph and then went into the temple and cleansed it, the religious Pharisees, the clergy of that day, sullenly looked on. The children were crying out, “Hosanna to the son of David!” and this irritated the clergy, and they wanted the children stopped. In response to these hypocrites Jesus quoted Psalm 8:2 and said: “Have ye never read, Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise?” That occasion marked a miniature fulfillment of this prophetic psalm. We may look for another and wider fulfillment, because we have found that many of these prophecies have a double fulfillment. We find it now.
“Babes and sucklings” are those who are otherwise called “little children”. (1 John 2:12,13,18; John 21:5) These endearing terms the Lord applies to such as are joyfully obedient to his will. They are the children of God, begotten of his spirit and anointed with his spirit to be his witnesses, and they gladly humble themselves under his mighty hand. They delight to do his will, and if they thus continue, he will in his due time exalt them to a place of glory in the Kingdom with Christ Jesus. (1 Pet. 5:5,6) Jesus on an occasion declared that “of such is the kingdom of heaven”. (Matt. 19:14) It is plain from the Scriptures that the humble ones, those who joyfully submit themselves to God’s way and will in carrying on his “strange work”, and who faithfully thus continue to the end, are the ones who will be in the heavenly kingdom of God. It is such ones that are now singing forth his praises in the earth. It is such that are now, this day, the speakers foreshadowed in the Eighth Psalm. These also witness today the gathering of the Lord’s “other sheep”, who shall inherit the blessings of the Kingdom on this earth and who are taking their little children forth with them into the field sendee, spreading the message of the Kingdom to others. Out of the months of such children, too, Jehovah God is perfecting praise.
Both the opening and the concluding words of Psalm Eight are the same, and refer to the excellency of Jehovah in the earth: “0 Jehovah, our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth!” (Am. Rev. Ver.) These words could not mean that Jehovah’s name is exalted throughout all the earth among all peoples. Such has never been true up to the present time. However, by his marvelous work through his witnesses, the remnant and their companions, Jehovah has now made his name known and is having it declared throughout all the earth before the battle of Armageddon, and that name is excellent among all persons of good-will coming to a knowledge thereof. (Ex. 9:16) The evident purpose of the psalmist is to associate Jehovah’s name with the earth. The Scriptures show that the heavens were defiled by Satan, the enemy, and that since the establishment of the Kingdom in 1914 Satan and his demons have been ousted from heaven and cast down to the earth. Henceforth the earth is the scene of the battle, which battle will determine who shall have dominion over the earth.
Never in the history of man was there a time of such peril and crime as now. These are “the last days” mentioned by the apostle and in which lawlessness holds sway and faithfulness among men is almost unknown. (See 2 Timothy 3:1-5.) Because Satan has come down to the earth he is pushing the human race over the brink into the abyss of crime and idolatry. (Rev. 12:12) He has obtained control of the religious organizations which are generally known as the ‘Christian church organization’, and the religious men who dominate the same are Satan’s representatives “having a form of godliness but denying the power thereof”, their hearts being entirely removed from Jehovah God. In these religious systems there are many persons who see no relief therein and who cry to the Lord God for help. Satan’s mighty organization rides arrogantly and tramples upon all the rights of men. The nations are in perplexity, and the people in distress. In this hour of great crisis God causes his little company of “babes and sucklings” to stand forth and sing the new song of the Kingdom established and thereby to announce to the nations and peoples that Jehovah is God Almighty, that Chnst Jesus is reigning King, that the Kingdom is at hand, and that relief to the people can come only through God’s kingdom under Christ.
This little company of obedient “babes”, together with their earthly companions, recognize the great honor which Jehovah has bestowed upon them; and that their honor is far greater than what any earthly institution could confer upon creatures, but that they themselves, when compared with the Almighty, are insignificant. The remnant say to Jehovah: “Thou hast announced thy purpose to put all things under the Son of man; and, recognizing that we are privileged by thy grace to be a part of thy ‘elect servant’ and therefore have prospects of a part tn the glorious work both present and future, we are overwhelmed by this honor and favor. But when we look at the heavens, and consider the work of thy fingers, how insignificant are we compared to our great Creator'” The knowledge of the Lord, and his spirit upon them, enables them to take a proper view of themselves and to humble themselves under the mighty hand of God. (1 Pet. 5:6) With great gladness of heart they go on in obedience to his commandments to give the witness to his name.
The religionists have combined with the great totalitarian monstrosity foreshadowed by the giant Gohath against whom the shepherd boy David seemed like a babe Such totalitarian-religious crowd hear the glad song sung by the remnant and their companions and it angers them As “the enemy and the avenger” they seek vengeance against those who stand for Jehovah’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, and this they do by opposing and trying to suppress the witness work being done by Jehovah’s witnesses under His direction. Now for their comfort and encouragement Jehovah announces that he will still these avengers and put them to silence, that his own excellency may appear in all the earth. To his remnant and their companions in this time of peril he says: ‘I have put my words in your mouth and my hand over you, that I may use you as my witnesses while I establish the new world.’—Isa. 51:16; Ps. 96:10.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
AMONG ARMY AND NAVY PEOPLE (VIRGINIA)
A special publisher reports: “Interesting remark by an English sailor from Capetown, Africa, who, on spying Judge Rutherford’s books, exclaimed to his buddy, “Look! the very same books we have in Capetown, Africa! They are good, too. I have read them.’ He then proceeded to tell some good things they contained. He was here while ship was undergoing several months’ repair from shipwreck of which he was a survivor. A sergeant, taking the book Children, upon hearing of the Kingdom blessings ahead, remarked with tears and great earnestness: ‘We need the Lord’s Kingdom on this earth, and I hope it will come soon! I wish it were here now—as I think of the boys at Pearl Harbor. I was right in the battle, and can appreciate more than others here the need of that Kingdom.’ Having survived the battle of Pearl Harbor he appreciated the Scriptures that in the Lord's Kingdom the present evils will not even be remembered, but forgotten; as he said, ‘You can’t get any of the boys to talk about it.’ Said an Army officer’s wife: ‘If I had known you were one of Jehovah’s witnesses I would not have left you in.’ Upon my leaving she said: ‘I now have a better opinion of Jehovah’s witnesses than I had before you called, and must tell my husband, as he has to deal with many of them in the Army. I now know they are sincere.”
FROM GIRLS RECEIVING “CHILDREN” AT ST. LOUIS ASSEMBLY
“Before the book Children was presented to the 15,000 children at St. Louis in August, 1941, all the children made a covenant that they would read the book and then tell it to others and try to have studies with their neighbors. After reading and studying the June Informant and making a covenant with Almighty God to do his will I saw it was then my duty that my covenant was fulfilled. So I am now working with some of my special pioneer friends. I am going right along with them, and it is surely adding to my hours and sets of booklets placed. I am sure that any other witnesses of Jehovah who have made a covenant with Almighty God and who are fulfilling that covenant will surely be blessed In pioneering you surely have a lot of experiences. When a person says he is not interested, don’t just leave them, but go on and tell them about the Kingdom message. Maybe if you tel) them of just one of the booklets it will open their eyes and they will take them and read them. Don’t miss a house.”—Washington C. H., Ohio.
“As you suggested in the June Informant, I am going out in the service during my summer vacation. I am spending my first week with my pioneer aunt in Xenia, Ohio The reason for this letter is to encourage other children of the King to fulfill the obligation they made last summer when they received their book Children. The pioneers had called upon this house three times. On the fourth time a friend my age and I were assigned that house. As we approached it looked as though nobody was home. Upon knocking, a little old lady came to the door and said she did not have time to listen to the phonograph. My friend spoke up and said, ‘We walked from away down at the end of the road to bring you this message.’ Here I took the opportunity to tell her about the seven booklets, and the Kingdom under Christ Jesus. After
giving the testimony she took the booklets and seemed very much interested. During my short visit here I have found how great and important it is to get this message to the people."—Columbus, Ohio.
“IN PRISONS MORE FREQUENT” (2 COR. 11: 23)
Leeds, England. “I am glad to be able to report myself free once more, and ready for action. I came out of Strangeways (Manchester prison) on Monday, and 1 have had a very happy time meeting all the Lord’s people again, and hearing all the news I have missed during the past nine weeks. I am very grateful to the Lord for all his care and protection over me during this experience, and we girls can certainly testify to the many blessings we have enjoyed even in prison. We have had a lot to be thankful for, especially during the past few weeks At first the prison officials did not realize what type of people we were and we got rather ‘cool’ treatment, but as they have come to know us they have begun to appreciate our sincerity. We girls (seven Jehovah’s witnesses) have tried by the Lord’s grace to live our lives as true Christians by being courteous and law-abiding and good workers and, of course, always keeping our Kingdom smile to the fore Gradually the officers have come to respect us for it. We have had many little kindnesses shown, and quite a few of the officers have commented on our good behavior and work, and what ‘good girls’ we were. We are glad of this, not for ourselves, but because we wish to be worthy representatives of the great name we bear. The weekly Watchtower study in prison was a great blessing to us, and we eagerly looked forward to each Sunday morning. . . . This will be my tenth year in the pioneer service ”
D. W., Pioneer, England. “The people of good-will are manifesting themselves in various ways, and this morning the lady I am living with manifested herself as a ‘sheep’, as described by Jesus in Matthew 25:34-40 My father has just received a sentence of ten months’ imprisonment for taking his stand as a Christian, and I had occasion to tell this lady last night. When I offered her my rent this morning she refused to take it, telling me to send it to my mother as she might need it. She herself has five children to care for and her husband is serving in the Middle East in the armed forces.”
FROM TRAILER TO PIONEERING (BIRMINGHAM, ALA.)
“One day I knocked on a trailer door. A young lady opened it. She read my card and said, ‘Yes, I have that book and was reading it when you knocked.’ She incited me in, and I saw the book Children opened upon the studio couch where she had been reading. I made arrangement for a study the same day, the following week On my first back-call she asked me what she must do. Not realizing that she was ready for service, I told her to study and the Scriptures would tell her. She almost put her eyes out studying, read two bound books, two booklets, and several magazines in a week and a half, and read the Bible a great deal besides. I held three studies with her, and then she was with me in the service, so that I had no chance to study with her. She attended all the meetings at the Kingdom Hall and went in the service almost every day. Six weeks from the time I found her, ■she had a car and trailer and was in the pioneer service.”
287
NEW WORLD THEOCRATIC ASSEMBLY, SEPTEMBER 18. 19 AND 20
ALL readers of the Watchtower magazine and their friends are cordially invited to attend the New Vr orld Theocratic Assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses on September 18, 19 and 20, 1942. Due to the present lack of traveling facilities, and knowing the need of Christian study and assembly for worship, the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, this year, has arranged for its national convention to be country-wide. The locations of auditoriums of this nation-wide convention are set out below. The key city is Cleveland, Ohio, but there are upward of 50 more convention cities that will be connected with the Public Auditorium, Cleveland, Ohio, by directwire communication.
The principal lectures that will be delivered at Cleveland, Ohio, will be brought simultaneously to each convention hall in the United States, including the widely advertised lecture, “Peace—Can It Last!” This lecture will be delivered by the president of the Society, N. H. Knorr. If for some reason you find it impossible to attend all the sessions of the convention, you should make it a point
to attend the Sunday meeting, September 20, at 4 p. m. Eastern time, and hear the lecture, “Peace—Can It Last!”
All the world is talking war and peace. Already those in authority are drawing up peace plans to be put into effect at the close of the war. What will be the result! The Lord has foretold the outcome of this war and the peace, in his.Word, the Bible. Therefore the question is asked, “Peace—Can It Last!"
Not only are Jehovah’s witnesses assembling at all the convention cities listed below, but like assemblies are being held in England, South America, and many other parts of the world. Jehovah has always poured out upon his people rich blessings at these assemblies, and we may confidently look forward to this assembly as one of great importance.
Select your nearest convention city, or if it is your desire to attend the key city convention at Cleveland, Ohio, and you can make such arrangements, make preparations now to be there. It.will be to your blessing.
CONVENTION CITIES, HALLS AND ADDRESSES
All conventions will open at 8: 30 Friday morning, September 18. Do not fail to be at one of the convention halls when the address of welcome and keynote lecture are given, Friday evening, at 8 o’clock Eastern time. (7 p.m. C. T.; 6 p.m. M. T.; 5 p.m. P. T.)
KEY CITY
Public Auditorium Lakeside Ave. & E Sth St. Cleveland, Ohio
ALABAMA
Cascade Plunge 6815 2d Ave 8. Birmingham Murphy High School 102 S Carlin St, Mobile
YMCA Colored Community Center 504 SU Anthony St, Mobile
ARIZONA El Zaribah Temple 15th Ave & Washington St, Phoenix ARKANSAS
Travelers Field, Adjoining Fair Park Little Rock
CALIFORNIA
Moose Hall, 1851 Fulton SL, Fresno Shrine Ballroom. 3244 Royal St.
Los Angeles Scottish Rite Temple Van Ness Ave & Sutter SL San Francisco COLORADO
El Jebel Temple. 4625 W. 50th Ave. Denver
FLORIDA
Municipal Auditorium, Plant Park Tampa
GEORGIA
Atlanta Women's Club Auditorium 1150 Peachtree St, Atlanta Waycross City Auditorium Pendieton & Oak Sts. Waycross
IDAHO
Liberty Theatre, Emmett
ILLINOIS
Ashland Boulevard Auditorium Ashland Blvd & Van Buren SL Chicago Theocratic Convention Tent 2400 East Cook St., Springfield
IOWA
Shrine Auditorium, 10th A Pleasant Des Moines
KANSAS
Trocadero Dance Pavilion 3400 W. Douglas, Wichita
KENTUCKY
Swiss Park, Preston A Lynn, Louisville
LOUISIANA City Park Skating Rink 1450 Perkins Road. Baton Rouge Knights of Pythias Hall (Colored) 597 S. 13th St., Baton Rouge
MAINE Witham’s Lobster Pound, Rockport
MARYLAND Lyric Theatre Opposite Mt. Royal Station Baltimore
MICHIGAN Moose Temple Cass A Elisabeth, Detroit
MINNESOTA
Shrine Auditorium 201 E First St.. Duluth Minneapolis Auditorium Grant & Third Ave. S., Minneapolis
MISSOURI
Victory Theatre 9th A Holmes St, Kansas City
MONTANA
Masonic Temple Auditorium 821 Central Ave , Great Falls
NEBRASKA The Welfare Society House 1430 N 10th St.. Lincoln
NEW MEXICO Silva Hall, Bernalillo
NEW YORK Odd Fellows Temple 46-48 Beaver St.. Albany Kalurah Temple
255 Washington St, Binghamton Assembly Hall. Memorial Auditorium Main St. A Lower Terrace, Buffalo Manhattan Center
34th St at Eighth Ave., New York
NORTH CAROLINA Griffith Baseball Park 614 Magnolia Ave, Charlotte
NORTH DAKOTA City Auditorium, Bismarck
OKLAHOMA Theocratic Convention Tent 8 mi. north of Capitol on Hy> 77 1/4 mi. east on Grand Blvd.
Oklahoma City
OREGON Biehn Building, 9th A Klamath Ave. Klamath Falls Norse -Hall. Ill N. 11th Ave.
Portland
RHODE ISLAND Rhode Island Auditorium
1111 N. Main St., Providence
SOUTH CAROLINA
Hibernian Hall, 1Q9 Meeting SL Charleston
v Dart Hall (Colored)
Kracke A Bogard Sts, Charleston
SOUTH DAKOTA
Deadwood City Auditorium 101 Sherman St , Deadwood Masonic Temple
120 E. Fifth Ave., Mitchell
TENNESSEE Palace Roller Rink Essary Road & N Broadway Fountain City Silver Slipper Club
on Macon Road. 7 /10 mi E. of U. 8 70.
4 mi. N E. of Memphis
TEXAS
Vickery Park
Highway 75, Greenville Ave , Dallas Kingdom Hail
4021 N. Piedras St., El Paso End of Main Dance Pavilion, on Old Main Street Road, near Bellaire Boulevard, Houston Municipal Auditorium
San Antonio
UTAH The I. O. O F Temple 41 Post Office Pl. Salt Lake City
VIRGINIA The Mosque Mam A Laurel Sts , Richmond
WASHINGTON Masonic Temple Harvard A Pine Sts. Seattle Turner Hall
25 W. 3rd Ave., Spokane
WEST VIRGINIA Municipal Auditorium Virginia and Trustow Sts . Charleston
WISCONSIN Odd Fellows Hall 308 W. Mifflin SL. Madison
CUBA
Salon “Artistica GaUega*’ Zulueta <51 Altos. Esquina Gloria
Havana
HAWAII Kingdom Hall
1228 Pensacola St.. Honolulu
“PEACE-—CAN IT LAST?” Sunday, Septembers 20
< p. m. Eastern time; 3 p.m. Central time; 2 p.m. Mountain time: 1 p.m. Pacific time. 288


JK\
FW1^
W;-S



At
sag
sss



•£’

HIT


0
, 1 .1
Jffl

■4 3
&
*j
5
h.
’t;1
*
•M.
ff
'■/i

r.
Announcing |
JehoVah’s Kingdom i


J
t.
fr
,z»


ri>
4

r,
ai
.'r;

K

/?
1
c1

"They shall know that I am Jehovah?
-Ezekiel 35 15.
Vol. LXTII Semimonthly
OCTOBER 1, 1942
No. 19
CONTENTS
The Only Light..................291
The Deliverer ................293
Unsilenced Testimony .........293
Anse, Shine ..................295
Dense as a Cloud, Swift as	Doves.297
The Right Rule ...............299
Baptism.........................300
Why Is the Tbuth Opposed f______302
Declabation (Letter)__________  303
Field Experiences ..............304
“Watchtoweb” Studies [Re Questions] 290
“The Wise” Testimony Pebiod
303
“Watchtoweb” Studies [Assignments] 303

I


gi
B

-
I i

1
i
1


THE WATCHTOWER.
Published Semdionthlt By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY.
117 Adams Street -	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
N. H. Knorr, President________W. E. Van Ambubgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children." - hatch 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, Is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESL'S was made human, and the man Jesus suftered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION Is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus Is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed In the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and Is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act Is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to ’‘fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wllL It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its. contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United Statzs, J 1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, JI.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, Bs. American remittances should be made by Foetal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft Canadian, BriUah, Sooth African and Australasian remittances should bs made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British  34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England Canadian_______________40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto B, Ontario, Canada
Australasian 7 Beresford Road, Stratbfleld. N. S. W-, Australia
South African _________ Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Heaae address the Society la every case
(Translation* of thia journal appear in several lasipuaffes.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may bare The Watchtower free upon written application to the publlabers, made once each year, stating the reason tor ao requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by tbs postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers' Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change ot address, when requested, msy be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice ot expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the aubscription expires.
Entered a* second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N.Y., under the Act of March S, ltrs.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
It is the desire of the Society to aid the students of The Watchtower m their study of this magazine. To this end the Society will supply questions on the leading article in The Watchtower. These questions will appear at the bottom of each column for the paragraphs that appear in the column These questions should be used in the company studies of the Watchtower magazine.
Proper procedure in the conducting of the Watchtower study would be as follows: The study conductor of the Watchtower study will select a person to read the questions, and another capable reader to read the paragraphs. First the question will be propounded on the paragraph discussed. Those attending the meeting having comment to make on the question will raise their hand, and the chairman will call on them to make comment; not to read portions of the paragraph, but to express in their own words the thought they have on the question. Several comments should be made on each question. If certain scriptures m the paragraph are not quoted in the paragraph, and time permits, the chairman should ask those in the meeting to read these scriptures. After this is done the summing up of the questions on the paragraph should be accomplished by reading the paragraph itself.
All Watchtower studies should be one hour in length. The study conductor can control this easily by scheduling his time, allotting a certain number of minutes to each column of the
assignment for the week and so marking each column as to how far along in the hour that column should be studied. By so scheduling his time for discussion on various paragraphs, equal emphasis will be put on every part of The Watchtower m the study meetmgs.
It is suggested that, in your personal reading and study of The Watchtower before you attend these study meetings, you first read the paragraph carefully, look up the scriptures cited but not quoted, and then read, at the foot of the column, the question pertaining to that paragraph, and answer it in your own words. If you cannot answer the question on the paragraph it would be well to read the paragraph again, so as to be sure to get the proper thought from it. Then proceed with the next paragraph; and do likewise until you have finished The Watchtower article. By so doing you will become thoroughly acquainted with the material set forth for the aid and comfort of all persons who love righteousness.
Having m mind that all things were written aforetime for our learning, it behooves everyone to give diligent study to those things that the Lord sets on His table for our sustenance and upbuilding. It is hoped that this arrangement will aid all persons to give diligent study to those things brought forth in The Watchtower and that it will help them, too, to make these truths their own so that they will be able to express them to others as opportunity affords.
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH'S KINGDOM
No. LXIII
October 1, 1942
No. 19
THE ONLY LIGHT
"But Jehovah will be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory." —Isa. 60:19, Am. Rev. Ver.
TEHOVAH has the right solution to the great I problem over which all the nations are divided J and, many of them, fighting desperately. For long centuries the nations have chosen their own way of life and government, and politically, racially and religiously it has been a divided world. Since 1918, marking the close of the first world war, a great change has come, affecting the destiny of all nations, and none of them can escape the certain result. Prior to that there had long existed a balance of power between the leading nations and the great continental powers, with more or less friction and frequent violent clashes, as was to be expected in a selfish world. Since 1918 the problem of world domination has been forced to the front to become the chief issue before every nation and people.
2 Back of the forcing of this issue to the forefront stands religion, innocent-looking and pious-appearing, but having political ambitions for a totalitarian world with all nations bound together by the tie of religion, and Rome to be the world center and seat of a federated-world government. Along with such federated world under totalitarian dominance there would go the federating of all religion under the domination of the strongest religious organization in the world and whose headquarters is at Vatican City. Eventually would come the swallowing up or forcing out of all religions not acknowledging the Vatican as the super-national power and head of the world.
’ Nations committed to the democratic way of rule now fight their great political opponent They declare their aim to dominate the earth with a world democracy, but they also bow superstitiously before religion, particularly Rome’s. They allow for religion the chief place in the proposed “New World order”. By this concession to religion they salve their conscience and think that Almighty God will compromise with them and approve their own chosen
1 Since 1918 what great problem of the nation* baa been forced to the front, and who has the right solution?
2 Who la back of forcing this Issue, and because of what ambitions? 3 Do nations committed to democracy make allowance tor religion In their proposed "New Order”, and. if so, why?
way of life on earth for ever, and let the politicians and religion remain.
4 This earth is but a minute part of an immense, measureless universe. When the politicians speak of world domination they think the issue is something just affecting this earth on which they live, and for whose surface they fight. The real issue is far more extensive, as vast as the universe and its inhabitation. The primary issue is universal domination. Therefore men and political organizations and their armies will not decide the issue, but the Almighty Ruler of the universe shall. “Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the balance: behold, he taketh up the isles as a very little thing. And Lebanon [the cedar forests on its mountainsides] is not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof sufficient for a burnt offering. All nations before him are as nothing; and they are counted to him less than nothing, and vanity. To whom then will ye liken God! . . . that bringeth the princes to nothing; he maketh the judges of the earth as vanity.”—Isa. 40:15-18, 23.
’ On the issue of universal domination all the nations are against Jehovah God. Although each group at war claims God is for its side, and though each side prays to the same God, they do not desire that God’s will be done on earth as throughout all the universe. They are all for continued man-rule on earth under religion, as opposed to the direct rule by Jehovah God through his great Executive Officer, Christ Jesus, the King. This brings the issue down to simply this: Man’s proposed new order of the federated world or the Kingdom of Jehovah God by Christ Jesus, The Theocracy: which shall it be over earth! The mighty and chief opponent of the Lord God in this universal issue is Satan the Devil. Those who are not on the side of Jehovah God and his Theocratic Government under his Son must be on the side of the great enemy, Satan the
4. Does the real Issue effect only this earth, end, therefore, who shall decide the Issue?
6.	(a) On the real Issue are the nations Id favor of God, or of what? (b) Who is God's chief opponent on the Issue, and la any neutral position guaranteed?
Ml
292
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Devil, the prince of demons. There is no neutral position. “He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad,” said the King of God’s Righteous Government. (Matt. 12:30) In 1815 the nations of earth guaranteed the eternal neutrality of Switzerland; but no such position is guaranteed to any nation or individual in this universal issue. Each must choose.
’ According to the above rule all the nations are under and on the side of the “god of this world”, and are a part of his world. (2 Cor. 4:4; John 14: 30) They are all on the one side, regardless of political disagreements. The vast majority of people think that the decision must be made by each individual as between totalitarian rule and democracy. The “god of this world” and all his demon hosts would keep the people in ignorance as to the real issue: that it is between this world of which he is god and Jehovah’s new world under The Theocracy of his Son Jesus Christ. The main question also takes in this related one, namely, Who are the Higher Powers, the religious-political rulers of this world or Jehovah God and Christ Jesus! The battle of Armageddon, which is near, will answer these throbbing questions, right.
* The time for individual decision is therefore limited. Each one must take the consequences of his choice, either destruction with Satan’s world or everlasting life on the victorious side of the Theocratic Government of the new world of righteousness. Satan and his demons would keep “Christendom” and all humankind in dark ignorance of the real issue. Being unable to see Jehovah God’s side of the issue, they would not see the way of escape from Satan’s doomed world, but would continue to be entangled in its political-religious disputes and conflicts. Since 1918 the dividing of the people has been on, for life or death. The people who love righteousness and seek life in peace and happiness must learn the issue of highest importance, that they may choose life and good and live. It is Almighty God’s will that they shall know, and nothing can keep them from learning. The “gospel of the Kingdom” is the means of informing them. Therefore Jehovah sends forth his witnesses to announce the established Kingdom.
’ The result of the proclamation of the Kingdom, or Theocracy, which result will be reached before the settlement of the issue at Armageddon, is positively foretold at Isaiah 59:19: “So shall they fear the name of Jehovah from the west, and his glory
6 Between what do moat people think that individual persons must decide, and what question concerning authority is related to the main one at issue?
7.	(a) Is there much time for Individual decision, and why are Satan and his demons wanting to keep all in the dark on the Issue? (b> Why must the real issue be learned, and what is the means of Informing lovers of righteousness?
8.	(a) According to Isaiah 59:19, what result will be reached before Armageddon by the proclamation of the Kingdom? (b) What Is the Kingdom, and who is the mother of it and Its members?
from the rising of the sun; when the adversary shall come in like a flood, the spirit of Jehovah will lift up a standard against him.” (Am. Rev. Ver., marginal reading) It is those of good-will toward Jehovah and his Righteous Government who learn to fear him before Armageddon, wherever the sun shines. The Kingdom is Jehovah’s capital organization under Christ Jesus, and it shall dominate all the universe, including our earth. The capital organization is pictured as a chaste woman who is joined in unbreakable wedlock to her King, Christ Jesus. Those who are bom in this heavenly organization and united with its King as his bride are 144,000 in number. They are redeemed from this earth and from among men and follow his footsteps faithfully unto death. (Rev. 14:1-4) He is their Redeemer and King and Bridegroom. These are the firstfruits unto God, being taken from among the redeemed ones who shall live forever on earth under God’s capital organization. The capital ruling body is God’s offspring born from his universal organization, which organization is symbolized as his woman named “Zion”. The name “Zion” therefore applies to the great mother organization in her privilege of bringing forth the capital city under Christ.
’ The year 1914 was a year of universal importance; for then the capital organization was established in heaven by the enthronement of Jehovah’s king thereof, Christ Jesus. Satan and his demons were opposed to the exalting of the capital to power. They fought to destroy it, but were whipped and cast out of heaven and down to the earth. This debasement has greatly maddened the great adversary and his demons, and therefore they have come in like a flood upon the earth’s inhabitants to sweep them away from God’s established kingdom and into destruction. They make the remnant yet on earth of the 144,000 their chief target, because these keep God’s commandments and give forth the testimony of Jesus Christ. (Rev. 12:17) The adversary, who is against Jehovah’s universal domination, seeks to deceive the whole world concerning the true issue upon which everlasting life depends. Therefore he has released a great and mighty flood of propaganda by the most up-to-date means of newscasting. By such he blinds the people to the issue, fixes their desires upon the religious, political and commercial things of this world as worth seeking for and preserving, and turns their hearts and minds away from and against Jehovah’s kingdom in operation under Christ Jesus.
10 Like a mighty tidal wave this demoniacal propaganda rolls over the world, and those yielding to the deception are drowned therein. To enable God’s
9.	Since their ousting from heaven, with what have the adversary and his demons come in like a flood, and for what purpose?
10.	What has the Lord raised up in resistance to the flood of demonlsm. and who has the privilege of holding It aloft?
October 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
293
devoted remnant and all persons of good-will and loving righteousness to keep their feet and resist the flood of demonism, the spirit or invisible power of Jehovah God has raised up a standard against the adversary. This standard raised up is the “testimony of Jesus Christ” concerning the Kingdom, or Theocratic Government. The privilege of offering this testimony to the world he shares with his remnant on earth, and he commands that “this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations”. (Matt. 24:14) The obedient and faithful remnant lift up this standard of the Kingdom that the people may discern the primary issue confronting all nations and may choose the side of life eternal. They are determined never to let that standard drop or permit any of the adversary's agents to snatch it from their grasp. The spirit of the Lord is upon his remnant and the men of good-will who rally to the standard to keep it aloft without apology or compromise with the foe.
THE DELIVERER
11	Down to 1918 and for a brief time thereafter those who make up the remnant in line for the Kingdom were affected somewhat by religious influence. Religion is ungodliness. Who can deny that all religion is opposed to Jehovah God and his rule of this earth by his Theocracy under Christ! As long as the remnant acted according to the view of “Christendom” that the political powers of this present evil world are the “higher powers” ordained of God there was a measure of ungodliness. It led to submission to ungodly men who were against God’s kingdom and his commandments concerning the preaching of the gospel. Jehovah God had chosen his redeemed ones for salvation. Therefore such ungodliness must be exposed to his devoted remnant, that they might turn and be cleansed therefrom. Only thereby could such maintain their integrity toward God and finally be made a part of God’s capital organization. Therefore God fulfilled his word pronounced long ago by his prophet Malachi (3:1-4) and sent the King and Redeemer to the temple to do the judging and purging work. “And the Redeemer [or, Deliverer] shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord.”—Isa. 59:20.
12	The apostle Paul quotes this prophecy, at Romans 11:25, 26. He applies it to the time the remnant of Christ’s followers and body members are brought in from among all nations or Gentiles in order to make up the fullness of the 144,000 who will be the bride or Kingdom body under Christ
11	What was the ungodliness with which the remnant were affected, and how were they turned from It?
12	(a) To what time in the development of Christ’s body does the apostle Paul apply Isaiah 69:20? (b) By whom does this application show the Lord’s standard must be raised on high, and in behalf of whom?
Jesus. The remnant are begotten of God’s spirit and are therefore spiritual Israelites. Hence they are pictured by Jacob, who was surnamed Israel. After mentioning the coming in of the fullness of the Gentiles at the end of the world, the apostle Paul quotes the prophet Isaiah, saying: “And so all Israel shall be saved: as it is written, There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob.” This proves that the standard lifted up by God’s spirit against the adversary must be raised on high by the remnant of “Jacob” in behalf of the people of good-will who seek life and truth but who do not find such in the standards paraded on high by the religious, political and commercial propagandists of the world. The standards of worldly propagandists for the “New World order” show a total omission of Jehovah’s Righteous Government administered directly by Christ. Hence such standards forget God and mislead the nations into the ditch of destruction. This is unmistakably the fatal course warned against at Psalm 9:17: “The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God.”
” Religion makes the nations of “Christendom” forget God Jehovah in all their schemes and counsels. Therefore all their purposes and plans run counter to Jehovah’s purpose by his Theocracy, and they religiously fight against Jehovah and his Kingdom. The religious clergy have persuaded the nations to believe they are “Christian nations” and that the ruling factors are the “higher powers” ordained of God because crowned in cathedrals and “blessed” by the religious Hierarchy. Hence the nations of "Christendom” command that Jehovah’s remnant lower the standard of the new world of righteousness and its Theocratic Rulership. But the Lord’s remnant have been turned from transgression and all ungodliness of religion, and they recognize now that Jehovah God and Christ Jesus are the “Higher Powers” to whom Christian souls must be absolutely subject or else be destroyed. They unhesitatingly choose to “obey God rather than men” and to follow the example left by their Leader, Christ Jesus. The standard of Jehovah's Supreme Government remains aloft because the spirit of the Omnipotent God is behind it.
UNSILENCED TESTIMONY
” The standard of Jehovah's name and kingdom will never be lowered until the flood-like onrush of the adversaries has been halted for ever at the battle of Armageddon and all human standards have been destroyed, as false, deceptive, and antiKingdom. This is not the mere idle boast of men.
13	. Why do the nations of "Christendom” command the remnant to lower the standard, and do the remnant obey?
14	. Will that standard ever be lowered, and what covenant-promise of Jehovah gives the reliable answer?
294
S'He WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
It is the solemn promise or covenant of the Supreme Power. It is stated through his faithful witness, the prophet Isaiah, unto us at the end of the world, namely: ‘‘And as for me, this is my covenant with them, saith Jehovah: my spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed’s seed, saith Jehovah, from henceforth and for ever.” (Isa. 59: 21, Am. Rev. Ver.) This is the Most High God’s declaration. It is his unbreakable covenant for that faithful remnant whom the King at the temple turns away from all transgression and ungodliness unto the righteous service of God. Jehovah keeps his covenants, and he neither recalls them nor alters them. This covenant to his faithful standard-bearers is therefore sure to be carried out.
15	Isaiah, here addressed in the covenant, is the one who under inspiration declared: “Behold, I and the children whom Jehovah hath given me are for signs and for wonders in Israel from Jehovah of hosts, who dwelleth in mount Zion.” (Isa. 8:18, Am. Rev. Ver.) The apostle Paul applies those prophetic words to Christ Jesus and his body of footstep followers, the 144,000. (Heb. 2:13) Hence the Greater Isaiah is Christ Jesus the King, and “his seed” is the “little flock” of 144,000, to whom Jehovah God is pleased to give the Kingdom with Christ Jesus. (Luke 12:31,32) Besides these who were redeemed by Christ’s blood for the heavenly kingdom there are “other sheep”. Them he likewise redeems, and to them he gives life eternal on earth, thus becoming their “everlasting Father”. (Isa. 9:6) Concerning these prospective earthly children Christ Jesus said: “And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and they shall become one flock, one shepherd.” (John 10:16, Am. Rev. Ver.) Inviting them into the Kingdom’s blessings on earth he shall shortly say: “Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.” (Matt. 25:34) These “other sheep” being redeemed in a secondary order unto life under the heavenly Theocracy, they are the ones mentioned to the Greater Isaiah as “thy seed’s seed”. He now gathers them to himself.
*’ What, then, is the divine covenant to the Greater Isaiah and his “seed” and his “seed’s seed”? This: that the invincible spirit of Jehovah God is now upon and will ever be upon the Greater Isaiah, who is Christ Jesus the reigning King of The Theocracy, and the word of Jehovah God concerning that Theocratic Government He has put in the mouth of Christ Jesus, “the Faithful and True Witness”; and that
IS Who Is addressed In Jehovah's covenant-promise, and who are meant by his "seed'' and his "seed’s seed"?
16	What, then. Is the substance or modern meaning of Jehovah's covenant concerning his spirit and his word?
spirit and that word shall not depart from the remnant of Christ’s body nor from the companions of the remnant, the “other sheep”, “from henceforth and for ever.” That means that Jehovah God will have a remnant keeping their covenant with him to the death and standing immovable for The Theocracy and keeping themselves in integrity, “unspotted from the world” and its new order; and that therefore Jehovah will never have cause to remove his spirit of power and his word of witness from them. It means that their companions, the “other sheep”, will continue to march forward side by side with the remnant and in indivisible unity, joyfully and gratefully bearing their share of the burden of work, holding up their end of the battle line against demonism and showing the same degree of faith, faithfulness and devotion to Jehovah and his Kingdom as do the faithful remnant. The spirit upon the Greater Isaiah, Christ Jesus the King, is the spirit to victory over the forces of demonism and to the vindication of Jehovah’s name. The word which fills and pours forth from His mouth is not the propaganda of religion. It is the revealed message of God setting forth the great issue of universal domination and foretelling the settlement of that issue permanently to the glory of the Most High.
1T To be filled with that spirit and that word is our only safeguard against being invaded and overpowered by the spirit and propaganda of this world, which is demonism in its most deceptive and alluring form. That spirit being upon the remnant as upon their Head Christ Jesus, it is their commission to preach, a commission direct from God and through Christ Jesus, and not through any religious theological seminary. Therefore they say as did their Head: “The spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because the Lord hath anointed me to preach.” (Isa. 61:1; Luke 4:16-18) That spirit being also upon the devoted “other sheep”, they have the moving power and the authorization and command to preach the same message as do the anointed remnant, and they pass along the message and say, “Come!”— Rev. 22:17.
” The anointed remnant from and after 1918 have had the temple experience of Isaiah. This prophet saw Jehovah’s messenger or representative seated upon the high throne in the temple surrounded by the seraphim ascribing holiness to Jehovah and announcing His purpose to fill the earth with his glory. The lips of those of the remnant were once unclean through fear of men and failure to preach the pure message of God’s name and kingdom, and, like Isaiah at the glorious temple vision, they have cried: “Woe is me! for I am undone; because I am a man of
17	. What la oar only safeguard against invasion by demonlsm, and what does it mean for God's spirit to be upon creatures today*
18	What experience like Isaiah's at the temple have the remnant had, and what have they received from the Lord for responding to his call?
October 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
295
unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips, for mine eyes have seen the King: the Lord of hosts.” Their eyes were enlightened to see the kingdom of Jehovah God, The Theocratic Government, and they had been silent about it because of the people of unclean lips round about them who put them in fear and under restraints. But today the message of the King of Eternity must go to the people. Now Jehovah God by his great Messenger has burned the uncleanness from their lips by the fiery coal of the spirit of God from off the altar of zealous service to God. At the Lord God’s call for willing volunteers, they have without any compulsion responded, “Here am I; send me.” Not from any earthly religious institution, but from the all-highest One, the King of heaven and earth, come the words of their commission: "Go and tell this people, Hear ye indeed”; even tell the people who refuse to understand and to see and to make tender their hearts and be healed.
” How long shall such willing volunteers keep going and telling! Till dictators, till totalitarian rule, till the new order of the “abomination of desolation”, come into power and start regimenting all nations! No, but till they go out of power, being junked in “the lake of fire and brimstone”. The specific command from the great Commissioner of Jehovah’s witnesses is: "Until the cities be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly desolate, and the Lord have removed men far away, and there be a great forsaking in the midst of the land.” (Isa. 6:1-12) That means till the door-to-door work is useless because there are no people in the houses to answer your doorbell ringing, because God has wiped out all who have refused to heed his message by his witnesses; and the cities that mischievously framed laws and mobbed you out of town have suffered the fate of Sodom and Gomorrah. (Matt. 10:13-15) Here, then, is the “Go ahead” signal from the Highest Authority to keep going on in his "strange work” of witness no matter what happens before Armageddon comes and desolates the earth of the “goat” class. Fear not what may stare you in the face. The spirit of the Lord upon you He will not remove; that invincible power will stay with you and bring you off more than conquerors by Christ Jesus. His word in your mouths will not fail you, as long as you keep your lips clean from paralyzing fear of creatures and clean from religion. Men may take away from you the Watch Tower publications explaining God’s Word, but then you will have the Bible itself to use from house to house. That is more than the faithful disciples had in the days of Jesus and the apostles.
19	. Bow long shall such service volunteers keep going, end what will equip and empower them to do m?
10	Worldly authorities under the influence of religion may even rule that Jehovah's witnesses do not know how to use the Bible and it is injurious in their hands. So they may take away from you God’s own Book, but then you will have the word of God in your mouths, and they will have to muzzle your very mouths to silence the spoken word. That will not come until the protecting hand of the great Builder of the new heavens and new earth permits it; for He says: “I have put my words in thy mouth, and I have covered thee in the shadow of mine hand, that I may plant the heavens, and lay the foundations of the earth, and say unto Zion, Thou art my people.”—Isa. 51:16.
ARISE, SHINE
” It would be foolish were God to put his spirit upon his devoted people and his word in their mouths and then approve when worldly governments assume to be the “higher powers” because ordained by the religious clergy and order God’s people to stop speaking His word and fulfilling their commission to preach by his spirit. God cannot deny himself, and is not the author of confused orders. His order stands written beyond recall, and was reserved for this day of world darkness, and it is this: “Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of Jehovah is risen upon thee. For, behold, darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the peoples; but Jehovah will arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee.” (Isa. 60:1,2, Am. Rev. Ver.) Do puny men crowned or ordained by the religious Hierarchy or receiving their power from the consent of the governed people think that they can prevent the carrying out of this covenant of Almighty God Jehovah! Has his word of command ever returned to him void in failure to accomplish that which he pleased! As well let such self-important worldly rulers try to keep God’s creation the sun from rising in the morning of the new day as for them to try to successfully block the carrying out of the divine command to get up and shine with the light of Jehovah’s glory. (Isa. 55: 10,11) If the rulers loved the light of truth and righteousness they would not be prejudiced and rebel against it just because it comes from Jehovah God and not from religion.
“ But to whom is the command “Arise, shine 1” directed! and who is in position to respond because Jehovah’s glory is risen upon such one! Is it the religious organization of “Christendom”! Impossible ! “Organized religion” of “Christendom” has for fifteen centuries tried to convert the world to its reli-
20	Will removal of the Bible itself silence the message, and may it yet be silenced?
21	. (a) Does God approve of governmental interference with bis orders to. his people, and what order has he reserved for the time of ^torld darkness7 (b) Can governments block the carrying out of this order? 22. (a> To whom is the command “Arise, shine1" addressed, and who is qualified to respond? (b) How has Jehovah's glory risen upon her7
296
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
gion, and the world was never in as black a darkness as right now, and “organized religion” has no message from God’s Word for the people. With her traditions of men she gropes around in the blackness with the worldly elements, not knowing whither bound. And in their darkness, which they love, they fight against Jehovah’s witnesses. Jehovah’s command at Isaiah 60:1,2 is directed to someone in the feminine gender, and hence to Jehovah’s “woman”, that is, his organization “Zion”, and to whom he now says: “Sing, 0 barren, thou that didst not bear; break forth into singing, . . . For thy Maker is thy husband; Jehovah of hosts is his name.” (Isa. 54:1, 5, Am. Rev. Ver.) The glory of her “husband” has risen upon Zion because the long period of travailing in pain waiting to be delivered ended in A.D. 1914. There God’s “woman” gave birth to the glorious capital organization long promised, Jehovah’s Righteous Government of the new world and of which his Son Christ Jesus is the installed King and Head. (Rev. 12:1-5) The Theocratic Government is born unto life eternal. The Theocracy, the Kingdom of God by Christ Jesus, is the light of the new world. Jehovah’s glorious light shines with approval upon that Government as the Rightful Rule, and light from Jehovah God upon his holy Word, the Bible, comes only through that glorious Government. All those who turn their faces away from that Theocratic Government and who look to the religious-totalitarian “New World order” of men are in death-dealing darkness.
“ Who possibly could be opposed to such a blessed Government of light and life? Satan, who is “the god of this world”, and all the demons of which he is the “prince” are wickedly opposed to it All human creatures, rulers and ruled, who oppose that Theocratic Government and who advocate for some man-made political substitute put themselves on the side of and under the power of the demons, whether they like to be told that fact or not. It is their own decision, and there are only the two great opposing governments in the universe between which to decide. Because the world rulers have listened to the propaganda of religion and, with religion’s approval and “blessing” and backing, have held on to their rulerships and scornfully rejected the administration of the earth by God through his Son, therefore the darkness now covers the earth, that is, the visible organization operated by worldly officials. Through their co-operation with religion in refusing to submit to the direct rule of the Theocratic King Christ Jesus the peoples are kept in gross darkness, as thick as that which covered the earth at its creation. (Job 38:9) It is not Jehovah God that would keep it thus
23.	(ft) Who oppose the Theocratic Government of light and life, and in what mental condition doe* their opposition put them? (b) What choice, therefore, are individuals now responsible to make!
dark, for he commands his organization to arise and shine. It is the demons that would keep all mankind in pitch-black darkness, and they use religious leaders and political rulers that lend themselves to the demons as instruments to keep the peoples in the dark concerning the Rightful Rule of the earth. It is now the responsibility of individuals among all peoples to choose whether to obey men and stay in the darkness or to obey Jehovah God and come into the light. To remain in the darkness means to abide under the wrath of God, and to abide there means death and destruction at Armageddon.
** Jehovah’s witnesses, upon whom he has put his spirit and in whose mouths he has put his word, must obey God and rise up and shine. The enemies of the light and truth of The Theocracy tried to keep them down by dealing them what seemed like a knock-out blow at the climax of the World War in 1918. But the Redeemer came to Zion and its temple and raised them up out of the dust and darkness. Now keeping God’s command, they will never again obey opponents of his kingdom and lie prone in the dust. Zion has arisen to shine for all time, because, by the King’s coming to the temple, Jehovah has arisen with favor upon his organization, particularly the faithful remnant thereof on earth. His glory is seen upon the remnant in that he has honored them in making them his witnesses and the ambassadors for his established and acting Government. They are privileged to receive its light and transmit it on to others who sit in darkness longing for the light. They must “shew forth the praises of him who hath called [them] out of darkness into his marvellous light”. (1 Pet. 2:9) To fail or refuse to do so would be falling down on the terms of their commission. The non-performance of their God-given commission would mean annihilation, being cut off from God’s organization and from life. Regardless of the course of individuals, Jehovah God will have an organization that will never fail to shine reflecting His glory light. Blessed are all those who keep integrity and abide immovable in that organization. “O Jehovah . . . they shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power; to make known to the sons of men his mighty acts, and the glory of the majesty of his kingdom. Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion en-dureth throughout all generations.”—Ps. 145:10-13, Am. Rev. Ver.
” The powers of darkness cannot prevent that Kingdom light of Jehovah from piercing through the gross darkness and reaching the religion-blinded
24.	(ft) By what action La Jehovab’a glory seen to bo upon bis remnant, and what would failure or refusal to net mean to them’ (b) In this dark world what kind of organisation will Jehovah have?
25.	(a) Can any powers prevent the light from piercing the darkness, and can persons therein at once adjust their eyes to the light? (b) What will surely result from the continued shining, and bow does Isaiah 60:3-7 bear this out?
October 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER,
297
persons of good-will and healing their eyes of understanding that they may see the way of escape from the ditch that lies ahead in the darkness. Those who have long groped in darkness of religion have difficulty for some time in adjusting their eyes of understanding to the light. However, the light is Jehovah God’s light, and there is healing in its beams. There can be only one result to the continual, steady, persistent shining of that light. True, it will cause the demons and all their bedarkened dupes to range up in hostility and to order a universal blackout. But no earthly creatures can black-out the sun or the moon, neither the heavenly light of the Kingdom of glory. The sure result of the shining is foretold in the Word of God and must have fulfillment, namely: “And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising. Lift up thine eyes round about, and see: all they gather themselves together, they come to thee: thy sons shall come from far, and thy daughters shall be nursed at thy side. Then thou shalt see, and flow together [become bright (Koun/s)], and thine heart shall fear, and be enlarged; because the abundance of the sea shall be converted unto thee, the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee. The multitude of camels shall cover thee, the dromedaries of Midian and Ephah; all they from Sheba shall come: they shall bring gold and incense; and they shall shew forth the praises of the Lord. All the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered together unto thee, the rams of Nebaioth shall minister unto thee: they shall come up with acceptance on mine altar, and I will glorify the house of my glory.”—Isa. 60:3-7.
16 That prophecy denotes a great contest between the power of darkness and the power of light. That prophecy was spoken with God’s full foreknowledge that the “abomination of desolation” would be set up by world rulers and be made to stand in the holy place and try to eclipse the light of the true kingdom of God. When God spoke he knew that the totalitarian “king of the north”, with “the king of the south” consenting, would plant the tabernacles of his “new order” in between the “mountain” of God’s kingdom and the “seas”, to prevent the abundance of the “sea” from being turned to that kingdom. (Matt. 24:15; Mark 13:14; Dan. 11:45) Lift up your eyes round about, then, and see. Has the prophetic assurance of the infallible Jehovah God been fulfilled?
” Have the kings come to the brightness of Zion’s rising? Not “the king of the north” and “the king of the south”, neither “the kings of the earth” and the “rulers” thereof who take counsel against Jehovah and his Anointed. (Ps. 2:1-3) The kings who
26	Id view of God's foreknowledge concerning the opposition, what does that prophecy denote in this time?
27	(a) Have the “kings" come to the brightness of Zion's rising? (b) Are the Gentiles also coming, and the sea’s abundance being converted to Zion?
come to the light are the members of the remnant and who are in line for the Kingdom, and who, if faithful unto death, will be resurrected and flive and reign’ with Christ a thousand years. (Rev. 20:4,6) It is so declared at Revelation 21: 24: “And the nations of them which are saved shall walk in the light of it; and the kings of the earth do bring their glory and honour into it.” Christ Jesus enthroned is the “prince of the kings of the earth”. (Rev. 1:5) Besides those of the remnant, now gathered and who are the sons and daughters of Zion, being spiritual Israelites, do you see being gathered to the brightness of Zion’s rising the “Gentiles”, that is, persons of good-will ‘out of all nations, kindreds, people and tongues’? Do you see an abundant number converted from the “sea” of the peoples alienated from God and supporting the Devil’s organization? Do you see the Good Shepherd bringing in his “other sheep” into the fold? and are they coming with their offerings of heart devotion and zealous service which find acceptance upon Jehovah’s altar? Has Jehovah glorified the temple of his glory so that these choose to serve him day and night in the courts of his temple, serving as witnesses of Jehovah in company with the remnant of the temple class? The honest answer of all persons informed on the facts and observing the proclamation of the Kingdom message and the results thereof must be a decided Yes! And were there nothing more than what has already been attained, it is marvelous in our eyes, it is Jehovah’s doing, and it would seem sufficient to constitute a fulfillment of prophecy in vindication of Jehovah’s word and name.
DENSE AS A CLOUD, SWIFT AS DOVES
“ There may, however, be still larger results to the fulfillment of the prophecy, and well may we so expect. By God’s grace the work is not yet finished and his witnesses refuse to quit as long as the Lord provides work, blessed work. This is suggested in the prophet’s next exclamation: “Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as the doves to their windows?” (Isa. 60:8) This is a cloud of witnesses, witnessing to the power and glory and presence of the Lord as a literal cloud in the sky does. This cloud, though, is different from that cloud of witnesses the apostle Paul mentions as composed of the faithful men of old who shall shortly be given a better resurrection out of death and be made “princes in all the earth” under The Theocracy.—Heb. 12:1.
” In the land of the prophet Isaiah the doves fly in such thick flocks that they are like a cloud that fairly darkens the earth beneath. This figure, therefore, denotes yet a great ingathering of active wit-
28	. What does Isaiah's prophecy concerning those flying as a cloud sue* gest as to further work and results, and of what is the cloud composed?
29	. What is denoted by the numbers being dense as a cloud, and also the flying as doves to windows of the dovecots?
298
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
nesses for the Kingdom, who shall in the short time remaining before Armageddon fly with the speed of doves to the entrance that Jehovah has provided to the refuge of safety. Doves were offered as sacrifices by the poorest of the land, and the figure “doves” may mean that such flight of further Kingdom publishers shall come from the people who have been greatly impoverished by the total war for world domination, especially those who are “poor in spirit”.
so There are multitudes of isles, and if these are to yield up those who have waited for God’s Rule to come, then there must be a multitude of such. The ancient ships of Tarshish made long journeys to far points, and the use of them as symbols would show that persons who have by circumstances been separated far from the Lord by previous opposition through blindness and misunderstanding of the Lord shall be brought into relationship with Jehovah’s organization. All such shall come and have part in the educational and constructive work of the Lord’s organization; for the time of God’s favor is come for all those seeking his organization. This is suggested in the following words of the prophet: “Surely the isles shall wait for me, and the ships of Tarshish first, to bring thy sons from far, their silver and their gold with them, unto the name of the Lord thy God, and to the Holy One of Israel, because he hath glorified thee. And the sons of strangers shall build up thy walls, and their kings shall minister unto thee: for in my wrath I smote thee, but in my favour have I had mercy on thee.”—Isa. 60: 9,10.
11 Likening Zion unto the city where Jehovah has placed his name and where his King of The Theocracy reigns, Jehovah addresses her and says: “Therefore thy gates shall be open continually; they shall not be shut day nor night; that men may bring unto thee the forces of the Gentiles, and that their kings may be brought.” (Isa. 60:11) The gates open continually day and night signifies freedom from fear of all enemies and that the angel guards are on the job. It means that Jehovah’s “strange work” of ingathering will go on day and night by his publishers and that the refugees escaping unto the Lord from all nations or Gentiles will steadily be brought in before Jehovah’s Chief Executioner destroys those outside, and that the enemy action will not close those gates to any fleeing there during this “day of salvation”. (Isa. 49:8; 2 Cor. 6:2) It is expected that Jehovah God, shortly before Armageddon breaks, will grant the faithful men of old from Abel to John the Baptist to be raised from the dead. Then without hesitation those future “princes in all the earth” will follow Zion’s light and enter in through the
30	Wbat is shown by the symbolic expressions of the isles waiting for the Lord, and of the ships of Tarshish bringing sons from far?
31	(a) What is signified by the prophecy that Zion's gates should be open continually, both day and night4 (b) When may the faithful men of old be expected to reappear, and will they enter in through those gatee?
open gates into the glorious “city” to serve God day and night in his temple.—Ezek. 46:1-12.
“ All organizations of men, whether national, religious, or commercial, that do not turn to Jehovah’s capital organization will be blotted out at Armageddon. Let those religious leaders and public officials who guide in the counsels of the nations and who advocate for a political, man-run “New World order” consider the next words of the prophet addressed to Zion: “For the nation and kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish; yea, those nations shall be utterly wasted.” (Isa. 60:12) As for God’s organization, there shall be no desolate and waste condition therein. Says Jehovah to Zion: “The glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee, the fir tree, the pine tree, and the box together, to beautify the place of my sanctuary; and I will make the place of my feet glorious.” (Isa. 60:13) The “glory of [mount] Lebanon” was its forests of trees here named, clothing its sides, exhaling a healthy, refreshing fragrance, “the smell of Lebanon” (Cant. 4:11), while, high above, the peaks of Lebanon, the highest in Palestine, glistened with patches of snow both in summer and in winter.
“ Such evergreen trees beautifully picture God’s anointed witnesses who are commissioned by the anointing of his spirit of power to preach the good news of the Kingdom, “that they might be called trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that lie might be glorified.” (Isa. 61:1-3) The place of Jehovah’s sanctuary or temple is in his organization Zion, and there his feet stand as he wields universal domination through his anointed King, Christ Jesus. (1 Chron. 28: 2) The King is the Vindicator of Jehovah’s name, and through him Jehovah makes the place of his feet glorious. The other “trees of righteousness” share with Christ Jesus in the vindication of Jehovah’s name and in proving the Devil a base liar. The remnant thereof on earth stand like evergreens as witnesses to Jehovah’s name and kingdom. No ax of the enemy will ever be able to cut them down.
“ Jehovah’s anointed remnant and their companions have endured great persecution because they uncompromisingly stand for the worship of Jehovah and give their devotion totally to The Theocratic Government and persistently and boldly proclaim the Kingdom to all nations as God commands. Today they are hated of all nations, without exception, proving that they are not friends of this world and are no part of it. They are of the new world of God’s creation and wherein dwells righteousness.
32	. What opposite destinies are in store respectively for Zion and for those governments not serving Zion?
33	. What is symbolized by the trees with which Jehovab beautifies the place of bis sanctuary, and bow does be glorify the place of bls feet’ 34 Why are Jehovah's remnant and companions hated and afflicted every* where, and what is prophesied concerning some of those at present taking part in mistreating Jenovab’a people?
October 1, 1942
SEeVVATCHTOWER.
299
They are afflicted, despised, avoided, and forsaken, and called by names which the religionists invent to misrepresent them and increase the persecution upon them. Many honest persons, like Saul of Tarsus, have been misled by religion to take part in such mistreatment of Zion’s children. But Jehovah God is gracious during this short period before Armageddon. If any of those misled ones faces the light, gets his eyes opened, and turns in repentance and conversion to Jehovah and his King and subjects himself to these “Higher Powers”, Jehovah permits him to find refuge under the capital organization Zion. Many of suchlike have already come. The prophecy indicates there are yet others to come. “And the sons [children of organizations] of them that afflicted thee shall come bending unto thee; and all they that despised thee shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet; and they shall call thee The city of Jehovah, The Zion of the Holy One of Israel. Whereas thou hast been forsaken and hated, so that no man passed through thee, I will make thee an eternal excellency, a joy of many generations. Thou shait also suck the milk of the nations, and shait suck the breast of kings; and thou shait know that I, Jehovah, am thy Saviour, and thy Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob.”—Isa. 60:14-16, Am. Rev. Ver.
" The remnant of Zion and their earthly companions now know that fact clearly. They repeat Psalm 3:8: “Salvation belongeth unto Jehovah: thy blessing be upon thy people.” (Am. Rev. Ver.) It would therefore be a violation of their clear knowledge and also of their enlightened consciences for them to do reverence to earthly creatures and things and to ascribe salvation and protection to such. On that issue there can be no halting between two opinions, no compromise. “Salvation to our God . . . and unto the Lamb.”—Rev. 7 :10.
THE RIGHT RULE
” At the actual establishment of The Theocratic Government (in 1914) and the coming of its King to Jehovah’s temple or sanctuary (in 1918) for the judgment of the house of God, there must come an all-round improvement in the earthly, visible part of God’s organization, the remnant of Zion. There must be a taking away of all that which the King at the temple judges to be religious wood, hay, and stubble, which do not stand the fire of divine judgment. That which is durable and approved and precious to the Lord God must be brought in. All confusion and controversies within must be done away with, and right order must be set up, that peace,
35 What fact do the remnant and companions now know concerning salvation, and what course of action would be a violation of such knowledge and enlightened conscience?
36 After the Lord’s coming to the temple in 1918 what all-round improvement In the visible part of God’s organisation must follow, and how did Isaiah’s prophecy describe this?
prosperity and righteousness may prevail in the organization. The Theocratic rule is the only rule that befits Jehovah’s organization and that secures these desired things. This rule from the Higher Powers in heaven was set up over the remnant of Zion and their companions, particularly from 1938 onward. The disturbers, the “elective elders” and the “evil servant” class who violently smite their brethren and cause waste and destruction to the Kingdom interests, and other “workers of iniquity”, the Lord cleared out by his angels. This taking the situation in hand for the betterment of the organization and to His praise Jehovah symbolically foretold in the next words: “For brass I will bring gold, and for iron I will bring silver, and for wood brass, and for stones iron: I will also make thy officers peace, and thine exactors righteousness. Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting nor destruction within thy borders; but thou shait call thy walls Salvation, and thy gates Praise.”—Isa. 60: 17,18.
” Statesmen, economists and clergymen predict the reconstruction of this present evil world as due to follow this war for world domination. Trusting in their own brains and arm of flesh, such worldbuilders look forward to building an international organization with military walls of defense which men may call their salvation. When and if you enter the gates of this “New World order” you will, as a condition, have to praise the organization and its super-government and its religious, political, commercial builders and the “god of this world”, or else you cannot live and get along in it. The people now hearing the Kingdom message must determine whether to go along with and look to such worldbuilders for relief and deliverance, or to turn to the glorious Theocratic Government which Jehovah has builded and seek refuge under it. ‘As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so Almighty God Jehovah is round about his organization,’ and therefore its walls are salvation unto life eternal in prosperity, peace and perfect health. Those who enter its gates do not forget God and praise creature men, but they praise Jehovah the great Theocrat and Christ Jesus his glorious King of righteousness.
“In June, 1942, the New York Times reported a banquet of religious leaders at a famous hotel and at which the nation’s vice-president made a speech, it being the very same day that the Supreme Court of America handed down the 5-to-4 decision that distribution of Bible literature concerning God’s kingdom may be subjected to license-tax. Concerning this the Times said: “The Vice President, re-
37.	Wbat decision must the people now make as between the proposed international organization after the war and God's organization Zion on the matters of salvation, protection and praise?
38.	In the Tlce-prealdent's recent speech to religionists, what was his interpretation concerning the “sun of righteousness”?
300
WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
calling that the Old Testament predicted that one day a ‘sun of righteousness’ would rise ‘with healing in its wings’, declared: ‘America, without pride of race but with complete tolerance and great power, can be that “sun of righteousness” with healing in its wings. America can establish the time of truly great peace based on justice to all the peoples. . . . We shall see the day when the sun of our Amprien is the sun of righteousness, and when that sun will rise with healing in its wings.’ ” There is no report that the religious clergymen there assembled objected to such human, nationalistic interpretation of the sacred prophecy concerning the “sun of righteousness”.
" The reader is now privileged to compare that with Jehovah God’s own interpretation thereof as given in his next words addressed to his organization Zion: “The sun shall be no more thy light by day; neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto thee: but Jehovah will be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory. Thy sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy moon withdraw itself; for Jehovah will be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended.” (Isa. 60:19,20, A.R.F.) The corresponding prophecy at Revelation 21: 23 reads: “And the city had no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it: for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb [Christ Jesus] is the light thereof.” Soon, therefore, the “rising sun” of Japan and the religious-political rule of all nations forgetting Jehovah God will set at Armageddon; but the heaven-
39.	According to Jehovah's prophecy by Isaiah, together with that of Revelation chapter 21. what will be the light of all the universe!
ly Theocracy, Jehovah God the great Theocrat and Christ Jesus his King, shall together flood all the universe with the glorious light of life and salvation and shall never set.—Ps. 84:11; Mal. 4:2; 2 Pet. 1:19.
40 Walking henceforth in the light of Jehovah as reflected by his capital organization under Christ Jesus, the faithful remnant and their loyal companions will never put forth their hands to the unrighteousness of this world and its “new order” and will never be moved away from The Theocracy. For their comfort the promise is made to Zion: “Thy people also shall be all righteous; they shall inherit the land for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may be glorified. The little one shall become a thousand, and the small one a strong nation: I, Jehovah, will hasten it in its time.” (Isa. 60:21, 22, A.R.V.) Now appears to be the time; and if the Lord God Almighty hastens the things promised in this time, then the time is short. The Lord can and will give strength to the remnant of his “holy nation” to carry on under all conditions to the finish of the “strange work”. If the ingathering of the “other sheep” seems small compared to earth’s vast population, Jehovah, who gives the increase, can make one to “become a thousand”. Let us have patience, then. He will hasten what He has purposed, at the right time in the near future. Let us be faithful to his command to “arise and shine”. Let us keep on reflecting the only light in the darkness of this world, that “he might be glorified”.
40.	(a) What assurance does the prophecy give concerning Jehovah's remnant and companions as to righteousness and his organization and strength to finish the work9 (b) Is there any reason for impatience, and what should be our determination in view of God's command through Isaiah?
BAPTISM
THE prophet Elisha was anointed as prophet in the room of Elijah, his companion. Elisha, when approached by Naaman the leper to be cured, instructed him to wash in the Jordan river seven times. Naaman the Syrian obeyed, dipping himself seven times beneath the Jordan’s waters, and was healed. That was a water baptism.—2 Kings 5.
By the prophet Malachi God prophesied that he would send the prophet Elijah before the coming of the great and terrible day of Jehovah. (Mal. 4: 5, 6) To the father of John the Baptist God’s angel foretold the child’s birth and applied to him that prophecy. Thirty years later Christ Jesus applied to John the same prophecy, saying of John: “And if ye will receive it, this is Elias [Elijah], which was for to come.” (Matt. 11:14) John as the forerunner of Jesus came baptizing the repentant Jews in the waters of the Jordan, and warned of wrath to come, a baptism of fire of destruction. Thus the prophecy concerning the coming of Elijah was fulfilled in miniature. (Matt. 3:1-12; 17:11-13) John’s baptism was for in
dividuals of the nation of Israel, which nation was unfaithful to its national baptism.
Fifteen centuries before John the nation of Israel was baptized unto God’s prophet Moses, who led them forth from bondage in Egypt out into the freedom of God’s chosen people. That baptism took place when the miraculous cloud of God’s guiding presence covered them from the pursuing Egyptians; and under cover of this cloud they followed Moses through the divided Red sea, with walls of water on each side of them. Thereafter, when the Egyptians were on the way through, the waters of the Red sea closed in upon them. That too was a baptism, but unto destruction, because the Egyptians were not baptized unto Jehovah’s prophet but were violently opposed to him and sought the destruction of Jehovah’s baptized ones. Concerning this the apostle Paul says: “Brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea; and were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea.” (1 Cor. 10:1,2) That was the baptism of a whole
October 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
301
nation at one time. It was unto the prophet whom Jehovah had raised up to foreshadow the Greater Prophet yet to come, namely, Christ Jesus. (Deut. 18:15-18; Acts 3:20-23 ; 7:36,37) It took place before the destruction of the Egyptian persecutors, and which destruction foreshadowed the climax of the battle of Armageddon at the end of the world. There was, however, a still earlier baptism than this one at the Red sea.
The first baptism in human history was upon all those who should escape the destruction of the old world and enter alive into the cleansed earth. This was in the days of Noah, who built the ark at God’s command, to survive the great flood. Noah was also a “preacher of righteousness” and he warned of the terrible baptism of destruction that was to come. Before the breaking forth of the flood seven persons, namely, Noah’s household of his wife and married children, came to him in the ark, “and the Lord [Jehovah] shut him in.” (Gen. 7:13-16) Thus, being covered in the ark and thereby hidden from sight of all the world outside, those seven were baptized unto Noah. Concerning this the apostle Peter says: “The longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls, were saved by water. The like figure whereunto, even baptism, doth also now save us, (not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God,) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ.” (1 Pet. 3:20,21) That baptism unto Noah in the ark was unto salvation from destruction with the world. The overflowing of all those outside the ark with a watery deluge was the baptism of a whole world in destruction. This becomes of vital meaning to us today in the light of Jesus’ words concerning the end of the world: “And as it was in the days of No'e, so shall it be also in the days of the Son of man.” (Luke 17:26,27) Since 1914 the world has been in its “time of the end” and the great deluge of fire of the world’s destruction at Armageddon is impending. Therefore the greater need appears for the persons who want to escape that baptism of fire to enter into the ark of God’s organization and be baptized unto the Greater Noah, Christ Jesus. He is Jehovah’s Savior for those who will be spared through Armageddon and inherit life in the new world.
In 1918 Jehovah’s Messenger came to the temple to begin judgment at the house of God. For forty years before that date he was preparing the way before Jehovah God with the end in view of making ready a people for Jehovah’s name who should be his witnesses, to declare His name and kingdom throughout all the earth. That preparatory work was called the “Elijah work” of the church. Because John the Baptist in his day did a work in miniature fulfillment of the prophetic work of Elijah, that forty-year preparation was also called the “John the Baptist work”. Just as the prophet Elisha was raised up in the room or stead of Elijah, so, after the Lord’s coming to the temple, the “Elisha work” was begun. It was carried on in the stead of the Elijah work which had been taken away or killed by the enemies in 1918 in the throes of the World War. Elisha did a work in connection with God’s anointed one, Captain Jehu, who became king of Israel. Jehu was anointed and used of Jehovah to destroy wicked queen Jezebel and all the Baal-worshipers in Israel. Jehu also took into association with himself a man whose heart
was right, namely, Jonadab, and together they rode in the chariot to the slaying of the religionists or devil-worshipers. Such slaughter work foreshadowed the destruction of the religionists and of Satan’s organization, his “woman”, at the end of the Elisha work, or Jehovah’s “strange work”. Such “strange work” is still going on, and the part which the men Elijah, Elisha, and John the Baptist had to play in foreshadowing that “strange work” and the preparatory work preceding it lays further emphasis on the importance of being baptized unto Jehovah’s Deliverer, Christ Jesus, now, before Armageddon. Not only spiritual Israelites, but also the modern Jonadabs, have need of such baptism unto salvation through God’s kingdom by Christ Jesus.
The Perfect Pattern for baptism is Christ Jesus. He was not baptized for the purpose of his own salvation, because he was “holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners”. (Heb. 7:26) Why, then, was he dipped beneath Jordan’s waters by John the Baptist? And was he baptized with “John’s baptism”? (Luke 7:29; Acts 1:22; 19 : 3. 4) His sinlessness answers No to that question, because John’s act was a “baptism of repentance” and Jesus had no sins whereof to repent.
Furthermore, John was not sent to baptize Gentiles, but those of his own nation, the Jews, who had been brought into covenant relationship with God through Moses their mediator. The natural Jews had fallen away from their covenant through disobedience and religion, and now the Greater Moses, Christ Jesus, was at hand. Therefore the Jews needed to be brought to a condition of repentance and to return to covenant-keeping, in order to be prepared to receive and be baptized unto the Greater Moses. Just as the animals sacrificed on Israel’s atonement day were pictorial and their blood did not actually take away human sin, so the immersion in water did not actually wash away the sins. It was merely symbolical of repentance and a turning away from sin and religion and coming into covenantrelationship with God.
Jesus, being without sin and being the Greater Moses and Mediator of the new covenant, was therefore immersed for a different reason than the repentant Jews were. The fact that John objected to baptizing Jesus and said that, instead, he ought to be baptized by Jesus, proves this. What, then, did Jesus’ water baptism symbolize? and is it confined only to the Jews after the flesh? The prophecy of the Psalms and also God’s own interpretation thereof by his inspired apostle Paul gives us the correct answer. Quoting from Psalm forty, verses six to eight, the apostle writes of Jesus at the time of his baptism, at w’hich time he was laid as the foundation of the new world: “Wherefore, when he cometh into the world, he saith, Sacrifice and offering [with animal victims] thou wouldest not, but a body hast thou prepared me. In burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin thou hast had no pleasure: then said I [Jesus], Lo, I come (in the volume of the book it is written of me) to do thy will, 0 God. Above, when he said, Sacrifice and offering and burnt offerings and offering for sin thou wouldest not, neither hadst pleasure therein ; which are offered by the law; then said he, Lo, I come to do thy will, 0 God.” (Heb. 10: 5-9) Hence, when John objected to dipping Jesus, that Perfect One answered, “Suffer it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfill all righteousness.” That Jesus did no wrong in offering
302
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
himself for water immersion is proved; for, when he came up out of the water, God’s voice came from heaven, saying : “This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.” —Matt. 3:13-17.
It is clear, therefore, that the water immersion of the Son of God was an open symbol before witnesses of his consecration to God and his agreement thereby to do Jehovah’s will even to the death. The covenant and laws of Israel were prophetic and foreshadowed God’s will for the future, and Christ Jesus entered into a compact with his Father to do God’s will as expressed in God’s covenant with his people. Jesus’ being plunged beneath the water symbolized his death and burial unto his human will. Being raised out of the w’aters pictured his being raised by God’s spirit (or power) to do the work and will of God set before him henceforth. Thus the water act was preceded by Jesus’ real baptism inwardly in his heart. This real baptism led to great suffering on his part, and to this his apostle refers, saying: “Even hereunto were ye called: because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps: who did no sin.”—1 Pet. 2:21,22.
Jesus’ example for us, therefore, includes water immersion. Whoever, therefore, would walk in his footsteps, following his example, must first undergo the real inward baptism, by denying himself and coming to do God’s will. Said Jesus: “I am the way, and the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me.” This is because he is the propitiation for our sins. (John 14:6; 1 John 2:1,2) Also it is written concerning pleasing God: “Without faith it is impossible to please him: for he that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him.” (Heb. 11:6) Hence, before anyone can receive water baptism he must become acquainted with Jehovah God and believe that He is. He must accept God’s Word and believe that Christ Jesus is Jehovah’s Son and is the Lamb of sacrifice for our sins and must seek approach to God through Christ Jesus. Then with such faith in Jehovah God and Christ Jesus his King, and repenting of all past sins and converting or turning from sin and the world, he gives himself completely to Jehovah God to forever after do God’s will as revealed in his Word
and through his Kingdom. Only this Scriptural course will lead to acceptance with God and to having one’s act of consecration acknowledged by him.
One of his acts of doing God’s will should be, as early as possible after consecration, to do as our great Example Jesus did, namely, be immersed in water, to give outward symbolic testimony of having devoted himself to God and His endless service. Such water baptism is not a symbol of one’s being baptized into the spiritual body of Christ, with hope of life in heaven. Whether that shall follow later, after one has proved himself in God’s service, is for God’s will to determine. The one baptized makes no bargain with the Lord and does not attempt to dictate what God’s will shall be concerning himself.—Rom. 6: 3-5.
Jesus sent forth his disciples with the instruction: “Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy [spirit] ; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you.” (Matt. 28:19,20) Therefore this water baptism toward you is performed in the name, that is, by the authority, of Jehovah God the Father and through Christ Jesus the Son, and with the spirit or holy power of God, which spirit of power is the commission of authority to do this. Hence, when you present yourself to the one baptizing in water, your baptism will be performed with this understanding and in the spirit of the Lord.
Before proceeding with your baptism it is proper, first, that you answer affirmatively these questions to show you are taking this step with the Scriptural understanding thereof and are fit for baptism as a devoted servant of the Lord, fully responsible to Him:
(1)	Do you believe in Jehovah God the Father, that “salvation belongeth unto Jehovah”, and that Christ Jesus is his Son in whose blood your sins are washed away and by whom salvation comes to you from God?
(2)	Have you therefore confessed your sins to God and asked for cleansing by Christ Jesus, and therefore turned away from sin and the world, and consecrated yourself without reservation to God to do his will?
Your answer, being Yes, is testimony that you are worthy and in line for water baptism in obedience to God’s will.
WHY IS THE TRUTH OPPOSED?
JEHOVAH, the Father of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, is righteous and all things with him are righteous. “The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works.” (Ps. 145:17) “For the righteous Lord loveth righteousness; his countenance doth behold the upright.” (Ps. 11: 7) Likewise Jehovah’s beloved Son is righteous, holy and pure; and because he loves righteousness at all times Jehovah has exalted him to the highest place next to the Almighty himself. “Thou lovest righteousness, and hatest wickedness: therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows."—Ps. 45: 7.
Who could hate Jehovah God, and who could plant hatred in the mind of another against the Almighty God, who is love? Only the wicked one, Satan the DeviL His name Satan means adversary or opposer of God. Satan is the prince of the world, from the time of Eden onward to Armageddon, and the entire world is under the power and
influence of Satan, that wicked one. (John 12: 31, 1 John 5:19) Therefore all creatures that hate Jehovah, the Almighty God, are the servants of the Devil. All who hate the Lord Jesus Christ are likewise servants of the Devil. All who hate the faithful servants of God and Christ are also of the Devil. These scriptures should convince all sincere persons who desire righteousness that those who hate Jehovah’s witnesses and persecute them are instruments of “that wicked one”, who hates God and Christ, and that all such opposers of Jehovah and his kingdom are doomed for destruction. But why does the world hate the Lord Jesus Christ, as stated in the Bible? His answer is: ‘The world hateth me because I testify of it, that the works thereof are evil.’ (John 7:7) The world hates all who faithfully follow in the footsteps of Jesus by giving testimony to Jehovah’s name.
October 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
303
What is meant in these texts just cited by the term “the world”? The people and nations of earth that are under the influence of demons, of which Satan the Devil is the prince or chief of demons, constitute the world that lies in the wicked one. (1 John 5:19, Diaglott') The world is made up chiefly of three ruling elements, to wit: religion, politics, and commerce; and all persons who thus rule practice some kind of religion, which is demonism, because their practice is contrary to God’s Word. The world, therefore, consists of the organization of the peoples of earth into forms of government which are dominated by the power and influence of the invisible overlord, Satan. The new world will consist of all people who survive Armageddon, and who love righteousness and hate wickedness, and such will live on the earth under the supervision and control of the invisible, righteous overlord, Christ the King. Thus it is seen that all people and all nations must now be separated or divided into two classes, that those who love righteousness and who serve righteousness shall live, and that those who choose wickedness shall be destroyed. “The Lord preserveth all them that love him; but all the wicked will he destroy.”—Ps. 145: 20.
The name Devil means traducer or slanderer. The name Jehovah God means the Almighty’s purpose toward his creatures. The Devil began to defame the name of Almighty God when he told the first lie to Eve. From that time till now the Devil has constantly slandered the name of Jehovah, and the Devil has caused multitudes of creatures to become slanderers and haters of the name of Almighty God. For this purpose the Devil put Nimrod forward as one equal to or above God, and hence Nimrod was honored as
“a mighty one” “before the Lord”. (Gen. 10: 8-10) Nimrod was the leader of the first organization of religion following the flood. The Devil and his servants have continuously reproached the name of Jehovah God; and His beloved Son, Christ Jesus, has always magnified the name of Jehovah. For that reason the Devil has continuously reproached the name of Jesus Christ. For this reason it is written of Christ Jesus: “The reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me.”—Ps. 69: 7, 9.
Every creature who has been faithful to Almighty God has suffered reproach, slander, opposition, persecution and cruelty. The faithful men of old, from Abel onward, suffered all manner of reproach and cruel punishment for the reason that they were for and declared the name of Almighty God and his coming kingdom. No one who loved God could be guilty of inflicting punishment upon those faithful men who proclaimed the name of Almighty God. The Devil was the one who brought reproach upon them and caused their suffering, and this the Devil did because those faithful men proclaimed the name of the Most High.
From the very day that Jesus began to proclaim the name and kingdom of Jehovah the Devil opposed him and sought to bring about his destruction. (Matt. 4:1-11) The Devil and his associate demons continued to reproach, slander and persecute Jesus, and to falsely charge him with erime, and finally brought about his crucifixion. The faithful servants of Jesus Christ spend their days declaring the name of Jehovah and Christ Jesus the King, and the Devil and his agents constantly reproach them and persecute them. And why? Because they uphold the name of the Lord and joyfully proclaim his name and his kingdom.
D E C LARATION
Dear Brother Knorr:
Declaration unanimously adopted on Saturday, July 4, 1942, reads as follows:
“By the Lord’s grace, we, 2,250 of Jehovah’s witnesses in Greater London, stand together as a body wholly united and fighting for The Theocracy. Jehovah gives us much strength, joy and a large portion of his spirit to enable us to stand firm in these times of great distress. We can testify how Jehovah answers the prayers of the righteous: ‘For the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open unto their prayers: but the face of the Lord is against them that do evil.’—1 Pet. 3:12.
“We thank the Lord for the continued stimulating truths so abundantly provided through The Watchtower. We will prove our faith m The Theocracy by our works. We refuse to break our covenant vows. The ‘abomination of desolation’ can never take
away from us the joy of praising Jehovah’s name. Doubtless many dark days are ahead. The people of good-will look to Jehovah’s witnesses for comfort. We cannot forsake them. We seek to be diligent and obey the Lord’s invitation ‘Feed my sheep’ We declare our determination to use every possible opportunity now to do this work. We will stand blameless.
“As a city compact together we face with full confidence in the Lord the threatening Assyrian entry into the land of Jehovah Victory lies with The Theocracy, the Holy City. Come what may, we are ready and willing to bear whatever reproaches and persecution the Lord may permit to the vindication of his name.
“As another season of spiritual refreshing from the hand of the Lord, we keenly look forward to the convention in September.
“We express to you and our American brethren our warm love and greetings. Unitedly with our brethren world-wide we shout ‘Hallelujah’.”
"THE WISE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The month of October is known by Jehovah’s witnesses as “The Wise” Testimony Period. During that month the servants of Jehovah will put forth an extraordinary effort to magnify the name of the Lord and to advertise his kingdom in the earth. It is good to serve the Lord and to aid others, and those persons who are wise will put forth every effort to aid those who love righteousness to seek the truth. In Proverbs, chapter 8, verse 31 onward, this thought is brought to our attention, “Hear instruction, and be wise, and refuse it not. Blessed is the man that heareth me, . . . for whoso findeth me findeth life, and shall obtain favour of the Lord ” During “The Wise” Testimony Period Jehovah’s witnesses will offer to the people the book Children and the booklet Hope, on a contribution of 25c, so that the people of good-will may receive instruction and be wise. All persons who love righteousness and want to help others find the way to life and learn of Jehovah’s
kingdom will share in the witness work during this period If you are not already associated with a company of Jehovah’s witnesses and would like to be, write to Watchtower, 117 Adams St, Brooklyn, N. Y., and we will get you m touch with the nearest company, so you may share with these servants of the Lord in the proclamation of the Kingdom In these perplexing times the wise man will seek the Lord and share his knowledge with others, so “that we may be able to comfort them which are m any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God”.
“WATCHTOWER" STUDIES
Week of November 1: “The Only Light,” fl 1-21 inclusive, The Watchtower October 1, 1942.
Week of November 8: “The Only Light,”
fl 22-40 inclusive, The Watchtower October 1, 1942.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
VICTORY IN LOUISIANA
“The judge would not let us three special publishers out on bond, pending our trial, unless we would promise not to go in the witness work until our trial. This we would not do; so we stayed in jail from June 13 until June 23. We appeared before the court June 22. After the prosecution presented their witnesses and evidence we filed the first motion to dismiss. The copies of the court decisions sent us by the Society were presented in support of the motion to dismiss, and the two Louisiana Supreme Court decisions were read aloud. We reminded the court that these two decisions were controlling in spite of the more recent U. S. Supreme Court decision. The judge said he wanted time to look into these and would give his decision the next day. Apparently much pressure had been put upon the judge by the rest of the officials, but the following day in court he made his position very clear and let it be known that he could not- let public opinion or prejudice or even his own personal feelings influence his decision. He is a devout Roman Catholic, but stated that even though his belief was not like ours it was still his duty to uphold the law; that he had to abide by the Louisiana Supreme Court decision, since the U. S. Supreme Court decision is not final and, upon a rehearing, may be reversed. He also read in court the article on ‘Religion’, from the June 22 issue of T-----. This judge was really put ‘on the spot’ by the
rest of the official element, but so far he seems determined to uphold American principles. This experience has made us realize more clearly than ever before that ‘the arm of the Lord is not shortened’ and that the Watchtower is His visible organization. We hope that this will help the people of good-will here to boldly take their stand for Jehovah and his Theocracy. We three were found ‘not guilty’ and released June 23.” (Natchitoches, La.)
IF THE CONDUCTOR GOES TO JAIL (HENLEY, ENG.)
“A lady with whom I have been conducting a regular Bible model study promised to arrange for a meeting on Sunday evening, inviting some friends of hers. When I arrived there were eight persons present, and we quickly got down to a study of ‘The Soul’. All had Bibles and booklets. After our study together all were greatly impressed and interested. They seemed to fully appreciate the truth as shown in the Scriptures. One said it was a pity the ‘Rev.’ was not present, which was followed by much laughter, and statements to the effect that he would not dare come anyway; he had recently told them to burn the books of Jehovah’s witnesses. After I left they had a discussion on the matter, and one lady said: ‘Now, what do you think of this? I have been burning the books which I should have read. This is just what I have been wanting.’ They are all realizing what a great fraud religion is. At the time, these people said they would not miss next Sunday for anything, although it meant they would have to miss their usual meeting at the local chapel. When next Sunday came, all were present. The question was asked: “What shall we do if Mr. R----- [myself] is removed to prison!’
The answer immediately came from one of the others: 'We have the AfodeZ Study booklets and the Bible; we can continue ourselves.’”
PROGRESS IN NORTHERN IRELAND
“In Holywood we have commenced a group study. One person of good-will with whom we have a model study did not know of our work before we first met her two months ago, and she has now opened her home for the study. The Society’s representative was with us to start the study and there was a total attendance of seven, including four persons of good-will whom we recently found. One of these came out in the service with us this week. She enjoyed the experience so much that she said, ‘Where will you be working at the week-end! Could I join you!’ and so was with us Saturday and Sunday, reporting seven hours of field service this week. Many persons who were first prejudiced against us are now appreciating the truth and defending it before others. We find many of the ‘goat’ class, but the few ‘sheep’ that we meet make up for all the opposition we encounter, and we carry on rejoicing in our privilege of full-time service for The Theocracy.”
AFOOT! (SWEETWATER, TEXAS)
“In spite of the disadvantage of not having an automobile to cover the rurals, we have overcome that difficulty. Within a period of one week we covered a radius of eight miles from one point. During that time approximately ninety miles was covered, entirely by walking. We were accosted by the sheriff the first day out. He warned us that if he received another complaint he would make immediate arrest. As a result of our efforts 150 booklets and 4 bound books were placed. Evidently he did not get another complaint. This shoWs how territories can be covered in spite of shortages and wartime restrictions.” —Two pioneers.
“THE LAW” MAKES A VISIT (OKLAHOMA)
"At one of my back-calls several gathered at a home to hear the lectures played. The last one played was ‘Religion’; we had present colored, white, and Indian, twenty-one in all. Among them was one who was an American Legionnaire. After the lecture was through I asked if anyone had any questions. No one had any, nor made any remarks. I invited them back for the following Wednesday night, telling them to be sure to bring their Bibles, as we were to have a Bible study. The next Wednesday we were there as usual. It being a cold night, not many came out. Just before starting, a well-dressed man came in and was introduced. The lady of the house whispers across the room, ‘The law!’ I rather suspected it was, when he came in. We passed out the Model Study booklet No. 1, together with the booklet Uncovered. It being our first study, the first few questions were very good. We commented to our visitor that we were sorry he did not have his Bible. After the meeting ‘the law’ remarked that he came out to see what was going on. I made no reply. Then he said: ‘I am 100 percent with you, as anyone that is trying to help the people to do better I am with them.’ Then when one of the men finished paying for his Bible ‘the law’ said he could make a contribution too. For the same he was given a sample copy of The Watchtower and the booklets Theocracy and Comfort All That Mourn. I invited him to come the next Wednesday night and bring any of his friends that he cared to. He has not been back. We have from six to eight attending, and more coming.”
&
£
£
S' £ $ ■i
77nmB-Him.nr
They shall know that I am Jehovah;
-Ezekiel 35:15.
il.

Vol. LXIII Semimonthly
No. 20
OCTOBER 15, 1942
CONTENTS
Fighter for the New World (Part 1) .. 307
Judges .....................
Backsliders into Religion...
Eighteen Years’ Oppression . Cry for Freedom of Worship Test of Sincerity ..........
Gathering Against Theocracy .
307
308
310
311
312
314
Ml

Popular Rule or Theocracy, Which! .... 315 Key Theocratic Assembly at
&
Cleveland ............
“The Wise" Testimony Period “Peace—Can It Last!”......
“Watchtower” Studies ____

317
306
306
306
& ft

THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
officers
N. H. Knorr, President	W. E. Van Ambubgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children,” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos Is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon It; that man willfully disobeyed God's law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death In order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus Is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah's organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed In the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon bls throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord's next great act Is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to •'fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wilL It arranges systematic Bible study for Its readers and the Societysupplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public Instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It Is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but Invites careful and critical examination of Its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United Statzs, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign. $1 50; Great Britain. Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bans Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances trom countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Forkion Offices
British 34 Craven Terrace. London, W.2, England
Canadian 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian__________7 Beresford Road, Strathfleld, N. S. W., Australia
South African Boston House, Cepe Town, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, novertv or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may hate The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting It, we are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulationa.
Notice to Subscribers.- Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested Chance of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, .V. T., under the Act of March 3, 1879
“THE WISE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The month of October is known by Jehovah’s witnesses as “The Wise” Testimony Period During this month the servants of Jehovah are putting forth an extraoidmary effort to magnify the Lord’s name and to advertise his kingdom in the earth. It is good to serve the Lord and to aid others, and those persons who are wise will put forth every effort to aid those who iove righteousness to seek the truth In Proverbs, chapter 8. verse 31 onward, this thought is brought to our attention, "Hear instruction, and be wise, and refuse it not. Blessed is the man that hcareth me, . . . for whoso findeth me findeth life, and shall obtain favour of the Lord.” During “The Wise” Testimony Period Jehovah's witnesses are offering the new book The New World and the booklet Peace—Can It Last! on a contribution of 25c, so that the people of good-will may receive instruction and be wise. All persons who love righteousness and want to help others find the way to life may share in the witness work during this period. If you are not already associated with a company of Jehovah’s witnesses and would like to be, write to Watchtower, 117 Adams St., Brooklyn, N. Y., and we will get you in touch with the nearest company, so you may share with these servants of the Lord in the proclamation of the Kingdom. In these perplexing times the wise man will seek the Lord and share his knowledge with others, so “that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God”.
“PEACE-CAN IT LAST’”
This new booklet contains the full text of the public address on this subject as heard round the world simultaneously m eighty cities at the New World Theocratic Assembly It presents the Scriptural, factual and hence authoritative answers to the questions. Can religion guarantee a lasting peace! What is the strange creature or beast that was and is not and shall again be present to the wonderment of the world! (Revelation 17) and, Who will establish over earth an enduring peace with righteousness! Peace—Can It Last! is paper-bound, but with a striking front-cover illustration, and may be had on contribution of 5c a copy.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of November 15: “Fighter for the New World” (Part 1), fl 1-15 inclusive, Th- Watchtower October 15, 1942.
Week of November 22: “Fighter for the New World” (Part 1), fl 16-32 inclusive, The Watchtower October 15,1942.
Week of November 29: “Fighter for the New World” (Part 1), fl 33-46 inclusive, The Watchtower October 15,1942.
ffieVWCHTOWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH'S KINGDOM
No. LXIII	October 15, 1942	No 20
FIGHTER FOR THE NEW WORLD
PART 1
"Jesus answered, My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom were of this world, then uould my servants fight."—John 18:36.
JEHOVAH is the mightiest fighter for the new world. His victory for it he long ago foreshadowed by his destruction of the forces of the old world as represented by ancient Egypt under Pharaoh. In the victory song those who were delivered from that 'old world’ power sang: “I will sing unto Jehovah, for he hath triumphed gloriously: the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea. Jehovah is a man of war: Jehovah is his name.”—Ex. 15:1,3, Am. Rev. Ver.
2 The prophet Moses led the Israelites in singing that song at the Red sea. He also was a fighter for a world of which Egypt was and is no part. He chose the people of Jehovah rather than the royal honors of Egypt, and his fight for the defense and deliverance of his Israelite brethren from Egypt caused him to be outlawed from that dark religious land of oppression. The first thing, in the land of his exile, he stood up and fought for the weak against the strong. Thereafter he became a shepherd among such weak ones, in a wild country, an occupation then attended with great danger. (Ex. 2:11-22; 3:1) In due time Jehovah sent him back to Egypt, where Moses took up anew the fight for the weak and oppressed. The fight finished in Jehovah’s glorious triumph over the then foremost power of the old world. Later, Moses under Jehovah’s inspiration declared himself to be a prophetic figure, foreshadowing a mighty Fighter to come, like Moses, only greater. The combined testimony of the inspired Scriptures is that such Fighter for Jehovah’s new world is God’s only begotten Son. By this mighty Judge and Warrior is the new world established, and he becomes Jehovah’s King of the world of righteousness that shall never have end.—Deut. 18:15-18; Acts 3: 22, 23; 7: 35-37; Heb. 1:1,2.
’ For more than forty-three centuries since the great flood of Noah’s day the invisible and visible
1	. Who la the mightiest fighter for the new world, and bow we* this called to attention in the song sung when be foreshadowed hl* victory for that new world?
2	(a) How did Moses prove he also was a fighter, down in Egypt, and during his exile, and then on his return to Egypt? (b) As such, of whom did Moses declare himself to be a prophetic figure, and what is the relation of such One to the new world?
3	What was pictured by the flood of Noah's day, what is signified in that conditions today are like those in his day, and what will then become the question determining one's survival?
powers which go to make up “this present evil world” have stood. (Gal. 1:4) That deluge of waters pictured Jehovah’s “strange act” in his fight for the new world. The fact that the conditions and happenings in our day are like but worse than those of Noah’s day is therefore of awful significance, if we believe the warning given us by Jesus Christ. (Matt. 24:37-39) We stand indeed at the portals of Jehovah’s new world, but we must first witness and experience his “strange act” surpassing even the Flood. Then it will be, not a question of “sink or swim”, but, Who is in the great Ark of safety and survival1
* How*, then, may anyone enter that ark? Is it by turning to religion, or by “more Religion”, as the politicians and clergy propose for their planned “new order” after this total war? No! Looking at the constant course of religion throughout all centuries, every honest person must admit that religion is of this world and takes part in this world’s organization. Therefore religion shall perish for ever with this old world, by Jehovah's “strange act”, which is the primary reason why his act is “strange” to religionists. Survey now what religion did to God’s chosen people of old, Israel, and the conclusion reached must be that the only way to survive is this: to immediately forsake religion and its confusion and take up the pure and undefiled worship of the great God Almighty of the new world, Jehovah. “Salvation belongeth unto Jehovah.”—Ps. 3:8, Am. Rev. Ver.
JUDGES
‘ From the Red sea Moses led the twelve tribes of Israel to the eastern bank of the Jordan river, opposite the Promised Land. En route Jehovah God by Moses as mediator between Him and Israel established by law the worship of the only true and living God among that people. He warned them against the snare of religion as practiced by the
4	. Is it by religion that anyone may enter that ark? and, after surveying religion's effect on Israel, what conclusion must be reached as to the only way to survive’
6. En route to the Promised Land, what safeguard and warning did God give to Israel, and whose lands did be give to Israel east of Jordan river, and why?
307
SKe WATCHTOWER,	Brooklyn, N. Y.
inhabitants of the Promised Land, which religious inhabitants must be destroyed as enemies of Jehovah and his Theocracy, in order to root out religion from that land of promise. (See Deuteronomy 7:16,25; Exodus 23:31-33.) The religious nations east of Jordan under Og and Sihon attacked Moses and Israel, and therefore Jehovah God destroyed those nations and gave their land to the Israelites, namely, the regions of Bashan and Gilead east of Jordan. Being cattle-raisers, half of the tribe of Manasseh was given the land of Bashan and part of Gilead, and the tribes of Reuben and Gad were given the remaining southern section of Gilead.
6	After Moses’ death Joshua led the Israelites across the Jordan into the Promised Land, and the remaining tribes were settled there in their assigned territories, after dispossessing the demon-worshipers in the land occupied. Not all such were driven out, and these with their religion proved a continual besetment and snare to the Israelites, who were under covenant obligations to worship and serve Jehovah. What next followed is important for those seeking life eternal to consider inasmuch as it provides a reliable prophetic picture of what has happened in the postwar period from and after A. D. 1918, where we are living. It shows the destiny of the nations of ‘Christendom” and heathendom, and discloses the destiny of those persons who as individuals take their stand on the side of Jehovah and his Righteous Government by Christ Jesus.
7	It is the day of judgment for the nations. The course of the nations, both those called “Christian” and those called “heathen”, shows they are headed for destruction at the hand of Jehovah’s Fighter for the world of righteousness, Christ Jesus. (Matt. 25:31,32) Of this One it is written: “In righteousness he doth judge and make war.” (Rev. 19:11) The fight of Armageddon comes after his judging of the nations is ended. The fight is in execution of the judicial decision rendered. To Christ Jesus Jehovah has committed all judgment and the power to execute judgment. (John 5:22,27) He was foreshadowed by the faithful judges whom Jehovah raised up in Israel.
' The term “judge” as used in the record of Judges does not mean a mere judicial officer drawing a salary from the government and being appointed by a politician or by popular vote. The term means one whom Jehovah God raised up in time of crisis and whom He appointed to lead the fight on religion, overthrow the power of the religious oppressors
6 After settling in the Promised Land, what proved a continual besetment and snare to Jehovah’s covenant people Israel, and why is it important for seekers of life to consider what followed thereafter? 7, Whither are the worldly nations headed, by whom will the judgment upon them be executed, and by whom was this Judge foreshadowed In Israel’
8.	(a) What does the term “judge” as used In the record of Judges mean? (b) What shows it to be God’s due time to study the prophetic drama of Jepbtbah, and of what benefit and effect will it be to lovers of righteousness to understand the drama?
over his people, and thereafter uphold God’s law and Theocratic organization among them and render judicial decisions in harmony therewith. This was for no selfish personal gain on his part. One such judge, the prophetic meaning of whose life the Lord God now makes clear, was Jephthah. The events of today fulfill the acts and scenes of the great prophetic drama in which Jephthah was the principal actor and show it to be God’s due time to study the role God had Jephthah play. The understanding thereof will gladden the heart of every lover of righteousness. It will stir up his zeal for the new world, enabling him to carry on in God’s service till the final victory is won and the new world established that it can never be moved. The next several issues of The Watchtower will, by God’s grace, carry forward the study of Jephthah. Those desiring to be and remain on the right side of the issue that has divided the living universe will follow these timely expositions carefully. The setting for the drama of Jephthah is laid in the tenth chapter of the book of Judges, and with that chapter our study now begins.
BACKSLIDERS INTO RELIGION
’ Israel was a typical Theocracy, because it was a nation administered and directed by God, and not by the people as in a democracy originating in the heathen land of ancient Greece several centuries before Christ. Instead of Jehovah deriving his powers from the consent of the governed and being servant to the people, the people worshiped and served Jehovah as the great Theocrat, and he appointed his own judge as his visible representative to the people. Judge Tola, who had served for twenty-three years, had just died. “And after him arose Jair, a Gileadite, and judged Israel twenty and two years. And he had thirty sons that rode on thirty ass colts, and they had thirty cities, which are called Havoth-jair [meaning, The villages of Jair] unto this day, which are in the land of Gilead. And Jair died, and was buried in Camon.”—Judg. 10:3-5.
10 Judge Jair was likely the descendant of the original Gileadite named Jair, a fighter, and mentioned at Numbers 32:39-41: “And the children of Machir the son of Manasseh went to Gilead, and took it, and dispossessed the Amorite which was in it. And Moses gave Gilead unto Machir the son of Manasseh; and he dwelt therein. And Jair the son of Manasseh went and took the small towns thereof, and called them Havoth-jair.” The death of Judge Jair left the nation of Israel without a visible judge. It put the Israelites under a great test as to faithfulness toward their covenant with Jehovah God and
9.	(a) Wbat differences between Theocracy and democracy prove wblcb one was the form of Israel's government? (b) With wbat part of the land of Israel was Judge Jair identified?
10.	(a) From whom was Judge Jair descended, and In what testing condition did bls death leave the nation of Israel? (b) That period corresponds with what time in the experience of the spiritual Israelites?
October 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER.
309
as to obedience to his commandments and as to their resistance to the religion of the enemies within and round about. The time that Israel was without a judge corresponds with the period when the spiritual Israelites, Jehovah’s covenant people of the present, were without their great Judge, because he had not come to the temple to begin judgment. His coming as Jehovah’s Messenger to the temple had been foretold and must take place. His presence at the great spiritual temple, though unseen by human eyes, was to be revealed by the events that followed his coming.—Mal. 3:1-3; 1 Pet. 4:17; Rom. 14:10; Matt. 25:31-46.
11	The physical facts, both immediately preceding 1918 and especially those that have followed since, prove that Christ Jesus came to the temple in the spring of 1918 and that since then the judgment day of the nations of the world has been under way. The climax, the execution of the judgment or judicial decision rendered, is near and all nations now face annihilation at Armageddon. The religious clergy of “Christendom” have failed to note this and to call it to the attention of the nations’ rulers, but Jehovah’s faithful witnesses have done so, as a warning to the nations.
12	What were the developments taking place among the spiritual Israelites just preceding the Judge’s coming to the temple? The conditions which developed in natural Israel of old give a true picture thereof. It is written: “And the children of Israel again did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, and served the Baalim, and the Ashtaroth, and the gods of Syria, and the gods of Sidon, and the gods of Moab, and the gods of the children of Ammon, and the gods of the Philistines; and they forsook Jehovah, and served him not.” (Judg. 10:6, Am. Rev. Ter.) The natural Israelites turned to religion. It was demonism, because the gods of those non-Israel-ite nations were demons worshiped under the symbol of idols, the Baalim statues representing Satan the Devil. The female Ashtaroth statues represented the so-called “queen of heaven”, Satan’s “woman”, that is, his organization of which he is husband and lordly head. The Philistines worshiped the Devil under the form of Baal-zebub, “the prince of the demons,” and also the fish-god Dagon, whose priests wore the tall hats split like an open fish-mouth and which hats were adopted by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and are worn by their popes and bishops to this day. The Ammonites worshiped the Devil under the name “Molech”, meaning “king”, or “Milconi”, meaning “their king”, denoting apolitical religion, the worship of the state.
11	(a) What year Is proved to be the year of the coming of the Judge? (b)Wbat, therefore, is now under way toward the worldly nations, and who is it that have failed as to thia information’
12	Before the coming of the next judge, to what did Israel turn, and whom did the> worship as named in the record?
” It needs no proof here that “Christendom”, which loudly claims to be spiritual Israel, has since her very beginning in the fourth century been given over to religion, or demonism, with politics as a close ally and supporter. Much has been published in previous issues of The Watchtower to show also that the Dagon-worshiping Philistines pictured the religious element of “Christendom”, in particular the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and its Catholic Action organizations. The Ammonites, as worshipers of the “king-god”, pictured the political element attached to and glorifying and serving the state, regardless of what its political form. The Moabites, a brother nation of the Ammonites, and worshipers of “Chemosh”, pictured the ally of religion and politics, namely, the commercial element.
24 Our concern, however, is chiefly with the true spiritual Israelites. These are in the midst of “Christendom”, but are no part of it. As long as forty years before 1918, so the historic facts show, the spiritual Israelites began to break away from “Christendom” and its religion, politics and commerce. They began to emerge to the light of the truth of God’s Word, the Bible, but down to 1918 they had not fully recovered from contact and association with such things in “Christendom". They still had many soils of religion on their garments, and the influence thereof prevented their full and proper worship of Jehovah God and Christ Jesus his King. While they had forsaken all politics of the world, yet in their desire to avoid all priestcraft and hierarchy they still carried on the democratic way of electing elders and other officers of their Christian congregations. Not yet had their eyes been opened to the Theocratic way as set forth in the Bible. It was even thought that when Christ Jesus should end his reign of one thousand years and deliver up all things to God the great Theocrat and be subject to Him, the form of government on earth would become democratic. (1 Cor. 15:24-28) Note some of the statements published before Jehovah’s King and Judge came to the temple:
“Thenceforth man shall again be king of the earth, subject to the Great King, Jehovah, in whose ‘everlasting kingdom’ Christ and the church will thereafter be associated. We may reasonably suppose that even perfect men will require some form of government, and that it will be a representative government, since every member of that human family will be perfect, and therefore equally a king with each other member. Such a government would be nothing more nor less than a republic, in which each individ-
13	How was this picture fulfilled in “Christendom’’, and who In “Christendom are pictured bj the Philiatlnes, the Ammonites and the Moabites whose gods Israel worshiped?
14	(a) When did the spiritual Israelites begin to break away from the three elements ot "Christendom". and bad they fully recovered therefrom hy 1Q18’ (b) What was their way of setting up officers in the congregations, and why, and what was their thought as to earth’s form of government at the end of Chnst’a thousand !ear reign?
310
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
ual is a sovereign, and one of their number is chosen as their servant or President.”—The Watch Tower and Herald of Christ's Presence, May 1, 1898, page 143.
“No one will dispute that a republic is the highest type of government. In a republic each citizen is a sovereign; and these sovereigns, by their votes, appoint some of their number to be their representatives and servants. . . . Had no fall occurred, undoubtedly this highest form of human government would have prevailed. . . . After Messiah’s kingdom shall have thoroughly subjugated sin, thoroughly uplifted humanity, absolutely destroyed all the wilfully wicked, and shall have completely brought the remainder of the race up to absolute perfection, then, at the close of Messiah’s reign, the earth to all eternity will be a republic, each member of the race a sovereign.”—The Watchtower February 15,1915, page 57.
“ Not then seeing that the Righteous Government over redeemed humankind on earth will forever be Jehovah’s Theocracy by Christ Jesus, the spiritual Israelites still accepted religion’s teaching, namely, that “the higher powers” to whom all souls should be subject are the political rulers of this world, the modern-day Ammonites. Now, in the light of the revealed Word of God, the faithful remnant of his covenant people see that Jehovah God and Christ Jesus are the only “Higher Powers”, and that they must obey These rather than men of the world.— Rom. 13:1-4; Acts 5:29; 4:19.
EIGHTEEN YEARS’ OPPRESSION
l# Does a Christian's conforming to the way of this world result to his good? Note the typical answer in the Record: “And the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Israel, and he sold them into the hand of the Philistines, and into the hand of the children of Ammon.” (Judg. 10:7, Am. Rev. Ver.) This shows that Jehovah God does not force or coerce creatures to serve him, and that those who make a covenant to do his will and then turn to religion Jehovah abandons to their course of action and its consequences, due to not heeding His warning. Religion proved to be a snare to the Israelites and led to their enslavement by the religious-political combine.
" In A. D. 1914 the “times of the Gentiles”, of 2,520 years’ duration, came to an end. That marked the time for Jehovah’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus to begin operating for the vindication of Jehovah’s name and the establishment of the Righteous Rule over the earth. Jehovah’s covenant
15.	At that time what religious teaching concerning powers of control were the spiritual Israelites still accepting, but what do they now see in that regard?
16	What facts concerning God’s dealing with creatures are shown by bis anger against the Israelites due to religion and bis selling them into the hands of the Philistines and Ammonites?
17.	The end of the Gentile Times, in 1914, marked the time for what action in heaven, and how was it marked on earth, and why?
people on earth called attention to this fact at the time. “Christendom’s” clergy, both Catholic and Protestant, refused to believe and notify their political allies of it, and, of course, the bloody World War broke out, exactly as Jesus foretold.
“ Like the Ammonites of Israel’s day, the political element came to the fore and set up war rule with its martial laws and prohibitions. The modern-day Philistines, the clergy under the lead of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, brought pressure upon their Ammonite allies, and these politicians used the wartime measures and hysteria to put Jehovah’s covenant people under bonds and restraints. They banned and seized their literature, and stopped the public witness being given concerning the end of the Gentile Times and the establishment of God’s Kingdom under Christ. Under the religious idea that the present-day Ammonites, or political rulers, were the “higher powers”, Jehovah’s people conscientiously subjected their souls to political-religious conspirators and refrained from the bold and continuous proclamation of the established Kingdom. Thus doing, they obeyed men rather than God’s supreme commands to be his witnesses having no fear of men. Those actually in bonds behind prison bars in Germany, Canada, and the United States, and elsewhere throughout “Christendom”, could do nothing. Their brethren, although outside, were likewise in a condition of restraint due to religious mischief framed by law. Let it not be overlooked that so-called “democratic” lands yielded to the totalitarian Roman Catholic Hierarchy and joined in the conspiracy against the worship of Jehovah by his servants.
l* “And that year they vexed and oppressed the children of Israel eighteen years, all the children of Israel that were on the other side [the eastern side of] Jordan, in the land of the Amorites, which is in Gilead.” (Judg. 10:8) The “other side” was the same side of the Jordan river as the Ammonites occupied. It was territory which they claimed belonged to them originally and was theirs by right, and they justified their aggressions against Jehovah’s covenant people on that false claim. In the spring of A. D. 1918 the world-wide oppression of the spiritual Israelites by the religious-political coconspirators reached its high point. That was when Jehovah’s servants were denied their constitutional rights in America and great religious persecution and mob violence were committed against them under the guise of patriotism. The Watch Tower Society’s officers were railroaded off to penitentiary on unproved charges, the Society was cut off also from its foreign branches, and its publications were pro-
18.	How did the modern-day Ammonites and Philistines use the circumstances of the World War against Jehovah’s co'enant people and into what condition did these come as to their service to God?
19.	How did the Ammonites Justify their aggressions against the land of the Israelites, and how did the modern-day Ammonite* commit like aggression* against spiritual Israelite* in 1918?
October 15,1942	THE WATCHTOWER,	311
scribed and much Bible literature was seized and destroyed.
80 Jehovah’s people, who are in a covenant to serve him according to his will and commandments, are his witnesses. The name “Gilead” means “heap of testimony” or “heap of witness”. It refers to the testimony or memorial of witness that was set up in that land to mark the nonaggression pact or agreement made between Jacob (later called “Israel”) and the father of Jacob's two wives. The pact guaranteed lasting peaceful relations between Jacob (Israel) and his father-in-law. It called upon Jehovah to watch between the two as to mutual performance by each party of the terms of their agreement for peace.
21	Today Christians who are Jehovah's covenant people should have witness of their peaceful relations with him and his organization. They enjoy “peace with God” through the Lord Jesus Christ as long as they keep their covenant with Jehovah God and do not fight against his Theocratic organization. (Rom. 5:1; 8:16,17) However, their enemies would have it otherwise. In their opposition to Jehovah’s Theocratic rule the political element of this world, together with the religious leaders, try to destroy this peaceful relationship of Jehovah’s people with him. They try to take away the witness which Christians enjoy of such relationship with the Father. This they do by efforts to coerce them to violate their conscience and their covenant with Jehovah. They also interfere in their field of activity and service unto God and by force and by mischievous laws and judicial decisions prevent them from carrying out God’s commandments freely and publicly. Thereby they endeavor to cause his covenant people to fail of obeying God’s laws and to thus prove disobedient to him. The modern-day Ammonites and Philistines did so during and after the World War period of 1914-1918, and their tactics today are a malicious repetition of those of the past which then worked with such success.
22	The ‘Ling-god” devotees extended their aggressions to other tribes of Israel. “Moreover, the children of Ammon passed over Jordan to fight also against Judah, and against Benjamin, and against the house of Ephraim; so that Israel was sore distressed.” (Judg. 10:9) According to God’s decree at Deuteronomy 2:19-21 and 32: 8, 9, the Ammonites had no right on the west side of Jordan river. The crossing over and assaulting the tribes of Judah, Benjamin and Ephraim was simply an act of aggression against the typical Theocracy "which Jehovah had set up over the Israelites in their God-given
20 What does the name “Gilead” mean, and to what does it refer as between Jacob and his father-in-law’
21	What witness to their relationship with Jehovah God should Cbnstiana have today, and how do the political and religious elements try to take away and destroy that witness and relationship?
22	What did the Ammonites' crossing Jordan and attacking other tribes of Israel picture, and bow did this fulfill the prophecy of Jesus concerning his followers at the end of the world?
territory. Hence the Ammonites’ move pictured a like move of the religious-political schemers for world domination against Jehovah’s Theocratic Government. That heavenly government under Christ began operations toward this earth in 1914. Not strange that then the World War was let loose and the servants of Jehovah and his Government were hated in all nations, in fulfillment of Jesus’ prophecy setting forth the proofs of the end of the Devil’s uninterrupted rule. That same Jesus declared that what was done to his followers was done to him, and hence that the hating of his faithful followers who were announcing his Kingdom was also hatred expressed against Christ Jesus, who had begun his active rule in 1914. The sore distress that thus came upon spiritual Israel was long ago foretold by the prophet Jeremiah and was called “Jacob’s trouble”. (Jer. 30:5-9) Mark now how Jehovah wrought deliverance for his people.
CRY FOR FREEDOM OF WORSHIP
” “And the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, saying, We have sinned against thee, both because we have forsaken our God, and also served Baalim.” (Judg. 10:10) This was evidently toward the end of their eighteen years’ oppression by the Ammonites and their coconspirators, the Philistines. We are now more than eighteen years removed from that critical year of 1918, and can therefore scrutinize the eighteen years that followed down till 193G, years marked by continuous persecution and oppression upon those publishing Jehovah’s name and kingdom. This persecution has been particularly marked since the new name, “Jehovah’s witnesses,” was discerned and adopted as their proper name in 1931. This fulfilled the ancient prophecy: “Thou shalt be called by a new name, which the mouth of Jehovah shall name.” (Isa. 62:2, Awi.Rev. Fer.) What name! “Ye are my witnesses, saith Jehovah, and I am God.” (Isa. 43:12, A. R. F.) .After twelve years of strenuous witnessing from 1919 forward amid the heat of persecution the revelation of the “new name” was made to them in 1931 as a reward. (Matt. 20: 1-16) During those twelve years many sincere seekers for God got their eyes open to the frauds and oppressions of religion and its allies. They repented and turned to Jehovah, and the Lord God brought them into his “vineyard” to serve with his older members of the faithful remnant, and these all shared in the “new name”.
21 The years of affliction, from 1918 onward, did not turn the remnant of Jehovah’s covenant people away from him, but caused them to repent and seek
23 When did the Israelites repent and cry to the Lord, and in the fulfillment of the drama, wbat facts down to 1931 show repentance and turning to God on the part of the spiritual Israelites ">
24 Wbat effect did the eighteen years of affliction, from 1918 onward, have on Jehovah's people, and what were they stirred to do respecting service, organisation and worship 1
312
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
his face. It stirred them to put away all things of this world, every thing tainted with religion, which is demonism. This was accompanied by constantly increasing their efforts in the service as witnesses to Jehovah’s name and his Government for the new world. To this end there was a steady reorganization among them to bring the organization more and more in line with the Lord’s will and to make it more efficient in doing his “strange work”. In 1932, or eighteen years after 1914, the religious “elective elders” who were an obstacle to the Lord’s work were removed as being contrary to Scripture. Still later, in 1936, or eighteen years after 1918, the Lord God enlightened the eyes of his witnesses to see that all religion is a snare, and that Christianity is distinct therefrom. They saw that the true worship of God (or “Christianity”) is the doing of God’s commandments as Christ Jesus does them, and that God’s law was given as a protection against religion’s snare. Thereafter the faithful remnant of Christians shocked the self-righteous feelings of “Christendom” by outrightly declaring that “religion is a snare and a racket”. This brought fiercer persecution upon such Christians.
TEST OF SINCERITY
” When the Israelites cried to Jehovah he did not immediately deliver them, but tested their sincerity by delay. “And the Lord said unto the children of Israel. Did not I deliver you from the Egyptians, and from the Amorites, from the children of Ammon, and from the Philistines? The Zidonians also, and the Amalekites, and the Maonites did oppress you; and ye cried to me, and I delivered you out of their hand.” (Judg. 10:11,12) The Watchtower, as an instrument in Jehovah’s hand, has since 1919 reminded his covenant people of like things. It has referred them to the inspired statements at 1 Corinthians 10:11 and Romans 15: 4, and has emphasized that those deliverances of ancient Israel were all typical or prophetic of grander acts to come; and that they were recorded in the Scriptures for the admonition, guidance and comfort of persons seeking to serve the only true and living God today at the end of the world. Such recorded deliverances call their attention to Jehovah who has saved and who can still save in fulfillment of his promise to do so. Hence the oppressed covenant people of God should turn to the one and only Savior and Deliverer and wait upon him for liberation, in the meantime faithfully serving as his witnesses to others concerning these vital truths.—Isa. 43:9-13.
”It would be out of pure mercy and only for the vindication of his name if Jehovah God rescued the
25	. How did Jehovah test out the sincerity of the Israelites who cried unto him, and how has The "Watchtower called attention to things like those God brought to Israel's remembrance?
26	. What was God's purpose In delaying to deliver the people called by bis name, and in what sense would he deliver such Israelites no mors?
people upon whom his name was called after he had given them fair warning after previous exhibitions of deliverance. Said He: “Yet ye have forsaken me, and served other gods; wherefore I will deliver you no more.” (Judg. 10:13) This meant that God would delay to deliver them, in order that they might be chastened and thus purified. The delay would prove whether their cries were solely to escape the physical oppression and hardships laid upon them by the demon-worshipers, or whether they really wanted to serve Jehovah fully, abundantly, and without restrictions by the oppressors. (Heb. 12:5-11) He would deliver them no more unless their repentance was deep-seated, from their heart, because of the reproach they had brought upon his name and because of displeasing him. Also they must harbor no desire to commit folly and return again to religion. (Ps. 85:8,9) Jehovah was warning that they could not endlessly trifle with him, because his time of dealing with them as a typical nation was limited, and his time might come when he would never again deliver them as a “nation”. (John 11: 48; Acts 24:17 ; 26: 4) Such time did finally come when the nation of Israel rejected the King Christ Jesus and his apostles. Thereafter only a “remnant” were saved out of that nation.—Rom. 11:5, 7.
27 Likewise, after the Lord’s coming to the temple, which was in 1918, God will not save “Christendom” as an organization, due to her rebellious conduct toward Him and his Theocracy under Christ. Jehovah, according to his promise, saves only a “remnant” of true spiritual Israelites who become his official witnesses and servant upon earth. Besides these he saves the persons of good-will who heed the witness given and join themselves to the remnant as companions in sendee. (Isa. 1:9; 10:20-22; Rom. 9:27-29) Hence Jehovah’s judicial announcement now by his Judge at the temple to the organizations of professed Christians is: “He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him be righteous still: and he that is holv, let him be holv still.”—Rev. 22:11.	’	‘
*’ God’s primary purpose is not to save mere human creatures who have no rightful claim upon him, but is to vindicate his name. Therefore he says to those who reject him and turn to other gods for protection and salvation: “Go and cry unto the gods which ye have chosen; let them deliver you in the time of your tribulation.” (Judg. 10:14) Regardless of what choice creatures make, Jehovah will vindicate his own name and prove He is the only God and Deliverer, and that Christ Jesus is his appointed
27	. What organization like unfaithful Israel will Jehovah not save, but whom will he save at this time, and what is bls judicial announcement concerning fixed destinies?
28	As concerning vindication and salvation, wbat Is shown in that God bade the Israelites to go and cry to the gods of their choice, and wbat does he bid "Christendom" to do, and why?
October 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
313
King, Judge and Savior for those who seek the new world. In the present distress of nations and with a black future ahead ‘'Christendom” turns to religion, which is demonism, and not to Jehovah God and his Theocracy for deliverance. She uses the name of God on her lips, but idolizes and deifies heroes, men of affairs, and systems of human government. To such she looks for deliverance from the impending disaster. By such exaltation and adoration of creatures of this world men commit the worship of the “god of this world”, who is the enemy of Jehovah the Creator of the righteous new world. The Lord God did not act on the pope’s “Holy Year” of 1933 for peace and prosperity, and when “Christendom” with all religious formality cries further to God in her great extremity’ he will not answer. “And he shall say, Where are their gods, their rock in whom they trusted; which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drank the wine of their drink offerings? let them rise up and help you, and be your protection.” (Deut. 32: 37,38; Jer. 2: 28-30; Prov. 1: 24, 31) The “god of this world” will be unable to save “Christendom”.
29	The Divine Record marks out the way of obtaining mercy and deliverance. “And the children of Israel said unto Jehovah, We have sinned: do thou unto us whatsoever seemeth good unto thee; only deliver us, we pray thee, this day. And they put away the foreign gods from among them, and served Jehovah; and his soul was grieved for the misery of Israel.” (Judg. 10:15,16, Am. Rev. Ver.) It was particularly in 1936, toward the close of the eighteen years after 1918, that the spiritual Israelites, Jehovah’s witnesses, and their companions came to realize that they had aforetime been spotted and deceived by religion, and that due to it they had sinned against Jehovah God and failed to keep his commandments to be his faithful and true witnesses. They had given way to fear and reverence of creatures, which is religion. From and after the Lord's coming to the temple they repented and mended their ways. Specially from 1922 on, when the presence of the Lord at the temple was revealed to them as in the temple picture recorded at Isaiah 6:1-11, they made confession of having sinned. They confessed to having come short during the faith-testing World War period due to their failure to keep on obeying God as his public witnesses testifying to his Kingdom now set up.
20	It was before the eighteen years’ oppression was up that the Israelites of old repented, confessed, and put aside the demon gods and their emblems. This proved that they did not permit the oppression to
29 What confession did Israel then make to God, and what like confession did the spiritual Israelites make after 1918, and particularly toward the close of the eighteen years thereafter?
30.	What course did Israel then take toward religion or demonlsm, and what was the motive behind their prayer for deliverance?
embitter them against God, who permitted it for their chastening, but would serve Jehovah God because it was right and was in keeping with their covenant with him, and because idolatry of creatures, animate or inanimate, was an insult to sane human intelligence. Their prayer for deliverance was that they might be an honor to his name and be a “holy nation” unto him and thereby be proper witnesses before all the nations of the world. Such, too, was the prayer of Jehovah’s faithful remnant at the time that the World War w’as stopped, in November, 1918, leaving them still alive on earth, but under restraints and oppression by the modern-day Ammonites.
” Jehovah’s “Messenger” was then at the temple, and the prophecy had foretold that he would judge and purge and cleanse those sincerely dedicated to his service and would set them in the way of the pure and acceptable worship of the Lord God. (Mal. 3:1-4) This cleansing work, by means of the spirit of the Lord and the purifying power of the truths revealed, Jehovah’s Messenger and Judge did. The faithful remnant responded and carefully and anxiously put away all traces of religion, laying it aside as “the sin which doth so easily beset us”. They underwent training for His service and were anointed and sent forth as Jehovah’s witnesses. For this they have been severely criticized, condemned, opposed, and persecuted, and the Ammonites and Philistines of today in their alarm have raised the counter-cry of “Give us more religion. The world needs more religion to save it from disaster.” In response, in an astonishing decision on June 8,1942, the majority of the Supreme Court ruled that a license-tax may be imposed upon faithful Christians who in obedience to Jehovah God’s command distribute his message of hope and comfort from house to house. This decision favors the worldly desire for the establishment of religion in America in the postwar “new order”.
*! The political-religious conspirators need not think that Jehovah is unaware of the ill-treatment which he permits upon his witnesses. When Israel of old, under Ammonitish-Philistine oppression, forsook religion and turned to his worship and cried to him, then, it is written, “his soul was grieved for the misery of Israel.” He took action to avenge his name and punish the oppressors and deliver his people. Doubtless Jesus had this in mind when he gave the parable of the judge who finally yielded to the persistent pleadings of the widow. Jesus applied the parable to this time just before the day of God’s vengeance, saying: “And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though
31.	Who did the cleansing work toward Jehovah's faithful remnant, how did these respond, and what countermovement have the Ammonites and Philistines of today carried on?
32	Being grieved for the misery of repentant Israel, for what purpose did Jehovah then take action, and how did Jesus confirm the like action as being due since hia coming to the temple?
SFEe WATCHTOWER.	Brooklyn, N. Y.
he bear long with them? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith on the earth?” (Luke 18:7,8) Certainly, since his coming to the temple, he has not found this faith or belief in “Christendom”; for she keeps up and increases her persecution and oppression of Jehovah’s elect servants on earth.
GATHERING AGAINST THEOCRACY
” Totalitarian rule is the avowed handmaid of religion and enemy of the Lord’s Theocratic Government. That fact is attested by the six thousand faithful Jehovah’s witnesses whose organization was broken up on Hitler's seizure of the dictatorship and who linger in German concentration camps to this day. Concerning the totalitarian-religious combine of which Hitler and the Vatican are symbols the prophecy of Daniel, chapter eleven, speaks. It describes their aggressions in the “time of the end”, where we now are, and says: “He shall enter also into the glorious land, and many countries shall be overthrown; but these shall escape out of his hand, even Edom, and Moab, and the chief of the children of Ammon.” (Dan. 11:41) Why Ammon? The prophetic drama of the judges shows it is because the Ammonites commit the same type of acts against the earthly condition or “land” of the representatives of the glorious Theocratic Government. Judges 10:17 reads: “Then the children of Ammon were gathered together [were cried together (margin)], and encamped in Gilead.” The Ammonitish political element of “Christendom” were cried together by the deceiving slogans and all the religious-Nazi-Fascist propaganda, over a stretch of years, even in such democratic lands as America and Britain. The modern-day Ammonite forces are gathered together in various religious and patriotic organizations, such as Catholic Action, whose real purposes are political. Such organizations the Hierarchy of Vatican City schemes to use to fight the Hierarchy’s battles and to protect it from exposure by the light of the truth.
’* The Ammonites pitched tent in Gilead, part of the territory of the typical Theocracy. The reason for their invasion was evidently that the Israelites put away the gods of the Ammonites and allies and came out wholly and unequivocally for Jehovah God as the Most High and the only true God, the Supreme Power whose laws and commandments must be obeyed, regardless of the conflicting laws of the oppressor totalitarian dictators. The demon gods stirred up the Ammonites to resent this as a slur
33	(a) What relation do the tacts show totalitarian rule has with religion and with The Theocracy, and why is it that Ammon escapes out of the hand of “the king of the north ’* (b) How are the Ammonites of “Chnatpndom” cried together and gathered together, and for what purpose?
34	(a) What was the reason for the Ammonite invasion of Gilead, and how did patriotism come to be involved? (b) In fulfillment of the drama, when did the political march Into “Gilead” begin and with what political maneuvers?
on their political position in Satan’s world. It also exposed to ridicule the religion which their hearts cherished. Theirs was a political religion, glorifying the demon-god whose name means “their king”. Their patriotism for the state sprang forth from their religion and caused them to put the state up above Jehovah, Israel’s God, and to fight against his covenant people. The Ammonite military forces encamping in Gilead, which name means “heap of witness”, got out of their bounds and onto holy ground, where they ought not to stand. (Matt. 24:15,16; Mark 13:14) In modern fulfillment, it appears that the political march into “Gilead” and encamping there began particularly in 1933, when the pope's "sword of the church” for restoring in Europe the “Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation” was put into power as totalitarian ruler of Germany. Without delay he made his concordat with Pius XI and took action against Jehovah’s witnesses in that land.
” The Lord’s covenant nation, now cleansed of religion, rose up to meet the aggressor. “And the children of Israel assembled themselves together, and encamped in Mizpeh.” (Judg. 10:17) "Mizpeh” (or “Mizpah”) means “watchtower”. Here it refers to “Mizpeh of Gilead”. (Judg. 11:29) Just how the city or town of that name came to be so called is explained at Genesis 31:48, 49 regarding the covenant made between Jacob (surnamed Israel) and Laban his father-in-law. “And Laban said, This heap is a witness between me and thee this day. Therefore was the name of it called Galeed [Heap of witness]; and Mizpah [Watchtower] ; for he said, The Lord watch between me and thee, when we are absent one from another.” Hence the watching means carefulness as to fulfilling one’s covenant with Jehovah and lest one violate the covenant and earn Jehovah’s disapproval.
’* Since the watch-place at the stone-heap bearing witness to the covenant was situated in Gilead, the watching must apply to carrying out one’s covenant with Jehovah to be his witness and to be at peace, harmony and unity with his Theocratic organization. This is shown by the further words of Jacob’s fatherin-law concerning his two daughters, Jacob’s wives, who pictured God’s “woman” or organization: “If thou shalt afflict my daughters, or if thou shalt take other wives [picturing organizations other than that of Jehovah] beside my daughters, no man is with us”; that is, to make a checkup and call the offender to account. But, “see, God is witness betwixt me and thee. And Laban said to Jacob, Behold this heap, and behold this pillar, which I have cast betwixt me and thee; this heap be witness, and this pillar be
35.	Where did the Israelites then encamp, what does the name of the place mean, and how did it come to be so called*
36.	What is Indicated by the fact that the watch place was In Gilead, and alto by Laban’s further words at and concerning the watch-place?
October 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER.
315
witness, that I will not pass over this heap to thee, and that thou shalt not pass over .this heap and this pillar unto me, for harm. The God of [thy grandfather] Abraham, and the God of [my grandfather] Nahor, the God of their father, judge betw’ixt us. And Jacob sware by the fear of his father Isaac.”— Gen. 31:50-53.
” From the above historical circumstances the rally of the Israelites to Mizpah in Gilead pictured how Jehovah’s faithful remnant rallied together to fulfill their covenant obligation to be his witnesses on earth to all nations, particularly from and after learning their “new name” in 1931 and adopting it. In 1937 the battle-cry stated in Obadiah’s prophecy, verse one, was raised, to go into action against demonism, which is religion. Shortly after the mass assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses at Columbus, Ohio, that year, with an attendance enlarged by a network of over 130 radio stations tied in with the convention, Jehovah God revealed to his witnesses that the Theocratic rule is the correct one for his organized servants. In the Watchtower editions of June, 1938, the Theocratic organization was Scripturally discussed and explained, and, beginning with October 1 thereafter, the Theocratic rule was established and set in operation in Jehovah’s visible organization on earth. This was long ago foreshadowed by Israel’s action at the Ammonitish invasion peril.
POPULAR RULE OR THEOCRACY, WHICH?
” “And the people and princes of Gilead said one to another, What man is he that will begin to fight against the children of Ammon! he shall be head over all the inhabitants of Gilead.” (Judg. 10:18) The people doubtless included many “strangers” or nonIsraelites who had taken up their sojourn with Jehovah’s Theocratic nation and had submitted themselves to His laws. This harmonizes with the actual facts of today. There is a multitude of persons of good-will who have heeded the warning message sounded by Jehovah’s witnesses, and these have associated themselves with such in the war of truth against religion. Side by side they resist the totalitarian invasion of the worship of Jehovah. The inquiry by the people and princes of Gilead foreshadowed that J ehovah’s witnesses would search the inspired Scriptures, and also study his latter-day dealings with them and his work of witnessing for them to do. With what purpose in mind! This, namely, to determine authoritatively the manner of organization approved and ordained by Jehovah God to do that -work. It was a time of extreme
37.	What, then, did the rally of the Israelites to Mizpah picture, when was the battle-crv raised, and what rule of organization was shortly thereafter established?
3S (a) At the camp in Mizpah, whom did the “people" doubtless include as confirmed by the facts of today? (b) What was foreshadowed by the inquiring of the people and princes of Gilead concerning a man to begin the ngbting against Ammon, and why was this needful?
danger, and a time for united, hard-hitting action, and the democratic, individual rule of procedure had not worked nor stood the test as being Scriptural. Due to Vatican City and its subtle scheme of Roman Catholic control of the world, totalitarian rule or a world federation with a seat of centralized religious-political control and with religion on top had appeared as a menace to all nations and as the arch foe on earth of God’s Righteous Government for the new* world. The big question raised in Christian minds was, Who can and will fight the monstrosity and stop once and for ever its aggressions on earth! Of themselves the little band of Jehovah’s witnesses could not do so.
” Turning back to the prophetic drama staged in Gilead: Why were the repentant Israelites who had turned to Jehovah perplexed! Why did not those Gileadites go forward, trusting in the Lord God? In asking and seeking for a man to lead the fight, were they relying on the arm of flesh instead of on Jehovah God? Were they committing the same mistake as the Israelites did many years later in asking for a visible king to be ruler over them? No, not that. The Gileadites were eager to fight, for they had raised an army and put it in the field and it was bivouacking at “Watchtower” (Mizpah) of Gilead. What they waited for and wanted wras an organizer and director of field operations, in order that they might attack the Ammonites in organized manner with telling blows and so accomplish the victory to Jehovah's honor and glory. They wanted field-service reorganization. The field maneuvers must be done orderly, with proper organization instructions from the right source subject to God’s guidance. Instead of each pushing himself forward like office-seekers in a political fight in a democratic country and settling the issue by the people’s votes at the polls, those princes and the people of Gilead looked for the chosen one of the great Theocratic Ruler, the God of Israel.
‘° To that one indicated of God they would yield their personal or sovereign rights and privileges in subjection to him. Said they: “He shall be head over all the inhabitants of Gilead.” In the crisis they did not want a number of heads with divided opinions and conflicting campaign plans of action; no, but unified, central command! They wanted to conform to Jehovah’s former ways of dealing with his people to give them the victory, as, for example, when He raised up his visible Theocratic representative to act the part of judge, such as Ehud, Barak, Gideon, and others. This time they did not want to dash
39	What was the real desire behind the waiting and looking for a man to begin the figbt, and did they proceed in a democratic fashion toward settling the issue?
40	(a) Why at that time did they decide that such man should be bead over them, and what kind of command would such arrangement mean51 (b) What is the only way to meet the aggression of the total state under demon control?
316
3Ee WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
ahead and overlook the Lord God’s provisions, but again they desired to have a Theocratic representative to be at the head and to issue God’s instructions. The Theocratic organization is the only way to meet the total state with its despotic, dictatorial head under demon control. Back there, the organization of Israel without a visible king was in fact a Theocratic organization. If everybody was faithful to God’s covenant and kept his Theocratic laws given to Israel, then all would be well with the nation. Such willing submission to Jehovah God and his commandments and arrangement for worship would be the national expression that alloAved the most freedom to the individuals for right-doing. It is so stated in the very last verse of the book of Judges: ‘Tn those days there was no king in Israel: every man did that which was right in his own eyes.”—Judg. 21: 25.
41	However, in a war against a regimented, authoritarian heathen nation engaged in a “total Avar” which made every individual in the state a part of the Avar machine, the Israelites could not afford to have any looseness of organization according to Avhich “every man did that Avhich Avas right in his o\vn eyes”. They needed then a Theocratic “head”, the same as in the case of earlier deliverances of Israel by Almighty God. To such head these Gileadites promised to yield obedience. They would hold fast to him as the Lord’s choice and be subject to organization instructions through him and carry them out.
42	Notably after the assault upon Jehovah’s covenant people by the totalitarian modern Ammonites under Hitler together Avith his “fifth column” agents planted in all outside lands, including the United States and other democratic countries, the like problem confronted spiritual Israel. Prior to this the organization of Jehovah’s Avitnesses had shown some looseness, with the authority considerably divided, resulting in confusion, friction, and self-obstruction. An overhauling Avas needed. A beginning of this had been made Avith the dropping of the Society’s traveling-speaker representatives, mere lecturers, and the replacing of such by “regional service” representatives, Avho Avere sent out on “serA*ice appointments”. (See the last page of The Watchtower of February 1,1928, in contrast with that of previous issues.) The decision to do this was made at a special meeting at the international convention of Jehovah’s Avitnesses at Toronto, July 18-26, 1927, the sixth of a series of seven annual assemblies. (See Revelation 9:13-21 and 16:12-16.) In the course of a speech to that vast gathering the Society’s president said:
“There are those today in the church occupying the responsible position of elder who insist on hold-
41. Although Israel was then under a Theocratic arrangement, what specially did they need in that time of war and what must they render? 42. What like problem confronted spiritual Israel after the totalitarian assault began, and how bad an overhauling of the organization been begun In 1927*1928?
ing to many of the foolish things brought from Babylon [organized religion]; who refuse to encourage their brethren to have part in the service and who refuse to participate in the service themselves. They object to the truth that appears in The Watchtower and discourage the brethren in the study thereof. They scoff at the suggestion of going from door to door to carry the message of the kingdom to the people. By their course of action they cause discouragement and division amongst the brethren. The time has come for the faithful to mark such and to avoid them, and to say to them that no longer will we entrust such men with the office of eldership. They should be invdted to take a back seat until they learn to co-operate in the Lord’s service. I Avould like to ascertain the sentiment of this convention in regard to this statement. Those who believe that this statement is correct and that the elders should encourage the brethren in the service and encourage them in studying The Watchtower and themselves take the lead in the house-to-house service work, and that if the elders refuse to do this they should be invited to take a back seat, signify their approval by standing up.”—The Watchtoicer October 1, 1927, page 293, paragraph 6.
41 Under the great Theocrat’s leadings, in 1932 an investigation Avas made into the question of such “elective elders”, that is, so-called “elders” elected to position by the democratic vote of the congregations of Christians. The findings were published in the Watchtower issues of August 15 and September 1, 1932, in the article “Jehovah’s Organization”, to this effect, that “elective elders” are unscriptural. On pages 265 and 266 of such issue of The Watchtouer a resolution was proposed for companies of Jehovah’s Avitnesses to adopt, setting up a service committee with a “service director” in place of having a board of elective elders and deacons. This resolution was adopted and put into effect by the organized companies all the Avorld round.
44 Even with the above reorganization for battle against demonism the proper principle of headship and leadership Avas not discerned according to which Jehovah’s witnesses could determine the one who “shall be head over all the inhabitants of Gilead”. The locating of the proper “head” required still more searching, prayer and study. In Jehovah’s due time the true, rightful and divinely ordained “head” was found. This was when Jehovah revealed that his organization in heaven and in earth is Theocratic. It is ruled, not from the bottom up, but from the top doAvn, and Christ Jesus, under Jehovah God, is the Theocratic Head of Zion, God’s capital organization.
43.	What findings were made in 1932 concerning ’ elective elders", and bow were such elected ‘‘elders" disposed of’
44.	With wbat revelation concerning God’s organization was the proper principle of headship and leadership discerned?
October 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
317
*’ These truths were published in the June issues of The Watchtower of 1938, under the heading "Organization”. Because of its instant importance the following quotations are made therefrom:
“Jesus Christ is ‘the Head of the church’, which is his body. (Col. 1:18) Jehovah is the ‘head of Christ’ (1 Cor. 11:3), and therefore Zion, God’s capital organization, is a Theocratic government, a pure Theocracy, and not ‘a peoples’ mandate’ or a government ‘of the people, by the people’. The organization of Jehovah is a kingdom. .. . For this reason there are no individuals in the organization under Christ Jesus who hold a superior degree or rank of superiority. ‘All are one in Christ Jesus’ and under Christ Jesus, the Head. Jehovah God and Christ Jesus are the Teachers, and Christ Jesus at the temple is in immediate command of the organization invisible and visible. Separate and individual rights do not exist, but every member of the organization must of necessity be in complete subjection to the Head.”
"Jesus Christ, Jehovah’s great Apostle or Sent
45 When and where were such revealed truths published, and what truths were set forth concerning the organization, its head and Its members, and also the Lord's visible representative?
One, and who is at the temple, has laid hands’ upon ‘The Society’ as his ‘faithful and wise servant’ and visible representative. (2 Tim. 1:6)... ‘The Society,’ acting as the servant and representative of the Lord, commits the testimony work to the Lord’s faithful witnesses now on the earth. (2 Tim. 2:2) They too must study to properly perform and set forth the will of God for his people. (2 Tim. 2:15)”—The Watchtotver June 1, 1938, paragraphs 2 and 38.
16 Forthwith the entire organization of Jehovah’s covenant people throughout the earth was brought into line with the Theocratic rule and on the first of October that year the Theocratic organization was set going, with amazing results to follow despite the world-wide totalitarian menace. Thus, in Jehovah's appointed time and under his unfailing guidance, his devoted witnesses and their earthly companions found the One, Jehovah’s chosen One, who should be their "Head” in the war against the demons and religion. (Eph. 6:12) How all this was marvelously staged in miniature in the experiences of the Gileadites The Watchtower will show in its next issue.
(To be continued)
4G Wben was the Theocratic organization thereafter set going, and what did this show that Jehovah’s covenant people had found’
KEY THEOCRATIC ASSEMBLY AT CLEVELAND
THE new world of righteousness is at the doors. The judgment of the nations of the old world is hastening to its disastrous climax, and the peoples are steadily being pressed to an individual decision and being divided for and against the new world. Such momentous facts were made sharply to appear by the convening of the New World Theocratic Assembly and by its attending circumstances and the train of events that followed, all in the midst of the old world girded for total war over world domination.
Never has the old world witnessed such an event as an earth-wide convention, embracing North America, Central America, South America, West Indies, Britain, Sweden, West Africa, South Africa, and Hawaii, and including more than 80 cities all featuring identically the same program of speeches and activities and on the same days. Such was this New World Theocratic Assembly, held September 18,19,20, by Jehovah’s witnesses, and with Cleveland, Ohio, as the key city. The successful conclusion of this stupendous gathering of heralds and ambassadors of Jehovah’s new world who are hated, opposed and persecuted by all nations of “Christendom” was a victory for the new world. The fact that only one out of the originally scheduled number of cities in the United States failed of gatherings shows that the “god of this world” and his demons and human dupes failed, and the rift between the New World “sheep” and the Old World “goats” has become wider.
At the key city, Cleveland, the representatives of practically every company of Jehovah’s witnesses throughout the United States, and from across its borders, particularly from Canada, thronged into the stately and beautiful Public Auditorium, near the lake-front of Lake Erie and across
the street from the Cleveland City Hall, and, a little beyond, the mammoth Cleveland Stadium. By this \ ery proximity of locations the outlines of the doomed world and those of the incoming “world without end” stood forth m bold relief, in absolute contrast with one another. Nightly the Stadium crackled and boomed with the show of the military forces of "the king of the south” with many thousands attracted thither to watch the maneuvers; whereas at the Public Auditorium the thousands of devoted followers of Jehovah’s “Prince of Peace” joined in songs of praise to the glorious Builder of the righteous New World and hearkened to messages concerning His Theocratic Government under Christ and its service, and united in prat er for the increase of that Kingdom.
It was not the city mayor’s standing by his contract for the use of the Cleveland Public Auditorium by Jehovah's witnesses at cost of thousands of dollars that showed where his heart was. It was his statement published in all the newspapers the day before the assembly, and in which statement he declared he could not attend the Theocratic Assembly’s public meeting, and would not attend even if he had no other engagement, and then cordially invited all the people of Cleveland to stay away from the worship of Almighty God, Jehovah, at the Public Auditorium. Whose voice did the “sheep” in Cleveland choose to hear and follow, that of the anti-Jehovah mayor or that of the Great Shepherd of the sheep, whose Psalm 23 the mayor doubtless repeats at religious meetings! The mayor’s religious statement caused considerable resentment among the citizenry, and the independent-minded people of this city of 900,000 gave him a •decided answer Sunday by packing out the Public Audito-
318
THE WATCHTOWER
num and its subsidiary halls at the public address on “Peace—Can It Last?”
At the time of making arrangements months in advance, the Cleveland Convention and Visitors Committee had expressed doubt that, since the death of the Watch Tower Society’s president last January, the Assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses could fill the Auditorium; to the Committee Jehovah’s witnesses were an organization founded by and following a man and hence doomed to come to nought; and the Committee listed sixteen conventions including that of Jehovah's witnesses as due to be held in Cleveland, and it estimated a total of 7,000 for all sixteen conventions. The spirit of Jehovah in his people put that worldly Committee to shame; at the address of welcome by the chairman opening the Theocratic Assembly Friday evening, September 18, at eight o’clock, there were more than double the above-given total figure, upward of 14,000 of Jehovah’s servants. Gasrationing, war-time inconveniences, and international boundaries were unable to cause them to ‘forsake the assembling of themselves together’. (Heb. 10:25) They obeyed God, and feared not man.
SURPRISES MARK PROGRAM OF EVENTS
The morning and afternoon of the opening day witnessed the continuing arrival of many thousands in the city, keeping the Rooms Accommodation department in the basement of the Auditorium well occupied, and also the Territory Assignment department Hence these hours were given over to field activities, brief assemblies being held at 8: 30 a m. and 3 p.m. to give instructions from the platform and to send the Kingdom publishers forth unitedly to witness from house to house, do information walking with placards or distributing handbills advertising the public address, or offer the Watchtower and Consolation magazmes on the street corners. Such witnessing was done both in Cleveland and in many near-by towns and terntones The police acted with understanding, and there was but one arrest throughout the entire time of the Assembly, and that in an outlying town.
The Public Auditorium’s main ball is a tremendous, deep horseshoe, with ground-floor, balcony, and gallery, and facing a broad stage, and seating 12,000 persons. At 7: 30 p.m. the songs of praise, led by an orchestra of trained musicians, began, and every seat was filled and all eyes turned to the proscenium, which was adorned with palms and vases of beautiful flowers, flanking on both sides the speakers’ stand. Behind was a beautiful backdrop curtam, upon which was fastened a broad banner with glittering letters in red bordered with shimmering gold forming the text: “Blameless in the day of our Lord”—1 Cor. 1:8. At eight o’clock sharp the great electne circuit was closed, tying in by telephone lines the American cities in the great network of gatherings with the Cleveland platform. The singing ceased, and the vice-president of the Watch Tower gave the address of welcome, emphasizing that this was never a one-man Society and never will be, but that Jehovah’s witnesses are following Christ Jesus as God’s appointed Leader for them. The Assembly approved this declaration with hearty applause.
The next forty minutes was occupied by another representative of the Society’s headquarters at Brooklyn, who delivered the keynote speech, “The Only Light.” This was based on Isaiah’s prophecy, chapters fifty-nine and sixty, showing that the light of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus would never be blacked out by the totalitarian forces, but that God Almighty was now giving the “Go ahead” signal to his witnesses on earth despite total war and persecution, and that they must continue preaching the Kingdom message to the final end, even if all Watchtower publications be taken away and only the Bible be left them to
Brooklyn, N. Y.
use, or not even that, but only God’s word in their mouths. They must “anse, shine!”
With the vast audience deeply stirred by that exhortation from God’s timely Word, the Society’s president then stepped forward, his part as announced on the program being that of “Presenting ‘The Sword of the Spirit’ ’’. Calmly he showed God’s written Word to be that “sword", and the need of properly wielding it. A Bible edition with helps fully abreast of the latest revealments of Bible truth was most desirable, at this time of expanding Bible educational work. At this point the speaker held forth on high a band-some maroon-covered Bible and announced the release of the Watchtower edition of The Bible. What a cry of delight and thunder of applause went up! Full-time publishers (pioneers) squealed with delight at the announcement of a copy for them absolutely free. With tense interest God’s wielders of the “sword of the spirit” followed the speaker’s description of the Bible edition and its unusual features and how it was prepared and produced, repeatedly applauding. All too soon the hour ended, and the telephonic circuit with other cities was broken But what a surprise! What joy! What satisfaction! Were nothing else besides this precious gift to be released at this Assembly it was sufficient, far more than anticipated. The brethren from lands where W atch-tower publications are proscribed and only the Bible may be earned in witnessing from house to house were overwhelmed at Jehovah’s provision of just what they required. After the close of the day’s sessions thousands eagerly procured and equipped themselves with this edition of the “Sword of the spirit” The October 1 issue of The Watchtower, contaming the keynote speech “The Only Light”, was also released for general distribution.
Saturday, September 19, broke, a fair day, and the attendance swelled in numbers and bounded in enthusiasm. The activities in the field, advertising the Kingdom, increased and Cleveland and adjacent places were given an exhibition of God’s ordained witnesses such as they had never expeneneed theretofore. At 3 p.m , an hour before the president’s next announced address, the mam auditorium was filled. In anticipation all the drop curtains between this and the music hall immediately adjoining to the rear had now been lifted, creating an enormous bowl; one could look across the double stage from one end of the auditorium to the other end of the music hall, with the speakers’ stand in the midst on the stage. The music hall accommodated part of the overflow, and the seating capacity arranged for also m the cafeteria and in the service department below was availed of. At the hour of 4 p.m never was an audience of upward of 17,500 more attentive to listen, this time to hear what the president had to say on “Fighters for the New World”.
The speaker stressed that in this critical world situation there was a great fight in.progress for the maintenance of the worship of Jehovah, which worship was being encroached upon by the totalitarian powers, the modern Ammonites. The mighty Fighter to push them back and maintain Jehovah’s worship clear through Armageddon into the New World was the Greater Jephthah, Christ Jesus. The imperative need in this crucial time as in the days of Jephthah of old was for a central and unified command, and this Jehovah God had established particularly since 1918 under the Greater Jephthah. Prominently associated with this fight for freedom of worship of Jehovah God was and is his visible instrument, the Watch Tower Society. But what about Jeph-thah’s vow? where does his one and only child, his daughter, figure in the fulfillment of the great prophetic drama? How was she offered up for a burnt offering in carrying out Jephthoh’s vow? Thrilled beyond measure, and in many cases moved to tears, was this hushed audience at the amazing explanation, which the speaker duly made with modern-day facts, showing that the ‘Jephthah’s daughter* class are the faithful remnant’s companions, the Lord’s “other sheep”, and who are gathered, not for commercial exploitation by Jehovah’s witnesses, but to be turned over wholly to God Almighty’s continuous service at his holy temple in celebration
October 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
319
of the victories of his Kingdom truth and worship over the opposing powers of demonism and totalitarianism Pointing out that the ‘Jephthah’s daughter’ class was already accomplishing a good work at God’s temple, and that the fight foreshadowed by Jephthah’s victorious campaign was not yet over, the speaker then proposed the following for adoption by the Theocratic Assembly:
RESOLUTION
“Jehovah’s witnesses, gathered throughout the earth in Theocratic Assembly, do hereby declare:
“That Jehovah God is the great Theocrat and the Builder of the New World, and Christ Jesus his Son is God’s appointed Judge and King of the New World and is the Head of God’s capital organization; and God’s organization is Theocratic;
“That we are unequivocally devoted to Jehovah’s Theocratic Government by Chnst Jesus, and therefore recognize our commission and obligation from the Lord God to proclaim the gospel of His kingdom and to thereby comfort all that mourn. This wc must do without fail and regardless of all worldly opposition;
“That, by the fulfillments of prophecy and by the course of action taken under the Lord’s guidance and blessing, the Watch Tower Society is the visible part of the Lord’s organization; and the only proper and rightful organization and rule of the Society is the Theocratic organization and rule;
“That the purpose of the Society and the activities of Jehovah's witnesses in co-operation with it are not commercial and are absolutely separate from the politics of this world. Their work is an unselfish one of education in the Bible and carried on m obedience to the commandment of the Most High God and to enlighten men of good-will concerning the only hope of humankind, God’s kingdom. All the increase that God gives to this work in gathering His “other sheep” into the fold we acknowledge to be the Lord’s and shall yield up such to the Lord to be used wholly in His service;
“That we are opposed to all totalitarian rule and its limitation of the worship of Jehovah God through Jesus Chnst We owe allegiance to no foreign power, religious or political, but our Head and Leader is the One of God’s choiee and designation, Christ Jesus the King, whose example we will follow in the worship and service of God. Come what the Lord may permit, we will continue to worship Jehovah God and to resist all demonized encroachments upon His worship and service, and to fight on in indissoluble unity until He gives the victory through his Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus.
“Dated, Saturday, September 19, 1942 ”
The president backed away from the microphone, and instantly a representative of the Society sprang forward and moved the adoption of the Resolution by “this New World Theocratic Assembly gathered in fifty-two cities throughout the length and breadth of these United States of America” The Assembly chairman promptly came forward with a 'Second the motion’, whereat the president said. “All in favor of the motion duly made and seconded to adopt this Resolution, give their word before the Lord God, saying ‘Aye!’” In solemn realization that they were giving their word before Jehovah God as Jephthah did in Mizpah long ago, the assembled host of fighters for the new world, old and young, gave voice to their earnest conviction and their unhesitating affirmation with a mighty “Aye!” and then broke forth in uproarious applause.
On the stage the president smilingly waited for the applause to die down, and then drew forth a peach-colored article from an envelope with these words: “To all Kingdom publishers and fighters for the new world it is now my privilege to release the latest provision of Jehovah God through his Greater Jephthah, this book entitled ‘The New World’,” and held the book on high. Taken utterly by surprise at this unexpected second major release to the Assembly, the aroused thousands burst forth in a joyous cheer, while many wept tears because of the abundance of the Lord’s goodness. This “Publishers’ Edition” of The New World was
eagerly taken up and finally all supplies thereof exhausted. At close of the day the regular edition was released for distribution afield to the public.
Other events followed after nightfall. As preliminaries the aged secretary-treasurer of the Watch Tower Society gave a five-minute expression, comparing this assembly, his sixtieth convention to date, with earlier ones, and voicing his appreciation particularly of this one; also another servant, long in the Society's work, expressed his appreciation and stressed how this assembly was a visible proof that this was no human leader’s organization but that the Lord God was in charge thereof by Christ Jesus Then followed the discourse on “Pioneer Opportunities Now”, sounding out the call for 19,000 pioneers by next Apnl, the discourse on “Serving The Theocracy”, reviewing the new Organization Instructions and further heartening all Kingdom publishers by the announcement and description of a decidedly new feature, the Society’s sending forth from October 1 onward of “servants to the brethren”; and finally the stirring address by the Society’s vice-president and legal attorney on “Victory”, setting forth Jehovah’s promise, and his hitherto fulfillments of such promise, to give victory to his “fighters for the new world”. This discourse terminated in a further surprise, when in answer to the cries of “Yes!” by the audience expressing their willingness to use a handy instrument from the Lord for their service work, the Society’s attorney announced the release of Kingdom News No. 11, with the front-page caption, “The People Have a Right to Good News Now.”
Sunday morning, September 20, was marked by a high wind and squall of rain that did damage along the lake front, but did not daunt Jehovah’s people from assembling for his woislnp and service. The day was opened with a discourse on “Baptism” at 8 a.m., and 459 presented themselves for water immersion in symbol of their complete consecration to the Lord, it was a pleasure to behold so many young persons thus ‘remembering their Creator in the days of their youth’. These, immediately after baptism, joined their other companions in the field activities
At 3 p.m. the reassembled servants of the Lord were refreshed by the discourse delivered by a representative from Canada, where Jehovah’s witnesses are declared an “illegal” organization, his subject being “Defeat of Persecution". During the half-hour intermission that followed the Assembly, already packing out the maiu auditorium and music hall (with no intervening curtains to block the full-range vision), was due to reach its highest attendance If the city mayor was then in his office the windows of which look across the street to the facade of the Public Auditorium, his eyes would behold the manifest rebuff from Jehovah for the uncalled-for, unnecessary published declaration calling on all Clci danders to boycott the worship of Jehovah God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ How sot Because the tremendous advertising campaign preceding and during the three-day Assembly was mightily blessed of Jehovah with success, and truth-seeking “sheep” of Cleveland and roundabout were not going in the way of the “goats” but pouring into the great two-block-long structure, filling up even the extra seating arrangements in the cafeteria, sernce department, and ballroom, and standing crowded in the foyer and lobby, and outside the building near loudspeakers The official count was 26,000 in attendance ; nor did ever a more oiderly multitude of that size assemble.
Neither was that great host disappointed at what they received Hugely repaid they were for their coming. The public address delivered, as publicly advertised, by the Watch Tower president, Brother Knorr, on the subject “Peace—Can It Last?” was masterly. Worthy to be mentioned is the tense interest and sustained attention of those many thousands, caught and held quiet and silent m the grip of the simple logic and truthfulness of the speech, and repeatedly breaking forth into expression of approval by heavy applause. To the question, Can religion, whose chief religious head at' the Vatican sat closeted for fifty minutes with the nation’s
320	THE WATCHTOWER.	Brooklyn, N. Y.
president’s personal envoy to the pope just the day before, guarantee a lasting peace! the Scriptural answer given was a stinging No! As the speech progressed the audience saw with mental vision a word-picture drawn according to Revelation chapter seventeen, and saw the identity of the scarlet beast that now “is not” but saw it ready to ascend out of the bottomless pit to become the “beast that was, and is not, and shall again be present”, this time with the Babylonish religious harlot dangling her legs over its back. But only for “one hour” in the future this, and then the harlot is unseated and destroyed, and “the King of kings and Lord of lords” destroys this “New Order” ‘peace beast’ with its seven heads and ten horns at the big fight at Armageddon. To the related question, Who, then, will establish the lasting peace, and when! the answer, given without fear or apology, was, Jehovah God’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, and after the utter destruction of the Devil’s demonic, religious, totalitarian organization in its entirety at Armageddon. The glories and the eternity of the Kingdom peace then to come to earth and the worshipers of Jehovah inhabiting it was briefly described in Scriptural terms, and the audience was referred for fuller information to the newly released book, The New World. Everyone in the audience was offered a free copy of the speech in the final Assembly release, the booklet Peace—Can It Last! and many acted upon the gracious offer of ten copies free to anyone whomsoever who desired to pass it out freely to others who had not heard.
That evening the anticlimax came, and it was most comforting and heart-warming to the many thousands that remained for this evening session, so many as still to crowd out the Public Auditorium. It began by a member of the Norwegian merchant marine, temporarily on shore leave and able to attend the Assembly, who told of thrilling encounters with Jehovah’s witnesses in South Africa and Egypt, the Lord’s new literature getting through to them
Now the programed features began, with a report by a representative from Australasia. A report then followed by a representative from Britain. These two reports helped the American brethren to appreciate what freedom of action and large privileges of service, with the best and fullest of equipment, they still enjoy over here in contrast with those m Australasia and Britain. A report on the Assembly activities was next made
The concluding discourse was then given by the Assembly servant, on “Final Gathering”, which would have made the cars of the Cleveland Convention and Visitors Committee and the city mayor tingle at hearmg. Finally, a “message from the president” was due to be given, but, before Brother Knorr could be introduced by the chairman, a representative from Canada strode across the platform and asked permission to read the following written expression of appreciation. This had been spontaneously drawn up by a group of grateful brethren who felt that an express response from the Assembly as a whole should be made before the Lord there before disbanding. The permission granted, he read as follows:
“September 20, 1942. “To the President of the Society.
“Dear Brother Knorr:
“Our hearts are full, and we feel constrained to express to you our great joy in attending this New World Theocratic Assembly. Everybody' here is saying: ‘This is the greatest convention yet; we are overwhelmed with blessings; we are satisfied.’
“We have all come to this convention, our first assembly since the passing of our beloved Brother Rutherford, to receive further knowledge and instruction from Jehovah. Each one of us can testify before the Lord that the leadership of Christ Jesus, the King of the New World, is more evident today than ever before, and that recent changes in the administration have not affected the forward movement of the Lord’s work. On the other hand, we are receiving today a greater vision and knowledge of The Theocracy and a fuller appreciation of our responsibilities before the Living God in being His witnesses in these days of great peril. How true
this day is Judges 5:9, ‘My heart is toward the governors of Israel, that offered themselves willingly among the people.’ We gratefully acknowledge you, Brother Knorr, as the Lord’s anointed servant, chosen to fill the office of president of the Watch Tower Society. The Lord’s spirit has indeed been poured out upon you. May he guide and direct you ever in administering the earthly interests of The Theocracy.
“Truly the fulfillment of Jephthah’s leadership is amongst us today. The central control has been placed in the Theocratic Society, where it rightly belongs. We greatly desire to express our appreciation of the blessings and bountiful provisions given to us at this convention. Amongst the evidences of Jehovah’s provisions is the fact that we are privileged to be at the key city of 52 conventions held in America. It has undoubtedly been the Lord’s will for his people to assemble at this season to be spiritually refreshed, by the very fact that the enemy has been thwarted in his attempts to interfere with these assemblies for divine worship. We gratefully acknowledge receipt of the New World edition of The Bible, ‘the sword of the spirit’; the beautiful book The New World; Kingdom News No. 11; the new Theocratic Instructions; and the booklet Peace—Can It Last! Recounting these evidences we also recognize the timely spiritual counsel and new truths provided for our edification. We hereby declare our great joy to take immediate action on the ‘Go ahead’ instruction, and again affirm our determmation to be ‘blameless in this day of our Lord'.
“We wish to express our appreciation for the much time and thoughtful care and great study devoted to the tremendous preparations made for this world-wide assembly, and we all thank the great Jehovah, the Giver of every good and perfect gift; the Lord Jesus Christ, the mighty Vindicator; yourself as president of the Society; and your faithful co-workers at Brooklyn Bethel, who tirelessly and lovingly shared with you in preparing these blessed gifts.
“The Lord Jehovah has said that he would open the windows of heaven and pour out a blessing that there would not be room enough to receive it. This indeed is our blessed portion this day. We have received to overflowing, and cannot contam more.
“We now wish you and all the Bethel family Jehovah’s richest blessing in the coming days. We go back to our respective assignments in the Lord’s ‘vineyard’, where we will keep covenant obligation and also continue singing the Victory Song. We are fully determmed to fight for the New World, which we are now entering, and with the Lord’s word ringing m our ears: ‘As for me, this is my covenant with them, saith the Lord; My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed’s seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and for ever.’—Isaiah 59: 21.”
At the request that all stand who approved of this as their own heart-felt expression the entire Assembly rose as one man
Quietly the president then delivered his final message to the servants of Jehovah God now poised for departure to their respective fields of activity. Briefly he showed the growth of the Lord’s visible organization from vhat it was in 1922 and to what it is today, by Jehovah’s grace. He warned them of greater trials ahead, sparing neither brothers nor sisters, but reminded them of Jehovah’s promises and sounded His keynote of victory to the more-than-conquerors. He announced the coming visits of the “servants to the brethren” and spoke of the Lord’s other provisions for their comfort and use m His service.
With such concluding words the Lord sent his people back to the fields of witness as “fighters for the new world”. With full hearts the Assembly blended their voices in a song denoting their stand for Jehovah and His King, the president closed with grateful prayer, and thus the New World Theocratic Assembly reached its triumphant end, in vindication of Jehovah’s name and Word and power.
i » MA
"They shall know that I am Jehovah’
-Ezekiel 35:15.
Vol. LXIII Semimonthly
No. 21
NOVEMBER 1, 1942
CONTENTS
Fighter for the New World (Part 2) 323
Jephthah ......................
Reproach ......................
Theocratic Rule Ignored........
Sole Way to Stop Aggressors ...
Quest for Theocratic Rule .....
Vow of Allegiance .............
Earth’s Place in God’s Purpose . Has the Battle or Armageddon
Begun! ......................
Letters from Britain ...........
Field Experiences...............
“Victory Song” Testimony Period
. 323 .. 325 . 320 .. 328 .. 329 ..331 .. 333
334
335
336
322
Watchtower Edition or the Bible ....322
322
335
“Watchtower” Studies “The New World” ...
“The New World” Question Booklet 335
"¥£^eMW™E55£S^AIfflAJEHO\^,THAri7iMG01^iBO?12^
THE WATCHTOWER,
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street -	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
N. H. Knorr, President_________W. E. Van Ambvrgh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, Is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power In heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon It; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are bom sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemp’.'ve price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed In the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God's kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah's kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
HIS Journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible Instruction specifically de
signed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good wlIL It arranges systematic Bible study for Its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organisations it Is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of Its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not Indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United Statzs, *1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, *1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 6s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian. British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by international Postal Money Order only.
Forxion Offices
British 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, England
Canadian —________________40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian___________7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia
South African Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Pleas* address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this Journal appear in several languages.)
Ail sincere students of the Bible who by reeeon of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may hare The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year la required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Buhserihers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post ogles at Brooklynt N. T., under ths Act of March 3, 1311.
“VICTORY SONG" TESTIMONY PERIOD
December is the month that brings to a close the calendar year of the old world. It is with joy that the servants of Jehovah sing the Victory Song after a long battle; but they look forward to further battles and victories. The faithful do say with gladness of heart that they have remained “blameless in the day of our Lord” and will continue to do so, by the Lord’s grace. During the “Victory Song” Testimony Period the song of the new world will be sung. To do this the publishers of The Theocracy will offer to the people the publication The New World and the booklet Peace—Can It Lastf on a contribution of 25c. If you wish to join in the “Victory Song” Testimony Period during the month of December, make arrangements now with your local company servant. If you are not associated with a company, write direct to the Society for further information.
WATCHTOWER EDITION OF THE BIBLE
For the first time in its sixty years of existence the Watch Tower Society has printed on its own presses an edition of the Bible. This was released by the president at the New World Theocratic Assembly, last September, to the great surprise and joy of the vast gathering, and the entire stock of 35,000 copies was at once taken up by the conventioners. This Bible edition is handsomely bound in maroon leatherette, and is 7| by 5 by 11
inches in size. The Bible text is that of the popular King James Version, unchanged,. and printed in minion type, with handy marginal references, and with maps. Among other features, it contains an extensive list of Bible names and expressions and their meanings; also a 59-page concordance of key Bible words and phrases, as well as a further section containing fully quoted texts grouped under various headings showing what God’s Word teaches on such subjects as ordination of Christians to preach, the Scriptural manner of preaching, what is hell, promises concerning the Kingdom, the standard of the Christian, and like important issues of the day. Such features make it excellent not only for private study, but also for Bible educational work in the field among seekers for truth. This Watch-toweb edition Bible is offered on a contribution of $1.00 a copy, and mailed to you postage prepaid. Remittance should accompany all orders, whether individually or from companies of Jehovah’s witnesses sending combined orders through their servants.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of December 6; “Fighter for the New World” (Part 2), fl 1-23 inclusive, The Watchtower November 1, 1942.
Week of December 13: “Fighter for the New World” (Part 2), fl 24-47 inclusive, The Watchtower November 1, 1942.
(Continued on page 335)
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
No. LXIII
November 1, 1942
No. 21
FIGHTER FOR THE NEW WORLD
PART 2
“Jesus answered, My kingdom is not o/ this world: if my kingdom were of this icorld, then would my servants fight."—John 18:36.
JEHOVAH opens the way into the new world, a world free of all demon rule and totalitarian aggression, enslavement and cruelty. By a fight, the greatest in universal history, Jehovah sets free those who now suffer for righteousness’ sake and who shall enjoy life abundantly and without end in the new world. That fight is near at hand. By his beloved Son, who judges the nations and makes war in righteousness, Jehovah of hosts will surprise all enemies by the suddenness of his attack. Then all the nations that scoff at the Bible record of past battle performances of Jehovah and that mock his witnesses shall see Jehovah in action for the avenging of his name, his cause and his people against all who despise his name and rule. Their destruction will leave the new world forever free of them.
2 "Where religion will stand in that fight is made certain by her past and present position. Religion has always fought against Jehovah and his worship. Christ Jesus is the Chief Worshiper of Jehovah. For that reason religious priests, scribes, Pharisees and lawyers had him killed, while they chose as king the Roman Caesar who was a demon-worshiper, hence a devil-worshiper. At this day Rome is the first city of modern times to go over to totalitarian rule and is the seat of totalitarian Fascist rule. It is totalitarian Fascist Rome that was first to sign a concordat, in 1929, with the Vatican, setting free the chief religious head of “Christendom”. By its papal nuncio (who is now pope) and by its Catholic statesmen and commercial magnates the Vatican maneuvered the Nazi totalitarian dictator into power in Berlin and immediately signed a concordat with him guaranteeing that (to quote Fritz Thyssen) “the rights of the Catholic Church would not be infringed upon”. On June 9, 1941, a United Press dispatch from Rome announced that “an editorial in the Turin newspaper Stampa said today Germany and Italy are organizing a new European order in conformity
1. By whom and by what action will the wav into the new world, shortly, be opened, and of whom will that world be made free thereby? 2 What position has religion taken toward Jehovah and his worship in the past, and where will religion stand in the fight for the new world as shown by her course since the rise of Nazi and Fascist totalitarian rule?
with the principles laid down in the Encyclical Rerum Novarum, to which Pope Pius called attention in his June 1 speech”. (New York Journal-American) Now religion uses the totalitarian monstrosity to fight against Jehovah in the endeavor to stamp out His worship and the proclamation of His new world from the earth.
3 It is a time of great crisis for all worshipers of Jehovah God in spirit and in truth. The question is before all “Christendom”, namely, Which is the true worship? Whom do you worship and serve? The vast majority are being scared off and driven away from any consideration and choice of the worship of Jehovah. They are being herded into religion’s pens by the aggressions and assaults of the totalitarian powers against the worship of Jehovah of hosts. None can stand up alone and survive against that religious-totalitarian “abomination of desolation”. Only Jehovah’s organization can and will fight that new-order “abomination” to a standstill and set the earth free of it. Jehovah’s organization is Theocratic and it will maintain the worship of Jehovah God under the most terrific pressure and all-out assault of demons and of rulers religious, judicial and political. Jehovah’s organization, his Theocracy, will preserve unbroken His worship into the new world. Only those who practice Jehovah’s worship in spirit and in truth shall survive the great Fight and live in that “world without end”. These true and dependable facts were marvelously portrayed in an actual-life drama of ancient days, the prophetic drama of the valiant fighter Jephthah. It is recorded in the eleventh chapter of the Bible book of Judges.
JEPHTHAH
‘ With particular reference to us today the inspired apostle wrote, saying: “Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of wit-
3 (a) What question concerning worship is before all "Christendom”, and where are the vast majority being driven on the question ’ (b) What organization alone can stand up against the new-order ‘‘abomination”, and whose worship will be preserved unbroken into the new world? 4 (a) What "cloud of witnesses” encompasses us about, and for whom were they witnesses*’ (b) What divine provision therefore awaits Jeph* that, and why Is this of special interest to those now alive on earth and witnessing tor Jehovah?
323
324
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
nesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith.” (Heb. 12:1, 2) What “cloud of witnesses” encompasses us about! and witnesses for whom! Those witnesses for Jehovah that the apostle mentions in the previous chapter, running all the way back to Abel the first martyr for Jehovah. Among those ancient Jehovah’s witnesses who overcame this world by their faith in Him the apostle names and lists Jephthah. (Heb. 11:32) Jehovah has reserved a princely place on earth for Jephthah in the new world. Shortly Jephthah will have part in the “better resurrection” from the dead and shall ‘rule in righteousness’ with his fellow princes, as visible human representatives of the heavenly Theocracy under Christ Jesus. (Heb. 11: 35, 39,40; Isa. 32:1; Ps. 45:16) The Scriptures give good grounds to believe that there shall shortly be a meeting on earth of those faithful witnesses of old when resurrected and those who are now like them in faithfully witnessing for Jehovah God in these days of the religious-totalitarian monstrosity. Will you see those resurrected witnesses who shall be made “princes in all the earth”? If such is your desire you will now read with interest the facts on the prophetic drama of Jephthah and its unmistakable fulfillment at this end of the world.
‘“Now Jephthah the Gileadite was a mighty man of valour, and he w*as the son of an harlot: and Gilead begat Jephthah.” (Judg. 11:1) In Scripture the names of God’s actors in his prophetic dramas are full of meaning and are keys to the understanding of the dramas. Jephthah’s name means “Opener”, or, “setting free.” The territory of Gilead was part of the Holy Land and lay east of the Jordan river, in what is now called “Trans-Jordan”. Jephthah’s father, Gilead, was a namesake of an earlier Gilead, a member of the tribe of Manasseh, and concerning him it is written: “Of the sons of Manasseh: of Machir, the family of the Machirites: and Machir begat Gilead: of Gilead come the family of the Gileadites.”—Num. 26: 29.
• Those ancestors of Jephthah had to fight against giants and demon-worshipers in order to occupy the land of Bashan and Gilead which the Lord God assigned to them by his prophet Moses. Concerning this Moses said: “For only Og king of Bashan remained of the remnant of giants; behold, his bedstead was a bedstead of iron; is it not in Rabbath of the children of Ammon? nine cubits [thirteen and a half feet] was the length thereof, and four cubits the breadth of it, after the cubit of a man. . . . All Bashan, being the kingdom of Og, gave I
5	. What does Jephthah’s name mean, and what was hit Immediate ancestry among the tribes?
6	. What record In the conquest of the land shows that Jephthah’s ancestors were fighters?
unto the half tribe of Manasseh; all the region of Argob, with all Bashan, which was called the land of giants. . . . And I gave Gilead [the territory] unto Machir." (Deut. 3:11-15) “And the children of Machir the son of Manasseh went to Gilead, and took it, and dispossessed the Amorite which was in it. And Moses gave Gilead unto Machir the son of Manasseh; and he dwelt therein.”—Num. 32: 39,40.
T It required fearless fighters to hold that border territory of Bashan and Gilead; and therefore concerning the allotment of the conquered territory among the twelve tribes of Israel it is written: “There was also a lot for the tribe of Manasseh, for he was the firstborn of Joseph; to wit, for Machir the firstborn of Manasseh, the father of Gilead; because he was a man of war, therefore he had Gilead and Bashan.” (Jo^h. 17:1) Would the Gileadites hold that Theocratic ground against the demonworshipers? We shall see.
‘Jephthah the Gileadite was descended from a fighter, namely, from Machir, a “man of war”. In view of the above history it is reasonable that the father would call his son “Jephthah”, meaning “He [that is, God] sets free”. This would call attention to how Jehovah had set Israel free from giant king Og and the other practicers of demonism that occupied the land allotted to the tribe of Manasseh. This Jehovah God did by helping Machir and his son Gilead in battle and giving them the victory over the giant monstrosity and other demonized Amorites that were holding down the land of Gilead without any authorization by Jehovah God.
’ Jephthah inherited some of his “valour” from his ancestor Machir. But Jephthah was a “mighty man of valour” mainly because of his faith in Jehovah, for whom Jephthah was a fighting witness. This is proved by the apostle’s record of ancient men of faith, at Hebrews 11:32, reading: “And what shall I more say? for the time would fail me to tell of Gedeon, and of Barak, and of Samson, and of Jephthae; of David also, and Samuel, and of the prophets.” Jephthah was like an earlier fighter, Gedeon, who was also a “mighty man of valour” and to whom Jehovah’s angel said: “The Lord is with thee, thou mighty man of valour.” (Judg. 6:12) An organization possessed of such faith and fighting qualities as Jephthah had is the need for this “time of war”, particularly from A. D. 1933 on, when the Catholic Nazi dictator became the “sword of his church” in Germany, which country was till then a Protestant stronghold. Whom, then, in this twentieth century does Jephthah picture?
7	. Why was the border territory of Bashan and Gilead assigned to part of the tribe of Manasseh?
8	In view of the meaning of the name, to wbat history of bls ancestors would the name “Jephthah” reasonably call attention?
9	. (a) Due to wbat do the Scriptures show Jepbtbah was a “mighty man of valour*', and in this wbat other earlier ngbter did be resemble? (b) Therefore for this time of war, of what kind of organization la there need ?
November 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
323
10	In the sacred prophecies and prophetic dramas no individuals or personalities -were ever foretold or typified, with the single exception of Christ Jesus. Jephthah’s house was in Mizpah, which name means ‘"Watchtower”. (Judg. 11:34) In the drama Jeph-thah of Mizpah acted the part picturing Jehovah’s organization which is Theocratic and which Jehovah uses as his servant. Of that organization Christ Jesus is the Head and Theocratic King, and there is a remnant thereof on earth today, who are Jehovah’s witnesses, spiritual Israelites. These constitute and act as “The Society”. The agent and servant of said Theocratic Society is by all established facts proved to be the Watch Tower Society. Christ Jesus the Head is a ‘mighty One of valor’. His remnant of footstep followers who line up with the Theocratic rule and organization become conformed to the image of that great Fighter for the new world.—Rom. 8:29.
REPROACH
11	Was it to Jephthah’s discredit that he “was the son of an harlot”! This woman was a harlot before marrying Gilead and becoming mother to Jephthah. However, Rahab of Jericho was also a harlot. She was the only one, with her relationship, that was saved from that city’s destruction, and she was given an honorable marriage in Israel and thereby became an ancestress of Jesus Christ.—Matt. 1:5; Luke 3:32.
12	Jephthah’s mother was apparently an Israelite woman, not a demon-worshiping heatheness. By marriage she came into an honorable estate, and Gilead had relations with her, not for passionate pleasure, but as a secondary wife. This is shown by the fact that Gilead took his child by her as his proper and legal son and named him Jephthah, and the boy was brought up in Gilead's house along with Gilead’s other sons, Jephthah’s half-brothers. Hence he was no bastard. Jehovah’s dealings with Jephthah prove that: ‘If ye endure chastening, God dealeth with you as with sons; for what son is he whom the father chasteneth not! But if ye be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons.” (Heb. 12:7,8) God’s rule, further, was: “A bastard shall not enter into the congregation of the Lord: even to his tenth generation shall he not enter into the congregation of the Lord. An Ammonite or Moabite shall not enter into the congregation of the Lord; even to their tenth generation shall they not enter into the congregation of the Lord for ever.” (Deut. 23:2,3) Jephthah was not excluded as a bastard; neither was his daughter, his first and only generation,
10	. Where was Jephthah’s home, and whom did he picture in acting out his part?
11	Was it to Jephthah’s discredit that his mother bad been a harlot, and what Scriptural example is there in support of the answer9
12	To what station was Jephthah’s mother lifted, and bow do Jehovah's dealings with Jephthah ana his offspring show be was not a bastard?
treated as the child of a bastard, else Jephthah could not later have sacrificed her acceptably to the Lord. All this proves that his mother was lifted up out of the class of harlot by marriage to Gilead.
18 The name Gilead means “heap of witness”. Hence Gilead, as father to Jephthah, pictures Jehovah as the Father whose purpose is to have a “people for his name”. Such people must pile up a great witness to Jehovah’s name and Righteous Government, The Theocracy, The Kingdom, which shall vindicate his name. Jehovah has a “woman”, to wit, his universal organization named “Zion”. To this organization which brings forth his servants, Jehovah says, at Isaiah 54: 4, 5: “Thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth; and the reproach of thy widowhood shalt thou remember no more. For thy Maker is thy husband; Jehovah of hosts is his name.” (Am. Rev. Ver.) Jephthah’s mother, therefore, pictures Jehovah’s “woman” from the viewpoint that she brings forth his capital Theocratic organization and its members, who are a “people for his name”, hence His witnesses. These under Christ Jesus are organized according to Theocratic rule for giving testimony to Jehovah’s name as his witnesses, and they stand in line for a place in the heavenly Theocratic Government, God's kingdom by Christ Jesus.
14	Jehovah’s “woman” is no harlot, but the visible part of his organization is made up of those who were once unclean because of union with religion. (1 Cor. 6:9-11) Since Jephthah’s mother was a harlot till Gilead elevated her by lawful marriage, her former position and its reflection on her afterlife in the eyes of self-righteous ones picture how such ones view God’s organization. They look down particularly upon the Theocratic rule of that organization and despise the obligation such rule lays on one in God’s organization to serve as Jehovah’s witness that thereby such one may share in the vindication of God’s name. The self-righteous do not look upon the vindication of His name as being of allimportance and more vital than personal salvation. During all the centuries since “Christendom’s” establishment her conduct has shown that she looks upon such features in God’s “woman” or organization as being outside of common decency and respectability and as lacking in “character development” and sanctimoniousness, and hence as not being worthy for the religionists of “Christendom” to adopt and associate with at all.
15	As in the picture, those who stand for Theocratic rule and who bear witness to Jehovah and his
13.	Whom do Jephthah’s father and mother picture?
14.	That Jephthah’s mother was aforetime a harlot has what reference to the former condition of those of God's people, and bow does It show the viewpoint taken by the self-righteous ones toward God's organization and its purpose?
15.	Like what are Jehovah’s faithful witnesses treated by "Christendom”, and therefore what words of Jesus concemlnc entry into the Kingdom well apply to her?
326	THE WATCHTOWER	Brooklyn, N. Y.
vindication by his kingdom are treated by "Christendom” as on a level with harlots. Therefore to her the words of Jesus concerning John the Baptist well apply; “Verily I say unto you, That the publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of God before you. For John came unto you in the way of righteousness, and ye believed him not; but the publicans and the harlots believed him: and ye, when ye had seen it, repented not afterward, that ye might believe him.”—Matt. 21: 31, 32.
” Besides Jephthah’s mother, Gilead had another woman who rated as his legal wife. Her having the full standing of wife put the other woman, Jephthah’s mother, in the position of secondary woman to Gilead and hence not of equal right and authority with such "wife”. This recognized “wife” would be also of more dignity. She would command more respect and attention, and the association of those in good standing in the community. It is not strange, therefore, what followed: “And Gilead’s wife bare him sons: and his wife’s sons grew up, and they thrust out Jephthah, and said unto him, Thou shalt not inherit in our father’s house; for thou art the son of a strange woman [(dm. Rev. Ver.) the son of another woman].”—Judg. 11:2.
THEOCRATIC RULE IGNORED
17 Whether the above action took place during the eighteen-year period of oppression by the nation of Ammon upon Israel is not stated. By the end of those eighteen years Jephthah had a daughter of marriageable age, about eighteen years or older. Whether any or all of those sons of Gilead’s “wife” were born during that same period is also not stated. But that they religiously felt superior to Jephthah is manifested by their conduct when their father Gilead was no longer alive to hold them in check. They were snobbish. They were affected by the religious influence which overwhelmed Israel when that people turned to the worship of the gods of the Ammonites and other neighbor nations. It is remembered that the patriarch Abraham had a son by a concubine, named Ishmael, and that thereafter a son by his regular wife was born, namely, Isaac; and when Isaac was weaned as heir of Abraham the older boy Ishmael mocked him. (Gen. 16:1,15,16; 21: 8-11) There is no record that Jephthah acted like Ishmael toward those other sons of Gilead, his halfbrethren. Plainly Jephthah profited because Gilead brought him up “in the nurture and admonition of the Lord”. (Eph. 6:4) Jephthah’s later conduct of faith proved this.
16	What standing did the other woman of Jephthah’s father bare la the house and community, and therefore what action did her sons take toward Jephthah?
17	How did those sons feel toward Jephthah, and by what were they influenced, and was Jephthah’s conduct toward them Like that of Ishmael toward Isaac?
18	During Israel’s indulgence in demon-worship and being oppressed eighteen years the sons of Gilead paid slavish submission to the political Ammonites as though these were the “higher powers” in the Holy Land. Such submission to powers of this world made Jehovah’s Theocratic rule in Israel of no effect. The same thing resulted to the Christians due to a large falling away to religion after the apostles of Jesus Christ died and down to the Lord's return and coming to the temple for judgment in 1918. (2 Thess. 2:3-12) In the forty years immediately preceding 1918 God’s truly consecrated people were growing up amid religious surroundings which confused them and spotted up their garments of identity as Christians. They tried to get clear of religion, but the time of full understanding was not due till the Lord’s coming to the temple, and hence those consecrated ones did not discern in the Scriptures the Theocratic rule and order. They kept looking up to public officials of this world as being the “higher powers” to whom Romans 13:1 commands Christians to be subject.
'* At the death of Gilead his sons thrust out Jephthah. While Gilead was among them he did not countenance or allow such an anti-theocratic deed. Likely Jephthah’s mother also had died. Then those sons acted selfishly against Jehovah’s servant and man of faith. This was to their own injury and continued oppression by the religious Philistines and political Ammonites. Likewise, during the larger period of religiousness and submission to worldly powers by unenlightened Christians such ones confused God’s manner of rule with the counterfeit theocracy of the religious hierarchy and priestcraft and hence rejected Theocratic rule. Thinking to safeguard their interests, they drove it out and demanded a democratic manner of operation of Christian assemblies. Concerning this the article "Organization”, in the June 1, 1938, issue of The Watchtower, states, on page 166, paragraphs 14,15:
“The faithful apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ could not have started an organization which for its method of operation is a government by democratic methods or [opposite thereto] a rule by ‘orders’ of priests or hierarchy. The rule of Jehovah God. both that with his typical people Israel and that of his people taken out for his name, is purely a theocratic rule. God’s kingdom or organization is a pure theocracy, not subject to the whims or rules of any creature. Smarting under the tyrannical rule by the clergy and Hierarchy, sincere men turned to the democratic government of religious organizations with a hope of a better condition, and that method
18.	What was the attitude of those sons toward the Ammonites during the eighteen-year oppression, and why were Christians taking a like position prior to 1918?
19.	When did those sons thrust out Jephthah. and when and why did unenlightened Christians take a course of action in fulfillment of that prophetic picture?
November 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
327
has for years been followed in religious organizations. But is such in harmony with the Scriptures? The fact that such a method was adopted in the congregations of thos'e who claimed to serve the Lord is ho proof that it is right. During the Elijah period [1878-1918] of the church sincere followers of Christ Jesus left the Babylonish organization and they came out with spots on their garments, which they had received by reason of associating with that devilish organization. Within the period known as ‘the Elijah time of the church’ elders and deacons in the congregations were selected by a vote of the members expressed by the stretching forth of the hand. Whether this was proper or not, at least the Lord permitted it or did not interfere.” [This was pictured by Gilead’s not interfering, due to death, with Jephthah’s ejection.]
20	No doubt Gilead’s sons felt justified in barring Jephthah as the “son of another woman” from inheriting in their father’s house and took as their guiding precedent a well-known ancient case. That was when Abraham’s true wife, Sarah, ordered him to drive out his Egyptian concubine Hagar and his son by her, Ishmael. Because of Ishmael’s mocking and persecution toward her son Isaac, Sarah said to Abraham: “Cast out this bondwoman and her son: for the son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son, even with Isaac.” So Abraham “rose up early in the morning, and took bread, and a bottle of water, and gave it unto Hagar, putting it on her shoulder, and the child, and sent her away”. —Gen. 21:10-14.
21	Prior to A. D. 1918 God’s consecrated servants on earth, like Gilead’s sons, did not recognize the Theocratic rule of organization and obedience. They were too concerned about their personal salvation to heaven. They did not discern or acknowledge God’s decree that a world witness to his name must be given in vindication of his name and in behalf of persons of good-will on earth. (Ex. 9:16; Ezek. 9:4) In self-concern they specialized exclusively on what they called the “spiritual class” who were in line for the heavenly kingdom. They felt that any educational instruction on the Kingdom to earthly persons of good-will would be the appointed, obligatory service of a spiritual “great company” during the 1000-year reign of Christ. They inclined to think themselves of better stuff, of higher standing due to begettal by God’s spirit, and as meeting a higher requirement of faithfulness to the Lord than such “great company”. So in their exclusiveness they tried to “develop character”. But there were those who called attention to the world-wide witness work, in
20	. What ancient case of ejection did those sons take as their precedent to justify them in thrusting out Jephthah from any inheritance of their fattier?
21	In what respects and toward whom were Jehovah’s consecrated people before 1918 and for some time thereafter like Gilead’s sons in their attitude toward Jephthah the fighter for God’s name and Theocracy?
fulfillment of Matthew 24:14, which work must be done by personal house-to-house visitation of the people. They spoke in favor of a closer lining up with the organization, The Society, in behalf of extending the witness work, putting more full-time publishers into the field in door-to-door witnessing, and paying less attention to self-cultivation, dreams of heavenly glory, formalities and religious mannerisms. Such ones the self-seekers dismissed from their personal association or attention, and it was therefore hard going for such service advocates. They were considered as “the son of another woman”, of a flock different from themselves, and as having no share rightfully in the heavenly inheritance which the democratic “character developers” were expecting and trying to prepare for above. This continued for some time after the Lord came to the temple for judgment in 1918.
22	“Then Jephthah fled from his brethren, and dwelt in the land of Tob: and there were gathered vain men to Jephthah, and went out with him.” (Judg. 11:3) This shows that the Israelites as a nation did not object to this treatment of Jephthah; which exposes the bad effect of religion upon a nation. (Prov. 14: 34; Ps. 33:12) The name of Jephthah’s land of exile, Tob, means “good”. It names a strip of country not far away, but outside of Gilead’s territory and beyond where the political Ammonites had carried their military aggressions. Maps picture Tob as north of Gilead and toward Syria or Aram. In the drama’s modern fulfillment, Tob pictures God’s arrangement for his organized people, and hence it was the only “good” arrangement and condition. To this arrangement all those fled whom the Lord began to enlighten as to his organization and his purpose to vindicate his name and to accomplish a mighty witness to his name before that vindication. These ones left behind the objectors and submitted to the ostracism and waited on and served Jehovah God through Christ Jesus, in “Tob”.
23	The “vain men” who gathered to Jephthah in Tob were not roustabouts or roughnecks, but “unemployed men”, or, literally, “empty men.” (Rotherham’s translation) Likely they were men in debt or men who had lost everything because of Ammonite oppression and Israel’s backsliding to religion, and were without settled home, employment and means of livelihood, except in servitude to Ammon, against which they revolted. There came a similar situation later on when David was outlawed by King Saul: “David therefore departed thence, and escaped to the cave Adullam: and when his brethren and all
22 To what land did Jephthah flee from bis brethren, and what did that land and Jephthah’s flight thither picture?
23 Who were the “vain men” that gathered to Jephthah in Tob, and what similar situation came later on in respect to David?
328
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y;
his father’s house heard it, they went down thither to him. And every one that was in distress, and every one that was in debt, and every one that was discontented, gathered themselves unto him; and he became a captain over them: and there were with him about four hundred men.”—1 Sam. 22:1, 2.
” Although cast out, Jephthah could not keep out of the news, or unobserved. This was because he could not keep inactive. He must lead a fighting existence, against Jehovah’s foes, but not against Israel, even though they had mistakenly cast him out. His acts and deeds of faith in Jehovah became noised abroad, especially among his Israelite brethren who had misunderstood him and discriminated against him for selfish benefit. Hence they were compelled to observe and learn, as stated in verse one, that “now Jephthah the Gileadite was a mighty man of valour”. By his selfish, prejudiced halfbrothers Jephthah had been emptied of everything and thrown out of his father’s house. Therefore other “empty men” resorted to him, “unemployed men” like him. These saw his deeds of faith and saw he was right and they themselves wanted to do something for God’s glory and have a share in the fighting activities of Jephthah. They did not like the galling oppressions of the political Ammonite aggressors nor the religious practices of their fellow Israelites.
” A resemblance to this may be seen in our time, in that more and more spiritual Israelites began to come over to the side of an organized activity for giving a witness to Jehovah God and his kingdom and a warning of his vengeance against Satan’s organization. They rejected the religious view that the Ammonitish political rulers were the “higher powers” “ordained of God”. In 1929 they resorted to the side of The Watchtower in the Scriptural position that God and Christ are “The Higher Powers”, whom Christians must obey rather than men.—See the article “The Higher Powers”, in The Watchtower, June, 1929.
" Jephthah’s “empty men” chose to be such rather than be employed by and obey the political Ammonites as higher powers. Nor did they swing in the other direction to a democratic rule of individual independence and self-determination. They looked to God’s indications as to whom He picked for judge and deliverer. On such one’s side and under his headship they put themselves, in recognition of the Theocratic principle of organization. In their hideouts they did not lie idle, but sallied forth into the active field service against the foes of Jehovah’s covenant people.
24	What fact were the Israelites under Ammonitisb oppression obliged to observe concerning Jephthah due to bls activities while in Tob. and why therefore did “vain men” resort to him there?
25	What movement in our time concerning Christian activity and the oidained powers was there that resembled the above?
26	Did the “empty men" that gathered to Jephthah awing from Ammonite rule to democratic rule, and were they idle toward God's cause?
" In harmony with that picture, the international convention of Jehovah’s witnesses at Toronto in 1927 was followed by an overhauling of the Society’s service organization to get more Kingdom publishers afield and get a greater and more effective work done. The Society pointed out that Sunday was the day set aside by “Christendom” for worship and therefore Sunday was an appropriate day for all of Jehovah’s people, and especially those who were employed at secular work during the week, to get out and fulfill their commission as ministers of the gospel by going from house to house witnessing to the Lord God and his Righteous Government. Also, in order to overcome the opposition of the old-time “elective elders” who acted as spiritual bosses of congregations, service committees were set up in all companies to push the witness work and to co-operate with the Society’s representatives. At self-sacrifice the Society’s Kingdom literature was provided at a lower cost and distributed on lower contributions and there was a call for more Kingdom publishers. The Lord, also, stirred up more of such to enlist and go into the field as a united company organized under the Society’s direction and guidance. Jehovah God by Christ Jesus showed his approval of this by adding his blessing.
SOLE WAY TO STOP AGGRESSORS
" “And it came to pass in process of time, that the children of Ammon made war against Israel.” (Judg. 11:4) This move, though they did not know it, meant the beginning of the end for the political Ammonites and their religious allies who had oppressed Jehovah’s covenant people for eighteen years. This forcing of war upon an already downtrodden people was the climax of the enemies’ action in opposition to Jehovah’s typical Theocracy. It foreshadowed that in the “time of the end” beginning A. D. 1914, and shortly before the final end of Satan’s entire organization at the battle of Armageddon, the foes of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government of righteousness will go the limit of their hatred, persecution and hostility to his witnesses. It agrees with the Scripture observation that “when the wicked spring as the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity do flourish, it is that they shall be destroyed for ever: for, lo, thine enemies, 0 Lord, for lo, thine enemies shall perish: all the workers of iniquity shall be scattered”. (Ps. 92:7,9) At this point in the picture was when what is stated at Judges 10:17 took place: “Then the children of Ammon were gathered together, and encamped in Gilead: and the children of Israel assembled themselves together, and
27	. Fulfilling the above picture, what took place after the 1927 convention of Jehovah’s witnesaee at Toronto affecting activity, organisation for service, and wider distribution of the printed message*
28	. The making of war by the children of Ammon against Israel meant what in the development of matters, and what did it foreshadow in the fulfillment of the drama?
November 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
329
encamped in Mizpeh ['Watchtower’].” The demons provoked the Ammonites to this war because the Israelites had now put aside religion and turned to worship Jehovah.
” Like things came to pass in process of modern time, 1929 being a marked date. That year the political powers of “Christendom” were deflated in the minds of the Christians witnessing for Jehovah, and Almighty God and Christ Jesus his ruling King were discerned and glorified as being “The Higher Powers”, to whom all souls that live must be subject. Also, the book Life was published in 1929, being the first book to point to the vindication of Jehovah’s name by his kingdom. A few months later that year the book Prophecy was published showing that the three worldly elements, religion, politics and commerce, constitute Satan’s visible organization, and that justly it is most important for God’s name to be vindicated against such. This was enough to rouse the modern-day Ammonites and their religious confederates to action as never before. It was even so.
10 The great Theocrat Jehovah was the One who had Jephthah in hand. By dealing with him Jehovah was grooming His Theocratic representative for the coming fight for deliverance. God’s responsibility in the matter is plainly stated in the w’ords of his prophet Samuel, at 1 Samuel 12:10,11: “And they cried unto Jehovah, . . . And Jehovah sent Jerub-baal, and Bedan, and Jephthah, and Samuel, and delivered you out of the hand of your enemies on every side; and ye dwelt in safety.” (Am. Rev. Ver.) On the other hand, -whom did the demons push forward as their appointed visible leader? The authoritarian king of the Ammonite aggressors was their man. He was a worshiper of the political-state god, Molech or Milcom, the name meaning “their king” and referring to Satan, “the prince of the demons.” Satan was the invisible king of that political state of Ammon.—Matt. 4:8,9.
51 The modern-day Ammonites, “king” worshipers, are the elements that aim at world domination under one political standard or other, and hence are not in favor of Jehovah’s Theocratic Government and Christ’s rulership thereby. As foretold at Daniel, chapter eleven, “the king of the north” and “the king of the south” are engaging on all continents and all seven seas in a war for world domination, in defiance of Jehovah’s rightful Theocratic domination. “Both these kings” must have their champion to rival Jehovah’s Greater Jephthah. Eventually, in the postwar “new order”, they will agree to have a common
29.	In process of modern time, what took place among Jehovah’s people to mark 1929 as an important year, and what effect did such have upon the modern-day Ammonites and confederates?
30	According to the prophet Samuel, who had Jephthah in hand, and tor what purpose? and whom did the demons put forth as their appointed visible representative man?
31.	Who are the modern-day Ammonites, and whom win they agree to have as their common champion against the Greater Jephthah?
champion in what Daniel and Jesus called “the abomination of desolation”. (Dan. 11:31; 12:11; Matt. 24:15) Note the development of events and that their trend has been continuously against Theocracy.
*2 Since 1922 Italy has had a Fascist totalitarian dictator, presumably as a protection against the aggression of the totalitarian dictators in Communist Russia. In 1929 the Fascist dictator and the totalitarian religious ruler at Vatican City entered into their deal or concordat. Thereby temporal power was restored to the papa and the papal state was re-established. Germany was then a republic and the work of Jehovah’s witnesses on the European Continent was being carried on, not in Fascist Italy or Communist Russia, but chiefly in Germany with its then Protestant majority. This German Republic granted democratic freedom of worship to Jehovah’s active witnesses. Here, therefore, was the sore spot for the Vatican, and therefore the strategic place for the religious-totalitarian combine to raise up their political monstrosity in another form and to wage war against Jehovah’s witnesses, earthly representatives of His Theocracy. This was done, in 1933, through Catholic Action and its chief German members, namely, the Catholic foreign minister and the leader of the Nazis. The history records that the Catholic chancellor of Germany had resigned in order that the Catholic foreign minister might become chancellor. This Nazi backer in his turn stepped aside, in fulfillment of a prior agreement with papal nuncio Pacelli, in order that the leader of the Nazis might be named chancellor of Germany and become its dictator. Once in power, the Nazi leader or fuehrer proceeded against Jehovah’s witnesses, namely, in April, the month when the pope declared the so-called “Holy Year” of 1933 for peace and prosperity for world Catholicism. July 20 that year the Nazi dictator entered his concordat with the Vatican, and to this day, despite the Nazi’s record, Pacelli as pope refuses all appeals by certain shocked Catholics of America that he cancel the concordat with Nazism. Why?
QUEST FOR THEOCRATIC RULE
*’ Glancing back at the drama: “And it was so, that when the children of Ammon made war against Israel, the elders of Gilead went to fetch Jephthah out of the land of Tob.” (Judg. 11: 5) They were not “elective elders”, by any means, but Israelites who had attained to eldership by reason of growth to maturity and by study and practice. They had repented from all religiousness and turned to Jehovah and his commandments. (Judg. 10:10-16) A like 32. What development of events from 1922 to 1033 on the European Continent showed a continual trend against Theocracy and for religious-dictatorial rule?
33 (a) Were they ’‘elective elders" that then went to fetch Jephthah out of Tob’ (b) What action took place from and after 1932 with regard to such "elective elders", and with what effect on participation ki God’s service?
330
5He WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
cleansing of Jehovah’s covenant people took place in 1932 by the discontinuing of the “elective elder” system among Jehovah’s witnesses. Thereafter the cleansed ones devoted themselves to His active witness work, every one on an equal level and all under the same obligation to take part in the house-to-house visitation as witnesses under the direct supervision of the Lord’s earthly instrument, the Watch Tower Society.
81	The sending to fetch Jephthah out of Tob followed the inquiry recorded at Judges 10:18: “The people and princes of Gilead said one to another, What man is he that will begin to fight against the children of Ammon? he shall be head over all the inhabitants of Gilead.” In the recent years 1932-1938 there was a continuous study of organization conditions, together with an examination of the Bible and of God’s dealings with his witnesses, to determine “what man is he that will begin to fight against the children of Ammon?” Otherwise said, What is the form of organization for the Society as God's instrument under Christ, that we may Scripturally follow it in carrying on the fight against the aggressions of the religious-totalitarian monstrosity that has risen up to wage a war of extermination against us and the witness work?
85	Jehovah did not fail his people in their honest search. In 1933 he pointed them to the modern Jephthah, namely, the Theocratic organization under Christ Jesus. Such Theocratic organization and rule had been rejected and driven out due to religious influence of reformers and due to the effort to avoid all bondage to the false and counterfeit theocratic system of priestcraft, the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. How was the God-picked “man” revealed or pointed out? The article “Organization” in the magazine The Watchtotcer, of June 1 and 15, 1938, is the answer. Instantly Jehovah’s witnesses who had come to maturity of understanding and practice and into unity with Christ hailed the Theocratic organization as Jehovah’s prescribed arrangement for them. They desired and prayed that Christ Jesus, Jehovah’s King of the Theocratic organization, put in effect the Theocratic rule over them in their fight against religion and to maintain holy ground against the aggressions of the totalitarian forces. On October 1, 1938, the Theocratic organization went into effect in the Society.
88	“And they said unto Jephthah, Come, and be our captain, that we may fight with the children of Ammon.” (Judg. 11:6) To gain final victory God’s
34. What inquiry preceded the sending to fetch Jephthah from Tob, and what did s>uch searching concerning organization and procedure foreshadow during the nineteen-thirties ?
35 (a) Who proved to be the modern Jephthah and how was he pointed out? (b) How did the mature ones of Jehovah's people receive such, and ^bat did they then desire and request?
30 In this time of war, what must Jehovah’s covenant people have to gain victory, and what did the examination of the Bible show in support thereof regarding MCtoriea in old time?
covenant people must have centralized authority to do the deciding for them as to war strategy and plans of action against religion and totalitarian encroachments. Jehovah’s witnesses carefully examined the Bible record. They saw that when the typical Theocracy was in power over Israel and was submitted to by Israel, Jehovah raised up his faithful judge, fought their battles for them, and gave them victory over all enemies in vindication of His own name. From the days of Abraham onward, all Godgiven victories were victories of Theocracy over the organization of Satan’s world. Now, in 1938, yes. in 1942 and hereafter, under the same banner of “THEOCRACY” can victory be gained for God’s witnesses.
8T “And Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead, Did not ye hate me, and expel me out of my father’s house? and why are ye come unto me now when ye are in distress?” (Judg. 11:7) This response was like Jehovah’s response to Israel, at Judges 10:13,14; and also similar to Isaac’s response, at Genesis 26:16,26-30. Jephthah was not taunting them in their distress. He wanted to make sure they realized their mistake and would not repeat their past course of action just as soon as he had served their present desires of victory over the Ammonites. Such course would be gross thanklessness to God, who provided the instrument for the fight to vindicate His name. Not merely amid distress is Jehovah to be sought, nor only during a fearful emergency is his Theocratic rule to be put into effect and complied with. It is the organization which, once set up and submitted to, is to be held fast and conformed to ever after, beyond Armageddon. It will succeed. Never need the democratic experiment be repeated by the driving out of Theocratic rule, and never will it be.
88 “And the elders of Gilead said unto Jephthah, Therefore we turn again to thee now, that thou mayest go with us, and fight against the children of Ammon.” (Judg. 11: 8) Contrast with this appeal to Theocratic order the pope’s appeal by concordat to the Nazi-Fascist totalitarians to set up the counterfeit theocracy by restoring the old “Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation”; also the appeals of religionists in liberal, democratic lands to “the king of the south” for the preservation of religion in the “new order” of the United Nations. Jehovah’s witnesses, however, have appealed to the great Theocrat and his appointed Head of the Theocratic organization. The Gileadite elders of old in appealing to Jephthah said: ‘The reason is, because we recognize our mistake and now confess it, and because we
37	Why did Jephthah call to the notice of the elders of Gilead their past and their present contrary course toward him. and what proper course toward Theocratic rule does Jepbtbah's response emphasize?
38	What did the elders give as the reason for their appeal to Jephthah. and bow do the appeals of religionists of these days contrast therewith?
November 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER.
331
recognize you are the one whom Jehovah has blessed to prove that he raised you up to be the judge, deliverer and visible representative in his Theocratic government over us. It is due to your faith, together with your works of valor, toward Jehovah our God and Ruler.’
’’From the summer of 1938 Jehovah’s witnesses wanted his Theocratic organization and its visible representative on earth, The Theocratic Society under Christ, “that thou mayest go with us.” This would make sure they were and are on the right side and are joined to the correct organization and are doing the work assigned to them by Jehovah through his chosen organization. It was as when Captain Barak requested Deborah, God’s prophetess, to go with him to the battle. (Judg. 4:8,9) Jehovah’s witnesses saw that if they had the Theocratic King to lead them in the fight, the Theocratic Society on earth being his visible representative, then the victory against demonism would be won for the vindication of God’s name and for their deliverance from the totalitarian “abomination of desolation”. Of themselves what could any small minority of people on earth today do against the demonized totalitarian monstrosity of the “new order” as pictured by the aggressive Ammonites of old seeking domination by violence!
40	The request for Jephthah to be “our head” was fitting because the “inhabitants of Gilead” were Jepthah’s closest brethren, he being the descendant of Gilead and hence being a Gileadite like themselves. Correspondingly, in 1938 Jehovah’s witnesses did most unequivocally declare the Theocratic rule and organization to be the only true way, ordained and approved by God Almighty. They renounced all personal headship and all democratic personal rights within God’s organization as concerns the carrying on of his work of witness. They declared themselves for the Theocratic organization and its royal Head, Christ Jesus. Solely under the Theocratic arrangement do they wish to wage the war against the encroachments of political-religious forces who oppose The Theocracy and its gospel message.
VOW OF ALLEGIANCE
41	“And Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead, If ye bring me home again to fight with the children of Ammon, and Jehovah deliver them before me, shall I be your head?” (Judg. 11:9, Am. Rev. Ver.) These words settle it that Jephthah was a witness of Jehovah and a man of faith in Jehovah, to whom Jephthah looked for the victory. His words showed
39 From 103S on what did Jehovah's witnesses want as to organization, and why did they wish it to go with them to the fight?
40	Why was the request for Jephthah as "head” fitting for the Gileadites, and, in fulfillment, how did Jehovah's witnesses declare themselves and proceed concerning headship?
41	How did Jephthah’s reply concerning accepting headship show he was an informed witness of Jehovah?
he was familiar with the things “written aforetime” about Jehovah’s triumphs over the demonized forces of wickedness. Jephthah was determined to proceed against Ammon, and this he would do, not in the name of demon gods whose worship had brought eighteen years of oppression upon Israel, but in the name of Jehovah and according to his Theocratic way. Religion had to be put away if God Almighty could be counted on to deliver over their enemies to be wiped out.
42	Jephthah made his headship conditional upon Jehovah’s victory. This proved he was not arbitrarily deciding he should be the head or Jehovah’s visible Theocratic representative over the Gileadites. By giving him success Jehovah must give positive, visible proof that Jephthah was the choice of the great Theocrat. Jephthah’s determination was that God’s rule should not be forsaken after the crisis had passed. The divine rule and organization must be enforced and carried forward as long as he had anything to do with the affairs of Israel as its judge. He wanted no more of such lawlessly throwing him out on the flimsy excuse that he was the son of Gilead only by a woman who had once been a harlot.
43	With God’s covenant people today it must be The Theocratic Government and its visible organization first, last, and all the time, both before Armageddon and forever after. As with Jephthah’s selection, so it has been with the Watch Tower Society. The Society did not select itself to be the visible part of Jehovah’s Theocratic organization on earth, but the Lord God, by Christ Jesus, did so. How?
44	Since 1918 there has been a controversy in “Christendom” as to the genuineness of the Watch Tower Society, that is, as to its relationship to God and as to its being his servant and channel of communication. By facts, which speak louder than wordy claims, the Lord God has demonstrated the Society to be his servant and channel. By it he has sent the testimony concerning Jehovah, his name and his Theocracy under Christ Jesus. By the Society he has carried on the witness work concerning The Theocracy and the vindication of Jehovah’s name through that Government. Also by the Society he now conducts the organized fight against the aggressions of the religious-totalitarian monstrosity. Through the same Society also he has brought back and reinstated among men the Theocratic rule and organization over consecrated persons in a covenant with the Most High God. This is not boasting, but
42 Upon what did Jephthah condition the decision for him tn be the bead of the Gileadites, and what w his determination respecting the rule over them after the crisis should have passed'9
43 What place must the Theocratic organization occupy wItb Jehovah's witnesses now and at any time, and who selected the Society to be the visible part thereof7
44 In the controversy over the genuineness of the Watch Tower Society what indisputable facts speak forth proving Jehovah God bad laid hold on it as bis channel and servant?
332
WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
an honest, humble statement of indisputable and well-known facts, all proving that Jehovah has laid his hands upon the Society and made it his visible representative of The Theocracy. Such proof discounts any idea that this has come about merely by the expressed wish and request of creatures like the “elders of Gilead”. The wise will consider these facts and ponder well their meaning.
45	“And the elders of Gilead said unto Jephthah, Jehovah shall be witness [{margin) be hearer] between us; surely according to thy word so will we do.” (Judg. 11:10, Am. Rev. Ver.) Young’s translation reads: “Jehovah is hearkening between us, if according to thy word we do not so.” It was a contract made before Jehovah and in his name, and as hearer he would watch as to its fulfillment. If the Gileadites sincerely meant their part of the covenant and showed faith by fighting courageously alongside Jephthah and under his command, then Jehovah would do his part and give victory over the aggressor Ammon. Also. now, by joining themselves to the Theocratic organization at God’s invitation and then by submitting themselves to it and offering expressions of loyalty and devotion to it, Jehovah’s witnesses are binding themselves. Like the elders of Gilead they know God is listening and attending to their expressions and promises and will hold them accountable if they rebel against and abandon or throw off the Theocratic rule and organization at any time henceforth.
45	“Then Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead, and the people made him head and captain over them: and Jephthah uttered all his words before the Lord in Mizpeh [“Watchtower’].” (Judg. 11:11) In modern fulfillment of this: After publication of the Watchtower article “Organization” in June, 1938, the Society sent out due “Organization Instructions” to all organized companies of Jehovah’s witnesses for their consideration and adoption. That same year, September 9-11, a world-wide convention was held with London, England, as key city, linked by land wires and radio beam with 46 simultaneous conventions in 46 other cities in Britain, America, Australia, Canada, and elsewhere, 117 stations also
45	With whom as witness, and why him. did the elders of Gilead make their contract with Jephthah, and now bow have Jehovah’s witnesses bound themselves likewise?
46	. From 1938 on bow did Jehovah’s witnesses fulfill that part of the drama where the elders of Gilead made him bead and captain over them?
radiocasting the speeches. A total of 150,000 personally attended this unparalleled convention. There the Theocratic “Organization Instructions” were discussed-by special representatives of the Society. (See The Watchtower, issues of August 15 and September 1, 1938.) Thereafter the field was laid out for work world-wide. Everywhere the companies of Jehovah’s witnesses acknowledged the Theocratic organization with joy and thanksgiving. Eagerly and gladly they yielded themselves thereto and began working under it in obedience to organization instructions. No popular democratic election that, but the acceptance by God’s covenant people of the organization they knew He had chosen and set over them. At the New World Theocratic Assembly of September 18-20, 1942, including simultaneous conventions in more than 80 cities throughout the earth, further organization instructions were issued to meet the situation created by the spreading power of the Ammonitish totalitarian monstrosity.—See the report in The Watchtower October 15, 1942, pages 317-320, under “Key Theocratic Assembly at Cleveland”.
4T Jephthah uttered all his words before Jehovah in Mizpah. Thereby he further showed he was Jehovah’s witness and had faith that Jehovah would regard his servant’s faithfulness and give the needed help, blessing and victory. Jephthah showed he recognized his obligation and responsibility as being to Jehovah and that he in his position over the Gileadites was merely God’s servant. Jephthah believed that “salvation belongeth unto Jehovah”. (Ps. 3:8, Am. Rev. Ver.) As the Gileadites brought Jephthah back from Tob to Mizpah (‘Watchtower’), his home, so in A. D. 1938 the Theocratic organization was brought back to where it belonged. The Watch Tower Society recognized its responsibility before Jehovah as his visible servant, and so confessed in the Watchtower’s columns. All faithful witnesses taking their stand for the Theocratic organization voiced themselves as to their faith, obligations and responsibilities, and did all things as unto Jehovah by Christ Jesus. Everything ready to go, now follows the challenge to the enemy!
(To be continued)
41. What waa shown by Jepbthah's uttering all hia words '‘before Jehovah" tn Mizpah, after they brought him back from Tob, and how was there a like utterance before Jehovah from and after 1838’
O thou that tellest good tidings to Zion, get thee up on a high mountain; Q thou that tellest good tidings to Jerusalem, lift up thy voice with strength; lift «t up, be not afraid; say unto the cities of Judah, Sehold, your God! Behold, the Lord Jehovah will come as a mighty one, and his arm will rule for him: Behold, his reward is with him, and his recompense before him. They that wait for Jehovah shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; they shall walk, and not faint. The word of our God shall stand forever.—Isaiah 40:9,10,31,8, A. R. V.
EARTH’S PLACE IN GOD’S PURPOSE
THE earth excites the wonder and admiration of man, even though man now is imperfect and his understanding greatly limited. Whether the earth is viewed with respect to the formation of its various layers or its vegetable and animal life; whether its endless varieties of things are seen by the use of the microscope; or whether by employing the telescope the relationship of the earth to the other planets and the stars is considered, the reverential man stands in awe and wonderment at the wisdom displayed in its creation. When man learns that the earth was created by the Most High God and was made to be the lasting habitation of man in perfection, his mind and his heart yearn to know more about it and more concerning its great Creator. The telescope was not discovered until early in the seventeenth century, and it is no matter for surprise that prior to that time worldly man thought that the earth was the center of all things.
The knowledge of the great Creator, as he reveals himself in his creation of man and his provision for man, was preserved by very few men. This knowledge was merely a tiny stream of truth which trickled down through the centuries, and few were they that drank thereat. Early in man’s history he put God out of his thoughts. Consequently the vision of man was limited to things he saw with his natural eye. When the sun, the moon and the stars came into view, some men gave consideration to the creation, but not to the Creator. Because it was apparent to them that all life enjoyed by earthly creatures proceeded from the sun, that body became the object of worship by men. Those who did retain a knowledge of the Creator and had faith in him knew God was beyond the starry heavens and they worshiped him as the Creator of both heaven and earth. Such men were so few, however, compared with the greater number, that they are hardly observable. —Rom. 1:19-25.
The development of the telescope, together with increased knowledge of things, brought men to see that the earth is not what man once thought it to be. He learned that instead of being fixed and the center of all things the earth is a sphere and one among other planets associated with the sun, and that the sun is the center of this planetary system known as the solar system. The ecclesiastical system of Rome, and particularly its leaders, for a thousand years and more thought that the earth is fixed and everything else revolves about it. They also claimed to be the sole interpreters of the Bible and they claimed the Bible as authority for this erroneous thought. This clergy teaching had probably more to do than anything else to fix the false thought in the minds of the people.
As knowledge increased men learned that the earth is a planet among the other planets which move about the sun. The facts learned by men disprove the theories held and taught by Rome’s clergy. This caused them to lose confidence in religious teachers. It also produced suspicion and doubt about the Bible as an authority of truth. The result was that many were led entirely away from the Bible. Had they understood the truth as taught in the Bible, and not been influenced by the misrepresentation of these religious teachers, they would not have turned away from the Bible and away from God.
It is claimed by scientists that the writers of the Hebrew
scriptures of the Bible were ignorant of the relationship between the earth and the other planets and the stars of creation. There is no evidence, however, to support such a claim. It is quite evident that it was not God’s purpose to state in his Word, which constitutes our Bible, all the facts relative to the earth and its relationship to other bodies in space. The spirit or invisible power of God operated upon the minds of the faithful men of old who wrote the Bible, and it is reasonable that they understood some things about the creation that are not recorded in the Scriptures. What they did write under divine direction was and is true, and of that we can be absolutely certain. These holy men of old wrote as they were moved upon by the holy spirit.—2 Pet. 1:21; 2 Sam. 23:2.
The Bible is the only credible guide either as to the real relationship between man and the earth and the great Creator of both or as to the purpose of the creation of both. Taking the Bible as his guide, teachable man sees that the earth occupies a place of great importance in God’s purpose and that in His due time every creature living in heaven and in earth will be brought into one grand harmonious whole or unity. Note Ephesians 1: 9.10.
The creation of earth did not happen by chance, nor did it come into existence by the operation of blind force. Its formation was by the will of God, and it was created directly under his supervision. (Isa. 42:5) “For every house is builded by some man; but he that built all things is God.” (Heb. 3:4) Future epochs may witness other planets of great size giving glory to the Creator beyond anything that is now revealed to us, but man cannot now conceive of any of them as ever being more highly honored than this earth. When man comes to appreciate this fact he appreciates more fully how he has been favored by the great Creator.
What lifts the earth into a position of importance beyond anything possible with the other planets is the fact that at the earth has been staged the great drama of the vindication of the name of Jehovah God by his Son Jesus Christ and by His kingdom.
The only begotten Son, the firstborn of every creature and the active agent of Jehovah God in the creation of all other things, did at the-will of Jehovah leave the courts of heaven and come to earth. While on earth he proved himself the faithful and true witness concerning Jehovah God and his kingdom. He was subjected to the severest testings at the hands of religious agents of the Devil and yet maintained his integrity unmarred toward God. Because of being Jehovah’s faithful witness for the Kingdom Christ Jesus suffered an ignominious death and then was raised out of death and exalted to the highest place in heaven, next to Jehovah. All this was done toward the vindication of Jehovah’s name and that, in his due time, which is at hand, he might establish his will among his creatures that live on earth and in heaven, and all to the everlasting good of obedient men on earth and to the glory of Jehovah.
Because God used the earth and faithful men thereon for his eternal purpose, and because his beloved Son Jesus when a man on earth proved his fidelity to God before men and angels, the conclusion must be that the earth is the most favored, and will remain the most favored, in the planetary creation of God and will always be dear to 333
334	THE WATCHTOWER	Brooklyn, N. Y.
the heart of the Creator. His own Word contradicts the in literal fire and says: "The earth abideth for ever.-’ religious teachings concerning the destruction of the earth —Ecel. 1: 4.
HAS THE BATTLE OF ARMAGEDDON BEGUN?
SCRIPTURALLY the answer is, No! According to the meaning of “Armageddon” the battle bearing that name has not begun. The part of the name mageddon (for Megiddo) means the place for the assembly of troops. The prefix Ar (Har in the Hebrew) means mountain or hill. The highest part of a mountain the Scriptures designate as a hill. A mountain symbolically represents Jehovah’s organization. Hence the word “Armageddon” means the high mountain or organization where the troops of Jehovah are assembled or gathered together. These troops assembled at Armageddon are Jehovah’s troops, including the remnant of faithful Christians on earth but who are not of this world. In Revelation 14:1 the Lord shows his troops to be made up of the 144,000 faithful Christians together with their Head and King Christ Jesus. They are assembled on Mount Zion, that is to say, they are gathered together in Jehovah’s capital organization.—See Psalms 2:6 and 132:13, 14.
The enemy of God and His government, Satan, knows that soon the final battle must be fought and the issue determined, and he proceeds to gather together his forces to bring them against Jehovah's organization Concerning the mustering together of Satan's forces it is written: “For they are spirits of demons, working signs; which go forth unto the kings [rulers] of the whole world, to gather them together unto the war of the great day of God, the Almighty, And they gathered them together into the place which is called in Hebrew Har-Magedon.”—Rev. 16:14,16, A. R. V.
A battle is often called by the name of the place where it is fought Hence the battle is said to be that of Armageddon. But it must be noted that Revelation 16:14 says, “the battle of that great day of God Almighty”; which clearly means that at that time is when Jehovah God. the Almighty, takes a hand in the great tribulation that comes upon the whole world, and that he does so in the execution of his judgment against Satan's old world.
Christ Jesus is the head and commander over Jehovah’s capital organization and leads the fight against the enemy. According to Ezekiel, chapters thirty-eight and thirty-nine, over against Christ Jesus is Gog, the chief field marshal of Satan the Devil, and which spirit prince leads the enemyforces at the great battle of Armageddon The vision given in Revelation 14:1-3 discloses Jehovah’s capital organization under the leadership of Christ the Lamb of God. All the members of that glorious organization are seen rejoicing They are singing together and now sing to the praise of Jehovah, because the time has come to settle the great issue of supremacy, and they know that it will be settled in favor of Jehovah and to the honor and complete vindication of his name. The remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses yet on earth are of that company assembled unto and rejoicing at Mount Zion, God’s organization.
Over against the army of the Lord are to be seen the wicked forces of Satan under the leadership of Gog. The wicked invisible demons and their visible dupes on earth
join in a conspiracy to destroy Jehovah’s covenant people that they may not be part of God’s “holy nation” and serve to the praise of Jehovah’s name, (Ps. 83:2-5;
1 Pet, 2:9,10) Satan sends forth his forces, demon and religious-totalitarian, under Gog and against the assembled troops of Jehovah at “Armageddon”. Up to this point Jehovah God by his Field Marshal Christ Jesus has taken no militant hand in the tribulation on the earth. The great battle that is about to be fought is called ‘the battle of God Almighty1, because then is when He will take a hand. In the nineteenth chapter of Revelation, verses 11-16, is given a vision of Christ Jesus ready for the battle of the great day of God Almighty and supported by his hosts of holy angels. He is symbolized as riding a white horse, thus saying that his cause is a righteous one and “in righteousness he doth judge and make war”. He is “The Faithful and True”, the Executive Officer of Jehovah, and “the King of kings, and Lord of lords”. Only the members of Jehovah’s organization will follow the great Leader in that war, and the part to be performed by the remnant and their companions on earth is to sing the praises of Jehovah and his kingdom. (Note 2 Chronicles 20-20-23.) The great battle of the day of God Almighty has not yet begun, but is near at hand, as all the evidence shows.
Satan’s organization has not only oppressed the poor people of earth, but made murderous assaults upon Jehovah’s witnesses in an attempt to destroy them. Every one of the anointed remnant and their faithful companions would have been destroyed ere now except for the protection furnished by Jehovah God through Christ Jesus The Scriptures show that Satan’s chief objective is to destroy the remnant of the Kingdom class because these maintain their integrity toward Jehovah and prove Satan to be a liar in claiming no one can remain a true Christian like Christ Jesus. In due time Jehovah God will fight for his name, his kingdom, and his own people, and that will be a righteous warfare As foretold, at Zechariah 14: 3: “Then shall the Lord go forth, and fight against those nations, as when he fought in the day of battle.”
To charge Jehovah God with the responsibility for the ills that now afflict the world is a gross defamation of his holy name by the religious clergymen Jehovah is right and righteous at all times, and all his works are done in righteousness. The great battle of the day of God Almighty, which will suddenly begin when the worldly rulers fix up conditions and cry “Peace and safety1” will be the worst tribulation that will ever have afflicted the world, and it will be the result of the execution of God’s righteous judgment against the nations that have forgotten Jehovah God and afflicted his faithful witnesses. (See 1 Thessalonians 5:3 and Psalm 9:17.) The prophet’s description, at Jeremiah 25.33-36, shows not many persons will be left alive on the earth. Only Jehovah’s faithful sen-ants, as foreshadowed by Noah and his family in the ark, will survive Armageddon.
LETTERS FROM BRITAIN
DETERMINED TO SERVE JEHOVAH
Dear Brother Knorr:
Four hundred Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions assembled at Edinburgh on the occasion of Brother Schroeder’s visit decided unanimously to send you this token of our love.
We are determined to continue unitedly in our service to The Theocracy and in withstanding the attacks of the Assyrian. (Mic. 5:5) By the Lord’s grace, we will go forward under the great Shepherd, Chnst Jesus, until the land of the enemy be wasted and the Holy City gains the victory of world domination. We recognize that the time is here for everyone to “bear his own burden”, and therefore we are ready and willing to continue in the service of Jehovah no matter what the future may hold.
We are looking forward with great expectation to the coming conventions in September, and we pray that the Lord will richly bless you to the end that the dwellers and refugees in the Holy City may continue to receive the rich food of truth.
It is our hope that we may soon have the joy of a visit from you in this land. It will be a great joy to have you share with us here, and we trust that it may be the Lord's will to allow this.
We are rejoicing in the nch spiritual food of the Micah prophecy, and long for the day of final vindication, when totalitarianism will be for ever destroyed and the Holy City rule to the honor of Jehovah’s name.
With warm love to you and all our brethren at Bethel, Your fellow servants of the Great Theocrat, Jehovah’s witnesses and Companions, South East Scotland.
“RESOLVED TO DO OUR PART”
Dear Brethren :
It is with great joy of heart that we thank Jehovah for Children.
Sixteen years have passed away since the “time of blessedness” began with the book Deliverance. That was a delightful and refreshing draught from the “wells of salvation”, giving great power to young Benjamin, binding him in its sweet influence to the “Greater Joseph”.
Deliverance and Children have a strong affinity. The one is interwoven with the “Birth of the Man Child”, the great Deliverer, and the other with the “Children of the King” and the great Deliverance. What visions this marvelous book inspires! How sweet and lofty are the thoughts of “John” and “Eunice”! How choice their words! How sensible their speech! As they reason on the ripening purposes of Jehovah one is caught up with them into Paradise, to walk its highways in unspeakable joy.
What heart will not be delighted with the superb presentation of the Mandate! With smooth and flowing diction, in language of transcendant beauty, the pure and exquisite message unfolds to mark this book as the most sublime of Kingdom publications.
(Continued from page 322)
“THE NEW WORLD”
In these lurid days when the handwriting on the wall is seen dooming the wicked old world to early destruction in appalling violence, this book entitled “The New World” is published as a special provision of the great Creator of the new world for the comfort and hope of those who long for a righteous world and who are now obliged to suffer sorely for righteousness’ sake. The New World has a jacket of peach-colored cloth, with a planetary front-cover embossing matching the title. On opening the book the end-sheets will surprise you with their pictorial story, but your full measure of delight and thrills will come with readmg through the 384 pages of the story of worlds, the amazing fulfillment of the ancient drama of Job, the final end of wicked rule, and the triumph of righteousness at last in the new earth and heavens. Artistic pictures in color enliven the swiftly moving theme; and an index of subjects, and another of all Scripture texts cited, make it valuable for study and reference. The New World, the “Publishers’ Edition”, is put up in better binding,
It is just grand to follow the mind of John and Eunice as they live and move through the purposes of Jehovah to emerge triumphantly resolved to share in the bounties of His grace.
The book itself is a literary masterpiece, and the Kingdom illustrations “dear to the heart of every child”. One sees Jesus stripped of all religious “trappings”, calmly and resolutely at the temple, watching the aged beginning to take the count.
How awe-inspiring to stand with Barak and Deborah on that immovable rock, thrilled beyond words, to see “Kishon” in flood sweep the enemy away!
Our hearts praise Jehovah for the faithful labor of Brother Rutherford and for the integrity of the Watchtower in placing this book in our hands.
We are resolved to do our part in making Jehovah’s name a praise in the earth.
Your fellow servants of The Theocracy, The Brethren of the Dartford Company, England.
“THE COMPANIES WILL CARRY ON”
Dear Brother Knorr:
At an assembly of the local companies at Chelmsford, Essex, last Sunday, the 5th July, the brethren expressed the wish that a letter should be sent to you that we appreciate the stand by yourself and the brethren in America for the truth at this time.
We are grateful to Jehovah and rejoice in the continued gracious provision of the “meat in due season” that he is providing through The Watchtower for his people at this time We value the light being thrown upon the Holy City and all that it implies.
We are determmed that if the enemy treads in our palace, at 34 Craven Terrace, the companies will continue to carry on where they are to the glory of Jehovah’s name. We are determined to face the enemy with the Kingdom smile to the end.
We appreciate the stand made by our brethren in America against the persecution and will, by God’s grace, do the same in Britain.
We keenly look forward to the coming convention and pledge ourselves to help and do all we are asked to do to further the Lord’s work herein.
All the brethren who have been in prison send their love and wish you to know that they are standing unitedly shoulder to shoulder with you agamst the persecution.
Assuring you of our continued love and our determination to maintain our integrity to the end, and with love and good wishes to you and those associated with you, we remain
Your brethren and fellow servants of The Theocracy, Hoddesdon [England] Company of Jehovah’s witnesses.
it bemg of washable cloth, and which will wear better and last longer. Hence this edition is preferable for use of those attending study classes on the book It will be mailed postpaid to your address on order accompanied by your contribution of 50c a copy.
“THE NEW WORLD" QUESTION BOOKLET
This &4-page booklet is provided as a complement to the book The New World. It is bound in a substantial paper binding, with neat cover design, and contains simple but searchmg questions on all the paragraphs of the book. It is therefore a vital aid in the study and understanding of The New World. It contains instructions on the most progressive method of group study, and thus with this booklet of questions any sincere person can conduct large or small groups of persons in a most profitable study of the Bible with The New World as the textbook. It is 5c a copy, mailed postpaid. You will want this booklet not only for your personal use, but also extra copies for your companions in study Companies and study groups should combine orders and send such through their respective servants.
335
FIELD EXPERIENCES
SHEEP HEARING SHEPHERD’S VOICE (BRITAIN)
“The sheep in B  and district are beginning to manifest themselves; also the goats. In the small village of 0---- there are now sixteen Watchtower subscribers,
and a district group study with the book Children has been arranged at the home of an Irish Protestant. The highest attendance at this study so far has been eighteen adults and children. On recommendation from a Watchtower subscriber a lady was found and she has just offered her home for a group study. This person is well known and has many friends in this district to invite along, and we look forward to good times at the coming studies, which commence next Friday evening. A brother who has been a publisher for only three months has opened his home for a group study with Children, and after only two studies his wife has commenced the house-to-house service. Two strangers appeared at the second study. This brother is a guard on the railway and always carries booklets on his travels, never missing the opportunity to give a witness. While pavement witnessing in B----, a Methodist minister
in passing was attracted by the publisher’s placard 'Escape from Death at Armageddon’. Said the minister: ‘That’s what I want—Armageddon.’ Publisher: ‘So do we!’ Minister: ‘I mean the booklet Armageddon.’ He also asked: ‘Why is it that Jehovah’s witnesses are so persecuted?’ Arrangements were made for a back-call on him, and also for the supplying of the booklet.”
AT a BUS STOP (STATEN ISLAND, N.Y.)
“I had just arrived at my post in the magazine work Saturday night and was fixing my literature and getting set for service. A man, in a great hurry to catch a bus, suddenly reeled and turned about-face when he heard a voice say, ‘Take the latest copy of The Watchtower with you, sir?’ ‘Did you say Watchtower’ he said, as he came towards me. Setting down his many packages he took the three Watchtower magazines I had in my hand, scanned through them and said, ‘So this is The Watchtower! I thought it would be a book, you know, one of those with a hard cover. I’ll take these anyway.’ Because his eyes were fixed on the bus which stands at this point a few minutes, I tried to hold him in conversation while I struggled a bit to get out of my magazine bag the book Children and the booklet Hope. Noticing an accent in his speech and making use of every precious moment, I asked what other language he spoke. ‘I am Swedish,’ he said, ‘and am on a boat most of the time.’ By this time I had the book out and said, ‘Perhaps this is what you really wanted.’ He looked through this too, in a hurry, while I tried to tell in a few words what it contained. ‘Oh I’ll take this book all right. It’s just what I wanted. Gosh, it’s gone, d--it [he meant the bus] !’ Apologizing,
he said, ‘I wanted to get that bus so badly. Oh well!’ While waiting for the next bus he turned to me and said, ‘Lady, I’m going to tell you something. One day, on the boat, me and a couple of men were discussing the Bible, when all of a sudden (and right in the middle of our conversation, mind you) we saw a small object floating near our boat. As it came nearer we could see that it was a book. One of the men scooped it out of the water and laid claim to it right away. We opened the book and saw
that it came from the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, and, I tell you, since then all our doubts and questions were answered from that book. That man read it from cover to cover and still has the book and is telling everybody what is in that book, and he says, “Now I am a Christian.” ’ By this time another bus had pulled up, and, gathering his packages together, he said he was so happy to take all this good reading back to the ship with him.”
PREACHING WHILE IN BONDS (CONNECTICUT)
Bridgeport: “One day last week a few of the friends went to the-----jail to see----. He was in good spirits
in spite of being confined. We learned that he was active even behind prison bars, finding interest and spreading the message of God’s kingdom. He said that except for a few inconveniences he did not mind the prison routine, but he added, ‘Don’t forget to tell this to the friends at the service meeting; tell them to get out in the service as much as they can, because when you are behind these bars you regret every minute that was not spent in the Lord’s work while free to do so. I ought to know.’ We departed, happy to still be free in the open air, with an opportunity to serve God.”
D-----: “The Children study is being held during the
hour of 5: 30 to 6: 30 on Wednesday; we opened the stud} tonight for the first time. There were four witnesses and two friends. The study is in the [Penitentiary] Educational Department. We have a room by ourselves; so you see the educational department- fits in nicely, because the greatest educational campaign on earth is being held by Jehovah’s witnesses, informing the people of the marvelous provisions that Jehovah has in store for His people. . . . There is a great interest shown here; by Jehovah’s grace, there will be a larger gathering the next time we congregate. It was a wonderful provision made by his grace for his witnesses to be able to have a meeting here. Praise ye Jehovah, for all his works are done according to his will. I received the seven books that you sent to me. Thank you very much. Will you please do me one more favor and send seven more Children books, if possible. I will see to it that you are well taken care of I will not slack the hand, but will drive the sword deeper into ‘Eglon’s belly’. . . . The Theocratic Assembly will be here shortly T hope that each one of you are able to attend. Personally I will not, because regulations will not permit me to.”
A DOUBLE CALL, WITH DIVIDED RESULTS (ARIZONA)
“I rang the doorbell, introduced myself to the lady, and proceeded to play the phonograph. ‘Is this that “Jehovah stuff”?’ she asked. ‘Start moving, and move fast, before I get my husband to— 1 ’ In the middle of this sentence a doorbell rang from the back of the house. I saw a man pass the lady (no doubt her husband), give me a look, and proceed to answer the back door. After the minute that I was still there trying to explain about the purpose of the work, the man passed back. In his hand was the book Children. My surprise could not even compare with the facial expression of the lady. She looked as if she had a bitter pill in her mouth and could not swallow it. When she did swallow, I saw it was time to leave. This was the last house to witness to in this block.”
336


THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
117 Adams Street •	• Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
OFFICERS
N. H. Knorr, President	W. E. Van AllBn.cn, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH Is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to ins creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God's law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind ; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted Lira to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION Is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and Is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah's kingdom under Christ, which has now begun ; that the Lord's next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom the people of good will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to "fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal Is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed Ln the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good will. It arranges systematic Bible study for Its rea.ders and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but Invites careful and critical exam cation of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United Statzs, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign $130; Great Britain, acstralasia. and Socrn Africa. Gs. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British. South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances rinni countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn oihce, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ................... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W.2, Enzland
Canadian.................40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto 5, Ontario, Canada
Australasian...........7	Beresford Hoad, Stratbfield, N. S. W , Australia
South African_________________Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of thio Journal appear in several lanpuaperj
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, norertv or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once m h 3ear, stating the reason for so requesting It. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year 13 required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers' Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Chance of address, wlmn requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration! will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Entered as second-class matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. Y , under the Act of 1/arch S, 1870
“VICTORY SONG” TESTIMONY PERIOD
December is the month that brings to a close the calendar year of the old world It is with joy that the sei vants of Jehovah s'ng the Victory Song atter a long battle; but they look forward to further battles and victories The faithful do say with gladness of heart that they have remained “blameless in the day of our Lord” and will continue to do so, by the Lord’s grace. During the "Victory Song” Testimony Period the song of the new world will be sung To do this the publishers of The Theocracy will offer to the people the publication The Neu. World and the booklet Peace—Can It Last! on a contribution of 25c. If you wish to join tn the “Victory Song” Testimony Peilod timing the month of December, make arrangements now with your local company servant If you are not associated with a company, write direct to the Society for further information.
‘‘THE NEW WORLD”
In these lund days when the handwriting on the wall is seen dooming the wicked old world to early destruction m appalling violence, this book entitled “The New World” is published as a special provision of the great Creator of the new world for the comfort and hope of those who long for a righteous world and who are now obliged to suffer sorely for righteousness’ sake. The .Ven World has a jacket of peach-colored cloth, with a
planetary front-cover embossing matching the title. On opening the book the end-sheets will surprise you with their pictorial story, but your full" measure of delight and thrills will come with reading through the 384 pages of the story of worlds, the amazing fulfillment of the ancient drama of Job, the final end of vvu-keu rule, and the triumph of righteousness at last in the new earth and heavens. Artistic pictures m color enliven the swiftlv moving theme; and an index of subjects, and another of all Scnptuic texts cited, make it valuable for study and reference The Neu World. the “Publishers’ Edition”, put up in better binding, " ill be mailed postpaid to your address on order accompanied bv your contribution of 50c a copy.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of December 20: “Fighter for the New World” (Pait 3), fl 1-22 inclusive, The Watchtower November 15, 1942
Week of December 27: “Fighter for the New World” (Pait 3), fl 23-45 inclusive, The Watchtower November 15, 1942.
•THE NEW WORLD” QUESTION BOOKLET
This 64-page booklet is provided as a complement to the book The New World It is bound in a substantial paper bind.ng, with neat cover design, and contains simple but searching question.-, (Continued on page 351)
ateWC>OV/ER
ANNOUNCING JEHOXAH’S KINGDOM
No. LXIII
No\embcr 15, 1942
No 22
FIGHTER FOR THE NEW WORLD
PART 3
“Jesus answered, My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom were of this uorld, then would mi) servants fight."—John IS: 36.
TEHOVAH has declared his unchangeable purpose I to give over the occupancy of the earth wholly J to those who worship him as the Most High and Almighty God. Both the prophecies and the shattering world events of the day in fulfillment speak eloquently to testify that the execution of his purpose is shortly to take place. The final outcome will be a Paradise to the four corners of the earth, and inhabited by perfect human creatures in Jehovah’s own image and likeness. “For thus saith Jehovah that created the heavens, the God that formed the earth and made it, that established it and created it not in vain, that formed it to be inhabited: I am Jehovah: and there is none else. By myself have I sworn, the word is gone forth from my mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, that unto me every knee shall bow. every tongue shall swear. Only in Jehovah, it is said of me, is righteousness and strength; even to him shall men come; and al) they that were incensed against him shall be put to shame.’'—Isa. 45: IS. 23. 24, Am. Rev. Ver., margin.
2 That is no mere Jewish view. Centuries after Jehovah's above pronouncement the Christian apostle Paul bore witness for the same Jehovah and said: “For it is written, As 1 live, saith the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God. So then every one of us shall give account of himself to God.’’ (Rom. 14:11,12) it therefore becomes crystal clear that the most pressing personal issue for each one who desires life on earth in the new world is the worship of Jehovah. The acquainting of the people with the truth about Jehovah that they might know, love and worship him is the most vital need of the hour. It is a service of highest value, being alone of lasting benefit to humanity now headed for destruction.
’ The war for world domination is raging, and the religionists of every stri]>e and creed are emraged therein. The schemers for world domination do not pause to consider the words of the Leader in Christianity: “’For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his angels; and then lie shall reward every man according to his works.” (Matt. IC : 2G. 27) The Son of man has come into his Kingdom, beginning A. D. 1914, and in the big fight at Armageddon he will reward the planners and battlers for world domination with destruction of their souls as enemies of Jehovah’s new world. They have fallen victims to the very enticement that the god of this pre.-ent wicked world held out to the Son of man as the price for his worship of the Devil. In meeting the searching test the Son of man put the worship of Jehovah God foremost as all-important. He brushed the outward glories of this world and its commercial domination aside as contemptible. Note this Perfect One's stand, which stand is right, let religionists say what they will against Jehovah. “And the devil, taking him up into an high mountain, shewed unto him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time. And the devil said unto him, All this power will I give thee, and the glory of them: for that is delivered unto me; and to whomsoever I will I give it. If thou therefore wilt worship me, all shall be thine. And Jesus answered and said unto him, Get thee behind me, Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God. and him only sh.alt thou serve.’ (Luke 4:5-8) Jesus here quoted from Deuteronomy 6:13: “Thou shalt fear Jehovah thy God; and him shalt thou serve, and shalt swear by his name.”—Am. Rev. Ver.
1 To the worshipers of whom will the occupancy of the earth be 0 T_	__. ,	,.
wholk given over, and what will be the final outcome of the execution J	ll?e “Pht to gain the whole world, whose words do the
of that purpose51	religious schemers for world domination leave out of consideration
2 in) How does the apostle Pau! testify to the same divine purpose'1 2 3 * 5?? ?ow be reward them5 (L) In the mount of temptation how
tb) What therefore the most pressing issue for each individual and d'd Jesus meet Satan's oner of earth's domination, and for what
the most valuable service to all humanitj dow?	worship did Jesus take a stand?
339
340
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
*The purpose of Almighty God that only those fearing, serving and worshiping Jehovah shall occupy the earth forever was pictured in miniature when lie gave the land of Palestine to his chosen people Israel. To their forefathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Jehovah had promised to give the land to the Israelites. In fulfillment of this covenant he brought them forth out of the demon-worshiping land of Egypt. On their journey to the Promised Land Jehovah halted them at Mount Sinai in Arabia and inaugurated over them a typical Theocracy or government administered by God. As Lawgiver in such Theocracy Jehovah gave them the Ten Commandments. the first two of which commanded his covenant people to worship only Jehovah as God and not to make any idols or representation of any creature and worship such. (Ex. 20:2-5) This law’ was to protect his covenant people from religion, which is the worship of the demons and which is harmful and death-dealing. (Gal. 3: 19) The effects of religion as at present visible in “Christendom” and in all other nations prove the wisdom and prime importance of these commandments of Jehovah’s law.
5 For forty years, at the hand of Moses, Jehovah led the Israelites through the waste and howling wilderness and finally brought them to the plains of Moab on the east side of the Jordan river and opposite to Canaan, the Promised Land. On the way Jehovah God did not permit his chosen people to invade or overrun the lands of Edom and Moab and Ammon. Passage through those territories peaceably would have made the journey to the Promised Land shorter and more convenient, but the demonized rulers of Edom, Moab and Ammon would not agree to it, and backed up their refusal with a show of military might. The Israelites had no fight with them, and marched around, minding their own business. Then the Amorite nations east of the Jordan, under King Og of Bashan and King Sihon of Heshbon, attacked the Israelites and Jehovah destroyed the aggressors before his, people and gave them the lands of those heathen nations. Miraculously Jehovah divided the flood waters of Jordan and marched his people through, and the conquest of Canaan began. The demon-worshiping heathen in the land resisted the execution of Jehovah’s good purposes toward Ins people, and were destroyed, except the Gibeonites, who made a covenant with the Israelites. Their lives were therefore spared that they might become the servants of Jehovah God at his temple.—Joshua 9 and 10.
4 With the Israelites, how did Jehosah picture his purpose to hare those worshiping Him to occupy the earth, and how did the first two ot Ins Ten Commandments to them agree with that purpose? 5 (a) During Israel’s fort)-tear journey through the wilderness to Canaan bow did Jehosah «how consideration to Moab and Ammon, and how were the Mnonte oppo>ers east of Jordan dealt with1 ib) How did Jehovah then bring his people across into Canaan, and how were the demon-worshiping heathen therein dealt with?
• Such wmr of the Israelites was a righteous war. because it wms commanded of Jehovah of hosts and was for his Theocracy in Israel. Israel’s invasion of Palestine was under the leadership of the Creator and Owner of the earth. The invasion was therefore no act of selfish, greedy totalitarian aggression. The destruction of the heathen inhabitants was no violation of the sixth commandment nor of God's everlasting covenant with humankind concerning the sanctity of the blood of life. The Israelites were commanded to act as God’s executional forces. The execution of those heathen squatters in the Promised Land was righteous, because they were demonworshipers and hence anti-Jehovah and anti-Theocracy, and their living presence in the land would be dangerous and ensnaring to His people. Their belligerent opposition to the entry of God’s covenant people proved this. In giving the Promised Land to the “nation whose God is Jehovah”, the Lord God was providing a homeland for the operation of Theocracy in full force therein for the honor of Jehovah’s name and for the protection of his people against the snare of religion. (Deut. 7: 1G. 25) Such was the typical picture foreshadowing how Almighty God will cut off from this earth all nations that forget Jehovah God. Then he will settle permanently in the cleansed earth all who turn from religion and worship Him and obey bis Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus.
THE CHALLENGE
’ In the days of Jephthah the Gileadite the nation of Israel had to decide this question of Jehovah’s worship. Unwisely and in disobedience to their covenant with Almighty God they had yielded to the snare of religion and forsaken his worship. Theieby they forfeited the protection of Jehovah God. and the Philistines and the Ammonites oppressed them for eighteen years. Toward the close thereof the Israelites repented and returned to Jehovah’s worship. To drive them back again into religion or demonism the Ammonites in great military force invaded Israel’s territory and encamped in the land of Gilead.
8 In harmony with the law of God granting the right of self-defense, which right is recognized by all nations except the Nazi-Fascist totalitanan powers, the Israelites mustered out an army for self-defense. To make certain of Jehovah’s help and deliverance, they turned to his Theocratic government and offered their services to Jephthah the Gileadite. Jehovah God, the Theocratic Ruler of
6 (a) Why were Israel's intasion and war against the Canaanites righteous and not a notation ot Goda Kixtb commandment and to\e-nanl concerning blood** lb) By gi\ing Israel the Promised Land what was Jebo\ah providing. and what does this action typically picture*' 7 In the dais of Jephthah. whv did the nation of Israel ba^e to decide this question of Jeho\ab» worship''’
8 How did the e\iied Jephthah now become captain and head of the Gileadites and what steps did he then take toward Jeboiah and against the Ammonites?
Ncaembek 13,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
341
Israel, had marked him as His appointed judge and leader for Israel. Jephthah agreed to accept the captaincy and headship provided that Jehovah God would manifest his approval by delivering over the enemy aggressors to defeat. The elders of Gilead then brought Jephthah out of exile and to Mizpah of Gilead. In Mizpah (meaning “Watchtower”) Jephthah confirmed all his words of this matter before Jehovah God. At “Watchtower” (Mizpah) he established his home, and there his one and only daughter resided. (Judg. 11:34) Having submitted all matters to Jehovah the great Theocrat for guidance and disposal, Jephthah then challenged and called a halt to the demon-worshipers that encroached upon the interests and the worship of Jehovah's Theocracy in Israel.
° "And Jephthah sent messengers unto the king of the children of Ammon, saying, What hast thou to do with me, that thou art come unto me to fight against my land"?-’ (Judg. 11:12, Am. Rev. Ver.) Jephthah's procedure here followed the Theocratic rule, namely, to serve notice upon the Lord's enemy before finding it necessary to take action violently. Before Jehovah brought the great Deluge, which destroyed the “world that then was", He gave due warning by his prophet Noah. Before destroying Egypt’s prized firstborn ones and her mighty chariots and armies in the Red sea, Jehovah served notice by the prophet Moses upon hard-hearted Pharaoh. The serving of notice and warning resulted in a great witness for the name of Jehovah throughout the earth; and concerning this Jehovah said to Pharaoh: “For this cause have I allowed thee to remain, in order to show thee my power; and in order that they may proclaim my name throughout all the earth.”—Ex. 9:1G, Leeser’s translation.
’"For eighteen years the Ammonites had had their way over Israel. Now they set out upon a course of violent destruction as a climax to their oppressions upon Israel. They were spoiling for their own destruction at the hands of the God of Israel, whose Theocracy they both despised and were out to cut off from the face of the earth. The time, therefore, was appropriate for Jehovah’s name and works to be declared to them as counsel and warning, that the responsibility for the destruction coming upon them might rest upon their own heads.
11 In considering the modern application of Jeph-thah’s protest, let this be remembered: Jephthah as visible head of the typical Theocracy pictured Jehovah’s Theocratic organization under Christ
•.» In vhat respect did Jephthah’s procedure toward the Ammonites follow the Theocratic rule on previous occasions, and in what does tip rolhivvinj: ot tin* rule result51
in Whv xiax it then appropriate tor Jephthah to declare Jehovah’s mint and works a» counsel and warning to the Ammonites'
Il In the matter of Jephthah’s protest whom did be picture and whom did the Ammonites under Molech picture today’’
Jesus, and of which organization the Watch Tower Society is the visible representative and servant The Ammonites under their “king-god’ Moiech. or Chemosh (meaning “Subduer"), pictured the world powers that go totalitarian in their effort for world domination and that are hence against the worship of Jehovah and his Theocratic Government over the earth. Such totalitarian Ammonites are therefore against the Watch Tower Society because it is Theocratic in organization and it acts as the administrative servant of Jehovah’s witnesses who publish His name and his kingdom under Christ.
12	It must here be remarked, unmistakably, that it is not pure democracy that has occasioned the protest of the Greater Jephthah. True democracy stands for and observes the principle of freedom to worship Jehovah God according to his will and commandments, and freedom to publish his name and his Righteous Government as Christ Jesus and his apostles did. For this reason Jehovah's witne^i-have for the past decade and more stood out pi eminently before the nations and proved themselves to be in the forefront of the fight for such righteous principles of democracy and against the modern Ammonites who would stop the exercise of <uch principles in America. The protest raised be tin Greater Jephthah has been occasioned be religion which has fostered totalitarianism in order to gam world domination and hold the monopoly of worship, to the intolerant exclusion of free worship according to conscience and uncensored by religion. Ilcli-gion of “Christendom" declares its aim to convert the world. Ominously there is one brand of religion, with headquarters at Vatican City, which claims the right and the God-given authority to foist its own form of worship upon the whole world and to mak<-all nations subject to the religious bead at the Vatican. “We must make America Catholic.” said Archbishop Ireland at the Hierarchy's anniversary held in Baltimore, November 10, 1SS9. (The elicited Catholic) “It is God’s plan that the Holy Father of Rome should be the temporal and spiritual head of his kingdom on earth.” (The National Cath oho Register) Hence the Vatican’s concordats with the Fascist and Nazi governments, and its exchange of ministers with Fascist Japan March 27, 1942. followed by unavailing protests by the United States Department of State.
13	Jehovah’s witnesses under the Greater Jephthah have no fight with human creatures. Ephesian- G. 12 expresses it: “For we wrestle not against flesh and
12	(al Is it true democracy that ha« occasioned the Greater Jephtli.iii -protest5 and in retent ,vear> how have Jehnvah-	maiiih'•«< 4
themselves with respect to democrat v - nuhteou* p’,ni<n»le*' M wbat then ha* Greater Jephthahs protect been occasioned ano 'Hi it are it* declared aims and it'' alliances in furtherance of &u<li inb’>.ritit aims'•
13	ia)bo Jehovah’s witnesse*- have anv fiuht with human cre.i’ur»-or* what is back of the trouble as proved b\ Scripture and fatt-(b) What is the chief visible obstacle to world peace, and bow will the vvaj be cleared to uninterrupted peace5
342
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against wicked spirits in heavenly places.” (Marginal reading) This goes to the heart of the trouble, that demonism is back of it all. and the Roman Catholic Hierarchy lends itself as the visible instrument of the demons in aiming at Catholic world domination by means of totalitarian rulers as in Germany, Italy, France, Portugal, Spain, and Slovakia. While the Vatican has stood, there has been no world peace; and there never will be as long as the Vatican remains with its so-called ‘’infallible” pronouncements of its papal ruler and the unchanging ambition and continual grasping for religious world domination. Only Jehovah’s "strange act" against religion at the battle of Armageddon will clear the way for uninterrupted peace in the new world. "Babylon” must go, by Jehovah's grace and power.—See Revelation 17 and 18.
PROTEST
14	Let the reader now scan the fulfillment of the prophetic drama of Jephthah in the deeds of the Ammonitish totalitarians that have provoked righteous protest. As heretofore stated in The Watch-touer, the Theocratic rule of operation was published June, 193S, and then through the Watch Tower Society it was put in practice among Jehovah's witnesses beginning October 1, 1938. A world-wide convention embracing 30 cities was arranged to be held three weeks before that date, to wit, September 9-11. The Protestant stronghold of London, England, was the convention center. In the arranging for the convention halls in the other cities of the chain there was great opposition by the Roman Catholic Hierarchy and its political allies of the Nazi-Fascist type, such as mayors, judges, civic bodies, law-enforcement bodies, pseudo-patriotic bodies, and Catholic Action groups. During the actual holding of the convention specially violent overt acts were committed against Jehovah's witnesses peaceably assembled.
13	The assaults upon these faithful Christians, the interference with their rights and privileges as God-fearing citizens, the disregard displayed by public officials and religious leaders for law and order and constitutional government, and the foul part that the Hierarchy of the Vatican played in these insults to democracy, liberty and Christianity, all this has been published in The Messenger of 193S, the magazine reporting this world-wide convention. Up to that time it was the worst invasion, on an international scale and all timed for the same period,
14	Ju4'! before the Theocratic rule vias put in practice among JehovahS witnesses in 193^ what convention was held and what wns the conduct of the modern Ammonites toward the arranging and holding of ‘‘aid convention'•
15	uiWhat did the foregoing enemy action constitute with respect to Jehovah’s Dcople. and what was the result on the convention' (b)Ol vvii.it was such invasion positive evidence and proof as regards the Hierarch) ’
such as Jehovah’s witnesses have suffered of their rights and privileges as Christians. Especial!} notorious were the developments at Clmago. III. Rochester, N. Y., New Orleans, La., and Ottawa. Canada. All such was evidence of the internatimia' pressure by the religions Hieiarchy upon the supposed ‘‘people’s servants” and upon so-called “patriotic” societies to force the doing of what the Hierarchy wants done. It was proof positive of religion's world organization for boycotting and slugging its way to world domination. As a re-ult only 47 of the proposed 50 joint conventions could be held: 118 radio stations broadcast the speeches from London.
18 This attack of modern-day Ammonites upon the right and privilege which all freedom-loving, democratic Americans, Britishers, and others cherish almost dear, namely, freedom of worship and freedom of assembly for such worship, was vicious It called for instant protest to the "king of the children of Ammon”, the Nazi-Fascist totalitarian mon-trositv and its religious backer at Vatican City. Immediately when the president of the Watch Tower Society got back from the key convention at London, arrangements were made for a protest meeting m New York city, Sunday, October 2. In conjunction with this assembly, at Mecca Temple, six joint conventions were held in other cities, including Ottawa and also New Orleans (this time by moan- of a Federal injunction against Catholic oll’n-ials and dupes there). The Protest speech wa- on the subject. “Fascism or Freedom—Which Shall We Have ’" It was also broadcast over a network of 62 radio stations, two of which cut the message short due to religionist howls while the speech was going out.
” That public protest put the question up to the “Ammonites ’ to answer why they were invading, denying and trampling down God-given and constitutionally guaranteed human rights and freedom-The speaker said: "Jehovah's witne--e- are true Christians, that is, followers of Christ, and God -command to all such true Christians is that the} must tell the truth, that the people of good-will max learn the way to righteousness and life (John 18:37) No human agency can rightfu 11 } interfere therewith. Those who object to the full publu ation of truth of God’s Word and the facts in support thereof thereby declare themselves against Jehovah God and Christ Jesus his King. Honest men will lay aside prejudice and calmly consider the facts.’ (See published speech in booklet Fascism or Freedom, page 5, paragraph 1.) Then the speech went on to detail how the "Ammonites’’ have been fighting
IC What did such vicious Ammonitish attack cal! for. and ho* nm it instantly delivered’
17	What question did that public protect put up to the modem Ammonites, and what Debt an.unM Jvhovnh Uod and Chrnt King did it call to attention ot the public’
November 13,1942
^FTie WATCHTOWER,
343
against Jehovah's witnesses in Continental Europe, especially in Nazified Germany, and now also in the United States as disclosed by the overt acts committed throughout this ‘‘land of the free” by the political element who are incited by the totalitarian-minded religious element. This speech was then printed in booklet form and distributed by millions of copies in many tongues.
18	"And the king of the children of Ammon answered unto the messengers of Jephthah, Because Israel took away my land, when they came up out of Egypt, from [river] Arnon even unto [river] Jahbok, and unto Jordan; now, therefore, restore those lands again peaceably.” (Judg. 11:13) It is the Greater Moses, Christ Jesus, who has brought up the spiritual Israelites out of the world symbolized by "Egypt”. As Judge he carne to the temple m 191S. enlightened his remnant of followers with the truth, and delivered them from the bondage to Satan's organization. He showed them that the kingdom of God K all-important in that it shall vindicate Jehovah's name by destroying all parts, visible and invisible, of Satan's organization. Hence a worldwide witness must now be given to the establishment of the Kingdom in 1914, and the primary purpose of the Kingdom, and its bounteous blessings for all taking their stand on its side. In 1929 the King and Judge at the temple shed light on the Bible to reveal that the worldly political powers are not what the Scriptures call "the higher powers” (Romans 13: 1), but that Jehovah God and Christ Jesus are such. To them must Christians subject themselves in cases where the political law conflicts with the higher law of God, the Supreme One. To the heavenly, invisible ’ Higher Powers” must all salvation and protection be ascribed. Homage and worship are to be rendered to Them, and not to the modern Ammonites and the things that these idolize and honor with religious e remonies.
19	The religious-totalitarian Ammonites object to the above. They claim it takes away what they from ancient time have enjoyed and been entitled to. It i> a failure, say they, to render to Caesar what is Caesar's, a failure to recognize the supremacy of the state and that the total state is the all-in-all and the individual citizen is nothing except for the state's service and interests, which means that God has no prior or higher claims upon his covenant people at all. The "Ammonites” argue that Jehovah's witnesses drive them out of a field they have claimed from Nimrod's time and which field, therefore, Jehovah's people have not the right to invade and occupy or
1 k What aii^xer did the Line of Ammon make to Jepbthab, and what are the facts concerning the spiritual Israelites as to coming up out cf ' Lgxpt” and as to position's that thej have taken since 1914 toward world rule and the earthlj political powers'’
I‘» Elow do the modern Ammonites object that such position of Jehosaii's witnesses crowd* them out. and what therefore do they demand of Jeboxab’s witnesses?
to explain and ADVERTISE to others. So they deniaml that Jehovah’s witnesses back down from then Christian position, and that they do so without trouble or fighting back, else they will suffer dire consequences.
20	To these threats the “Ammonites” add force by acts of discrimination through public officials, by arrests, conniving at mob action and lawless police action, by laws mischievously framed contrary to the Constitution, just to "get” God's servants. In totalitarian lands, Germany, Italy, Japan, etc., they are rounded up and put into concentration camps and dungeons. In other lands under the Vatican's influence they are dragged into court, their children are unschooled and put in state reformatories, and they are declared judicially and officially to be an "illegal organization". This hacks up the "Ammonite' demand for Jehovah's witnesses to compromise their stand for The Theocracy.
21	“And Jephthah sent messengers again unto the king of the children of Ammon.” (Judg. 11: 14; Jephthah did not crawfish nor yield any Theocratic ground. This is true today. Jehovah's visible organization under Christ Jesus keeps on sending out his messengers with the same uncompromising menage of Jehovah’s supremacy and kingdom. More interested persons are brought in, trained, and sent into the active service as publishers to help give a wider spread of the message. The London Convention speech "Face the Facts" and the Protest speech "Fascism or Freedom" were recorded as originally given, on phonograph records, and these speeches were reproduced on many thousands of phonographs carried from house to house and on sound-cars and also through public-address systems to many othei thousands. This is no activity interfering with the defense of democratic nations, but is a making of them more awake and alive to the real enemy and danger to their democratic principles. Je»us said. “No man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him.” Jesus’ followers are not inducing anyone to quit his worldly allegiance. It is Jehovah God that does the drawing of creatines to his organization. Jehovah's witnesses merely give the testimony of the truth, and God does the ie«t, and what he does is right and is irresistible. What reason, then, have the "Ammonites” to object and complain and pick a fight?
22	In the message of The Theocracy the ones addressed in particular are the policy-making rulers of the nations that go totalitarian and that open up
20	How do the modern Ammonites add force to such threats, and v. bat demand does it back up'4
21	(a) How has the picture been fulfilled that "Jephthah sent messen^rx again’ to the king of Ammon' (b) this an interference with deii n*e actixitie* of democracies or is it an inducing by men to cause other', to quit tbeir xxorldlx allegiance'’
22	To whom is the Protest message of Hie Theocracx add’p'-sw) and who is responsible for pending the message, and are Jchu»ahb witnesses therefore a ‘sect’’ or a ’cult"'4
344
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
relations with the Vatican. “And [Jephthah] said unto him. Thus saith Jephthah, Israel took not away the land of Moab, nor the land of the children of Ammon.” (Judg. 11: 15) As chosen “head”, Jephthah discharged the responsibility to speak in reply to false charges. At present the one responsible for the message of God’s covenant people is Christ Jesus, the Head of the Theocratic organization and who represents God Almighty. Christ Jesus is Jehovah’s Chief Witness, “The Faithful and True Witness,” and he leads his faithful followers on earth. Jehovah’s witnesses. Theirs was and is not a man s message. They are not a religious sect or cult; for they do not follow the traditions of some man or men nor any religious rigmarole. They practice Christianity by doing as Jesus did in obedience to God's law and commandments. Hence in the name and by the authority of God’s Word (bo visible part of his Theocratic organization sends forth for public information its rebuttal of enemy false charges.
23	That Jehovah's covenant people took no land away without authority from Him. note Moses’ words on the plains of Moab, shortly before the Israelites crossed the Jordan into Canaan. “And the Lord said unto me. Distress not the Moabites ("children of Lot], neither contend with them in battle; for I will not give thee of their land for a possession, because I have given Ar unto the children of Lot for a possession. And when thou contest nigh over against the children of Amnion, distress them not. nor meddle with them; for I will not give thee of the land of the children of Ammon [also descendants of Lot] any possession: because I have given it unto the children of Lot for a possession. Only unto the land of the children of Ammon thou earnest not, nor unto any place of the liver Jabbok, nor unto the cities in the mountains, nor unto whatsoever the Lord our God forbad us.’’—Dent. 2:9,19,37.
24	Centuries later, in the face of like invasion by Ammon and its allies, Jehoshaphat king of Jerusalem confirmed Moses' words. He did so in prayer to God, who knows the truth, saying: “And now, behold, the children of Ammon, and Moab, and mount Seir, whom thou wouldest not let Israel invade, when they came out of the land of Egypt, but they turned from them, and destroyed them not; behold, I say, how they reward us, to come to cast us out of thy possession, which thou hast given us to inherit.”—2 Chron. 20: 10, 11.
25	The modern application of King Jehoshaphat’s
23 What do the worth of Mose* to Israel in the plains of Moab show regarding the Ammonites' cbaige that Israel took away the land of Moab and of Ammon9
2-1 Centuries later, in a time of like invasion upon Israel, how were those words of Moves confirmed'’
25 \s Mated in The Watchtou et of Julv 15 193Q. how have Jehovah’s vvitne*see fulfilled those words of Jehoshaphat declaring Jehovah bad not permitted Ins covenant people to invade the lands of Ammon, Moab dud Mount Seir9
statement is interesting, as given in The Watchtou er of July 15, 193S, paragraph 23;
“Jehovah’s witnesses on the earth now fulfill this part of the prophecy, in this, that they have never at any time been commissioned by the Lord to destroy literally those who compose the visible elements of Satan's organization. They have been plainly told that vengeance belongs to Jehovah and he will repay; consequently their work is different from using carnal weapons. For that reason Jehovah’s witnesses have not advocated or engaged in revolutions, or any like attempts to overthrow worldly institutions. They have never encouraged anyone else to do so. Their sole duty and commission is to inform the people of God's purpose to destroy Satan and his supporters, thereby giving warning to those who are of good-will toward God that they may flee to the place of safety in God's organization. Jehovah's witnesses have never attempted to use politic’ [Ammon's province] or any like means or the legislative bodies or the courts to deprive any person of the freedom of thought or the operation of their organization or to prevent the expression of their views and convictions, because they clearly see that Jehovah has permitted the wicked institutions of the world to remain until his due time to show hi* power against all his enemies. It is therefore the commission and obligation of his witnesses to non tell the people of and concerning Jehovah's purpose'. Jehovah’s witnesses follow strictly the rule that there should exist and be freely practiced the freedom of speech, and freedom of belief and expression.'
26	The above statement to the “king of Ammon' was made the next thing after the Lord God disclosed that his approved organization is Theociatic (See The Watchtoieer, June, 1938.) In agreement with the foregoing statement Jehovah’s witnesses have strictly followed the rule laid down by the Head of the Theocratic organization, namely, ’Render unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, and unto God that which is God’s.’ In thus doing Jehovah's witnesses have neither taken away the "land" nor denied anything that properly belongs to the state.
27	Further. Jephthah said: "But when Israel eanu-up from Egypt, and walked through the wilderness unto the Red sea. and came to Kadesh; then Isiael sent messengers unto the king of Edom, saying. Let me, I pray thee, pass through thy land: but the kin? of Edom would not hearken thereto. And in like manner they sent unto the king of Moab; but he would not consent: and Israel abode in Kadesh.”— Judges 11:16,17.
2G What rule was laid down hy the Fiend of the Theocratic organization9 and in following that rule have Jehovahs vvitne*M?s taken away or denied what belongs to the state9
27 In answer to the king ot \uimon what conduct of Edom and Moab toward Israel did Jephthah call to bis notice’
November 15,1942
Tik WATCHTOWER-
345
5S In tlie Bible symbohsms “Edom” pictures “organized religion”, under the dominance of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy; and “Moab” pictures the profiteering commercial element of the world. All the facts testify that Jehovah’s witnesses have never done any bodily or property harm to religionists, but have discussed merely religious doctrines publicly taught. A world deception was pulled off in 1933 when, in April, Pius XI declared a “holy year” throughout “Christendom”. This was a reproach to God’s name, and Jehovah’s witnesses took issue with the Roman Catholic Hierarchy by a radio broadcast over 55 stations in the speech “Effect of Holy Year on Peace and Prosperity”. The speech was also recorded as given and thereafter reproduced on sound machines throughout “Christendom”. Whether Jehovah’s witnesses were right in declaring the so-called "Holy Year” an unscriptural farce, let all honest persons judge by the totalitarian aggressions and the measure of peace and prosperity that have followed since 1933.
2,1 Hot resentment filled the Hierarchy at this approach to their territory, and they engineered boycotts and programs of violence against those who dared call in question the “infallibility” of the Vatican. Offers were made to the Hierarchy for debates over the radio upon the subjects of Catholic church doctrines as regularly taught by them publicly. Such proposals the Hierarchy consistently turned down and ignored, despite a Petition for such a coast-to-coast radio debate signed by 2.G30.001 petitioners in America. The Hierarchy treated all such fair and honorable proposals as contemptible and beneath their ‘Toly” notice. They refused to grant any favors or considerations in behalf of enlightening the public on the truth. They roused up violent Catholic Action, in like manner as Edom did of old: “And Edom said unto [Israel], Thou shalt not pass hy me, lest I come out against thee with the >word. And the children of Israel said unto him. We will go by the high way; and if I and my cattle drink of thy water, then I will pay for it [as illustrated by the offer to pay for half of the radio-debate broadcasting expense]: I will only, without doing any thing else, go through on my feet. And he said, Thou shalt not go through. And Edom came out against him with much people, and with a strong hand. Thus Edom refused to give Israel passage through his border: wherefore Israel turned away from him.” (Num. 20: 1S-21) So Jehovah’s witnesses turned away from the Hierarchy and visited the ’ Catholic population” in their private homes.
2s <a) Whom do * Edom" and "Moab" picture9 (b) On what did Jehovah s vvitne.^se* take issue with the religious Hierarchy in 1933. and how maj vve judge whether they were right m so doing9 J*i How did the Hierarchy act at this approach of Jehovah’s witnesses to their territory, just as foreshadowed b\ Edom s action of old. and whither did Jehovah’s witnesses turn awaj from them?
,0 “Big Business” and the rest of the commercial element have played “Big Brother” to religion and have supported it financially, granting it free time on radio networks, free advertising in newspapers, together with large and always favorable reports of religious activities and speeches, such as the pope’s encyclicals and “Christ-mass” and “peace” speeches printed in full, free. This same commercial element imitates ancient Moab and does not “consent” to any favors to Jehovah’s witnesses, but charged them regular commercial rates for broadcasts on the Bible. It refused them radio facilities because the Hierarchy threatened stations with boycott and “more drastic action” if the witnesses were given the air. In the commercial newspapers “Moab” publishes lying reports written by religionists against Jehovah’s witnesses. “Moab” has broken contract for advertisements, paid for in advance, of Bible lectures. Now commercial laws, never intended to be used against ministers of the gospel, are applied against the gospel-preaching by Jehovah’s witnesses as against peddlers. By its 5-to-4 decision of June *, 1942, the Supreme Court of America ruled that license-tax ordinances of towns and cities may be applied against Jehovah's ministers of the gospel as though common ambulating vendors. Also the commercial element join in the hue and cry for “more religion!" They ask that religious teaching be introduced into the public schools as being the most important thing in a public-school course, and many public schools let the children take time off from regular school hours to get religious training outside.
S1 The Edomites and Moabites made it hard, wearisome going for the Israelites to reach the Promised Land. Said Jephthah: “Then they went along through the wilderness, and compassed the land of Edom, and the land of Moab, and came by the east side of the land of Moab, and pitched on the other side of Arnon [river], but came not within the border of Moab: for Arnon was the [northern] border of Moab.” (Judg. 11: IS) The people who have been visited in their homes know, and the testimony offered freely in the courts prove, that Jehovah's witnesses have not imposed on the commercial “Moabites" nor violated the commercial laws and regulations by their witness work. In the manufacture and distribution of Watch Tower literature they have avoided everything savoring of commercial motive, practice and profit. They have distributed the printed and recorded message unselfishly out of love for God and in obedience to Him. Nevertheless, as in the Theocracy trials in Kentucky
30 How have the modern Moabites shown favors to the religious element but 'consented' to none for Jehovah* witnesses9
31 (a 1 Due to the actions of Edom and Moab, how was the coins tyr the Israelites on the waj tn Canaan9 /1>'• Do the fact- show that Jehovahs witnesses have imposed on the commercial ‘Moabite*"' and what have the prosecutors in court trials charged and tried to prove on this question?
346
THE WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
and Indiana and elsewhere, the state prosecution tried to make it appear Jehovah's witnesses were a commercial organization opeiating under a religious appearance for profit.
AUTHENTIC FACTS
” How. then, did Israel get the disputed territory? Jephthah answered: “And Israel sent messengers unto Sihon king of the Amorites, the king of Hesh-hon; and Israel said unto him, Let us pass, we pray thee, through thy land into my place." (Judg. 11: 19) This fact proves that the Ammonites were not occupying and had never occupied the land which they said Israel took away from them, namely, the land northward “from Arnon even unto Jabbok, and [westward] unto Jordan”. (Verse 13) It was the Amorites under Sihon that occupied and held such land in possession when Israel reached the southern border of it: "for Arnon is the border of Moab, between Moab and the Amorites.” (Num. 21:13) The Ammonites, however, occupied land to the east of Sihon's country, and hence their territory did not run as far west as Jordan. Furthermore, Numbers 21: 26 says: “Heshbon was the city of Sihon the king of tlie Amorites, who had fought against the former king of Moab, and taken all his land out of his hand, even unto Arnon.” This is additional proof that the Ammonites never once possessed this land.
33	Sihon's name means “sweeping”: as when a warrior sweeps all befoie him. He was an Amorite, and hence a descendant of the accursed Canaan. (Gen. 9: 25: 10: 15, 16) The Amorites were Canaanites and also demon-worshipers. "Amorita" is understood to mean “mountaineer". Their likeness to "organized religion” is clear; for religion claims to dwell in the mount of God’s kingdom, but it goes out after Moabitish commercial gain and commercializes religion and sweeps all before it. Hence the modern Amorites resist Jehovah's witnesses, who have renounced all commercialism. They feel hurt at exposure of their religious racket, and lienee show Jehovah's witnesses no favors.
34	Jephthah continued: “But Sihon trusted not Israel to pass through his coast: but Sihon gathered all his people together, and pitched in Jaliaz, and fought against Israel. And the Loud God of Israel delivered Sihon and all his people into the hand of Israel, and they smote them: so Israel possessed all the land of the Amorites, the inhabitants of that country.” (Judg. 11:20,21) Jephthah's statement
32	What fact did Jephthah then cite to show whether the Ammonites had possessed the disputed territory, and what terntorj did the Ammonites actualh occupy '
33	Whom do Kitnr Sihon and the Amorites picture and how ig the PKture fulhlled ot the Amorites' taking the disputed land out of the baud of the Moabites'5
34	(a) What course did Klne Sihon then take toward Israel, and with what outcome’ (hi Bj his statements on Israel's history what did Jephthah show concerning himself ‘ and what does Jehocab's cictort over King Sihou make certain as to the worship to be established iu the earth’
agreed with that of the prophet Moses, at Deuteronomy 2:32-37 and Numbers 21:21-31. Bv this familiarity with the Bible history of Isiael Jephthmi showed he was not some rough desperado and wildlife ignoramus, but that he studied and was v ell acquainted with the written Word of God. He had faith in its records of Jehovah's judgments successfully executed against all enemies. For the vietor> over Sihon Jephthah’s words gave the credit to Jehovah God. Jehovah’s part in the battle was the important thing; it was His victory and HL conquest. Nothing stopped him in establishing hi-worship in the land then, and nothing will stop hi-establishing it through the whole earth now, no matter who opposes. Christ Jesus, who refused to worship the “prince of the demons", is now rightful King of the earth. With him in office it must be. Out with religion, which is demonisin' He, as Gods agent, will establish Jehovah's worship over all the earth.
35	Jephthah continued: “And they possessed all the coasts of the Amorites, from Arnon even unto Jabbok, and from the wilderness even unto .Ionian. (Judg. 11:22) Had this territory been Ammmi-. then God would not have permitted Diael to gair it; for Jehovah God had told the Isiaehtes n< t to distress or meddle with Ammon. (Dent. 2: 19) B) thus clearly defining the limits of the conqueied territory Jephthah showed he was not disposed to compromise or to yield to the enemy one meh of anything God had given to His covenant people. Said Jephthah to Amnion: "So now the Lotto God of Israel hath dispossessed the Amorites from before his people Israel, and shouldest thou pos-ess it1 (Judg. 11: 23) This sets the right example for God'' servants today.
38	In 191S Jehovah sent to the temple for jud<rm< nt his “Messenger of the covenant'. Chri-t Jesti-. (Alai. 3:1-3) Every advancement since then m knowledge and understanding, anil all pi<>gr<" toward a pure and proper service of the Lord <rod. has meant just that much of a pushing back of the power and forces of religion and a gaming of victoi \ over religion. From all advanced po-itimis thu-attained the Lord's servants may not diaw back To do so would be to yield ground to religionist* and their allies. Jehovah, by Chri-t Je.-us at the temple, is the One responsible for (leaning up hi-witnesses on the earth. He drove out religion and religionists from among them and gave them tiemastery over that snare and racket. He brough4 them into the privileges of proclaiming the Kingdom
35 Had the disputed territory been Ammon* wouhl Israel ba\o tai < n possession of it, and bj what statement doe* Jephthih next *how whether he was willing to compromise 'ir j icld toward tmmon •
30 (a) Since 1918 bow and through whom lave the Loris 'crsants made cams acainst reHinon and it* practitioner' and ina\ ’h< \ now withdraw from such advanced positions' ibi To whom thenture do the religious elergj appeal and for what action’
November 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER,
347
go«pel to the people as his ordained ministers, which privileges the religious clergy had claimed as their prerogative and exclusive right. Hence the clergy and their allies scoff when God’s witnesses declare themselves ordained ministers of the gospel and present identification cards to trial-court judges and others to that effect. Jehovah’s servants have shown the falsity of the claim of the religious clergy to being God’s ordained ministers and representatives. Now the clergy try to regain and hold on to that position in the minds of the people, from which position Jehovah’s witnesses have driven them out by exposure. So the religionists of the day appeal to the Amnionitish political element and urge them to try to drive back the Lord’s witnesses from the ground they have gained against demonism and its pi actitioners.
From whom do religious totalitarians derive all their powers? Revelation 13:2 answers. From Satan’s organization, the dragon. To that effect Jeph-thah said: ■‘Wilt not thou possess that which Cheniosh [meaning ‘Subduer’] thy god giveth thee to po-sess? So whomsoever the Loud our God shall drive out from before us, them will we possess.” (Judg. 11: 24) The Bible and the worship of Jehovah are not the field for control by the demon-serving political element. Neither are the politicians the interpreters of the Bible to decide the difference between religion and Christianity. On the other side, Jehovah’s witnesses do not mix in the politics of this world. They do not even exercise the citizen’s right of suffrage or vote. Whatsoever Jehovah God has permitted the “god of this world” (“Chemosh”) to help his religious totalitarian element to take possession of, with such Jehovah’s witnesses do not interfere, knowing Almighty God will take care of it at Armageddon. They know Jehovah has permitted Satan, “the prince of this world,” to remain till that battle. Daniel’s prophecy, chapter eleven, has foretold how the totalitarian-religious element would gain ground at this end of the world. Hence God’s servants join in no subversive movements against any of the political governments.
3? Inasmuch as Jehovah will not let religion survive to enter into His new world, it is vain and useless for the totalitarian and other political elements to come to religion's rescue and try to shield it from exposure and to protect and preserve it a> a useful handmaid for backing up political systems. Jehovah ha- foretold this present “strange work” against religion, and he has led and blessed his witnesses in pressing the battle to its gates. In fulfillment of 07 (a) What ha* rhe god “Chemosh” linen the modern Ammonites to po-se-- and di>	witnesses interfere therewith’’ (Li XX hat has
Jehus ah God en In- witnesses to po-se*-. and what bate the modern \:nmoniTe- the autbnrin to do theiewitb?
3- i.ii XV h\ it \a;n and useless for modern Ammonites to come t > religions rescue' ib} XX hat course do Jehovah- witnesses take r.niiii all gains against leligion uud for light and truth and the kingdom interests?
His prophecies, he has given them repeated triumphs over religion and its clergy. All gains for truth and for the Kingdom interests which God’s witnesses have gained by His grace, they refuse to yield up even under threats, ultimatums and the cruel pressure of religion’s political allies, the Nazi-Fascist powers particularly. God-given conquests they will uphold and abide by. and not yield to any countermove by the enemy to thrust them back into darkness and bondage. Being given the liixht. they will not put it under the bushel which totalitarian rule would use as a black-out; they will put the light on the candlestick to give litrlit and comfort to those mourning in darkness. (Matt. 5:15,16) Like Ehud, they do not draw out the sword from the fat belly of the antitvpical King Eglon, “organized religion."— Judg. 3: 21. 22.
39	For this reason Jehovah’s witnesses have battled their way clear through all courts up to the Supreme Court in their defense of and demand for constitutional rights, privileges and liberties as citizens and Christians. Where the highest human court refuses to protect their conscientious rights, then thev take the punislmient rather than yield and compromise. They resort to all other constitutional and Clirist-like means to preserve the rights and liberty of Christianity. In the Nazi-Fascist lands and other lands going totalitarian they carry on as far as possible in spite of jeopardy to their very lives.
40	The modern-time Ammonites should contemplate Jephthah's further words: “And now art thou any thing better than Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab’ did he ever strive against Israel, or did he ever fight against them while Israel dwelt in Heshbon and her towns, and in Aroer and her towns, and in all the cities that be along by the coasts of Arnon, three hundred years’” (Judg. 11:25, 2G) According to the Nazi-Fascist way of reasoning, the Moabites should have found a casus belli against Israel, from what is written at Numbers 21: 25. 26: “And Israel took all these cities: and Israel dwelt in all the cities of the Amorites. in Heshbon, and in all the villages thereof. For Heshbon was the city of Sihon the king of the Amorites, who had fought against the fi'rmeh king of Moab, and taken all his land out or His hand, even unto Arnon.” From the time of Israel s action against Sihon the Israelites had had more than three hundred years of judgeships over them, and during all that time the Moabites had not tried to wrest from the Israelites the territory thev had by Gods help taken from King Sihon. Hence Jeph-tlia.li put the challenging question to the Ammonite
39 Hou far hate they battloci In the fight for their due rmhts, pri'ilege* and liberties, and, when denied their right*, what do tho> then do’
4U According to the Nazi-I'n-cis’ sty)e who might base made complaint atfd gone to war oser Israel* otiupano in disputed tprr,ior\ three hundred \car-, and with what question therelore did Jepbtbab challeuge the Ammonites’'
348
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
claimants' “Why therefore did ye not recover them [those cities] within that time?’’ (Judg. 11: 26) The real reason for the Ammonite aggressions now was nothing other than their demoniacal hatred of Jehovah’s Theocracy to which repentant Israel had turned.
41	In passing, it is noted that in 191S it was three hundred years from the beginning of the Thirty Years’ War for religious tolerance, and in 1940 it wa« three hundred years from autumn of 1640. when Ferdinand III. new emperor of the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation, assembled a diet at Rati-bon, in Catholic Bavaria. Germany, to deliberate over the best method of conducting the Thirty Years' War, and he continued his deliberations into 1641.—The Encyclopedia Amei icana, Vol. 26, page 567.
42	Jephthah therefore threw back the responsibility upon the heads of the Ammonites with this last word: "Wherefore I have not sinned against thee, but thou doest me wrong to war against me: the Lord the Judge be judge this day between the children of Israel and the children of Ammon.’’ (Judg. 11:27) In the present world crisis Jehovah’s witnesses have not sinned against the worldly political element, but have stuck to Jesus' command, ‘Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's.' The wrong which the political forces do against them is at the insistence of the clergy, particularly the Roman Catholic Hierarchy of Authority, who hate Jehovah's name and Theocracy. As the president of the Watch Tower Society stated in the public address on the subject "Government and Peace", at Madison Square Garden. New York city, on June 25,1939, and which speech the Catholics and Nazis jointly tried to break up by a twelve-minute riot, but failed: “The fight," said the speaker, “is not Catholic against Protestant; the issue is not Fascism or Communism against democracies; but the is»ue is, man rule under Satan against Theocracy by Chri<t Je.-cs. It is religion and state against Christ and his kingdom. There is no middle ground, because Jesus emphatically says: ‘He that is not with me is against me.' (Luke 11.23) . . . Why such violent and persistent opposition? Is it because Jehovah's witnesses are endangering the welfare of the people? No, not at all. The sole reason for such opposition is that religious leaders and allies are against the Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus."
43	Jephthah declared to a heathen king, “Jehovah
41. In connection with the war for religious tolerance, what Interesting three-hundi ed jear peuod mnj be noted*
4J Aciotding to Jephthah» word* who hate sinned against the other Jehovah* witne--e- <»i the modern \mmonire- and beo.iu-e of hatred or what ha* sin been commit tod concerning the i--.ue involved’
43 mi In I'i- appeal for judgment, how did Jephthah -how be w Jehovah- witnc-s* (bl In view or recent treatment of them bj the nation- whom must the Greater Jephth ih and th<»-e under him let be the judge, and what is it that will decide (be judgment executed?
the Judge be judge this day between the children of Israel and the children of Ammon." This showed again he was a Jehovah’s witness and a man of outstanding faith and trust in Jehovah. And now after the decision of the Nazi courts in Germany and the Fascist courts in Italy against Jehovah s witnesses there, and after the United States Supreme Court decision of 1940 on the /Zag salute case and their decision of June 8,1942, on license-tax measures against Jehovah’s witnesses in America, what then’’ It becomes plain that the Greater Jephthah of today must let Jehovah he the Judge. Let him set the .judges of modern Ammon in their place. What Almighty God the Supreme Judge thinks, decides and rules is of highest concern, not what the worldly courts and judges hand down concerning those who faithfully safeguard God’s Kingdom interests and represent His Theocratic Government. Those under the Greater Jephthah today know that Jehovah has committed to him all judgment and the execution thereof, and that he is on the throne of his glor> and all the political element and allies of all nation1-are gathered before him. He is judging such one' as to their treatment of His brethren and companions, Jehovah’s witnesses. These have fearle-sh warned the political element and allies concerning the judgments that Jehovah God will execute against them in the battle of Armageddon.
44	But to no avail! “Howbeit the king of the children of Ammon hearkened not unto the words of Jephthah which he sent him.’’ (Judg. 11: 28) Today the Ammonitish politicians and statesmen desire to rule the earth for themselves and have since 193^ refused the Theocratic message. They contemptuously brush aside Jehovah's witnesses and heedk-ssh push on violently with their schemes for world domination.
45	Jephthah did not expect to turn back tlm Ammonite hosts by his message challenging and refuting all their baseless claims. Jephthah expected to fight! First, however, he must show the enemy then-wrong and guilt before God and serve notice and warning of the serious consequences, and thus put the sole accountability for the disastrous outcome upon the aggressors themselves. Since 1938 Jehovah’s witnesses have not expected to turn l>a<’k the Nazi-Fascist-Hierarchy totalitarian force" by tin-mere Theocratic message and thereby avoid a fight. On June 24, 1939, at New York city, just a year after the revelation of the Theocratic organization, they publicly, by the speech “Victory", threw the
44	Did the king of Ammon hoed Jephthah*- word- and hon hkewi-e do the modern Ammonite- proceed'*
45	tai Although sending his me—me to Ammon xvh.it did Jephthnh realiv expect, and whv. then did he -erve notice and warring on iberi tb) .Siuce lU3s have Jehovah'- witne—e- expected to amid i tight on the issue * and what declaration made in l'J3U and since support-the au»wer'J
November Io, 1942
STe WATCHTOWER,
349
challenge of Joel 3: 9-12 into the face of the modernday Ammonites. That challenge is being further circulated in the book Religion (pages 315-335), pub
lished in 1940. It is now up to the people as individuals to make, each one, his choice.
(To be continued)
IS '-CHRISTMAS” CHRISTIAN?
THIS is a timely question. There is good historic precedent for raising it, in this: The Jews left the keeping of the commandments of Jehovah God, and to offset this they became very religious and indulged in a lot of giving or offering of sacrifices; but was this acceptable to the Lord God? Ills own answer, as delivered under inspiration by his prophet Isaiah, proves interesting in the light of holiday giving and feasting:
"To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me? saith the Lord: I am full of the burnt offerings or rams, and the fat of fed beasts; and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he goats. When ye come to appear before me, who h vth required this at your hind to tread my courts’ Bring no more vain oblations: incense is an abomination unto me; the new moons and sabbaths, the calling of assemblies. I cannot a«av with - it is iniquity, even the solemn meeting Your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hateth: they are a trouble unto me; I am weary to bear them And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you; yea. when ye make many prayers. I will not hear your hands are full of blood."—Isa 1: 11-15
Today the world witnesses the spectacle of religion bringing together the elergy and dictators whose hands are ’‘full of blood’’, and fully proving that the Nazi-Fascist dictators are not trying to stamp out religion as certain religious clergymen are publicly and loudly declaring as a screen to hide their co-operation with the criminal dictators In support of this, note two press dispatches In a wireless to the New York Times, dated London, October 12, under the heading, ‘'Nazis in Poland Establish Two Separate Catholic Groups." it was stated • ‘‘Two Catholic associations, one for Poles, the other for Germans, hare been formed with Polish Bishop Dymek and the German Franciscan, Bieitniger, as heads of the respective societies News of the Vatican's appointment of Breitmger as the leader of German Catholics in occupied Poland grievously surprised Polish circles in London. . . . complaining of the violation by the Vatican of the concordat with Poland . . the Polish ambassador to the Vatican had protested vigorously against the appointment of a German to a church post in Poland." An earlier dispatch by the International News Service, dated Rome, January 3, 1941, reads “Marking perhaps the first time that the Vatican has obtained any important concessions from Russia, Josef Stalin especially relaxed Soviet anti-religious laws in order to permit Catholics in Russian-occupied territories [including part of Poland at the time] to attend Christmas services, it was learned today. . . . Chancellor Hitler acted as intermediary between Pope Pius and the Soviet dictator . . . The pontiff sent his personal thanks to Hitler through Monsignor Orsenigo ”
That so-called “Christmas” is religious, even the Jews, the Moslems, the Chinese, and the Nazis and Fascists and
Communists will admit. But is it Christian’ Its celebrat.on by certain religious organizations does not make it Christian, any more than bingo games, lotteries, or card parties in religious parish houses or parish schools are for that reason Christian.
Look high and low in the Christian writings of Jesus’ apostles and their companions, and you will not find once the word "Christmas”, neither the word “mass" Not only is the date of Jesus’ birth not given anywhere for the purpose of having it celebrated, but the oulx b'.rthdav celebration mentioned is that of the adulterous King Heiod whose step-daughter Salome danced to make the celebration “merry”, yes, merry by having the head of the forei miner of Christ, namely, the head of John the Baptist chopped off (See Matthew 14:6-12, Mark 6 21-29 ) Eien Origen of Alexandria (A.D. 1S5-254). who is celebrated as one of the “early church fathers", was sharp enough to see the point, so that he stated that “m the Scriptures sinners alone, not saints, celebrate their birthday". Jesus (’bust nowhere instructed his disciples to celebrate his nmnan birthday on cither the legitimate day or any fictitious date , and for religionists to engage in such a celebration on a religious fixed date, winch date is furthermore sacred to a heathen false god. is a case of adding to the Word of God. Concerning this it is written, at Proverbs 30.5. G “Every word of God is pure- he is a shield unto them that put their trust in him Add thou not unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar" —See also Deuteronomy 4:2 and Revelation 22 IS, 19
The early Americans, such as the Pilgrims, the Puritans, the Quakers, etc . would have nothing to do with "Christmas" celebrations Scotland to this da\ does not observe “Cnristmas" as a national holiday, but views it as "popish" The early Christians did not celebrate it, because undci-standmg it to be the pagan “feast of the sun" T.'iat least was celebrated the third d;n after the winter solstice, namely, on December 25. and it was used to back up the Devil's lie in behalf of the great anti-Jehovah huntsman Nimrod (Genesis 10:8-10) The Devil's lie was, ‘There is no death,’ and the so-ealled “Christmas tree" practice symbolizes the lie that the dictator Nimrod is not dead, but is immortal in the spirit world. (Gen 3-4,5) As shown by every encyclopedia, centuries before the birtn of Jesus the heathen worshipers celebrated the rebirth of Sol, the sun, in that connection making use of holly. the mistletoe, the yule log, and the evergreen, which last is the "Christmas tree" of modern times used by the religionists of “Christendom” about which to have a “joll\ good time", not barring drunkenness, gluttony and licentiousness
Says a world history, On the Road to Civilization, page 164, used as a textbook in American high scnools “The feast of Saturn, the Saturnalia, was a winter festival which lasted for a week beginning on the twenty-fifth da\ of December, and was celebrated with dancing, the exchang
350
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
ing of gifts, and the burning of candles. The Saturnalia was later taken over by the Christians as their Christmas, and given a new significance.” Despite the Saturnalian hilarity practiced at “Christmastide'’ with the full connivance of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, yet The Catholic Encyclopedia tries to sidetrack the people from the truth by saying, “The origin of Christmas should not be sought in the Saturnalia (1-23 December).” However, concerning the picking of the date from the heathen worship it admits this- “The well-known solar feast, howeier, of Xatalis Invicti [‘Birthday of the Unconquered’], celebrated on 25 December, has a strong claim on the responsibility for our December date.” The celebration became popular after the Nicene Council convoked by Emperor Constantine in A. D 325, and the Encyclopedia therefore speaks of another “early church father" who defended the celebration of the new custom on December 25 • “Home, therefore, has observed 25 December long enough to allow of Chrysostom speaking at least in 388 as above ”
The fact that Jesus was not born in the dead of winter makes no difference to the celebrators Have not the Roman Catholic priests, from the pope down, said mass on December 25 for centuries since 388, and is it not therefore "Christmas" ?
Jesus being thirty-three and a half years old at the time of Ins death at Calvary at the beginning of spring, the evidence is that he was born m a season a half-year earlier, namely, at the beginning of autumn, or about October 1, at which time the shepherds could reasonably be watching their flocks by night out m the open fields, and at which time of the year also John the Baptist could seasonably be baptizing repentant Jews in Jordan nr er and could baptize Jesus now come to thirty years of age (Luke 2 7-16. 3-.21-23) Hence, according to the inspired Scriptures, the evidence is that the annunciation to the Jewess. Mary, look place nine months earlier in the year, or sometime in December. Nevertheless Christ Jesus and his heavenly Father m no part of the Bible command any true Christian to celebrate either of these events, and in harmony therewith the dates thereof were withheld The celebration of "Christmas" is a concession to the heathen, pagan holiday and is a compromise with demonism winch is religion
The etergreen tree, besides piettiring to the heathen sunworshipers that Sol did not really die. was used by other idolateis to show that Nimrod, called the "lather of the gods", did not really die. when lie was slam by his enemies for his crimes His mother Semiranns (who had also become Nimrod's wife) announced that her son and husband had been made a god. a demon. The story is not easily-traced in history, but sufficient evidence remains in the mythology of various countries to enable students to piece together tlie story, as is done m the book The Tao Babyions, by Hislop. This accounts for it that while the pope and other religionists are celebrating ‘ Christmas” the Nazis of Hitler Germany can on the very same date celebrate with propriety the pagan rites of demon-worshipers of ancient Germany, who celebrated such evergreen-tree rites and carousing and other forms of self-indulgence centuries before Jesus’ birth.
Semiramis advanced the thought that she was really the "woman” mentioned in Eden, at Genesis 3:15, and
that her husband-son Nimrod was the “seed" who would destroy the ‘‘serpent”. This “mother and son” or "Madonna and bambino" doctrine runs through all the false religions of earth, and is, no doubt, a part of Satan’s religions scheme to get people to lose sight of the real "seed of the woman”, namely, Christ Jesus, the "seed" of Jehovah-'-organization Zion.
The emphasis now is placed bv religionists upon Madonna and, secondly, upon the "baby” Jesus, rather than on Jesus Christ, the glorified spirit who is the “express image of God's person" and whose kingdom has begun with him m the throne as the highly exalted King and Servant of Jehovah God. In most Catholic churches there is a "b. by Jesus’ at Christmas time Catholic Francis of Assisi began the "baby” practice, and claims to have used an empty crib in which there appeared a real live baby Jesus at the opportune moment. Compare this emotional religious tradition with the plain statement of the apostle Paul at 2 Corinthians 5:16: “Yea, though we have known Chrst after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more " Francis of Assisi evidently did not read the Bible or take that inspired scripture seriously; otherwise he would have known that he was a victim of the demons at the ‘baby Jesus" trick.
Then, too, those “wise men”: the Bible does not say there were three of them Those ‘‘wise men” who traveie<l to Bethlehem sometime after Jesus' birth were really magicians, or "magi’’, and hence were astrologers, demonologists. concerning which religious sect see Deuteronomy 4 19 and Isaiah 47:13,14. Jehovah God ehose God-fearing Jewish shepherds to be witnesses to the birth of his Son at Bethlehem, and not those astrologers Such demon-woishipers. though sincere, w-ere driven by the superstitious fear of the "star” or luminous body which the Devil demonized them to see in the sky. Thereby the Devil misled them and caused them to drop in on murderous King Herod and frighten him about the birth of a new-born king of the Jews and thereby arouse lus murderous passions Wheieas the shepherds had not informed Herod of the birth, these "wise men” were obliged to first apply direct to Herod and get the location of the birthplace as at Bethlehem and thereafter the “star” led them to Bethlehem, with King Herod’s soldiers close on their heels to massacre the babes of Bethlehem, including Jesus, if possible (See Matthew 2.1-18) Who. then, sent those "wise men' to seei. the child Jesus’ Was it Jehovah God, or was it the ’Serpent" who God had foretold would bruise the heel of the seed of the woman! And who created that "stai" to lead them to Herod’ and why, then, should those ‘wise men’, three of them, and the "star” be glorified so much by religionists at ‘Christmastide”’ What Christianity is there in it'1 “Bewaic lest any roan spoil you through philosophv and vain deceit, after the tradition of men. after the ruuiments of the world, and not after Christ ” This is the warning given at Colossians 2.8 by an apostle of Jesus Christ
Religion’s annual celebration of the unscriptural holiday of “Christmas” lays the chief emphasis on the selfish matter of human salvation The true and pure Christianity now rejoices in and publishes world-wide the birth in A. D. 1914 of Jehovah God’s kingdom by- Christ Jous, which will vindicate Jehovah’s name at Armageddon, soon
WHO ARE GOG AND MAGOG TODAY?
SINCE the Nazi hordes have penetrated so deeply into Russian territory, and since Adventists and other religious organizations, including Anglo-Israelites, have long taken the view that Gog and Magog are to be identified with Russia, some Adventists and others are now wondering why Soviet Russia has been losing up till now, and will it continue so?
Foretelling things concerning "the latter years”. Jehovah God told his prophet Ezekiel to turn his face toward Gog, the land of Magog, and to prophesy against him This must mean that Jehovah's witnesses, of whom Ezekiel was one in his time, must today declare the prophecy against that which Gog represents Ezekiel 38:1-3 reads: “And the wind of Jehovah came unto me. saying. Son of man, set thy face toward Gog, of the land of Magog, the prince of Rush [not Russia], Meshech [not Moscow], and Tubal | not Tobolsk], and prophesy against him, and say, Thus s.nth the Lord Jehovah: Behold, I am against thee, 0 Gog."—.Im Rev Ver.
L'p to this point in his prophecies Ezekiel had prophesied in symbol against the visible religious, commercial and political elements of Satan the Devil's organization, and against Satan himself. However, aside from Satan himself there was no specific prophecy against the invisible part of Satan's organization of demons, the wicked angels, and the officers m his invisible realm. These invisible powers have had much to do with debauching the human race and have had much to do with the ruling of the nations on earth, and it is certain that these demons will be destroyed with Satan because they are enemies of Jehovah God. It is reasonable, therefore, to expect to find in the book of Ezekiel some prophecy setting forth Jehovah's judgment and the execution thereof against these wicked angels or invisible powers. The apostle Paul called attention to the fact that in these latter da> s God's people would be warred against by these invisible
powers and principalities, and facts now prove this—Eph 6.10-12
Based upon the certain truths that are revealed by the Scriptures the following conclusion a.-, to the meaning of Gog and Magog is here set forth in brief Gog is one of the princes in Satan's organization, invisible, of course, to human eyes, with a possibility of the power to materialize in human form should God permit such Hence the "land of Magog” pictures the invisible spirit realm of Satan, whose inhabitants include Gog and all the wicked angels within Gog's division of Satan's organization. According to Ezekiel’s prophecy, Gog forms and organizes a conspiracv against God's anointed remnant of witnesses and the persons of good-will who take their stand alongside the remnant as representatives of Jehovah's Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus These have not been gathered to Palestine wherein was situated Megiddo of old, but they have been gathered unto the Theocratic organization of Jehovah God and there worship him in spirit and in truth Into the demon-eontrolled conspiracy are drawn many cieatures on earth as well as wicked angels, and the overt acts committed with mutual understanding by them recently show that this conspiracy includes Big Business elements. the chief political rulers of the earth, and the practitioners of and leaders in religion inside of “Christendom" a» well as without.
The mass of evidence published in the newspapers, and elsewhere all combines to show that all the afore-mentioned conspire and come against Jehovah’s organization, including the remnant and their companions on earth , and that such conspiracy is carried out by the committing of secretly planned acts This has been done, as foretold m Ezekiel, chapters 38 and 39, since the close1 of the World War in 1918 and the restoring of the faithful remnair of Jehovah's witnesses to the freedom of fearless activity ir worshiping and serving Hun and His Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus.
(Continued from page 33S)
on all the paragraphs of the book It is therefore a vital aid in the study and understanding of The New World It contains instructions on the most progressive method of group study, and tiiu> with this booklet of questions any sincere person can conduct ,nge or small groups of persons in a most profitable study of the Bible with The New World as the textbook. It is 5c a copy, mailed postpaid You will want this booklet not only for your personal use, but also extra copies for your companions in stud} Companies and study groups should combine orders and send such through their respective servants
WATCHTOWER edition of the bible
For the first time in its sixty years of existence the Watch Tower Society has printed on its own presses an edition of the Bihle. This was released by the president at the New World Theocratic Assembly, last September, to the great surprise and joy of the vast gathering, and the entire stock of 35,000 copies iris at once taken up by the conventloners This Bihle edition is handsomely bound in maroon leatherette, and is 71 by 5 by If inches in size The Bible text is that of the popular King James Veision, unchanged, and printed in minion type, with handy marginal references, and with maps. Among other features, it contains an extensive list of Bible names and expressions and l heir meanmgs, also a 59-page concordance of key Bible words
and phrases, all together 1.800 of them, with more than 20f>00 Scripture references, and a further section containing fu'ly quoted texts grouped under vanous headings showing what God’s Word teaches on such subjects as ordination of Christi.in, to preach, the Scriptural manner of preaching, what is hell, promises concerning the Kingdom, the standard of the Christian, and like important issues of the dav Such features make it excellent not only for private study, but also for B.ble educational work in the field among seekers for truth This Watchtower edition Bible is offered on a contribution of $1 00 a rmt, and mailed to you postage prepaid Remittance should aceomp.inv all orders, whether individually or from companies of J.hovan’s witnesses sending combined orders through their servants
"PEACE—CAN IT LAST?”
This new booklet contains the full text of the public addies, on this subject as heard round the world simultaneously m eighty cities at the New World Theocratic Assembly. It present, the Scriptural, factual and hence authoritative answers to the questions, Can religion guarantee a lasting peace? What is tne strange creature or beast that was and is not and shall again be present to the wonderment of the world? (Revelation 17 i and, Who will establish over earth an endunng peace with righteousness? Peace—Can It Last* is paner-bound. but with a striking front-cover illustration, and may be had on contnbution of 5c a copy.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
PIONEERING IN ARIZONA
“Just as I was finishing the street work a lady in a pas>u.u ear called When I discovered she was calling me I went to the ear, and she said. ‘I want one of those magazines ’ Her husband asked what it was all about, and was told the magazine would explain it. The lady said that Oklahoma City, whence they came, was full of people offering the magazines, but they did not pay attention, as they thougnt it was just in Oklahoma City. They took a trip to California, and wherever they went there were Jehovah's witnesses with the magazines. So they wanted to find out what it was all about. After they got home they said, they were going to inquire more about it. At one house I called three times and could not place the book Children Saturday, on the street a man ran his car up close to me and I tried to get out of the way. He called me over and asked if I had The Watchtower. I did. and was told to come to his house at three o’clock, liesuit One subscription and a bound book. He said he 'a anted to investigate furtner. as every place he went he saw a Children book or a Watchtower and he had picked up a tew and liked what he had read. A lady I met was quite interested and came to one study but could not come to any more because of her children and opposition. She really was studying, and one day thought she would read « little m the new Watchtower, as her husband had just none to work and the children were still asleep. ‘I couldn't find a place to stop.’ she said. ‘So I read it all the way through, and now I am going back over some of the points ’ Iler brother was killed on the battleship Arizona at Pearl Harbor, and she showed me a picture of a fine-looking group of men m his company most of whom are now dead as a result of the treacherous attack there. She is now a Kingdom publisher."
AT A COUNTY SEAT IN ARKANSAS
“While working in regular door-to-door work in Clinton, the county seat, three men came to me and ordered me to leave town I said. ‘Who are you”’ One answered, ‘We are from the American Legion, and we don’t want you here.’ I said. ‘If I were you I wouldn’t tell anybody I belonged to the American Legion.’ They said, ‘Humph1 Why'” I told them my wife and I came here from the next county north. Last year while she was siek with malaria some members of the American Legion found that the only place we got our water from was a near-by spring. They put human excrement in the water, thereby making it necessary for me to carry water a quarter of a mile while she was sick: ‘Nobody else would do a trick like that ”. No further conversation was necessary. We continued our work, placing nine books, magazines, and many booklets. One Legionnaire that took Children dropped Ins membership with them and told us two more were doing likewise. The leading preacher (Baptist) invited us to his study. During our conversation he said: ‘I wish the members of my congregation were as sincere about coming to church as you are in your work I know you are just about through with the town here, because I have been either just ahead or right behind you in every home of members of my congregation ' I asked if he had told his congregation not to read the Lord's books. He said not.”
HOW CAN I UNDERSTAND EXCEPT—’ (BRITAIN)
“About three months ago a young lady said both she and her husband had read one of our books but could not understand it. We promised to call back one evening when her husband would be at home. We received a real welcome. Mr. L------had quite a lot of questions regarding
our work and organization, but seemed perfectly satisfied with the answers we were able to give Anyway, we agreed to call the following week, after having assured him he had no obligation to ‘join’ anything. Next week, after a most interesting model study and answering more questions we left a copy of The Watchtower. On our next visit not only did they subscribe for a year, but Mr L--------
stated he had read how the Society sent The Watchtower free to those too poor to subscribe for themselves He gave us a further six shillings to be used m this manner. Meanwhile, Mrs. L----was also demonstrating intense interest,
and promised to attend the Watchtower study the next Sunday. Since then they have attended regularly. Nov they are both regular publishers. Although they have two kiddies, Mrs. L-----put in thirty hours of Kingdom
service last month, and comes with me in every phase of Kingdom service. The first time out she asked what she would have to do to be worthy of a magazine bag1 Three months ago they knew nothing of the Bible, not even the story of David and Jonathan' How the Lord rewards an honest seeker for the truth 1”
Mold, North Wales: “In this little country town it was local market day. The one main street was lined with stalls and barrows, and the narrow pavements were thionged with shoppers and country folk. Our bags, never seen there before, attracted much attention and there were manv curious gazes. After always working with a company, we were feeling rather strange on our own. A lady elbowed her way through the crowd towards us and excitedlx exclaimed: ‘Is it The Watchtower f’ On being assured it was, she quickly told us how she had read the Society's publications, but had never been visited at her home Ia any brethren for about six years and had had no opportunity to study with them. We at once arranged a mode1 study with her for the same afternoon, and now we ha\c a Children study with her regularly She invites her friends and neighbors to share with her in receiving the spiritual food provided by God.”
RELIGION’S PASTURES SPOILED IN CALIFORNIA
“The man at first seemed prejudiced, but as he showed good-will I engaged him in conversation. He invited me inside. He had been reared a Catholic, but for some time he has not been associated with them. Evidently the truths we discussed appealed to him and he volunteered some interesting information. ‘Do you know,’ he asked, to what extent the Catholic people are leaving that institution” Then he related a conversation he had recently with a bishop, who, though lamenting the fact, stated that more than three thousand Catholics (about fifteen hundred of them Mexicans) had left his diocese during the past three years. More power to the truth, the spreading of which is doubtless the cause, directly or indirectly, for the deliverance of those people from that terrible prison-house ”
352
THE WATCHTOWER-
Published Semimonthly Bt
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street -	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
Officers
N. H. Knorr President__________W, E. Van Amburoh, Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.'1 - Iiaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God and is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all other things, and is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, as the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah;
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life;
THAT THE LOGOS was made human as the man Jesus and suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every other creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority;
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the Kingdom before all who will hear;
THAT THE OLD WORLD ended in A. D. 1914, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of the “new earth” of the New World;
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Chnst, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the complete establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the Kingdom the people of good-will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically
designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good-will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Ybarlt Subscription Prior
Cnitro States. 11.00; all other countries. 11.50, American currency; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 8s. American remittances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Orricaa
British 34 Craven Terrace. London. W. 2, England
Avstralostan 7 Beresford Road. Strathfield, N S. W., Australia
Booth African-------------------Boston House. Cape Town, South Africa
Indian 40 Colaba Road, Bombay 5, India
Please address the Society In every case.
Translations of thia Journal appear in several languages
ALL SINCERE STUDENTS OF THE BIBLE who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price mav have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers* Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label witbin one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the Journal one month before the subscription expires.
Printed in the United States of America
Entered as lecond-class matter at the poet office at Brooklyn, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879.
“VICTORY SONG” TESTIMONY PERIOD
December is the month that brings to a close the calendar year of the old world. It is with joy that the servants of Jehovah sing the Victory Song after a long battle, but they look forward to further battles and victones. The faithful do say with gladness of heart that they have remained “blameless m the day of our Lord” and will continue to do so. by the Lord’s grace. During the “Victory Song” Testimony Period the song of the new world will be sung To do this the publishers of The Theocracy will offer to the people the publication The New World and the booklet Peace—Can It Last! on a contribution of 25c. If you wish to join m the “Victory Song” Testimony Penod during the month of December, make arrangements now with your local company servant. If you are not associated with a company, write direct to the Society for further information.
“WATCHTOWER" STUDIES
Week of January 3: “Fighter for the New World” (Part 4), 1J 1-22 inclusive, The Watchtower December 1, 1942.
Week of January 10: “Fighter for the New World” (Part 4), 23-47 inclusive, The Watchtower December 1, 1942.
“THE NEW WORLD”
In these lurid days when the handwriting on the wall is seen dooming the wicked old world to early destruction in appalling violence, this book entitled “The New World” is published as a special provision of the great Creator of the new world for the comfort and hope of those who long for a righteous world and who are now obliged to suffer sorely for righteousness’ sake The New World has a jacket of peach-colored cloth, with a planetary front-cover embossing matching the title. On opening the book the end-sheets will surprise you with their pictorial story, but your full measure of delight and thrills will come with reading through the 384 pages of the story of worlds, the amazing fulfillment of the ancient drama of Job, the final end of wicked rule, and the triumph of righteousness at last in the new earth and heavens. Artistic pictures in color enliven the swiftly moving theme; and an index of subjects, and another of all Scripture texts cited, make it valuable for study and reference. The New World, the “Publishers’ Edition”, put up in better binding, will be mailed postpaid to your address on order accompanied by your contribution of 50c a copy.
ffieWffCHTOWER
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM
Vol. LXin
December 1, 1942
No. 23
FIGHTER FOR THE NEW WORLD
PART 4
"Jesus answered, My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom were of this world, then would, my servants fight."—John 18:36.
TEHOVAH’S spirit is the power behind the new I world. It is his invisible power, ever holy because J its Source is such and it is all-powerful for good and righteousness. It is a power for light, and that is what it brought to this globe. In the day of earth’s creation when a vast cloud canopy covered the entire globe like swaddling bands of thick darkness, then, says the Inspired Record, “the spirit of God moved [brooded] upon the face of the waters. And God said, Let there be light: and there was light. And God saw the light, that it was good.”—Job 38:4,9; Gen. 1:2-4.
2 After six thousand years of human existence upon this earth, a destructive darkness due to the unholy powers of demonism hangs like a pall over its two billion inhabitants. The guns of war booming for world domination make horrible the darkness. Educators, statesmen, clergymen, politicians and social leaders say that only the morale of the people can carry them through until the combined and rising might of nations under assault gathers strength to overpower and destroy the demonized totalitarian enemy. However, in the final battle, Armageddon, following which the righteous new world comes, it will not be morale that will carry any people through, but the spirit of Jehovah God. To those who “worship the Father in spirit and in truth” he says: “Not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit, saith Jehovah of hosts.” (Zech. 4:6, Am. Rev. Ver.) His spirit is the invincible power unto victory and survival. His spirit Jehovah puts upon those who devote themselves to His purposes and who offer themselves for his service and seek to vindicate His name.
’ It was the spirit of Jehovah God that Jephthah the Gileadite needed as he took over the command
1.	What Is the power behind the Dew world* and what did it bring to this globe at the time of creation?
2	Will It be what is called “morale” or some other power that will carry any people through Armageddon* and upon whom is It put?
3	(a) What were the developments leading up to Jephthah’s taking over the command of the armies of Israel, ana what then came upon Jephthah as he moved to the fight? (b) What did its coming prove both as to the fight and as to Jephthah?
of the armies of Israel at Mizpah and sent the challenge and warning notice to the king of the Ammonites who had invaded Israel’s God-given land. The Israelites had repented and converted from demon worship and turned to the worship of Jehovah God and subjected themselves to Theocratic rule. According to this rule they put themselves under the valorous man of faith, Jephthah, that he might lead them in the fight for Theocracy and worship of Jehovah God. Jephthah agreed to continue in headship over the Israelites upon the condition that Almighty God would give him the victory over the forces of demonism. “Then the spirit of Jehovah came upon Jephthah, and he passed over Gilead and Manasseh, and passed over Mizpeh of Gilead, and from Mizpeh of Gilead he passed over unto the children of Ammon.” (Judg. 11:29, Am. Rev. Ver.) The coming of the spirit upon the man proves that the battle at hand was the Lord God’s, and that Jephthah was approved of Him and was his choice and his representative among His covenant people. This further confirms that Jephthah was a man of faith and an approved “witness for Jehovah”, and was not simply the choice of the elders of Gilead who had marked his deeds of valor and called upon him for his military assistance. Other cases of the coming of Jehovah’s spirit upon his consecrated creatures for victory are those of Judge Othniel, Judge Gideon, Samson, and shepherd boy David.—Judges 3, 6,14,15; 1 Samuel 16.
* The tribe of Manasseh occupied the territory of Bashan and part of Gilead, and the Ammonites crossed over the border and encamped in Gilead. They refused to heed Jephthah’s protest and warning and get out. In a modern parallel action: Particularly since the signing of the concordat between the Vatican and the totalitarian dictator of Nazi Germany in July, 1933, there has been a persistent
4.	Since 1033 what modern parallel baa there been to the Ammonite invasion of Gilead, and wbat two booklets appeared in 1941 as part of the proteat thereto?
855
356
3THE WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. Y.
invasion of the rightful earthly domain of Jehovah’s covenant people who worship him and serve as his witnesses. By the propaganda and Catholic Action of the Vatican’s Hierarchy the totalitarian spirit of encroachment spread unchecked to the lands where democracy has long obtained, and deep inroads were made upon the freedom of worship and of service to Jehovah. Due protest was raised. In February, 1941, the booklet God and the State was published showing that Jehovah God is supreme and no human law is valid except when in harmony with His law and that Christians obey all laws of the state save those which conflict with God's supreme laws. At the same time the booklet Theocracy was issued showing from the Scriptures that God's kingdom by Christ Jesus is a Theocracy, and that Jehovah’s visible organization among his servants and worshipers on earth must be Theocratic, hence governed by His supreme law and subject to the headship of Christ Jesus.
5 Hot off the press, both Theocracy and God and the State were mailed free to 12,800 newspapers and non-Catholic publications over all the United States, and thereafter copies were submitted to public school boards, to city and county officials, and to the political lawmakers in the legislative houses of all state capitals and of Washington, D. C. Further, the booklet Theocracy was presented to all Protestant and Jewish clergy to enable them to see how grossly Jehovah’s witnesses have been misrepresented by religious-totalitarian agents and dupes. Finally Theocracy and God and, the State were released for general distribution and were circulated in several languages to the millions of copies. All this publication of such a challenging message to an anti-Theocracy world required the spirit of the Lord upon his people. The irresistible spirit of Almighty God will continue to move the remnant of his witnesses and their earthly companions until his “strange work” on earth is completed and the time arrives for his “strange act”, the battle of Armageddon.
’ Jephthah’s purpose in passing through Gilead and other territories of the tribe of Manasseh was doubtless in order to recruit more men for the army already encamped at Mizpah, and also to mop up any enemy sympathizers and groups and agents behind the battle front. It appears that the great God of hosts was holding back the beginning of the decisive battle, thereby to provide the opportunity to call to other Israelites to turn out for the field service and have a share in the vindication of
5.	(a) How were these two booklets used in delivering the protest? (b) As in Jephthah’s case, what was required for such action?
6	(a) What was Jephthah’s purpose in passing over Gilead and Manasseh, and why was Jehovah holding back the beginning of the battle? (b) To what extent of personal risk was Jephthah obliged to go at this time, and why?
Jehovah’s name and Theocracy. In preparing to face the Ammonites on the field of battle who for eighteen dreary years had oppressed Israel, Jeph-thah displayed great faith and was putting his life in his hands. It was during this preparatory period that there occurred what Jephthah later stated in answer to the false charge of the tribe of Ephraim across the Jordan river. “And Jephthah said unto them, I and my people were at great strife with the children of Ammon; and when I called you, ye delivered me not out of their hands. And when I saw that ye delivered me not, I put my life in my hands, and passed over against the children of Ammon.”—Judg. 12:1-3.
T Battle was not launched against the aggressor Ammonites as soon as Jephthah took charge of the armies of Jehovah’s typical Theocracy. First more warriors for Theocracy and defenders of the worship of Jehovah God were called for and enlisted. Likewise with the installing of Theocratic rule over Jehovah’s witnesses in October, 1938, there was a call for more publishers of God’s kingdom and for all active publishers to give more time in the field. The desired increase of active field-witnesses for Jehovah and his Theocracy came, by His grace. There was also an increase in the time devoted to the field activity, especially since the publishing of the rousing article “Kingdom Activities” in The Watchtower, December 1, 1938. Said this article: “The army of the Lord on earth is small, but. with its equipment, can perform miracles, by the Lord’s grace, in spite of the Devil’s opposition. The faithful will see to it that this work is done to promote the kingdom interests.” The record of field activities since then shows those words are true. Now despite the violent conditions of global war, the witness work goes on, with increase of publishers in America, Canada, Australia, and Britain, and under extreme difficulties. Also at great hazard to life and freedom some faithful witnesses carry on the witness to Jehovah’s name and kingdom in the lands hung crushed under Nazi-Fascist-Vatican forces.
’ Some professing to be consecrated to God have acted like the tribe of Ephraim and ignored the invitation to service and have not crossed ‘the waters of the Jordan river’ in between, the stream of peoples alienated from Jehovah and who are rushing down the broad road to destruction in the “Dead sea” at Armageddon. To the shame of these spiritual “Ephraimites”, the most of those offering themselves willingly for Jehovah’s field witness-work are from
7.	(a) Before launching off on battle against Ammon what was done after Jephthah took the command of armies, and what like operation was carried on after installing Theocratic rule over Jehovah's witnesbes in 19381 (b) In this respect what does the record of Held activities to date show ?
8.	How have some consecrated ones conducted themselves like the tribe of Ephraim at the call to arms? and who are the ones chieflj offering themselves willingly?
December 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
337
among the persons of good-will, the Lord’s “other sheep”, who have his promise of life in the new world on an earth cleansed of all wicked-doers.
’ From Mizpeh of Gilead Jephthah passed over at last to meet the hosts of Ammon. (Judg. 11:29) “Mizpeh of Gilead” means, literally, “Watchtower of the Heap of Witness.” Such name agrees well with the circumstances and the purpose of the Lord’s visible Theocratic organization in carrying on in his “strange work”, namely, to heap up a tremendous witness to His name and purpose before he shows his power over Satan’s organization in the “battle of that great day of God Almighty”. (Ex. 9:16) Those engaged in the “strange work” anxiously watch to keep their covenant with Jehovah to be his faithful and true witnesses like Christ Jesus. The enemy whom Jephthah challenged and moved out to engage were not far distant: “then the children of Ammon were gathered together, and encamped in Gilead.” (Judg. 10:17) Jephthah’s movements against them denoted offensive action against demonized oppressors and invaders, who were on territory of the typical Theocracy and where they had no right to stand.
10 It is thus seen that those children of Ammon, under the standards of their “king-god”, Molech, pictured the political element of the nations gone totalitarian and w’hich line up with the proposed “new world order”. “Organized religion” will dominate such “new order” briefly, as pictured by the harlot Babylon riding the scarlet-colored beast, at Revelation 17:1-5,14. All the elements that formulate, set up and compose the new order are against Jehovah’s Theocracy. Hence the religionized “New World order” after this war is certain to be anti-Theocratic. It is therefore abominable to God and Christ. It is the final form of the “abomination of desolation” foretold by the prophet Daniel and Christ Jesus and it marks the final end of Satan’s world. (Dan. 11:31; 12:11; Mark 13:14) The question now pushed to the fore is, Can religion if restored to power maintain “peace and safety” and save the world from disaster! The Roman Catholic Hierarchy and other religious leaders claim Yes, and religious politicians fall for this snare, and will entrust religion with the task, by peace-conference arrangements and guarantees. Religion will then assume to undertake such task. She will try t.o ride the “new order” creature or “beast” and make it use its ten horns against The Theocracy and against those who have taken their stand for it.
9 (a) From what citv did Jephthah finally pass to meet the Ammonites, and how is the name of the city in agreement with the circumstances and the purpose of God's organisation now carrying on his “strange work”? (d) where had the Ammonites encamped, and what therefore does Jephthah’s movement against them denote?
10	. (a) Whom therefore did the children of Ammon there picture, and of what is their worship of the “king-god". Molech. an indication in this connection? (bl What question concerning the world’s fate therefore now comes to the fore? ana will religion undertake the task, and how?
JEPHTHAH’S VOW
11	The Lord God Almighty did not require any special vow from his servant Jephthah as a condition for granting him and the Israelites under him the triumph over Ammon. The repentance of the Israelites and the faith of Jephthah and his fellow warriors were the basis for bestowing the victory. “According to your faith be it unto you.” (Matt. 9:29) A vow on Jephthah’s part would be entirely voluntary, but must be in harmony with God’s will and pleasing to him. “And Jephthah vowed a vow unto the Lord, and said, If thou shalt without fail deliver the children of Ammon into mine hands, then it shall be, that whatsoever cometh forth of the doors of my house to meet me, when I return in peace from the children of Ammon, shall surely be the Lord’s, and I will offer it up for a burnt offering.” —Judg. 11:30,31.
12	The vow being absolutely of his own accord, it manifested Jephthah’s earnestness for a winning fight in order that God’s name and honor might be vindicated. Religious commentators, in the running heads of their Bible editions, speak of Jephthah’s utterance as “his rash vow”. However, Jephthah was an actor in a prophetic drama staged by Jehovah’s power and which was enacted for our benefit today. He doubtless received the mental suggestion by means of an angel of the great Director of this drama. There was no compulsion upon Jehovah’s servant, but he willingly acted on the thought. Thereby God permitted him to show the all-sacrificing devotion of a faithful Jehovah’s witness who was fighting for the Theocratic cause. As to the uncompelled spirit behind acceptable vows, note the Lord’s law: “When thou shalt vow a vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shalt not slack to pay it: for the Lord thy God will surely require it of thee; and it would be sin in thee. But if thou shalt forbear to vow, it shall be no sin in thee. That which is gone out of thy lips thou shalt keep and perform: even a freeicill offering, according as thou hast vowed unto the Lord thy God, which thou hast promised with thy mouth.”—Deut. 23: 21-23.
18 Concerning the obligation to pay one’s vow to God when once made, even though of one’s free will, the Scriptures say: “Vow, and pay unto the Lord your God: let all that be round about him bring presents unto him that ought to be feared. He shall cut off the spirit of princes: he is terrible to the kings of the earth.” (Ps. 76:11,12) “When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it; for he hath no pleasure in fools: pay that which
11.	Was a vow from Jephthah a requirement for victory, and what did he row?
12.	(a) What did Jephthah’s vow manifest respecting himself, and why was it not a rash act*"' (b) What was God's law concerning vows and the performance thereof?
13.	(a) What was God’s law concerning the obligation to pay vows when once made? <b) How did Samuel's mother. Hannah, display the same earnestness and in like manner as Jephthah?
358
5Ke WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
thou hast vowed. Better is it that thou shouldest not-vow, than that thou shouldest vow and not pay. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin; neither say thou before the angel that it was an error: wherefore should God be angry at thy voice, and destroy the work of thine hands?” (Eccl. 5:4-6) Hannah, the mother of a later judge of Israel, displayed the same unselfish earnestness in her vow as did Jephthah. “And she vowed a vow, and said, 0 Lord of hosts, if thou wilt indeed look on the affliction of thine handmaid, and remember me, and not forget thine handmaid, but wilt give unto thine handmaid a man child, then I will give him unto the Lord all the days of his life, and there shall no razor come upon his head [he shall be a Nazarite].”—1 Sam. 1:11.
14	Jephthah was eager for winning because Jehovah’s name and Theocracy were tied in with the result of the fighting. His vow showed he believed that Jehovah “is, and that he is the rewarder of them that diligently seek him”, and that He is allpowerful and able to deliver up the enemies for destruction by his executioners. A like unselfish vow in behalf of the vindication of God’s name upon his enemies was earlier vowed by the Israelites under Moses when approaching the Promised Land, Canaan. Numbers 21:1-3 records it: “And when King Arad the Canaanite, which dwelt in the south, heard tell that Israel came by the way of the spies; then he fought against Israel, and took some of them prisoners. And Israel vowed a vow unto the Lord, and said, If thou wilt indeed deliver this people into my hand, then I will utterly destroy their cities [as devoted and cursed; and hence not go after their booty]. And the Lord hearkened to the voice of Israel, and delivered up the Canaanites; and they utterly destroyed them and their cities: and he called the name of the place Hormah [meaning ‘utter destruction’].” From Jephthah’s familiarity with Israel’s history as shown in his challenge to the Ammonites he must have known of Israel’s vow and how God granted its appeal.
15	Like earnestness of desire fills the hearts of Jehovah’s witnesses today. It is desire for the triumph of the “strange work” of the Theocratic organization over all the inroads, assaults and persecutions by the Ammonitish totalitarian-religious crowd. The present concern is not over the fight at Armageddon, but over finishing the work of testimony and the hunting out the Lord’s “other sheep” who must be gathered into the one fold under the
14	(a) Why especially was Jephthah eager to win the tight, and what belief did he show by bis vow? <b> Of what earlier vow ot like unselfishness made by Israel must Jephthah have known, and bow did God respond to that vow?
15	. (a) Over wbat matter of concern does like earnestness of desire fill Jehovah’s witnesses today9 (b) What have our eyes been opened to see concerning the issue as it relates to the earth, and why is the arrangement set up by modern Ammonites the “abomination of desolation” ?
Good Shepherd. Our eyes have been opened to see that Satan’s visible organization is symbolized by the seven-headed beast that rose out of the sea of humanity which is alienated from Jehovah God and such beast is bent on world domination and hence opposed to Jehovah’s worship on earth. We see also that the issue is between political rule by men under Satan and God’s Theocratic Government by Christ Jesus, which Government Jehovah’s witnesses represent as its ambassadors. Since the last World War the modern Ammonites, under the guidance of the demons and their religious clergy, have set up an “image” of the ‘sea-beast’, a federation of nations which they have tried to palm off as a substitute for The Theocracy. To God it is the “abomination of desolation” he foretold. It desolates men’s faith in God’s true kingdom. It makes faithless men feel they can dispense with the kingdom of God and can independently set up just as good a rule over themselves and even better and more suited to governing mankind.—Rev. 13:1-18.
14 The effort has been made and will yet be made to regiment all humankind into the worship of this idolatrous “beast” and his “image”. The earnest vows of Jehovah’s faithful servants in his Theocratic organization is that they might gain the victory over the “mark of the beast” and his “image”, and be faithful unto and carry on the pure and undefiled worship of Jehovah God. (Jas. 1:27, Syriac) Thus they would have part in the vindication of His name together with Christ Jesus. The religioustotalitarian Ammonites might dissolve the chartered legal organizations recognized by the state, but they cannot dissolve the real Society of Jehovah’s witnesses which depends upon union with their Theocratic Head, Christ Jesus, and which is above and beyond the decrees of human political states. The divinely commanded activities of that Theocratic Society must go on till finished, and it is for this they make their unselfish vow unto Jehovah God. Jephthah’s vow, which sets the pattern for their vow today, absolutely proves that Jehovah’s witnesses are unselfish, not seeking commercial profit, and are not ambulating peddlers, as the Supreme Court majority ruling of June 8,1942, classified them.
“WHATSOEVER COMETH FORTH”
1T By the terms of his vow, “whatsoever cometh forth of the doors of my house to meet me,” Jephthah could not have meant some four-footed animal as possible to come forth first. Such kind of clean
16	(a) Wbat effort will be made with respect to the “beast” and bis “image”, and for wbat, therefore, is the tow of Jehotab’s servants made? (bl Wbat does such vow prove as to the motives and work of Jebovab’s witnesses?
17	. (a) To wbat creatures did Jepbtbah have reference by bis expression, “whatsoever cometb forth of the doors of my home to meet me"9 (b) How did Jepbtbah thereby show the wboleheartedness ot bis desire Ln Jehovah's behalf?
December 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER,
339
animal acceptable for sacrifice, as a sheep, ox, or goat, was not kept in the Israelite homes and granted free run there. Unquestionably Jephthah had many such animals in possession in the pens, folds and fields, so that the offering of any such would just be one of the ordinary kind of sacrifice. It would be no peculiar hardship to Jephthah nor show extraordinary devotion to Jehovah God. In his vow Jephthah was referring to the human inmates of his home at Mizpah, including his men servants and maid servants, and not excluding his only daughter, or his wife, if she was alive. Such human creatures would hear in advance of Jephthah’s victory, when gained, and would arrange to meet him and would turn out to do so at the announcement of his approach. They would come forth through the doors of his house. Jephthah knew that his daughter was at home and that she might be the one, but he made his vow so sweeping as to cover and include her. Thereby he expressed the fullness of his devotion, the wholeheartedness of his desire to see Jehovah’s cause triumphant, all for the vindication of God’s name and the maintenance of his typical Theocracy and the continuance of it to worship and serve Jehovah. Jephthah was aware of the possibility that his only child might be the one. Hence it is wholly wrong to say his vow was “rash”.
18	Jephthah’s attitude was, Cost what it may, pay what I must, I shall be glad and willing for it to be so for the sake of the name of my God and his Theocratic rule over his covenant people. Jephthah was not making a mental reservation or secretly hoping it might not be his only child and daughter. Nor was his vow any burst of impetuousness, ill-considered and excessive, to be later regretted. He would have in mind Abraham’s sacrifice of his only son Isaac.
19	The fond hope, “when I return in peace from the children of Ammon,” meant a peace established by Almighty God, and not by religionists or politicians. No negotiated peace of compromise with the enemy, but the complete pushing back of the demon-worshipers, the Ammonites, breaking the power of their eighteen-year oppression and keeping the Theocratic Holy Land free of the rod of these wicked aggressors. Jephthah was not authorized to meddle in Ammon’s internal affairs and cross over into the land God assigned the Ammonites and wipe them out of existence. (Deut. 2:19-21) He would not return home in peace to attend to the internal affairs of the house of which he was head until, by God’s grace, the rod of the wicked oppressor had been lifted.
18 What was Jephthah’s attitude concerning the cost of victory to him personally, and what room was left for regrets on his part later? 19 With peace only on what conditions did Jephthah hope to return home from the Ammonites?
50 Jephthah’s vow that the creature first meeting him “shall surely be the Lord’s” meant this: Such human creature shall henceforth not be retained in my home for the service and interests of Jephthah’s house or for the preservation and perpetuation of his name in Israel, but shall be dedicated to the exclusive sendee of the Lord God. Whatever be the service such one is qualified for or is called upon to perform mattered not. Jephthah knew of the case of the heathen inhabitants of Gibeon. By God’s decree condemning all Canaanites to destruction the Gibeonites of Canaan had been devoted to be destroyed by Jehovah’s executional forces, the hosts of Israel. The Gibeonites escaped by willingly coming over onto the side of Joshua in unconditional surrender without a show of fight. The only escapearrangement for sparing these doomed Gibeonites was to dedicate them to the exclusive service of Jehovah at his tabernacle or temple. This dedication was not their own choice. It was by Jehovah's Theocratic servant Joshua, who said to the Gibeonites: “Now therefore ye are cursed; and there shall none of you be freed from being bondmen, and hewers of wood and drawers of water for the house of my God.” “And Joshua made them that day hewers of wood and drawers of water for the congregation, and for the altar of the Lord, even unto this day, in the place which he should choose.” (Josh. 9: 23, 27) The Gibeonites in being saved from execution by Jehovah’s special provision could not become the servants of men, but must serve the Lord God as being his property. Therefore they picture the Lord’s “other sheep”, Jonadabs.
91 By vowing to “offer it up for a burnt offering”, did Jephthah mean to kill the human victim and burn it on an altar, as God commanded Abraham to do to his son Isaac? No; a vow was not at God s command. Jephthah meant that this human creature thus devoted should wholly and with fiery zeal serve God, rather than that Jephthah should offer up a literal offering of some clean beast acceptable for sacrifice by fire upon the literal altar. Jephthah knew that God’s law did not allow for literal human sacrifice, but that Jehovah God condemned such sacrifices as demonistic, religious. What pleases God is stated by him at Psalm 50:13,14: “M’ill I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats! Offer unto God thanksgiving; and pay thy vows unto the Most High.” Psalm 69:30, 31 expresses the vow of the Christian: ‘1 will praise the name of God with a song, and will magnify him with thanksgiving. This also shall please the Lord better than an ox
20	(a) What did Jephthah mean by his vow that the one first meeting him should “surely be the Lord s”* (b) What heathen Canaanites were likewise dedicated to Jehovah’s service at the tabernacle and whom did these picture?
21.	Did Jephthah’s vowing to “offer it up for a burnt offering” mean a human sacrifice on the altar, and how do God’s law and good pleasure determine thia?
360
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
or bullock that hath horns and hoofs.” Also Psalm 51: 16,17 : ‘Tor thou desirest not sacrifice, else would I give it: thou delightest not in burnt offering. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, 0 God, thou wilt not despise.”
” Concerning the human sacrifices as marks of demon worship Jehovah said to his covenant people: “There shall not be found among you any one that maketh his son or his daughter to pass through the fire, or that useth divination, or an observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch.” (Deut. 18:10) “And thou shalt not give any of thy seed to make them pass through the fire to Molech; neither shalt thou profane the name of thy God: I am Jehovah.” (Lev. 18: 21, Am. Rev. Ver.) The demon god Molech, symbolizing Satan, was the “abomination of the children of Ammon”. Against Ammon Jephthah was fighting; and he would not vow to imitate their religious practice in order to make sure of needed help from God, who condemned such practice.— 1 Ki. 11:7.
” The figure of a “burnt offering” was rightly used by Jephthah. Why? Because no part of the burnt offering was eaten by the priest or the offerer, but was wholly offered up to the Lord upon his altar, only the skin of the flayed animal being given to the sacrificing priest. (Lev. 1:3-17; 7:8) True, Abraham was commanded to offer his only son as a “burnt offering”, but after Abraham’s faith and spirit of obedience had been fully proved to the point of actual execution, Jehovah provided a ram as substitute for Isaac. (Gen. 22:1-13) However, no one could vow to do a thing contrary to the Theocratic law of God and then hope to have such vow recognized and its performance approved by God. Hence Jephthah’s use of the figure of a burnt offering was to indicate the wholeness and completeness with which he would dedicate the one that Jehovah would designate to be thus devoted. Victory for Jehovah’s sake was worth it.
’* Jephthah thus vowing pictured Christ Jesus the heavenly Head of the visible part of Jehovah’s Theocratic organization on earth, of which organization there is yet a small remnant left on earth as the anointed witnesses of Jehovah. This remnant was brought under Theocratic rule in October, 1938, as explained in previous issues of The Watchtower. In the real drama of which Jephthah’s was only a prophetic pattern, the vow is the expression of the Theocratic organization under Christ Jesus to this effect: Whatever class of persons gaining life by Christ’s sacrifice first comes out to greet as victor
22.	What did God's law specifically state concerning human sacrifice by fire, and whom would a vow to render such sacrifice be imitating? 23 (a) Why was use of the figure of a ‘'burnt offering” right in Jephthah’s vow’ (b) To be recognized of God. with what must a vow be in agreement?
24 (a) In thus vowing, whom did Jephthah picture’ (b) In the fulfillment of * the prophetic drama, what is the substance of the vow, and what does it prove regarding the organization involved?
such organization under its Theocratic King, that very class shall be used for no selfish advantage nor to perpetuate any earthly creature’s name. Such class shall be rendered up fully and unreservedly to the Most High God for his service at his holy temple of worship. This proves that Jehovah’s •witnesses are not trying to get “joiners” or to build up any human organization called by some human person’s name or of any subversive nature.—Ps. 56:12.
FIGHT FOR FREEDOM OF WORSHIP
” “So Jephthah passed over unto the children of Ammon to fight against them; and Jehovah delivered them into his hand.” (Judg. 11: 32, Am. Rev. Ver.) Likewise since the inauguration of Theocratic rule in 1938 the Society of Jehovah’s witnesses under their Head Christ Jesus have passed over to the fight. They fight in a new line-up against the religious-totalitarian aggressors, who menace and invade the right and liberty of free worship of the Supreme Ruler of the universe.
*• The fight of the modern Jephthah corresponds with that of King David at Mount Perazim, because the battle of Perazim foreshadowed God’s “strange work” preliminary to the fight at Armageddon. (Isa. 28: 21) At Perazim the enemy were routed and left behind their demon-god images to be burned by David and his men. (2 Sam. 5:17-21) Jephthah’s fight also corresponds with Samson’s last action against the Philistines in the temple of Dagon, because it also pictures the “strange work” against religion and the “do or die” spirit of those who fight for the Theocratic new world. Now to the “Jephthah” Society Jehovah has given a forevision of the final form of the “abomination of desolation”. Like the Ammonites, it will presume to stand in the place where it ought not, in defiance of God. Hence the powers going to make up that “abomination” impudently move to crack down with their rod of power upon the lot of Jehovah’s righteous ones and forcibly regiment them to put forth their hand to iniquity, lawlessness against God and their Gospel commission from Him. This Jehovah’s consecrated servants refuse to do. They have the Almighty’s assurance that though the modern Ammonites and their “abomination” beastly legislate and persecute, yet their -wicked rod shall never rest and stay put upon the lot which God has assigned to his faithful righteous servants. (Ps. 125:3) They know and can prove their ordination and commission from the Most High, and such they will never let go. Jephthah said as much to the Ammonites before throwing
25 What did Jephthah’s passing over to the Ammonites to fight against them illustrate?
2G fa) How does Jephthah’s fight against the Ammonites correspond with battle actions by David and Samson’ (b) Like the Ammonites, what do the powers making up the “abomination of desolation'' move to do toward the lot of Jehovah's consecrated servants, and do these submit thereto?
December 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER,
361
them out: “Wilt not thou possess that which Chemosh thy god giveth thee to possess? So whomsoever Jehovah our God hath dispossessed from before us, them will we possess.”—Judg. 11: 24, Am. Rev. Ver.
" Jehovah delivered the Ammonites into Jeph-thah’s hands. He has also now delivered up the religious-totalitarian aggressors, to be withstood, outmaneuvered, outfought, and turned back by his Theocratic Society under Christ Jesus. This will be true until the “strange work” is done, and the dividing of the people as “sheep” and “goats” is completed and all these “other sheep” of the Lord are gathered into the fold at the right side of the King. (Matt. 25: 31-46) Jehovah’s witnesses fight not with carnal weapons, for they know that they fight not with “flesh and blood”, but with the demons who are back of the religious-totalitarian crowd. (Eph. 6:12) Their fight is to uphold the worship of Jehovah by serving as his witnesses and honoring his name. Jephthah was not on the defensive, and neither are they. The persecution upon them by the modern “Ammonites” shall be defeated in its purpose. Jehovah’s “strange work” strategy shall gain all its objectives. Therefore His servants take heart and obey his command: “In that day it shall be said to Jerusalem, Fear thou not: and to Zion, Let not thine hands be slack.”—Zeph. 3:16.
” The Ammonites are delivered up, and to his faithful witnesses pictured by the prophet Jeremiah God Almighty says: “They [the modern Ammonites] shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee; for I am with thee, saith the Lord.” (Jer. 1:19) That verse was the yeartext of the Society during the first year of Theocratic organization, namely, 1939, and the first article of the year in The Watchtower was based on that text and entitled “Deliverance Guaranteed”. All throughout that year The Watchtower repeatedly stressed that text. On November 1, 1939, The Watchtower published the challenging article based on Jesus’ words at John 17:16 as the theme text: “They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.” This was indeed a challenge, because for the first time since the great apostasy of “Christendom” this article set forth the stark Scriptural and therefore correct position of genuine Christians toward the elements of this world and their violent controversies. When the writer thereof (now deceased) submitted the article to the board of directors and others for hearing, discussion and vote as to its publication, he said to them: “This may cost you your lives.” But, now guided with this correct understanding of the Lord’s position for them in this world, Jehovah’s
27 How has Jehovah delivered tip the modern Ammonites, and how and tor what do His witnesses tight in that connection?
28 How did the articles in the Watchtower issues of 1939 indicate that the Ammonites were delivered up. and how were Jehovah’s witnesses aided thereby?
witnesses have been enabled to triumph over the Ammonitish assaults and encroachments against their integrity.
VICTORY
” By help of Jehovah, to whom he had appealed with an extraordinary vow, Jephthah steadily pushed back the demon-worshipers: “And he smote them from Aroer, even till thou come to Minnith, even twenty cities, and unto the plain of the vineyards, with a very great slaughter. Thus the children of Ammon were subdued before the children of Israel.” (Judg. 11:33) This meant a rout of the enemy. Aroer, its name meaning “ruins, heap”, was the town on the river Arnon, hence at the southern boundary of the territory claimed by Ammon (verse 13); and Minnith, its name meaning “allotment”, was about thirty miles north of Aroer and was famous for its fine wheat, which was exported to the markets of Tyre. (Ezek. 27:17) This source of food-supply was therefore cut off from the Ammonites. “The plain of the vineyards,” or, “Abel-cheramim” (/bn. Rev. Ver.), was the city or region famous for its vineyards. It was near the headwaters of the river Jabbok, hence at the northern border of the territory Ammon claimed. It was about six Roman miles from Rabbath-Ammon, the chief Ammonite city, about thirty-eight miles northeast of Aroer. (Ezek. 21:20,28-32) The source of joy of the Ammonites was crimped and the exhilarating wine cut off from their lips. In the above stretch of territory the invaders had seized and occupied twenty cities, or double ten. Jephthah made a clean sweep of those cities, marching on from victory to victory.
,0 Just how the series of battles was fought and how the Lord God put the Ammonites at the mercy of Jephthah and his Theocratic fighters is not described in detail. All that matters is this • The battle was Jehovah’s and he fought and maneuveied the course of battle and gave a resounding victory to his men of faith, courage and unselfishness. Victory, not the details of battle, is the outstanding thing!
SI In the first year of Theocratic organization of the Society violence broke out between “the king of the north” and “the king of the south”, as foretold by Daniel’s prophecy, chapter eleven. With lightning-like rapidity the totalitarian-religious elements struck and extended their aggressions. Under nothing less than demon inspiration they used the disturbed world conditions as their big chance to transgress on “the glorious land”. They encroached upon the full, proper and rightful exercise of Jehovah’s
29	. Wbat was the extent of Jephthab's rout of the Ammonites’
30	Id the record of Jephthah's battle campaign, what is it that should be noted in the absence of details’
31	In the first year of the Society’s Theocratic organization what did the totalitarian-religious element use the wartime conditions to dor and how did those under the Greater Jephthah proxe whether they were pacifists or fighters?
362
THE WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
worship by his covenant people. But, clad in the “whole armour of God”, his servants under the Greater Jephthah smote the aggressors with the “sword of the spirit”, with Bible arguments in which they were trained to meet and repel the totalitarian encroachments on the worship of God. Jehovah’s witnesses are not pacifists, but fighters for the new world, in God’s way.
” On June 3, 1940, came the decision of the Supreme Court on the flag salute case. That was the signal for outrageous mob violence throughout this land of democracy. The results thereof to date show that that 8-to-l decision has failed to serve the modern Ammonites as a stepping-stone to victory. The God-fearing children and their elder fellow witnesses march on straight forward against demonism, and toward the new world. A month later came the action on America’s Independence Day, July 4, 1940, when the Quebec-Catholic justice minister of Canada outlawed the work of Jehovah’s servants throughout that Dominion. It likewise has failed the totalitarian religionists’ purpose, and the proclamation of The Theocracy by God’s ordained ministers goes on, whereas that Canadian justice minister has since died. In counter action, on December 1, 1941, the Theocratic organization made arrangements for more intensive work among the people. Without loosening one whit the binding ties of Theocratic unity, it made the working arrangement more capable of coping with the devilish aggressions of the Ammonites. It has put all Jehovah’s witnesses on notice of the Theocratic rule (Gal. 6: 5), “Every man shall bear his own burden,” wherever the enemy action physically scatters him. Comes now the Supreme Court decision of June 8, 1942, upholding license-tax ordinances as applied against serving the spiritually starved people from door to door. That 5-to-4 decision threatens to affect the food-supply distribution from the Lord’s table; but here let Jephthah’s victory at Minnith be recalled as our assurance from on high. Jephthah’s “very great slaughter” of the Ammonites will eventually be duplicated in God’s further “strange work”, for all the nations will become a battle-ground on this issue as they go totalitarian and agree on the final form of their desolating abomination.
'* The children of Ammon were subdued before Jehovah’s Theocratic nation of Israel. Equally so, Jehovah’s faithful remnant and their earthly companions will hold fast to The Theocracy, which is now here. They will, down to the last, gain victory
32	, (a> What judicial rulings in the United States and Canada In 1940 were made the basis of aggressions against Jehovah’s witnesses, and with what success in stopping their advance* (b) Wbat counter action under the Greater Jephthah began December 1, 1941, and will the Supreme Court decision of June 8, 1942, halt bis “very great slaughter” of modern Ammonites?
33	(a) How. then, will the outcome be realized, as expressed, namely, “Thus the children of Ammon were subdued before the children of Israel”? (b) How was the actual destruction of the modern Ammonites at Armageddon foreshadowed at ancient Jerusalem?
over the “beast” and his “image” and over the “mark” of such anti-Theocracy powers. (Rev. 15: 2; 14:9-12; 20:4) The Lord’s “strange work” will without successful interruption be carried through to the finish. His name will be declared throughout all the earth, the Kingdom gospel will be preached down to the final end, and the Lord’s “other sheep” will be hunted out and gathered every one to the side of salvation at the King’s right hand. At the finish thereof, the Ammonitish “abomination of desolation”, at its last border and on its way out for ever, will act against the servants and ambassadors of The Theocracy. It will, in self-deception, to bolster its morale, cry, “Peace and safety!” But it will be too late. Jehovah’s “strange work” by his Greater Jephthah will have victoriously succeeded over all persecution and opposition. It will be all done. Vain the enemy efforts after that! The actual destruction of the “Ammonites” at the battle of Armageddon that follows their cry was foreshadowed by what befell the Ammonites and allies before Jerusalem in the days of King Jehoshaphat.— 2 Chronicles 20.
FACING THE VOW
The anticlimax of the prophetic drama now begins, and it also finds its fulfillment since 1938 and before the battle of Armageddon, as will be proved by Scripture and fact. “And Jephthah came to Mizpeh unto his house, and, behold, his daughter came out to meet him with timbrels and with dances; and she was his only child: beside her he had neither son nor daughter.” (Judg. 11: 34) Jephthah’s action afield was against foreign foes, the Ammonites. His coming home to Mizpah, which name means “"Watchtower”, pictures the Greater Jephthah as he turns attention to the home affairs of the Theocratic organization over Jehovah’s covenant people today. Under his guidance, and after the serving of notice on the political officials in the early part of 1941 as above described, the Watch Tower Society turned the attention of all Theocratic fighters to their obligation henceforth, “Comfort all that mourn.” (Isa. 61:2) The official Ammonites and allies had had their warning. Let the “other sheep” now have attention.
“ Jephthah did not by-pass his house to avoid fulfilling his vow. His God-given triumph over Ammon was Jehovah’s confirmation that Jephthah be “head and captain” henceforth over all Gilead. (Judg. 11:11) He being father and owner of his home, “his house” would be his household and all the servants thereof. Today the Head of the Theocratic organization of which the Society forms the
34	Wbat was pictured by Jephthah’s coming borne to his bouse Id Mizpah?
35	(a) Whom did Jephthah’s house include, and wbat did bls relationship thereto picture? (b) Wbat is pictured by the age of Jephthah’s daughter at his return, and by the non-appearance of the servants of his house?
December 1,1942
WATCHTOWER.
363
visible part is Christ Jesus. He is also “The Everlasting Father” to his “other sheep”, the consecrated faithful ones to whom he gives everlasting life on earth. (Isa. 9:6; John 10:16) Jephthah’s daughter pictured such “other sheep”. On Jephthah’s arrival home his daughter was of marriageable age, possibly eighteen or more years old. Likewise the “other sheep” class is some years old now, it having come into existence since the Lord’s coming to the temple in 1918 for judgment. (Matt. 25:31,32) In contrast with these there are many religionists who profess to be serving Christ Jesus, but, like the servants of Jephthah’s house, they do not come out first like Jephthah’s daughter to greet Jehovah’s victorious Warrior, through whom life eternal comes to the “sheep”.
30 When Jephthah took over the command of Israel’s armies encamped at the time in Mizpah, his daughter in the house near by in Mizpah approved. Note the modern fulfillment. Instanter with the publication of the Watchtower article “Organization”, in June, 1938, followed by the application of the Theocratic principles of organization and operation to the Society, the “other sheep” class as companions of the anointed remnant at once accepted that truth and arrangement enthusiastically. They lined up unhesitatingly with the Theocratic organization of the Society under the Greater Jephthah. The eighteen years of Ammonitish oppression from 1918 on had ended, and the big fight with religious totalitarians was impending. Since 1938 there has been a great ingathering of these “other sheep”. Now must come a great manifestation of these as to their stand. The questions must be answered: Who sees the great universal issue? Who sees the uncompromising stand of Jehovah’s Theocratic organization against totalitarianism? Who sees God is with his faithful remnant, approving their stand against demon rule as right and Scriptural? Who sees that The Theocracy and its worship of Jehovah is on the offensive and will continue clear through to victory over the forces of demonism? Jephthah’s daughter foreshadows the answer.
37	Being first to come out and also meeting Jephthah with timbrels and with dances proves that his daughter had heard in advance how Almighty God had favored him with a crushing defeat of the enemy. She rejoiced that the Ammonites were driven out of Theocratic territory. She prepared herself to meet her father joyfully as was due him in honor of his and her God. She did not keep her joy to herself, but went out openly and publicly to express it and thereby to call much attention to the
36 (a) What was Jephthah’s daughter’s attitude at his taking over command of the armies of Israel, and what was the modern fulfillment? lb! Oo what questions must the "other sheep” now manifest their stand? 37. (a) What does Jephthah’s daughter's coming forth with rejoicing to meet him prove, and how was she in this like the woman Jael? (b) How, therefore, are the Lord’s “other sheep” like Jephthah’s daughter?
victory of the Lord God and his typical Theocracy. How like the earlier woman Jael who slew Captain Sisera in her tent and then went forth to greet victorious Barak coming from the slaughter of God’s foes, and to show her harmony and co-operation therewith. (Judg. 4:22) Like Jephthah’s daughter of old, the persons of good-will, the Lord’s “other sheep”, are the only earthly class out of all this present generation of mankind to show favor to the Jephthah class, whom Jesus called “the least of these my brethren”. It is only such “other sheep” that the kingly Judge puts at his right hand as approved ones, to be blessed of his Father Jehovah. They are put in line for life everlasting on earth under the Theocratic government of which he is King.—Matt. 25: 31-46.
38	What affected Jephthah’s daughter affected his whole offspring, for “beside her he had neither son nor daughter”. Aside from the “other sheep” and their “princes” there are no offspring of the Theocratic organization of which Christ Jesus is Head, and this sole offspring at this end of the world is the only earthly class that shall survive the tribulation at Armageddon alongside the remnant. Christ Jesus, by his proclamation of “this gospel of the Kingdom” and his judgment of the nations thereby, has brought forth this class of “men of good-will" toward Jehovah and his Righteous Government.
39	“And it came to pass, when he saw her, that he rent his clothes, and said, Alas, my daughter! thou hast brought me very low, and thou art one of them that trouble me; for I have opened my mouth unto the Lord, and I cannot go back.” (Judg. 11:35) Jephthah’s daughter by coming forth first to greet him automatically imposed a great responsibility and service upon herself, of which she was possibly not aware. If, however, anyone had heard Jephthah’s vow spoken and had noised it abroad and it preceded Jephthah’s arrival and came to his child’s ears, then she deliberately decided, vow or no vow, to let none be ahead of her in praising Jehovah’s defeat of the foe nor be ahead of her in gratefully offering her lifelong service to Him as her thank-offering. Likewise the joyful welcoming of the Theocratic organization for its triumphs in Jehovah’s name puts a great responsibility and service obligation upon the Lord's “other sheep” or “daughter” class.
10	When Jephthah saw her and rent his clothes, he did not mean to signify that he regretted his vow. This manifestation of feeling was enacted in order to show the deep love and attachment he bore toward his only child and daughter, just as David
38	. What does Jephthah’s having “beside her neither son nor daughter” show regarding the modern fulfillment?
39	In the drama and its fulfillment, what does such coming forth first impose on those so doing, and is It deliberately decided to do this’’ 40 If not regret, what was Jephthah’s expression of feeling at the sight of his daughter meant to show?
364	5THE WATCHTOWER-	Brooklyn, N. Y.
had great love for his friend Jonathan, “passing the love of women.” (2 Sam. 1: 26) It testified also that to have a glorious part in the vindication of God’s name was at no light cost to Jephthah. It was at the expense of what on earth was tenderest to him and touched him most. It called very much upon his faith and faithfulness toward the great Theocrat.
41	J ephthah’s rending his clothes and the words escaping his lips were permitted of the great Dramatist Jehovah also in order to put a test upon Jephthah's daughter and to call forth from her an expression as to her position and her feeling with regard to carrying out her father’s vow. Hence this dramatic scene is not staged to picture that Christ Jesus and the remnant members of the Theocratic organization give way to grief and sorrow over payment of their vow and over the requirements and obligations that come upon the Lord’s “other sheep”. Rather the scene makes prominent the deep love that those of the remnant have and express for those devoted “other sheep” of the Lord, who are their friends that ‘stick closer than a brother’.
42	That the remnant of the Theocratic organization under Christ the Head saw this “daughter” class coming out first on the side of The Theocracy, before Armageddon, is manifest. They do not say, as do many professed ones blinded by religion or demonism, Where is the great multitude? Where is there any evidence of such?’ No; but in the summer of 1939 the book Salvation was published as “A Textbook for the Jonadabs”, as so stated on the title page, the Jonadabs being the same as the “other sheep”. (2 Ki. 10: 15-23) The coming of this “daughter” class is an open and indisputable token of the victory of the Theocratic Society under Christ Jesus over the unrighteous, unconstitutional encroachments of the religious-totalitarians. The years 1940 and 1941 were crucial years, Jehovah’s witnesses being then violently beset by modern Ammonites as never before. But the “Jephthah” class pressed on in God’s service over the vicious opposition of the “Ammonites”. The “daughter” class took note of it and manifested themselves, and of this there was a marked manifestation in August, 1941.
*’ That the Greater Jephthah saw the “daughter” class taking their stand for the triumphant Theocracy, and realized the urgency of the situation, is proved by the preparation early in 1941 of the book Children and the arranging for “Children’s Day” at the St. Louis Theocratic Assembly, due to be held August 6-10. Here, then, was an expression of deep love and care of the “Jephthah” Society for the pro-
41	. Id what way was Jephthah's demonstration permitted to affect his daughter, and what was this scene staged to picture in this time? 42. (a) What is there to show that the remnant saw the “Jephthah's daughter" class coming forth’ (b) Of what is the coming of this "daughter” class an open token?
43	. What preparation and arrangement in 1041 are proof that the Greater Jephthah saw the “daughter” class taking their stand, and on nbat occasion did this reach a marked climax?
spective children of the King-Father Christ Jesus. This tender affection was touchingly expressed at the Theocratic Assembly, and especially on the last day. There were 75,000 expected at that mighty gathering, but on Sunday, the final day thereof, “Children’s Day,” the convention was climaxed by an overflowing attendance of more than 115,000 at the speech “Children of the King”. A heart-endearing sight it was to see 15,000 boys and girls of between the ages of 5 and 18 years, immediately in front and in full view of the speaker, the president of the Watch Tower Society who has since finished his course.
44	At the conclusion of the speech the president directly addressed his words to the young children. He questioned them on their consecration and allegiance to Jehovah the great Theocrat and His King Christ Jesus, to which they responded in their thousands as with one voice and pledging that they would use the instrument that the Lord provided for them to use in His service. Then the president announced and held forth the instrument, the new book Children, and bestowed, upon each of these children before him a copy as a gift from the Theocratic Society. Many onlookers wept at the sight, especially those of the older members of the Society, being as touched to the heart as was Jephthah at the sight of his daughter whose future he could then envision because of his vow to Jehovah. Thereafter the book Children was released to all other prospective children of the King there assembled and those others throughout the earth.
45	Due to the conflict between the totalitarian and the democratic world powers, a like Theocratic Assembly was not held in Britain until the following month, at Leicester, England. On the “Children's Day” there, with a like assembly of young children, a surprise total attendance of 12,000 braved the airraid menace and listened to the exact reproduction of the original" speech on “Children of the King-’. (See report of ‘Theocratic assemblies of Jehovah’s witnesses’ of 1941.)
44	The impression of these vast assemblies was overwhelming and stirred the depths of the soul of the “Jephthah” Theocratic organization. Why? Because it was a visible manifestation of Jehovah’s granting to his advocates of The Theocracy victory over the modern Ammonites; also because it was evident that the vast attendances at the assemblies were made up predominantly of the “Jephthah’s daughter” class, the Lord’s “other sheep”, or Jonadabs, the prospective sons and daughters of the
44.	On that occasion, how was the younger element of that "daughter” class led to express tbemsehes toward Jeho\ab and bls King, and how were many affected emotionally thereby’
45	What like demonstration by those of the "daughter” class was made the next month in Britain’
46.	What did these assemblies make manifest as to the fight against modern Ammonites, and what was evident as to the attendances at these assemblies ?
December 1,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
365
King of kings and Lord of lords, and who shall inherit life for evermore on a glorious earth under the heavenly Theocracy. The spiritual remnant of that Government are continually diminishing from the earth as they prove faithful unto death, but the number of those joyfully putting in appearance to celebrate The Theocracy and its King who shall be their “Everlasting Father'’ is increasing. It
greatly moves the remnant and kindles loving affection in their heart.
*’ What the full portent is of Jephthah’s words and of his daughter’s responses, and how he fulfilled his vow of a burnt offering with respect to her, will be published in the next issue of this magazine.
(To be continued)
47.	What further regarding Jephthah and his daughter may we expect to be developed and cleared up in The 11 atchtoicrrt
THE HOPE OF THE NATIONS
FOR the guidance of the bewildered people today it is written in inspired language, first stated at Isaiah 42: 4 and restated hundreds of years later at Matthew 12 20, 21: “Till he may put forth judgment to victory, and in his name shall nations hope.” (Young's translation) The term “nations” means the people of good-will throughout the earth, Jew and gentile alike.
Many millions profess to be followers of Christ Jesus, and yet most of these are without hope because they are ignorant of the purposes of his Father, Jehovah God. After centuries of operation of a religious system called “organized Christianity” the peoples of “Christendom” are hopeless. Divers and numerous schemes formulated by men and man-made organizations have been placed before the people, and such schemes have promised the people relief and blessings. The people have feared their men as leaders and have trusted in them, and, for that reason, have been led into the snare of the enemy. They have failed to trust in God and in his Word, the Bible. “The fear of man bringeth a snare: but whoso putteth his trust in the Lord shall be safe.” (Prov. 29:25) Selfish men have made and promulgated these various schemes, and the invisible ruler, Satan the Devil, has overreached the men of the world and hence led the whole world into his snare. The nations of the earth are therefore under the domination of that wicked one, the Devil.—1 John 5: 19.
Only those who have trusted in the Lord and who faithfully serve him according to his Holy Word have escaped the snares of the wicked one. (Ps. 119:110; 2 Tim. 2.26) Satan by and through his various worldly agencies has blinded the people to the truth of Jehovah’s purpose. In times past the people had hope in the schemes of men, but now those schemes have all failed and the people are sad and distressed. (Prov. 13:12) No person can have a substantial hope who is without knowledge of God and his kingdom. The only hope for the peoples of the nations is the name of Jehovah and of his Christ, because it is God’s kingdom under Christ that will vindicate Jehovah’s name and bring relief to men of good-will.
The greatest of all questions for determination is the vindication of Jehovah’s name. All other matters are subsidiary thereto. The salvation of humankind or any portion thereof will be a vindication of Jehovah’s name and prove his supremacy, but the salvation of human creatures is not the important thing. Jehovah could wipe out the entire race and make a new one, and in so doing he would in no wise violate justice. On the other hand, by placing the truth before human creatures and
giving everlasting life to those who willingly obey him, maintaining their integrity toward God, the result is to vindicate his name and it is to the benefit of the creature that obeys. When the wicked are destroyed, and those who love God and are obedient are given life eternal, such proves that Jehovah alone is the Supreme One and worthy of all worship and joyful service. That will settle for ever the question of supremacy, and then all creation will see that only the obedient ones are given life everlasting by the Most High. Thus is magnified the name of Jehovah’s anointed King, Christ Jesus, through whose name He brings vindication and the hope of life to the obedient.
Jehovah made Christ Jesus his servant or anointed one to vindicate his name. He appointed his Beloved, Jesus, as leader of all who will ever get life. Therefore it is written, at Isaiah 55: 3,4: “Incline your ear, and come unto me: hear [obey], and your soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David [Beloved], Behold, I have given him for a witness to the people, a leader and commander to the people.” Those who faithfully and successfully follow the Leader must have faith and confidence in the Leader and must obey his commandments They must do as the Leader does; and since Christ Jesus maintained his integrity toward Jehovah God, others who live must do likewise He leads first those whom he associates with him in his kingdom in heaven, and afterwards all humans that get life eternal on earth."
Jehovah sent his beloved Son to earth to bear testimony to the truth, and even-one who maintains his integrity toward God must hear and obey the truth as declared by Christ Jesus. (John 18:37) Jehovah by and through Christ Jesus takes out from among men a people for his name. Now, as the great vindicator of Jehovah's name, Christ Jesus commands these taken-out ones to ‘preach this gospel of the Kingdom as a witness to the nations’. (Matt. 24:14) This means that they must obey this commandment in order to maintain their integrity toward Jehovah.
The question of supremacy must now be for ever settled, because it is Jehovah’s due time to settle it He has assembled his capital organization Zion and made his taken-out covenant people a part thereof, and to them he says: “I am the first, and I am the last; and beside me there is no God. . , . Fear ye not, neither be afraid: have not I told thee from that time, and have declared it! ye are even my witnesses.” (Isa. 44:6-8) Jehovah’s
36G
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
anointed remnant of witnesses must therefore fully trust him and fearlessly declare his name. The time approaches now when he will give final opportunity to the people to determine in whom they will trust and whom they will serve. Because he has made Christ Jesus his vindicator Jehovah now speaks to his great Servant and Witness, Christ Jesus, and says: “Thus saith God Jehovah, he that created the heavens, and stretched them forth; he that spread abroad the earth and that which cometh out of it; he that giveth breath unto the people upon it, and spirit to them that walk therein: I, Jehovah, have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thy hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles; to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the dungeon, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison-house.” (Isa. 42:5-7, Am. Rev. Ver.) This prophecy does not say that Christ Jesus is commissioned to take the people to heaven, but it does say that he is commissioned to open their blind eyes and inform them of the truth, that they may have an opportunity to choose whom they will serve. Those who believe upon the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, the great Redeemer and Vindicator of Jehovah’s name, have reason for a hope. They must then be obedient to Jehovah, the Supreme One. Every one who maintains his integrity toward God will, therefore, to that extent prove Satan to be a liar, and hence have a part in the vindication of Jehovah’s name.
When Jesus had endured much suffering and thereby continued to be obedient to his Father he was made the vindicator of his Father’s name. For that reason Jehovah made Christ Jesus his “right hand and his holy arm” to accomplish His purpose of proving Uis own great supremacy. It is Jehovah, therefore, who gains the victory over his enemies; but he gets this victory by and through his beloved Son as his instrument. He makes his Son this instrument or vindicator because the Son was obedient under suffering. In harmony with this Jehovah caused to be written, at Psalm 98: 1,2: “0 sing unto the Lord a new song; for he hath done marvellous things: his right hand, and his holy arm, hath gotten him the victory. The Lord hath made known his salvation: his righteousness hath he openly shewed in the sight of the heathen.” This-victory song his anointed remnant of witnesses, and their earthly companions, are now joyfully singing in the hearing of the “heathen”, or the nations. It is Jehovah who saves the obedient ones and gives them everlasting life; and this he does for his own great name’s sake. Their salvation is a vindication of his name, and this vindication operates beneficially to everyone who proves his integrity.
All sane persons desire to have life and dwell in peace and enjoy the things God has provided. No human creature can realize such desired blessings until he learns whence they come and what he must do to obtain them. Jehovah God sent his beloved Son to earth that man might believe in him as God’s Vindicator and man’s Ransomer and might live and not perish. This means that without knowledge, and hence without belief, mankind must perish. The life of the perfect man Jesus provided the redemptive price for believers, but in order for man to reap the benefits thereof he must know Jehovah God and Christ Jesus and
choose to be obedient to the righteous laws of his kingdom. (John 17:3) Jehovah has made provision for the people to learn, and he lays the privilege and obligation upon his witnesses to now declare to them that their hope is in His kingdom by Christ Jesus.
The crisis is here when the paramount question must be settled. Satan is exercising all his power in his effort to win, but he is certain to lose. Satan would destroy all the people rather than see any of them serve God. Satan continues to oppress the people and to increase their burdens, and this drives them to desperation, as foretold at Revelation 12:12. The rulers in their efforts to pull the world out of the mire continue to lay greater burdens upon the people. There is absolutely nothing in this world upon which the people can hope; hence honest persons are in despair.
Standing out boldly in contrast with the miserable condition of the old world is Jehovah God’s gracious provision for obedient mankind. He has made Christ Jesus his vindicator and has placed the name of Christ above every name save that of His alone, and he calls upon the people to hear his great King and to learn the importance of his name. The remnant of the elect company yet on earth are made the witnesses of Jehovah and are commanded to point the people of good-will to Jehovah’s kingdom and his great King. The name of Christ Jesus stands for the kingdom of Jehovah, which will vindicate Jehovah and bring salvation through the blood of Christ Jesus, and hence ‘in his name shall nations hope’. There is no other name which God has given under heaven m which the peoples of the nations can hope or whereby they can possibly be saved, as Peter stated at Acts 4:12. Jehovah’s witnesses must therefore point the people to this one and only complete hope.
Is it to be expected that Jehovah’s witnesses can give testimony to the name of Jehovah God and his kingdom without being subjected to persecution and suffering? Certainly not! The Devil piled persecutions upon Jesus in an effort to prove his side of the question at issue and to prevent the giving of testimony by Jesus concernin'! God and His kingdom. Amid great suffering Jesus continued to the end to bear testimony to the truth and to maintain his blamelessness and to thus prove God to be true Those who are associated with him, and particularly the anointed remnant and their companions on earth, must likewise suffer at the hands of Satan, because they are bearing the testimony of Christ Jesus the great King. At the same time they must maintain their blamelessness by learning obedience by and through the things they must suffer (2 Tim. 3:13) But there is a real joy in tribulation when we know that the tribulation is heaped upon us because we are doing right in obedience to God’s commandments
As Jehovah’s witnesses go forth and with boldness declare the name of Jehovah God and his King and kingdom, it is to be expected that persecutions and sufferings will be their lot. Those who willingly persecute Jehovah’s witnesses and oppose God’s kingdom are now marking themselves for the slaughter that shall come upon all opposers at the battle of the great day of God Almighty, at Armageddon. They are putting on their garments of identification; and the people must be told that their
December 1,1942
5THE WATCHTOWER
367
only hope is in the name of Jehovah God’s great Vindicator and they must identify themselves as being on his side. In due time Jehovah will go forth to fight for his own
people, and thus He will vindicate his witnesses who have faithfully maintained their integrity toward him in proclaiming his name and the name of his King.—Zech. 14: 3
FELLOWSHIP
WRITING to the congregation at Corinth, the apostle Paul said: “God is faithful, by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.” (1 Cor. 1:9) What is meant by the word “fellowship”?
Many have understood fellowship to mean that when they attend a convention or a meeting of God’s people they must spend a part of the time in shaking hands and indulging in gossip. Often an hour is set aside for what is known as “fellowship” and in that hour almost everything is discussed except ways and means to further the cause of Kingdom truth. Surely that is not what is meant in the apostle’s words above.
“Fellowship,” properly understood, means partnership. It means an association of one with another or a participating one with another in a certain work. Jehovah God long ago summoned his beloved Son Christ Jesus to discharge the duties of royal High Priest to Jehovah; that is to say, to fill the office of Executive unto God in the outworking of His purpose. God then condescended to call others from among men to participate with the Lord Jesus Christ in that work; that is to say, to have fellowship or partnership with him therein. God plainly defines the duties of such while on earth. Likewise he has revealed some of the duties that will devolve upon these “called” ones m heaven. For example:
The apostle Peter declared that the members of the “body of Christ” are called to follow in the footsteps of Jesus as He left us the example; that is to say, they must take the same course of action that Jesus took on earth.—See 1 Peter 2: 21.
Concerning himself the apostle Paul wrote as a follower of Christ Jesus: “I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ. That I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his death; if by any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the dead.” (Phil. 3: 8,10, 11) Furthermore, the apostle John wrote: “That which we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us: and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin.”—1 John 1: 3, 7.
To walk means to pursue a certain course of action; it means to deport oneself in a certain way. To walk as Jesus walked means, then, that the footstep follower on earth must deport himself as Jesus did and must follow Jesus as his companion by doing the same things that Jesus did. There is no evidence that Jesus wore a
long, sanctimonious face and a long clerical coat, or that he stood on the platform and indulged in silent prayer to be seen of men for admiration. On the contrary, he rebuked those very things that were so marked in the clergy of his day. (See Matthew 6:5.) There is no evidence that Jesus taught his disciples to develop a beautiful and sweet character so that all who might come in touch with them would be able to see how “sweet” they were. On the contrary, the reeord shows he spoke the truth with boldness and plainness, and that his disciples did likewise, and that the religious clergy and courts took note of the boldness of his disciples and thereby perceived that they had walked with Jesus as Teacher.—Acts 4:13.
The apostle Paul was a faithful witness for the Lord God. He delighted to have partnership in the sufferings of Christ Jesus. Did such sufferings result to him because of assumed piety and by reason of wearing a long and solemn faee and long garb and speaking with a sanctimonious voice? No; he suffered not for that, because he did not indulge in such. He suffered by reason of being a bold, fearless and faithful witness to the truth. He was elothed with a special commission as an ambassador for Christ to the Gentiles. That, however, did not swell his head He remembered at all times that he was a servant of God and of Jesus Christ. He did not think it beneath his dignity to go from nouse to house to preach the gospel Speaking to the elder brethren of the congregation of Ephesus who were overseers, Paul said: “I kept back nothing that was profitable unto you, but have shewed you, and have taught you publicly, and from house to house, testifying both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks.” (Acts 20:20,21) Not only did he go from house to house to testify to the truth, but he made no distinctions of men He did not insist on having his territory among the rich or the influential. It was rather out of place according to the customs of men for Jews to call upon Greeks or Gentiles, yet the apostle called on both Jew and Greek, telling them of God and his kingdom.
What Paul, the special apostle of Jesus Christ, did, surely we ean do as fellow disciples. If he found it pleasing to the Lord and profitable to the cause in giving a witness to go from house to house, then surely his example is such as other Christians may follow. (1 Cor. 11:1) Furthermore, Jesus, the Son of the great Eternal God, journeyed from house to house and place to place, speaking to the poor and teaching the outcast ones concerning the truth. What Jesus Christ the great Redeemer and Head of the church did, surely every member of the body should delight to do. This was His work. This was the work that the apostle Paul had partnership in, and such is the work that other footstep followers must take part in that they may have partnership (fellowship) with Christ Jesus before the Kingdom witness is finished and the battle of Armageddon is fought to the unfading glory of Jehovah God.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
■FIGHTING AGAINST GOD,’ FOOLISHLY (TEXAS)
“After receiving the magazine article ‘Changed Convictions Regarding Flag-Saluting” I went to the chief of police (Laredo) to deliver him several copies. He was not in the office, but the man in charge said he was at the mayor’s office. Upon my entering the mayor’s office he had other business; so I said that I would wait, as I wanted to talk to him and the chief of police together. When I did get to speak, I said that the licensing and taxing of Jehovah’s witnesses is still under discussion, and handed them the article and The Watchtower cont lining ‘Dissenters for Righteousness’. The mayor said, ‘I don’t give a d------ about the rulings of the Supreme Court;
they are not running the city of Laredo. We have this little kingdom down here and we are going to run it to suit ourselves.’ The police chief spoke up and said, ‘I don’t have no use for your religion, as the Bible contradicts itself in five thousand places. As to you and your workers, we are going to start clamping down and arrest you every time we get a complaint on trespassing. I don’t care who mobs you ; we are not coming to your defense, as you people are traitors to the American flag.’ I replied that our work is of the highest spiritual benefit to the American people in building the people up in faith, courage and morality. The mayor went on to say: ‘If you seek to cause trouble on the streets or cause a gathering and obstruct pedestrians on sidewalks, we are going to fine you; or if you go to a house and make somebody hear your records and they put in a complaint we are going to jail you for trespassing.’ ‘Suppose I go to a house and the person permits me to play the phonograph and they put in a complaint and I am arrested?’ The third man speaks up: ‘Well, when you go to a house and tell the people you have a propaganda record, that way they will know what you have.’ I mentioned that, while in magazine work a while back, a man comes up to me and seeks a controversy and, after I turn to walk, tears off my shirt. On another occasion a man of the same type asks information concerning the magazine, and when I tell him he says. ‘You are one of those Jehovah b----- 1’ and I go to call the police to arrest him and
he hikes out. ‘What kind of offense would you call that?’ I asked the mayor. The mayor says, “Well, he feels like all the rest of us; he wants to get rid of you.’ The mayor now steps out of the office and I tell the chief: ‘Last year I was arrested while in magazine work, brought to the station, asked a number of questions Some of the boys go and ask the mayor what to do with me. The mayor says if I would leave town I could go. I told him I could not do that, but would take the consequences. So they locked me up, and let me go the next day.’ ”
CALLING ON FIRMS (BIRMINGHAM, ENG.)
“In following up the subscription reference slips recently sent to us via the servant of companies, we found one slip bearing the name of a firm, but with no individual shown on it. In making the call I passed through the yard and happened to eatch sight of a notice on the wall near a door. The notice read: ‘Carters and lorry-drivers will please note that swearing under this window is strictly forbidden.’ I decided that this might prove useful in conversation with the principal of the firm if I could get
in. After questioning various ones I was shown into a very nice reception room. One of the two partners in the firm came in. I was well received, and one of the firm’s (lady) secretaries was deputed to deal with the matter. A cheque was made out to the Society for the renewal of the subscription, and then I was able to conduct a very nice model study on the spot with this lady, who expressed herself as very interested. She said the chapel she attended had ‘no soul’ in it. I explained where she could find a very live soul, and that when The Theocracy was fully established there would be no longer need for notices such as that displayed on the wall outside. This lady said she thought the Roman Catholic Hierarchy to be thoroughly corrupt. She readily gave me her name and address for a model study at home. In another instance the principal of the firm received me very kindly and a similar cheque was made out. This gentleman expressed abhorrence at the Roman Catholic Hierarchy, and concern at its activities. I explained that the Society was doing more than any other organization in this country for freedom of speech and liberty of action, and is worthy of their good-will. Two pioneer girls, who worked in the district for about a year, originally got in to these firms and into the ‘sanctums of the mighty1, surely like ‘locusts’ (Joel 2:9), and our own work has been mostly following them up.”
AMONG THE •‘SHEEP" IN MINNESOTA
“A publisher placed the book Children with a lady and returned a month later. The woman had just returned from a trip to St. Louis, Mo., having taken her boy to a specialist there. The publisher told her of our big Assembly held there last summer and endeavored to arrange a back-call to play one of the lectures. Lady: ‘Did you say you had a big convention in St. Louis last summer?’ ‘Yes’ ‘How long did it last?’ ‘Five days.’ Lady: ‘Why, the woman I roomed with told me about a kind of religious convention held there last summer. I stayed with a Mrs. N-----out near the Arena. She told me she had arranged
to take in some of the conventioners. Then everyone told her not to, that they were just terrible people, that all they’d do is just sit around talking their religion to her, etc. But she took them in anyway, and, why, they were the finest people she would ever want to see. She said she'd just like a chance to take those people in again ’ The lady was impressed by what she heard and immediately contributed for the Assembly Report and set a date to hear the lecture. ... At one home the mother was able to take Children with a quarter the 12-year-old boy had earned. They invited the publisher back to play a lecture within a few days, and a week after that a Children study was started. On arriving for the study the publisher saw lying on the table their Bible, Children (covered with brown paper), and a sheet of paper all written out. On picking up the paper she found the answer to the first set of Children study course questions. The boy and the 10-year-old girl had written them out. Last night at the second study the publisher was presented with the answers to the second set of questions. The parents as well as the children are interested in the Bible study, and now they have just learned that the man’s sister has been studying the Bible, too, and has become a witness for Jehovah.”
MS
THE WATCHTOWER
Published Semimonthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street -	- Brooklyn, N.Y., U.S.A.
Officers
N, H Knorr, President W E Van Amburgh. Secretary
“And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” - Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God and is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all other things, and is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, as the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah;
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man willfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life;
THAT THE LOGOS was made human as the man Jesus and suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for obedient ones of mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every other creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority;
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is a Theocracy called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the Kingdom before all who will hear;
THAT THE OLD WORLD ended in A. D. 1914, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of the “new earth” of the New World;
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ, which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the complete establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the Kingdom the people of good-will that survive Armageddon shall carry out the divine mandate to “fill the earth” with a righteous race.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses and all people of good-will. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and the Society supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all religion, parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of the Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $100; all other countries, $1.50, American currency: Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa. 6s. American remit tances should be made by Postal or Express Money Order or by Bank Draft, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Orricsa
British ____________________34 Craven Terrace. London. W 2. England
Australasian _________7 Beresford Road, Strathfield. N. S W , Australia
South African .................. Boston	House, Cape Town, South Africa
Indian ..........  —.............    40	Colaba Road, Bombay 5, India
Please address the Society In every case.
Translations of this journal appear in several languages.
ALL SINCERE STUDENTS OF THE BIBLE wbo by rea’on of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price mar have The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting il We are plad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations.
Notice to Subscribers- Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Chance of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires.
Printed In the United States of America Entered as second-cliMS matter at the post office at Brooklyn, N. T , under the Act of March 3, 1379
“VICTORY SONG" TESTIMONY PERIOD
December is the month that brings to a close the calendar year of the old world It is with joy that the servants of Jehovah sing the Victory Song after a long battle, but they look forward to further battles and victories The taithtul do say with gladness of heart that they have remained “blameless in the day of our Lord” and will continue to do so, by the Lord’s grace During the “Victory Song” Testimony Period the song of the new world will be sung. To do this the publishers of The Theocracy will offer to the people the publication The New World and the booklet Peace— Can It Last? on a contribution of 25c If you wish to join m the “Victory Song” Testimony Period during the month of December, make arrangements now with your local company servant. If you are not associated with a company, write direct to the Society for further information.
1943 YEARBOOK OF JEHOVAH'S WITNESSES
The year 1942 has been a most eventful and thrilling year in the experiences and activities of Jehovah's witnesses. You may now get a world view of such exploits and their lasting benefit to men of good-will by reading the annual report as prepared by the president of the Watchtower Society. This is published in the 1943 Yearbook of Jehovah’s witnesses, now off the press. Also contained therein are the yeartext for 1943 and explanatory comment thereon, together with a stirring text and comment for each day of the year.
As to the courage, strength, joy and vision to be derived therefrom, and also as to the need and usefulness of such throughout the year by Christians, there is hardly any need of comment Due to the limited edition a"contribution of 50c is asked per copy of the 1943 Yearbook of Jehovah's witnesses. Companies should combine individual orders and forward same to us with remittance, to expedite the handling thereof and to make for postage savings
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of January 17: “Fighter for the New World” (Part 5), 51 1-15 inclusive, The Watchtower December 15, 1942.
Week of January 24: “Fighter for the New World” (Part 5), V 16-29 inclusive, The Watchtower December 15, 1942
Week of January 31: “Fighter for the New World” (Part 5), 30-44 inclusive, The Watchtower December 15, 1942.
CALENDAR, 1943
The yeartext for 1943 is “More than conguerors through him that loved us”. (Romans 8:37) All Christians bent on keeping integrity toward God will be strengthened by having that text daily-before them during 1943. The Watchtower calendar, now released, will enable you to do that. The theme picture in artistic colorwork under the yeartext brings into sharp relief the situat.on facing-humankind and in which faithful Christians must overcome (Continued on page 382)
ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH'S KINGDOM
Vol. LXIII
December 15, 1942
No. 24
FIGHTER FOR THE NEW WORLD
PART 5
"Jesus answered, My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom were of this uorld, then nould my servants fight.”—John 18:36.
"JEHOVAH'S Fighter for the new world of right-| eousness is his beloved Son, who has been equipped J for the fight with all power in heaven and in earth. This makes the righteous new world a sure thing. Since A. D. 1914 we have been in the period the Scriptures call “the day of Jehovah''. Therefore we know that the fight is near, because it is the “battle of that great day of God Almighty'’ and the demon forces are exercising an irresistible power upon the nations to gather them to the condition that provokes the fight. (Rev. 16:14-16) When on earth Jehovah's Son did not resist being killed by his religious enemies and would not permit his followers to fight with carnal weapons in his defense, because his Government was and is no part of this world, which is Satan's organization. Now that the “day of Jehovah” has begun, his Son has been enthroned as King and the time is at hand for the establishment of the world of righteousness to which his kingdom belongs. Therefore in the coining battle of Armageddon Jehovah's royal Son will this time fight against the old world and with violence such as all creation has never yet witnessed. (Matt. 24: 21, 22) The old world and all organizations and men who are a part of it shall be destroyed for ever.
- The new world of righteousness shall be estab-liUied so firmly that it can never be moved. Those followers of the new world's King who finished their earthly course faithful unto death and who have been resurrected to life in the spirit to “reign with him" shall share in the Armageddon fight with the Warrior-King. (Rev. 19:11-16) His remnant of faithful followers yet on earth and their earthly companions will witness the fight for the new world, but will not take part in it with violence to the enemies. They are hated of all nations for his name's sake, but as they faithfully proclaim God’s kingdom
2	(a) Who is Jehovah’s fighter for the new world, and due to the presence of what daj do we know that the fight therefor is near13 ibi Win did he not put up any fighting resistance against being killed when on earth and what will be bis course with respect to the battle of Armageddon’
j What part Id the Armageddon fight will be had by Christs faithful footstep followers who have finished their earthly course and bj the remnant jet od earth?
the divine instruction is given them: ‘Tear not ye, neither be dismayed by reason of this great multitude; for the battle is not yours, but God’s. Ye shall not need to fight in this battle: set yourselves, stand ye still, and see the salvation of Jehovah with you." (2 Chron. 20:15,17, Am. Rei. T’er.) The fight for the new world will be won without man’s help.— Ex. 14: 13,14.
3	Jehovah requires willing obedience, self-sacrificing devotion, and faithfulness with joyfulness on the part of all who will have his protection dunmr Armageddon and enter into life on earth under the New M orld conditions. Besides the remnant of Christ's body of followers, there is an unnumbered multitude of persons of good-will now manifesting themselves that will survive with the remnant through earth’s greatest tribulation. These v ere foreshadowed by Noah's family that passed with him alive through the destruction of the “world that then was’’, “the world of the ungodly.” (2 Pet. 2: 5: 3: 5, 6; Gen. S: 15-22) These also prove their goodwill toward Jehovah God and his kingdom by accepting the Kingdom message at the hands of His witnesses. Then they forsake this “present evil world ’ and consecrate their lives to him and the service of his Righteous Government for evermore.
‘ This blessed multitude will never go to heaven, but will inhabit the earth in peace and happiness, being regenerated unto human perfection. Continuing faithful and obedient to the heavenly Kingdom, they shall never die. (John 8: 51; 11: 26) God's mandate to the family of Noah after the Flood, that they should multiply and fill the cleansed earth, foreshadowed that this favored multitude will after Armageddon receive a like divine mandate. In joyful obedience thereto they will intermarry, and bring forth children in righteousness, and thereby fill the face of the earth with righteous inhabitants to God's
3	What does Jehovah require of those he preserve*; during Armageddon, and what does the Flood picture of >oah’s day sho^ an tu anj surviving Armageddon besides the remnant’
4	What does that prophetic Mood picture further show as to the destinj of that blessed multitude after Armageddon’
371
THE WATCHTOWER,
372
honor. Paradise shall glorifv the earth.—Gen. 9: 1, 7; Matt. 24:37.	'
5	The formation of this multitude of companions of Christ's remnant and their joyous acclamations to Jehovah God on his heavenly throne and to his Beloved One, the Lamb slain in behalf of the new world, is pictured and expressed at Revelation 7: 9-12 in symbolic speech. After the vision of the triumphant members of the body of Christ, the beholder of the visions says: "After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands; and cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb. And all the angels stood round about the throne, and about the elders and the four beasts, and fell before the throne on their faces, and worshipped God. saying, Amen: Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honour, and power, and might, be unto our God for ever and ever. Amen.” The scene there reminds one of when Christ Jesus rode into Jerusalem, ‘‘the city of the great King,” and presented himself as Jehovah’s anointed King. Then multitudes of the people, including young children, but not the religious clergymen and the commercial men at the temple, hailed him with palms and with outbursts of praise and salvation and glory to Jehovah God. (John 12:12-16: Matt. 21: S-14) The joy and expressions of devotion on the part of those who will form the “great multitude” surviving Armageddon were also foreshadowed by the joyful welcome that Jophthah's daughter gave him on his homecoming from a successful campaign against the enemy Ammonites.
VOW OBLIGATIONS
6	As Jephthah returned home from defeating and driving out the invaders of the Theocratic nation of Israel, his heart must have been in harmony with the expression of the psalmist, who pictures Christ Jesus: “What shall I render unto Jehovah for all his benefits toward me? I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of Jehovah. I will pay my vows unto Jehovah, yea, in the presence of all his people.” (Ps. 116:12-14, Jm. Rev. Ver.) Before entering into the campaign for the free worship of Jehovah in the Theocratic land without interference and encroachments by the Ammonites Jephthah uttered a vow to the Lord God. He confessed that he could not of himself gain the victory over the
5	(a) How are the formation and acclamations of that multitude symbolical!*' shown in the book of Ke*elation9 (b) Of what does such hailing of the King remind one in the experiences of Jesus on earth and bow was it foreshadowed in Jephthuh's experience9
6	(a) What mwt have been Jephthab’s state of heart on returning home victorious from battle, and what tow was now due to be fulfilled9 (b) What position did the God-gnen Mctory assure to Jephthah in Israel, and whom today did be picture?
Brooklyn, N. Y.
demonized aggressors, but if Jehovah would deliver over the Ammonites to defeat before him, then he would offer as a burnt offering to Jehovah whatsoever first came forth from the house to meet him on arrival home. Jephthah was a mighty man of the land of Gilead east of the Jordan river, and his home was in the city of Mizpah, or “Watchtower", as the name means. The victory over the Ammonite^ assured him the place of visible "head” over all those of the Lord's typical Theocracy in Israel. That was the agreement between himself and the inhabitants of Gilead at the time he accepted the command of the war against the Ammonites. (Judg. 10: 18; 11: 8-111 Since the inspired statement at 1 Corinthians 10.11 leaves no doubt that these events were types or prophetic patterns, Jephthah was a prophetic figure. He pictured Jehovah’s chosen visible organization of spiritual Israelites today, and which organization or Society is Theocratic and under the headship of Christ Jesus, the Greater Jephthah. The part which the Watch Tower Society has played and plays in this connection is historically and Scripturally established. Let us note this further in the remaining part of the prophetic drama.
7	“And Jephthah came to Mizpeh [“Watchtower"] unto his house, and, behold, his daughter came out to meet him with timbrels and with dances; and she was his only child: beside her he had neither son nor daughter. And it came to pass, when he saw her, that he rent his clothes, and said, Alas, my daughter! thou hast brought me very low, and thou art one of them that trouble me; for I have opened my mouth unto the Lord, and I cannot go back.” (Judg. 11:34,35) Her being his only child and daughter was the troublesome point in the matter. For him to devote her to Jehovah in fulfillment of the vow would mean that his family and his name would be without anyone to carry them on in God's typical Theocracy and hence both family and name would perish.
8	The like is true at present. The remnant of the Theocratic organization under Christ Jesus the Head declare this Scriptural fact: That Jehovah's Theocratic Government under Christ the King is limited to just 144,000 members under him, and that the remnant are the last members thereof on earth and their number is decreasing as the members thereof finish each one in due time his course in the flesh “faithful unto death”. (Rev. 7:4-8; 14:1,3) Having fought a good fight and finished their course and kept the faith unto the end, such ones are at death given an instantaneous resurrection and changed to life in the spirit and see their glorious heavenly Head as he is and are made like him.
7	. What was Jephthah’s exclamation at meeting bls daughter, and what was the troublesome point in the matter9
8	How is the like situation true today with respect to continuing the existence of the spiritual company of Christians od earth9
December 13,1942
THE WATCHTOWER.
(2 Tim. 4: 7, 8; 1 Cor. 15: 50-54; 1 John 3: 2) Hence the remaining ones of the remnant are no more carrying on their witness work and Bible educational campaign in behalf of a spiritual company with a heavenly destiny. Those who are now being led to the Lord as a result of his “strange work’’ through the remnant are his “other sheep’’, who shall form the “great multitude” and abide on earth permanently under The Theocratic Government and perform the divine mandate.
" These “other sheep” are therefore not being brought into the fold to increase or to continue further on earth the number to be incorporated in The Theocratic Government, because the Lord does not call such "other sheep” to the high calling of the heavenly Kingdom. When, in the Lord's due time, the last ones of the remnant complete the Lord’s work for them among those companions or “other sheep', then the remnant will cease to exist and the “body of Christ" will be fully made up in the invisible heavens. Those then left on the earth as the visible representatives of the divine Theocracy under Christ will be those men whom the King-Father will “make princes in all the earth”, namely, the faithful men of old, including Jephthah himself, shortly to be raised from the dead in a ‘Tetter resurrection”. Hence, to use the words of John the Baptist in a relative comparison of numbers of the “other sheep” and the remnant, ‘the former must increase, but the latter must decrease.' (John 3:30) The thought of eventually parting bodily does not of itself give pleasure, for the companionship between the remnant and the “other sheep” is very pleasant and refreshing, like that between David and Jonathan. —2 Sam. 1:17-27.
10 Young's translation of Jephthah's words reads: "Alas, my daughter, thou hast caused me greatly to bend, and thou hast been among those troubling me; and I—I have opened my mouth unto Jehovah, and I am not able to turn back." Jephthah's daughter was in herself innocent in the matter. She had merely come forth first from her home in genuine celebration of Jehovah's vindication by victory over the Ammonites, which victory meant the preservation of the Theocratic organization and the worship of Jehovah among his covenant people. What righteous person who loves God would hold back from rejoicing thereat? Who could be blamed for it? A failure to thus rejoice would betray something wrong concerning the love and devotion for the Most High and his Theocracy. Certainly, then, Jephthah was not blaming his beloved child nor finding fault because she spontaneously and publicly expressed her jubila-
9 A« time goes on. bow do the numbers of the remnant and of the Lord * other sheep” compare, and how does the thought of finishing their companionship on earth affect them?
lu Wh\ was Jephthah's daughter not to be blamed for coming forth best, and hots, therefore, shall we read bia words speaking of her as among those troubling him?
tion at God's victory through him and took the lead in the celebrating. How, therefore, shall we read Jephthah's words? To this effect: That there are times when there is need to readjust conditions which bear upon one’s love for Jehovah and his Theocracy and also upon one's love for an earthly creature, and this readjusting does put a strain upon anyone devoted to Jehovah’s Theocratic service. Study of the following facts discloses this.
11	For many years the subject of the “great multitude" described in Revelation 7 has been a perplexing one, and it still troubles some professed Christians. It must be admitted that the Lord's “other sheep” are not in themselves troublemakers. Their consecration to the Lord, and their joyful and enthusiastic devotion to Him as displayed in their field activities for The Theocracy, are hugely appreciated by the spiritual remnant and all favoring The Theocracy. However, up till the year 1935 the question of the “great multitude” and their identity and destiny had all Christians guessing. Were they to be finally a spiritual company in heaven or remain human on the earth under the Kingdom ’ When would be the time of their appearing and being gathered? What should be their privileges of service in company with the remnant ? That is, were they to be witnesses for Jehovah, engaging in the house-to-house educational campaign, and could they serve over others as servants of organized companies? Were they also required to offer the same degree of faithfulness to Jehovah God and his Righteous Government as must the remnant, and could they partake of the memorial emblems at the Lord s supper?
12	These proper questions were a source of “trouble", debate and discussion, especially so from the quarter of the “evil servant" class. This unfaithful spiritual class justify their rebellious cour.-e against the Lord's Theocratic organization and its appointed work. They maintain that the “great multitude” are a spiritual company, spirit-begotten and not yet manifest, and that they are only partial!} faithful to God and hence get merely a secondary position in heaven as Levite servants of the wholly faithful “little flock”.
13	Jephthah’s words “among them troubling me" refer to this “evil servant” crowd who stand off independent from the Theocratic organization of the Society under Christ and who, the same as the religious clergy, cause trouble for God’s faithful remnant. Aside from these troublers, however, the fact
II Are the Lord's “other sheep” viewed as troublemakers, and prior to 1935 what questions concerning the “great multitude” and their identity, destiny and service had all Christians guessing’
12	Who especially make these questions a matter of trouble and debate, and why or because of what views’
13	Who. then, are meant by the words “them troubling me”, and what revelations of truth of the Lord in 1923. 1931, and 1932, prepared for clearing up the questions at issue?
374
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N.Y.
that there was to be a '‘great multitude" was foretold in Scripture, but just what to do with and abbut them needed clearing up. In 1923 the Lord at the temple revealed that the "sheep" who do good to his brethren and who are separated from the “goats" and gathered to the King's right hand are an earthly class that is being divided from the “goats" at present. (Matt. 25:31-46) Their present fellowship with the remnant in the witness work, however, was not understood. Years passed. In 1931 at the great international convention at Columbus, Ohio, the Lord revealed to his faithful remnant their “new name", to wit, “Jehovah's witnesses.” There he also disclosed this, to wit. that those whom the ‘man clothed in linen and with inkhorn by his side' marks in the forehead to be spared from execution at Armageddon by Jehovah's Executioner are an earthly class and identical with the “other sheep". (Ezek. 9: 4) In 1932 still more! Then the Lord opened the remnant’s understanding to see that Jonadab. who got into King Jehu's chariot and went with him to the slaughter of the religious demon-worshipers, also pictured the “other sheep” or persons of good-will. Hence these “other sheep” are called “Jonadabs". (2 Ki. 10: 15-23) But the full light was yet to come.
14	It was at Washington. I). C.. in 1935. at the convention the chief feature of which was the public address entitled “Government”. Then God graciously identified the “great multitude'’ as an earthly class, which shall be composed of the “other sheep", and that they are in large numbers already manifest in company with the remnant. The same degree of loyalty, obedience, devotion and faithfulness to Jehovah and his Righteous Government is required of this earthly class as of rhe remnant of the “little flock". Shortly thereafter, in August of 1935, the Watchtou er magazine published the explanation of the Scriptural facts at Revelation 7: 9-17.—See the book Iliches, published in 1936, and its chapter VIII, under the title “Great Multitude’’.
15	Next Jehovah unfolded another typical picture of the “other sheep” who shall form the “great multitude”. Long ago they had been foreshadowed by the Gibeonites, who peaceably came over onto the side of Israel’s typical Theocracy. Joshua spared them from execution and made them wood choppers and drawers of water for the worship of Jehovah at his sacred tabernacle. As to putting the antitypical Gibeonites to work alongside the remnant The Watchtower said, as of May 1, 1937, under the heading “Company Servant", the following: “Proclamation of the kingdom message is all-important
14 When thereafter was the “great multitude” identified and their requirements explained, and what did the revelation nhow as to such ’ 15 What people in Joshua's dealings with the Canaanites also pictured the “other sheep”, and what did The Watchtower publish in 1937 concerning the service positions of such “other sheep” in connection with the remnant’
now. It is the duty of the anointed to vote as to who shall be company servant; but ‘hewers of wood and drawers of water’ may serve. (Josh. 9:21-27: Deut. 16:12-15; 29:11) When there are none rLof the remnant] in the company capable of filling the places of company servants or service committees and there are Jonadabs who have the ability and zeal, let the Jonadabs be placed on the service committee and give them opportunity to serve. The work should not drag because some of the company have lack of zeal. The gospel must now be proclaimed.
—Matt. 24: 14.”
19	When the Greater Jephthah. Christ Jesus, the Head of the Theocratic organization, introduced its rule and operation among Jehovah’s witnesses in October, 193S, he emphasized anew God’s will as to the place, opportunities and obligations for the “other sheep", whom Jephthah’s daughter prefigured. Through his visible organization and its official publication The Watchtower he caused to be published as of December 15,193S, this: “The same rule of the Lord God requires likewise that all those who will compose the ‘great multitude’ (Rev. 7: 9-17) must believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, that he is the Savior of obedient men. that by his own precious blood he furnished the price for the purchase of men and all their rights as men, including the right to perfect life, and then they must prove that belief by consecrating themselves to do what God's Word requires and must set themselves to the task of faithfully performing the will of God as agreed upon. The Jonadabs must now have this information and follow it. They must learn that consecration and sanctification are required of each one who shall become a part of the great multitude and live on earth and carry into effect the divine mandate to multiply and fill the earth with a righteous people. . . . (Mark 10: 44, 45) While this text was addressed specifically to those whose hopes are heavenly, the same rule applies to those who get life on earth and shows that the ransom inures to the benefit, not of everyone, but to those who comply with the rules.”— Paragraphs 16 and 17.
” The Watchtower Society under Christ cannot go back on such words, because they are the truth of the Word of Jehovah. Later that same year (193S) of the revelation of the Theocratic organization, and on the occasion of the world-wide convention of 47 cities with Royal Albert Hall, London, England, as the key assembly place, the Greater Jephthah revealed that the divine mandate will be issued and go into force toward the “other sheep” of the “great
16	When was Theocratic rule put in operation among Jeboxabsj witnesses, and what did The Watchtower tbereatter publish concerning the Lord’s requirements upon the "great multitude” respecting the steps unto life and servce’
17	Whv cannot the Watchtower Society go back on such words, and what further was said at rhe 1938 Theocratic convention from London as to the “great multitude” and their privileges concerning marnage and the Lords service?
December 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
375
multitude-’ after the battle of Armageddon. Hence marriage now was no part of fulfilling the divine mandate and was inadvisable according to the Scriptures. This was in effect saying that the Lord's ‘ other sheep” who shall form the “great multitude” after Armageddon must now remain a “virgin” company in order that they might be wholly devoted, without earthly distraction, to the Lord’s business now in hand, which is to declare Jehovah’s name throughout all the earth before he fights and shows his power over Satan’s old world at Armageddon. (Ex. 9:16) The preaching of “this gospel of the kingdom", as commanded, was the work for this “other sheep” class as well as for the remnant, and not the building up of any earthly house or organization at present. (Matt. *24:14) The Lord will take care of that after Armageddon.
111 Here, then, in essence, was the expression of the vow of the Greater Jephthah concerning the “other sheep", and coining just when the Theocratic organization was installed on earth and the fight against totalitarian-religious encroachments began as an aftermath of the 193S Munich conference between the Nazi fuehrer and the British prime minister and his appeasement policy. If now Jehovah God would grant victory to his covenant people or remnant as against the totalitarian encroachments on worship and service of Jehovah, then whatsoever would first appear as the fruit of such victory in the way of an ingathering, even such would be wholly dedicated to the Lord's “strange work”, which is the work of his temple class. There would be no selfish exploitation of such “other sheep” by the remnant, such as the Roman Catholic Hierarchy make of the “Catholic population”.
SUBMISSION TO "‘HIGHER POWERS”
10 How the “other sheep” since 1938 responded to this was marvelously enacted in true life by Jeph-thah's daughter. “And she said unto him. My father, if thou hast opened thy mouth unto the Loro, do to me according to that which hath proceeded out of thy mouth ; forasmuch as the Lord hath taken vengeance for thee of thine enemies, even of the children of Ammon.” (Judg. 11: 36) Her father made his vow without consulting her, and properly so. Now out of his parental love for her he expressed grief at the separation it would mean. All this put a great test upon the girl. Would she rebel? or would she recognize the Theocratic rule, inasmuch as her father was the “head” of his household and God’s victory had confirmed him as “head and captain” over the typical Theocracy of Israel? Would she submit to the will of the Supreme Power and trust in Him who had
IS What. therefore, in effect, was the vow of the Greater Jephthah then facing the fight against totalitarian encroachments0
1’j In reply to Jephthah’s tender expression, what questions were put as a test upon his daughter to answer?
maneuvered this or permitted it to be so? What does her response show?
20	Her expression “my father” showed she did not think her father had been rash and arbitrary. He was the one that had the right to dispose of his unmarried child according to the rule of Jehovah s typical people, not, of course, to any wrong use. His Theocratic law, at Leviticus 19: 29, to fathers, reads: “Do not prostitute thy daughter, to cause her to be a whore; lest the land fall to whoredom, and the land become full of wickedness.” As to the Lord’s recognized rule concerning the control of the father over the daughter, note the action of Laban in substituting his older daughter Leah for Rachel to be the wife of Jacob for his seven years of service. (Gen. 29:16-30) Note also King Saul’s offer of his eldest daughter in marriage to whosoever would fight and kill the Philistine giant Goliath. (1 Sam. 17: 25; IS: 17) Note also faithful Caleb's offer of his daughter Achsah to whoever first smote the Canaanite city of Kirjath-sepher and conquered God's enemies there. (Josh. 15:16,17; Judg. 1:1'2,13) Further showing the father’s guiding control over his daughter, Numbers 30: 16 refers to a girl's vows made without her father’s approval and says: “These are the statutes which the Lord commanded Mo-ws between a man and his wife; between the father and his daughter, being yet in her youth in her father’s house.” This same authority resides in the Greater Jephthah, Christ Jesus, who becomes “the Everlasting Father” to the subjects of his Kingdom. (Isa. 9:6) The “other sheep” must receive life through him as their King-Father, and be regenerated. (Matt. 19: 28) He is God's appointed Head of The Theocracy, and these “other sheep” must put themselves under the Theocratic organization, even as Jephthah’s daughter did.
21	The Authorized Version Bible inserts the word “if” into her speech, but the American Revised Version and the Young's translation read: "My father, thou hast opened thy mouth unto Jehovah; do unto me according to that which hath proceeded out of thy mouth, forasmuch as Jehovah hath taken vengeance for thee on thine enemies, even on the children of Ammon.” Hereby she recognized the Theocratic arrangement as in force and also the binding power of vows under that arrangement, as stated at Numbers 30: 2: “If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an oath to bind his soul with a bond; he shall not break his word, he shall do according to all that proceedeth out of his mouth.” Jephthah’s daughter would not rob God by causing anything to be held back that was promised him.
20 (a) What did her use of the words ‘'my father" show, and what was God’s rule concerning a father’s control over his dauchtor* (b) Why doe« like authority reside in Christ Jesus respecting his "other sheep’’ ’
21 , What stand does the reply of Jephthah’s daughter show she took toward the arrangement Id force in Israel and toward tows unto God*
376
SEe WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
She stood for faithfulness to vows, no matter how it affected her, all because she looked up to Jehovah as the Supreme Power and recognized his Theocracy and its rules.
22	“When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it; for he hath no pleasure in fools: pay that which thou hast vowed. Better is it that thou should-est not vow, than that thou shouldest vow and not pay. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin; neither say thou before the angel that it was an error: wherefore should God be angry at thy voice, and destroy the work of thine hands ?” Those words of Ecclesiastes 5: 4-6 were written long after Jephthah’s daughter, but she believed in the faithful line of action they expressed. Her father’s vow which unexpectedly took hold on her could not harm her and her relationship to the Theocracy, because the vow was made to Jehovah. Her spirit of submission with devotion and trust in God was as well expressed in the following quotation: “The entire organization of Jehovah is honorable and blessed, and happy is the creature that has any place therein. Some have selfishly craved to be in heaven and help run the universe. Others have said: ‘Whatever my position given me by the Lord, I shall be glad.’ The latter is the proper attitude. The picture here [at Revelation 7: 9-12, quoted above] shows the host of angels and the saints all in full accord, and likewise the great multitude [the class pictured by Jephthah’s daughter] in full accord with them, and all together singing praises to the name of Jehovah.”—From The Watchtower August 15. 1935, V 4.
23	The Greater Jephthah. Christ Jesus, while yet on earth gave his word as to the disposal of the “other sheep” that Jehovah would give him. (John 10: 16; Matt. 25:3'2-40,46) Also after his ascension to heaven, this mighty Warrior for the new world gave to the apostle John the Revelation concerning things to come, including the disposing of the “great multitude". But all such was not understood until the time for the modern reproduction of the Jephthah drama. Particularly since the revealment of the Jonadab picture in 1932, and still more so since 1935, when the “great multitude" mystery was solved, Christ Jesus has caused the understanding of the prophetic dramas and pictures to be made clear and set forth in the Watch Tower publications. Those gathered in as “other sheep” read and study those things which have “proceeded out of the mouth” of the Greater Jephthah through his visible organization. Such “sheep” in the spirit of their consecration to God say, “Thy will be done,” and are thoroughly in
22 What warning concerning vows as Mated in Ecclesiastes 5 did Jephthah's daughter believe and why did <he not need to fear sub-imttiHff to the terms of her father's tow as affecting her and her position? 23 <a) When did the Greater Jephthah give his word as to the disposal of the “other sheep” of the “great multitude’, but when was all such first understood’ (b) On coming to an understanding thereof, what spirit and attitude do those “other sheep” show’
harmony with all such prophetic pictures showing their part. They rejoice at God's gracious provision for them and are willing that whatever was pictured in miniature should be enacted completely toward themselves.
24	Jephthah’s daughter saw her father ‘put his life in his hands’ for the vindication of Jehovah's name, and was her life any more precious? The “other sheep ' of today have witnessed such endangering of the life and property of those of the Watch Tower organization under Christ Jesus the Head, just to keep God’s commandments and have part in vindicating His name. The “other sheep” have seen Jehovah giving victory over the religious-totalitarian "Ammonites”, and have observed the work by his witnesses who keep on going under his protection and preservation, outsmarting and outmaneuvenng the enemies of liberty and free worship. Like Jephthah’s only child these “other sheep” cannot refrain from acting as companions and falling right in step with the program of activities against the treacherous “Ammonites”. “Let them shout for joy, and be glad, that favor my righteous cause: yea, let them say continually, Jehovah be magnified, who hath pleasure in the prosperity of his servant.” (Ps. 35:27, .In! Rev. Fer.) “The humble [meek] shall see this, and be glad: and your heart shall live that seek God.' —Ps. 69:32, margin.
25	The “other sheep” imitate the Greater Jephthah “as dear children”. (Eph. 5: 1,2) They echo him in the solemn declaration that it is worth anything and everything to have God’s name victoriously upheld in his "strange work” against the aggressive totalitarian Ammonites. The prophetic dramas of old forecast the part the Lord's "other sheep" would play toward vindicating God’s name. Hence Christ Jesus, who always does his Father's will, vows to see to it that the prophetic pictures shall be faithfully fulfilled in all details concerning his “other sheep He cannot take into consideration whether individual persons of good-will may or may not like what the prophetic dramas show is their part to plax in God’s service. However, those of like mind \\ ith Jephthah’s daughter see that the vindication of the name of the Most High by his Theocratic organization under Christ Jesus is the thing of supreme importance. The disposal that is made of themselves and the requirements placed upon them are only secondary and are even then a privilege to perform. The cost is worth it to see divine vengeance dealt to the totalitarian-religious crowd and their idol, “the abomination of desolation,” or religious “new order”.—Ps. 92: 11.
24	What risk did Jephthah's daughter witness him take and what course do the “other sheep' «ee (hose under the Greater JepLttub take, and how do the> themselves then act'*
25	What does the Greater Jephthah xow to do as to the f. Hillinc of the prophetic pictures, and how do the “other ■Jieep” imitne him n* to the disposal of themselves for the sake of the vindication of God name
December 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
377
MOURNING DISPOSED OF
2C Jephthah's vow had. specified no definite time concerning exactly when he must offer up his symbolical “burnt offering”. (Judg. 11:30,31) An instantaneous offering thereof immediately after the victim's appearance at Jephthah's homecoming had not been promised. Reasonably there must be a preparatory period for the human victim, as in the case of the boy Samuel. His mother Hannah vowed to devote her first man child to God if he granted her motherhood, but she did not turn her boy Samuel over to the tabernacle and its priests and Levites as soon as the babe was born. Properly she waited “until she weaned him. And when she had weaned him, she took him up with her" and turned him over to the high priest, to keep her vow. (1 Sam. 1:11,19-28) Likewise in the case of Jephthah’s marriageable daughter. “And she said unto her father, Let this thing be done for me: let me alone two months, that I may go up and down upon the mountains, and bewail my virginity, 1 and my fellows [my companions (Am. Rev. Per.)].” (Judg. 11:37) That is, Do not yet for two months turn me over to the tabernacle at Shiloh, and God's future service for me there.—Judg. 18: 31.
27 The girl asked nothing contrary to her obligations to the Theocratic rule, nor to provide a loophole to escape paying to Jehovah that which is due and owing to him. She designated two months’ grace, evidently one month as for her father, because his name and the extension of his family would be cut off in the sacrifice of her; and the other month as for herself, because she would be denied motherhood and would die childless with no one to carry forward a family from her. The request of such stay of time was reasonable, when taking into consideration her great-grandfather's case, Jacob's: “The Egyptians mourned for him threescore and ten [70] days.” (Gen. 50:3) In the case of Moses’ brother Aaron, “they mourned for Aaron thirty days, even all the house of Israel.” (Num. 20:29) In the case of Moses, “the children of Israel wept for Moses in the plains of Moab thirty days: so the days of weeping and mourning for Moses were ended.” (Deut. 34: S) In view of the dying out of her father's house and lineage by reason of fulfilling his vow upon her, Jephthah’s daughter asked for just two moons, or about 59 days, to do what was fitting. Compare this with how the Israelites wept at the seeming danger that one of the twelve tribes, Benjamin, might possibly be cut off by childlessness and die out: “And the people came to the house of God, and abode there till even before God, and lifted up their voices, and
26	Was an immediate offering up of Jepbtbab’s daughter on the ppot required or specified, and in view thereof what request did she make of him?
27	Why did Jephthah's daughter ask that the months of mourning be two and wb\ was this reasonable, in view of the mourning over Jacob and Aaron and Moses and the tribe of Benjamin’
wept sore; and said, 0 Lord God of Israel, why is this come to pass in Israel, that there should be to day one tribe lacking in Israel?" “And they said, There must be an inheritance for them that be escaped of Benjamin, that a tribe be not destroyed out of Israel.”—Judg. 21: 2,3,17.
25 In Jephthah’s daughter the Roman Catholic “buck nuns” and female nuns find no example or precedent for their parading around in public in gloomy black to arouse sympathy and superstitious awe in beholders. She had the spirit of Jesus, who said: “Moreover, when ye fast, be not, as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance: for they disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward. But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy face; that thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father which is in secret: and thy Father, which seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly.” (Matt. 6; 16-1S) Jephthah's daughter did not propose to hang around the home and bewail and mourn there to be seen of men and to depress the lives of others thereabout. That would cause them to fix their minds and attention more on her and her case than on the vindication of God's name by his vengeance expressed through her father upon the devilworshipers. She would not divert the attention of God’s covenant people away from the Creator down to the creature, herself. It was a time for Israel to rejoice, and never would she give it a sour note by her presence and appearance of mourning.—Contrast Zechariah 7: 3 and 8: 19.
25 The request to “go up and down upon the mountains” bewailing her virginity calls to attention that her homeland, the territory of Gilead, was very mountainous. Hence it was as a whole called “mount Gilead". (Gen. 31:21.23,25) The “high places” were accustomed places to weep, in solitude, as noted, foi example, in Isaiah 15:2: “He is gone up to Ba.pth, and to Dibon, the high places, to weep.” In the isolated mountains Jehovah God, who sees in secret, could discern her self-effacing course, and he would reward her openly; which He did. She would bewail her case before, and not after, entering into the Lord's exclusive service at his tabernacle at Shiloh. Her mourning being then for ever accomplished by the two months of roaming on the mountains of Gilead, she would ever thereafter serve the Lord with gladness at his holy house. Is it not so today? The Lord's “other sheep” do not intrude any note of personal sorrowfulness upon the company of Jehovah’s witnesses to mar their rejoicing at His acts
2S (a) How did the request of Jephthah’s daughter contrast with the public sbowj manner of religious nuns but harmonize with Jesus' words concerning self-denial’ <L»> XVby did she desire to mourn in isolation away from home’
29	Why were the mountains a suitable place for mourning before ber entry into service at the tabernacle, and bow lg tbit picture of mourning fulfilled in the case of the “other sheep’’ today •
378
THE WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
of vindication by his Theocracy during the “strange work". Only in secret, for a time, do they inourn to the Lord over any sacrifices that are made whereby the reproach of the enemy comes upon them. Thus they get it over with, so that thereafter they ever serve Jehovah joyfully in union with his temple company. They rejoice that they are “counted worthy to suffer shame for his name”.—Acts 5:41.
30	The faith and devotion of Jephthah and his daughter to the Theocratic rule over Israel can be appreciated. She being his only child, her virginity being made perpetual cut off her father’s name as well as her own opportunity for marriage. This proves that her share in the vindication of God’s name which followed the vow of her father was at real personal cost, a denial that touched her sore, even as it did her parent. It was a reproach to be unmarried and childless in Israel. It was like being a fruit tree that was barren of fruitage and hence cut down as unnecessary expense, especially as fruit trees were taxed in the orient by the government. (Luke 13: 6-9; Jer. 17: 7. 8) Jephthah was by faithfulness to his vow rendered as childless, and his daughter must now remain virgin, and so childless. This in God's typical Theocracy was really something to lament and bewail.
31	This dramatic situation shows that the Lord’s “other sheep" must count the cost and be thoroughly tested to prove their love and agreeableness to forego all for Jehovah and the vindication of his name by his glorious Government. They must choose to become the companions of the faithful remnant of Christ’s body, who bear the reproaches such as came upon the Head Christ Jesus and also upon his Father, Jehovah, the great Creator of The Theocracy. Their sorrow, if any at all, for bearing such reproaches, they take out to the mountains under the vision of Him whose eyes “run to and fro through the earth’’. When before and in the company of Jehovah's witnesses they share the rejoicing in the triumphs of his truth and “strange work” over the constant encroachments by the demonized “Ammonites” in all nations. They get the sorrowing over with once and for all, and then rejoice henceforth in Jehovah and his concpiests by The Theocracy. "For the Lamb, which is in the midst of the throne, shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters: and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes."—Rev. 7:17.
32	The “fellows”, or “companions”, that went with Jephthah’s daughter to the lonely mountains would be virgins like herself, with no family responsibili-
30	On the points of name and offspring, how can the faith and devotion of Jephthah and his daughter to Theocratic rule be appreciated ’
31	In ix hat respects does this situation show the Lord's ’other sheep” must count the cost and be tested, and how far do they continue any sorrow mg •
32	Who xxere pictured by the ‘'fellows” of Jephthah’s daughter, and x\hat does her arranging for these to join her in the mourning mean to say for this time?
ties. These companions volunteered to share reproach with her and to bewail with her. All these virgins together picture the Lord’s “other sheep” who shall form the “great multitude”. This means to say that the “other sheep” do not remain alone in this state of complete devotion to the Lord, but they declare God’s requirements for life in the new world to others. The}’' help others thereby to become “companions” of themselves and of Jehovah's remnant and thus to share in suffering those reproaches that come on all who uphold the banner of The Theocracy. They picture the same ones as the virgin associates of the bride of Christ, concerning which Psalm 45: 14,15 speaks: “The virgins her companions that follow her shall be brought unto thee. With gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought: they shall enter into the King’s palace.”
33	The spirit of Jehovah God was upon Jephthah. He was resolved to turn neither to the right hand nor to the left, but to be true to his vow. lie knew that to break his vow would be a reproach upon God’s name and a damaging example to God’s covenant people and would be to his own destruction as a covenant-breaker. (Rom. 1: 31, 32) “And he said. Go. And he sent her away for two months: and she went with her companions [(Am. Rev. Ver.) and she departed, she and her companions], and bewailed her virginity upon the mountains.” (Judg. 11’38) So doing, Jephthah deprived himself of her presence and companionship in the home. Home, he realized sanely, was not the place for mourning when Jehovah’s victory was the big event making all personal matters fade away and talcing away all creature sorrow. Personal costs for the sake of God’s vindication must not be noised about to the neighborhood nor paraded before others who should rejoice in Jehovah.—1 Thess. 5: 16.
34	There should be no confusion of thought at this point. Jephthah’s daughter bewailing her virginity and thereafter remaining childless is a distinctly different picture from that of Noah and his family when coming forth from the ark and hearing the divine mandate to fill the earth restated to them. The drama of Jephthah is a prophecy of events preceding the “battle of that great day of God Almighty”. Hence it must not be mistaken to picture that the “great multitude” after Armageddon will not have the divine mandate issued to them to be this time really carried out to a finality under the righteous overlord, The Theocracy. The requirement of virginity pictures that before Armageddon’s fight the Lord’s “other sheep” must serve Jehovah at his temple in singleness of devotion to him.
33	Why did Jephthah grant bls daughter's request, and at what cost to himself
34	Why does the childlessness of Jephthah’s daughter not contradict the fulfillment of the dnine mandate by the “great multitude’’. and what does the requirement of her virginity picture?
December 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER
379
INTEGRITY TOWARD THE VOW
35	“And it came to pass, at the end of two months, that she returned unto her father, who did with her according to his vow which he had vowed: and she knew no man. And it was a custom [(margin) an ordinance] in Israel.” (Judg. 11: 39) The girl showed up at the time appointed, as true to her word as her father was to his. What prompted her to keep promise and come back and hand herself up for her parent to perform his vow was her appreciation and devotion toward the Theocratic rule. It was a joyful task because it was coupled with God’s vindication and preservation of free worship in Israel by her father’s whipping the demonized invaders just two months previous. The weeping and bewailing were all now things definitely of the past and no more to be bothered with. From now on only the joyful service of God Jehovah for her! Equally so, the ’ other sheep" put sorrowing aside and yield themselves up to the Greater Jephthah, Christ Jesus, ‘ the Everlasting Father” and Head of The Theocratic Government. He is also the Head over all those who put themselves under that Theocratic Government for refuge and protection, to do unto them and to do for them all that his word of promise foretold as recorded in the Bible.
36	In fulfillment of the vow Jephthah's daughter must “surely be the Lord’s” and he must “offer [her] up for a burnt offering”. (Judg. 11: 30. 31) Hence he could not give her in marriage to another Israelite with a view to future descendants for himself. He must turn her over to Jehovah God at his tabernacle in Shiloh, across the Jordan river, where God’s priests and Levites under their high priest ministered to the Great Theocrat. The girl was a thing devoted exclusively to Jehovah, and no one could touch her for selfish purposes. As the daughter of the victorious “head and captain” in Gilead she might have been married off to the highest and best in the land. But now as a devoted creature she was reduced to the standing of the Gibeonites at the tabernacle, whom Joshua spared from death and dedicated for ever to the service at Jehovah's temple or tabernacle. Concerning the Gibeonites the princes of Israel who had given their word before God said: “We have sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel: now, therefore, we may not touch them. This we will do to them; we will even let them live; lest wrath be upon us, because of the oath which we sware unto them.” “And Joshua made them that day hewers of wood and drawers of water for the congregation, and for the altar of the Lord, even unto this day, in the place which he should choose.” (Josh.
35	Wbat prompted Jephthah’s daughter to return at the end of the two months, and bow do the “other sheep” now do likewise, with the .same attitude toward the future aemce’
3G (a) In wbat way must Jephthah's daughter henceforth “surely be the Lord's”’ (b) To the standing of wbat other devoted persons a: the tabernacle was she now reduced?
9:19,20,27) That devoted women also assembled at the tabernacle, at the door thereof, note Exodus 3S: S. At the battle of Shiloh those who violated any of those women w’ere destroved.—1 Sam. 2: 22, 34; 4:10-21.	’
33 At the tabernacle Jephthah’s daughter, as the companion of the Gibeonites, would be assigned duties of service suitable for her to do and of aid to the priests and Levites. The position of servant of the Most High God is made honorable by Christ Jesus, Jehovah’s Elect Servant. Titles, as “director", “manager,” and the like, have been dropped and find no place in Jehovah’s Theocratic organization, and all having special assignments of work are designated “servants”; which they are. (See Informant, July. 1936.) How appropriate, therefore, that Jephthah’s daughter as a servant at the temple should foreshadow the same class as the Gibeonites, namely, the “other sheep” who shall make up the "great multitude". “These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple: and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them.” (Rev. 7:14.15) Centuries after the Lord Jesus gave John tins vision he made it understandable to the John class, and thus the Greater Jephthah has given his word of promise or vow. Now since 193S especially he does to his “other sheep” everything “according to his vow which he had vowed”. Thus he pleases the great Theocrat who has made all this possible bygiving victory over totalitarian opposition in order that His “strange work” may yet go on. The Jona-dabs, or “other sheep”, now outnumber the remnant and are more and more taking their place in the service organization and in the field work. By God's grace, they are doing a good job!
35 Of Jephthah's daughter it is testified: “And she had not known man” (Eng. Rev. Ver.); “and she knew not a man.” (Young’s) This virgin state she maintained at the tabernacle, as her father s vow debarred her serving a husband and family. She served God without abstraction of family cares. Concerning such condition 1 Corinthians 7:32-35 reads: “(But I would have you without carefulness. He that is unmarried careth for the tilings that belong to the Lord, how he may please the Lord. . . . There is difference also between a wife and a virgin. The unmarried woman careth for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body and in
37 (a) Wbat position at the tabernacle did Jephthah’s daughter occupy, and bow is it shown whether thin is dishonorable in Jehovah's Theocratic organization or temple’' <b) How is the Greater Jephthah now fulfilling the word of ht< vow concerning the “other sbeep” who will form the "great multitude'?
38 (a) Wbat did Jephthah's daughter's virginity allow (or at the tabernacle and how w such condition in harmony with the apostles di^cusaton of virginity at 1 Corinthians 7 *' (bi What timely suggestion is there in this for these days before Armageddon?
380
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
spirit: but she that is married careth for the tilings of the world, how she may please her husband. Arid this I speak for your own profit; not that I may cast a snare upon you. but for that which is comely, and that ye may attend upon the Lord without distraction.” Although those words were not directly written to the ‘‘other sheep”, but to the “little flock” including the remnant, here is a timely suggestion for the "Jephthah's daughter” class, namely, to wait till after Armageddon and till Jehovah sends forth in unmistakable definiteness the divine mandate. Such as give heed can more fully attend upon the temple service in company with the remnant of Christ's body. (See the book Satiation, page 325, and Children, pages 312. 366.) The virginity of Jephthah's daughter at the tabernacle unerringly illustrates the undivided devotion of the “other sheep” class in serving God at his temple "day and night”. Theirs is the course of the apostle: “This one thing I do."—Phil. 3: 13.
PLEASANT COMPANIONSHIP
39 The record in the Authorized Version Bible reads: “And it was a custom in Israel, that the daughters of Israel went yearly [from year to year] to lament the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite four days in a year.” (Judg. 11:39.40) In the Hebrew text there is a soph pasuk or “end of the verse” sign after "custom in Israel", which suggests that here should come a period, rather than a comma and the inserting of a that in italics to tie it in with verse 40. Young'.- translation reads: “And it was a statute in Israel.' That is, it was an “ordinance" or a "statute ' in God s typical Theocracy to faithfully perform a vow to God. as Jephthah did in faith, regardless of what it required. Hence Jephthah's "burnt offering” was proper.
4C In the Theocratic organization today the vow to Jehovah God must be carried out. Christ Jesus, the Head of that organization, must perform and fulfill the things promised to God. which things are set forth for him in the prophetic dramas and also in the direct prophecies foretelling the “other sheep”. That is Jehovah’s will or “statute". His Greater Jephthah will not fail to carry it out in spiritual Israel. What took place, therefore, on “Children's Day” at the St. Louis Theocratic Assembly, August 10, 1941, after the public speech “Children of the King”, namely, the presentation of the book Children to the 15,000 children between 5 and 18 years of age who publicly declared their devotion to the Lord, was in absolute harmony with the action of the Greater Jephthah. That Jephthah’s action and
39. Id Jephthah’s time, what was it that “was a custom in Israel” ’ 40 (a> How must that “statute" be now earned out by the Greater Jephthah in spiritual Israel*’ (b) How does such action correspond with offering up a burnt offering, and what classification Is Jephthah gnen in Scripture due to his faithful act?
that of his great Counterpart correspond to a "‘burnt offering" note Psalm 69:30-32: “I will praise the name of God with a song, and will magnify him with thanksgiving. This also shall please the Lord better than an ox or bullock that hath horns and hoofs. The humble shall see this, and be glad: and your heart shall live that seek God.” Jephthah's faithful act marked him as a man of faith. Therefore he was given honorable mention as one of the ancient Jehovah’s witnesses, at Hebrews 11: 32, and shall shortly have a “better resurrection” to be made one of the “princes in all the earth”.—Heb. 11: 35; Ps. 45: 16.
41	The “daughters of Israel” who visited the devoted girl at the tabernacle yearly were virgins who appreciated her course and associated themselves with her to strengthen and encourage her. Not to lament and mourn did they go. Other translations of the record read: “The daughters of Israel went yearly to celebrate” (Am. Rev. Per.) ; “From time to time the daughters of Israel go to talk to the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite.” (Young's) The Hebrew expression here (tahnah) occurs in only one other place, at Judges 5:11: “In the places of drawing water, there shall they rehearse [tahnah] the righteous acts of the Lord.” These yearly meetings were not to glorify Jephthah’s daughter, but were service meetings, going over the reason for her being there in tabernacle service, namely, the vindication of God’s name by his Theocratic organization over which Jephthah was then the visible God-appointed “head”. Thus they strengthened her to faithfulness, what though she could not possibly be a mother in the royal ancestry of the promised Messiah or mother of the Messiah himself.
42	Jephthah's daughter had done her lamenting in the past, for two months before her entry into tabernacle service. Lamentation was behind her, and she was “forgetting those things which are behind"; hence she would join in no weep-fest with others over herself. She would not now lament as though Jehovah God had permitted a specially severe, unusual and discriminating fate to come upon her. Before her now the performance of God’s service faithfully and to the vindication of His name was the chief thing, and this must be done by maintaining her integrity under the vow for Theocratic victory. It is exactly the same with her modern counterpart today, the Lord’s “other sheep”.
43	Whether four days in succession, or one day at a time at intervals during the year, were spent with her at Shiloh is not indicated. For Gileadites this meant a back-and-forth trip across the Jordan river
41	How often and why did the "daughters of Israel” go to Jephthah a daughter at the tabernacle’
42	. Why is the textual rendering ‘yearly to lament the daughter of Jephthah” evidently a poor translation of Judges 11 40, judged by what she would do at the tabernacle’
43	What would the "four days in a year” mean for the “daughters of Israel” and Jephthah's daughter and how and to what end would he also have regular companiunbhip with her?
December 15,1942
^he WATCHTOWER,
381
each time to and from Shiloh, and that with no modern means of traveling to conventions. It was a complete period, four-square, well-balanced, and hence sufficient, and not interfering with her assigned duties at the tabernacle. It was without question a time of joyful get-together for her. And doubtless whenever Jephthah visited the tabernacle in the regular feasts, three times in a year as commanded by the Lord, and also on other special occasions when he consulted with the high priest on Theocratic matters or offered animal sacrifices, he would have the opportunity to see and associate with her. They would rejoice together in her special privilege of absolute devotion to the Holy One of Israel and his direct service. Jephthah would also strengthen her to continue therein with faithfulness and integrity and blamelessness.
44	The likeness thereof is beautifully kept today.
44 Hon h the likeness of «uch association and companionship beautifulk kept toda\ on earth and nhj may courage be bad concerning the tight jet ahead against demonisin'*
Though the separate destinies of each class are distinctly understood now, this has not split up the companionship of the spiritual, heaven-bound remnant yet on earth and their devoted companions, the ‘‘other sheep”, who will abide on earth and fulfill the divine mandate. They alike serve at the temple. They associate together, regularly, in Bible studies, in service meetings, and in general conventions, this to exhort one another regarding service for The Theocracy, and to hold fast their faithfulness, unflagging zeal, and unbreakable integrity for the vindication of Jehovah's name. They rejoice together. They fight shoulder to shoulder under Jehovah’s mighty “Fighter for the new world", Christ Jesus. The fight against demonism is not all over. Yet courage! the “abomination of desolation” that ascends out of the pit, and all the unfaithful disgruntled ones, shall not prevail. In assurance of this, see the final article, in the next issue of The Watchtower.
(To be continued)
SALVATION TO LIFE
IN A collegiate section of New York city on a recent Sunday a prominent clergyman deplored the failure of his generation to build a new world at the end of the last war and then declared it was now the turn of the young brother and the young son to make the new world. “The world,” he added, “is longing to be built by the new generation so that it can hang to its glory on the solid pegs of integrity, freedom and good-will. It is possible now to build that kind of a new world, and may God hasten the coming of that day.” Despite using the name “God”, the clergyman glorified self-salvation, and denied God’s way of salvation to life unending.
Salvation from impending disaster is one thing ; salvation to life is another thing. The great enemy of man is death. Man's chief blessing is to receive life everlasting in a state of peace, happiness and prosperity To obtain salvation from death means to gain everlasting life. Salvation from God's wrath to be expressed at the battle of Armageddon will not necessarily mean that all such rescued ones will be saved from death and live forever. Jehovah God has made certain and unchangeable rules which, if obeyed by man, will result in man’s salvation to everlasting life Those who escape the disaster of Armageddon will then be entering upon the way to everlasting life. To learn of God’s requirements, and to have faith and be obedient, will then be absolutely necessary on the part of all who will be saved to everlasting life on earth.
Noah and his sons escaped the disaster of the flood of waters, but Noah is the only one, of the eight survivors, specifically mentioned as receiving God’s final approval. (See Hebrews 11:7,13,39.) Moses and a multitude of Israelites were saved from the waters of the Red sea, which destroyed the Egyptians (Heb. 11:29), but only a few of those Israelites are later mentioned by the Lord God as having received his approval. That does not neces
sarily mean that none of the others will receive life everlasting, but the point here made is that all who do receive salvation unto life must have the approval of Alm.uhty God. It is therefore necessary for man to learn what God requires of him, and then he must obey God's fixed rules
Religious organizations, and particularly the leaders therein, induce persons to believe that they must join some religious system or organization, which men improperly call “a church”, and the leaders or clergymen claim that joining such religious organization now or in their proposed ‘‘new world" is the means to salvation Such claim or representation by the clergymen is entirely wrong, because such organizations do not have God’s approval On the contrary, such religious organizations teach chiefly the doctrines of men, which doctrines blind the people to the truth of (mil's purpose to vindicate, his name by his kingdom under Christ, and such demon-inspired teachings of men make the commandments of God of no effect and hence are exceedingly harmful to men (Matt 15.1-9) “There is a way which seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof arc the ways of death.” (Prov 14 12) To follow teachings or traditions of men, therefore, leads to destruction
The wise man is he that diligently ascertains God’s way as set forth in the Bible and then faithfully and earnestly follows that way. “The wise in heart will receive commandments: but a prating fool shall fall.” “He that walketh with wise men shall be wise: but a companion of fools shall be destroyed.” “Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not unto thine own understanding In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths ” (Prov. 10:8; 13:20; 3: 5, 6) God’s way is the righteous way: “In the way of righteousness is life, and in the pathway thereof there is no death.” (Prov. 12 28) Only such wise ones will gain everlasting life in the new world Of righteousness which He creates.
WHY THE COMMANDMENT TO LOVE?
LOVE, according to the Scriptural and therefore proper meaning, is this. The perfect expression of unselfishness Not only does it mean to have an unselfish feeling toward another, but it means to express that in some form If a creature does or performs an act toward another and expects to receive something in return therefor, the moving cause on his part is selfishness, and not love. A free gift is a benefit bestowed by one upon another without expectation of compensation, and a gift thus freely made and unselfishly made is prompted by love Jehovah God is the true and,only Giver of good things, and that by Christ Jesus.—Jas 1:17; 1 Cor. 8: 6.
Jehovah’s law, first stated by him to the nation of Israel, and afterwards restated by Jesus, commands: '’Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart.” (Deut. 6:5; Matt. 22.37) That means the creature must, in order to be pleasing to God, be wholly and unselfishly devoted to Him If a man claims to be the follower of Christ Jesus and takes that course merely that he may get something that he desires, he is not moved by love If he wholly and entirely devotes himself to Jehovah God because God is right and righteous and supreme and deserves the adoration of all creatures, then such man is moved by love.
Why should God command that the nation of Israel in a covenant with him to do his will should love Jehovah God? The recorded history of the human race furnishes the most complete answer to that question, in harmony with the Scriptures Had Adam loved God he would not have permitted himself to be drawn into Satan's net and thereby to come under sentence to death and also bring condemnation upon his offspring It was selfishness that caused him to sin in the perfect Eden, because he wanted to keep something that he called dear to himself rather than obey God. When God selected Israel as a people for himself he told them in substance that their only condition of safety would be in devoting themselves entirely to him and to none other. Had they done so in obedience to their covenant they would not have fallen. Likewise, had all professed Christians devoted themselves wholly and unselfishly to God and been his active witnesses and kept themselves clear and free from selfish affiliation with Satan's organization of the world they would not have been in their present unhappy condition in "Christendom’’. All these things prove that the commandment of Jehovah that
the people in covenant-bonds with him must not have another god is for the benefit of such people, and is therefore an unselfish act on Jehovah God’s part. Those following the Devil reap suffering.
Many persons say this: “I love God ” How do we know that anyone has love for God ? Surely not by mere words, nor by merely trying to do right within what the worldly law judges to be right. We must go much farther than that. Just before departing from earth Jesus instructed his disciples, saying to them: “If ye love me, keep my commandments. He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him.” This rule laid down shows that man proves his love for God by first ascertaining God's will and then diligently doing that will.—John 14:15. 21.
The world is Satan’s organization, the visible part of which organization is made up of the religious, political and commercial elements. When one professes to be a follower of Christ Jesus and then openly says, “I love the things of the world and consider it my duty as a Christian citizen to participate in the things of the world.” is he the friend or the enemy of God? James 4: 4 answers that ‘he that is a friend of the world is the enemy of God’ And 1 John 2 : 15 admonishes the Christian : “Love not the world neither the things that are in the world.” Those who are pleasing to God must be entirely devoted to him, and not devoted partially to him and partially to Satan's organization Love God with all thy heart.
The proof is overwhelming that the final end of Satan's organization is near and that his wicked world is doomed to early destruction. Jehovah now makes it known that it is his will concerning those who claim to love him that they shall go among the people and tell them the truth of and concerning Jehovah God and his kingdom by Christ Jesus which will bring in the righteous new world. All who really love God will now do that very thing. Those who love and wholly trust in God do not fear what man or devil may do to them. For that reason they boldly go from house to house, telling the people about God’s Righteous Government and so preaching the "gospil” (1 John 4:17,18) In no other way can they now prove their love for God than by keeping his command to be His witnesses.
(Continued from page 370)	calendar is yours at 25c a copy, or five copies mailed to one
The calendar pad names the new tear's Testimony periods, and address on a contribution of $100 Companies should please also the special objectives of the intervening months This service combine orders and send through the company servant
SCRIPTURE INDEX FOR THE WATCHTOWER, 1942
GENESIS 124	355 . 1 26 23	228 1 2S	36 90	10 10 10 12	8-10 9-11 15 16 3	43 132 346 231	31 31 15	48 40 50 53 20 28 19	314 14 315 14 204 1 5 115 15	13	183 13 14	371 13	195 1 3	307	23 31 33 28 2. 40 2S 30 38 8	308 266 84 379	16	3-14	259 16	4	247 ’6	5	247 16	6	249	10 16 16 17	29 29 31 30 34 3 6	267 245 2G« 250	21 13 21 21 31 21 25 20 21 26	346 ’ 346 347 346	2 ?2 37		346 324 1 x < 1 «l
																3 6	1115 12 13 4 5	
2 15	103	15	13 14	o 7 r.	4r'	10	279	1 5	I 21	183			16 7	249	17	5 7	250	Chaps 22 23		6		
2- 17	223	15	18	180	50	3	377	15	20	130 ’	LEVITICUS		16 8	250 262	IT	11	250	24	139 ■	G	13	339
3 14. 15	184	16	1. 15. 16				' 19	1.2	277	1 3 17	.60	16 9	250	17	1) 14	252	24 8	119	•	6 25 308	340
3 15	60 167 ,			326		EXODUS	' 19	5. 6	277	1 9 13, 17	266 ।	16 10	250. 262	18	21	360	24 17	199	10	I’	200
179. 228 ।	17	1	*» 4 »	n	11-22	307	19	6	88	3 16	266	16 11	251	19	9 10	155	26 29	324	12	O 7	21
4 7	24 7	21	8-11	326	3	1	307 ' 19	11-13	277 ’	4 11. 12	267 '	16 12	251	19	15	85	30 2	375 •	13	12 17	135
689	135	21	10-14	327	3	1. 11. 12	277	19	14-20	278 '	4 31	266	16 13	252	19	29	375	30 16	375 1	lb	12 10	374
69	232	o o	1-13	360 '	5	3	276 ' 20	1-5	22 45 I	6 30	267 .	16 14	252		21	232,	263	32 1. 16 33	।	16	19	85
7 13 16	301 '	esn	13. 14	247	8	25 28	276 20	1-7	278 ।	7 8	300 ,	16 15	235. 260	23	13	207		183 1	17	a 13	84
8- 1	204 1	22	18 18?	189 ।	9	16	4. 139	104 : 20	2 5	340	8 21	266 1	16 10	201	23	22	155	32 39 40	324 |	17	16	i -
8 6 7	201 '			231 .			163	20	3	104	10 9, 10	207 । 265 ।	16 17	261	24	20 21	231	32 39-41	398 ,	17	18	!> 4
8 15-22	371	25	29-34	68 1		170,	327. i 20	3-5 136, 155	14 1-5		16 18 19	262	25	23	103	35 11-15	10	18	10	360
8 18 22	102	2C	16. 26-30	1		341.	357	20	6	138 •	14 3 8	266 :	16 20	262		NUMBERS		36 7	103 ,	18	15 18	IM
9 1. 7	90 133			330 1			375 20	7	19 104 1	14 10. 19.		16 21	263					i		278	301
9 1-10	102	27	1-10	68 ।	10	24 29	276 20	10	280 '	21 23	266	16 23, 24	266	II	4	280	DEUTERONOMY !				3u7
9 6	84	o 7	41-46	68 ।	12	12	104 20	18-21	278 '	14 49-55	266	16 25	266	11	16. 1?	84	1 15-18	84 1	19	17	4
9 6 11 102 140	29	16-30	375 i	12	35 36	28 20	25	262	Chap 16 235	248 -	16 26	267	20	18-21	345	2 9 19. 37	344	19	19	152	2 . ’
9 17	372 !	31	21. 23. 2		12	38	280 1 21	23-25	231	16 2	246 i	16 2?	267	20	29	277	2 19	346	19	21	2^9
9 25	346 ।			377	Chapa 12-15		244 1 23	68	156 .	16 3	246 I	16 28	267	21	1-3	358 I 2 19-21 311		359 .	21	5	84
382
December 15,1942
THE WATCHTOWER.
3S3
21	20	207 1
23	2 3	•’25
23	1 5	139
23	17 18	23
n T	21 23	35 7
21	1 2	207
24	1-4	206
24	] 9 oo	155
n	13 16	Hs
20	1 I	374
30	15. 19	1R3
32	2	133
0	4	55.	o o ft
-> o	R 9	311
32	35 41 43 20	
-> n	37 38	313
-5 o	40	
QO	41	24
	43	1 r>*>
’3	R 10	R4
Q ?	17	119
34	8	377
	JOSHUA	
A	1R 19	120
-	10-26	120
Q	jo 20 27	379
n	21 2 7	371
o	n n o •	350
Chaps 9 10		340
10	Q 14	20?
14	5 13	103
16	16 17	’’75
17	1	324
24	9 10	139
1	JUDGES 12 13	375
■j	0 1 oo	347
Chaps 3 6		
	14, 15	355
♦	R Q	R®!
4		PA?
5	ii	7Rf»
A	12	324
—	2 o 22	1 02
n	io 13	103
Chan 10		3OR
10	3 5	?0fl
10	6	3OQ
10	7	?1O
10	R	3]O
10	n	31’
) n	10	31'
1 o	10 1A	
10	11 12	312
10	13	312
10	’3 14	730
10	14	
10	15 16	713
10	17 314	7?R
		75?
10	18 315	770
		3,»n
Chap 11		723
11	1	324
11	n	726
11	3	327
11	4	728
1’	5	?2Q
11	A	?7O
11	7	370
11	ft	370
11	R 11	? 72
11	Q	‘>71
11	10	•? t n
11	• 1	332	362
11	12	341
11	13 343	74A
		361
1’	1 4	743
11	15	374
11	16 17	744
11	1R	34 5
1 1	!Q	34 A
11	2n 21	7 1 A
11	22	74A
1 1		346
11	24	347	361
1 1	25 26	747
’ 1	26	74R
11	27	34R
11	28	34R
11	29 314	757
11	30. 31	? 5"
	377.	? 7 Q
11	32	700
11	33	361
11	34 325,	341
		7A2
11	34, 35	372
11	35	763
11	36	37 5
11	37	777
11	3R	37R
II	39	37s
11	39 40	3RD
12	1-3	356
14	5 6	7
16	4 21	165
1A	22 30	167
18	31	377
21	2 13. 17	377
21	25	316
1.	RUTH 1	122
1	1 SAMUE1 11	358
1	11 19-28	377
-	22, 34	379
15
2
37
I 37
| 38 I 38 ; 38
I 38 38
। 39
14 19, 21
13 C-10
22 24
23
9
23
10, 10.
12
60 |
164 ।
164 >
204 !
204 I 99
83
83
83
84
355
296
203
201 I
119 ।
170 |
85 RA 87 89
90
92
9 11. 12
15-18
16-18
6-8
8, 9
2 20 37
2
133
220
21
13
300
187
312 '
23
23
RR
231 51
140 20n
1 R3
29
29
29
20, 21
30
31
16 18
28
9
2
73 : 139 207 207 207 207 1 168
2 SAMUEL 1	17-27	373
1	26	3A<
5 17 21 7	12 16	231
7 23	41 104
7 23 24	277
23 3 4	71
23 13	52
23 20	204
1 KINGS 3-25	21
3	7-9	84
4	25	102
4	26	27
3	IQ 22	27
’0	26 29	27
11	7	360
11	7 13	21
12	2* 33	20
16	23 24	20
1“	14	156
19	15-18	156
PSALMS
59
1 2
6
8 9
8
57 I
297 .
2u2 .
JRO
56, 8R
10 1-13
92
279 । 124 i
. _ 119, 137. 166, ! 299,307 '
332 ‘
7 15, 16 8 4 8
9. 17 26
35 131
171
220 ।
19 I 133
42 1O0. 216.
22’, 293 ,
92
Q4 94
9 10 10
329
171
154
10
20
29
30
30
30
30
31
18
30
32
134 138 I 188 188
84 ;
75 206 204 121 134 . 184 1 204 |
1"7
181
100
102
102
16
18
1 RO 166
ECCLESIASTES
4 6	358. 376
9
102 ' 53
CANTICLES
ISAIAH 9
298 !
2 KINGS 2	9	10	187
2	9.	15	76
Chin	5	300
9	30	37 1 53. 172
10	1 27	20
10	15 23	364.
374 10	15-28	155
1 5	7 36 38	6
15	34 35	21
16	4	21
1659	21
18	4	5	22
18	7	8	7
18 Q-ll	8
21	3	4	22
25	8	10	87
16 16 16
I 16 I 18 ' 18
19 19
I
1 21
i 23
I 23
6 10
25
28
9
8
' 3
I 23 6 | 24 I
I 25
10
233 1 39 , IRA
168
169
134
6’. 1R2
170
124 182
55
103
91
103 10? io*» 104 105
107
107 ] 00
110
110
110
no 110
10-12
18
265 1R7 IRA
23
27
275
139 | 85 I 170 ! 2R0
13-15
1RR
42
1 AR 1A« 184
3
10 11
184 ।
10 55
182
22
54
2
56 107
RR
2AR
6 6
6 6
23
169
3
10R
167
> 8
1 8 8
Q 16
156 313
168 , 1R7
20
132
106
1 CHRONICLES
12	8	234
17	20, 2]	185
23	3. 4	84
28	2	298
29	10-13	115
29	23	107.	115,
196
11
19
19
19
2 CHRONICLES
Chap 20 20 10, 11
20
20
20
26
26
29
21
22 24
27 84
84
85 362 344 135, 371 196
33 33 33 34
34
35
35
36
36
37
I 37 I 37
I 38
I 39
I 42
43
45
45
12
10. 11
12
16
17
168
150
5 92
116
22
27
9
9. 10
23 24 16-19
10
16
15
10
171 118
10
11
23
102, 196
6 6
18
19 21-23
27
29'3 6. 7,
36
10, 11, 15. 16
15
6
6
6
138
46 I 46 । 46 I 46
48 48
49
50 > 50
50 I 50
51 I 51
53 I 54
I 55
56
59
ay
I §1
1 62 1 67
NEHEMIAH 1'5	139
2	17-6 15	172
3	26-31	41
4	14	172
7	46-62	41
7	73	202
10 28, 29	202
13.2	139
ESTHEB 5.13	184
7:10	168
6 15 14 4
327
73
73 220 376
53
119
119
119
120
55 Jos IS! ’ *126
165	i?2
,171 1 140
169	]41
142
143
91. 102. ■
124 133
360
260, ,
380 2b4 284 , 102
91
145 14A
10-12
22
R4 86
106 ] 60
1*1 106
157
154
6-9
182
18
12
13
20
1 <A 7
Chip H7
166
R9 91
I 8
I 9
18
6
15
1RR
8 16’
220
10
10
10
10
10
6
363
25. 39 83 '
20	265
156, 214 •
16. 17
43 359 134 . 228 360
3
10 12
6
21
12
3 11
l 68. 2
I 68- 4 68 11 68 11, 12.
140
132 , 360 . 187 107 ।
99 103
10
16 18 19.
68
18
14
204 , 24
184
220 f
232 251 232 164
28 231
1AQ 50
202 , 360 1R0 , 280 ।
'
252 166 1R7 296
167
' 2R
]Q7 23
140 1Q7 . 28
68 1QR
19s 28
?oo 200
2oo 1 2
2oi । "
20]	31
14
17
20
HQ 8 9 149' 9
76
24
26
22
25
149 , 312 106
132 ।
15
12 16
181 AR 1R0
105, 16R I 186 ,
24
28 31
163
44	28	172
45	1 13	199
45	7	131
45 45	12. 18 18 23. 24	229 339 !
45	23	185
46	10	230
48	2	86
43	18	204
49	8	298
51	5	181
51	11	8s
51	16	5.	295
52	2	167
52	6	105
52	7	106
52	10	171
52	11	118
52	11. 12	70
53	2-6	2C3
53	4	232
53	12	264
54	1-3	173
54	1. 5	296
54	4. 5	325
54	5	116
54	13	4 86 91	
54	17	170
55	3, 4	152
55	4	212
55	10, 11	203. 295
59	19	292
59	20	293
59	21	294
60	1	60
60	1 2 168 295	]Q’i 296
60	2. 20	188
60	3-7	2d7
GO	8	2&7
bO	9. 10	298
60	11	298
60	12	298
60	13	298
6U	14-16	299
60	17. 18 19	299
60		291
60	19, 20	300
6V	21, 22	300
61	1	294
61	1. 2	92
61	1-3	298
61	1.10	282
bl	2	9. 20.	217, 362
61	3	154,	170
61	10	3	170
02	2	104 171,	148. 19 it 311
62	10	7C	91
€ i	12	185
64	1. 2	9
64	0	185
65	13-15	152
65	15	104
65	21 22	103
65	25	184
66	7	116.	123
GO	8	116
66	15. 16	101
66	24	155
JEREMIAH
26	8-19	88	3 1 2		1R2
26	10 16	84	3 9-12		34Q
26	18	5	3 9 14		75
26	20 23	218	3 10		100
30	5 9	311			
30	6 7	117	AMOS		
31.	31-34	154.	3 2		245
		1R6	5 12		85
31	34	187	2A5	6 3 7		86
34	7		7 10-17		57
35	19	15’>	8 10		26
Chaps 39 40		21s	8 14	20	155
42	1 22	218	9 1-4	102	154
43	1 13	218			
50	10-13	182	OBADIAH		
5n	1R-20	IRA	11 12		167
50	33. 34	16s	12		118
50	45	11Q	15, 16		40
51	10	170	16		136
51	3?	119	21		279
51	35 3?	169			
MICAH
LAMENTATIONS 3 52	43
4 18,19	43
Chap 1 1- 10 2 6
EZEKIEL
7 5 6
7 in 11 23
8 17
9 4	327
o 5 7
11 2-7 12 27 13 1R-20 16 24, 25, 31-33 39 18 21-28 20 10-36 20 38
1 R7 11« 265 156 122
56 no 150 374
37 JAR
RA 43
136 2'1
13
2. 3
3
3
167 I RA 117
69 2s4
1 o 1 124 132 nn 1R2
84 29R 103
42
2
10
18
21
21
203
20
1. 3
2 3
6
8
9
10
12
13
IC
2
2 3
2 6 2 7
57.
11
9
10
2
3
R4
<0 28
184
20?
3 00
4 86 QI
135 ,
19
5 8, 31
:8 30
23
2C 31
4 14. 15
29 30
2u
2 6
i 32 20?	33
204 । 33 204 ,
235,'324
18 102
10
203 1 35
35
8 10 10
PROVERBS 2< 31
on 1 Chaps 36
100 I 3-
89 37
26 I QQ i 169 '
68 l QI 180 ।
131
30 25
73 I 40
119 । 40
33 38 36 3
6
183
202
132 j
15
15
15
16
16
16
16
16
16
IC
6 7
20 23
15 20
16
18
5 361 138
313 44
181 43
86 138
52 203 165
76
3, 4
5 7
7 1s	187 2r5
7	20	15-.
NAHUM 3	10	15P
2	1	25
HABAKKUK 1 2-4	150
15	1 <6
1	13 17	168
2	2 3	?'>
2 14	10 I
2	20	9
3	9 16	184
23
24 I
24 I
25 I
^?l
51 ;
56
58 16’ I
58. 6R .
59 i
fit)
60
67 68
70
76 I
76 I
8’ I
84 I
8 6 88 PO 99
133
10 I
20.
ZEPHANIAH
1 14	? c
2 2, 3	• * >
21	55 91	
2 11	IM
3 R 43 101	
3 8 9	1 54
3 9	151
? 13	IM
3 16	2A	?A1
3 IQ 20	10 6
HAGGAI 267	283
2 7	8 Kir,
2 22	102
133
69.9
69 26. 28
69 30,31 69* 30-32	359 1 A* 8’ 380 | 6-23	204 02	40 15-18, 23 40 22	291 184
69 32	376 । 8 13	206	41 14	185
71. 13	171 i R 14	78	41 14-18	120
72 6, 7	204 111-1	14Q	42 1	52
72: 8	123 । 14 34	327	42 8	199
72 9	184 15-3	53	42 12	181
74' 19, 20	150 | 15'5	4	42 19	206
74 20	168 । 15'8	1?R	43 5-10, 21	173
74 22, 23	169 ' 16* 6	1R7	43 9-13	312
75 1	148 • 1? 15	156	43 10-12	104
75 6. 7	99 , 17: 17	164	43 10. 12 5.	148
78 11, 12	357 1 JR 10	107	171	19Q
78 55	57 1 18 24	164	43 12	92	311
78.67*69	88 , 19 20. 21	119	44 8	17]	199
83. 4	106 1 19* 21	275	44: 25	75
20
21
23
23
25
25
25
25
25
16
16
16
16
16
10-13
14. 15
15. 16
16
16. 17
17
18
19
20, 21
10
11. 12
28 1-3
28. 29
29, 31
33
33 35
34
34. 35
36
1 86 164
21 230
104
28 37
37
24
38
39
40
DANIEL Chap 2	201
2	31-45	120
2	34 44, 45 107
2	34-45	t>R
2	44	2b4
5	5-9. 25-28 164
1	10	122
7	13 14	108
7	22 27	108
8	13	J52
8	13 14	1 <5
“	4 19	169
10 14	75
Chap 1] 314 329 347 <6. 11 27	150
1 1 2 7-45	75
U 30 40	119
U 31	89 32Q
11 32	106 1R4
U 33 35	216
11 37	60
11 40
11 40. 41. 45
HOSEA
2 4-11
2 6 11
2 28
2 28. 29
2 32
JOEL
121
283
75. 124
139
107
10
13
6
10
118
6
6
6 6
15
3
8
10
12
13
r 15 6 16 Chap
3
3, 4
6
8
9
10
12
13
15
16
7. 18
2n3 , 100 ' 102 104 105 107 116
119
119, 120 1
131, 132
133 )34
27
140
135
1 $8 1 iH , 139 ’
147
14s
150 ।
151 I
154 : 20. 1 54 i 155 163 ,
155 I 163 I 43. 156 85
156 163 164 165 166
263, 107 168
118. 170 I 172 1 180 181 182 183 183 184 185 I
MATTHEW
4	1	261
4	110	2 <4
4	11	251
489	9
4	h	10	2'0
4	17	234
4	1'	22	42
5	5	55
5	JO	)2 202 21-'
5	15	IC	<»?
‘	’I	32	2"r
' 35	92 1 ^
f	J6	18	377
621	]01
633	212
7	IS	156
8	11	10 I
8	16 17	2 .2
9	29	357
10	]]	H	222
10	12	14	213
10	13	15	2s5
10	14	15	2IH
16 16	213 220
10 21 22
34-37	166
10	22	23	217
10	26	2R	21'
10	27	28	170
10 28	88 201
10 29	26A
11 11	261
11 14	300
11 19	207 212
12 5 6	268
12 14 16	213
12 18 28	264
12 30	217, 276
292 13	20. 21	214
13	23	HO
13	24-30	123
13 41	106 135
155 187 13 44 46	230
13 47 50	42
384
^He WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
15	1-6	60		12 37	212	
15	13		154	13 9	156	217
16	24		205	13 14	72	297
16	26 27		339		314	357
17	5	149	2*>1	13 20		167
17	11-13		300			
1’	n 7		42	LUKE		
19	4-9		207	1 9 10		252
19	16 19		140	2 13 14		195
19	17		92	2 42-49		233
19	28		375	3 32		325
20	I 16		311	4 1.2		264
20	22 23		234	4 1-13		251
20	23	x47	2*>$	A . 1		
21	S 14		372	4 14. 18		264
21	31. 32		212	4 16-18		294
			326	5 1 11		42
21	38		51	6 19		232
21	43 21	50. 60		6 44		156
			155	7 29		301
21	43 23	15		8 40		232
			213	9 62		265
23	14	54	103	10 5-7		213
23	33		265	11 2		115
23	37 38		86	11 23		348
24	3		9	12 24		201
24	7-9	87.	11 fl	12 31 32		294
24	7 13		117	12 32	07	122
24	7 13	1		199	260	2«n
	22		198	12 37-53		165
24	7’*14		215	13 6 9	103	378
24	7 14	89	'>'11	13 28 29		103
24	9	55	221	16 13-15		150
24	10		166	16 15		5
24	‘.0 12		156	17 26 27	39	301
24	14 41	56	58	17 32. 33		153
	92	7 ”	183	18 7 8	73	120
	Bg	n i) 0	2n3			314
	32"	374	375	19 5-9		213
24	14 21		8	19 17		140
24	15	72	89	20 35 36		261
	297		329	21 24		56
24	15, 16	10	60	21 25	157	184
			314	21 25 26		283
24	15-18		153	21 29		137
			201	21 29-32		204
24	19		38	2° 2s 30	38	152
24	20 21		203	23 28-30		38
24	21. 22		186	23 31		157
			371	24 44		197
24	22		167			
24	24	00	293	JOHN		
24	3?		372	1 3		229
24	37 39	39	276	1 14		231
			307	1 29		138
24	45-47		164	1 29 36	244	264
24	4 5 51	36,	135	1 31.34		263
			155	2 13-17		252
24	48-51		106	3 13		268
			116	3 16		227 373
24	51		40	3. 30		
25	1-13		36	3 35. 36		228
25	14-30		36		240	248
25	21		140	3 36		264
25	31		281	4 32 34		156
25	31 "s2		121	5 22. 27	3	99
	182	308	363		121	308
25	3". 46	9	36	5 28 29		235
		82	309			26!
		61	363	5 44		86
			374	6 45		91
25	32. 35 45		119	6 51	233	260
25	32-46		376	6 62		234
25	34	103	294	7 1 10		213
25	40		217	7 15		213
26	28	251	282	7 39		269
26	36 48		201	8 42		122
26	41		166	8 42-44		55
2s	10 16	18	213	8 44	136	151
28	19 20		302	8 46 47		232
				8 51		371
	MARK			8 59		122
1	12 13		264	10 10 10		41
5	30		232		215	2s0
10	44 45		374	10 11. 16		132
10
10 11 11 11 12 12
13 14
14 1 *
15 15 15 16 10 17
17 17 K 17 18
IB lc 18 19
20 21
16	294
30.
8 12, 13 18-21 23 1 2
33 10 12 16 17 21-23
36	307
339 355 36 37
363
376 230 371
312 213 372
213
8
233 302
292 |
ACTS
1‘ 20	197
1 J	301
Chap 2	234
2 23-32	233
2 37 41	234
2 41 47	213
3 JO 23	301
3 Z2 23	139
	183 307
4 1 2	213
4 13	213
4 17-31	213
4 19	310
4 .Q 20	213
4 ^5-28	197
5 29	58. 200
5	34	213 275
5	’8 39 71,	
*	41	378
5	C. 42 1 54-58	214
7		213
7	35 37	307
7	36 37	301
7	37	139	183
7	37 33	278
-	51 53	278
8	1-5	214
8	4	211
8	5 12	214
8	14-40	214
9	1 2	214
9	1-3	213
9	4 5	217
*j	22 30	218
11	19-21	214
13	32 33	197
13	40 4 !	136
13	50 52	218
14	19 20	218
15	14	104	ISO 282
	14 18	234
15	18	230
1’	3 4	301
20	16 22-24	217
20	20	200	206
20	28	251
21	4 10 14	217
	8 9	214
O Q	3	213
24	17	312
24	26	85
25	9-11	166
26	4	312
2 CORINTHIANS
ROHANS
5 5
5 5
6 6
6 8
8 8
8
1	234.311
1.9.11	200
8-11	243
9	251
12	228
3-5	234.	302
9. 10	266
23	252
1	205 234
3	263
4	232
16. 1?	28	51.
60	3 U
3 17. 18	168
4 1. 7-12	920
4 4	104 292
4 4-6	3
4 13	83
5 10	281
5 23-15	319
5 17	234.250
5 20 21	263
5 21	233
6 1	165
6 2	298
6 14-16	136
6 15 13	205
6 16	89
6 17	118
7 1	205. 206
9 15	268
10 4	69
12 9	134
12 9. 10	220
1 THESSALONIANS 4 13-17	261
4 14-16	68
4 16 If 123
5	3	58,	101
164 259
5 16	378
2 THESSALONIANS 134	213
1	6-9	41	220
2	1	68	261
2 1,2	281
2 3 12	8.326
GALATIANS
8 29	325	1. 4	307
8 31 35	39	219	1 13 23	213
9 27 29	312	3 16	188
9 32. 33	164	3 18 19	278
	167	3 19	340
11 5. 7	312	3 23-25	244
11 11.25	234	3 28	139
11 17-27	154	♦ 4	249
11 25 26	293	4 26	92.107
11 26	122 1W	5 10	220
11 26 27		6 4. 5	219
12 2	140	6 5	121. 140
12 4 S	51		362
12 19	20	6 7	182.277
13 1	9 172	6 15 16	279
	326 343		
13 1-4	17 199 310	EPHESIANS	
13 1-10	53	1 9. 10	35
13 9. 10	205	1 10	123
14 4	140	2 13 14	219
14 4 10	164	3 15	55
14 10	201 309	4 12	19
14 11	185	4 8	24
14 11. 19	339	4 25	151
14 17	212	4 26	20
15 3	287	5'1 2	376
15 4	8f.140	5 14-18	207
	312	6' 1 4	38
15 10. 11	90. 102	6 4	326
16 1? 18	165	6 10	200
	202	6 II	121
		6 11-18	196
1 CORINTHIANS		6 12	59 202
1 8	«1	"3 134	317	341 361
	207	6 12 18	121
3 9	165	6 17	69
3 11. 16	17	88		
3 17	219	PHILIPPIANS	
4 13	267	1 28	134 164
5 7	138		283
6 9 11	325	2 5 8	231
6 20	251	2 7 8	232, 2B3
7 1-15	207	2 19 22	106
7 23	251	3 3	279
7 32 35	379	3 13	380
9 27	206	3 19	74
10 1. 2	245 300	3 20	107
10 11 277	37 196 312. 372	4 13	106
10 13 10 21	166 151	C0L0SSIAN5	
11 3	317	1 9-11	76
12 18	4	1 15	122 229
15 24-28	309	1 15-18	230
15 25 26	103	1 18	212 317
15 50-54	235	2 11	279
	373	2 16 11	244
15 51 52	54 68	3 13	19
15 51 54	188	3 14. 15	219
PHILEMON 9. 10	197
1 1. 2 1:2 1:3	51. 307 231 266
1 4-14	279
1 6	280
1 8 9	212
1 8 13	197
1 9	266
2 2-5	278
2 6-9	42
2 9	233
2 10	230,282
2 11	123
2 13	188, 294
2 14	137
3 1	234,249.
	251, 261
3 1 1	245
3'6	88
4'1-11	268
4 15	231
5 1-6	234
5 5, 6	268
5 7. 8	252
5 8	282
6 7. 8	156
8 11 12	4
6 13 20	188
7 1-17	234
7 1-21	268
7- 24 28	262
7 25 26	247
7 26	301
7 26 27	261
7 27	248
8 6	251
8’ 12	18?
9: 1-8	246
9 4	252
9 7, 3	268
	11. IS	148
9	11 12 21-24	261
9	12	248
9	14, IS	251
9	16. IT	244
9	16-22	244.248
9	22	248. 249
9	22-26	262
9	23. 24	83
9	24	246
9	28	266
10	1	236.244
10	1-4	245
10	4-7.	
	10-13	247
10	5-9	301
10	5-13	197
10	12. 13	115.
		234
10	14-18	265
10	23-25	284
10	27	56
10	30	20
10	34	214
10	38. 39	265
11	1-40	212
11	8	302
Li	32	324. 380
11	35	124 380
11	35, 39. 40	
		133,324
11	•35-40	235
11	39 40	261
Chap 12		279
12	1	36 153 212.297
12	1. 3	324
12	5-11	312
12	7 8	325
12	7 10	169
12	9	282
12	16 17	279
12	18-21	279
12	19	283
12	22 23	275
		281
12	22 24	280
12	23	249,282 1
12	23 24	68
12	25	283
12	26 27	283
12	28 29	2B4
13	10-12	248
13	11-13	267
13	13	249
10	14	249
13	15	168 249
	JAMES	
	5. 6	166
1	18	82. 234. 251.281
1	27	134. 358
2	13	73
2	18	219
3	1	232
3	6 8	151
3	17	106
4	4	23	28. 59
	199,	155,279
5	1 0	24. 149
5	11	202
4 17 5- 3
3‘ 20 3 20.
3 22 4 15 4- 17
21
19
SOI 99. 115
3 9 182
18
212 121 281
309 36
183 182
12 I B
12 1 13 17
12 5	124
5 ’
7 9
7-12
123 215
151
1 PETER 25	92
4-10	88
9	106 250
296 15	59
17	107
21	58 71
201 21 22	302
21 24	232
1 JOHN		
1'	0	168
1	7	247 266
2.	1. 2	227 243,
	259	261. 302
2	6	20?
3	1. 2 2	235
3		3?3
3	4	20. 243
3’	12	19
4	8. 9	276
♦ .	10	229
4	1?. IB	76
5'	3	166
5	11 12	229
5'	If	24 3
5-	IB	104.246 251
	REVELATION	
1.	0	212, 247. 266 297
2	14	139
2	17	104.148 199
2	20-23	153
2.	25 27	215
2	26	124
3	12	123.199
3	14	122 212
3	16	278
3	21	233
4	7	119
5	9. 10	251
6	5. 6	150
0	16. 17	99
Chap ?		373
7	4 8	88 123
	199	281 372
7	9-12	372, 376
?•	9-17	55. 133, 374
7:	10	299
?•	14. 15	379
7	15	91
7	17	378
8	3. 4	252
8	3 6	251
8	10 11	26
9	6	151
9	13-21	316
9	14 15	181
11	7-10	156
11	10	167
11	10-12	184
11	n. 1 17 1	117
11		107
11	19	9, 14H 170
12	1-5	59 29A
12	1 12	108
14 3 4
14 4
14 9 10
14 9-12
15 2
15 4
18 9 U 21
16 12
16 12-16
16 13-16
108
16 14
16 14-16 Chap 1?
Chaps 17 10 17 1-5
SUBJECT INDEX FOR THE WATCHTOWER, 1942
Acknowledgment .. ..	............ Ill
A**emh|v unto the Kinedom ..	275
Atonement	for	the	New	World	(Part	1) 227
Atonement	for	the	Nev.	World	(Part	2) 243
Atonement	tor	the	New	World	(Port	3) 259
Baptism
------------------------300
Calendar. 1942 ........................     2
Calendar 1943 ........................    370
Celebrating the Memorial	79
‘"Children of The King” Testimony Period 60
“Children” Study Questions ___________    130
“Comfort” Testimony Period 194
Defeat of Persecution ..........  --	..	211
Dissenters for Righteousness ...........  221
Dual Power Foreseen ............... ,_____ 11
Earth’s Place in God’s Purpose__________333
Enduring Riches ................  ,rT___157
Everything for the Issue______ _ ,	-
Faithful Witness. A ..............  _	45
Fellowship .....
Fighter tor the Fighter tor the Fighter for the Fighter tor the Fighter foi the Final Gathering
New World New World New World New World New World
(Part (Part (Part (Part (Parc
Has the Battle of Armageddon Begun? — 334
Hid During the Indignation 			.....	... 1*9
Hope	..... 60
Hope of 1 he Nation. The 		..... 36.5
“Image of the Beast”				- “Integrity" Testimony Period - . Is ’ Christmas" (Tin.tian1 			 93 		2
	.... 349
Jehoiah’t Seriantt Defend'd 		.... 162
Kev Theocratic Assembly at Cleveland	... 317
Kingdom Work 				141
Memorial	77
Micah (Part 1)	.... 3
Micah (Part 2)	.	.	19
Micah (Pan 3)	.	51
Micah (Part 4)	..	67
Micah (Part 5)			. . 83
Micah (Part 6)	....	.	.	. 99
Micah (Part 7)	. .	..	.	115
Micah (Part 8)			131
Micah (Part 91		 „	.	147
Micah (Part 10)			.	163
Micah (Part 11)				.. 179
Name to Be Honored. The 	 ,		108
“New World” Ruler and Associates .. _		141
New World Theocratic Assembly		288
No Come-back for Religion —		-...270
Only Light, The 			— 201
Pease—Can it Laetf 		. - —-		— 306
Right Action and Government Root of the World Evil
35s 347
24 163 136 137 134
88 115 ]<JQ
19 13
19 14 15
19 15 16
19 20
20 1-3
20 4
20 4 6 60
20 6
21 1
21 1 2,9 10
21 12 27
21 23	168
21 24
22 1]
22 12
22 ’ 8
22 17	11
198
292 249 182 134 282 38 2
90 151 181 316
101 ll« 132 371 152
342
72 S57 149 136 181
72 124 154 154
71 154 187
39
72 120 19« 247 3ns 371 101
108 92
121 101 136 243 362
235 297 245 235
198
83 103 182 3nn 297 312 182 199 90
Safety During World Emergency Salvation to Life	’**"
Scripture Indei for The Watchtoicer iduo ringing in the World's Cri-u.
Singing till God’s "Strange Act"....
Song-Call to Action	“
Steadfastness ....	. ..........
Subject Index for The Watchtower, 1942 The Emphatic Diaglott, New Edition of The ,\ew World .......
{‘The World” Question Booklet...........
The Wise” Testimony Period ____	“*
Theocratic Assembly	.......
Triumph by Whose Works 1	"""
United Servants .....................
“Victory Song” Testimony Period ......*
23s 125 173 3S1 3*2 230 253
195
384 22(1 335 335 254 239 268
61 .	  322
Watchtower Edition of the Bible 32° Watchtower Studies (Re Questions] "" ”’290 Who Are Gog and Magog Today? ...	’
Who Must Control the Earth’ _______*’	?S4
Why Is the Truth Opposed’ .............^02
Why the Commandment to Love’ ......... 3^2
“Willing Volunteers” Testimony Period..130
Yearbook of Jehovah’e witneteet. 1942 .. 34
Yearbook of Jehovah’i wttnettet, 1043 .... 370