A Secure Future Under God’s Rule
SOON our anxieties about the future will be over, for God will take charge of planet Earth by putting in place his own government, called God’s Kingdom. Jesus Christ had that wonderful prospect in mind when he taught his followers to pray: “Let your kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.”—Matthew 6:9, 10.
God’s Kingdom will neither cooperate with nor work through human political leaders. Rather, it will eliminate every vestige of human self-rule, as indicated in the following prophecy of Daniel about “the last days,” the time in which we live. (2 Timothy 3:1) “In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin. . . . It will crush and put an end to all these [man-made] kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.” (Daniel 2:44) Those words offer no comfort or hope to people who prefer rulership by man, but to all who desire God’s sovereignty as expressed through his Kingdom, they glow with promise.
A Wonderful Future!
When God’s Kingdom rules over the entire earth, its subjects will not be divided by politics, race, religion, or lines on a map. Rather, they will form a global brotherhood united by spiritual truth and genuine love. (John 13:34, 35; 17:3, 17) Yes, under Kingdom rule, “the righteous one will sprout,” and there will be an “abundance of peace until the moon is no more.”—Psalm 72:7.
Besides these things, God’s Kingdom will elevate submissive humans to perfection in mind and body, eradicating all sickness, suffering, and death. (Revelation 21:3, 4) The result? Our planet will be a paradise in every respect, thus fulfilling God’s original purpose as stated in Eden.a—Genesis 1:28.
The Only Real Good News
When giving his composite sign of “the conclusion of the system of things,” Jesus included a particularly noteworthy element. (Matthew 24:3-7) He said: “This good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations; and then the end will come.”—Matthew 24:14.
In harmony with God’s will, in 2007 almost seven million Witnesses of Jehovah in 236 lands shared the Kingdom message with their neighbors, joyfully contributing well over 1.4 billion hours of their personal time to this work. Why are the Witnesses so firmly convinced of the promises contained in the Bible? The answer is really quite simple. As the following article explains, God is always true to his word.—Romans 3:4.
[Footnote]
See the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: Will Earth Be a Paradise?” on page 10.
[Blurb on page 7]
The Bible says that there will be an “abundance of peace”

