A Splendid Gulf
BY AWAKE! WRITER IN MEXICO
BETWEEN mainland Mexico and the Baja California peninsula lies the turquoise-blue Gulf of California (indicated below), originally known as the Sea of Cortés. Much of this region of desert coastline and rugged islands has been declared a World Heritage site by the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization. Why is the area so special?
Over 700 miles [1,000 km] long and an average of 95 miles [153 km] wide, the Gulf of California, as well as its surroundings, is both beautiful and rich with life. The gulf also has one of the biggest tidal surges on the planet, up to 30 feet [9 m] at the northern end. Ample sunlight and an upwelling of nutrient-rich waters results in swarms of plankton and extraordinary biodiversity. These factors and the clear waters in much of the region moved ocean explorer Jacques-Yves Cousteau to call the gulf the “aquarium of the world.”
Boasting more than 890 species of fish, some 90 of which are unique to the region, the gulf is a natural laboratory for the study of marine life. Sadly, though, many species are in decline, including an elusive porpoise called the vaquita, Spanish for “little cow.”
The smallest member of the porpoise family, the vaquita grows to nearly five feet [150 cm] in length. Its skin color varies from a subdued gray to tawny brown, and it has black patches around the eyes. Found only in the shallow, murky waters of the gulf near the Colorado River estuary, this shy little animal is rarely seen and little understood. In fact, it was not discovered until 1958 when three skulls were found on a Baja California beach.
With a population of just hundreds, the vaquita is listed as critically endangered. Even so, dozens drown each year in nets set by local fishermen. To help ensure the survival of this rare mammal, Mexico has created a nature reserve that embraces part of the vaquita’s habitat. The gulf’s other residents and migratory visitors include whales, giant manta rays, leatherback sea turtles, sea lions, marlins, sailfish, and huge schools of tuna.
In the southern part of the gulf, deep down, scientists have found exotic life forms that very few people have seen. The reason is that these organisms live in the Guaymas trench, which is nearly 7,000 feet [2,000 m] deep. The abyss boasts hydrothermal vents that support thriving communities of creatures that obtain energy, not from sunlight, but from hydrogen sulfide. One vent creature is the tube worm, a mouthless, gutless, crimson-plumed worm that lives in groups, stands upright with one end attached to the ocean floor, and waves like a wand in both the cold ocean water and the warm vent effluent. Each tube worm sustains itself by means of a symbiotic relationship with bacteria living inside its trunk. The worm’s crimson plume is really its gill.
Although the biodiversity of the gulf is at risk, its long-term future is promising. How so? Because the Creator cares. In fact, he cares so much for all the earth that he will soon intervene to protect it from further harm and thereafter restore it according to his original purpose. (Genesis 1:26-28; Revelation 11:18) How beautiful the Gulf of California will then be is hard to imagine. Indeed, the word “splendid” may barely do it justice.
[Picture on page 25]
Fin whale
[Picture on page 25]
Tube worms
[Picture Credit Lines on page 24]
Satellite view: NASA/The Visible Earth (http://visibleearth.nasa.gov/); reef: © Dirscherl Reinhard/age fotostock
[Picture Credit Lines on page 25]
Beach: Mexico Tourism Board; whale: © Mark Jones/age fotostock; tube worms: © Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution

