Announcements
◆ Reporting baptisms: Baptisms performed locally by a congregation should be reported on the bottom of the Congregation Report card for that month. This does not include circuit assembly baptisms, since they are reported through the assembly arrangement.
◆ Old speech counsel slips may still be used in the Theocratic Ministry School, even though the study numbers do not correspond with those in the Theocratic Ministry School Guidebook.
◆ Literature offer, January through April: Watchtower subscription, and three booklets, for $1.50; or one-year subscriptions for both The Watchtower and Awake!, with six booklets, for $3.
◆ Accounts servant: Please keep in mind that all renewal subscriptions are for the full rate of $1.50 per year. There is no publisher or pioneer rate on renewals! On each new subscription slip please mark whether it is obtained by publisher or pioneer, and on all subscriptions note whether they are for six months or one year. Subscriptions turned in on expiration back-call slips are viewed as new subscriptions.
◆ On Sunday, March 26, a special public talk entitled “Mankind’s Deliverance into God’s New Order” will be delivered world wide. Manuscripts will be sent to all congregations in due time. This special talk will be followed by two more. It is recommended that all congregations schedule for April 23 the talk “Jehovah Has Become King​—How We Know It,” and for May 21 the talk “What Jehovah’s Kingship Means for You.” Full outlines for these two talks will also be sent to each congregation. If the circuit servant is visiting your congregation during any of these three weeks, or if you are having your circuit assembly, then we suggest that you arrange to have the talk in this special series one week later than is shown above. Handbills for these talks may be ordered now.
◆ The Memorial date is Wednesday, March 29, after 6:00 p.m. Orders for Memorial invitations may be sent at the same time that orders are submitted for the special public talk handbills, but on separate order forms.
◆ New Publications Available:
Theocratic Ministry School Guidebook​—Cebuano, Iloko, Tagalog
“This Good News of the Kingdom”​—Konkani (Kanarese Script)
When All Nations Collide, Head On, with God​—Danish, Korean
◆ Again Available:
“Make Sure of All Things; Hold Fast to What Is Fine”​—English
◆ Out of Stock in U.S.A.:
When God Is King over All the Earth​—English
◆ After January 15, 1972, congregations may begin ordering the Watch Tower Publications Index for 1971. The Index is 10c.

