Serving with a Complete Heart
1 Wholehearted giving brings happiness to the giver. It was such giving that caused rejoicing as preparations were made for the temple in David’s day. “The people gave way to rejoicing . . . for it was with a complete heart that they made voluntary offerings to Jehovah.” (1 Chron. 29:9) We get the same feeling, do we not, when we give of ourselves with a complete heart in the Christian ministry today?
2 Take for example the effort we expend in the Watchtower campaign starting this month. We know what the information in the magazines has done for us and so we can, with a complete heart, recommend that others subscribe. We rejoice when someone says “Yes” to the subscription offer, for we know what benefits can be theirs by having the magazines come to their home for a year. So we have good reason to involve ourselves enthusiastically in offering to others the opportunity to subscribe.
3 How are you going to approach people at their homes during the subscription campaign? What are you going to talk about? The December Kingdom Ministry suggested that we might talk to them along the lines of “Benefits of Living by Bible Teachings.” It suggested a few introductory sentences that could be used to get a conversation going. But then what? Well, before you go out in the field service, we suggest that you open your current issue of The Watchtower to the first article. Read the opening paragraph or two and get the main ideas in mind. If you work this into your conversation, it will be easy to open the magazine and tie in your discussion with what you are offering. (You may even read these paragraphs to the householder, if you prefer.) The January 1 issue features the subject “A Great Change Near​—What Is It?” The January 15 issue includes the article “How Can We Make Right Decisions?” Both subjects are practical, and timely, and they highlight that basic idea, “Benefits of Living by Bible Teachings.” In each of these opening articles you will find that the introductory comments lead up to a scripture that is cited but not quoted. This affords you the opportunity to show the householder how to use the Bible along with the magazine. It will impress the fact that this magazine can truly help one to understand and apply the Bible.
4 It may be that you have developed some other method of approach that works well for you. Do not hesitate to use it. The important thing is to try to reach the hearts of the people to whom we talk. They need to recognize the seriousness of the times in which we are living. Their lives are at stake.
5 Even though the first article in The Watchtower may be used as an opener to the conversation, you may observe that the material in one of the study articles is what the householder more urgently needs. If so, shift to that article. Or, if you are acquainted with the thinking of the householder, start the conversation with any appropriate subject that you believe will interest him.
6 This alertness to what the householder is concerned about will also be of aid when we make a return visit. By jotting down on our house-to-house record the subject that caught his attention, we will have a starter for our conversation on the next call. It might also be well to mention at this point the value of making a definite appointment to return, where interest warrants it. By this he will know you are interested in him and want to be of further help. Also, he can arrange his affairs, as can you, to be available at that time. It may be that a study can be started, and this would provide an even greater opportunity to give spiritually so the receiver may learn how to serve Jehovah.
7 While January is a subscription month, some persons we meet may prefer something else. Why not carry in your briefcase a book to offer to those who do not accept the Watchtower subscription? You could place the ‘Know Jehovah’ book and two magazines for 60 cents. Or you may want to offer one of the pocket-sized books, Truth, Evolution, Word of God or Great Teacher, along with two magazines, for 35 cents. Whether it is a subscription, a book or simply two magazines for ten cents that we leave with the people, the message in the literature can reach their hearts and start them toward a right relationship with Jehovah.
8 King David admonished his beloved son and successor Solomon to serve Jehovah “with a complete heart.” (1 Chron. 28:9) When he did, Jehovah blessed him. You, too, like Solomon, want Jehovah’s blessing, and it comes as you continue to make the Christian ministry a wholehearted way of life. While the field ministry, using the subscription offer, is only one part of the Christian ministry, it surely provides us a wonderful way to express our appreciation to Jehovah.
[Blurb on page 1]
Serve Jehovah with a complete heart.
[Blurb on page 8]
Did you share the “good news” with someone today?

