1998 “God’s Way of Life” District Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses
1 Year after year Jehovah’s modern-day worshipers throughout the earth eagerly anticipate gathering in large numbers at district conventions. In this, they reflect the spirit of Jehovah’s faithful servants in ancient Israel who joyfully sang the words of Psalm 122 while en route to worship Jehovah at Jerusalem. Verse 1 of that psalm reads: “I rejoiced when they were saying to me: ‘To the house of Jehovah let us go.’” On such occasions we also see increasing evidence that the inspired words of Isaiah 2:2, 3 are being fulfilled.
2 This year we have special reason to rejoice in view of the international flavor that will be added by thousands of delegates from countries around the earth attending some of the larger conventions. Missionaries returning to visit family and friends will be at many of the conventions. Therefore, the convention program at each location will feature field experiences and reports on the progress of the Kingdom-preaching work in other lands.
3 Of course, only invited congregations in the general area of the international conventions will be able to attend those gatherings. It is vital for everyone to respect these limitations in order for all conventions to be held in an orderly manner. The international flavor will be evident at all district conventions in some program parts and reports, as well as by the presence of missionaries who may be attending.
4 As preparations continue for our 1998 “God’s Way of Life” District Convention, we would like to review some information you will need in order to obtain hotel rooms for the convention. Your full cooperation will show your personal appreciation for all the arrangements made in your behalf.
5 Making a Hotel Reservation: When this insert is considered at the Service Meeting, your district convention assignment letter will be read to the congregation. The Recommended Lodging List for your convention will be posted on the congregation information board after the meeting that night. No reservation calls to ANY hotels, by the elders or anyone else, are to be made until after the Service Meeting when the district convention assignment letter is read. Hotels available for the upcoming convention have been placed on the first Recommended Lodging List. Only if these hotels are filled will new hotels be added and a revised list be sent to your congregation. If at all possible, make your reservation during January from the first Recommended Lodging List.
6 If the hotel you have selected is full, call another until you have a reservation. If you have called all the hotels on the list and no rooms are available, inform your congregation secretary. He will contact the Rooming Department at the telephone number shown at the top of the Recommended Lodging List. Hotels will be added, and a revised list will be mailed to your congregation. Please wait for the new list rather than make your reservation from hotels not on the list. Because of fire and safety regulations, you should arrange for no more than four persons in each room. If the hotel will allow more than four persons to a room, this will be indicated on the Recommended Lodging List. When you make a reservation, always ask for a confirmation number from the hotel.
7 Sending Deposits to Hotels: The only way to guarantee a room reservation is if your deposit is received by the hotel. Without a deposit, the hotel has the right to give your room to someone else. For each room reserved, a one-night deposit must be made within ten days of making your reservation. Your deposit may be by credit card, check, or money order. Please do not send cash. If you send a check or a money order, write your confirmation number on the front of it and contact the hotel about two weeks later to confirm that your deposit was received. If you provide a credit card number for your deposit, you should tell the reservation clerk that you want the deposit to be charged to your credit card immediately.
8 Changing Hotel Reservations or Making Reservations at More Than One Hotel: Before the convention the Rooming Department calls each hotel on the list to find out how many rooms have been reserved by our delegates. Because of the large number of brothers and sisters needing rooms, we are asking that once you make a reservation, please keep that reservation. Do not switch your reservation to another hotel, even if one that is closer or more desirable appears on a subsequent list. That hotel has been added because there are brothers and sisters who still need rooms. It was not added to provide upgrades for those who already have rooms reserved. Also, please reserve only the hotel rooms you will actually use during the convention. Do not reserve rooms for other delegates unless they have personally requested that you make their reservation. Double booking rooms is not fair and creates more work for the Rooming Department and the hotels.
9 If you experience a problem with a hotel during the convention, please bring this to the attention of the local Rooming Department at the convention. For any difficulties experienced before or after the convention, you can contact the Rooming Department, using the address and telephone number shown at the top of the Recommended Lodging List.
10 Using Only Those Hotels on the Society’s Recommended Lodging List: The Society is making an effort to arrange conventions in locations that are more convenient for our brothers and sisters. Although the convenience of our convention locations permits many brothers to commute to and from the convention site, hotel accommodations remain a necessity. Last year, 1,095 hotels were used at the 194 conventions held in 66 different cities. For 1998, the Society is attempting to obtain blocks of rooms at hotels closer to each convention site. Each year, we appeal to the brothers to make reservations only at hotels on the Society’s Recommended Lodging List. What is accomplished by heeding this direction?
11 Saves money for our brothers and sisters: When hotels cooperate with the Society’s arrangement, room rates are lower for our brothers. Instead of our resources going to the hotels, they can be put to better use supporting the families of our brothers and sisters and the worldwide work. Even if we personally can afford more expensive accommodations, we should support the efforts of the Rooming Department by using only hotels from the Recommended Lodging List. This spirit of concern for others is described at 1 John 3:17 and is the principle behind 1 Corinthians 10:24.
12 Demonstrates obedience to the Society’s directions: This point should be one of our main concerns. Hebrews 13:17 says: “Be obedient to those who are taking the lead among you and be submissive, for they are keeping watch over your souls as those who will render an account; that they may do this with joy and not with sighing, for this would be damaging to you.” Our cooperation in this matter is requested only two or three days each year. Even if our personal choice is different, our good example, as seen by our brothers, promotes a loving, united, and supportive spirit.​—See 1 Corinthians 16:16; Philippians 2:1-4.
13 Special Needs: The elderly, the infirm, those in full-time service, or others may require assistance in attending the convention. Relatives, the elders, and others in the congregation who are aware of the unique circumstances of those with special needs can lovingly make the necessary arrangements, not shifting the responsibility of family and congregation to the convention organization.​—Compare 1 Timothy 5:4.
14 For those who cannot be cared for in this way, the Society’s Special Needs Room Request form outlines the qualifications for submitting a Special Needs form. This provision is only for publishers in good standing, including those with well-behaved children, who have been approved by the Congregation Service Committee. Before filling out a Special Needs Room Request form, carefully read the information at the bottom of the form. These requests should be sent to the Rooming Department as soon as possible. Please use the convention address shown on the reverse side of the Special Needs form.
15 Attending Another Convention: Each congregation is assigned to the nearest convention location. Taking into account the number of publishers assigned to each convention, the Society estimates the attendance in order to arrange for sufficient seating, rooming, literature, and so forth. If you plan to attend another convention, you may need information regarding rooming and parking tickets, among other things. The congregation secretary can provide you with the address of the convention headquarters for the convention you will be attending. This can be found on the reverse side of the Special Needs Room Request form. Be sure to enclose a stamped, self-addressed envelope with your request for the current Recommended Lodging List or for any additional information you may need. If there is more than one convention held in that city, be sure to indicate the dates for the convention you will be attending.
16 Conclusion: Comments from hotel personnel show that you brothers and sisters are to be commended for demonstrating godly qualities. The managers at one hotel said Jehovah’s Witnesses are “the nicest and best behaved group that we host.” Another said: “I felt I needed to say thank you on behalf of the hotel staff. Your delegates are to be praised as one of the most pleasant, congenial, and courteous groups we have had the pleasure of serving. It is a true reflection of your organization’s values and sincere respect for humankind. We look forward to hosting you again.” While making her room reservation for last year’s convention, a sister was told the following by the reservation clerk: “I can immediately tell when one of Jehovah’s Witnesses is on the phone. You are always so polite, warm, and conversational. This Baptist is always impressed, and you are all to be commended.” Comments like these are good to hear, are they not? The conduct of the brothers and sisters that prompted these comments surely makes Jehovah’s heart glad.
17 The Society receives many letters from brothers and sisters expressing their appreciation for the arrangements made for them. A family from Illinois said: “We just want you to know that we did not take the district convention for granted. We realize it did not happen by chance but was the result of much hard work on the part of many brothers. We wrote to thank you.” A sister from Michigan wrote: “I want to express heartfelt thanks to all my brothers involved with the rooming arrangements. My husband and I appreciate the reduced rates, as we are subsisting on one income so that I may continue pioneering. These arrangements help us benefit so much more from the convention.”
18 It is clear to all of us that Jehovah is supporting the arrangement of annual conventions. Since many of the brothers traveling to district conventions require rooms, we can be assured that Jehovah will adequately provide for these needs as well. Proving that we are “faithful in what is least” puts us in line for receiving the grand blessings that await those whom Jehovah loves.​—Luke 16:10.
[Box on page 3]
Making Your Hotel Reservation
 1. Call hotel during regular business hours.
 2. Ask reservation clerk for a confirmation number.
 3. Make your deposit. Write the confirmation number on your check or money order. Do NOT send cash.
 4. If you pay by check or money order, contact hotel in two weeks to verify that your deposit has been received.
[Box on page 5]
Do’s
▪ DO make your reservation during January.
▪ DO identify yourself as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses or as a delegate attending the Watchtower convention.
▪ DO make your deposit as soon as your reservation is made.
▪ DO reserve only the room(s) you will personally use.
▪ DO keep your first reservation.
[Box on page 6]
Program Times
Friday    and  Saturday
9:30 a.m.  –   5:00 p.m.
Sunday
9:30 a.m.  –  4:00 p.m.

