Make Good Use of Handbills
1 Congregation handbills are useful for informing people in the community of the Kingdom Hall address and the correct time of the meetings. It would be good to leave one with every person you contact. To that end, each congregation should keep an ample supply of handbills in stock. For congregations that change meeting times annually, in January, new handbills should be ordered during the preceding October each year so that a supply with current meeting times will always be on hand. The Handbill Request form is to be used for this purpose. Once you have them, how can handbills be used to best advantage?
2 Many publishers find that handing one to a person is an effective way to introduce themselves and start conversations. Pointing out the meeting schedule or the message on the reverse side can open the way to a discussion about our work and its purpose. Parents can involve their young children in the ministry by having them offer a handbill at the door. Publishers who share in letter-writing witnessing should enclose a handbill in their letter and invite the person to attend the meetings. It may be that handbills can be left at not-at-homes, provided that care is taken to put them under the door so that they are completely out of sight.
3 Handbills have been instrumental in directing honesthearted ones to the truth. One experience tells of a woman who, thanks to a handbill, was able to fulfill her lifelong desire to understand the Bible. After she had spent a night in prayer to God, a Witness couple rang her doorbell in the morning. Looking through the peephole, she called out that she could not open the door. The Witnesses pushed a handbill under the door. It read: “Know Your Bible.” She saw it and opened the door. A study was started immediately, and she was later baptized. Never underestimating the power of God’s spirit, may we regularly make good use of handbills as we fully accomplish our ministry.​—See also February 1994 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 1.

