Service Meetings for January
Week Starting January 5
Song 10
 8 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
17 min: “Take Delight in Giving a Thorough Witness.” Audience discussion of article. Highlight essentials of an effective presentation: (1) Give a friendly greeting, (2) comment on or raise a question about a subject of current interest, (3) refer to an appropriate Scripture text, and (4) direct interest to the publication being offered. Have a capable publisher demonstrate a suggested initial presentation and corresponding return visit.
20 min: Prepare Now to Uphold God’s Law on Blood. Qualified elder discusses importance of filling out both the Advance Medical Directive/​Release card and the Society’s health-care power of attorney form. Inspired direction at Psalm 19:7 shows that Acts 15:28, 29 is an expression of God’s perfect law on blood. Loyal worshipers strive to uphold that law. These documents make known your determination to do so and speak for you when you are unable to speak for yourself. (Compare Proverbs 22:3.) A new card provides a current declaration of your refusal to take blood. Following this meeting, baptized Witnesses who desire to have a new card will be given one, and those with unbaptized minor children will receive an Identity Card for each child. These cards are not to be filled out tonight. They should be filled out carefully at home but NOT signed. Signing, witnessing, and dating of all cards will be done after the next Congregation Book Study, under the supervision of the book study conductor. This will ensure that all assigned to his group who want to execute this medical directive have the needed assistance. Those signing as witnesses should actually see the cardholder sign the document. Anyone missing at that time and who desires to fill out and sign a card will be assisted by conductors/​elders at the next Service Meeting until all baptized publishers have their cards properly completed. (Review letter of October 15, 1991.) By adapting language from this card to their own circumstances and convictions, unbaptized publishers may write out their own directive to use for themselves and their children. The durable power of attorney form on the other hand is a more comprehensive document and, since it is based on state statutory law, is respected by medical and legal personnel. (Refer as needed to the January 1997 sheet entitled “Information About the Society’s Health-Care Durable Power of Attorney Forms” and the Question Box in the December 1995 Our Kingdom Ministry.) For the best legal protection, it is recommended that both documents be filled out. On the front of the Advance Medical Directive/​Release card write, preferably in your own hand: “I have also executed a health-care power of attorney.”
Song 142 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 12
Song 125
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Outline field service arrangements for January 19.
15 min: “Make Good Use of Handbills.” Audience discussion. Include experience in December 1, 1996, Watchtower, page 13, paragraph 15.
20 min: “Jehovah Gives Power Beyond What Is Normal.” Questions and answers. (See w90 7/15 19, paragraphs 15-16.) Arrange for some to relate encouraging experiences showing how Jehovah has strengthened them.
Song 81 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 19
Song 1
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: Family Study That Brings Joy. Married couple discuss spiritual needs of their family. Concerned about worldly influences affecting their children in a negative way, they feel a need to strengthen the spirituality of their children but acknowledge that their family study has been sporadic and often ineffective. Together, they review recommendations on how to conduct a meaningful family study that were given in the August 1, 1997, Watchtower, pages 26-9. Both are determined to follow through in safeguarding the spiritual well-being of their children.
Song 146 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 26
Song 187
12 min: Local announcements. Review literature offer for February. Mention one or two points from the Revelation Climax book that will be helpful when offering it.
15 min: “Show Respect for Jehovah’s Place of Worship.” Questions and answers. To be handled by an elder, who should make kindly local application.
18 min: Reporting Our Share in the Worldwide Witnessing Work. (Based on Our Ministry book, pages 100-2, 106-10) Talk and discussion handled by the secretary. After showing the Scriptural precedent for regularly reporting our activity, he invites two ministerial servants to review the subheading “Why We Report Our Field Service.” The secretary then stresses the importance of promptly turning in accurate reports. He points out reasons why setting personal goals is beneficial, concluding with encouraging comments about the blessings that come to those who have a full share in the witness work.
Song 189 and concluding prayer.

