Show Respect for Jehovah’s Place of Worship
1 When we are guests in someone’s house, we show respect for that person’s property, not doing anything to damage it, and we do not disrupt the orderly routine of the household. How much more should this be true when we are Jehovah’s guests! We ought to know how to conduct ourselves in his household. (Ps. 15:1; 1 Tim. 3:15) Whether our Christian meeting is held in the Kingdom Hall, a private home, or a public facility, the vast majority of us always show respect for our place of worship as if it were the house of Jehovah, whose “dignity is above earth and heaven.”​—Ps. 148:13.
2 Some brothers show a lack of respect at the meetings by being noisy or acting as if the information presented were unimportant. A few adults carry on needless conversations in the foyer, lobby, rest room, or outside of the Kingdom Hall while the meeting is in progress. When an older child is left to supervise a younger one, sometimes the two begin playing and derive little benefit from the program. Some youths have been seen outside the Kingdom Hall after meetings, playing, being excessively noisy, even making karatelike movements toward one another. In some cases they have disturbed the neighbors or interfered with traffic in the parking lot or street.
3 How to Avoid Being Disrespectful: Appreciating the dignity and sacredness of our worship, undoubtedly we would not want to distract others by whispering, eating, chewing gum, rustling papers, making unnecessary trips to the rest room, or habitually arriving late for meetings. Respectful and appreciative parents do not allow their children to soil the carpet, upholstery, or walls of the Kingdom Hall or the home where the book study is held. And doubtless all of us agree that there certainly is no place for any kind of shameful conduct, foolish talking, or obscene jesting at our meetings.​—Eph. 5:4.
4 If we always remember the purpose of our Christian meetings, we will make sure that we and our children show due respect for Jehovah’s worship in the place where we “have chosen to stand.”​—Ps. 84:10.

