Announcements
◆ Literature offer: January through April: Watchtower subscription and an older 50-cent bound book copyrighted in 1961 or earlier, for $1.50, or double subscription with two such 50-cent books for $3.00. If congregation runs out of these older books, leave three booklets with each subscription.
◆ A special public talk scheduled for all congregations for Sunday, March 25, is “How Resurrection Benefits All the Dead in Hell.” A manuscript for this will be sent to each congregation in due time. Special handbills showing this lecture only, may be ordered now. If your circuit assembly falls on that weekend, the special talk may be scheduled for the next week, and if other circumstances arise, the body of elders can make adjustments.
◆ Memorial this year will be on Tuesday, April 17, after 6:00 p.m. Orders for Memorial invitations may be sent at the same time that orders are submitted for the special public talk handbills, but on separate order forms. The body of elders can decide what adjustments in the schedule of other meetings for the week would be best locally. Memorial invitations may be ordered in lots of 250 at 25c, 500 at 50c, or 1,000 at $1.00. Exact payment should accompany each order.
◆ New publications available:
Listening to the Great Teacher​—Portuguese
“Babylon the Great Has Fallen!” God’s Kingdom Rules!​—Portuguese
Divine Rulership​—the Only Hope of All Mankind—​Portuguese
◆ Again available in U.S.A.:
From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained​—Arabic
◆ Out of stock in U.S.A.:
Strong’s Concordance​—English (without index)
Leeser Bible​—English
◆ Please use a Remittance and Credit Request form to request credit for books given free with subscriptions. Remember to list them under “Other Items” as “Books given free with subscriptions,” followed by the quantity. A credit of 45c for each book will be included with your pioneer credit.
◆ Please keep in mind that all renewal subscriptions are for the full rate of $1.50 per year. There is no publisher or pioneer rate on renewals! On each slip for a new subscription please mark if it is obtained by a pioneer, and on all subscriptions note whether they are for six months or one year. If subscriptions are for several years, each additional year is full rate. Please do not send the duplicate copy of the subscription slip. Send only the original copy along with a remittance form and exact payment to cover the subscriptions. Please list the name of the congregation and the city on the remittance form. The person handling the accounts should be familiar with the information on page 8 of the Watchtower Cost List.

