Present Subscriptions with Conviction
1 How do we personally feel about encouraging someone to accept a subscription? We need to be convinced that their receiving the magazines regularly twice each month is a good thing if we are going to speak with conviction when making the offer. Some might feel that just as much good can be accomplished by covering the territory regularly with the magazines or by having a magazine route. But would that assure that interested persons would get every issue of the magazine? No, because even with a magazine route there will be times when something interferes with our schedule, such as illness, or they may not be at home. But with a subscription they will be receiving a copy of each issue.
2 Are we convinced that the magazines contain information that interested ones will understand, or do we feel that much of it is for Jehovah’s people only and thus difficult for others to grasp? Never should we allow this thought to hinder us from enthusiastically offering the magazines to others. Even though some of the study articles might not be fully understood by them, still there is a great deal that they do understand and that will benefit them. The opening article, in fact, is usually intended to catch and hold the interest of people in the territory. Why not study it carefully, getting acquainted with its main talking points, and thus be in a position to discuss it with the householder? Many newly interested ones have expressed special appreciation for the life stories of faithful brothers and sisters as published in The Watchtower. Others, not understanding fully the study articles, have come to the Watchtower study to hear the full discussion.
3 Are there some of us who still hesitate in presenting the subscription because the rate has been increased to $1.50? There is really no reason whatsoever to hold back from that standpoint. People in this country usually recognize that $1.50 simply covers the cost of printing and mailing. Contributing 50 cents more than in years past for the twenty-four issues received during the year is really inconsequential. This will be especially apparent as we offer one of the fifty-cent books copyrighted in 1961 or earlier as a premium with each subscription.
4 Subscriptions for The Watchtower have accomplished a tremendous amount of good ever since it was first published. The “faithful and discreet slave” has used this instrument to dispense spiritual food not only to Jehovah’s people, but to millions of others who were hungering and thirsting for the truth. Jehovah’s faithful people appreciate that it is even more important today to be bound closely to Jehovah’s visible organization and they understand the vital part The Watchtower plays in forming this close tie. Interested ones must also be helped to see this need, and their having each issue of The Watchtower available through a subscription will be invaluable to this end.
[Blurb on page 4]
Most subscriptions are obtained in house-to-house work.

