Presenting the Good News​—“Who Is It?”
1 When the householder will not open the door but, instead, calls out, “Who Is it?”, what do you say?
2 Usually we do not know what the situation is on the other side of the door, so the first thing is to be sure we are kind and considerate in our response. It is not good to try to establish rules to fit all situations. People and circumstances vary greatly. In large Eastern cities, for example, people often seem to have less time and appear to be less tolerant. In other areas they respond more readily and will converse.
3 If we have a variety of situations and people, then what we say should be varied. In some areas publishers feel it is best to identify themselves by name and organization, doing so quickly and clearly. In other areas it is the message and purpose that are identified. In either case, the goal is to remove fear or break down prejudice so that the door will open. If it does not, then the goal is to see if a testimony of some kind can be given, or if literature can be placed, even if just a handbill or study folder.
4 In places where householders are fearful and the voice is businesslike, one might give one’s name and then say, “I’m one of Jehovah’s witnesses and I would appreciate seeing you for a minute.” If the door opens, the regular presentation can be given. If the door does not open and it is felt this is because of fear, one might say: “I understand. Conditions are bad everywhere and people are fearful. Let me slip this folder under the door for you to read.” Some publishers have then suggested to the householder that they have the book described in the folder if it is desired. If one identifies oneself and one’s purpose clearly and the door does not open, one might feel that the responsibility now rests upon the householder for refusal to listen to the message.
5 In some neighborhoods publishers have learned that the householder who asks, “Who is it?” is not necessarily expecting the publisher to identify himself clearly by name and by organization with which he is associated. Here, having our current theme in mind, one might say something like this: “We are engaged in a community service. Honest-hearted people are concerned about the growing godlessness in the country. We believe we have something that will help those who want something better. I’d be glad to explain it to you briefly.”
6 One capable publisher relates that after trying many different things in a New York city territory composed primarily of apartment buildings, the most effective response he has found is simply to say, “Mr. (your name) to see you.” If the householder demands more identification, then one could clearly identify oneself. Some have said, “I’m from the local? Kingdom Hall at (give address).” No matter what the householder’s response, let us not indicate disappointment or disapproval, but, rather, understanding. Many are concerned for their safety, and we can show empathy.
7 There is no need to allow experiences like these to diminish one’s happiness in the house-to-house work. We are glad when people readily open the door and listen to what we have to say. But in some neighborhoods, where people are more cautious, we can accept this as a challenge. Try different approaches; talk to other publishers and get their thoughts.
8 Having considered the matter in advance and being prepared, we will not be uncertain or apprehensive, but will know what is best in our territory and will give to all the opportunity to hear the truth, allowing them to decide what they will do.

