Question Box
● What can each of us do to ensure that the monthly field service report is complete and sent to the Society on time?
Reporting our field activity at the end of the month is important. It aids the elders in the congregation to see how the brothers are doing, so they can provide needed assistance. It makes possible an accurate report to the Society and thus a meaningful report of field ministry for the country can be given in the “Kingdom Ministry,” and it makes possible a full report for the “Yearbook.” We are encouraged by these reports, so we all want to cooperate to make them complete. What can we do?
After enjoying a day in the field ministry, it is good to write your activity on the field service report slip so that nothing is forgotten. Then promptly at the end of the month, publishers and temporary pioneers can add up these figures and submit to the congregation just one report for the month. Regular pioneers hand their monthly report card to the field overseer. Bible study reports should be submitted by both publishers and pioneers when their field service report is turned in.
The field overseer will then immediately compile the reports and give the congregation report card to the presiding overseer, who will sign it and mail it right away. Mail service often is not good. At times a letter with regular postage (not airmail) reaches the branch office as much as seven days after being postmarked. As soon as the report is ready, the presiding overseer should mail it, not waiting until the sixth of the month, the deadline date, unless absolutely necessary.
Before mailing the report, the presiding overseer is to check it to make sure the total field activity for congregation publishers, regular pioneers and temporary pioneers is given. In this connection, a careful review of the article “Reporting Suggestions” on page seven of the November 1972 “Kingdom Ministry” would be very helpful. With the report he should include all regular pioneer report cards.

