The Work That Remains to Be Done
1 Our work of preaching and teaching was given the best kind of start over nineteen hundred years ago. Jesus, at his Father’s direction, “went around throughout the whole of Galilee, teaching in their synagogues and preaching the good news of the kingdom.” (Matt. 4:23) He had the same love for people that his Father had.
2 What is our view of the work that yet remains to be done? Do we view it as an opportunity to bring the good news of salvation to still others while there is yet time and to warn the wicked? as an opportunity to demonstrate to God what is really in our hearts? as an opportunity to set a good example for our brothers in zeal and faithfulness in these critical times?
3 Many are the opportunities to do so! Thus we look forward to the next four months of the 35th annual Watchtower campaign. We recognize it as one of the chief instruments furnished us by Jehovah through his “faithful and discreet slave,” bringing us ‘food at the proper time’ and assisting us in bringing the truth to others in our territory. And how will these be found? Primarily in the house-to-house work. What a fine thing it would be if all in our assigned territory could listen to our Scriptural presentation on “Getting to Know God,” also to see the current issue of The Watchtower and hear our description of it!
4 Effective presentations are usually not made without forethought. Practicing in advance with family members or with others in the congregation will result in confidence as you participate in the house-to-house work.
5 Preparation should also include our appearance. Let us bear in mind that we have the privilege, as did Timothy, of being “a fine minister of Christ Jesus” And how did he reach this status? By being “nourished with the words of the faith and of the fine teaching which you have followed closely” and not by imitating the extreme fads and hair grooming of worldly persons. (1 Tim. 4:6) Encouraging others to subscribe for and read The Watchtower will be more convincing if we are dressed neatly, tastefully and in an attire associated with one who represents himself as God’s minister. First impressions are important, so why place an obstacle before someone who might be looking for the truth?
6 During the Watchtower campaign it would be good to carry several copies of the pocket-size publications with us. We have a variety now, including the Evolution, Truth, Word of God and Great Teacher books. If people tell us they subscribe, we can offer them one of these books and possibly get a home Bible study started. If they refuse the subscription offer, we could show a small book and two magazines for thirty-five cents.
7 The field ministry means work. What our attitude toward work should be is indicated for us at Ecclesiastes 9:10, which says, “All that your hand finds to do, do with your very power.” It is true that “there are varieties of ministries” that must be cared for in the congregation. (1 Cor. 12:5) But while caring for all necessary matters, let us give more than the usual attention to the need to share fully in the field ministry and especially the house-to-house work.

