Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 7
15 min: Song 53. Introduction, text and comments. Discuss January theme.
20 min: “The Work That Remains to Be Done.” Questions and answers. On paragraph four, might have some capable publishers relate what they feel will be effective in the local territory in presenting the Scriptural discussion “Getting to Know God.”
10 min: Branch Letter. Handle in harmony with material and needs of the congregation.
15 min: Concluding comments. To be handled by Bible study overseer: What is being done about family study? Interview some family heads, also sisters who regularly study with their children although father is not a believer. Ask them what they study, when they have their family study, how much time they spend, how they handle the study, etc. Encourage others to do the same. If some are having a problem, invite them to speak to the Bible study overseer about it. Song 86.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 14
15 min: Song 91. Introduction, text and comments. “Question Box,” also December field service report for the congregation.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—‘Who Is It?’” Questions and answers. Demonstrate some points.
15 min: “Benefiting from the Circuit Overseer’s Visit.” Can cover by means of questions and answers. If time allows, some publishers can be given an opportunity to express themselves concerning their appreciation for engaging in the field ministry during the visit of the circuit overseer.
 5 min: Monthly accounts report. Follow the form of Monthly Accounts Report on page 2 of “Instructions for Congregation Accounting,” Form S-27, filling in the items and categories of receipts and disbursements. Payments of interest and principal on any Kingdom Hall construction or indebtedness and the balance remaining on any Kingdom Hall loan account should be made clear in the monthly report. The congregation should be given the opportunity to ask any questions they may have on the report, and such questions should be fully answered. The report should be clear and complete so all in the congregation will be informed as to the financial standing of the congregation. (See “Organization,” pages 152, 153.)
10 min: Concluding comments. Discuss slogan at bottom of page four concerning obtaining subscriptions in house-to-house work. Applicable Announcements. Song 93.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 21
(You may plan your own service meeting for this evening.)
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 28
10 min: Song 1. Introduction, text and comments.
15 min: “Present Subscriptions with Conviction.” Questions and answers. Arrange for some publishers to relate experiences or incidents that illustrate benefits newly interested ones received from “Watchtower” subscription or individual copy.
15 min: “Questions from Readers.” December 15, 1972, “Watchtower.” This can be a discussion between two brothers. The scriptures can be read and applied. Make discussion Scriptural and upbuilding. Show what each mate can do to keep the marriage clean and approved in God’s sight.
20 min: Concluding comments. To be handled by “Watchtower” study conductor: How do you study your “Watchtower”? Interview some of the publishers. Emphasize gaining understanding, appreciating how statements in the lesson help us to understand portions of the Bible itself, also making it a practice to apply the material to oneself. Song 12.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 4
10 min: Song 15. Introduction, text and comments.
15 min: “Getting to Know God” Discuss various aspects of Scriptural discussion that have been found most successful in local territory. Also, what might be said to introduce the current issue of “The Watchtower” being distributed, and especially the opening article that ties in with the theme of the Scriptural presentation. Include a demonstration, one that is well prepared, and show how to tie in thoughts with current “Watchtower” opening article.
20 min: “Do You Really Believe It?” By means of questions and answers have thorough discussion of this article in the January 15, 1973, issue of “The Watchtower.” One in charge should see that material is thoroughly covered and understood. Discuss together the scriptures. Group the paragraphs for an entire subheading for reading or read just certain key paragraphs.
15 min: Concluding comments. To be handled by field overseer: How we use our magazines. Interview publishers who do well in placing them. Let them tell how they do it, also why they emphasize use of magazines. Tell congregation how many of the territories were actually covered with offer of magazines during past six months; how many were not. Outline arrangements for group witnessing with magazines. Include some Theocratic News items. Song 3.

