Announcements
● New Publications Available:
Our Incoming World Government—God’s Kingdom—Dutch, German
True Peace and Security—From What Source?—Hungarian, Malagasy
Is There a God Who Cares?—Chishona, Chichewa, Efik, Fijian, Kisi, Sepedi, Slovak, Tshiluba, Tswana, Yoruba
● After January 1, congregations may submit orders for the 1977 bound volumes of The Watchtower and Awake! in English, French, Italian, Portuguese and Spanish. Order Dutch and German after February 15. Volumes are $2.50 each. There are no pioneer rates. Unlike last year, PAYMENT SHOULD NOT ACCOMPANY ORDERS. But payment is expected at the end of the month that you receive the volumes. These will be charged to the congregation’s literature account. The 1976 bound volumes of The Watchtower and Awake! are also available at $2.50 each in English.
● The Society has now completed the publications Good News—to Make You Happy and Your Youth—Getting the Best out of It! in Grade-two English braille. Each publication comes in a four-volume set and may be obtained by writing to the Braille Desk. We also have a supply of the booklet Jehovah’s Witnesses and the Question of Blood available in Grade-two English braille. All the above publications are sent out on a loan basis, so they should be returned to the Braille Desk when you are finished with them. No braille publications should be stocked by the congregation.
● Literature offer for December: New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures and the World Government book, on a contribution of $1.25. January: Watchtower subscription (with any 384-page book free to new subscribers), for $2.00; or subscriptions for both Watchtower and Awake! (with two 384-page books free to new subscribers), for $4.00. A half-year subscription, with a pocket-size book, may be offered for $1.25. If the subscription is not accepted, a pocket-size book along with one magazine may be offered for 35c.
● During December the presiding overseer should audit the congregation accounts for September, October and November or arrange for another capable brother to do so.
● During January and February we will have public talks based on the books Our Incoming World Government—God’s Kingdom and Life Does Have a Purpose. The outlines for these eight talks, rather than being brief write-ups in Our Kingdom Service, will be full-sized. These are being mailed separately. These talks will become part of the regular series of talks for the congregation, to be scheduled again in the future as desired. The outlines contain some interesting teaching techniques involving the audience that, when applied, will benefit all of us. In scheduling the talks, the first four will be based on the World Government book, to fit in with our studying that book in our congregation book studies. As for the book Life Does Have a Purpose, we will have the talks based on it during February. If two congregations want to exchange speakers, one can begin the series a week later than the other.

