Are You Instructing Your Family?
1 “I bend my knees to the Father, to whom every family in heaven and on earth owes its name,” wrote the apostle Paul. (Eph. 3:14, 15) Yes, Jehovah is the Father of mankind and also the Originator of the family arrangement. He knows and can tell us what is needed to make a family spiritually strong and happy.
2 Jehovah has set the perfect example for all fathers by effectively instructing us through his Word and by means of the faithful and discreet slave. (John 6:45) Are you fathers regularly feeding your wives and children with spiritual food? Are you studying with them, using publications and information appropriate to their needs? Take the initiative in providing the help that is needed. Encourage heart-to-heart discussions with the members of your family. Help them to grow spiritually. You will reap good fruitage from your hard work if you do.—Prov. 22:6.
SHARE IN KINGDOM-PREACHING AS A FAMILY
3 During December, with its school holidays, parents have an excellent opportunity to share in Kingdom-preaching with their children. Endeavor together to engage householders in conversation and to present the New World Translation and the World Government book on a contribution of $1.25. Since this will be the first time we will be offering the World Government book in the field, it may be helpful if your whole family has some ‘practice sessions.’ This can be done with others at the book study group, too. Preparing ahead of time will help you as you endeavor to engage householders in the conversation and to present the offer in an interesting way.
4 Whether both husband and wife are in the truth, or only one of you, when you share with your children in the field, it can be a very pleasant time for you and for them. Commend them for the efforts they put forth and the progress they make. As you serve together, you also have the fine opportunity to help your children make progress in Jehovah’s service. Do they need assistance in encouraging the householder to have a share in the conversation? If you observe this, you can help them. Do they lack appreciation for the real purpose of the field service? Help them to see that lives are involved and that our service is an honor to Jehovah. Are they discouraged when householders are brusque? Help them to see that the householder was not angry with us personally. Do your children need help to see why we should participate regularly in Kingdom-preaching? (Rev. 22:2) As you accompany them, you will become aware of their needs and will be in a position to encourage and help them.
5 As you share in the field service with your children, be sure to include them in the conversation. And by all means, invite those with whom you are talking to express themselves also. All of us enjoy a conversation when we have a part in it. How can you do this?
6 You might say: “Good morning! My name is ․․․․․․․․․․, and this is my son (or daughter). No doubt you have wondered why world conditions have continued to deteriorate. My son (or daughter) and I have found a Bible verse that we believe will interest you.” [Invite your son (or daughter) to read Proverbs 29:2 and comment if they would like.] Then ask the householder: “Do you believe that those in government may be contributing to the difficulty?” (Allow for response.) Ask the householder if he thinks God has enough interest in mankind so that he will eventually take a hand in world affairs. (Allow for response.) Then you might continue by saying: “Jesus knew that God someday would take a hand in the affairs of mankind and that is why he taught us to pray for God’s kingdom to come and God’s will to be done on earth. This publication about the incoming world government will aid you to learn more about God’s kingdom government, and we are offering it, along with the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures, for $1.25.” As you draw the householder into the conversation, be discerning. You will be able to determine the interest of the householder or the lack of it. You will also be able to determine whether it would be appropriate to offer literature or not.
7 When witnessing with your children, do not underestimate how effective young publishers can be in presenting the good news. There are times when they can be more effective than older publishers in reaching certain people.
8 One father was going from house to house with his two sons, eight and ten years old. In talking to a woman who had ten children, he said: “Children can learn much from the Bible, but they need to understand it.” The woman replied: “Where do you ever see children six and twelve years old reading and understanding the Bible?” The brother turned to his son, who was ten years old, and asked him to read some of God’s promises about everlasting life. The boy read and explained Psalm 37:29. When the woman showed amazement and pleasure, the brother turned to his eight-year-old son and asked him to read and explain Matthew 4:1-11. The woman readily took the Truth book and a Bible study was arranged with her and her children.
9 Are you taking time to teach your children the truth and to share with them in the field service? Are you young publishers showing a willingness to study with your parents and accompany them in the field service? You can be sure that Jehovah is pleased with you when you do. Yes, both parents and children are called upon to show appreciation for the family arrangement.

