Presenting the Good News—On Holidays
1 “Let your utterance be always with graciousness, seasoned with salt, so as to know how you ought to give an answer to each one.” (Col. 4:6) This fine counsel of the apostle Paul applies to our conversations about Jehovah and his purposes at all times, but especially can we apply this admonition during holiday seasons.
2 Generally speaking, during the holiday season people are in a better frame of mind and are a little more willing to converse about religious matters. We do well to take advantage of their feeling this way by incorporating comments perhaps to this effect: “We note at this time of year that many people are particularly concerned with subjects dealing with religion, and we are happy to find that. Since the Bible is the basis for true Christianity, now is an especially fine time to read God’s Word.” Then we can go on to consider our topic for conversation from the Bible and offer the easy-to-understand New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures and the World Government book.
3 Or we might say: “At this time of year many people are thinking about religious matters and particularly about Jesus Christ. Most know of the ‘Our Father’ or ‘Lord’s Prayer,’ which points out that when the Kingdom comes, then God’s will is to be done on earth as it is done in heaven. (Read or quote Matthew 6:9, 10.) But will that Kingdom govern the whole earth? Or will it be a small, temporary Kingdom? (Allow for response; then read Daniel 7:13, 14.) That description of Christ’s kingdom shows it will not be weak or temporary. It is the government by which righteous conditions will be brought about world wide.” Then we could go on to offer a Bible study or discuss some point in the World Government book or the New World Translation and present this month’s suggested offer.
4 We want to be tactful and present the message of truth in a way that appeals to the heart and mind of the householder. It would not be wise to offend individuals unnecessarily with regard to their attitudes about holidays. If they specifically ask how we feel about the subject, we can truthfully, though respectfully, answer.
5 If questions come up with regard to holidays, or if the householder appears to be interested although too busy to talk, we should make a note of this on our house-to-house record. Then we can prepare and call back to give a further witness after the holiday season is past. It would be wise to make our message brief and to the point if people are busy due to having company or getting ready to visit others.
6 Sometimes when we call early in the morning on a holiday such as New Year’s Day, we disturb people who want to sleep late. Might it be wise to start your house-to-house activity a little later than usual on that day? Or you may feel it would be considerate to start your service by making some return visits first on those you know are in a position to receive you. You will be able to decide what will be appropriate for your territory. We want to present the good news in a way that attracts the householders, and if we can talk to them without disturbing them from their sleep, they are more likely to listen to what we have to say.
7 Presentations ‘seasoned with salt’ can be appealing. We are wise to recognize the feelings of others as we present the good news during the holiday season.

