From Our Readers
Grandparents  The “Young People Ask . . .” articles in the July 8 and July 22, 1992, issues dealt with having grandparents move in. My grandmother moved in with us after her husband died. She took care of me and my five siblings while Mom and Dad worked; we became very close. Now that Grandma can no longer care for herself, I have the privilege of giving back a little of what she gave me. It hasn’t been easy, since I have a family to take care of, and I am not too well. But I feel good about caring for her. Yes, many positive things can happen when a grandparent moves in!
B. M., United States
Rearing Children  Thank you for the articles on “Rearing Children in an Immoral World.” (June 22, 1992) You warned of deceitful ones who slip into the congregation, claiming to be Christian. Last year our young daughter was drugged and raped by such a young man. He was studying the Bible with a member of our congregation. Although the courts convicted him, the toll on our family has been devastating. We hope all Christian parents will study these timely articles with their children, cautioning them not to be too trusting of those who appear to have an interest in the Bible.
K. V., United States
This magazine made me realize how much effort our parents have to put forth to raise us in the fear of God. I personally benefited from the article “Help Them Choose a Mate Wisely.” I am only 16 and am not interested in marriage now. However, I am sure this practical counsel will be useful to me in the future.
N. G., Italy
Death-Metal Music  Many thanks for the article “Death Metal​—What’s the Message?” (July 8, 1992) Both heavy-metal and rap music are very popular in my school. Anyone who does not like this sort of music is made fun of. The article made it easier for me to say no as well as to explain why I do not like this music. Thanks a lot.
M. F., Germany
Public Speaking  Just a few comments on the article “You Can Speak Before an Audience!” (July 22, 1992) I was always shy. In school I could rarely talk in front of the class, and I finally quit school because of my fears. But when I became a Christian, I joined the Theocratic Ministry School and had to speak before an audience. It was not easy, but with prayer and a will to overcome my problem, I gradually improved. I still feel timid, but I have even spoken before large audiences at conventions of Jehovah’s Witnesses!
A. H., Brazil
Improve Your Memory  Just before reading the article “How to Improve Your Memory” (July 22, 1992), I discovered that I had once again forgotten to buy something while out shopping. The article pointed out a number of aids in training one’s memory, such as forming a mental image. The example of picturing a cow brushing her teeth when one needs to purchase milk and toothpaste was particularly amusing. In the future, I will use these methods and hopefully do away with my shopping list.
E. B., Germany
From Our Readers  Thank you very much for the feature “From Our Readers.” Far from being a medley of statements chosen to support your point of view, it is a collection of touching human experiences. The readiness with which you publish readers’ criticism and, on occasion, the editor’s corrections is a clear proof of your humility.
C. Q., Italy

