VOL. XIX. AUGUST 1, 1898. No. 15. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 226 

"Ye Serve the Lord Christ" 227 

Poem: Some Better Thing 230 

Interesting Questions Answered 230 

Elisha Doing Restitution Work 231 

General Naaman Healed— Mercies 

Appreciated 233 

General Naaman's Gratitude 236 

The Covetous Servant 238 

"Are They Not All Ministering 

Spirits?" 238 

page 226 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 



R2343 : page 227 

"YE SERVE THE LORD CHRIST." 



"Whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto 

men; knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward 

of the inheritance: for ye serve the Lord Christ."— Col. 3:23,24. 

SERVANTS are specially addressed by the 
Apostle. He points out to them not only 
here but elsewhere that all service should be good 
service, and that whether the person served were one 
of the Lord's people or an enemy of the truth, the 



work should not be slighted. The principle of the 
thing is pointed out, namely, that we are servants of 
the Lord and therefore his representatives. So then, 
if we find that we are in the place in which Providence 
has placed us, we are to serve in that place or position 
faithfully, perseveringly, interestedly, as tho we were 
laboring for the Lord, and not for men: whereas if we 
considered ourselves as merely laboring for men, we 
might labor hard and faithfully for the good, and 
slightingly for the unkind and froward. But a point 
to be remembered is that we are all servants: none are 
called to be masters under the gospel call; one is our 
master, even Christ, and we all are brethren and fellow 
servants. 

The effect of such advice is good: first, upon the 
world, and secondly, upon ourselves. Worldly people 
are keen to appreciate good service, altho they may 
not always acknowledge it or properly reward it: and 
the Apostle's instructions here, if diligently followed, 
would soon have the effect of making Christians the 
most desirable servants in any and every field of usefulness, 
because their work would be more faithfully 
and more carefully performed, and hence more satisfactory 
in its results. The effect of this would be that 
Christian intelligence and skill would be appreciated 
and sought; and under the operation of the general 
rule, being appreciated, they would be advanced to 
positions of more and more responsibility, where their 
carefulness might be the more valuable to their employers. 
Thus, the name of Christ would come to be 
respected amongst the most intelligent people, and the 
inquiry would naturally be, What is there about these 
Christians, or about their teaching and doctrines, that 
makes them more capable and efficient as servants? 

The answer would be, This is the spirit and result 
of their law of Love: they are not only forbidden to do 
injury to anyone, even their enemies, but they are enjoined 
to be faithful to everyone, and to do good even 
to their enemies. They are instructed to labor daily, 
not merely for the praise and approval of their earthly 
masters, but especially for the praise and approval of 
their heavenly Master. And then, if the inquiry came, 
Why should they do so? the answer would be, These 
Christians are not expecting earthly rewards but heavenly 
rewards: they are content to be "pilgrims and 
strangers" in this present time, and servants, if Providence 
so orders for them, and to learn lessons in 
patience, submission and love, anticipating that the 
time is coming when they shall be highly exalted, 
—when their present efforts to please their Master, by 
faithfulness in humble positions, shall be exchanged 
for a most glorious service,— when they shall be united 
with their Master in the great work of ruling and 
instructing the world of mankind, during the Millennial 
age. 

And if the intelligent employer continued questioning, 



and asked, What has such a hope of the future 
to do with their faithfulness in the little affairs of 
the present life? his question would bring the answer, 
Their King, Master and Teacher has instructed them 
that all the little affairs of the present life have a bearing 

R2343 : page 228 

upon the development of character, and that they 

must develop characters of obedience, meekness, patience, 

love, else they will be unsuited to the future 

service in glory, to which they are called. Their Master 

has instructed them that in his view of matters he 

that is faithful in little things is the one who will be 

faithful in great things, and that only as they show 

their faithfulness and subordination to him, and their 

willingness to do his will in the present life, 

can they hope to be accounted worthy of the 

high position and great rewards which he has 

in reservation for those that love him. The employer 

would be informed further that all the tests and trials 

of patience and faith, in obedience to the Word of the 

Lord, are understood by Christians to be tests of their 

love for and loyalty to their Master and King, because 

he has so instructed. Who can doubt that the influence 

of such living epistles would be great for good in 

the world? 

And what is true as respects those who are engaged 
in serving masters literally is true also of the 
entire household of faith, whatever may be their stations 
in life,— master or servant, mistress or maid, 
manager or subordinate; because all of the Lord's people 
are his servants. True, we are termed his brethren 
also, but there is nothing inconsistent with the 
thought of our being his brethren and still being his 
servants; nor would there be anything inconsistent 
with the thought that while all of the Lord's people 
are brethren some of them might, in a particular sense, 
be servants of brethren; and both of these thoughts 
are prominently set before us in the Scriptures. Each 
one is to share in the others' love. "Love as brethren;" 
and each one is to share in serving, and to esteem 
it a special privilege to "serve one another." 

Nothing could be much more contrary to the spirit 
of the world, than this. The spirit of the world is to 
make other people your servants, and as for you, 
avoid serving anybody as much as possible. The spirit 
of Christ, on the contrary, is a spirit of service, and 
not a spirit of mastery, browbeating, domineering, 
force, compulsion: it leads those who possess it to seek 
opportunities for service— to "do good unto all men as 
we have opportunity, especially to the household of 
faith;" and to the contrary it leads those under its influence 
to be very generous and to ask or require only 
reasonable service from others. 

The foundation principles of the Christian religion 



are laid upon these lines, which are the reverse of the 
world's lines of thought and conduct; namely, that the 
greatest one in the Church is the one who is the greatest 
servant, the one who renders most assistance to others. 
The greatest servant in the Church was the great 
Head of the Church himself, who gave even his life on 
our behalf. And those of his followers who desire to 
be great in the estimation of the Lord and so esteemed 
of their fellows, are enjoined that they should follow 
closely in the Master's footsteps, and with humility of 
heart be ready and seek to lay down their lives for the 
brethren. (1 John 3:16.) Nor does this mean simply 
formal service; it means an actual service. Our Lord's 
sacrifice, we see, was not merely a form or a show of 
interest and of love: it was the giving of his life as the 
purchase price for ours. So with us; we are not merely 
to love one another and to serve one another, in 
word, in profession, in title (as for instance, the word 
"minister" signifies servant); but we are to serve one 
another as we are to love one another, "in deed and 
in truth. "--1 John 3:18. 

Looking about us for opportunity of service we 
find our Lord's instruction through the Apostle, that 
we should seek to do good to all men according to our 
ability and opportunity, but especially to the household 
of faith. As we look first to the household of 
faith to see what service we can render, we find in 
this household some who are naturally more attractive 
to us than others, some whom we would find it a pleasure 
to serve; while others, because of more perverse 
natural conditions, we find less congenial, even repellant; 
and these we feel less disposed to serve. But this 
is because of a wrong view of the subject. We are to 
remember that all consecrated believers are new creatures 
in Christ Jesus and accepted of the Lord as members 
of his body, fellow-members with ourselves. From 
this standpoint only can we realize to the full the significance 
of the Apostle's words in our text, "Ye do 
serve the Lord Christ." The Master informs us that 
the slightest service done to the least of his brethren 
is accepted as done to himself. With this view of matters 
clearly in mind, we see our duty of service in a new 
light. We see that the brother or sister of high spiritual 
development and possessing more of the Lord's 
likeness and grace, whose company we find so congenial, 
and whom we would delight to serve, often needs 
our service far less than others who are of the same 
Body, acknowledged by the same Head, who have 
much more natural depravity, unconquered, to contend 
with. These need our special sympathy and love 
and care and helpfulness; for the proper conception of 
service is a desire to render some benefit: and there 
is the more opportunity to benefit or help those who 
most need assistance. 

Of our Lord it is written that he "pleased not himself," 
in his serving. He did not come into the world 



on a mission of self-gratification and pleasure; but to 
render service. He himself said, "The Son of Man 
came not to be served, but to serve, and to give his 
life a ransom for many." We are to have his spirit, 

R2343 : page 229 

and the thought with us is not to be our own pleasure 
or convenience, but on the contrary the necessities of 
those whom the Lord would have us serve,— namely, 
those of his household most in need of our aid. We 
may have less pleasure, according to the flesh, in serving 
such than we would have in serving others, but it 
is not fleshly pleasure that we are seeking; and we can 

R2344 : page 229 

have as much or more spiritual pleasure serving those 
who are the most needy members of the body of Christ, 
because we realize that this is the will of our Master. 
It is to him that we really render the service, and our 
highest spiritual pleasure must be in doing those things 
which are pleasing in his sight. And it is because our 
Master has so ordered, that the household of faith is 
to be served in preference to any other class; consequently 
we are to ignore the opinions of the worldly 
and of the nominal church and not to seek out the 
most degraded people of the world, and spend our energies 
upon them, but we are to seek the most needy 
members of the body of Christ, that we may be most 
helpful to them. The Lord will attend to the poor 
heathen world in due time, and the time is now nigh 
at hand. The first work is, as we have seen from the 
Scriptures, the preparation of the body of Christ; and 
it is to this end that we are to "edify one another, 
building up one another in the most holy faith." 

Another thought respecting service is that the true 
service of the Lord and his truth may be a small, humble 
and comparatively insignificant service, or a larger 
and more prominent service. And of course, if two 
opportunities for service offer, which were otherwise 
alike, we should choose and use the larger and the 
more important of the two opportunities. But we are 
to guard ourselves against seeking for large opportunities 
for service, and overlooking or intentionally passing 
by smaller opportunities. We believe this is a common 
error amongst those who seek to serve the Lord 
Christ. They desire to do some great thing for him; 
they would be overjoyed with the privilege of addressing 
thousands of intelligent and interested hearers. 
They fain would sway nations to the Lord's standard. 
Some would be willing to use smaller opportunities, 
and to address a hundred or fifty or even less, yet perhaps 
would think it not worth while to use the little 
opportunities of everyday life in speaking to one or 
two or three, or a dozen or a score, in a day, or of 



handing a tract, or of loaning a book, or of circulating 
tracts in the railway train, or upon the street corner. 
These services they would esteem too insignificant to 
render to the Master; they feel that they must do some 
great thing. 

This is a serious mistake, and any who find such 
a disposition in their hearts should at once analyze 
their sentiments carefully, to ascertain whether or not 
they have the desire to serve the Lord, or whether 
theirs is a desire for self-glorification,— a desire to be 
identified with something great, prominent and distinguished. 
The Lord's rule is, not to put a new servant 
into a very important place. The captains in the 
Lord's army are expected to rise from the ranks. He 
tells us the process of his judgment respecting fitness 
for prominent service, when he says, "He that is faithful 
in that which is least will be faithful also in that 
which is greater." "He that humbleth himself shall 
be exalted; he that exalteth himself shall be abased." 
And the more we look at the principles here set forth, 
the more we see of their wisdom and correctness. The 
person who is earnest and zealous to serve the Lord, 
so willing and so anxious for the opportunity that he 
will do what his hand finds to do with his might, that 
is a true servant; that servant shows his love for the 
Master,— shows that his is not a love of self and of 
self-advancement. Such servants, the Lord sees, can 
be trusted with a more important service, and consequently, 
when a more important service is to be attended 
to, usually the Lord selects one who has been 
faithful in a few things, to give charge over larger 
things. And who would dispute the wisdom of the 
Lord's method? He who has not humility enough to 
do the smallest service for the Lord, for the truth, and 
for the fellow-members of the body of Christ, has not 
humility enough to be entrusted with any larger service; 
for larger service might prove a great injury to 
himself, since it would tend to cultivate a quality 
which is latent in every member of the fallen race, and 
one which would thoroughly incapacitate him for further 
service, namely, pride,— self-conceit and its concomitant 
evils. 

In thus requiring that all who would be followers 
of him shall be servants, not merely in name, but in 
deed and in truth and in spirit, our Lord lays down a 
rule which tends to keep out of his real flock the selfish 
and ambitious wolves. Yet the danger remains 
that, if the Lord's flock as a whole in any place loses 
the real conception of their call, that it is a call to 
service, the self-seeking disposition is apt to spread as 
a contagion from one to another of the entire company, 
until, instead of being servants one of the other, they 
may become a group of self-seekers; each seeking his 
own welfare and honor and position, and each neglecting 
the fact that the chief business of life is to render 
service to others. And each one who gets into this 



attitude of self-seeking himself is thereby to a large 
degree blinded to the proper principles that should 
govern. And a group of Christians in such a condition 
might, and very probably would, select as their 
principal one or leader a person of self-seeking disposition, 
a lord over God's heritage, instead of a servant 
of the flock. 

R2344 : page 230 

Seeing that this is the Lord's arrangement, that 
we are to grow in this grace by noticing and using our 
opportunities as servants, we exhort all who may read 
these lines to be more faithful, henceforth, in seeking 
for opportunities of service to the Church which is the 
body of Christ; and that thus carefully seeking they 
take heed that they do not pass by some of the small 
opportunities. Let us remember that our great Master 
set us an example in this direction, preaching some 
of his most wonderful sermons to extremely small 
audiences. For instance; his discourse on the Water 
of Life, to the woman of Samaria; his discourse on 
Heavenly versus Earthly things, to Nicodemus; his discourse 
to Nathaniel, and his discourse to the two who 
were going to Emmaus, after his resurrection. If we 
take care of the little opportunities for service, in a 
humble way, and are faithful in these, and render this 
service heartily as unto the Lord, we will by and by 
be granted larger and still larger opportunities. To 
him that hath used his opportunities shall be granted 
more, and from him who hath not used his opportunities, 
that which he has had will be taken from him. 
"Whatsoever ye do, do it heartily as to the Lord, and 
not unto men, knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive 
the reward. For ye serve the Lord Christ." 



R2344 : page 230 

SOME BETTER THING. 



Tho wintry wind the yellow leaf displaceth, 

For spring's sweet harbingers it maketh room;— 

Ere long the tender bud the forest graceth, 

New verdure waketh from old Nature's tomb. 

The snowy blossom from the orchard fadeth, 
'Tis then the earnest of fair fruit we find; 

Tho morning mist the landscape overshadeth, 
The sunlit mountain-peaks are just behind. 

Lo, in the crimson West the glory dieth, 

And from his throne Day's monarch hath withdrawn! 



Herein the promise of the sunrise lieth— 
Already we are waiting for the dawn. 

O heart bereaved, some better thing remaineth, 
Tho God should seem thy treasures to remove; 

Some better thing his gracious hand retaineth, 
He will not fail the children of his love. 

Some better thing! Thy life-joy all departed- 
Its glory trailing sadly in the dust; 

O cleave to him,— the Savior tender-hearted; 

Thou canst not understand, but thou canst trust. 

Perchance he leads to depths of self-abasement, 
And storms awake, and billows round thee roll; 

Give thanks! Contrition is the open casement 

Through which the Dove of Peace shall reach thy soul. 

O patient heart, thy best, thy brightest bringing, 

With full consent upon his altar lay! 
Some fair new blessing even now is winging, 

All unobserved, its sure but noiseless way. 

Thy purpose crossed, each sunny prospect clouded, 
Still to his changeless promise learn to cling; 

Altho his ways may be in darkness shrouded, 
Jehovah hath reserved some better thing. 
-LUCY A. BENNETT. 



R2344 : page 230 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 



Question. Had Adam a knowledge of death by 
observation of it in the lower creation? 

Answer. There is nothing to show that he had. 
But whether he had or had not witnessed death, he 
probably understood to some extent what God meant 
when he used the words, "Dying, thou shalt die." 
He was not deceived. Tho Adam's experience was 
limited, he undoubtedly understood what it meant to 
have life, and had some idea of what it would mean to 
lose his life and to be resolved into the elements from 
which he had been created. 

Question. In Gen. 1:28 and similar passages the 
word "replenish" seems to indicate that the earth had 
been peopled before Adam's creation. Is there anything 
in the claim of a pre-Adamic race? or that some 
of the more barbarous nations are not Adam's 
offspring? 

Answer. You would find it of advantage when 
such questions come up to consult Young's Concordance 



and show the advocate of any erroneous view the 
definitions there given, and also other passages in 
which the word in question occurs. If "replenish" 
be the meaning here, it should fit the other instances 
in which the word is used; but it does not. The 
proper rendering of the word is fill.— See margin. 

The Scriptures are positive in the declaration that 
Adam was the first human being. In 1 Cor. 15:45,47, 
he is called the first man. In Acts 17:26, it is 
stated that God "made of one blood all nations of men 
for to dwell on all the face of the earth;" in other 
words, all the peoples of the earth are descended from 
Adam, no matter how different in color, stature, intelligence, 
etc., they may now be. 

Furthermore, the entire testimony of the Bible 
must needs be set aside to give color to such a theory: 
for the Scriptures record that present races had their 
start in father Noah and that only his descendants survived 
the flood. And in the New Testament our Lord 
and several of the Apostles corroborate this record— 
of Noah and the flood. The negro race is supposed 
to be descended from Ham, whose special degradation 
is mentioned in Gen. 9:22,25. 

Question. Please briefly give us your views on 
Rom. 2:14,15. 

Answer. These verses assure us that some heathen 
people do some good things in harmony with the 

R2345 : page 230 

divine law, and that to that extent their conduct meets 
with the divine approval. But the Apostle clearly 

R2345 : page 231 

shows that neither the Jews nor the heathen do all 
things in harmony with the divine law, nor can they, 
because of inherited imperfections. Hence, neither 
the Jews nor the heathen would be justified under the 
Law. God, however, has provided through Christ 
a justification, under the terms of the New Covenant, 
which excuses and forgives whatever is not wilful sin, 
on the part of both Jews and heathen, who receive 
Christ, and through his merit. Thus it is that God 
will justify the heathen through faith— not all the 
heathen, but all the heathen who will exercise the 
faith when the knowledge of Christ shall reach them, 
in God's due time. 

Question. I was surprised to note your advice to 
any who might be drafted into the army. Would not 
your advice seem like compromising to avoid trouble? 

Answer. It is proper to avoid trouble in a proper 
manner. It is proper to compromise when no principle 
is involved, as in the case mentioned. Notice that 
there is no command in the Scriptures against military 
service. Obedience to a draft would remind us of our 



Lord's words, "If any man compel thee to go a mile, 
go with him twain." The government may compel 
marching or drilling, but cannot compel you to kill 
the foe. You need not be a good marksman. 

Question. You suggested in a recent WATCH 
TOWER that, if drafted and in the army, we need not 
shoot to kill. Would such a course be right? Would 
it not be fraudulent? 

Answer. No; it would be quite right to shoot, 
not to kill. You forget, perhaps, our provisos, which 
were that we explain our conscientious scruples against 
war, and seek to be excused; if not excused, that we 
seek non-combatant positions, as nurses, etc.; but if 
compelled to go a mile or many miles as a soldier, we 
still need not kill anybody. 

Question. Will we know each other in the 
Kingdom? 

Answer. When the Apostle says (1 Cor. 13:12), 
"Now we see through a glass darkly [i.e., as through 
an obscured glass], but then face to face; now I know 
in part, but then shall I know, even as I also am 
known," he undoubtedly included in the future 
knowledge the recognition of friends, even as he realized 
himself already known of God. If we are to be 
partakers of "the divine nature" and inheritors of all 
things, we must expect to be acquainted with the beings 
who form a considerable part of our heritage for 
a thousand years as well as with our associates in that 
inheritance. 

Question. Were not the Psalms inspired specially 
for song service; and is it not therefore improper to use 
other hymns? 

Answer. David's thought in writing the Psalms 
may have been merely their use in song; but the Lord's 
object was to give prophecy to assist his people of a 
later period. See what Peter says on this subject. 
(1 Pet. 1:10-12.) Other prophecies of the Old Testament 
are written in poetical form, particularly Isaiah 
and Job. Our Lord quoted from both, as did also his 
apostles, and showed that in some of the Psalms David 
typified the Lord. 

While some of the Psalms seem to us very suitable 
for singing, others we regard as less appropriate than 
hymns of praise of modern date. When the apostles 
said that we should sing "psalms and hymns and spiritual 
songs" (Eph. 5: 19), he recognized a distinction 
between the three kinds of songs and commended all. 
We believe it is safe to follow his instructions, remembering 
the instruction, "Be not wise above what is 
written." However, on this subject we believe each 
one should follow his own conscience. Doubtless the 
Lord accepts the offering of song, whatever its form, 
so long as it comes from the heart,— just as with prose 
prayers; for hymns and psalms should be regarded as 
union or concert prayers. 



R2345 : page 231 

ELISHA DOING RESTITUTION WORK. 

--AUG. 14.-2 KINGS 4:25-37.- 

"Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and 
he shall sustain thee."— Psa. 55:22. 

ELISHA did receive a double portion of Elijah's 

spirit, or power. Not only did Jordan part 

before him, in obedience to his faith and at the stroke 

of the mantle, but other important works followed. 

Coming to a school of the prophets, they found that 

in preparing the dinner of vegetables something had 

gotten into the stew which they recognized to be poisonous, 

and the dinner was spoiled; but Elisha miraculously 

antidoted the poison, and made the dinner 

wholesome. Again, the people of Jericho complained 

that the fountain of water which supplied them was 

brackish, and he healed the waters so that the fountain 

became known as the fountain of Elisha, and the 

place is so known to-day. 

These may be considered as typical of the restitution 
works which the Elisha class will introduce to the 
world. What do people who are religiously disposed, 
and who seek to understand the Word of the Lord, 
need, as the first feature of restitution blessings? Will 
it not be that something shall be put into their mess 
of pottage, that will destroy its poisonous errors, and 
make it health-giving, nutritious? Surely the peoples 
of civilized lands have God's Word in their hands, and 
its contents are good and nourishing and health-giving; 
but some of the theological cooks have unintentionally 
added doctrines of the Evil One so that it is 
made to the people a poisonous dinner, injurious, as 
represented in the various creeds of Christendom. And 
what does the world in general need more than that 
the springs of the water of life (which have become 
corrupted and brackish, through false theories and 
misinterpretations of the divine Word and plan) should 
be corrected, healed, made sweet and pure and refreshing? 
And such restitution work will be accomplished, 

R2345 : page 232 

we understand, by the successors of the Gospel Church 
in a much larger measure than the Church itself is 
able to accomplish it now— the Church's work being 
specifically the making of herself ready.— Rev. 19:7. 

Further, we have the record of how the poor 
widow and her sons were helped by the prophet Elisha, 
to whom she appealed in her distress. A debt 
was upon her, and, according to the terms of the Law, 



her sons would be bound to serve the creditor until 

the indebtedness had been discharged, or until the 

Jubilee year should be ushered in; and as she was a 

widow she needed her sons' assistance at home. The 

prophet saw her distress, sympathized with her, and 

assisted: the assistance being rendered in a manner 

which helped to develop her faith in the Lord. The 

only merchantable thing she had in her house was a 

pot of oil; and the prophet directed her to send among 

her neighbors and borrow all the empty vessels that 

she could obtain, and to pour all full of oil, which then 

she could sell, and from the proceeds pay the debt and 

have something left; and so she did, according to directions. 

Does not this act of relieving the poor illustrate 

restitution powers and work also? Are we not 

told that in that time the Lord will "lift up the poor 

and the needy, and him that hath no helper?" There 

is in this a lesson of the Lord's sympathy with us in 

our earthly difficulties; a lesson of his willingness to 

assist us to pay our honest debts; and a lesson of the 

propriety of paying honest debts. And there is another 

lesson respecting how God is pleased to bless the use 

of the things which we have, rather than to send us 

other things, or to miraculously put the money into 

our pockets. There is also a lesson for faith, because 

it was in proportion to her faith that the woman gathered 

a large or small number of vessels, and therefore 

got a larger or a smaller evidence of divine bounty 

and mercy. Let us, when dealing with the Lord, remember 

that all the gold and silver are his, and the 

"cattle on a thousand hills," and let our works be in 

harmony with our faith. 

We come now to the particular feature of this lesson, 
the Shunammite woman and her son: and this also 
contains a suggestion of the great restitution blessing 
of awakening the dead. This Shunammite has the record 
of the Scriptures that she was "a great woman." 
Apparently she and her husband were comfortably 
situated in life; perhaps indeed the greatness referred 
in part to wealth, but evidently she was a more than 
ordinary woman in other respects, as is indicated by 
the narrative. She may have been superior to her 
husband in intelligence, as the narrative seems to indicate. 
She had the kind of greatness, too, which 
recognizes goodness, and reverences the Lord, and those 
who are his. Seeing the prophet pass her place occasionally, 
probably on his way to the schools of the 
prophets, she hospitably urged him to take dinner with 
her, and so, apparently, every time he passed that way 
he stopped to partake of her hospitality. And the 
more this great woman saw of the Lord's prophet the 
more she realized that it was a favor to have him under 
the roof, so she said to her husband, "Behold now, 
I perceive that this is an holy man of God, which passeth 
by us continually. Let us make a little chamber, 
I pray thee, on the wall, and let us set for him there 



a bed, and a table, and a stool and a candlestick: and 
it shall be when he cometh to us that he shall turn in 
thither." Altho apparently the husband was less religiously 

R2346 : page 232 

inclined than his wife, and perhaps less 
"great" in some other respects, yet this courteous request, 
expressed in so wifely and proper a manner, 
appealed to him, and was acted upon, and we may say 
that part of the woman's greatness is manifested in 
this her dealing with her own husband. How many 
women there are who, if they felt themselves the 
greater of the two, would altogether forget the propriety 
of consulting with the husband, the divinely 
appointed head of the family, and requesting cooperation 
in religious work and benevolence, rather than 
demanding it. Modesty and humility are true signs 
of greatness, both in men and women. 

Hotels and lodging houses and restaurants were 
not arrangements of those days, and consequently hospitality 
was more practised than to-day. In some respects 
we have lost considerably by the change of customs, 
for the spirit of hospitality seems to be considerably 
less than in olden times. We believe that so far 
as possible every Christian family would do well, if 
their means would justify, to have such a spare room 
for the entertainment of the Lord's servants who may 
come their way. We believe that a blessing, spiritual 
if not temporal, comes to all who seek to cultivate this 
spirit of loving generosity, benevolence, kindness, in the 
entertainment of the Lord's servants,— and in general 
the household of faith, as they may have opportunity. 

A similar spirit of benevolence and thoughtfulness 
for others was in the Prophet, who requested his servant 
to notice whether or not the kind entertainer was 
lacking of anything which would minister to her comfort, 
which he could supply. The answer was that 
she was childless; and seizing the opportunity the 
Prophet informed her that she should have a son. 
There is a lesson here for each of us, to the effect that 
if we are the recipients of favor from others— either 
from the Lord or his people— if we have the same spirit 
we will seek to do something in return. Those who accept 
of the favors of others, and lack the desire and fail 
to seek the opportunity to do as much or more in return, 
are certainly lacking the Lord's spirit in this particular. 

R2346 : page 233 

Years passed; the child grew to boyhood, and 
while in the harvest field was taken ill with something 
like sunstroke, and died. The mother, with exhibitions 
of great faith, laid the dead child in the prophet's 
room, upon his bed, and immediately started with her 
servant in all haste to find the Prophet. When the 



Prophet by the mouth of his servant asked, "Is it 

well?" she had faith enough to answer, "It is well;" 

and reaching the prophet's presence she reminded him 

of the fact that she had not requested the son, that he 

had been a gift, and intimated that if now the lad were 

taken away, instead of being a gift or benefaction to 

her the matter would be only a sorrow; yet she did not 

say that the boy was dead, apparently having full confidence 

in the power of God, through the Prophet, to 

awaken him, even from the sleep of death. The 

Prophet, full of faith also, sent his staff to be laid upon 

the child, at the hands of the servant; but the mother 

had not so much faith in the staff as in the Prophet, 

and would be satisfied with nothing else than a visit 

from him. When Elisha arrived he found the child 

dead, but neither did this stagger his faith: he shut 

the door, and prayed to the Father in secret, but not 

only did he pray, but he used restorative means, which 

finally resulted in the awakening of the child from the 

sleep of death, when he delivered him to his mother, 

whose faith had thus its reward. 

There are several lessons here for us. Considering 
Elisha as a type, and his works as typical of the 
works of restitution in the beginning of the Millennial 
age, we note what the New Testament Scriptures 
clearly affirm, that vitality will be restored to humanity 
so that "All that are in the graves shall hear the 
voice of the Son of man, and shall come forth." And 
the earthly agents in the Kingdom will no doubt be 
participators to a considerable extent in restitution 
work along this line, as well as along other lines. Thus 
Elisha in his companionship with Elijah seems to represent 
the "tribulation saints," and subsequently the 
work and workers of the entire Millennial age. 

But we may draw lessons of profit for the present 
time from the Shunammite woman's faith and the 
Prophet's faith and works. Apparently the Prophet 
was perplexed by this case. The staff in the hands of 
his servant had been without avail; his own efforts for 
a considerable time were without avail. Here was 
room for doubt as to whether or not the Lord's power 
had forsaken him. He walked the little room repeatedly, 
and again and again laid his face upon the child's 
face, and his hands upon the child's hands, presumably 
the meanwhile praying the divine blessing. But 
finally faith triumphed. This case reminds us of the 
one in which the disciples failed to cast out the devil 
from the boy, while the Lord and Peter, James and 
John were in the Mount of Transfiguration. Our 
Lord's remark was, "This kind goeth not out but by 
prayer and fasting." So, apparently the Lord is 
pleased to exercise his power either slowly or quickly, 
according to circumstances and conditions. 

We are not to consider this as a resurrection of 
the dead, in the proper Scriptural sense of the word 
resurrection. It was merely a temporary awakening 



from the sleep of death, as in the case of Lazarus and 
the son of the widow of Nain and the daughter of 
Jairus. These parties all, later, relapsed into death. 
Nor could their subsequent death be properly termed 
the second death, unless, after their awakening, they 
by wilful sin came under its condemnation. And to 
whatever extent we are less than perfect and possessed 
of life in its completeness, to that extent each is already 
in death, whether he have a greater or a smaller 
spark of vitality remaining. As heretofore seen, in 
discussing the subject of resurrection, that word signifies 
a raising up— all the way up to all from which 
we fell in Adam, namely, to the perfection of life. — 
See our issue for April 1, '93. 



R2346 : page 233 

GENERAL NAAMAN HEALED-MERCIES APPRECIATED. 

-AUG. 21.-2 KINGS 5:1-14.- 

"Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed; 
save me, and I shall be saved."— Jer. 17:14. 

ELISHA'S fame was evidently very general 

throughout Israel, and this lesson tells us 

of its spread to Syria, the adjoining kingdom, through 

one of its captives— a maidservant in the household of 

one of Syria's principal generals. For some reason 

the Lord seems to have had more interest in Syria than 

in the other nations of the world outside of Israel and 

Judah. The reason of this probably lies in the fact 

that King David conquered Syria, and incorporated it 

as a part of the twelve-tribe kingdom, and it so continued 

during the period of Solomon's reign. It was 

thus considerably permeated with Israelitish influence. 

At the time of the revolt of the ten tribes and the division 

of Israel into two kingdoms, the kingdom of 

Syria seems to have regained its independence: nevertheless, 

because of its intimate relationship with the 

people of Israel we found (in our lesson of July 24), 

that Elijah the prophet was sent to anoint Hazael to 

be king over Syria, as indicating a special oversight of 

that people on the Lord's part, more than of other 

Gentile nations. No doubt because of this intimacy 

with Israel, Syria is frequently referred to also in the 

R2346 : page 234 

prophets, and her captivity to Babylon was foretold. 

At all events, affairs so shaped themselves as to 
bring to the chief general of Syria a better knowledge 
of the true God, Jehovah, and that through the instrumentality 
of the little bondmaid. Naaman, with all 



his prowess in war, and his favor with the king, and 
the honor done him by the people, had a very serious 
ailment— leprosy. A man of wealth and position, he 
would have given almost anything to be free from the 
loathsome disease. The little maid, so far from feeling 
envious, revengeful and wickedly toward her captors, 
was evidently exercised by a very benevolent, 
kindly disposition; and perhaps indeed she had been 
well cared for by her captors, and was appreciative. 
Seeing the general's trouble she called the matter to 
the attention of her mistress, assuring her that there 
was a prophet in Israel who could heal him. 

She probably knew nothing about the name of the 
prophet, nor about his resident city, but her account 
was sufficiently explicit to awaken the interest of her 
master, the leper, who started out on his journey to 
the land of Israel, to see the prophet. Naturally, he 
sought to bring as much influence to bear as possible, 
and hence took letters from the king of Syria to the 
king of Israel, as well as valuable presents of money, 
fine apparel, etc. This would be expected of a wealthy 
man, dealing with a wealthy man, a king. And the 
thought in mind of the general, as well as in that of 
the Syrian king, evidently was that any prophet so 
notable as the one indicated, and able to cure any kind 
of a disease, and who had already performed wonderful 
cures, would be found at the royal court, specially 
favored of the king, and made a high officer in some 
sense in the kingdom. 

Hence it was that so remarkable a letter was written, 
which for the time confounded the king of Israel. 
It read: "I have herewith sent Naaman, my servant, 
to thee, that thou mayest recover him of his leprosy." 

R2347 : page 234 

Leprosy was recognized as being an incurable disease; 
therefore the king of Israel at once surmised that the 
king of Syria wished to pick a quarrel with him, and 
to have an excuse for another invasion, to carry off 
more spoil and more captives. The rending or tearing 
of the outer garment was, in olden times, a sign of 
sore distress, perplexity of mind; but it was much less 
of an operation than it would be with modern clothes. 
The action of the king was evidently soon noised 
abroad, and came to the ears of Elisha, who at once 
sent word that the king need have no perplexity, but 
should send the leper to him; intimating that he would 
be healed. All of this experience doubtless seemed 
very strange to Naaman, as he found that the king 
knew nothing about such a person at first, and finally 
had sent him to a lowly house. He was still more surprised 
and disappointed when the prophet did not even 
think it worth while to come out and salute him, or do 
obeisance, or make particular inquiry or say any words 
of enchantment, etc., but sent him a commonplace 



message, that he needed to go and wash several times. 
He was indignant; he knew that the waters of the river 
Jordan were muddy, far less likely to wash away any 
defilement than the waters of his own city, Damascus, 
which were beautiful, clear mountain streams. Naaman 
was wroth: had he come a long journey, and with 
imposing outfit of chariots and servants, to be treated 
like a dog? Was he not a great man with his master, the 
king of Syria, and was not the latter an influential 
king in those parts? "So he turned and went away 
in a rage." 

Leprosy in the Scriptures, because it is incurable, 
and because it eats as a canker, is used as a symbol of 
sin, which cannot be eradicated from the blood and the 
system, except by divine power. Sometimes great 
sinners, and wealthy sinners, recognize themselves as 
sinners, and desire to be cleansed; and some of these 
are inclined to think that there should be some special 
manner of dealing with their cases, different from the 
general one: for they are willing to give of their influence 
or of their means. They forget that our God is not 
poor; all the gold and silver are his, and the cattle 
upon a thousand hills. It is, therefore, difficult for 
wealthy people to humble themselves, and to come to 
the Lord in the only attitude of humble obedience, 
that will gain the desired end; hence it is that the 
Lord said, "How hardly shall they that have riches 
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven"— with what difficulty 
will they get in,— how few of them will get in. 
And this applies not only to great riches of money, 
but also to riches of reputation and to wealth of learning. 
Hence we see that it is much easier for poor 
people, and unlearned people, and people without great 
reputations to come to the Lord and to accept the great 
gift of his grace, upon his conditions. In coming to 
the Lord there is no difference between the king and 
the beggar; both need his bounty, his grace, and it is 
offered to both upon precisely the same terms. 

WISE COUNSEL HEEDED. 



Naaman had evidently some sensible companions, 
servants, or possibly under officers, who "came near," 
approached him in a moderate and wise manner, and 
offered him some good advice, saying in substance, 
We know how disappointed you feel; we know that if 
this prophet had demanded of you some great thing, 
you would have been pleased to perform it, and not 
only so but would have been pleased to have rewarded 
him handsomely, and now because he has ignored your 
wealth and your presents, and has bidden you do 
something which seems quite common-place, it is well 
calculated to make you resentful; but consider the 



R2347 : page 235 

other side: it is an easy thing to perform, and we advise 
that you do so forthwith. 

How excellent a thing is good counsel; it is needed, 
not only by the foolish, but needed also by the 
wise, as in this case. Naaman was undoubtedly a 
wiser and abler man than his servants, yet in the present 
case he was so closely interested that his judgment 
did not act as well as theirs; and they were wise servants, 
and were surely the more appreciated by Naaman 
for not simply joining with him and agreeing with his 
every word and every thought. They might have assented 
to his proposition, and said, Yes! you are insulted; 
we are all insulted! Resent the insult, ask the 
king of Syria to permit you to bring up an army against 
them, and teach them a lesson of your greatness, etc. 
But instead, they wisely counselled their general to 
perform the simple thing which had been directed, 
and all the more willingly than if it had been a very 
difficult matter. 

So there are everywhere people who are ready to 
counsel evil, and they are generally more numerous 
than those who are ready to counsel good— in favor of 
peace, harmony, obedience, righteousness. Yet this 
should always be the attitude of the Lord's people: 
they are always to be peacemakers— on honorable 
grounds, of course; but nevertheless always striving or 
making for peace. How often it is that those who are 
inquiring the way to the Lord, especially if they are 
wealthy, are misdirected, by the very ones who have 
opportunity to help them to take proper views of the 
matter— to humble themselves to learn the lesson of 
complete submission to the Lord and his methods of 
getting rid of sin. 

TRUE GREATNESS MANIFESTED. 



The true greatness of Naaman is also here incidentally 
brought forward. Had he been a man of inferior 
mind, he would have been so haughty and dignified 
that his servants could not even have offered 
him a suggestion; or, receiving it of them, he would 
have resented it, as being from an inferior source; considering 
that his servants were not qualified to offer 
him any suggestions. But being a wise man, "a great 
man," as our lesson expresses it, he was not unapproachable, 
nor inclined to disrespect sound, reasonable 
advice, even tho it came from an unexpected and 
humble quarter. All of the Lord's people should realize 
that the little child or a person least learned either 
in religion or science may be able to offer a suggestion 
which would be valuable to the most profound thinker. 
It therefore is not only the Scriptural course but the 



reasonable, wise course, that all of the Lord's people 
should be so humble minded as to be approachable, 
and able to hear, weigh, and act upon sensible advice, 
even from those below them in the social scale. 

Naaman dipped himself in the water of the Jordan, 
as directed, once— no sign of improvement; twice- 
still no sign; three, four, five, six times— still no sign. 
The prophet had said seven times; but he might reasonably 
have expected that the leprosy would begin to 
go away with the first dip; but no, he was to exercise 
faith. It required faith to go to the muddy river of 
Jordan to bathe at all; it required faith to continue the 
bathing until he had fulfilled the full number of times, 
according to the promise. With the seventh dip came 
the blessing, and he was clean. His flesh came again, 
soft, smooth, clean, not scurfy and dead, as in leprosy. 

Thus it is also in reference to sin,— moral leprosy. 
Every man realizes that he is imperfect, that sin has 
a hold upon his mental, physical and moral powers; 
and many are the methods advocated for getting free, 
getting rid of sin. The natural man suggests that he 
can get rid of sin for himself, without any advice from 
any quarter; he can wash and be clean by moral reforms 
which he will some day begin in earnest; he can 
cleanse his own flesh and spirit; he needs no prophet 
to teach him where or how; he has as much knowledge 
on the subject as anybody. He has no great high 
Priest and wants nobody to redeem him as his substitute. 
Besides, to fulfil the conditions required for the 
forgiveness of sin would be taking a very open and 
courageous step, and he shrinks from making such an 
outward demonstration, and considers that it would do 
no special good anyway: that if the Lord would save 
him he can save him just as well at one time and place 
as another. Others make the mistake of being unwilling 
to do anything for their own recovery out of 
sin; they will not go to Jordan and wash; because they 
lack faith. Not a profession of faith, but the exercise 
of an active, living faith brings the blessing. 

But the sinner who has come to feel the load of 
his sin, its grievousness, is prepared to do a good deal 
if he can only get rid of it. When he comes to this 
place of being ready to obey the Lord's voice, it not 
infrequently is the result of good counsel on the part 
of his friends— Christian friends. He is finally prepared 
to take the humiliating step of acknowledging 
that nothing that he can do for himself will relieve his 
own trouble; of acknowledging that there is only the 
one power that is able either to prescribe the remedy 
or to supply it; and that is the Lord. But when finally 
the sinner plunges into the antitypical Jordan, "the 
fountain filled with blood, drawn from Immanuel's 
veins," and when he dips therein seven times (that is, 
perfectly,— seven being a symbol of perfection) then 
he has indeed a cleansing. He is justified by faith, 
justified from all which the law would not justify; he 



is made every whit whole, reckonedly, and has then a 
standing with God. We can imagine the rejoicing of 

R2347 : page 236 

Naaman and of his companions, and we know the still 
greater rejoicing of the one who, coming to the Lord, 
has had the moral leprosy of sin all washed away. 
"Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, 
through our Lord Jesus Christ." 

Our Lord refers to this miracle (Luke 4:27) saying: 
"Many lepers were in Israel in the time of Elisha, 
the prophet, but none of them were cleansed, 
save Naaman, a Syrian." Our Lord points out that 
there was a difference in the condition of heart as between 
some of these lepers of Israel and this particular 

R2348 : page 236 

Syrian leper, just as there was a difference in that 
particular widow of Zarephath with whom the prophet 
Elijah dwelt during the famine, and whose cruse of oil 
and crock of meal on this account did not exhaust. 
There was faith found in the widow. There was faith 
also found in Naaman. The "many lepers" of Israel 
had heard of this prophet, no doubt, as well as had 
the little bondmaid. But Naaman had faith in God 
to come seeking Elisha, and with large presents, while 
the lepers of Israel had not thought it worth while to 
seek Elisha, for help, altho in the same country. This 
illustrates to us the general lesson of the Scriptures, 
that "without faith it is impossible to please God." 
God tells us of his benevolence and willingness to forgive 
sins, yet only those who have faith in him, and 
who come to have their sins forgiven, only such get 
the blessing. 

How comforting is the Scriptural assurance 
that the notable, general lack of faith is owing very 
largely to the influence of Satan, "the prince of this 
world," who shortly shall be bound for the thousand 
years of Christ's reign. "The god of this world hath 
blinded the minds of them which believe not." Thank 
God that soon all these "blind eyes shall be opened." 
-Isa. 35:5. 

GENERAL NAAMAN'S GRATITUDE. 



Another matter which shows Naaman in an excellent 
light, and which assures us that God appreciates 
character, and made no mistake in sending word to 
Naaman respecting his prophet, etc., is found in the 
fact that, after he had been healed in Jordan, he did 
not thanklessly go on to his home, saying, Now that 
king and his prophet, who were so independent that 



they would not come down and make more ado over 
me, and perhaps come to Jordan with me, to see 
whether or not it took effect, have missed getting 
the present which I brought from Syria for them, and 
I am the gainer by just that much. No; with a true 
nobility of soul he desired to make some acknowledgment 
of the goodness which had been bestowed upon 
him. He probably knew something about the true 
God, and probably with his heart and with his lips 
acknowledged him, and rendered thanks for his recovery 
from the leprosy, so soon as he was healed: but 
this was not enough. As God had seen fit to use an 
agent in bringing the blessing to him, he rightly 
judged that it was as little as he could do to recognize 
the same agent that God had recognized— God's own 
accredited agent in his healing. So he returned to 
Elisha with the remarkable words, "Behold, now I 
know that there is no God in all the earth but in Israel; 
now therefore, I pray thee, take a blessing [a 
present] of thy servant." Here true dignity of character 
is shown. He was not seeking to see how cheaply 
he could get the favor of heaven; he did not say 
within himself, If Elisha had bargained with me for 
a large sum before I went down to Jordan, and got the 
blessing, then indeed I would have given him much to 
obtain this great benefit, but now I will put him off 
with some trifling gift, and no doubt, as a poor man, 
he will think a great deal of it. 

On the contrary, he had brought a gift representing, 
it is claimed, over seventy-seven thousand dollars, 
besides much "goodly apparel," and he evidently was 
desirous that the prophet should receive all of this as 
a token of his appreciation of the great benefit conferred. 
Our Lord's reference to Naaman and his cure, 
and how the Lord's favor reached him, even tho he 
was a Gentile, reminds us of the fact that when our 
Lord healed ten lepers by the wayside, only one of 
them returned to give God the glory for his healing. 
Naaman, the Syrian, was more noble, evidently, than 
the other nine, if not more noble also than the tenth, 
who, so far as we know, offered no present— tho perhaps 
this was because he had nothing to offer. 

This illustrates to us the difference in conduct 
amongst those who receive the blessing of the forgiveness 
of sins— cleansing from moral leprosy. Some receive 
it as a matter of course; some are thankful, but 
especially glad that they got it so cheaply— that salvation 
is free. It is only the occasional one ("not many 
learned, not many wise," not many altogether), who 
receives the divine blessing, forgiveness, who returns 
to give God the glory and to offer him a thank-offering. 
Not very many present either money or influence 
or their lives at his feet, in recognition of the 
boon of their forgiveness. 

Addressing these who have been washed from 
their sins in the precious blood, who have received 



forgiveness of sins through faith in that blood, and 
who consequently are reckoned of the Lord as justified 
freely from all things, the Apostle says to them, 
"I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of God 
[manifest toward you in the forgiveness of your sins], 
that ye present your bodies living sacrifices, holy and 
acceptable, to God, which is your reasonable service." 

R2348 : page 237 

Naaman had the spirit, the disposition, the mind, 
which under the favorable conditions of the Gospel 
age would have made of him a saint— a member of the 
elect "little flock," the Church. If he appreciated so 
largely, so heartily, his physical cleansing, who can 
question that he would have appreciated much more a 
moral cleansing, and the full reconciliation to God, 
and the privilege of coming into the family of God as 
a son and as a joint-heir with Christ? His conduct 
shows to us that he would have been ready to lay 
down his life, and all his wealth, all his possessions 
and his honor with the King of Syria. And this, we 
see, would be but a "reasonable service" for him as it 
is for us, and for all who have been made recipients of 
this great blessing of forgiveness of sins— cleansing. 

But if the noble, proper spirit was manifested by 
Naaman, in desiring to render something in return for 
the mercies received, there was not less of the noble 
spirit in Elisha, in refusing to receive those gifts. To 
have received the presents would have meant the selling 
of the divine power which operated through him; 
and Elisha well knew that God's gifts are not for sale. 
Fortunate would it be for many who deal with the 
spiritual things of the Lord, in the cure of the leprosy 
of sin, if they could take as exalted a view of matters as 
did Elisha. We fear that too often the Lord's servants 
are ready to accept earthly rewards for their part 
in the healing of sin-sickness— costly apparel, gold 
and silver. 

And then comes out still another lesson of nobility 
of character. Naaman requested that he might 
have as much soil from the land of Israel as two pack 
mules could carry, intimating that his desire for this 
earth was that he might place it in some suitable location 
in his own country, that he might kneel upon the 
sacred soil, which God had blessed, and might offer 
prayer to the true God, who had healed him, besides 
whom there is no God. And the keenness of his conscience 
is shown by his further remark that he knew 
that his king, as a worshipper of a false God, would 
expect him to go with him, as his servant, as usual, 
that he might lean upon his arm, when bowing himself 
before the false god; and he inquired whether or 
not Jehovah would pardon him for thus joining with 
and assisting his king in the worship which now he no 
longer would take part in from the heart. Elisha indicated 



to him that he would be forgiven for joining 

thus unwillingly in the bowing before the idol, as a 

servant with his master, the king. 

We cannot doubt that Elisha sought direction of 
the Lord in this matter, and that he had the Lord's 
mind in respect to it. But why even this much sanction 
to a false god should be permitted may be a question. 
We suggest, as an explanation, that God was 
not then dealing with any Gentile nation, but with 
Judah and Israel only; "You only have I known [recognized] 
of all the families of the earth." (Amos 3:2.) 
The other nations were without any of God's 
promises, or, as expressed by the Apostle Paul, "without 
God and having no hope." The redemption sacrifice 
for the sins of the whole world had not yet been 
offered, would not be offered for several centuries; 
consequently, altho Naaman was of so honest a heart 
that the Lord delighted to send him to the Prophet, 
and to heal him of his leprosy, and altho the Lord appreciated 
his nobility of character, yet the time had not 
come for making any offer of reconciliation to the Gentiles. 
The only offer thus far made was to the seed of 
Abraham, according to the flesh. 

Consequently, altho Naaman recognized Jehovah, 
Jehovah had not yet recognized him,— could not do 
so, under the covenant then in force, the Law Covenant, 
—and had not prepared to recognize him or any 
other such noble Gentile characters, until the New 
Covenant would go into force, later. Hence, it mattered 
not, except to Naaman himself, how he worshiped. 
His worship would not be accepted. He had no mediator! 
It was entirely proper, therefore, that while 
Naaman, having recognized Jehovah for himself, 
should worship Jehovah and respect him alone, as the 
true God, yet nevertheless, as the servant of the king 
of Syria, he might join in any worship that might 
please his master, Jehovah not having accepted or 
even "called" him, to become his servant. We cannot 
doubt that, when the Millennial age shall have 
fully dawned, and when those who are in the graves 
shall come forth, and the turn of Naaman shall come, 
it will find in him one whose condition of heart and 
mind toward the Lord will make him very ready for 
the good tidings of great joy unto all people through 
the New Covenant, sealed by the precious blood of our 
Lord Jesus at Calvary. We cannot doubt that so noble 
a character will make rapid progress under the favorable 
conditions of the Millennial age back to the original 
perfection, the image and likeness of God, lost 
by the whole race through father Adam. 

The conscientiousness of Naaman, the Gentile, 
who had never before heard much of Jehovah, is strikingly 

R2349 : page 237 

in contrast with the deficiency of this quality in 



many who have enjoyed many privileges in Christian 
lands, and much advantage every way. We wonder 
much, for instance, when some of the Lord's people 
are translated out of darkness into his marvelous light, 
when their minds are relieved of the cloud of superstition 
and vail of ignorance which long have hindered 
them from seeing God's true character,— we wonder 
why these do not take an equally decided course and 
inquire of the Lord through his oracle, the Word of 

R2349 : page 238 

the testimony, whether or not it is longer permitted of 
them to bow themselves down before creeds of men, 
which misrepresent the divine character and plan: 
whether or not it is permitted of them to continue 
worshiping after the old manner, which they have 
found to be an erroneous manner: whether or not it is 
proper for them to lend their influence and presence 
at meetings whose tendencies and influences are chiefly 
against the truth, tho outwardly they are "religious" 
and have "a form of godliness." Such inquiries now, 
at the oracle of God, get the response, "Come out of 
her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, 
and that ye receive not of her plagues." 

THE COVETOUS SERVANT. 



There is still another feature of this narrative 
which contains a valuable lesson. Elisha had a servant 
named Gehazi, who had been with the prophet for 
a considerable time, and had witnessed many of his 
wonderful works; the same servant, probably, who 
carried his staff and laid it upon the Shunammite woman's 
son, and who very well knew that the Lord's 
power had operated through the Prophet for the recovery 
of the child to life. But all of this contact with 
divine power and goodness and mercy, and all of the 
illustrations of the Prophet's nobility of character and 
generosity— all of this counted for practically nothing, 
to Gehazi. He saw the rich presents that had been 
brought by Naaman, and allowed covetousness to enter 
into his heart, instead of allowing the spirit of righteousness 
and generosity to prevent it. He said to himself, 
What a pity to see this wealth thus rejected by 
the Prophet. I will contrive a plan by which I may 
get some of it for myself; then I can have olive groves 
and vineyards, and be a very wealthy man, and some 
of these costly garments will make me the envy of all 
my neighbors. So he ran after the departing chariot, 
to accomplish his purpose. 

As a matter of fact, covetousness, with almost 
everyone, leads to various other sins— generally to lying, 
sometimes to murder. Nearly every crime is more 



or less traceable to covetousness. In this case Gehazi 
did not hesitate to lie, and not only so, but to misrepresent 
his master, and thus indirectly to misrepresent 
God. His falsehood was, "My master hath sent me, 
saying, Behold even now there be come to me from 
Mount Ephraim two young men of the sons of the 
prophets: give them, I pray thee, a talent of silver 
[$1944] and two changes of garments." Nothing 
doubting, the generous Naaman urged him to take 
two talents of silver, and bound them in two bags, 
with the changes of garments, and laid them upon two 
of his servants, and they bare them before him, and 
when he came to a secret place Gehazi took them from 
their hands and hid them in the house. 

But Elisha called him and said, "Went not my 
heart with thee when the man turned again from the 
chariot to meet thee? Is it a time [a suitable occasion] 
for the receiving of money, garments, olive yards, 
vineyards, sheep, oxen, menservants and maidservants?" 
—intimating that all of these things had been 
the moving covetous cause before the mind of Gehazi: 
and no doubt at that period such an amount of money, 
nearly $4000, would have purchased a great deal and 
have made Gehazi a wealthy man. But the penalty 
of his misconduct was severe, for the leprosy of Naaman 
was given him. 

The lesson here would seem to be that while some 
who have been ignorant of the gospel of grace of God 
are mightily and properly actuated by it (like Naaman), 
others who are in daily contact with divine 
grace, fail to have the right attitude of heart to appreciate 
it, and know of it chiefly as so much merchandise 
(like Gehazi). This covetousness becomes to some, 
even if they had already been cleansed, a renewal of 
the leprosy or sin. The same influence which operates 
favorably upon one heart, operates unfavorably upon 
another. This reminds us of the Apostle's statement, 
which is applicable throughout this Gospel age, that 
the gospel of Christ is either a savor of life unto life, 
or of death unto death. It will either have the effect 
of bringing us near to the Lord, in appreciation and 
imitation of his goodness and love, or it will have the 
reverse effect of repelling us from the Lord, and bringing 
us under a spirit of evil and selfishness. Let all 
who have come in contact with the grace of God take 
heed, lest they receive the grace of God in vain; lest 
instead of being benefited by it they are hardened by 
it, and finally should be esteemed wilful sinners on 
their own account. 



R2349 : page 238 
"ARE THEY NOT ALL MINISTERING SPIRITS?" 



--AUG. 28.-2 KINGS 6:8-18.- 

"The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them 
that fear him, and delivereth them."— Psa. 34:7. 

THE SPECIAL feature of this Scripture lesson is 
that there are invisible powers on every hand 
for the protection and assistance of the Lord's people, 
while doing his work. As we have already shown, there 
are "wicked spirits," invisible to humanity, whose 
fiendish delight is to deceive, mislead and ensnare 
mankind.* But in this lesson we have the other side 
of the question presented to our attention. It is an 
encouragement to know that, tho beset by evil spirits, 
the Lord's people are surrounded by other invisible 
agents no less powerful, whose interest in their welfare 
is of the highest order, and who are near to guard us 
in proportion as our hearts are pure, and loyal to the 
Lord and his Word. 

Tho we do not understand the process, we accept 
the fact, that God has both spoken and written and 
operated miraculously through holy men of old. We 
have had illustrations of this in the preceding lessons 
respecting Elijah and Elisha. But how these communications 



*See What Say the Scriptures About Spiritualism?— 10c. per copy. 

R2349 : page 239 

were made to the prophets we are not informed. 
Quite possibly they were made through the 
invisible spirit beings who serve the Lord and his people. 
Concerning these invisible spirit beings, angels, 
the Apostle says, "Are they not all ministering [serving] 
spirits, sent forth to minister unto those who 
shall be heirs of salvation?" It may be that they 
ministered to Elijah and Elisha the information which 
they possessed, and which therefore constituted them 
prophets. For instance, in this lesson, we are informed 
that Elisha sent word in advance to the king of Israel 
respecting the movements and intentions of the king 
of Syria, and that his fame as a seer had extended to 
Syria: so that the counsellors of Syria's king explained 
the matter to him, saying, "Elisha, the prophet that 
is in Israel, telleth the king of Israel the words that 
thou speakest secretly in thy bedchamber." 

Is it unreasonable to suppose that it was these invisible 
ministering spirits which were the divine instrumentality 
in making known to Elisha the things 
proper to be told to the king of Israel for his protection? 
We think it not unlikely; we think it probable. 
In one of our previous lessons we saw that, when 
the Shunammite woman came to Elisha to inquire 
about her son, Elisha said, "The Lord hath hid it from 



me, and hath not told me." (2 Kings 4:27.) From 
this it is evident that it was not by any power that the 
prophet himself possessed that he had any special 
knowledge, but by revelations from the Lord. And 
this agrees with the testimony of the Apostle Peter, 
who says, "Holy men of old spake as they were moved 
by the holy spirit." (2 Pet. 1:21.) Our suggestion 
is that the holy spirit of God communicated information 
to the prophets through the holy angels, the invisible 
spirit beings who encamp round about them 
that fear God. But for God to use this instrumentality 
in communication would make it no less his power, 
just as he may use the lightning or the storm to do 
his work, and it be none the less his work; just as we 
may speak by telephone or telegraph or cable, and it 
be as really our word and deed as tho done without 
those agencies of communication. 

The folly of humanity attempting to cope with 
the spiritual powers is well illustrated in this lesson by 
the conduct of the king of Syria in sending an armed 
company to capture Elisha. He might well have 
reasoned that if the prophet had information of his 
most secret plans respecting the king of Israel, he 
would none the less have information respecting the 
proposed capture of himself. But the king of Syria 
and some of his people were to be taught a lesson respecting 
the power of the God of Israel, and of any 
man whom the God of Israel might choose to use as 
his channel or mouthpiece. Here, the foolishness of 
man was made to show forth the wisdom and power 
of God. 

Elisha's servant (not Gehazi, we may feel assured, but 
another more worthy), seeing the armed host surrounding 
the city, was in terror, but the Prophet, who likewise 
saw the armed host, also discerned another host, 
more powerful, more numerous; and he entreated the 
Lord on behalf of his servant that he might have an 

R2350 : page 239 

opening of the eyes, to see that all the mountains round 
about them were filled with spirit beings— "horses and 
chariots of fire," or like fire, as all spirit beings are 
described in Scripture. (See Ezek. 1:13,14; Dan. 7:9; 
Rev. 4:3-5.) The Lord answered the prayer: and 
then the young man saw what Elisha had already told 
him, that "they that be with us are more than they 
that be with them." 

It is important that every Christian should have 
the eyes of his understanding opened, that he may see 
by faith that which was shown to Elisha and his servant 
literally. During this Gospel age the Lord does 
not open our natural eyes to see the wonderful provisions 
he has made for us, and his power for our protection; 
but instead he gives us a still better knowledge 
of the subject through his Word of grace and 



truth, so that we are enabled to walk by faith and not 

by sight; to see the armies of the Lord encamped around 

about us and to recognize their protection of us, without 

any miracle being performed upon our natural 

sight. None of us are sufficiently strong to pass through 

the fight of Christian warfare without just such assistances 

as these which the Lord has provided, and 

which faith beholds, accepts, lays hold of, rests upon 

and is strengthened by. 

Shall we call this faith in invisible spiritual powers 
and agencies of God the true spiritualism of the Scriptures 
—in contradistinction to the evil spiritualism 
which is of Satan and his fellows, the fallen angels, 
the "wicked spirits in exalted positions?" We believe 
that this is so, and spiritualists admit that there 
are both good and evil spirits. They are sure that 
there are evil spirits, because they know how these 
have ensnared them in evil, enticed them into sin. 
They know that they are what the Scriptures term 
"lying spirits," because they have been lied to by the 
spirits which communicated with them; but they insist 
that there are good spirits, and they think that sometimes 
they have had communications with these. But 
this proposition we dispute: we hold that all the rapping, 
wonder doing and other manifestations of so-called 
spiritists are from the Evil One, and his consorts 
entirely. 

A very small amount of common sense should 
convince anyone that the holy angels must have something 
better, higher, nobler, to do than are the various 

R2350 : page 240 

practices of these so-called spirits who speak 

through mediums and by obsession. Indeed, we hold 

that the good spirits, the holy angels, make no communications 

with man now: that these communications 

belonged to a previous time, when they were appropriate 

and necessary as the channels of divine communication. 

We do not need their ministry through 

mediums to-day, and are especially forbidden to seek 

communication or knowledge through such channels: 

this for the same reason that we do not need the testimony 

of the inspired seers and prophets to-day; because 

God has made an abundant provision for us 

through the prophetic utterances of the past, to the 

intent that we of this Gospel age should walk not by 

sight nor by communication with the angels, but by 

faith. We may realize no less clearly, but even more 

clearly, than did the ancients that he who is on our 

part is more than all they that be against us; we may 

discern by the eye of faith that the "angel of the Lord 

encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivereth 

them;" we may realize that all the powers of 

heaven— "more than twelve legions of angels"— altho 

invisible to us, are nevertheless present, and fully subservient 



to every will of our glorious Lord; and that 
thus surrounded and protected we are living "under 
the shadow of the Almighty" and, as it were, in the 
hollow of his hand. 

In this connection we are reminded of our Lord's 
words respecting his faithful disciples, his "little 
ones." He assures us that the very humblest of those 
who are his have high connections with the heavenly 
throne, saying, "Their angels do always behold the 
face of my Father in heaven." (Matt. 18:10.) That is 
to say, as the angels are all "ministering spirits sent 
forth to minister for those who shall be heirs of salvation" 
(the Gospel Church), there are some of them 
who have a charge, a watch, a care over each member 
of the body of Christ. Perhaps one guardian angel to 
each saint, perhaps more than one; but we have the 
Lord's assurance that his provision is "sufficient." 
One thought that our Lord's words give to us is, that 
these holy angels, charged with ministering to and 
caring for the elect, are in no danger of being detained 
so that they must wait for a long time on more important 
business before having access to the Father: 
on the contrary, they always have access to him, they 
can always see his face; and through the Redeemer, 
and by these agencies, God is ever ready to respond to 
our cries and to cause all things to work together for 
good to them that love him. 

Turning to the host of Syria, the prophet prayed 
to the Lord that they might be smitten with blindness, 
our Common Version says; but from the original text 
the thought would appear to be not the loss of sight, 
but a bewilderment or hallucination, somewhat similar 
to that produced by hypnotism; when a person sees or 
imagines that he sees things differently from what they 
actually are. Exercising this power upon the host, 
Elisha guided them to the city of Samaria, saying, 
"This is not the way, neither is this the city; follow 
me, I will bring you to the man whom ye seek." And 
this was true, for Dothan was not Elisha's city, his 
home was in Samaria, and thither he took them; and 
he did indeed bring them to the man they sought, 
namely, himself; but not after the manner that they 
had expected. The narrative proceeds to say that 
when he had led them into the city of Samaria (under 
the influence of some power like hypnotism), he then 
said, "Lord, open the eyes of these men, that they 
may see," and then they understood where they were. 
They were completely in the hands of their enemies; 
surrounded by the king of Israel and his soldiers. 

The king of Israel inquired whether or not he 
should smite them with the sword? Such an inquiry 
seems to indicate a considerable change of the kingly 
attitude toward the Lord and his representative: the 
reformation work was taking effect; Israel's kings were 
learning gradually that the will of the Lord was to be 
considered, and that to neglect his counsel would be 



unwise indeed. Elisha, in his reply, shows a large 
and benevolent heart, in full accord with the highest 
teachings of the New Testament. He showed the 
king that these men should not be put to death; but 
that instead a better way would be to return good for 
the intended evil. Accordingly, the king made a great 
feast and entertained his enemies and sent them home. 
We cannot doubt that they marveled at their peculiar 
experiences, and the happy outcome of what seemed 
for the moment so great a disaster. We may suppose, 
too, that they had a higher degree of respect for the 
Lord and his prophets and the king upon the throne 
of Israel, than they ever before had. 

There is a lesson in this for us also: the best victories 
are the bloodless ones; the ones in which the 
spirit of righteousness and mercy and benevolence 
gains the victory over the spirit of rivalry, ambition 
and selfishness. This, under the New Covenant, among 
the soldiers of the cross is known as fighting the good 
fight and overcoming evil with good. It may not succeed 
in fullest measure in the present time, but nevertheless 
it will develop in ourselves the peaceable fruits 
of righteousness, and prepare us for a share in the 
strong government of the future, which with one hand 
will restrain the wicked and all the powers of evil, 
while with the other hand it blesses, washes, refreshes 
and anoints with the oil of gladness and blessing all 
the willing and obedient of the entire groaning 
creation. 



page 241 