Maintaining Worship at “the House of Our God”
HOW prone the fallen human flesh is to give in to materialism and to overlook the spiritual interests and benefits and thus fall into neglecting Jehovah’s house, as did the Jews in Nehemiah’s day! Helping to guard us against making that mistake is our theme for July, “Maintaining Worship at ‘the House of Our God.’”—Neh. 10:39.a
Of course, strictly speaking, “the house of our God” now is the Christian congregation, of which just a “remnant” remains until the present time. (Eph. 2:19-22) But in association with the remnant are a “great crowd” of whom the apostle John wrote that “they are rendering [God] sacred service day and night in his temple.” (Rev. 7:15) Maintaining worship at “the house of our God” would therefore mean associating in the worship carried on by the local Christian congregation that is under the direction of the remnant, as represented by the “faithful and discreet slave.”—Matt. 24:45-47.
How do Christians individually share in maintaining this worship at “the house of our God”? First of all, by attending all the congregational meetings faithfully each week, not being easily discouraged from doing so by obstacles. More than that, by preparing for such meetings and then sharing in the worship by joining in song and offering comments as opportunity affords. Included, naturally, would be praying for God’s house, that he might bless it, prosper it and keep it pure.
Additionally, Christians can share in maintaining the worship at God’s house by contributing toward the expense involved in the upkeep of Kingdom Halls, of which there are upward of 24,000 throughout the world; thereby helping to pay for the rent, light and heating bills, and so forth. And there is also the matter of keeping the Kingdom Hall presentable, free from dust and dirt.
Not to be overlooked is the fact that “the house of our God” is the center of the preaching activity, for the offering up of sacrifices of praise. To maintain its worship, therefore, would include going from house to house and in other ways preaching the good news of God’s kingdom. In all such ways true Christians can be doing their share to maintain worship at God’s house, to his glory and to their own everlasting welfare.—Heb. 13:15.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, December 15, 1965.

