Jehovah Has Given Me Godly Joy
As told by Babette Herrlinger
JOY has been the continuous theme of my lifetime of service with Jehovah’s organization. My sentiments of joy are well expressed in song Number 101 of the songbook “Singing and Accompanying Yourselves with Music in Your Hearts,” a song entitled “Our Godly Joy.” And now, with Jehovah’s help and spirit, I would like to tell you how Jehovah has given me godly joy.—Isa. 65:14; Phil. 4:4.
I was born in 1894 in Altenstadt bei Geislingen a/d Steige, now known simply as Geislingen an der Steige, Germany. I was a happy child, and my parents were as happy as others around them, though they did not live by a true Bible hope. As far as they could do so, they taught us three girls and four boys to do what is right and to work hard. Still, there was something missing in life. I did not really know God. We had a measure of happiness, but it was not the “peace of God that excels all thought.” That was the kind of joy I wanted.—Phil. 4:7.
In the year 1913 I went to Zurich, Switzerland, to work for my aunt who operated a bakery store. A year later, World War I broke out. Three of my brothers had to go to war. That was a hard experience. Now I needed something more than a happy family upbringing to sustain me. I needed something that only God can give—spiritual qualities to aid me to face this era of death and sorrow. The religions with which I was acquainted offered no real hope or joy. On Sundays I would seek out lonely places in the woods where I could meditate and pray. I did not know God by his name Jehovah at that time, but I know he was the only sure source of joy. I was much like the Ethiopian eunuch about whom the Bible tells us, a man who was reading the Scriptures but needed guidance to gain right understanding. (Acts 8:30, 31) Jehovah knew my problem and began to answer my prayers.
In 1914 one of Jehovah’s witnesses (then known as “Bible Students”) came into the store to buy bread. Little did I realize that she had the more important “bread of life” for which I longed. (John 6:31, 35) She talked of God’s kingdom, and, though my aunt showed no interest, I listened eagerly. It was so different, so logical, so refreshing! I invited her into the kitchen.
I will always remember how patiently and kindly she explained that wondrous Bible promise: “And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be any more.” (Rev. 21:4) How could this ever take place? I inquired as to where I could learn more about such matters. She invited me to regular meetings of the Witnesses.
JOY THROUGH ASSEMBLY
How precious that first meeting was! What joy I found there! Here at the Assembly Hall was the real Christian fellowship that I had lacked. How right the Bible is to advise the assembling together of true Christians! (Heb. 10:25) So deeply impressed was I that it has been my goal ever since to make meeting attendance a “must” in my weekly schedule. Without meetings I could not possess true godly joy.
As one progresses to maturity, joy begins to take on new depths. In those days, as today, meetings were truly beneficial. We studied such publications as The Three Worlds, Tabernacle Shadows, and Studies in the Scriptures. My godly joy increased to the point of cultivating the hope of one day being with Jehovah and his beloved Son in the heavenly kingdom. I dedicated my life to Jehovah, being baptized in token thereof.
Not long ago, when I sat in our Kingdom Hall here at Brooklyn Bethel and saw the film “God Cannot Lie,” my mind went back to the days when another film was popular—“Photo-Drama of Creation.” I wanted everyone to see and hear that Drama. Together with one of my Christian sisters I wrote the Watch Tower Society to arrange for showings in Geislingen. Those who came were greatly blessed and my joy increased at seeing some increase of interest on the part of people in my hometown. Today there is an active congregation of seventy-five Witnesses in Geislingen, and even now I receive letters telling how older people in the territory still recall my earlier efforts among them.
Assemblies, too, have been a source of great joy. In 1922, for example, I attended one in Stuttgart, Germany, where the main lecture urged us to “advertise, advertise, advertise the King and his Kingdom.” Those of us who had been engaged in Kingdom work for many years learned that we were not yet “going home” to the heavenly kingdom to be with our Lord Jesus Christ. No, not yet! There was more work for us right here on earth.
Joyfully I continued sharing in the preaching of the Kingdom, though not without opposition. Satan the Devil was busy sowing bad seed among Jehovah’s faithful servants. An “evil slave” class was beginning to be manifest. (Matt. 24:48-51) I knew something was going on in the congregation. As one of God’s “sheep” I wanted to be led correctly and avoid those having selfish designs on God’s flock. How happy I was when matters were clarified by J. F. Rutherford, the Watch Tower Society’s president, in a speech at the Basel assembly in 1926. A week later he spoke to our small group at Zurich, encouraging us to stick loyally to Jehovah’s organization. Now we knew what road to take. Jehovah was leading us toward greater joys and privileges in his service.
JOY OF BETHEL SERVICE
I knew that the worldwide witness work must be accomplished and I wanted to get closer to the headquarters of Jehovah’s earthly organization, so I decided to come to America. The day of departure came. I left behind me my dearest friends in Zurich and reached New York in September 1926. A few months later I put in my application for Bethel service. Today, most young people who qualify are called to Bethel in a matter of months after submitting an application. I had to wait ten years. That really made me wonder if it was Jehovah’s will. But I waited. I was determined to serve joyfully at what I was doing in the meantime.
It never occurred to me to go back to Switzerland. I knew that if it was Jehovah’s will for me to be in Bethel service, I would receive the call in due time. I kept the matter before him in prayer, and as I waited there were many things for me to learn as a preacher of the good news of his kingdom.
When a servant of Jehovah waits for his blessing long enough, why, when the blessing does come it seems that there is an extraordinary joy experienced. That was what I found. Imagine the peak of joy when I received that long-awaited letter from Brother Rutherford inviting me to be a member of the Bethel family! What better place to be than at Bethel. I have come to appreciate it fully during my thirty-two years in this wonderful place.
At Bethel a new life began for me. I well knew that my part as a woman was to serve my God humbly and I assented in my heart to do anything Jehovah would arrange for me to do through his organization. I was assigned as a housekeeper, taking care of thirteen rooms. That meant something that a housewife ordinarily does not have to do—making twenty-six beds every morning! Also there was the scrubbing of floors, cleaning windows, dusting, washing sinks and mirrors, vacuuming rugs and taking care of washrooms.
On the surface this might appear to be plain, ordinary hard work. Not so at Bethel! I have learned to face each day with the happy thought that I am doing something for my brothers here. They would not appreciate coming home from a hard day’s work in the factory or office to an untidy room and unmade beds. No, there is a sense of satisfaction in doing this work. Seeing things neat and clean also brings joy and satisfaction.
Many are the expressions of appreciation I have received from the brothers whose rooms it was my privilege to clean. A housekeeper gets a certain pleasant relationship with the occupants of a room, even though she may not often see them. It was always a joy to know that people appreciated such services. Actually I have found that a housekeeper can be artistic, getting joy out of fixing little things in the room differently each week.
However, as time goes on we get older, and with age come problems. I recall feeling that I could not possibly keep up with the work. But then I had a heart-to-heart talk with one of the older Christian sisters in our beloved family. I will never forget that discussion. It opened my eyes to other avenues of joy; for example, the joy of trusting in Jehovah to grant one strength for each new day. When young we tend to overlook the need for that kind of trust. We already have the physical strength. But as we get older, our need becomes apparent, our problems take on a new aspect, and this draws us more frequently to Jehovah in prayer. So I learned to pray often for strength, while at the same time learning how to do things more efficiently. After all, actors, even in old age, often improve on their art, even though their faculties are not so sharp. So we, in Jehovah’s service—more precious than all of the arts—can strive for efficiency even in old age.
JOY IN SINGLENESS AND OLD AGE
Looking back on my years of Bethel service, I am thankful for the valuable training received here. The combination of so many different personalities, all devoted to Jehovah and all assembled in one place with their imperfections, their varied habits and interesting customs, surely provides a grand field for training. In every aspect of life I have learned that I am not so good as I once thought I was. Bethel has taught me to be humble—that quality so precious in God’s sight. (Jas 4:6; 1 Pet. 3:4) I have been able to develop patience, endurance, peace and gratefulness. Situations have arisen that aid one to measure one’s humility and willingness to share with others. It is my prayer that Jehovah will continue to mold me as a vessel fit for honorable use in his house.
Then there is the blessing of singleness. I have chosen to lead a single life in my service to Jehovah. Do I ever get lonely? Not at all. Really, my moments alone are among some of the most precious. I can commune with Jehovah in prayer. I can enjoy meditation and personal study without distraction. And whenever there is a need for companionship, all I have to do is visit some friend’s room, sit in the beautiful Bethel garden, or go to the lounge, where one can often enjoy hearing someone play the piano. Singleness has contributed not a little to my joy.
Bethel service, too, includes assignments with one of the local congregations. All members of the Bethel family have the privilege of preaching from house to house, making return visits on interested persons, and conducting Bible studies with people who hunger and thirst for righteousness—all this in cooperation with one or another of the 187 congregations in the New York area. When I first came here there was only one congregation in Brooklyn. How joy-inspiring it has been to witness the marvelous growth! Surely it is the Lord’s doing!
I have also witnessed the construction of two new Bethel homes and three new factories for producing Bibles and Bible literature. Even as I write, another Bethel home takes shape just across the street. What wonderful evidence of Jehovah’s prospering hand with his devoted people! I have seen all this. What more could one ask?
It has been a pleasure to learn of the phenomenal growth of Kingdom interests in the land of my youth also. Among the multitudes in Germany who have listened to the Kingdom message and thrown in their lot with God’s worshipers is the son of that aunt of mine in Zurich. He and his whole family are now Witnesses, to my great joy.
I am now seventy-four years of age. Considering all things, I am in fair physical condition. Looking back over the three decades and more of Bethel service, I am constrained to praise Jehovah for all he has given me, and above all for the joy. I still do some housework along with other lighter duties in the Bethel home. I have no regrets. I have been privileged to receive divine education here. I have witnessed Jehovah’s manifest blessing upon his people in these “last days.” To me it is marvelous, satisfying, joy-inspiring. Life has been anything but monotonous. It has been filled with good things. I have learned to renew my strength through trust in Jehovah. I thrill at the new music we have, the new literature, the sharper discernment of Jehovah’s purposes. My heart is strong and joyful.
Upon Jehovah’s people world wide I have seen the fulfillment of his grand promise: “Look! My own servants will rejoice, . . . My own servants will cry out joyfully because of the good condition of the heart.” (Isa. 65:13, 14) With strong confidence in Jehovah, then, I am continuing right on down to the close of my earthly ministry, trusting in him to aid me to retain, cultivate and improve my godly joy!

