Atrocities—What Is God’s Solution?
HOW can atrocities be prevented? What is the solution? When we study history, it becomes obvious that human solutions have failed. In fact, there is a great element of contradiction, if not outright hypocrisy, in the way human leaders have approached the subject.
Consider, for example, the year 1995. It marked the 50th anniversary of the end of the Nazi Holocaust, of World War II, and of the explosion of the atom bomb. That year, commemorative ceremonies attended by world leaders were held in many parts of the world. Why? To transmit a sense of revulsion for these atrocities so that they may never be repeated. Yet, some observers noted an unhealthy dose of contradiction in such ceremonies.
Hypocrisy
In these highly publicized ceremonies, all religious and governmental representatives wanted to be viewed as benefactors or at least to avoid being viewed as evildoers. Yet, nations that condemned past atrocities have built arsenals of weapons, budgeting huge sums of money for that purpose. At the same time, they have not solved such vital problems as poverty, moral degradation, and pollution, often saying that they do not have enough funds.
Worldly religion seeks to write history that camouflages her prolonged silence on the atrocities of dictatorships and hushes up her conniving with them. These religions did not do anything to stop people of the same religion from slaughtering one another. For instance, in World War II, Catholic killed Catholic and Protestant killed Protestant because they were of different nationalities and on opposing sides. Both sides claimed to be Christian but practiced what was totally contrary to Jesus’ teachings. (Matthew 26:52; John 13:34, 35; 1 John 3:10-12; 4:20, 21) Other religions have done the same. Today, in various parts of the world, atrocities are still committed by members of these religions.
In the time of Jesus, the religious leaders were hypocrites. Jesus denounced them, saying: “Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because you build the graves of the prophets and decorate the memorial tombs of the righteous ones, and you say, ‘If we were in the days of our forefathers, we would not be sharers with them in the blood of the prophets.’ Therefore you are bearing witness against yourselves that you are sons of those who murdered the prophets.” (Matthew 23:29-31) Those religious leaders claimed to be godly but were hypocrites who persecuted Jesus and his disciples.
Lessons Taught by the Bible
Lessons can be drawn from secular history, but the Bible is the source of the most beneficial lessons. It does not entrust the task of interpreting history to human judgment or prejudice. The Bible explains history and the future in the light of God’s way of thinking.—Isaiah 55:8, 9.
The Scriptures speak of good and bad events as well as of good and bad people. Often a correct lesson, one in harmony with God’s will, can be drawn from these accounts. After mentioning a number of events in the history of the ancient Israelites, the apostle Paul concluded: “Now these things went on befalling them as examples, and they were written for a warning to us.” (1 Corinthians 10:11) Jesus himself drew a lesson from history when he said to his disciples: “Remember the wife of Lot.”—Luke 17:32.
What God Remembers and What He Forgets
We learn from the Bible that God remembers or forgets individuals on the basis of their actions. Those who sin but manifest repentance God forgives “in a large way.” (Isaiah 55:7) If a wicked one repents and “turns back from his sin and carries on justice and righteousness, . . . none of his sins . . . will be remembered against him.”—Ezekiel 33:14-16.
Paul wrote that “God is not unrighteous so as to forget your work and the love you showed for his name.” (Hebrews 6:10) Thus, Jehovah will reward those he remembers favorably. Faithful Job prayed: “O that in Sheol [the common grave of all mankind] you would conceal me, . . . that you would set a time limit for me and remember me!”—Job 14:13.
Conversely, God will deal with the unrepentant evildoer in harmony with the words He spoke to Moses: “I shall wipe him out of my book.” (Exodus 32:33) Yes, God will forget wicked ones forever.
The Final Judge
God is the final Judge of history. (Genesis 18:25; Isaiah 14:24, 27; 46:9-11; 55:11) According to his superior judgment, he will not forget the numerous atrocities committed against mankind. On the day of his righteous indignation, he will judge all responsible persons and institutions.—Revelation, chapters 18, 19.
Among these will be the whole system of false religion, given in the Scriptures the symbolic name “Babylon the Great.” Of her it is written: “Her sins have massed together clear up to heaven, and God has called her acts of injustice to mind.”—Revelation 18:2, 5.
These religions were supposed to teach their adherents to do the right thing but failed. Thus, God’s Word says of all worldly religion: “In her was found the blood of prophets and of holy ones and of all those who have been slaughtered on the earth.” (Revelation 18:24) Because of failing to instruct their members to love their fellowman and fellow religionist, these religions are charged with bloodguilt.
A New World at Hand!
The day in which evil will be destroyed is finally at hand. (Zephaniah 2:1-3; Matthew 24:3, 7-14) Following that day, the time will come when ‘mourning, outcry, and pain will be no more’ for the happy residents of the earth. (Revelation 21:3-5) Atrocities and massacres will never occur again because rulership of this earth will be taken from humans and will be given to God’s heavenly Kingdom in the hands of the “Prince of Peace,” Jesus Christ.—Isaiah 9:6, 7; Daniel 2:44; Matthew 6:9, 10.
At that time the prophecy at Psalm 46:9 will be completely fulfilled: “[God] is making wars to cease to the extremity of the earth.” That peace will last forever because, as Isaiah 2:4 foretells, “nation will not lift up sword against nation, neither will they learn war anymore.” Psalm 37:11 thus foretells: “The meek ones themselves will possess the earth, and they will indeed find their exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.” Yes, then it will be said that “the whole earth has come to rest, has become free of disturbance. People have become cheerful with joyful cries.”—Isaiah 14:7.
All of this means that a righteous new world is near. And in that new world, under the rule of God’s heavenly Kingdom, another marvelous event will take place—the resurrection of the dead! God’s Word guarantees: “There is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous.”—Acts 24:15.
While on earth, Jesus demonstrated this by raising people from the dead. For example, when he resurrected a young girl, the account says: “Immediately the maiden rose and began walking . . . At once [those observing] were beside themselves with great ecstasy.” (Mark 5:42) In the resurrection those killed in atrocities as well as others long dead will be raised from the dead and will be given the opportunity to live forever on a paradise earth. (Luke 23:43) And in time “the former things will not be called to mind, neither will they come up into the heart.”—Isaiah 65:17.
You will act wisely in acquiring an accurate knowledge of God’s Word, the Bible, and doing his will. Then God will remember you with favor when he forever solves the problem of atrocities and restores life to victims. Jesus said: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.”—John 17:3.
[Pictures on page 8, 9]
God will transform this earth into a peaceful paradise
[Pictures on page 10]
God will remove the effects of past atrocities by resurrecting the dead

