How Much Does Religion Interest Young People?
BY AWAKE! CORRESPONDENT IN FRANCE
FOR the 750,000 youngsters in the audience, this was to be an evening of euphoria. They waved flags, sang, and applauded. Lasers and fireworks traced paths through the air, and musicians roused the crowd. The atmosphere resembled a “gigantic improvised discotheque.” Finally, to screams of adulation, the man they had been awaiting came on stage.
Was this the kickoff for the world tour of some rock band? No. It was a religious mass meeting in Paris during the Catholic World Youth Days, and the man was none other than Pope John Paul II!
For some, young people’s interest in religious festivals like this may seem strange. But now the media are talking about a religious revival among youths.
Outward Appearances
At face value, religion might seem to be in fairly good shape. About 68 percent of young Europeans say that they belong to a religion, and in Ireland this figure exceeds 90 percent. In Armenia, a former Soviet republic where many at one time considered religion a relic from a bygone era, a priest said of once deserted churches that are now full: “I’m amazed at the attraction religion holds for the younger generation.”
In many countries the media have widely publicized young people’s involvement in cults and charismatic groups. Religious festivals, like the one mentioned at the outset, are popular. What happens, though, when we look below the surface?
Taking a Closer Look
A closer look reveals that in 1967, 81 percent of French youths believed in God, but in 1997, the percentage was less than half. In Europe as a whole, only 28 percent of young people believe in a personal God. It is not surprising, then, that only 12 percent of Europe’s youths pray often. How is this reflected in the way youths view religion?
In Denmark 90 percent of young people say that they belong to the national church. Only 3 percent describe themselves as practicing members. In 1997 a poll by La Croix, a Catholic newspaper in France, showed that 70 percent of French youths admit that religion plays no real part in their lives. Three quarters of them place more importance on personal experience than the teaching of a religion. The same is true in most other European countries.
Why are young people turning away from the churches? For most of them, mainstream religions do not inspire confidence. In France, for instance, the majority of youngsters think that religion is a dividing factor in the world. In addition, it is not uncommon to find youths who feel the way 15-year-old Judith, a Catholic from Spain, does. She said: “I don’t agree with what the church says on morality.” Similarly, 20-year-old Joseph, from Taiwan, finds religion “too traditional.” But if most young people do not agree with their own religion’s teachings, what do they believe in?
Religion à la Carte
Young people now commonly choose religious beliefs as they would dishes on a menu. Religious “practice à la carte,” one magazine called it. A Catholic magazine referred to it as “religious window-shopping.” Ideas that were becoming outmoded are now common fare. Thus, in Europe about 33 percent of young people believe in lucky charms, 40 percent believe that fortune-tellers can predict the future, and 27 percent believe that the stars influence people’s lives. Ideas like reincarnation now form part of the beliefs of many young Europeans.
The variety of religious beliefs is such that young people can pick ideas to suit their tastes. Few believe that only one religion has a monopoly on truth. With young people picking at will, the difference between their religious beliefs is becoming less distinct. Thus, sociologists now talk about a “progressive wiping out” or “general erosion” of formal creeds. In this spiritual climate, how are traditional religions reacting?
Religion’s Quest for Youths
Religions are finding it a challenge to attract youths. A French priest asked of the crowds attending the Catholic World Youth Days festival in Paris: “Where do these young ones come from? I’ve got no youths in my churches. I never see them.” In its quest to attract and keep youths’ attention, the Catholic Church is having to change its presentation and its packaging.
“The church changes its style!” declared the French newspaper Le Figaro. For the 12th World Youth Days festival in Paris, the church employed agencies that are more used to organizing rock concerts to look after the presentation. Over 300 shows were put on to entertain youths visiting from over 100 countries, and designer clothing was specially made for the clergy.
Out of touch with young people today and feeling the need to adapt, many religions are becoming catchall faiths. Reflecting this policy, Michel Dubost, the clergyman who organized the World Youth Days festival in Paris, said: “Of course, I would like all the baptized to be faithful to Christ. But even if they are not, they have their place in the church.”
Youths’ Quest for Answers
Highlighting that youths’ quest for answers is indeed real, one newspaper described the youngsters’ attendance at the religious festival in Paris as “a cry for faith, rather than of faith.” Was such a cry answered by the Catholic Church?
When you take off the wrappings or peer through what one Catholic newspaper calls the “optical illusion” of large religious festivals, what remains? The French newspaper Le Monde commented on the “lack of real content” below the surface.
While presentation is important, food has to be nourishing. Young people’s questions about the meaning of life require spiritually nourishing answers. The attractive but empty replies that youths are served do not satisfy them.
Devoid of real substance, are such religious events having any lasting effect on youths today? French sociologist Danièle Hervieu-Léger observed: “These spectacular operations have little chance of developing durable social effects.” Where, then, can youngsters find satisfying answers to their questions?
Satisfying Answers
In 1997 the French magazine Le Point published an article about the difficulties youngsters face. In addition to the questions about the meaning of life common to most youngsters, youths also have to cope with crime and violence. Is it possible to rise above this? The magazine article explained: “At 30 years of age, David started to worry about the toll that alcohol, drugs, and violence were taking on his body. Jehovah’s Witnesses knocked at his door with an answer to his hopes for purification. He studied. He converted. He paid back his gambling debts and reimbursed all those who did not even know that he had cheated them at poker. He does not smoke, drink, or fight anymore.”
Regarding other youths who studied the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses, the article continued: “They have found all the answers to all their questions.” One young Witness expressed it simply: “The Bible has been telling the truth for two thousand years, so why should I go elsewhere for guidance?”
God’s Word contains a message for youths. Its practical advice helps them cope with today’s problems and gives them a solid basis for believing in a future of peace and brotherhood. In a constantly changing world, the hope that the Bible provides is “an anchor for the soul, both sure and firm,” providing stability and comfort. (Hebrews 6:19) Hundreds of thousands of youths have found real meaning in their lives through a personal Bible study with Jehovah’s Witnesses. They have seen for themselves how the Bible produces changes that are more than skin-deep. By accepting the Bible’s answers, young people find that their quest for real faith is rewarded.
[Picture on page 12]
Religious festival attracts thousands of youths in Paris
[Picture on page 13]
World Youth Days in Paris—a genuine religious revival?

