“Sea Sense”​—Boating Wisdom
By “Awake!” correspondent in New Zealand
“MISSING After Boat Swamps,” “Man Lost in Cook Strait,” “Police Launch Saves Yacht,” “Six Good Kids Die​—And a Town Weeps,” “Man Rescued After 11 Hours in Water Without Lifejacket,” “Holiday Drowning Toll Is 14.”
These headlines and others like them appeared in the Auckland, New Zealand, daily newspapers between mid-December 1975 and mid-January 1976. They all referred to individual tragedies involving people using, for recreation, the sea and waterways of New Zealand’s North Island.
Reports such as the foregoing will sadly be echoed around the earth, wherever man pits his knowledge, or lack of it, against the sea, whether for pleasure or profit.
While it is true that the practice of pleasure-boating has reached a peak in recent years, thus attracting many novices, it should be carefully noted that even ships passing inspection by the most reputable authorities and manned by qualified professional seamen continue to be overwhelmed by tempests and other perils, often resulting in the loss of life.
Cities on Harbors, Rivers and Lakes
Almost all the large concentrations of population are located on either harbors, rivers or lakes. One such city is Auckland, with a population approaching 800,000. It sits astride an isthmus between two great harbors, the one on the west opening to the Tasman Sea and the eastern one providing entry from the Pacific Ocean. A combined coastline of some 380 miles (610 kilometers) is contained within these two waterways alone, while further harbors, rivers and sheltered islands and inlets abound within easy reach of small craft. Such an environment, together with a mild climate, make this South Pacific city a place of considerable acquatic activity.
Not only in this area, but in the whole of New Zealand, with its long coastlines and numerous rivers and lakes, the toll from drownings continues to rise, no fewer than 130 persons losing their lives in this way in 1975. The water safety council has pleaded with people to take better care in the water this year; and the New Zealand Volunteer Coast Guard recommended that “a healthy state of fear [is] probably the most important thing to take with you in a small boat.”
“The Ordinary Practice of Seamen,” or Common Sense
By international accord the Maritime nations observe and follow the “International Regulations for the Prevention of Collision at Sea,” with which are incorporated lights and shapes required to be carried by vessels as well as the “Steering and Sailing Rules” and distress signals. Since the opening paragraph of the rules states that they are to be observed by all vessels upon the high seas, and in waters connected therewith, it follows that everyone who seeks to take a craft of any description from the shores should at least be familiar with their contents. But surely the most important rule is No. 2, which states: “Nothing in these rules shall exonerate any vessel or owner, master or crew thereof, from the consequences of any neglect to comply with these rules or of the neglect of any precaution which may be required by the ordinary practice of seamen, or by the special circumstances of the case.”
The overriding words to define “the ordinary practice of seamen” are common sense, nothing more and nothing less. Not to be exonerated, as stated in the rule, may mean suspension of license or certificate or may even mean a fine or imprisonment. Some local authorities impose fines and penalties against amateur pleasure-boat owners for infringements of bylaws and regulations. But what about the boat owner who, through lack of observing “the ordinary practice of seamen,” and through carelessness or neglect of common sense precautions, causes loss of life? Certainly his conscience would never exonerate him, even if the law did.
Ten Basic Rules
The New Zealand booklet Ahoy Skipper lists what it calls ten golden rules for safe boating. These are (1) Watch the weather, (2) Do not overload, (3) Make sure you have necessary equipment, including life jackets, (4) Keep your engine 100 percent reliable, (5) Know the collision regulations and bylaws, (6) Keep a good lookout, (7) Know the distress signals, (8) Guard against fire, (9) Do not mix drinking and boating, (10) Before you depart advise some person on shore of your intentions.
But whatever approach you might take when embarking upon your first or your one-hundred-and-first voyage, do not treat the experience lightly or as being in the same category as a trip in the car. For the person setting out on a water journey, however short, there are profound differences.
The water roads do not remain smooth all the time. One may not be able to stop and ask directions. If the engine fails, one cannot pull to the side of the road and await assistance. The types of vessels using the water roads may vary in size from a few feet to over 1,000 feet (300 meters) in length. These vessels may be fishing, dredging or navigating with difficulty in confined waters. They may be towing, anchored or anchoring. They may be “not under command” or sailing with or without power. They may be crossing your course or overtaking you, or may be on a collision course or approaching you head on. You must be able to identify them by their lights at night and by their characteristics by day. You should be sufficiently familiar with the “rules of the road” to know what to do to avoid collision​—what your rights, responsibilities and obligations are under international and local laws, all of which amounts to plain common sense and observing the ordinary practice of seamanship.
You cannot hope to absorb the sea lore of generations of seafaring in ten easy lessons. There are some things that only experience will give you​—you will realize that there is always the unpredictable, the unforeseen threat of calamity. And one man may be able to cope with a sudden emergency in an unfamiliar environment, while another, even though experienced, may “go to pieces.” So, do not attempt small-boat activity for pleasure if you are not sure you can handle any emergency situation that may arise.
High-Speed Runabouts
These small, fast craft have become a source of particular concern to the authorities in New Zealand and elsewhere. They are relatively easy to purchase, are launched by a ramp from a trailer and are retrieved in the same manner. Under ideal circumstances a boy or a girl can start them, open the throttle and steer them at speeds of twenty knots and more. Obviously such boats are highly lethal in the hands of the inexperienced or foolhardy or those too young to recognize the awesome responsibility involved in confined or crowded areas. Legislation makes it illegal for persons under fifteen years of age to drive any vessel capable of exceeding ten knots under power. They must not exceed five knots when within 200 yards (180 meters) of the shore or when passing within 100 feet (30 meters) of other vessels or any person bathing or fishing. When towing water skiers, the boats can approach or leave the shore only through properly designated access lanes and must always have aboard at least one person in addition to the driver.
Minimum Safety Requirements
In any waters on which a craft is being used the wise boatman should see that his vessel is adequate for its intended purpose, and that it meets at least the minimum safety requirements. All boats should have at least a secondary method of propulsion, such as a spare set of oars or a spare engine (outboard), or sails. They should have means of dealing with fire, and a bailing device, such as a bucket or a pump. There should be sufficient buoyant material, such as cushions filled with kapok, to provide flotation for the number of persons in the boat, and an anchor with enough rope or “warp” to be able to hold the craft under at least moderate conditions.
All boats capable of making extended cruises involving the prospect of overnight passages should carry a reliable compass, and the person in charge should know how to steer by it and take an elementary bearing so as to establish a position on a chart. Such vessels, of course, should be equipped with regulation navigation lights. All boat owners should have a copy of the latest chart covering their area of proposed operation or at least be familiar with outlying shoals and sand banks and with tidal flows and ranges. They should know where the deep-water channels used by vessels other than small craft are, and the obligations that they have not to obstruct such fairways and the large vessels that use them.
Gaining Experience and Confidence
If you have never done any sailing or boating before, do not start off with a flourish and set sail with your family on a long trip such as one of forty miles (60 kilometers) or so across Auckland’s Hauraki Gulf to the Great Barrier Island. Be content to do short inshore passages of a mile or so for a season while you build up knowledge by observing and talking to others and acquiring experience and confidence in varying circumstances and conditions. It is better to start with a small low-powered motor or sailing craft whose limitations are obvious so that you will not be tempted to exceed your own capabilities. If you possess a lifetime of experience, you should not need to be reminded that when you have recently purchased a new boat you should limit your passage duration until all “bugs,” if any, have been eliminated and you have become thoroughly familiar with the boat’s characteristics and behavior.
You may be able to recite every publication ever written on safety in small boats and craft, but you will not have profited at all if you fail to exercise sound common sense and prudence. Make this the guiding principle in every step you take, in every voyage you contemplate, for the sea is harsh and unrelenting to those who treat it lightly or fail to accord it proper fear and respect.

