





SECTION 12
Divine Wisdom for Life

The book of Proverbs is a compilation of inspired counsel—mostly by Solomon—that provides guidance for daily life




IS Jehovah a wise Ruler? One decisive way to answer that question is to consider the counsel he gives. Does it work? Does applying it make life better and more meaningful? Wise King Solomon wrote hundreds of proverbs. These touch on virtually every aspect of life. Consider some examples.
Trusting in God. Trust is key to a good relationship with Jehovah. Solomon wrote: “Trust in Jehovah with all your heart and do not lean upon your own understanding. In all your ways take notice of him, and he himself will make your paths straight.” (Proverbs 3:5, 6) Trusting in God by seeking his guidance and obeying him brings profound meaning to life. Such a course enables a human to make God’s heart rejoice and gives Jehovah a reply to the issues raised by His adversary, Satan.—Proverbs 27:11.
Dealing wisely with others. God’s counsel for husbands, wives, and children is more timely today than ever. “Rejoice with the wife of your youth,” God advises the husband, directing that he remain faithful to his wife. (Proverbs 5:18-20) Married women find in the book of Proverbs a glowing description of a capable wife who wins the admiration of her husband and children. (Proverbs, chapter 31) And children find direction to obey their parents. (Proverbs 6:20) This book also shows that friendships are vital, as isolation breeds selfishness. (Proverbs 18:1) Friends can influence us for good or for bad, so we need to choose them wisely.—Proverbs 13:20; 17:17.
Dealing wisely with oneself. The book of Proverbs contains priceless counsel on avoiding alcohol abuse, cultivating healthful emotions and combating destructive ones, and being an industrious worker. (Proverbs 6:6; 14:30; 20:1) It warns that trusting in human judgment apart from the counsel of God leads to disaster. (Proverbs 14:12) It urges us to protect the inner self, the heart, against corrupting influences, reminding us that “out of [the heart] are the sources of life.”—Proverbs 4:23.
Millions of people the world over have found that living by such counsel makes for a better life. As a result, they have ample reason to accept Jehovah as their Ruler.
—Based on the book of Proverbs.



  What can we learn from studying the book of Proverbs?

  What guidance does Proverbs provide about trusting in God and dealing wisely with others and with oneself?




ECCLESIASTES
  Where can satisfaction and meaning in life be found? Solomon was in a unique position to seek the answer. With immense wealth, wisdom, and authority, he was able to investigate whether these could bring him genuine fulfillment. He pursued the pleasures of material things, married many beautiful women, and enjoyed the best in recreation. He undertook great building projects. He explored the wisdom of learned writings. What did he find? “Everything is vanity.” However, he came to this profound realization: “The conclusion of the matter, everything having been heard, is: Fear the true God and keep his commandments. For this is the whole obligation of man.”—Ecclesiastes 12:8, 13.


