





SECTION 18
Jesus Performs Miracles

Jesus through his miracles demonstrates how he will use his power as King




GOD empowered Jesus to do things that other humans could not do. Jesus performed a great many miracles—often in front of crowds of eyewitnesses. Those miracles demonstrated that Jesus has power over enemies and obstacles that imperfect humans have never been able to combat with lasting success. Consider some examples.
Hunger. Jesus’ first miracle involved turning water into fine wine. On two other occasions, he fed hungry crowds of thousands with just a few loaves and fishes. In both cases, there was more than enough food for everyone.
Sickness. Jesus cured people having “every sort of disease and every sort of infirmity.” (Matthew 4:23) Blindness, deafness, leprosy, and epilepsy were cured under his healing touch. He cured the lame, the crippled, and the maimed as well. There was no form of illness that proved insurmountable to him.
Dangerous weather. When Jesus and his disciples were sailing across the Sea of Galilee, a violent windstorm broke out. The disciples were terrified. Jesus simply looked at the storm and said: “Hush! Be quiet!” At that, a great calm set in. (Mark 4:37-39) On another occasion, he walked on the water during a frightening storm.—Matthew 14:24-33.
Wicked spirits. Wicked spirits are far stronger than humans. Many people have proved powerless to break the grip of these vicious enemies of God. Yet, again and again, when Jesus ordered them out, he broke the spirits’ hold on their victims. He did not fear those spirits. On the contrary, they knew his authority and feared him.
Death. Aptly termed “the last enemy,” death is a foe that no human can defeat. (1 Corinthians 15:26) Yet, Jesus resurrected the dead, restoring a young man to his widowed mother and a young girl to her grieving parents. In a most remarkable instance, Jesus resurrected his dear friend Lazarus in front of a crowd of mourners, although the man had been dead nearly four days! Even Jesus’ most determined enemies acknowledged that he had performed this miracle.—John 11:38-48; 12:9-11.
Why did Jesus perform all those miracles? After all, did not death eventually claim all those whom he helped? Yes, but Jesus’ miracles did lasting good. They proved that all the thrilling prophecies about the rule of the Messianic King had a basis in fact. There is no need to doubt that God’s appointed King can eradicate hunger, sickness, dangerous weather, wicked spirits, or death itself. He has already demonstrated that God has put all such power in his hands.
—Based on the books of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John.



  How did Jesus demonstrate his power over hunger? sickness? dangerous weather? wicked spirits? death?

  What do Jesus’ miracles indicate about his future rule over the earth?




