





SECTION 26
Paradise Regained!

By means of the Kingdom under Christ, Jehovah sanctifies His name, vindicates His sovereignty, and eliminates all evil




THE last book of the Bible, called Revelation or Apocalypse, provides all mankind with hope. Recorded by the apostle John, the book contains visions that climax in the fulfillment of Jehovah’s purpose.
In the first vision, the resurrected Jesus commends and corrects a number of congregations. The next vision takes us before God’s heavenly throne, where spirit creatures are offering him praise.
As God’s purpose moves forward, the Lamb, Jesus Christ, receives a scroll with seven seals. With the opening of the first four seals, symbolic horsemen charge onto the world scene. The first is Jesus on a white horse and crowned as King. Next come riders on different-colored horses, prophetically representing war, famine, and pestilence—all of which take place during the last days of this system of things. The opening of the seventh seal leads to the blowing of seven symbolic trumpets, denoting proclamations of God’s judgments. These lead to seven symbolic plagues, or expressions of God’s anger.
God’s Kingdom, depicted as a newborn male child, is established in heaven. War breaks out, and Satan and his wicked angels are cast down to the earth. “Woe for the earth,” says a loud voice. The Devil has great anger, knowing he has a short period of time.—Revelation 12:12.
John sees Jesus in heaven represented as a lamb, and with him 144,000 who are chosen from among mankind. These ones “will rule as kings with” Jesus. Revelation thus reveals that the secondary members of the seed will total 144,000 in number.—Revelation 14:1; 20:6.
The rulers of the earth gather to Armageddon, “the war of the great day of God the Almighty.” They wage war with the one seated on the white horse—Jesus, who leads heavenly armies. All the rulers of this world are destroyed. Satan is bound, and Jesus and the 144,000 reign over the earth for “a thousand years.” At the end of the thousand years, Satan is destroyed.—Revelation 16:14; 20:4.
What will the Millennial Reign of Christ and his corulers mean for obedient humans? John writes: “[Jehovah] will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.” (Revelation 21:4) The earth becomes a paradise!
The book of Revelation thus completes the Bible’s message. By means of the Messianic Kingdom, Jehovah’s name is sanctified and his sovereignty completely vindicated for all eternity!
—Based on the book of Revelation.



  What is the meaning of the symbolic horsemen?

  What dramatic things take place as God’s purpose moves forward?

  What is Armageddon, and what is its outcome?




“BABYLON THE GREAT”
  In the book of Revelation, all false religions—that is, religions that stand in opposition to the true God—are collectively identified as “the great harlot.” She is called “Babylon the Great,” and she sells, or prostitutes, herself to the world’s political powers. At Jehovah God’s appointed time, says Revelation, these powers will turn on this harlot and destroy her.—Revelation 17:1-5, 16, 17.


