Be Zealous for Pure Worship
1 Jehovah is the zealous God. (Isa. 9:7; 59:17) It is to be expected that all lovers of Jehovah would prove themselves to be zealous in worshiping him. Like Jesus, they manifest a genuine concern for the glory of Jehovah and the spiritual welfare of mankind.​—Ps. 69:9; John 2:17.
2 Through Jehovah’s organization we receive constant reminders to help us to be zealous in our service to Jehovah. By heeding these reminders, we will not be halfhearted in our worship. (Ps. 119:113) We will imitate such zealous men as Jehu and the apostle Paul, as well as other faithful servants of God.​—2 Ki. 10:16; 1 Cor. 14:12.
IN THE FIELD MINISTRY
3 During the month of May, we will have many fine opportunities to demonstrate zeal as we continue to offer the Watchtower subscription. Since 1879 The Watchtower has been available on a subscription basis, and millions of people continue to benefit as regular subscribers. Over three million of its readers now enthusiastically present the Watchtower’s Bible-based message to still others. During this Watchtower subscription campaign, we want to use the current Topic for Conversation, “The Bible Benefits Family Life.” How can this be done?
4 After introducing yourself, you might ask: “Have you noticed that many families are finding it difficult to bear up under the pressures of life today? [Allow for reply.] While some seem to be doing quite well, many others are experiencing serious problems that range from disobedient children to child abuse and from general distrust to the breakup of marriage and family. Where do you think concerned family members can turn for trustworthy counsel and assistance? [Allow for reply.] The one that instituted marriage, the Creator himself, gives us the best counsel on family life. Notice how Genesis 1:27, 28 states God’s purpose for the human family. [Read.] Since God instituted the arrangement, he is the One who knows what the family needs in order to achieve real happiness. We can all benefit from following God’s instructions regarding family life. [Read Isaiah 48:17, 18.] For more than a hundred years, The Watchtower has directed the attention of its readers to Bible principles that benefit family life.” Then, after calling attention to a specific point in the current issue, offer the subscription.
5 You may find it helpful to review the introductions found in the Reasoning book on pages 10 and 11 under the headings “Bible/​God” and “Family/​Children.” These introductions can be adapted to fit the circumstances in your own congregation’s territory.
6 Let true Christian zeal move you to speak about the message of pure worship published in The Watchtower. Speak in a positive way, with conviction, when offering the subscription. Sheeplike ones will hear the Bible message with appreciation and will respond favorably.
7 As we use every appropriate occasion to make the good news known, may honesthearted ones see that we are “a people . . . zealous for fine works.”​—Titus 2:14.

