Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING MAY 2
Song 186
10 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With Joy.” Question-and-answer consideration. In connection with paragraph 3, demonstrate mature publisher helping newer one to prepare presentation, using Topic for Conversation and Reasoning book.
15 min: “Be Zealous for Pure Worship.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. In considering paragraphs 3 and 4, demonstrate use of current Topic for Conversation with literature offer.
Song 16 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 9
Song 23
10 min: Local announcements and accounts report. Include expressions of appreciation for financial support of congregation. Read any acknowledgment of contributions sent to the Society. Encourage all to share in field service on second Saturday of the month. Have a 30- to 60-second demonstration on how to offer current magazines.
20 min: “Teach Students How to Use the Bible.” Audience discussion. After considering paragraph 3, have brief demonstration with a publisher assisting a Bible student to find scriptures. Refer to listing of Bible books and explain how to look them up. Show him where the Hebrew and Greek Scriptures begin and end and how Bible books are divided into chapters and verses. Point out where Genesis and Revelation, as well as the book of Psalms, are found. When considering paragraph 5, explain how to use “Bible Words Indexed” feature.
15 min: “Is Your Giving a Sacrifice?” Talk by elder, based on pages 28-31 of the December 1, 1987, Watchtower.
Song 118 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 16
Song 139
10 min: Local announcements and discussion of Question Box.
20 min: “Help Children to Benefit More From Meetings.” Question-and-answer coverage of article. Include interview with youngsters. What have they been learning at the meetings or in their personal study? What experiences have they had in the field? Show the value of bringing children to the meetings and studying with them as well as taking them in the field.
15 min: “The Theocratic Ministry School Library.” Theocratic Ministry School overseer discusses article with audience, applying information to circumstances of local congregation.
Song 183 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 23
Song 30
10 min: Local announcements. Consider talking points from latest magazines. Present two well-prepared 30- to 60-second demonstrations, one featuring The Watchtower and the other, Awake! Encourage all to share in magazine witnessing this Saturday.
15 min: Local needs or talk on “A Lesson in Forgiveness,” pages 8 and 9 of the March 1, 1988, Watchtower. Make local application.
20 min: “1988 ‘Divine Justice’ District Convention.” Question-and-answer coverage of paragraphs 1-18 of insert.
Song 31 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 30
Song 65
 5 min: Local announcements and Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
25 min: “1988 ‘Divine Justice’ District Convention.” Question-and-answer coverage of paragraphs 19-31 of insert by presiding overseer. Help brothers appreciate that good conduct and dress are expected of all in the congregation. Comments may also be made on any local problems in connection with convention. As time permits, discuss “District Convention Reminders.”
15 min: Literature offer for June and July. Zealous Congregation Book Study conductor discusses offer with audience, suggests practical talking points for local territory, and uses five minutes for demonstrating how to tie in presentation with Topic for Conversation suggested for June.
Song 68 and concluding prayer.

