Presenting the Good News​—With Joy
1 Jesus Christ found great joy in his ministry. For him, doing his Father’s will was his food. (John 4:34) Likewise, Paul derived great joy from his work in the ministry. What was the secret of their having joy in the ministry despite the many hardships and persecutions they had to endure? Their service to Jehovah was whole-souled. They worked hard in their God-given assignments, and the result was joy because of their labors. (John 13:17; Rev. 14:13) How can you increase your joy in the ministry as you serve Jehovah?
THINK IN TERMS OF HELPING PEOPLE
2 Jesus Christ and Paul were excellent teachers. They aimed to reach the hearts of those who listened. Many did not respond, but those who did were a real cause for joy. (Phil. 4:1; compare Luke 15:7.) Yes, helping people to learn of Jehovah and seeing them take a stand for the truth makes us happy. In the first century, “the conversion of people of the nations” was a cause for “great joy to all the brothers.”​—Acts 15:3.
3 You too can experience this joy by skillfully sharing what you know with others. Jehovah’s organization has provided excellent tools to assist us as we teach others the truth. For example, we have the Topic for Conversation found in Our Kingdom Ministry. There is also the Reasoning book, which has many appealing introductions and answers to important questions that people ask. When you prepare for the ministry, think in terms of how you can use suggestions from Our Kingdom Ministry and the Reasoning book to help those living in your area. Work hard to help people get on the road to salvation by being well prepared to initiate good conversations with them. Such may lead to productive Bible studies and greater joy in our service.​—Jas. 1:25.
A POSITIVE ATTITUDE
4 Whether you are serving as a publisher or a pioneer, keep in mind the purpose of the ministry. (Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20) The preaching of the good news for a witness is an assignment from God. It is a privilege, and we should appreciate that what Jehovah asks of his servants is not burdensome. (1 John 5:3) He wants his people to enjoy his service. Consequently, even though some may not respond favorably to the preaching work, you can still have much joy in the ministry. Why is this so?
5 Jesus’ disciples found great joy in their ministry, and he explained to them what their principal reason for joy should be. (Luke 10:17-20) Those of the “great crowd,” who have earthly hopes, also have every reason to rejoice. (Rev. 7:9, 10) Whether your hope be heavenly or earthly, the fact that you are doing God’s will should give you great joy because “your labor is not in vain in connection with the Lord.” (1 Cor. 15:58) Jehovah “is not unrighteous so as to forget your work and the love you showed for his name.” (Heb. 6:10) Serving Jehovah whole-souled is a source of joy for those who love him.​—Ps. 40:8.
6 A Christian should enjoy his service to God. Continue to find joy in the ministry, assured that Jehovah appreciates even the smallest act of genuine devotion. (Compare Mark 12:41-44.) May all of us continue to ‘glorify our ministry’ and experience the joy it brings.​—Rom. 11:13.

