The Theocratic Ministry School Library
1 The apostle Paul urged Timothy to ‘continue applying himself to public reading, exhortation, and teaching, and to ponder over the things he had learned, to be absorbed in them, that his advancement might be manifest to all persons.’ (1 Tim. 4:13, 15) One way we can apply this admonition is through personal study and research. A good theocratic library can be very helpful to this end. It is good to have and use our own personal library at home. But the Theocratic Ministry School library located at the Kingdom Hall may have additional references, especially for newer ones who do not have personal copies of older publications.
2 In 1944 congregations were encouraged to establish a Theocratic Ministry School library at the Kingdom Hall. The purpose of the library was to enable students to have access to Society publications and other reference books advantageous for research and Bible study but not otherwise available.​—Acts 17:3.
WHAT TO INCLUDE
3 What publications should be included in the Theocratic Ministry School library? Since its purpose is to aid us in Bible study, it should include current publications of the Society and a variety of Bible translations. Also, a good dictionary may be provided. (See Question Box, May 1972 Kingdom Ministry.) The Watch Tower Publications Index 1930-1985, which is designed for research and study, is an essential item in a good theocratic library. However, many Kingdom Halls do not have all the publications referred to in the Index. In order to make more material available, the Society is planning to reprint The Watchtower bound volumes for the years 1960 to 1979, in English only. This will make a fine addition to those Theocratic Ministry School libraries that do not already have these references.
4 The Theocratic Ministry School overseer is responsible for the library. A ministerial servant may be assigned to assist him in caring for it. The school overseer should be interested in helping new ones learn how they can use the library to gain the most benefit. He should also be alert to see that appropriate new publications are added and that the books are clearly marked to show that they are the property of the congregation. All should cooperate with the school overseer in keeping the library neat and in good order. If you have publications you wish to donate to the library, then you can let the school overseer know what you have available.
MAINTAIN IN GOOD CONDITION
5 The school overseer will arrange a periodic check of the library to see that it is in good order and that any repairs or replacements are cared for. Feel free to use any of the publications in the library before and after the meetings. However, no books should be taken from the Kingdom Hall. If there is some exceptional need, then the matter should be discussed with the school overseer. When more than one congregation meets in a Kingdom Hall, each congregation should have its own Theocratic Ministry School library.
6 The Theocratic Ministry School library serves a very beneficial purpose. As we take advantage of this provision to do research, we can have the joy of uncovering the ‘hidden treasures’ of God’s Word that give knowledge, wisdom, and understanding.​—Prov. 2:4-6.

