Actively Trusting Jehovah Free from Fear
JEHOVAH’S servants are free from fear. Long ago the prophet Isaiah voiced their sentiments when he wrote: “Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and will not be afraid: for Jehovah, even Jehovah, is my strength and song; and he is become my salvation.” Yes, although the world all about them is filled with fear because of “expectation of the things coming upon the inhabited earth,” Jehovah’s servants do not fear.—Isa. 12:2, AS; Luke 21:26, NW.a
What makes them free from fear? Chiefly, their fear of Jehovah. Fear of him drives out all fear of man or what man may do to them. By the study of God’s Word and by putting into practice its teachings they have built up their confidence in Jehovah and so their hearts do not fluctuate between Jehovah’s world and that of Satan. They will not back down from their uncompromising position regardless of how many enemies they may face.—Ps. 112:7.
They are also helped to be free from fear because of their love for Jehovah. Hearts kept strong in their love and devotion for Jehovah and his kingdom keep them from worry and the tyranny of fear, even as the apostle John says: “There is no fear in love, but perfect love throws fear outside, because fear exercises a restraint. Indeed, he that is under fear has not been made perfect in love.”—1 John 4:18, NW.
True, because of this stand for Jehovah his adversaries will also hate them, but those who love Jehovah will be glad to suffer for him. They know who Jehovah is, what he has done and can do, and so they take his view of his adversaries and theirs. Why, in his sight all the nations of the world are as but a drop in a bucket or the small dust on the scale pan.
And how do they show that they are “actively trusting Jehovah”? By ‘giving to the poor.’ While Jehovah’s servants keep giving to the poor among them the necessary material things, the emphasis of their giving is on spiritual gifts. Yes, their primary concern is not for those poor in a material way but with those who are conscious of their spiritual need, those who hunger and thirst for righteousness. To such they have given and continue to give generously without ever taking up collections, charging fees or assessing any dues.—Ps. 112:9.
In giving to the poor Jehovah’s servants are really lending to him, for such poor ones are his poor and so Jehovah considers himself as indebted to such generous givers. And how does he pay his indebtedness to those who generously give to the poor? By fulfilling his promises to them, among which is the one that their righteousness will stand forever.—Prov. 19:17.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, December 15, 1954.

