A Good Time to Pioneer
1 The fulfillment of Matthew 24:14 takes place during the “short period of time” before Satan is abyssed. (Rev. 12:12) That means we also have a short period of time in which to preach the Kingdom message before the end of this system comes. No doubt you have made the decision to share in that work. At Ecclesiastes 3:7 the wise man said there is “a time to speak.” That time is now! But have you come to grips with the question of how much time to spend doing so? That is a decision that could deeply affect your life and the lives of others—your life, because Jehovah is pleased when you render whole-souled service—the lives of others, because “the harvest is great, but the workers are few.”—Matt. 9:37.
SHOULD I PIONEER?
2 Must you be a pioneer in order to be whole-souled in your service? That depends. Whole-souled service means you are doing all you can in God’s service. It is obvious that the circumstances of many would not permit them to pioneer. There are Scriptural responsibilities that must take priority over full-time service. So the decision to use your time in the pioneer work, or not to do so, is a decision that only you can make.—Gal. 6:5.
3 Many reach a point in their lives where their circumstances would allow for full-time service. This was true in the case of Jesus, was it not? When he reached the age of 30 the time had come for him to commence the special work assigned to him by his Father. He did not hesitate. (Luke 3:23) Just think of how much he accomplished during the next three and a half years in full-time service as compared to the 30 years prior to that. The Bible takes only a few lines to describe events during those first 30 years. But the account of his three and a half years of full-time preaching fills almost four of the books of the Bible and yet John says: “There are, in fact, many other things also which Jesus did, which, if ever they were written in full detail, I suppose the world itself could not contain the scrolls written.”—John 21:25.
4 Here is the model, the example, for all true Christians to follow. As we develop spiritually, we want to pattern our lives after this one. We never want to be like those about whom Jesus spoke when he said: “My word makes no progress among you.” (John 8:37) Has his “word” made progress in you to the point where you want to imitate him in the full-time preaching work? The apostle Paul, himself a full-time preacher, reached that point. He felt so strongly about his responsibilities that he said: “Woe is me if I did not declare the good news!”—1 Cor. 9:16.
WHAT ARE YOUR CIRCUMSTANCES?
5 We can all reach that point in our spiritual development where we want to pioneer. Yes, we can all have the pioneer spirit, even though circumstances may prevent many from actually being in that service. Perhaps you have recently finished your schooling or are about to do so. Have you noted what is stated in the Organization book under the subject “Regular Pioneer Service”? On page 136 it says: “Every young person ought to give serious consideration to this field of service. When he completes his years of required secular education, what is he going to do with his life?” In answer to that question it goes on to show that in the case of one who is dedicated and is baptized “there should be no doubt.”
6 Are you retired from secular work or financially independent? Are you a housewife whose responsibilities are such that you could care for them and also pioneer or auxiliary pioneer? The Organization book goes on to say on page 136: “Pioneer service is not limited to any certain age-group. The pioneer ranks include young and old, single and married, the physically strong and some who have limited resources of health.
7 September 1, 1981, will be the first day of the 1982 service year. Is that a good time for you to start pioneering? Some publishers take up the pioneer work for at least a year to see if they can do it. Many of these will find that they want to continue year after year. Yes, many of us make decisions every day. But there are few decisions that one could make that would bring more happiness or lasting benefits than the decision to pioneer. One wiser than Solomon has told us there is a time to speak. Now is a good time to pioneer for those whose circumstances permit.—Matt. 24:14.

