Announcements
● Literature offer for August: My Book of Bible Stories on a contribution of $2.50, or, if not available, use any 192-page book on a contribution of 60c. September: Same as August except that 192-page book will be 75c. October and November: Subscription for either The Watchtower or Awake!, or for both magazines on a contribution of $3.50 for each subscription.
● As soon as the August report is compiled, the form (S-10) for supplying the Society with the activity of the congregation should be completed and sent promptly to the Society. Be sure to double-check all the information for accuracy. Keep the duplicate in the congregation file.
● Pioneer report cards for use during the coming year are being sent under separate cover and should arrive in September.
● Congregation secretary should complete and send the Pioneer Information Report (S-207) to the Society as soon as he has received the August service reports from the pioneers. This must be sent in even if there are no pioneers in the congregation. Keep duplicate in congregation file.
● New Publications Available:
Watch Tower Publications Index for 1978—Italian
● Each congregation will receive three Literature Inventory forms and should take an actual count of campaign literature and controlled-stock items. Please fill out the forms completely and send the original to us no later than September 6. Keep the carbon copy for your files. We are sending a third copy to be used as a work sheet.
● The Society now has available the following booklets in Braille:
The Path of Divine Truth Leading to Liberation—grade-two English Braille
There Is Much More to Life!—grade-one French Braille
These one-volume publications may be obtained on a loan basis or purchased and kept permanently. A remittance of $1.00 should accompany all orders if purchased. Orders for Braille items should be sent to the Society’s BRAILLE DESK and not included on regular congregation literature orders. Braille publications should not be stocked by the congregation.

