Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 2
Song 63
 8 min: Local announcements. Have capable brother, possibly service overseer, discuss how we should make August a fine month of field service as a fitting conclusion to the service year. Offer practical suggestions on things we might do to accomplish this.
16 min: “Presenting the Good News—With the Topic for Conversation.” Audience discussion. Reason with audience on importance of teaching at the door. Better to help householder reach a conclusion on his own than to tell him. Ask audience to comment on this. At appropriate point have new Topic for Conversation demonstrated. Publisher draws out householder, helping him to reason on points.
12 min: “God’s Word Is Alive.” Talk. Each 15th-of-the-month issue of The Watchtower now carries an interesting article entitled “God’s Word Is Alive.” (Heb. 4:12) Review titles and pertinent points from recent Watchtowers such as 6/15, 7/15. Designed to help us combat apathy on part of householders. Helpful pictures practically tell the story in many issues and are especially useful when talking to young persons. Have you featured these articles in your presentations? (Demonstrate prepared presentation highlighting this article in August 15 Watchtower.) Article can be used either in magazine work or when presenting offer for month. If householder accepts and reads magazines, it gives God’s Word a chance to exert power in his life. (1 Thess. 2:13) Some introductory points can be drawn from Watchtower 7/15/74, pages 444-446. Conclude with encouragement to support weekend field service arrangements. This coming Saturday is second Saturday, magazine day.
 9 min: Literature Price Changes. Discuss with audience. Help all to understand when they should start placing magazines at 15c each.
Song 15 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 9
Song 71
10 min: Local announcements. Include “Coming Circuit Assembly Program.” Accounts report.
20 min: “A Good Time to Pioneer.” Questions and answers. Also interview one or two pioneers, as time permits. (If no regular or special pioneers, interview auxiliary pioneers or those who have pioneered in the past.) What adjustments did they have to make in order to make pioneering possible? What did they give up to make room for full-time service? What blessings have they experienced in full-time service? Is it a full and satisfying life?
15 min: “A Book That Is Helping People.” Assigned publishers, including some children, relate experiences from The Watchtower, 4/1/81, pages 27, 28. Other experiences by those in congregation can be given, as time permits. What are some opportunities for placing the Bible Stories book this month in addition to offering it from house to house? Conclude with warm encouragement to support field service on weekend.
Song 20 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 16
Song 70
 5 min: Local announcements and discuss appropriate points from Announcements in Our Kingdom Service.
15 min: “Things of Serious Concern.” (Phil. 4:8) Talk by an elder. Draw out some comments from various ones on how and when they schedule time for field service, personal study, association with the friends and recreation. Show the need for proper balance in order to lead a life with full godly devotion under present system.
15 min: “Contributing Toward an Accurate Report.” Audience discussion. Give congregation’s report for July when discussing paragraph three and give commendation.
10 min: Elders may arrange locally, or, if needed, the secretary may use this time to discuss any problems in connection with reporting locally. Keep the discussion positive and commend where appropriate. Include field service arrangements. How is congregation doing in making August a fine field service month to end the service year?
Song 54 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 23
(The program you normally would have had the week you attend[ed] the district convention may be used this week.)
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 30
Song 61
Local announcements. This entire program should be used to review the highlights of the “Kingdom Loyalty” District Convention. Bring in a few experiences some had as a result of sharing in field service at convention city. If the elders wish to switch this program with one nearer to a date following the convention attended by your congregation, they may do so. If possible, families, individuals or book study groups may be assigned ahead of time to cover certain days or sessions of the convention. The friends should be encouraged to bring their convention notes with them to this meeting.
Song 50 and prayer.

