Presenting the Good News—With the Topic for Conversation
1 If people are to respond to God’s promises, the real meaning of those promises should be easily understood. We can aid them in understanding when we ourselves clearly grasp what the Scriptures mean and make the explanation simple to them. It means that we must be prepared to reason with them on Bible texts. (Acts 17:2, 3) To do so, we can carefully prepare simple questions, based on certain key words in the text itself, that will help them grasp the meaning. For example, we could tell the householder that the “new earth” means a righteous human society, but it is much more effective if we use simple questions that will enable him to reach this conclusion in his own mind. We should be prepared to isolate the thought-conveying words in the verse, and then phrase simple questions that will stimulate thinking on the part of the householder. (See sg, page 129.) We must be ready to answer the questions ourselves, if necessary, so as to avoid embarrassing anyone. Let us consider how this might be done, using the text at 2 Peter 3:13.
2 After an appropriate introduction we could say: “Truly there are conditions existing today that cause us to be very concerned about the future, are there not? [Give opportunity to answer and give examples.] Do you think that conditions will ever improve and that people will be able to live on earth in peace and security? [Allow answer.] Notice this promise of better things as set forth in the Bible at 2 Peter 3:13. [Read, then discuss text.] God promises a ‘new earth.’ What do you think God means by a ‘new earth’? Does it mean he will create another planet, new ground under our feet, and call it a ‘new earth’? Do we need new ground, mountains, lakes and trees? Notice, the verse says ‘righteousness is to dwell’ in the ‘new earth.’ Righteousness is the quality that must be manifested by people doing the right thing, so the ‘new earth’ obviously refers to renewed or righteous people who will live in peace and unity with their neighbors. We really do not need a new globe. We need changed people.” If you are limiting your presentation to a simple, one-scripture discussion, you could conclude at this point by turning to Story 115 in My Book of Bible Stories and share the picture of what conditions will be like in the “new earth.” Offer the book.
3 Some may want to proceed further with the discussion. Depending upon the response, you could go on to discuss other aspects of the same verse. Call to the attention of the householder that “his promise” also includes a “new heavens.” You could ask: “Do we need a new sky or universe?” (Allow householder to comment.) Point out again in text that “righteousness is to dwell” there too, so it must refer to righteous, heavenly rulers who will beautify earth and uplift human society. You can point out that “ungodly men” who make up “the heavens and earth that are now” will be done away with, destroyed.—2 Pet. 3:7.
4 If time permits, you can show the changes that are to take place, according to Revelation 21:3, 4 or Isaiah 65:17, 22, 23. In making your transition go to Story 115 and discuss paragraph two and the illustration.
5 We do want people to listen and respond. All of this takes thorough preparation, but it is worth it.

