VOL. XIII. FEBRUARY 1, 1892. NO. 3. 

"UNTIL THE LORD COME." 



"Therefore, judge nothing before the time, until the 
Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden things 
of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the 
hearts: and then shall every man have praise of God." 
-1 Cor. 4:5. 

The teaching of the Apostle here is parallel 
to that of our Lord in his parable of the wheat 
and the tares. (Matt. 13:24-30,36-43.) When 
the zealous servant in the parable inquired, 
"Wilt thou then that we go and gather them 
[the tares] up?" the Lord answered, "Nay; 
lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also 
the wheat with them. Let both grow together 
until the harvest: and in the time of 
harvest I will say to the reapers,* Gather ye together 
first the tares, and bind them in bundles 



to burn them: but gather the wheat into my 
barn." 

All through the Gospel age the wheat and 
tares have grown together, and only the Lord, 
who could read the hearts, could distinguish 
between them with unerring precision. But both 
the Lord and the Apostle, in the above Scriptures, 
indicate a difference in the time of harvest, 
and show that it will then be possible for 
the faithful saints to judge also. With this 
thought in view, they are told to "judge nothing 
before the time, until the Lord come." 

And now the day of the Lord has come: 
we are now living in the days of the parousia 
(presence) of the Son of Man— "the Lord 
of the harvest," "having on his head a golden 
crown [divine authority] and in his hand [in 
his power] a sharp sickle"— the sickle of present 
truth, the clear unfolding of the "Word 
of God [which] is quick and powerful, and 
sharper than any two-edged sword. ..and is 
a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the 
heart." (Heb. 4:12; Matt. 9:38; Rev. 14:14.) 
And he is sending forth such "laborers," 
"angels" or "messengers" into this harvest as 
he sent forth into the harvest of the Jewish age, 
viz., his consecrated and faithful disciples, 
bearing the harvest message— the now fully revealed 
plan of God and its appointed times and 
seasons. 

The truth thus sent forth is doing its appointed 
work. Like a magnet, it gathers to itself all 
who have an affinity for it. Thrust it in wherever 
you will, it will invariably accomplish its 
work of finding the loyal and faithful. And we 
can readily judge, from this affinity for the magnet, 
who are at heart true and loyal and faithful 
to the Lord. "My sheep hear my voice," 
said the Master, "and I know them, and they 
follow me;. ..for they know my voice [they 
are able to recognize his voice of truth]: and 
a stranger they will not follow, but will flee 
from him; for they know not the voice of 
strangers." (John 10:27,4,5.) Again he says, 
"He that rejecteth me, and receiveth not my 
words, hath one that judgeth him: the word 
that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in 
the last day. "-John 12:48. 



*"The reapers are the messengers" who bear the 
truth, the indirect influence of which binds the tares. 
See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. III., Chap. VI. 

R1362:page36 



Thus, in this last day, the harvest of the age, 
this day of the Lord's invisible presence in the 
world, the truth concerning the divine plan, 
which he has been revealing since 1874, and 
which is now being widely testified for the sealing 
of the elect, is doing its separating work; 
and the saints, who understand the present situation 
and watch with interest the progress of 
the harvest work, can see clearly where the lines 
of judgment are drawn between the faithful and 
the unfaithful. And often with astonishment 
they mark the divisions which the truth makes 
when some prominent church-member, whom 
they had always judged to be faithful and true, 
manifests no affinity for the truth, but turns 
from it and hugs the error more tightly than 
ever; or, when some other one, touched by the 
power of the truth, awakes to earnest self-sacrifice 
in its service. 

"Judge nothing before the time." How 
could we have judged before this time as to 
whose hearts were loyal and true? But now, 
in this day of the Lord's presence, when the 
magnet of divine truth makes manifest those 
who have and those who have not an affinity 
for it— those who refuse to recognize the voice 
of the "Good Shepherd" and will not follow 
his leading, and who flee not from the voice of 
strangers, but hearken to and follow them— it 
becomes our duty, as well as our privilege, to 
judge who is on the Lord's side and who is 
against him; for, says the Master, "He that is 
not with me is against me; and he that gathereth 
not with me scattereth abroad."— 
Matt. 12:30. 

"Judge nothing before the time, until the 
Lord come;" but then let your spiritual senses 
be exercised in observing and marking the heretofore 
hidden things which the truth, in its 
effects, is bringing to light. See how it is 
bringing to light the hitherto covered deformities 
of the various creeds. Where is the intelligent 
Calvinist to-day who would not like to 
bury his creed sea deep, and forever hush this 
wrangle that has been exposing its deformity 
for a few years past? And where is the intelligent 
Armenian that is not trembling lest his 
turn may come next? Everything is being 
dragged to the light, whether men are willing 
or not; for every hidden thing must be revealed. 
And not only the hidden things of creeds and 
systems of error and iniquity, but also the hidden 
things of individual character; "for there 
is nothing covered that shall not be revealed, 
neither hid that shall not be known. Therefore, 



whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness 
shall be heard in the light; and that which ye 
have spoken in the ear in closets shall be proclaimed 
upon the housetops." (Luke 12:2,3.) 
Ah! it is the day of reckoning with the Church, 
and "the Lord hath a controversy with his 
people." And this controversy, this reckoning, 
is not merely with the Church-nominal in 
its great sectarian branches; but in a special 
sense it is with those who have escaped from 
the bondage of error and sectarianism, and who, 
because faithful to their consciences and the 
truths brought to their attention, have been 
served by the Master with present truth as 
"meat in due season" (Luke 12:37), and who 
have been permitted to enter into some of the 
"deep things" of God's plan. 

The world has not yet come into this judgment: 
its reckoning is yet future; but ours is 
now upon us. We, to whom the testimony of 
divine truth has been borne, before whose mental 
vision the whole plan of God with all its 
specifications has been spread out and carefully 
explained, now stand on trial, yea, under the 
final tests of that trial which is either to prove 
or disprove our worthiness to enter into the 
promised reward of the faithful. Many, as 
predicted (Psa. 91:7), are proving unworthy, 
and some still stand. And among those whom 
we fellowship and bid God-speed as faithful 
brethren in Christ, it is our duty to judge as to 
whether they are still faithful when the magnet 
of truth makes their judgment so manifest in 
this day of the Lord; for it is written (2 John 10:11) 
"If there come any unto you and bring 
not this doctrine, receive him not into your 
house, neither bid him God-speed; for he that 
biddeth him God-speed is partaker of his evil 
deeds." Here is a responsibility with reference 
to our endorsement of another which we cannot 
ignore and still be faithful; and except we 
judge of one's course by his fidelity or infidelity 
to the truth, we shall be endorsing error 

R1362:page37 

quite as often as truth. It is our privilege to 
know the truth and to hold it firmly and to be 
faithful to it to the end; and if we so abide 
and walk in the light we will quickly know 
when one has turned away from the light into 
darkness, and will be able to render wholesome 
counsel and warning to such, and to help those 
who still retain enough of the spirit of meekness 
to accept the proffered assistance. But, if 
such a one still pursue the path of darkness 



and call it light, thus deceiving himself and 
others, we cannot further endorse him and be 
guiltless. To do so is to add our influence in 
some measure, at least, to the error and in opposition 
to the truth, and thus to become partaker 
of his evil deeds. 

The necessity for this careful discrimination 
and jealous guarding of the truth in these last 
days is very manifest, both from the warnings 
of the Scriptures and from observation of 
their fulfilment. "In the last days," says the 
Apostle, "perilous times shall come." (2 Tim. 3:1.) 
Why? Because the prince of darkness 
will make every possible effort to retain his 
power and dominion; and ignorance, error and 
superstition are his strongholds. He first used 
all his power to keep men in ignorance and to 
foster superstition. But now God's due time 
has come for knowledge to be increased (Dan. 12:4), 
and the Millennial dawn is breaking; 
and not only the Church but the world is now 
waking up and beginning to think. So the 
policy of Satan now is to devise plausible 
counterfeits of the truth whereby to entrap and 
mislead those who have been making progress 
in the knowledge of the divine plan. As, in the 
beginning of our Lord's ministry at his first advent, 
Satan's efforts were concentrated upon 
the one object of causing him to stumble, thereby 
to nip the divine plan in the bud, and during 
the Gospel age the consecrated members of 
the body of Christ have been specially opposed 
and beset by him, so now his efforts are concentrated 
specially upon the last members of 
that body, "the feet of him," who are running 
the race for the prize of the high calling. It is 
for this cause that so many new and plausible 
forms of error have been brought forward within 
this harvest period. Satan is using every effort 
to thwart God's plan and to stumble the 
feet. And God even more than permits this: 

R1363 : page 37 

he encourages it by sending these strong delusions 
of Satan among his professed followers— at 
the same time assuring all who at heart are 
faithful to his Word and to their covenant of 
self-sacrifice that they need fear no evil, for he 
will be with them and uphold them though a 
thousand fall at their side. 

Ever since the plan of God has been made 
manifest to the saints, the delusions of error 
have been rapidly multiplying. This was foretold 
by the Apostle who, referring to our Lord's 
second coming, said, "And then shall that 



wicked [the Man of Sin] be revealed, whom 

the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his 

mouth, and destroy with the bright-shining of 

his presence,* whose parousia [Christ's presence] 

is with+ [or accompanied by] the working 

of Satan with all power and signs and 

lying wonders, and with all deceivableness 

of unrighteousness in them that perish, because 

they received not the love of the truth, 

that they might be saved. And for this cause 

God shall send them strong delusion, that they 

should believe a lie, that they might all be 

condemned who believed not the truth, but 

had pleasure in unrighteousness. "++ (2 Thes. 2:8-12.) 

One after another the deluded ones 

who have fallen into the various snares set for 

their feet have become active advocates of the 

several causes they have espoused since they 

departed from the truth, and are advanced by 

the adversary as teachers, angels or messengers 

of new light. They never seem to realize that 

they have gone into darkness, but imagine they 

have made great strides of progress in the light. 

This is because they have been overcome by the 

strong delusions of this evil day. They verily 

mistake the darkness for the light, the error for 



*The words, "Even him," here supplied by the translators, 
and not in the original text, as indicated by the 
italics, tend to obscure the sense of this passage. 

+The Greek word "kata," rendered "after" in the 
common version, should here be rendered "with," as the 
same word is rendered in Mark 1:27; 1 Cor. 2:1; 
Eph. 6:6. 

-H-Greek adikia should here be rendered untruth or 
error because contrasted with truth. 

R1363 : page 38 

the truth. But, though they be cast thus into 
the outer darkness of the world and of the 
nominal professor, thank God, we can now see 
that by and by the shining forth of the Sun of 
Righteousness in the Millennial morning shall 
open all the error-blinded eyes to the full and 
glorious Truth, though too late to assist any to 
win the great prize of joint-heirship in the 
Kingdom. 

However, none are ever permitted to be thus 
overcome who have not in some way been unfaithful 
to the truth and hence unworthy of it. 
Upon all such God has said he would send 
the strong delusion, so that they shall believe 
a lie. The truth being designed for those only 



who are worthy of it— the elect— all others are 
bound to lose it. But it is impossible to deceive 
the "very elect." God will keep them 
by his mighty power because of their faithfulness 
and loyalty to him. 

The Lord distinguishes between the nominally 
elect and the finally elect, and so should we. 
Not all who have accepted of the Redeemer's 
favor of justification from guilt, and have heard 
and accepted the high calling to joint-heirship 
with Christ in his kingdom and glory, will attain 
that great prize. All such have entered 
the race as now the nominally elect, and all 
such are eligible to membership in the glorified 
Church as the finally elect; but in order to 
gain that prize they must fulfil the conditions 
specified when they entered the race— when 
they in Christ's name and merit made a covenant 
with God, to sacrifice themselves in his 
service. In no other way can they make their 
calling and election sure. 

It is this nominally elect class that is being 
tried now; and God is now making manifest 
the secret counsels of the hearts of his people. 
He puts us all on guard, too, saying, "Let him 
that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he 
fall;" and telling us to take heed that no man 
take our crown. 

How great is the responsibility of our present 
position before God, the great Judge of all 
hearts. He has shown us special favor in revealing 
to us the wonders of his plan and in 
setting before us the grand prize of our high 
calling. Thus far we were counted worthy of those 
favors and eligible to the prize of joint-heirship 
with Christ. How worthy have we proved ourselves 
since receiving this knowledge? Have 
we received it with meekness and humility and 
with a gratitude which manifested itself in active 
service of the truth— in proclaiming it to 
others and in defending it and standing by it 
nobly in the midst of all the reproaches hurled 
against it? Have we refused to compromise 
the truth to any extent to avoid its otherwise 
inevitable reproach? 

If we are not thus jealous for the truth we 
are not worthy of it, and some of the deceptions 
of this "evil day" will surely number us 
among its victims; for it is in this time of 
the Lord's presence that Satan is to work so 
mightily, with great power to deceive and with 
signs of success and with lying wonders of error. 
His various schemes will have great success, 
in comparison with which the success of the 
truth will seem small; for with these, as with 
Gideon's band, it will be a time of sifting, and 



"who shall be able to stand?" But let those 
who stand girt about with divine truth fear nothing 
the Lord is permitting these delusions that 
they may serve his own wise and benevolent 
purposes in the separating of the worthy from 
the unworthy, and for the manifestation of 
those who are at heart loyal to him. 



R1360 : page 38 

PRESBYTERIAN REVISION OF FAITH. 



The secretary of the Committee for the Revision 
of Faith for the Presbyterian Church, 
which met in New York on January 12th, received 
reports from nearly two hundred Presbyteries, 
as follows:— 

Twenty-eight unreservedly approve the proposed 
amendment of the Confession. One 
hundred and twelve give assent, but ask that 
it be further amended. Fifteen request that 
the old Confession be held and that all effort 
to amend it be discontinued. Thirty-eight, are 
dissatisfied with the amended Confession and, 

R1360 : page 39 

believing that it cannot be sufficiently amended 
to please them, ask for an entirely new one, 
which shall be extremely simple and almost devoid 
of doctrine. These latter would like to be 
free if the others would let them; but are unwilling 
to lose their position in the denomination. 
Each party will doubtless sacrifice principle 
and stay in, no matter what sort of a Confession 
the others may exact from them— just 
as they have done for years past. 

The Rev. Dr. Parkhurst, of the New York 
Presbytery, who, although a Presbyterian minister 
for over eight years, under vows to believe 
and to teach its doctrines, it will be remembered, 
declared that he had never so much as 
read the Confession of Faith, is one of the 
pronounced advocates for a totally new Confession. 
He recently stated himself as follows:— 

"I don't believe that the old Confession of 
Faith should be patched up or revised, but that 
it should be stowed away among the archives 
of the Church as a relic of mediaeval theology. 
To take its place an entirely new Confession 
should be formulated. The new one should be 
divested of all the non-essentials which have 



caused so much dispute. It should be a simple, 
direct statement of fundamentals of our belief, 
so worded that the commonest people could 
understand it. Instead of being 124 pages in 
length I would like to see it two pages long. 
"After the old Westminster Confession is 
laid aside, I would not advocate its use for instruction 
in theological seminaries, but would 
lay it aside altogether." 



R1367 : page 39 

THE PRESENT AND THE FUTURE. 



Our age's sphere of light, 
Though widening still, is walled around by night; 
With slow, reluctant eye, the Church has read, 
Skeptic at heart, the lesson of its Head.— Whittier. 



Despite the light that cheers the world to-day, 
Shadows surround us, on our heavenward way, 
And Error darkens Truth's celestial ray. 

Not yet the beams, whose radiant splendors dart 
From the fair realms of Science and of Art, 
With equal glory shine from soul and heart: 

Men worship golden calves and serpents still, 
Like cringing slaves bow to their masters' will- 
Obey the letter, but the spirit kill; 

Still tremble at the Priest's uplifted rod, 
For fear that he may doom them, by a nod, 
To endless hell-fire in the name of God. 

False prophets still the wrath of Heaven provoke, 
And hypocrite, and Pharisee, and rogue, 
Sit in high places in the synagogue. 

As sheep disguised, wolves still make sheep their prey, 
The blind still lead the blind the downward way, 
And sneaking Judases their Lord betray. 

Still is assailed the free soul that aspires, 
Still persecution feeds her smoldering fires, 
And still, to murder Truth, are leagued the Liars. 

Still everywhere a selfish spirit rules- 
Men herd themselves in squabbling sects and schools, 
And deem dissenting brethren knaves or fools; 



Still hack their heads with dull, polemic swords, 
Fan the fierce flames of hate with windy words, 
And take the Devil's plaudits for the Lord's. 

The world, which God gave to his children all, 

They parcel into sections, large or small, 

And round each petty church "patch" build a wall; 

Shout their strange shibboleths and battle cries, 
Assert pre-emption title to the skies, 
And curse him as a heathen who denies. 

Thus bigotry and sect intolerance 
Sharpen the infidel's else harmless lance, 
And cause the Devil's imps for joy to dance! 

Thank God! Religion is a plant that grows: 

Its perfect flower perennially blows, 

More fragrant and more fair than Sharon's rose. 

It yet shall rise from out the sloughs and swamps, 
Shed from its shining leaves the dungeon damps, 
Break every bond that yet its free growth cramps. 

Methinks I see it rising and expand! 
Its mighty branches arching every land, 
From Zembla's snows to India's sunny strand. 

Upward, forever up, I see it rise, 
Flashing resplendent glory on our eyes, 
Until its crown is lost within the skies. 

And there, beneath this everlasting tree, 
This Tree of Life and Human Destiny, 
I see the nations gather, bond and free, 

Gentile and Jew, of every clime and race- 
God's children all— and, standing face to face, 
Own but One God, their Father, and embrace! 

Then, only then, will men indeed be free, 
Then will the Golden Age we dream of be, 
And Jesus Christ reign universally! 

—Charles W. Hubner. 



R1366 : page 40 

AN ANCIENT AND INTERESTING DOCUMENT, 

FOUND IN THE VATICAN AT ROME, WHICH PURPORTS TO BE 

THE ORIGINAL REPORT OF PILATE, ROMAN GOVERNOR OF JUDEA, 

TO THE 

EMPEROR TIBERIUS CAESAR: 

EXPLANATORY OF 



THE CAUSES WHICH LED TO THE TUMULT IN JERUSALEM, IN CONNECTION WITH 
THE DEATH OF JESUS OF NAZARETH. 



The Public is indebted to the energy of a Christian 
minister, W. D. Mahan by name, for calling 
attention to and securing an English translation 
of this interesting document. He first 
heard of it through a German student who had 
spent a large portion of several years in searching 
for curiosities in the immense library of the 
Vatican at Rome. The German Professor did 
not consider the MS. of sufficient interest to 
take a copy of it, but years afterward made 
mention of it to the minister mentioned. The 
latter felt a great interest in what he had heard, 
and finally he wrote to his friend, the German 
Professor, who meantime had returned to Westphalia, 
Germany, requesting that the latter, 
who was intimate with Father Freelinhusen— 
chief guardian of the Vatican— would undertake 
to procure a translation of the MS. into 
English. 

This was finally accomplished at a cost to Mr. 
Mahan of seventy-two dollars and forty-four 
cents. 

The parties concerned in procuring this translation 
are unknown to us, but the circumstances 
leave no room for questioning the fact. 
As to whether or not the Vatican Manuscript 
is what it purports to be, each must judge for 
himself. Certain it is that the account does 
not contradict, but fully corroborates, the accounts 
given us by the Apostles in the Bible. 
We give here 

AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER, 
PURPORTING TO BE PILATE'S. 



To TIBERIUS CAESAR-Emperor. 
Noble Sovereign, Greeting: 

The events of the last few days in my province 
have been of such a character that I 
thought well to report the details as they have 
occurred, as I should not be surprised if in the 
course of time they may change the destiny of 
our nation; for it seems of late that the gods 
have ceased to be propitious. I am almost 
ready to say, "Cursed be the day that I succeeded 
Valerius Gratius in the government 
of Judea." 

On my arrival at Jerusalem I took possession 
of the Judgment Hall and ordered a splendid 



feast to be prepared, to which I invited the tetrarch 
of Galilee, with the high priest and his 
officers. At the appointed hour no guests appeared. 
This was an insult offered to my dignity. 
A few days after, the high priest deigned 
to pay me a visit. His deportment was grave 
and deceitful. He pretended that his religion 
forbade him and his attendants to sit down at 
the table of the Romans, and to offer up libations 
with them. I thought it expedient to accept 
of his excuse, but from that moment I was 
convinced that the conquered had declared 
themselves the enemies of the conquerors. It 
seems to me that of all conquered cities, Jerusalem 
is the most difficult to govern! 

So turbulent were the people that I lived in 
momentary dread of an insurrection. To repress 
it I had but a single centurion, and a 
handful of soldiers. I requested a reinforcement 
from the Governor of Syria, who informed 
me that he had scarcely troops sufficient to defend 
his own province. An insatiate thirst for 
conquest— to extend our empire beyond the 
means of defending it — I fear will be the means 
of overthrowing our noble government. 

Among the various rumors that came to my 
ears, there was one that attracted my attention 
in particular. A young man, it was said, had 

R1366 : page 41 

appeared in Galilee, preaching with a noble 
unction a new law, in the name of the gods 
that had sent him. At first I was apprehensive 
that his design was to stir up the people against 
the Romans, but soon were my fears dispelled. 
Jesus of Nazareth spake rather as a friend of the 
Romans than of the Jews. 

One day, in passing by the place of Siloe, 
where there was a great concourse of people, I 
observed, in the midst of the group, a young 
man who was leaning against a tree, calmly addressing 
the multitude. I was told that this was 
Jesus. This I could easily have expected; so 
great was the difference between him and those 
who were listening to him. His golden-colored 
hair and beard gave to his appearance a celestial 
aspect. He appeared to be about thirty years 
of age. Never have I seen a sweeter or more 
serene countenance. What a contrast between 
him and his hearers with their black beards and 
tawny complexion. Unwilling to interrupt him 
by my presence, I continued my walk; but signified 
to my secretary to join the group and 
listen. My secretary's name is Manlius. He 
is the grandson of the chief of the conspirators 



who encamped in Etruria, waiting Catiline. 
Manlius was anciently an inhabitant of Judea 
and well acquainted with the Hebrew language. 
He is devoted to me and worthy of my confidence. 
On entering the Judgment Hall, I 
found Manlius, who related to me the words 
Jesus had pronounced at Siloe. Never have I 
heard in the Pettico, nor in the works of the 
philosophers, anything that can compare to the 
maxims of Jesus. 

One of the rebellious Jews, so numerous in 
Jerusalem, having asked him if it was lawful to 
give tribute to Caesar, Jesus replied, "Render unto 
Caesar the things which belong to Caesar, and 
unto God the things that are God's." It was 
on account of the wisdom of his sayings that I 
granted so much liberty to the Nazarene, for 
it was in my power to have had him arrested 
and exiled to Pontus; but this would have been 
contrary to the justice which has always characterized 
the Romans. This man was neither 
seditious nor rebellious, and I extended to him 
my protection unknown, perhaps, to himself. 
He was at liberty to act, to speak, to assemble 
and address the people, to choose disciples unrestrained 
by any Pretorian mandate. Should 
it ever happen— may the gods ever avert the 
omen— should it ever happen, I say, that the 
religion of our forefathers be supplanted by the 
religion of Jesus, it will be to this noble toleration 
that Rome shall owe her premature obsequies, 
while I, miserable wretch, shall have been 
the instrument of what Christians call providence, 
and we, destiny. 

But this unlimited freedom granted Jesus 
provoked the Jews; not the poor, but the rich 
and powerful. It is true that Jesus was severe 
on the latter, and this was a political reason, 
in my opinion, not to control the liberty of 
the Nazarene. "Scribes and Pharisees," he 
would say to them, "you are a race of vipers; 
you resemble painted sepulchers." At other 
times, he would sneer at the proud alms of the 
publican, telling him that the mite of the 
widow was more precious in the sight of God. 

New complaints were daily made at the Judgment 
Hall against the insolence of the Jews. 
I was even informed that some misfortune would 
befall him— that it would not be the first time 
that Jerusalem had stoned those who called 
themselves prophets— and if the Pretorium refused 
justice, an appeal would be made to 
Caesar. 

However, my conduct was approved by the 
Senate, and I was promised a reinforcement 
after the termination of the Parthian war. Being 



too weak to suppress a sedition, I resolved 

upon adopting a measure that promised to establish 

the tranquility of the city, without subjecting 

the Pretorium to humiliating 

concessions. 

I wrote to Jesus requesting an interview with 
him at the Judgment Hall, and he came. You 
know that in my veins flows the Spanish, mixed 
with Roman blood, as incapable of fear as it 
is of puerile emotion. When the Nazarene 
made his appearance I was walking in my court, 
and my feet seemed fastened with an iron 
hand to the marble pavement, and I trembled 
in every limb as a guilty culprit, though he was 
calm— the Nazarene— calm as innocence. 
When he came up to me, he stopped, and by 
a signal seemed to say to me, "I am here." 

R1366 : page 42 

For some time I contemplated with admiration 
and awe this extraordinary type of man— a 
type of man unknown to our numerous painters, 
who have given form and figure to all the 
gods and heroes. 

"Jesus," said I to him at last— and my 
tongue faltered— "Jesus of Nazareth, I have 
granted you for the last three years ample freedom 
of speech, nor do I regret it. Your words 
are those of a sage. I know not whether you 
have read Socrates, or Plato, but this I know, 
that there is in your discourses a majestic simplicity 
that elevates you far above those philosophers. 
The Emperor is informed of it, and 
I, his humble representative in this community, 
am glad of having allowed you that liberty, of 
which you are so worthy. 

"However, I must not conceal from you the 
fact that your discourses have raised up against 
you powerful and inveterate enemies. Neither 
is this surprising. Socrates had his enemies, 
and he fell a victim to their hatred. Yours 
are doubly incensed against you on account of 
your sayings, and against me on account of 
the liberty extended towards you. They even 
accuse me of being indirectly leagued with you, 
for the purpose of depriving the Hebrews of 
the little civil power which Rome has left 
them. My request— I do not say my order- 
is, that you be more circumspect in the future, 
and more tender in arousing the pride of your 
enemies, lest they raise against you the stupid 
populace, and compel me to employ the instruments 
of justice." 

The Nazarene calmly replied: 

"Prince of the earth, your words proceed 



not from true wisdom. Say to the torrent, 
Stop in the midst of the mountain home! because 
it will uproot the trees of the valley. 
The torrent will answer you, that it must obey 
the laws of the Creator. God alone knows 
whither flows the torrent. Verily, I say unto 
you, before the Rose of Sharon blossoms, the 
blood of the Just shall be spilt." "Your blood 
shall not be spilt," replied I with emotion, 

R1367 : page 42 

"You are more precious, in my estimation, on 
account of your wisdom, than all the turbulent 
and proud Pharisees, who abuse the freedom 
granted them by the Romans, conspire against 
Caesar, and construe our bounty into fear. Insolent 
wretches, they are not aware that the 
wolf of the timber sometimes clothes himself 
with the skin of the sheep. I will protect you 
against them. My Palace of Justice is open to 
you as an asylum." 

Jesus carelessly shook his head, and said, with 
a grace and a divine smile, "When the day 
shall have come, there will be no asylum for 
the Son of Man, neither in the earth, nor under 
the earth. The asylum of the Just is there," 
pointing to the heavens. "That which is written 
in the books of the prophets must be 
accomplished." 

"Young man," answered I, mildly, "you 
oblige me to convert my request into an order. 
The safety of the province, which has been 
confided to my care, requires it. You must 
observe more moderation in your discourses. 
Do not infringe. My orders you know. May 
happiness attend you. Farewell." 

"Prince of the earth," replied Jesus, "I 
came not to bring war into the world, but peace, 
love and charity. I was born the same day 
on which Augustus Caesar gave peace to the 
Roman world. Persecution proceeds not from 
me. I expect it from others, and will meet it 
in obedience to the will of my Father, who has 
shown me the way. Restrain, therefore, your 
worldly prudence. It is not in your power to 
arrest the victim at the foot of the Altar 
of expiation." 

So saying, he disappeared like a bright shadow 
behind the curtains of the palace. 

[Concluded in our next issue.] 



R1371 : page 42 



"THE RESURRECTION OF DAMNATION." 

-John 5:29.- 

A subscriber inquires for the signification of 
this expression. We reply: The difficulty to 
the English student arises from the word damnation, 
which is a mistranslation of the Greek 
word krisis. The Revised Version renders the 
expression, "The resurrection of judgment," 
which conveys the true sense much more clearly, 
although not entirely so; because the word 
judgment is so often understood to mean sentence 
merely, whereas it really signifies trial, 
including, of course, the sentence at its conclusion. 
The sense of the passage is: Some 
(the Church) will have passed their trial and 
will be resurrected to their reward; while others 
will awake to a trial for life, during the Millennial 
age, when Christ and his Church will be the 
judges.— 1 Cor. 6:2. 



R1363 : page 43 
INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS. 



SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



THE GRACIOUS CALL. 



LESSON VI., FEBRUARY 7, ISAIAH 55:1-13. 

Golden Text— "Seek ye the Lord while he may be 
found; call ye upon him while he is near."— Isa. 55:6. 

In our last lesson— Isa. 53:1-12— the Prophet 
brought to view the "Lamb of God" whose 
sacrifice would take away the sin of the world, 
and thus prepare the way, legally, for the glorious 
restitution of all things spoken by the 
mouth of all the holy prophets since the world 
began. -Acts 3:19-21. 

This lesson opens with the gracious invitation, 
"Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye 
to the waters; yea, come, buy wine and milk 
without money and without price." This at 



once calls to mind the very similar invitation 
of Rev. 22: 17--" And the Spirit and the Bride 
say, Come; and let him that heareth say, 
Come; and let him that is athirst come; 
and whosoever will, let him take the water 
of life freely." It will be observed that the 
call in both cases is only to those who desire 
the water of life: "every one that thirsteth" 
and "whosoever will" may have it; but 
it will not be forced upon any. Here, as 
frequently in the Scriptures, water is mentioned 
as a symbol of truth (See also John 4:10-14; 
Rev. 7:17); consequently the invitation 
to these is to accept or partake of the 
favor of everlasting life through obedience to 
the truth.-John 17:17. 

Isaiah also compares this sanctifying and 
life-giving draught to exhilarating wine and 
nourishing milk, which the thirsty, who desire 
it and have nothing to give in exchange for 
it, may have without money and without 
price. The truth or water of life thus offered 
is the good news of redemption and consequent 
restitution to perfection and eternal life, 
through "the precious blood of Christ," "shed 
for many [for all] for the remission of sins." 
(Matt. 26:28.) Since we were all bankrupt and 
had no means wherewith to purchase so great 
a treasure, those who value it will gratefully 
appreciate its offer as a free gift, without money 
and without price. 

But though these two invitations are virtually 
the same, the student will observe that that 
of Rev. 22:17 is due in the Millennial age, 
when the now espoused virgin Church will have 
become the Bride of Christ. Then the Spirit 
and the Bride (who has no existence as the Bride 
yet) will say, Come, etc. But that the invitation 
of Isaiah 55: 1 is intended for those thirsting 
for truth during the Gospel age is manifest 
from verses 2 and 3, which show that those of this 
class have not only been desirous of the truth, but 
that they have been diligently, though hitherto 
vainly, searching for it. In hope of finding 
the truth, they have been spending their money 
for that which is not bread, and their labor for 
that which satisfieth not. In the Millennial age, 
none will thus vainly search for truth; for then 
"the earth shall be full of the knowledge of 
the Lord, as the waters cover the sea," and none 
will teach his neighbor, saying, Know the Lord, 
for all shall know him from the least of them 
to the greatest of them (Isa. 11:9; Jer. 31:34); 
and the way of life will be so plain 
that a wayfaring man, though unlearned, shall 
not err therein. (Isa. 35:8.) But such is not 



the case now, when hundreds of conflicting 

creeds jar and jangle with both reason and 

Scripture, each one saying to the bewildered 

inquirer, "This is the way of truth: walk ye in 

it." Such bewildered, yet earnest, thirsting 

souls the Lord here counsels to leave the unsatisfying 

portion and to hearken diligently to 

his Word, saying, "Hearken diligently unto me, 

and eat ye that which is good, and let your 

soul delight itself in fatness." The reference 

R1364 : page 43 

here is to the good plan of God, the clear unfolding 

of which, in these last days, is meat 

and drink in due season for the household of 

faith. 

The invitation is synonymous with that of 
Rev. 18:4 to the same class, to come out of 
Babylon (confusion— the confusion of sectarianism); 
for while they remain in those systems 
of error, endeavoring to support and defend 
them, they are prejudiced and blinded against 
God's truth, wherever it conflicts with their 
creeds, so that they cannot progress in knowledge 
while they thus continue to spend their 
"money"— their influence and their labor— 
for that which is not bread and which satisfieth 
not. 

But, thank God, there is a satisfying portion 
for those who earnestly crave it, and some are 
eating that goodly portion, and their souls are 
delighting themselves in fatness. Let the thirsty 
hear further the gracious invitation, "Incline 
your ear [turn your ear away from the 
clash of conflicting creeds, and incline it towards 
God's own precious word, in simple faith 

R1364 : page 44 

accepting all of its testimony, notwithstanding 
the testimony of men to the contrary], and 
come unto me: hear [my word] and your soul 
shall live." 

To those who thus heed the invitation there 
is a special promise given, over and above the 
promise of life and the satisfaction now, of receiving 
this gift by faith. It is this: "I will 
make an everlasting covenant with you, even 
the sure mercies of David." [He will make an 
agreement with such that they may share in 
those sure, holy promises which belong to his 
beloved Son— the kingdom, power and glory 
of the world to come.] The name David signifies 
beloved; and the Apostle shows (Acts 13:33,34) 
that it here refers to our Lord, the 



Beloved Son of God. And not only is the 
name David sometimes used in prophecy, as 
here, to refer to God's beloved Son, but David 
himself frequently figures as a type of our Lord, 
as in Psalm 22:1,17,18. Moreover, "the 
sure mercies" or holy promises here referred 
to as belonging to our Lord, and in which we 
of this Gospel age are invited to share with 
him, were made to King David (2 Sam. 7:8-16) 
and will evidently have a partially literal 
fulfilment, although the substance is in Christ. 

These sure mercies or holy things of David 
(Christ) are clearly set forth in Psalm 89:20-37, 
to be— 

(1) That the Lord would anoint him to be a 
great king, and that he would establish his 
throne forever— as long as the sun and moon 
endure; 

(2) That no enemy should have advantage 
over him, but that all should be made subservient 
to him; 

(3) That God's covenant to bless all the 
families of the earth should stand fast with him, 
or be fulfilled by his reign; 

(4) That his children (by redemption and 
regeneration) should have such reformatory discipline 
under his reign as would be necessary 

for their correction and establishment in 
righteousness; 

(5) And that all the willing and obedient 
who shall profit by the discipline shall endure 
forever— that thus he might see of the 
travail of his soul and be satisfied. 

Verse 5 shows how the work will progress 
among the people of the world after the Christ 
has been glorified— after all the members of 
the "body" have filled up that which is behind 
of the afflictions of Christ and entered 
into his glory.— Col. 1:24. 

The succeeding verses picture for us the 
blessed opportunities of the Millennial age and 
the fulness of provision there for all to come 
into full harmony with God's Kingdom through 
the Christ. 

Verse 6 shows that when God does thus reveal 
his grace it must not be trifled with. God 
has graciously appointed a day [a thousand 
years— the Millennium] in which he will judge 
the world in righteousness— granting to each 
the fullest knowledge and opportunity for a return 
to his favor and to its reward, everlasting 
life; but God has determined to "make an 
end of sin and to bring in everlasting righteousness," 
and those who do not "seek the Lord 
while he may be found" will be accounted unworthy 
of further judgment [trial] and will 



perish in the second death as lovers of unrighteousness. 

(Rev. 21:8.) Or, as elsewhere stated, 

when God shall raise up to glory and dominion 

this Great Prophet, Priest and King (the Lord 

and his body or bride), it will come to pass 

that the soul that will not hear [obey] that 

Prophet shall be cut off from [life] among his 

people.— Acts 3:22,23. 

Verse 7. That will not be a time for pardoning 
wicked men, but for pardoning those who 
desire to forsake their wicked ways and thoughts. 
Nor are we to understand that the forsaking of 
the sin brings the pardon, aside from the sacrifice 
of Christ: this is merely stating the conditions 
upon which all during the Millennial 
age will share its favors. Preceding verses and 
chapters have shown how the "Beloved" first, 
by the will of God, died as the redemption 
price of Adam and his race, and in consequence 
inherited the "sure mercies"— the privilege 
of blessing the world by giving to each full 
knowledge and a righteous trial for life 
everlasting. 

Verses 9-11 take note of the present blindness 
of mankind respecting the gracious character 
of God— that they will not believe so 
gracious a message even when it is called to 
their attention. God reasons with such and 
shows them why they do not believe that he 
will be so gracious as he here promises, saying, 
My plans are not as you would plan, nor my 
ways of executing my plan such as you would 
surmise— mine are higher than yours. These 
my promises are as sure to bring blessings ultimately 
to all [whether they will hear or whether 
they will forbear; whether or not they will 
seek the Lord when he thus draws near], as my 
blessings now are extended to all— the sun 
shining upon the just and the unjust and the 
rain coming upon the evil and the good. "So 
shall my word be that goeth forth out of my 
mouth: it shall not return unto me void, but it 
shall accomplish that which I please, and it 
shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it." 
I have declared that in the Seed of Abraham 
(Christ and the elect Church-Gal. 3:16,29) 
all the families of the earth shall be blessed, 

R1364:page45 

and the whole earth shall be filled with my glory. 
Although men may count me slack and suppose 
that this promise and also the promise to bring 
punishment upon the wicked will never be 
fulfilled, they are mistaken: they overlook the 
fact that a thousand years with men are as one 



day with me. The day so long promised shall 
come— the day of blessing and restitution to 
all who shall prove their love of righteousness 
—the day of vengeance upon all who shall 
prove their love of iniquity.— 2 Peter 3:8. 

Verses 12,13 recount in symbolic terms the 
Millennial blessings of peace and joy for all 
who love righteousness. Instead of the thorn 
[the wicked man who wounds and injures his 
fellow creatures] shall be the fir tree [an evergreen 
tree, representative of a man possessing 
everlasting life], having inherent grace and 
fatness: "his leaf fadeth never." 

R1364:page45 

THE NEW COVENANT. 



LESSON VII., FEBRUARY 14, JER. 31:27-37. 

Golden Text— "I will forgive their iniquity and I 
will remember their sin no more."— Verse 34. 

The opening verses of this lesson (verses 27,28) 
point to the return of God's favor to Israel 
according to the flesh, and have no reference 
to spiritual Israel, as is clearly evident. Verse 10 
confirms the assurance, saying, "Hear the 
word of the Lord, O ye nations, and tell it in 
the isles afar off, and say, He that scattereth 
Israel will gather him, and keep him as a shepherd 
his flock." Verse 27 mentions Israel and 
Judah both, which might at first appear to 
teach that God has a different blessing for them 
and that the distinction which had its start after 
the death of Solomon is to be perpetuated. 
But no: we see no distinction in the blessings 
enumerated. Subsequent verses ignore all distinctions, 
thus showing that the object in mentioning 
both is to prevent any from getting the 
idea that only the ten tribes would be blessed 
in the future, and not the two tribes for a time 
known distinctively as Judah. The distinction 
really ended with the restoration from Babylon 
(Hosea 1:11); and our Lord and the Apostles 
used the name Israel as a general name. 

It is undeniable by either Jew or Gentile 
that ever since Messiah's rejection, five days 
before his crucifixion, when he said to them, 
"Your house is left desolate," Israel has been 
under divine displeasure, tempest-tossed all over 
the world. Surely God has watched over them, 
as foretold, "to pluck up and to break down 
and to throw down and to destroy and to afflict" 



them; and the faithful performance of 

the evil part of the promise is an assurance of 

the ultimate fulfilment of the promised blessings. 

Jer. 16:13-18 shows the same rejection 

and punishment of fleshly Israel, promises the 

same regathering and blessing, and indicates the 

time when it will commence. See MILLENNIAL 

DAWN, Vol. II., Chap. VII. 

But while verses 27 and 28, and verses 36 and 37, 
refer to fleshly Israel alone, we are glad 
that others as well as Israel shall have a share 
in the blessings of the New Covenant related 
in verses 24 to 34. The divine method of hiding 
truths until the due time for revealing them 
is peculiar to the Bible. As with the doctrines 
of Election and Free Grace, some affirm the 
one and deny the other, and the majority stumble 
into partial error on one side or the other, 
while in reality both are taught and both are 
true, so it is with the majority in studying 
prophecies of which Israel is the theme. Some 
will contend that it is fleshly Israel, while 
others as vehemently claim everything for spiritual 
Israel— the Gospel Church. The fact is 
that both are represented in prophecy, and it 

R1365 : page 45 

is only necessary to rightly divide the word of 
truth to see them both and their respective 
portions. 

Israel as a nation had certain inalienable 
promises yet to be inherited as a nation (Rom. 1 1:26-32), 
but it was also a typical people. 
As we have already shown, they as a people and 
their age and their ceremonies, sacrifices, etc., 
typified the Gospel Church of the present age. 
(MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., pages 201-248.) 
Moreover, they serve again in other respects as 
a type of those people of all nations who, during 
the Millennium, will accept the opportunities 
then offered, and come into covenant 
relations with God. In this latter sense they 
are before us in this prophecy of the blessings 
of the New Covenant. They represent not 
merely the faithful ones of the natural seed of 
Abraham, but all who, under those favorable 
conditions of the times of restitution, will believe 
God and seek to serve him, as did Abraham. 

As proving that Israel typified God's general 
blessing for the world, notice their three divisions, 
and what each division represented. 
(1) Priests, called out from the tribe of Levi 
and specially consecrated. These, we know, 
typified Christ our Chief Priest and his faithful, 
consecrated "little flock," the Royal Priesthood. 



(2) The Levites, who represented the 
general household of faith who serve the tabernacle 
and carry along the work financially and 
otherwise, yet never see the holy things, "the 
deep things," in any clear and definite manner. 
(Num. 4:5-15.) (3) The people of Israel, for 
whom the priesthood made sacrifices and offerings 
for sins, effecting their atonement and the 
establishment of the Covenant between them 

R1365 : page 46 

and God. These were typical, as well as the 
Priests and Levites. As the typical sacrifices 
were made for the people of Israel who desired 
harmony with God, they typified the better 
sacrifices of Christ made for the sins of the 
whole world, who might come unto God by 
him. 

It is when Israel is thus seen to be the type 
of the repentant, reconciled world that we begin 
to get a conception of the length and breadth, 
the height and depth of God's great plan as it 
embraces "whosoever will" of all the families 
of the earth. It is when we get this comprehensive 
view that we understand the Apostle's 
frequent expression— to the Jew first and also 
to the Gentile. The worthy, faithful Israelites 
after the flesh, especially those tried prophets 
and patriarchs of past dispensations, will take 
first rank in the blessings of the repentant world 
under the Millennial reign of Christ. But every 
promise and blessing to them under the New 
Covenant, will be also in as full measure to the 
numberless class whom they typify. No wonder, 
then, the Apostle reasons on this question 
that the promises of God to Israel imply life 
from the dead and general blessing. His words 
are, "If the casting away of them be the reconciling 
of the world, what shall the receiving 
of them be but life from the dead?"— 
Rom. 11:15,30-33. 

Realizing, then, that the blood of Christ 
sealed the New Covenant, not alone for Israel, 
but, as well, for all the world whom Israel typified, 
we see that whatever shall be declared true 
of Israel under that New Covenant will be 
true as well of all who, after the selection of 
the royal priesthood, shall become Israelites 
indeed, by the circumcision of the heart, when 
the full knowledge of the truth shall, in due 
time, reach the Jew first and afterward all men. 

Verses 29,30. "In those days"— days future 
at the time of the prophecy, and days still 
future, which shall be indicated by the return 
of divine favor to Israel— "In those days, they 



shall say no more, 'The fathers have eaten a 
sour grape and the children's teeth are set on 
edge.' For every one [who then dies] shall 
die for his own iniquity: every man that eateth 
the sour grape, his teeth shall be set on 
edge." The "teeth on edge" represent the 
heredity of sickness and death by the human 
family, and the "sour grape" represents 
Adam's original sin, repeated and emphasized 
in his children. We as a race die for Adam's 
sin, the effects of which we inherit, as also saith 
the Apostle. (Rom. 5:12.) As a part of the 
New Covenant sealed by the blood of Christ, 
this present state of things which has continued 
for over six thousand years is to give place 
to a new order; and none shall any longer die, 
as now, for Adam's sin; but whoever dies 
will die for his own wilful sin— the second death. 
It will be the second death because the first 
death sentence covered all. By one man's 
disobedience sin entered into the world, and 
death as the result of sin; and thus death passed 
upon all. 

The death of our Lord, "the man Christ 
Jesus who gave himself a ransom for all," was 
the full payment to justice of the penalty which 
came upon Adam, and through him by heredity 
upon all his race; so that he who paid our 
penalty thus ratified or made possible the New 
Covenant under which Israel first and then all 
the world shall be blessed, and whosoever will 
may be recovered to everlasting life. Adamic 
death or the first death, or, as people generally 
miscall it, natural death, will entirely cease as 
soon as the Great Priest, Prophet and King 
(head and body complete) shall take the control 
of earth's affairs and introduce to Israel, 
and to the world through Israel, the New Covenant. 
None, after that, shall die, unless, being 
proved unworthy of life, they come under condemnation 
to the second death, for personal, 
wilful disobedience against fullest knowledge 
and opportunity.— Acts 3:22,23. 

Verses 31 and 32 clearly point out that Israel 
must not expect these favors as a part of their 
Law Covenant made with them at Mt. Sinai, 
when they were on their way from Egypt to 
Canaan, which covenant they failed entirely to 
keep, and from which, consequently, they must 
expect no blessing. They must learn that 
this favor comes as a result of another— a new 
covenant; and in learning that, they will learn 
about him whom they pierced, whose death 
ratified or made effective this New Covenant. 
Thus they shall look upon him whom they 
pierced, and, thank God, they shall mourn as 



they come to see the actual facts.— Zech. 12:10. 

Verses 33 and 34 particularize some of the 
blessings and advantages of the Millennial age 
under the New Covenant, contrasting them 
with Israel's Law Covenant experiences. The 
Law Covenant written on tables of stone was 
easily forgotten by the typical people, and God 
was continually reminding them of their unfaithfulness, 
and chastising them by sending 
them into captivity among the nations, by 
sending blights, drouths, etc., and by sending 
his prophets to reprove their idolatries (Jer. 7:25); 
but the Israel who will enter into the 
New Covenant with God, in Christ, shall not 
be so. It shall be introduced by a greater 
prophet and mediator than Moses. The Christ 
shall be Jehovah's agent in carrying out all 
of its blessed provisions. Its law, Love, will 

R1365 : page 47 

be gradually written in the hearts of men during 
that Millennial age; and so completely 
will outward sin be kept under control, and so 
fully will temptations to forsake God be excluded, 
and so general will be the diffusion of the 
true knowledge of God (Heb. 2:14; Isa. 11:9), 
that it will no longer be necessary, as in the 
past and present, to be always preaching, 
"know the Lord;" for they shall all know him 
from the least of them to the greatest of them. 
And under this New Covenant, God (through 
Christ, the mediator of that New Covenant, who 
sealed it by the sacrifice of himself as our ransom 
price) will not only instruct all fully, and 
write his law in their hearts, but he will forgive 
their iniquities and remember no more their sins, 
i.e., of such as in that favored time of knowledge 
shall accept of the privileges offered and 
enter into the New Covenant conditions, obeying 
the law of love from the heart as it is written 
there by the finger of God— by the Great 
Prophet— the Christ. 

It will require the entire Millennial age to 
re-write in the heart of man the law of God— 
the law of love. We say re-write, for the law 
was written in man's heart, in his very constitution, 
when God created him in his own likeness. 
The law on tables of stone was given to 
Israel after two thousand years of falling had 
almost effaced the original moral-likeness. 
"When they knew God they glorified him not 
as God, neither were thankful, but became 
vain in their imaginations and their foolish 
heart was darkened. Professing themselves to 
be wise, they became fools."— Rom. 1:21,22,28. 



But God foreknew that the Law Covenant, 
made at Sinai, and the typical sacrifices for 
sin which were a part of it, could never take 
away sin nor make (Israel) the comers thereunto 
perfect; and he designed it only as a 
lesson to Israel and the world to point out the 
real remedy for sin and to foreshadow the better 
New Covenant and its superior arrangements 
for the relief of sinners at the hands of 
the Mediator like unto, but far superior to Moses. 

God gave a figure of his original law written 
in the heart of man and the renewed law as it 
will be re-written under the New Covenant. 
When Moses first went into the Mount he 
received two tables of the law, perfect, from 
the hand of God— representing the perfect man 
in the likeness of God, as he came from God's 
hand. But those tables of the law were dashed 
in pieces when Moses reached the camp, representing 
how the fall into sin has almost destroyed 
the law of God from the hearts of men, 
effacing the likeness of the Creator. God's 
method of replacing the broken tablets of the 
law was an illustration of how he purposes to 
restore his likeness and re-write his law in the 
hearts of all who desire to be in harmony with 
him under the New Covenant. He told Moses 
to hew out, polish and prepare two tables of 
stone, and promised to re-write the law thereon. 
So Christ, whom Moses typified, is to prepare 
mankind ("whosoever will") for the writing 
of the law of God. Christ does this, first of 
all by giving the ransom for all, secondly by 
bringing all who desire it back into harmony 
with God and into a full knowledge of the 
truth, which, as God's pen, will re-engrave the 
law of Love and godliness in all obedient hearts. 



page 47 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM EARNEST WORKERS. 



Manitoba. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Just a word to say 
we are all well and are still rejoicing in the 
glorious Truth and endeavoring to overcome 
through the merits of our dear Lord and Redeemer, 
who has bought us and loves us. 

Our time is at present all taken up with things 
at home, and this seems to be the Master's will 
according to our judgment. 

Find enclosed a draft for $200.00 which is for 



the Master and for his work to be used as he 
may direct. We are his stewards in those 
things. He can trust some of his saints with 
this world's goods, knowing that they are in 
harmony with himself, and as he wants, they are 
perfectly willing to assist in any way they can 
in his work. So, dear Brother, just use this as 
your judgment may direct for the Master. 

With kindest love to Sister Russell and yourself, 
in which Sister Webb joins, I am yours in 
the glorious hope, W.J.WEBB. 

[Our dear Bro. W., in addition to the financial 
aid he is able to give to the Lord's work, 
has several times so arranged his affairs as to 
give some months to the Colporteur work, in 
which Sister W. also joined, taking their two 
young boys along and sending them to school 
in whatever town they chose for the work. 
The little fellows gladly helped in the distribution 
of tracts and delivery of books, being interested 
in the truth to the extent that their 
young minds can comprehend it. God bless 
the household where his name is enshrined in 
every heart— EDITOR.] 

page 48 

California. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I must write to 
tell you how exceedingly interested I have been 
in MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. III., which I spied 
out in a bookstore in Los Angeles. I enclose 
50 cents, for which I would like you to 
send me at once Vols. I and II of the series. 
I would also much like a sample or two of your 
paper-ZION'S WATCH TOWER -for if it is what 
I expect it to be, after DAWN Vol. III., I shall 
at once become a subscriber. Volume III., 
THY KINGDOM COME, is already circulating 
among my friends. 

Yours in the waiting for Christ's Kingdom, 
Pastor First Baptist Church. 



New York. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Enclosed you will 
find an order for twenty books, together with 
money order in payment for the same. I arrived 
in Buffalo on Friday evening. Cannot 
tell just how long I shall be here, but not a day 
longer than is necessary to get my clothing in 
order for winter. I had a pleasant and fairly 

profitable canvass in W . It is a small 

place, with only about 650 inhabitants, but I 
found a few precious souls, a few who, it seems to 



me, are all ready for the truth. I sold a cloth 
bound set of DAWNS to the president of the library 
association to be put in the circulating 
library there. Nearly all my sales there were of 
full sets. I did not have books enough to fill 
them all, and am to go back again. 

I called on the Presbyterian minister, a man 
of about fifty-five or sixty years, I think. I 
said, I called to show you MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
and before I got a chance to say another word, 
he said, "I am glad you came, I have always 
time to look at anything that treats on that 
subject." Then he took the books and spent 
an hour and a half looking at them. I could not 
get away. He read the preface and table of contents, 
and then extracts here and there through 
the books, asking me questions now and then, 
as to what your books taught about this or that. 
At last he said, "I believe this will prove to be 
the most valuable and reliable work I have on 
these questions, and I am going to write you a 
line with regard to it that I want you to use 

here in W , and in any place else where it 

will be of any help to you; and I hope you will 
urge every member of my congregation to buy 
the books. I wish you might leave them in 
every house in town." He then wrote a paper 
which reads as follows: 

"Having examined very carefully the books, 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, by Charles T. Russell, it 
gives me great pleasure to recommend it as a 
reliable and profitable treatment of its subject, 
and I would advise any one interested in and 
desiring to study the subject to purchase this 
work. Pastor Presbyterian Church ." 

Also the principal of the school there says 
his father, a Baptist minister, has the books, 
and values them very highly. It seems to me 
strange that any can read the books, and value 
them, and still retain their positions as pastors 
or as members of any denomination. 

I believe that I am improving a little in my 
work, and I do hope I shall learn to be a good 
worker. I do not like to do inferior work. I 
want to be able to sell as many books as other 
colporteurs do. 

I wish I could tell you half how precious the 
blessed truths are becoming to me, but I cannot. 
I read them over and over again, and they 
are like the Bible itself, in that they never grow old. 

Yours in the harvest work, MRS. M. PECK. 



Louisiana. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The package containing 



Teacher's Bible and DAWN, Vol. III., 
came duly, also your welcome letter of the 20th 
inst. Volume Third is far beyond what I could 
either ask or think. The Teacher's Bible is all 
that is claimed for it. 

As I look back now and view the way the 
Lord has led me, I can praise him with my 
whole heart for sending unworthy me this 
glorious harvest message, and also in giving me 
an ear to hear it. It is favor upon favor indeed. 
In looking back I realize how apt, yea, 
almost sure, I would have been, ere this, to 
have been caught in some of the many snares 
of deceptive errors that, according to predictions, 
abound at this time, had it not been 
that the Good Shepherd had reached out a 
helping hand in the shape of the WATCH TOWER 
publications just in time. 

My dear Brother in Christ, I must tell you, 
for your encouragement, that I am striving daily 
to put off the old man and to put on the 
new. I have nothing to boast of, though, for 
I fail so often; but my full confidence is in 
Christ and the robe that he provides, and our 
Father has promised to give power to the faint, 
and to them that have no might he increaseth 
strength. I am striving to abide in him by 
abiding in his word, that I may bear some fruit. 
Many thanks for that timely article on fruit-bearing 
in the May TOWER. 

I shall do whatever my hands find to do, 
praying earnestly that the Lord of the harvest 
may open an effectual door for the harvest message 
among my own countrymen according to 
the flesh, that they also may be sanctified by 
the Truth, and made ready for the glorious consummation 
of the hope. 

Praying God's blessing upon you and yours, 
your brother in Christ, CHARLES STRAND. 



page 50 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



R1370 : page 50 

HARVEST LABORERS. --PRAY FOR THEM! 



Brother and Sister Adamson have nearly finished 
their present field of labor in Cincinnati, 
Ohio. They have about 4000 Millennial Dawns 
circulating there now. They have done and are 
doing a good work— gathering ripe wheat and 
witnessing to others. Sunday Meetings held 
by Brother A. help to water the good word of 
present truth which he scatters during the week 
by circulating MILLENNIAL DAWN. 

Sisters Harper and Weir will soon be a year 
in Louisville, Ky., and vicinity. The Lord is 
blessing them, and through their labors quite a 
number are coming to the Light. They are 
faithful soldiers of the cross. 

Brothers Rogers and West have been in New 
York City for some months past. They already 
have over 3000 DAWNS in circulation. They 
report some very interesting meetings held 

R1371 : page 50 

lately— well attended and evidently profitable. 
God bless them. 
Brothers Leigh, Demming and VanHook have 



spent the last nine months in southern Ohio 
and northern Kentucky. They are earnest and 
faithful and are blessed and a blessing wherever 
they go. 

Sisters Erlenmyer, Clark and Peck are still 
laboring in southern New York. We have frequent 
proofs of their zeal and willingness to 
endure hardness as good soldiers of the cross- 
bearing the good tidings to those who have ears 
to hear. Their labors are not in vain in the 
Lord. 

Brother Wise is still in the harvest field, in 
Ohio, seeking the ripe wheat, and, thank the 
Lord, finding some ready to be garnered. 

Brother Smith is making a thorough canvass 
of Pittsburgh and vicinity. He is letting the 
light shine and attracting the attention of some 
of the children of the light. In the portion of 
the city already gone over, he has circulated 
over 2000 copies of DAWN, which, sooner or 
later, will bring results. 

Brothers Haynes and Thorn are in Massachusetts. 
They have recently circulated over 
1800 copies of MILLENNIAL DAWN in Lynn, and 
report considerable interest among readers. 

Sisters Vogel and Boehmer are in the work 
in eastern Pennsylvania, circulating the present 
truth— "meat in due season"— and accomplishing 
good, we trust. 

Brother and Sister Rogers in Detroit, Brother 
and Sister Utley in Minneapolis, Brother 
C. C. Wright in Iowa, Brother Hewes in Philadelphia, 
Brother and Sister Wallace in western 
Pennsylvania, Brother Brown in Michigan, 
Brother Brewer in Atlanta, Ga., Brother Herr 
in central Pennsylvania, Brother Marchant in 
Canada, and Brother Dailey in Ohio, are all 
serving the Lord and his cause earnestly and 
with success. 

Besides the above are some faithful ones who 
have been obliged to suspend operation temporarily 
from sickness and other reasons, who, we 
trust, will soon be in the work again; and who 
even now, we are sure, are not idle. 

But we have only mentioned a few of the 
noble army of the Lord who are daily battling 
for the truth— seeking to free themselves and 
others of the Lord's household from the chains 
of error and sin. We believe that more than 
one-half of the WATCH TOWER subscribers are 
true laborers in the harvest field, whose chief 
aim in life is, not money, nor pleasure, nor 
fame, nor any other selfish, earthly object, but 
who seek chiefly, and with their best endeavors, 
not only to gain for themselves a share in the 
Kingdom promised, but to help others to so run 



as to obtain the same provision of God's grace. 

Dear co-laborers, remember one another at 
the throne of the heavenly grace, and remember 
us also of the TOWER office, as we do you all. 
~2 Thes. 3:1; Heb. 13:18. 



R1367 : page 51 
