Announcements
“DROOP NOT YOUR HANDS” TESTIMONY PERIOD
This is the Testimony Period for the month of April. It was an encouraging command first uttered by the prophet Zephaniah to a people bearing the name of Jehovah and doing a work of praise. Today, as then, there is a people doing a like work of praising their Creator. This work is publishing the Kingdom message, “a pure language,” to all nations. All Bible prophecy calls for fearless action in this work, “Fear not, droop not your hands.” (Zeph. 3:16, Mo) The one who commands today is the supreme authority; so his servants have no fear, but speak the pure language to all they contact, favorable circumstance or not. There is no stopping this upbuilding work; hundreds of thousands have willingly put their hands to it, and many more godly-inclined persons of all lands would take it up if given opportunity. Do you want to be one of these and aid others? If so, a ready implement is at hand; offer the Watchtower magazine subscription to others for $1 a year. To new subscribers during the month the booklets Evolution versus The New World, Can You Live Forever in Happiness on Earth? and one other will be given free. Lift up your hands and then send a report of your time and activity to us.
NEW WORLD TRANSLATION
The New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures, first released to the public on Wednesday, August 2, 1950, during the international assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses in New York city, answers a long-felt need for an accurate and dependable translation of the Greek Scriptures. Done in modern speech, it is just as understandable to present-day readers as the original writings of Christ’s disciples were understandable to the simple, lowly readers of their day. It is not a revision of any previous work, but is a new rendering from the original Greek text, using primarily the standard text of Westcott and Hort. To insure accuracy the translation is as literal as modern English usage permits. One of its outstanding features is the use of God’s given name Jehovah throughout. There are copious marginal references, chain references, footnotes, an enlightening foreword, an appendix, maps and illustrations. This new translation presents the Greek Scriptures in all their purity and is worthy of close study. A copy will be sent you, postpaid, on a contribution of $1.50.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of April 8: Torments of the Rich Man.
Week of April 15: No Relief for the Rich, but Comfort for the Poor.

