Prayers for Peace
MANY persons pray to God when in trouble, but forget him when all is well. Others blame him for their woes, but never bless him for their joys. Peace prayers abound when war threatens, but when the scare subsides how concerned about God is Christendom? Few thank him for good as earnestly as they implore him when trouble strikes. Whom do you consider your true friends? Those who come only when they want something? Whom do you feel the urge to help? Those who wish to use you selfishly? or those who at all times love you sincerely? If one who runs with others in good times comes to you only in hard times, are you not inclined to refer him back to his fairweather friends for help?
So it is likewise understandable why Jehovah finally said to Israel: “You have forsaken me, and served alien gods. Accordingly, I will not save you any more. Go and cry to the gods whom you have chosen! Let them save you in your time of distress!”—Judg. 10:13, 14, AT.
What about nations of Christendom that claim to serve God? Their politics is corrupt, their commerce greedy, their religions hypocritical. Their trust has been placed in international alliances, in mechanized armies, in weapons of destruction. Since in such the nations place hope, to such they should cry for help in trouble. Like the nations, so the people generally shun anything more than lip service to God and his Word. As foretold, the masses of men are “lovers of themselves, lovers of money, self-assuming, haughty, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, without gratitude, with no loving-kindness, having no natural affection, not open to any agreement, slanderers, without self-control, fierce, without love of goodness, betrayers, headstrong, puffed up with self-esteem, lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God, having a form of godly devotion but proving false to its power”.—2 Tim. 3:1-5, NW.
When such men and nations pray to God for peace, can we expect him to listen? Without forsaking their wrong course, should they expect divine aid? God’s Word states: “Jehovah is far from the wicked; but he heareth the prayer of the righteous.” “He that turneth away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer is an abomination.” “Jehovah’s eyes are upon the righteous and his ears are toward their supplication, but Jehovah’s face is against those doing injurious things.”—Prov. 15:29; 28:9, AS; 1 Pet. 3:12, NW.
If prayers are to be heard, the praying one must heed God’s Word, show love for God by obeying His commands, and voice petitions in harmony with God’s purposes for a peaceful new world. Such prayers for peace will be answered.—Isa. 9:6, 7; Matt. 6:9-13; Jas. 4:3; 1 John 5:3; Rev. 21:1-4.

