
August
Sunday, August 1

The One who sent me is with me; he did not abandon me.​—John 8:29.



Even while being persecuted, Jesus had inner peace because he knew that he was making his Father happy. He remained obedient when it was difficult for him to do so. He loved his Father and built his whole life around serving Jehovah. Before he came to earth, he was God’s “master worker.” (Prov. 8:30) And while on earth, he zealously taught others about his Father. (Matt. 6:9; John 5:17) That work brought Jesus great joy. (John 4:34-36) We can imitate Jesus by obeying Jehovah and “always having plenty to do in the work of the Lord.” (1 Cor. 15:58) When we are “intensely occupied” in the preaching work, we are better able to put our troubles into perspective. (Acts 18:5) For example, those we meet in our ministry often face worse problems than we do. Yet, when they learn to love Jehovah and apply his counsel, their lives improve and they become happier. Each time we see that happen, we feel more confident that Jehovah will care for us. w19.04 10-11 ¶8-9




Monday, August 2

Quite a number of those who practiced magical arts brought their books together and burned them up before everybody.​—Acts 19:19.



These individuals were serious about resisting wicked spirits. Their books about magic cost a lot of money. But instead of giving those books away or selling them to others, they destroyed them. They were more concerned about pleasing Jehovah than about how much money the books were worth. How can we imitate the example of those first-century Christians? It would be wise to get rid of anything we may have that is connected with the occult. This includes amulets, charms, or other objects that people wear or own to try to protect themselves from wicked spirits. (1 Cor. 10:21) Examine your entertainment carefully. Ask yourself, ‘Does any of my entertainment involve spiritism?’ Be determined to make choices that will help you stay far away from anything Jehovah hates. We want to do our best to “maintain a clear conscience” before our God.​—Acts 24:16. w19.04 22-23 ¶10-12




Tuesday, August 3

Call the elders.​—Jas. 5:14.



The elders have a number of concerns when they receive a report of serious wrongdoing. They are primarily concerned with maintaining the sanctity of God’s name. (Lev. 22:31, 32; Matt. 6:9) They are also deeply concerned with the spiritual welfare of their brothers and sisters in the congregation and want to help any who have been victims of wrongdoing. In addition, if the wrongdoer is a part of the congregation, elders are concerned with trying to restore him if that is possible. (Jas. 5:14, 15) A Christian who gives in to wrong desire and commits a serious sin is spiritually sick. This means that he no longer has a healthy relationship with Jehovah. In a sense, the elders are spiritual physicians. They endeavor to make “the sick one [in this instance, the wrongdoer] well.” Their Scriptural counsel can help him to restore his relationship with God, but this is only possible if he is genuinely repentant.​—Acts 3:19; 2 Cor. 2:5-10. w19.05 10 ¶10-11




Wednesday, August 4

God . . . energizes you, giving you both the desire and the power to act.​—Phil. 2:13.



Jehovah can give us the desire to act. Perhaps we learn of a particular need inside or outside our congregation. In response, we might ask ourselves, ‘How can I help to fill this need?’ Or maybe we have been invited to accept a challenging assignment, but we wonder if we can do it justice. Or after reading a portion of God’s Word, we may wonder, ‘How can I apply this Bible passage to help others?’ When Jehovah sees that we are willing to examine ourselves, he can give us the desire to follow through and act. Jehovah can also give us the power to act. (Isa. 40:29) He can enhance our natural abilities with his holy spirit. (Ex. 35:30-35) Through his organization, Jehovah may teach us how to perform certain tasks. If you are ever unsure about how to carry out an assignment, ask for help. Also, feel free to ask our generous heavenly Father for “power beyond what is normal.”​—2 Cor. 4:7; Luke 11:13. w19.10 21 ¶3-4




Thursday, August 5

Men will be lovers of themselves.​—2 Tim. 3:2.



The world has encouraged an inflated view of self. One reference work says that during the 1970’s “self-help books proliferated.” Some books “urged readers to know and accept themselves and to celebrate who they were.” Consider, for example, the statement made in one such book: “Be in love with the most beautiful, exciting, worthy person ever​—you.” The book advocates a “religion of the self in which an individual determines his own behavior based upon his own conscience and the laws of his culture that work for him.” Does that idea sound familiar to you? Satan encouraged Eve to do something similar. He said that she could “be like God, knowing good and bad.” (Gen. 3:5) Today, many think so highly of themselves that in their opinion no one​—not even God—​can tell them what is right and what is wrong. For example, that attitude has become especially evident in the way people view marriage. w19.05 23 ¶10-11




Friday, August 6

I am distressed and extremely downcast; I walk around sad all day long.​—Ps. 38:6.



At times, King David was overwhelmed by stress. Think of the challenges he faced. He was weighed down with guilt for the many mistakes he had made. (Ps. 40:12) His beloved son Absalom rebelled against him, leading to Absalom’s death. (2 Sam. 15:13, 14; 18:33) And one of David’s closest friends betrayed him. (2 Sam. 16:23–17:2; Ps. 55:12-14) Many of the psalms David wrote convey his feelings of discouragement as well as his unshakable trust in Jehovah. (Ps. 38:5-10; 94:17-19) Later a psalmist began to envy the lifestyle of wicked people. He may have been a descendant of the Levite Asaph, and he served at “the grand sanctuary of God.” This psalmist suffered emotional stress, causing him to become unhappy and discontented. He even started to doubt the blessings that come from serving God.​—Ps. 73:2-5, 7, 12-14, 16, 17, 21. w19.06 17 ¶12-13




Saturday, August 7

We are not ignorant of [Satan’s] designs.​—2 Cor. 2:11.



Satan appeals to natural desires. We have a natural desire to learn skills that can help us provide for ourselves and our families. (1 Tim. 5:8) Often, we can gain those skills by attending school and being diligent students. But we must be cautious. The educational system in many countries teaches students not only practical skills but also human philosophy. Students are encouraged to question the existence of God and to disregard the Bible. They are told that the theory of evolution is the only intelligent explanation for the origin of life. (Rom. 1:21-23) Such teachings are opposed to “the wisdom of God.” (1 Cor. 1:19-21; 3:18-20) Be determined never to be taken captive “by means of the philosophy and empty deception” of Satan’s world. (Col. 2:8) Continually guard against Satan’s tactics. (1 Cor. 3:18) Never allow him to blur your view of Jehovah. Live by Jehovah’s high moral standards. And do not let Satan trick you into ignoring Jehovah’s advice. w19.06 5 ¶13; 7 ¶17




Sunday, August 8

[Teach] them to observe all the things I have commanded you.​—Matt. 28:20.



Whatever subject you choose to discuss, think about the people who will hear you. Imagine how they will benefit from learning what the Bible really teaches. When talking with them, it is important that you listen to them and respect their viewpoint. That way you will understand them better, and they will be more likely to listen to you. Before a person decides to study the Bible, you may need to invest time and effort in making return visits. Why? Because people may not be available when we call on them again. Also, you may need to return several times before the householder feels comfortable enough with you to accept a Bible study. Remember, a plant is more likely to grow when it is watered regularly. Similarly, an interested person’s love for Jehovah and Christ is more likely to grow when we regularly discuss God’s Word with that person. w19.07 14 ¶1; 15-16 ¶7-8




Monday, August 9

Happy are you whenever men hate you, and when they exclude you and reproach you and denounce your name as wicked for the sake of the Son of man.​—Luke 6:22.



What did Jesus mean? Jesus was not saying that Christians would enjoy being hated. Instead, he was being realistic. We are no part of the world. We live according to Jesus’ teachings and preach the message that he preached. As a result, the world hates us. (John 15:18-21) We want to please Jehovah. If men hate us because we love our Father, that is their problem. We must not make the mistake of measuring our worth by how popular we are. We do not know when a wave of persecution or even an outright ban will affect our worship of Jehovah. However, we do know that we can prepare now by strengthening our relationship with Jehovah, by building up our courage, and by learning to cope with hatred from men. The preparations that we make now will help us stand firm in the future. w19.07 6 ¶17-18; 7 ¶21




Tuesday, August 10

Whoever approaches God must believe that he is.​—Heb. 11:6.



When we conduct Bible studies with people from nonreligious backgrounds, we must continually build up their belief in the existence of God. And we need to help them to build faith in the Bible. This might require that we repeat some points a number of times. During each study session, we may need to discuss evidence that the Bible is God’s Word by pointing to fulfilled prophecies, scientific and historical accuracy, or practical wisdom. We help people to become disciples of Christ by displaying love for them, whether they are religious or not. (1 Cor. 13:1) As we teach them, our goal is to show that God loves us and wants us to love him. Every year thousands who previously had little or no interest in religion get baptized because they have grown to love God. So be positive, and take a loving interest in all sorts of people. Listen to them. Try to understand them. By your example, teach them to be disciples of Christ. w19.07 24 ¶16-17




Wednesday, August 11

Do not forget to do good and to share what you have with others, for God is well-pleased with such sacrifices.​—Heb. 13:16.



The daughters of Shallum were among those whom Jehovah used to share in repairing the walls of Jerusalem. (Neh. 2:20; 3:12) Although their father was a prince, Shallum’s daughters were willing to do that difficult and dangerous work. (Neh. 4:15-18) In our day, willing sisters are happy to help perform a special form of sacred service​—the construction and maintenance of buildings that are dedicated to Jehovah. Their skill, enthusiasm, and loyalty are vital to the success of this work. Jehovah motivated Tabitha to abound in “good deeds and gifts of mercy,” particularly in behalf of widows. (Acts 9:36) Because of her outstanding generosity and kindness, many mourned when she died. But they were overjoyed when the apostle Peter resurrected her. (Acts 9:39-41) What do we learn from Tabitha? Whether young or old, male or female, we can all do practical things to help our brothers and sisters. w19.10 23 ¶11-12




Thursday, August 12

Make sure of the more important things, so that you may be flawless and not stumbling others.​—Phil. 1:10.



How could we stumble someone? Consider this scenario. A Bible student is finally able to control his addiction to alcohol. He realizes that he must abstain from it completely, makes progress, and gets baptized. Later, a well-meaning host of a Christian gathering urges the new brother to accept an alcoholic beverage, saying: “If you exercise self-control, you should be able to make moderate use of alcohol.” We can only imagine what the consequences would be if the new brother were to listen to that misguided advice! Our Christian meetings help us to apply the instructions given in today’s text. They remind us of what Jehovah considers to be more important and how to apply what we learn so that we may be flawless. They also encourage us to love God and our brothers. When these two great loves fill our heart, we will do our very best to avoid stumbling our brothers. w19.08 10 ¶9; 11 ¶13-14




Friday, August 13

I am the least of the apostles, and I am not worthy of being called an apostle, because I persecuted the congregation of God.​—1 Cor. 15:9.



People who appear confident or forthright are not necessarily proud. (John 1:46, 47) Yet, whether we are outgoing or not, all of us must work at developing a humble heart condition. Consider the example of the apostle Paul. He was used mightily by Jehovah to establish new congregations in one city after another. He may even have accomplished more in the ministry than any other apostle of Jesus Christ. Yet, Paul did not elevate himself among his brothers. He correctly attributed his fine standing with Jehovah, not to his own qualities or works, but to God’s undeserved kindness. (1 Cor. 15:10) What a fine lesson in humility Paul gave in his letter to the Corinthians​—especially when we recall that some men in the congregation were seeking to prove themselves to be superior to Paul!​—2 Cor. 10:10. w19.09 3 ¶5-6




Saturday, August 14

Should we not more readily submit ourselves to the Father?​—Heb. 12:9.



One reason why we might find it a challenge to submit to Jehovah is that we all inherited sin and are imperfect. So we have rebellious tendencies. After Adam and Eve rebelled against God and ate the forbidden fruit, they set their own standards. (Gen. 3:22) Today, most of mankind still prefer to ignore Jehovah and decide for themselves what is right and what is wrong. Even those who know and love Jehovah may struggle to submit fully to him. The apostle Paul faced this challenge. (Rom. 7:21-23) Like Paul, we want to do what is right in Jehovah’s eyes. But we must constantly fight the tendency to do wrong things. Another reason why it can be a challenge to submit to Jehovah is that we are influenced by the culture in which we were raised. Many human ideas are in conflict with Jehovah’s will, and it can be a constant struggle to free ourselves from common ways of thinking. w19.09 15 ¶4-6




Sunday, August 15

Go, sell what things you have and give to the poor, . . . and come be my follower.​—Mark 10:21.



We must be realistic. Each of us has a certain amount of energy. So we must be careful about what we take on. For example, we could waste energy trying to gather material possessions. Note what Jesus said to a rich young man who asked him: “What must I do to inherit everlasting life?” He must have been a decent man because Mark’s Gospel account specifically states that Jesus “felt love for him.” Jesus presented the young ruler with the invitation above. The man was torn, but it appears that he could not let go of his “many possessions.” (Mark 10:17-22) As a result, he rejected the yoke that Jesus had offered him and continued to slave “for Riches.” (Matt. 6:24) What choice would you have made? From time to time, it is good for us to reassess our priorities in life. Why? So that we can make sure that we are using our energy wisely. w19.09 24 ¶17-18




Monday, August 16

In all the nations, the good news has to be preached first.​—Mark 13:10.



Our Kingdom-preaching work will not be finished until Jehovah says it is over. How much time is left for people to come to know Jehovah God and Jesus Christ? (John 17:3) We cannot say. We do know that until the great tribulation begins, any who are “rightly disposed for everlasting life” can still respond to the good news. (Acts 13:48) How can we help these people before it is too late? Through his organization, Jehovah is giving us all that we need to teach people the truth. For example, we receive training each week at the midweek meeting. This meeting helps us know what to say on initial calls and return visits. And if after a refreshing conversation with an interested person, you leave him a tract or magazine, he will be able to do further reading until you are able to contact him again. It is our personal responsibility to keep busy every month in the Kingdom-preaching work. w19.10 9 ¶7; 10 ¶9-10




Tuesday, August 17

Do not forget to do good and to share what you have with others, for God is well-pleased with such sacrifices.​—Heb. 13:16.



Jehovah promised Simeon, a loyal older man in Jerusalem, that he would not see death before he laid eyes on the Messiah. That promise must have encouraged Simeon greatly, since he had been waiting many years for the Messiah. His faith and endurance were rewarded. One day, “under the power of the spirit,” he came into the temple. There he saw the infant Jesus, and Jehovah used Simeon to deliver a prophecy about this child who would become the Christ. (Luke 2:25-35) Although Simeon likely did not live long enough to see Jesus carry out his earthly ministry, Simeon was grateful for the privilege he had, and the best is yet to come for him! In the new world, that faithful man will see how Jesus’ rulership will be a blessing to all the families of the earth. (Gen. 22:18) We too can be grateful for any privilege Jehovah gives us in his service. w19.10 22 ¶7; 23 ¶12




Wednesday, August 18

Above all the things that you guard, safeguard your heart.​—Prov. 4:23.



Whether we have little or much materially, we need to guard our heart. How? Do not develop a love for riches. And do not allow your secular work to take priority over your service to Jehovah. How can you know if that is happening to you? Some questions you could ask yourself are: ‘Do I often think about my secular work when I am at meetings or in the ministry? Do I constantly worry about being financially secure in the future? Are money and material possessions causing problems for me and my mate? Would I be willing to do secular work that others look down on if it allowed me to spend more time serving Jehovah?’ (1 Tim. 6:9-12) When considering those questions, let us remember that Jehovah loves us and makes this promise to those who are devoted to him: “I will never leave you, and I will never abandon you.” That is why the apostle Paul wrote: “Let your way of life be free of the love of money.”​—Heb. 13:5, 6. w19.10 29 ¶10




Thursday, August 19

As iron sharpens iron, so one man sharpens his friend.​—Prov. 27:17.



When we work alongside fellow believers and observe firsthand their endearing qualities, we learn from them and draw closer to them. For example, how do you feel when you are in the ministry and you hear your friend boldly defend his faith or speak with heartfelt conviction about Jehovah and his purposes? Likely you feel drawn to him even more. Adeline, a 23-year-old sister, asked one of her friends, Candice, to go with her to preach in seldom-worked territory. “We wanted to be more motivated and to enjoy the ministry more,” she says. “We both needed a spiritual boost.” How did they benefit from working together? “At the end of each day,” says Adeline, “we discussed how we felt, what touched us about the conversations we had, and how we sensed Jehovah’s direction in our ministry. We both enjoyed these deep discussions and got to know each other even better.” w19.11 5 ¶10-11




Friday, August 20

Take up the large shield of faith.​—Eph. 6:16.



In ancient times, a soldier would feel humiliated if he returned home without his shield. The Roman historian Tacitus wrote: “To have abandoned one’s shield is the height of disgrace.” That is one reason why soldiers made sure to keep a firm hold on their shields. We keep a firm hold on our shield of faith by regularly attending Christian meetings and by speaking about Jehovah’s name and his Kingdom to others. (Heb. 10:23-25) In addition, we prayerfully read God’s Word every day and apply its counsel and direction in all that we do. (2 Tim. 3:16, 17) Then, no weapon that Satan uses against us will cause us any lasting harm. (Isa. 54:17) Our “large shield of faith” will protect us. We will stand firm, shoulder to shoulder with our brothers and sisters. And we will do more than win our daily battles​—we will have the honor of being on Jesus’ side when he wins the war against Satan and his followers.​—Rev. 17:14; 20:10. w19.11 19 ¶18-19




Saturday, August 21

The way I am aiming my blows is so as not to be striking the air.​—1 Cor. 9:26.



A clear plan that you put in writing can help you turn your decisions into action. (1 Cor. 14:40) For instance, bodies of elders are directed to assign an elder to record each decision of the body of elders, including who is assigned to follow through and the suggested date for completion. Elders who follow this direction are more likely to carry out their decisions. You could try to do something similar with your personal affairs. For example, you could prepare a daily to-do list and arrange the items in the order you intend to handle them. This can help you not only to complete what you start but also to get more done in less time. But you will need to exert yourself. It takes effort to follow your plan and complete what you start. (Rom. 12:11) The apostle Paul told Timothy to “continue applying” himself and to “persevere” in becoming a better teacher. That advice applies equally to other spiritual goals.​—1 Tim. 4:13, 16. w19.11 29-30 ¶15-16




Sunday, August 22

Jehovah spoke to Moses face-to-face, just as one man would speak to another man.​—Ex. 33:11.



When Moses was asked to lead the nation of Israel out of captivity, he lacked confidence and repeatedly told Jehovah that he felt unqualified. God responded with real compassion, providing help for Moses. (Ex. 4:10-16) As a result, Moses was able to deliver powerful judgment messages to Pharaoh. Moses then saw Jehovah use His power as He saved the Israelites but destroyed Pharaoh and his forces in the Red Sea. (Ex. 14:26-31; Ps. 136:15) After Moses led the Israelites out of Egypt, they constantly found things to complain about. Even so, Moses observed Jehovah’s great patience in dealing with the people He had freed from slavery. (Ps. 78:40-43) Moses also saw Jehovah show remarkable humility when He changed His mind after Moses asked Him to do so. (Ex. 32:9-14) After the Exodus, Moses’ relationship with Jehovah became so close that it was as if he could see his heavenly Father.​—Heb. 11:27. w19.12 17 ¶7-9




Monday, August 23

He is going ahead of you into Galilee. You will see him there.​—Matt. 28:7.



Most of Jesus’ disciples were Galileans. So a mountain in Galilee​—rather than a private home in Jerusalem—​would be a reasonable place to gather with a large number of people. Also, the resurrected Jesus had already met with his 11 apostles in a private home in Jerusalem. If Jesus wanted to instruct only the apostles to preach and make disciples, he could have done that in Jerusalem instead of asking them and the women and others to meet him in Galilee. (Luke 24:33, 36) Jesus’ command to make disciples was not limited to Christians living in the first century. How do we know? Jesus concluded his instructions to his followers with the words: “I am with you all the days until the conclusion of the system of things.” (Matt. 28:19, 20) Today the disciple-making work is in full swing. Think of it! Nearly 300,000 people each year get baptized as Jehovah’s Witnesses and become disciples of Jesus Christ! w20.01 2 ¶1; 3 ¶5-6




Tuesday, August 24

He remembered us when we were low.​—Ps. 136:23.



Young, but diagnosed with a debilitating disease. Getting older and unable to find work. Being elderly and becoming increasingly limited in what you can do in Jehovah’s service. If you are experiencing something like one of the situations just mentioned, you may feel that you are not useful anymore. Those situations can rob you of joy, destroy your self-respect, and interfere with your relationships with other people. This world reflects Satan’s view of human life. Satan has always treated humans as if they were of little value. He heartlessly offered Eve a path to freedom, knowing full well that the penalty for disobeying God was death. Satan has always controlled this world. So it is not surprising that many of its leaders reflect his lack of respect for human life and dignity. Jehovah, on the other hand, wants us to feel good about ourselves, and he supports us when we face situations that could make us feel worthless.​—Rom. 12:3. w20.01 14 ¶1-4




Wednesday, August 25

You must not prophesy in the name of Jehovah, or you will die by our hand.​—Jer. 11:21.



For at least 40 years, Jeremiah lived among disloyal people, including neighbors and possibly some relatives from his hometown of Anathoth. (Jer. 12:6) However, he did not isolate himself. In fact, he expressed his feelings to his loyal secretary Baruch and ultimately to us. (Jer. 8:21; 9:1; 20:14-18; 45:1) We can well imagine that as Baruch wrote down Jeremiah’s eventful story, the two developed deep affection and respect for each other. (Jer. 20:1, 2; 26:7-11) For many years, Jeremiah had boldly warned the Israelites about what was going to happen to Jerusalem. (Jer. 25:3) In a further attempt to move the people to repentance, Jehovah asked Jeremiah to write His warnings on a scroll. (Jer. 36:1-4) As Jeremiah and Baruch worked closely together on this God-given task, which probably lasted several months, they no doubt had faith-strengthening conversations. w19.11 2-3 ¶3-4




Thursday, August 26

Whoever exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.​—Matt. 23:12.



How should we treat anointed brothers and sisters? It would be wrong to admire a person too much, even if he is an anointed brother of Christ. (Matt. 23:8-11) When the Bible speaks of the elders, it encourages us to “imitate their faith,” but it does not tell us that we can make any human our leader. (Heb. 13:7) It is true that the Bible says that some are “worthy of double honor.” But this is because they “preside in a fine way” and “work hard in speaking and teaching,” not because they are anointed. (1 Tim. 5:17) If we give anointed ones too much praise and attention, we could embarrass them. Or even worse, we could cause them to become proud. (Rom. 12:3) None of us would want to do anything that might cause one of Christ’s anointed brothers to make such a serious mistake!​—Luke 17:2. w20.01 29 ¶8




Friday, August 27

Besides those things of an external kind, there is . . . the anxiety for all the congregations.​—2 Cor. 11:28.



The apostle Paul had many reasons for feeling anxious. The problems his brothers and sisters faced weighed heavily on his mind. (2 Cor. 2:4) Opposers beat him and threw him in prison. He also had to endure hardships that caused anxiety, such as being “low on provisions.” (Phil. 4:12) And considering that he had been shipwrecked at least three times at that point in his life, we can only imagine the anxiety he experienced when traveling by boat. (2 Cor. 11:23-27) How did Paul deal with the anxiety? Paul felt anxious for his brothers and sisters when they faced challenges, but he did not try to fix all their problems by himself. Paul was modest. He arranged for others to help in caring for the congregation, trustworthy men such as Timothy and Titus. The work those brothers did no doubt helped to reduce Paul’s anxiety.​—Phil. 2:19, 20; Titus 1:1, 4, 5. w20.02 23 ¶11-12




Saturday, August 28

Children, be obedient to your parents.​—Eph. 6:1.



Jehovah also expects us to obey him. He deserves our obedience because he is our Creator, the Sustainer of our life, and the wisest of all parents. However, the primary reason why we obey Jehovah is that we love him. (1 John 5:3) Although there are many reasons why we should obey Jehovah, he does not force us to do so. Jehovah gave us the gift of free will, so he is happy when we choose to obey him out of love for him. Parents want their children to be safe. That is why they establish standards of behavior. When children obey those guidelines, they show that they put trust in their parents and respect them. How much more important it is, then, that we know our heavenly Father’s standards and live by them. When we do, we show Jehovah that we love and respect him and we also benefit ourselves. (Isa. 48:17, 18) By contrast, those who reject Jehovah and his standards end up hurting themselves.​—Gal. 6:7, 8. w20.02 9-10 ¶8-9




Sunday, August 29

Let your servant girl speak to you, and listen to the words of your servant girl.​—1 Sam. 25:24.



Like Abigail, we need to have the courage to speak up if we see someone heading down a dangerous path. (Ps. 141:5) We must be respectful, but we must also be bold. When we lovingly offer a person necessary counsel, we prove that we are a true friend. (Prov. 27:17) Elders in particular must have the courage to speak to those in the congregation who take a false step. (Gal. 6:1) Elders humbly realize that they too are imperfect and may one day need counsel. But elders do not let that hold them back from reproving those who need discipline. (2 Tim. 4:2; Titus 1:9) When counseling a person, they try to use their gift of speech to teach him skillfully and patiently. They love their brother, and that love moves them to action. (Prov. 13:24) But their primary concern is to honor Jehovah by upholding his standards and protecting the congregation from harm.​—Acts 20:28. w20.03 20 ¶8-9




Monday, August 30

For all things I have the strength through the one who gives me power.​—Phil. 4:13.



Jehovah caused Moses to become a deliverer of the Israelites. But when did Jehovah use him? Was it when Moses felt qualified after being “instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians”? (Acts 7:22-25) No, Jehovah used Moses only after He had shaped him into a humble, mild-tempered man. (Acts 7:30, 34-36) Jehovah gave Moses the courage to stand before the most powerful ruler in Egypt. (Ex. 9:13-19) From this we see that Jehovah uses those who display godly qualities and who rely on him for strength. Throughout history, Jehovah has caused his servants to fulfill many different roles. What will he cause you to become? Much depends on how willing you are to exert yourself. (Col. 1:29) If you make yourself available, Jehovah can cause you to become a zealous evangelizer, an effective teacher, a capable comforter, a skilled worker, a supportive friend, or whatever else he needs to accomplish his will. w19.10 21 ¶5; 25 ¶14




Tuesday, August 31

I have called you friends.​—John 15:15.



Good friends will help us to stay loyal to Jehovah. And the best way to make good friends is to be a good friend. (Matt. 7:12) For example, the Bible encourages us to expend ourselves in behalf of others, especially those who are “in need.” (Eph. 4:28) When we are absorbed in helping others, we are more likely to be happy. (Acts 20:35) The friends we make will support us when we face trials, helping us to maintain our inner peace. Just as Elihu listened when Job spoke about his trials, our friends help us by patiently listening as we put our concerns into words. (Job 32:4) We should not expect our friends to make decisions for us, but we are wise if we listen to their Bible-based advice. (Prov. 15:22) And just as King David humbly accepted the help of his friends, we should not be too proud to accept the help our friends offer when we are in need. (2 Sam. 17:27-29) Really, such good friends are a gift from Jehovah.​—Jas. 1:17. w19.04 11 ¶12; 12 ¶14-15




