
December
Wednesday, December 1

There is . . . a time to be silent.​—Eccl. 3:1, 7.



If we fail to control our speech, it can cause a lot of damage. For example, if you meet someone who lives in a land where our work is banned, are you tempted to ask him to give details about how our work is carried out in that country? No doubt your motives are good. We love our brothers and are interested in what is happening to them. We also want to be specific when praying for them. However, this is a time when we should hold back from speaking. If we put pressure on someone who has confidential information, we show a lack of love​—both to that person and to the brothers and sisters who are relying on him to keep quiet about their activity. Certainly, none of us would want to add to the difficulties of our brothers and sisters who live in countries where our work is under ban. Similarly, no brother or sister serving in such a land would want to reveal details about how Witnesses living there conduct their ministry or Christian activities. w20.03 21 ¶11-12




Thursday, December 2

You certainly will not die.​—Gen. 3:4.



God did not intend for humans to die. But in order to live forever, Adam and Eve had to obey Jehovah, who gave them a simple command: “As for the tree of the knowledge of good and bad, you must not eat from it, for in the day you eat from it you will certainly die.” (Gen. 2:16, 17) Then Satan came on the scene. Speaking through a serpent, he said the words of today’s text to Eve. Sadly, she believed the lie and ate the fruit. Later, her husband too ate the fruit. (Gen. 3:6) In this way, sin and death entered the human family. (Rom. 5:12) Adam and Eve died, just as God had said they would. But Satan did not stop lying about death. At some point in time, he began to introduce other lies. One of those lies is the teaching that the physical body dies but that some part of the person lives on, perhaps in the spirit realm. Variations of that lie have deceived countless humans right down to our day.​—1 Tim. 4:1. w19.04 14-15 ¶3-4




Friday, December 3

When I was a child, I used to speak as a child, to think as a child, to reason as a child.​—1 Cor. 13:11.



Children are not fully developed in their ability to think, to reason, or to recognize and avoid danger. So it is all too easy for devious abusers to deceive children. Abusers teach children dangerous lies, such as the idea that the child is to blame, that the abuse must be kept secret, that no one will listen or care if the child reports the abuse, or that sexual acts between an adult and a child are actually normal expressions of sincere love. Such lies can distort a child’s thinking ability and perception of truth for many years. Such a child may grow up thinking of herself or himself as damaged, defiled, and unworthy of love or comfort. It is not surprising, then, that sexual abuse can cause lasting harm. We are living in the last days, a time when many have “no natural affection” and when “wicked men and impostors will advance from bad to worse.”​—2 Tim. 3:1-5, 13. w19.05 15 ¶7-8




Saturday, December 4

In this way you will fulfill the law of the Christ.​—Gal. 6:2.



In what ways did Jesus teach? First, he taught people by what he said. His words had power because they conveyed the truth about God, taught the real meaning of life, and pointed to God’s Kingdom as the remedy for all human suffering. (Luke 24:19) Jesus also taught by example. By how he lived, he showed his followers how they should live. (John 13:15) When did Jesus teach? He taught during his ministry on earth. (Matt. 4:23) He also taught his followers shortly after he was resurrected. For example, he appeared to a group of disciples​—perhaps numbering over 500—​and gave them the command to “make disciples.” (Matt. 28:19, 20; 1 Cor. 15:6) As head of the congregation, Jesus continued to instruct his disciples after he returned to heaven. For instance, about 96 C.E., Christ directed the apostle John to give encouragement and counsel to anointed Christians.​—Col. 1:18; Rev. 1:1. w19.05 3 ¶4-5




Sunday, December 5

Make sure of the more important things.​—Phil. 1:10.



It takes a great deal of effort to earn a living these days. Many of our brothers work long hours just to provide the necessities of life for their families. Countless others spend several hours each workday traveling to and from their place of employment. Many support themselves by doing hard physical labor. By the end of the day, these hardworking brothers and sisters are exhausted! The last thing many are inclined to do is study. The fact is, though, that we must find time to study​—really study—​God’s Word and our Christian publications. Our relationship with Jehovah and our everlasting life depend on it! (1 Tim. 4:15) Some rise early every day and study when their home is quiet and their mind is fresh after a night’s rest. Others set aside a few tranquil minutes at the end of the day to take in spiritual food and meditate on it. w19.05 26 ¶1-2




Monday, December 6

Stop being molded by this system of things, but be transformed by making your mind over.​—Rom. 12:2.



These changes do not take place overnight; nor do they occur automatically. We may need to exert “earnest effort” over a period of years. (2 Pet. 1:5) We must do our utmost to change our inner self. Prayer is the important first step. We need to pray as did the psalmist: “Create in me a pure heart, O God, and put within me a new spirit, a steadfast one.” (Ps. 51:10) We must acknowledge the need to change our dominant mental attitude and ask Jehovah for help. Meditation is the second vital step. As we peer into God’s Word each day, we need to take the time to meditate, or to think deeply, on what thoughts and feelings we need to change. (Ps. 119:59; Heb. 4:12; Jas. 1:25) We must identify any tendencies we may have to be attracted to human philosophies. We need to admit honestly what our weaknesses are and then work hard to get rid of those weaknesses. w19.06 8 ¶1; 10 ¶10; 12 ¶11-12




Tuesday, December 7

[Make] the best use of your time.​—Eph. 5:16.



When making decisions, you must choose a time to implement your decision and stick to it. Avoid waiting for the perfect time to act; the perfect time is not likely to come. (Eccl. 11:4) Be careful not to allow less important things to consume your time and rob you of the energy you need for the more important things. (Phil. 1:10) If possible, set aside time during which you have few interruptions. Let others know that you need time to concentrate. Consider turning off your phone and checking your e-mail or social media at a later time. The result, or outcome, of your decision is like the destination of a journey. If you really want to reach that destination, you will keep going even if a road is closed and you thus must change your route. In the same way, if we focus on the outcome of our decisions, we will not give up easily when we encounter setbacks or detours.​—Gal. 6:9. w19.11 30 ¶17-18




Wednesday, December 8

The word of God . . . is able to discern thoughts and intentions of the heart.​—Heb. 4:12.



What should be the basis for your decision to get baptized? As a result of your careful study of the Bible, you have learned much about Jehovah​—his personality and his ways. What you have learned about him has warmed your heart and moved you to love him very much. Your love for Jehovah must be the primary basis for your decision to get baptized. Your decision to get baptized is also based on the Bible truths you have accepted. Consider what Jesus said when he gave the commission to make disciples. (Matt. 28:19, 20) According to Jesus, those who get baptized must do so “in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy spirit.” What did this mean? You must believe with all your heart the Bible truths about Jehovah; his Son, Jesus; and the holy spirit. These truths are very powerful and can deeply touch your heart. w20.03 9 ¶8-9




Thursday, December 9

Warn the disorderly, . . . support the weak, be patient toward all.​—1 Thess. 5:14.



Jehovah sent angels not only to warn Lot but also to help him escape the disaster brought on Sodom. (Gen. 19:12-14, 17) Likewise, we may need to warn our brother if we see that he is heading for trouble. Even if he is slow to apply the Bible-based counsel he receives, we need to be patient. Be like the two angels. Rather than give up and draw away from our brother, we should look for practical ways to assist him. (1 John 3:18) We may need to offer to take him by the hand, figuratively speaking, and help him apply the good advice he is given. Jehovah could have focused on Lot’s imperfections. Instead, he later inspired the apostle Peter to refer to Lot as a righteous man. (Ps. 130:3) Can we imitate the way that Jehovah viewed Lot? If we focus on the good qualities of our brothers and sisters, we will be more patient with them. They, in turn, will be more likely to accept the help we offer. w19.06 21 ¶6-7




Friday, December 10

Each one will carry his own load.​—Gal. 6:5.



If the government where you live bans our worship, you may wonder if you should move to a country where you can serve Jehovah freely. This is a personal decision that no one else can make for you. Some might find it helpful to consider what Christians in the first century did when they were persecuted. The disciples in Jerusalem moved throughout Judea and Samaria and even as far as Phoenicia, Cyprus, and Antioch. (Matt. 10:23; Acts 8:1; 11:19) However, after another wave of persecution afflicted the first-century Christians, the apostle Paul decided not to move away from areas where the preaching work was opposed. (Acts 14:19-23) What do we learn from these accounts? Each family head must make a personal decision about moving. Before deciding, he should prayerfully and carefully consider his family’s circumstances and the positive and negative effects a move might have on them. We should not judge others for the decision that they make. w19.07 10 ¶8-9




Saturday, December 11

This means everlasting life, their coming to know you, the only true God, and the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ.​—John 17:3.



Jesus told us to “go . . . make disciples of people of all the nations.” (Matt. 28:19) And in addition to teaching a student what Jesus requires of his disciples, we need to help the student come to know how to live as a true Christian. We must patiently assist him as he struggles to put Bible principles into practice. Some are able to change their thinking and habits in just a few months; others take longer. A missionary in Peru had an experience that illustrates the benefit of being patient. “I had studied two books with a Bible student named Raúl,” says the missionary. “But he still faced serious challenges in his life. He had a stormy marriage, used foul language, and had children who found it difficult to respect him. He came to the meetings regularly, so I continued visiting him to help him and his family. More than three years after I met him, he qualified for baptism.” w19.07 15 ¶3; 19 ¶15-17




Sunday, December 12

Exert yourselves vigorously.​—Luke 13:24.



Consider how the apostle Paul was exerting himself when he wrote to the Philippians. He was under house arrest in Rome. His freedom to preach was severely limited. Yet, he kept busy by witnessing to visitors and writing letters to distant congregations. Paul knew that, like Christ, he must exert himself to the very end. He thus compared the Christian course to a race. (1 Cor. 9:24-27) A runner in a race stays focused on the finish line and avoids distractions. For example, runners in an urban race today may follow a course that is lined with businesses and other potential diversions. Can you imagine that a runner would stop to examine the goods displayed in the store windows? Not if he wants to win! In the race for life, we too must avoid distractions. If we stay focused on our goal, exerting ourselves vigorously as Paul did, we will win the prize! w19.08 3 ¶4; 4 ¶7




Monday, December 13

Pay constant attention to yourself and to your teaching. . . . By doing this you will save both yourself and those who listen to you.​—1 Tim. 4:16.



When we conform our life to God’s standards, our relatives may find it difficult to adjust to our new beliefs and lifestyle. Often, the first thing they notice is that we no longer join with them in celebrating religious festivals and no longer engage in political activities. Some relatives might initially be angry with us. (Matt. 10:35, 36) But we should not give up on them. If we stop trying to help them understand our beliefs, we have, in effect, judged them as being unworthy of gaining everlasting life. Jehovah has not given us the job of judging​—he has assigned that task to Jesus. (John 5:22) If we are patient, our relatives may eventually be willing to listen to our message. We need to be firm but tactful, even if we must endure trials. (1 Cor. 4:12b) It may take time before our relatives fully understand just how serious we are about serving Jehovah. w19.08 17 ¶10, 13; 18 ¶14




Tuesday, December 14

For all things I have the strength through the one who gives me power.​—Phil. 4:13.



“When I think about the trial I have gone through, I know that I could not have faced it on my own.” Have you ever said something like that? Many of us have. Perhaps you said it after reflecting on how you were able to cope with a serious illness or the death of a loved one. Looking back, you feel that you were able to go on from day to day only because Jehovah’s holy spirit provided you with “power beyond what is normal.” (2 Cor. 4:7-9) We also rely on holy spirit to deal with the influence of this wicked world. (1 John 5:19) In addition, we have to struggle against “wicked spirit forces.” (Eph. 6:12) Jehovah’s holy spirit helps us by giving us the power, or strength, to fulfill our responsibilities despite trials. The apostle Paul felt that he was able to keep working and to accomplish his ministry despite his trials because he relied on “the power of the Christ.”​—2 Cor. 12:9. w19.11 8 ¶1-3




Wednesday, December 15

Whoever has seen me has seen the Father also.​—John 14:9.



The Bible is the only accurate record that explains what Jesus has done for you. Learn to love Jesus, and your love for Jehovah will grow. Why? Because Jesus reflects his Father’s qualities perfectly. So the more you learn about Jesus, the better you will understand and appreciate Jehovah. Think of the compassion Jesus showed for those who were looked down on by others​—the poor, the sick, and the vulnerable. Think, too, of the practical advice he gives you and how your life improves when you listen to him. (Matt. 5:1-11; 7:24-27) Your affection for Jesus is likely to become stronger as you think deeply about the sacrifice he made so that our sins can be forgiven. (Matt. 20:28) When you understand that Jesus was willing to die for you, you may feel moved to repent and seek Jehovah’s forgiveness. (Acts 3:19, 20; 1 John 1:9) And as you come to love Jesus and Jehovah, you will naturally be drawn to others who feel the same way. w20.03 5-6 ¶10-12




Thursday, December 16

Though Jehovah is high, he takes note of the humble.​—Ps. 138:6.



A Christian man could begin to think that he is the one who is most qualified for a certain assignment. Or a Christian wife might think, ‘My husband is much more qualified than so-and-so!’ However, if we are truly humble, we will avoid such a prideful spirit. We can learn from the way that Moses reacted when others received privileges. Moses appreciated his assignment of leading the nation of Israel. How did Moses react when Jehovah permitted others to serve alongside him? He was not jealous. (Num. 11:24-29) As to judging the people, he humbly allowed others to share some of his workload. (Ex. 18:13-24) This meant better service for the Israelites whom he was appointed to judge. In that sense, Moses did not put his privileges ahead of the welfare of others. What a good example for us! We remember that if we are to be truly useful to Jehovah, our humility should exceed our ability. w19.09 5-6 ¶13-14




Friday, December 17

Jehovah protects the faithful.​—Ps. 31:23.



We do not know what reasons the nations might give to justify their attack on Babylon the Great. They might say that the world’s religions are an obstacle to peace and that they constantly meddle in politics. Or they might say that those religious organizations have accumulated too much wealth and property. (Rev. 18:3, 7) It seems reasonable that this attack will not mean that all the members of those religions will be destroyed. Rather, it seems that the nations will get rid of the religious organizations. Once those organizations are gone, the former members will realize that their religious leaders failed them and will likely try to distance themselves from those religions. The destruction of Babylon the Great will take place within a relatively brief time. (Rev. 18:10, 21) Jehovah has promised that he will “cut short the days” of the tribulation so that his “chosen ones” and true religion will survive.​—Mark 13:19, 20. w19.10 15 ¶4-5




Saturday, December 18

Advise the younger women . . . to love their children.​—Titus 2:4.



Mothers, you may have been raised by parents who easily lost their temper and spoke harshly to their children. So you may have grown up thinking that this was a normal way to raise a family. Even after learning Jehovah’s standards, you might find it a challenge to remain calm and patient with your children, especially if they misbehave when you are tired. (Eph. 4:31) At such times, you need more than ever to rely on Jehovah in prayer. (Ps. 37:5) Some mothers find it difficult to express their love for their children. They may have been raised in a household where their parents did not have a warm relationship with their children. If that is how you were raised, you do not have to repeat your parents’ mistakes. A mother who submits to Jehovah’s will may have to learn how to express love for her children. It may be difficult for her to make the change. But it can be done, and it will benefit both her and her family. w19.09 18-19 ¶19-20




Sunday, December 19

No one can slave for two masters.​—Matt. 6:24.



A person who worships Jehovah while also spending excessive time and effort trying to gain this world’s riches would, in a sense, be trying to serve two masters. He would not be giving Jehovah exclusive devotion. Near the end of the first century C.E., members of the congregation in the city of Laodicea boasted: “I am rich and have acquired riches and do not need anything at all.” But in the eyes of Jehovah and Jesus, they were “miserable and pitiful and poor and blind and naked.” Jesus counseled them, not because they were wealthy, but because their love of riches was damaging their relationship with Jehovah. (Rev. 3:14-17) If we detect that a desire to pursue riches is growing in our heart, we must act quickly to correct our thinking. (1 Tim. 6:7, 8) If we do not, our heart will be divided and Jehovah will not accept our worship. He “requires exclusive devotion.”​—Deut. 4:24. w19.10 27 ¶5-6




Monday, December 20

Men spoke from God as they were moved by holy spirit.​—2 Pet. 1:21.



The Greek word translated “moved” literally means “carried along; borne along.” A similar form of the same Greek word was used by Luke, the writer of Acts, to describe a ship that is “driven along” by the wind. (Acts 27:15) So when the apostle Peter wrote that Bible writers were “borne along,” he used “a fascinating maritime metaphor,” as one Bible scholar put it. Peter said, in effect, that just as a ship is carried along by the wind to accomplish its journey, so Bible prophets and writers were borne along by holy spirit to accomplish their task. The same scholar said: “The prophets raised their sails, so to speak.” Jehovah did his part. He provided “the wind,” or holy spirit. The Bible writers did their part. They worked in harmony with the direction of that spirit. And today, like a favorable wind on a stormy sea, holy spirit moves us forward through stormy trials to the haven of God’s promised new world. w19.11 9 ¶7-9




Tuesday, December 21

If you become discouraged in the day of distress, your strength will be meager.​—Prov. 24:10.



At times we may feel discouraged. But we must not allow our problems to dominate our thinking. If we do, we might lose sight of the marvelous hope that Jehovah has given us. (Rev. 21:3, 4) Feelings of discouragement could then drain our strength and cause us to give up. Consider how a sister in the United States is maintaining her faith while caring for her seriously ill husband. She wrote: “Our situation has been stressful and discouraging at times, but our hope is strong. I am so very impressed with the information we have been getting to strengthen our faith and lift our spirits. We really need this counsel and encouragement. It keeps us going and helps us to endure.” We learn from this sister’s comments that we can overcome discouragement! How? View your trials as being a test from Satan. Recognize Jehovah as being the Source of comfort. And appreciate the spiritual food he provides. w19.11 16 ¶9-10




Wednesday, December 22

The trustworthy person keeps a confidence.​—Prov. 11:13.



Elders in particular must apply this Bible principle. An elder realizes that he must not reveal the “confidential talk” of those in the congregation. If he did, he would lose their trust and ruin his reputation. Those who are appointed to a position of trust in the congregation cannot be “double-tongued,” or deceitful. (1 Tim. 3:8; ftn.) That is, they cannot be devious or inclined to gossip. If an elder loves his wife, he will not burden her with information that she does not need to know. A wife can help her husband maintain a good reputation by not pressuring him to talk about matters that should be kept confidential. When a wife applies this advice, she not only supports her husband but also shows honor to those who have confided in him. And most important, she makes Jehovah happy because she is contributing to the peace and unity of the congregation.​—Rom. 14:19. w20.03 22 ¶13-14




Thursday, December 23

Jehovah will appear to you.​—Lev. 9:4.



In 1512 B.C.E., when the tabernacle was set up at the foot of Mount Sinai, Moses presided over a ceremony to install Aaron and his sons as priests. (Ex. 40:17; Lev. 9:1-5) How did Jehovah show his approval of the newly installed priesthood? As Aaron and Moses blessed the people, Jehovah caused fire to consume the remainder of the sacrifice on the altar. (Lev. 9:23, 24) What was accomplished by the awesome display at the installation of the high priest? Jehovah thereby showed his full support of the Aaronic priesthood. When the Israelites saw this clear evidence of Jehovah’s backing of the priests, they had good reason to give them full support. Is that relevant to us? Yes! The priesthood in Israel was just a shadow of a much greater priesthood​—the 144,000, who will serve alongside Christ in heaven. (Heb. 4:14; 8:3-5; 10:1) Without a doubt, Jehovah is guiding and generously blessing his organization today. w19.11 23 ¶13; 24 ¶14, 16




Friday, December 24

We were working night and day so as not to impose an expensive burden on any one of you.​—2 Thess. 3:8.



While in Corinth, the apostle Paul stayed with Aquila and Priscilla and “worked with them, for they were tentmakers by trade.” That Paul worked “night and day” did not mean that he worked nonstop. He took breaks from tentmaking, such as on the Sabbath. That day provided him with opportunities to witness to Jews, who also were not working on the Sabbath. (Acts 13:14-16, 42-44; 16:13; 18:1-4) Paul had to do secular work; still, he made sure to share regularly “in the holy work of the good news of God.” (Rom. 15:16; 2 Cor. 11:23) He urged others to do likewise. Consequently, Aquila and Priscilla were his “fellow workers in Christ Jesus.” (Rom. 12:11; 16:3) Paul urged the Corinthians to have “plenty to do in the work of the Lord.” (1 Cor. 15:58; 2 Cor. 9:8) Jehovah even inspired the apostle Paul to write: “If anyone does not want to work, neither let him eat.”​—2 Thess. 3:10. w19.12 5 ¶12-13




Saturday, December 25

Children are an inheritance from Jehovah.​—Ps. 127:3, ftn.



Jehovah created the first couple with the desire to have children. But who should decide if and when a married couple will have children? In some cultures, newly married couples are expected to start having children as soon as possible. They may even feel pressure from their family and others to follow that custom. Jethro, a brother in Asia, says, “In the congregation, some who have children pressure the childless couples to start a family.” Jeffrey, another brother in Asia, observes, “Some tell childless couples that they will have no one to take care of them when they grow old.” However, each couple should decide for themselves whether to have children. That is for them to decide; it is their responsibility. (Gal. 6:5, ftn.) Understandably, friends and family want a newly married couple to be happy. But all need to remember that the decision whether to have children or not belongs to the couple.​—1 Thess. 4:11. w19.12 22 ¶1-3




Sunday, December 26

You must pray, then, this way: “Our Father.”​—Matt. 6:9.



Do you find it difficult to think of God as your Father? Some may feel small and insignificant in comparison to Jehovah. They doubt that Almighty God cares about them as individuals. Yet, our loving Father does not want us to feel that way. He gave us life and wants us to have a relationship with him. After stating this truth, the apostle Paul explained to his listeners in Athens that Jehovah “is not far off from each one of us.” (Acts 17:24-29) God wants each one of us to go to him just as a child naturally goes to a loving and caring parent. Others may find it hard to view Jehovah as their Father because their own human father showed them little or no love and affection. One Christian sister says: “My father was very abusive. When I first began to study the Bible, it was difficult for me to relate to a heavenly Father.” Do you have similar feelings? If so, be assured that you too can come to see Jehovah as the best possible Father. w20.02 3 ¶4-5




Monday, December 27

Do not abandon me when my strength fails.​—Ps. 71:9.



Jesus taught us that no matter how limited our abilities or how small our efforts seem to us as we get older, Jehovah treasures whatever we can do in his service. (Ps. 92:12-15; Luke 21:2-4) So focus on what you can do. You can, for example, speak about Jehovah, pray for your brothers, and encourage others to stay faithful. Jehovah considers you to be his fellow worker, not because of what you accomplish, but because of your willing obedience to him. (1 Cor. 3:5-9) How grateful we are to worship Jehovah, a God who truly values those who serve him! He created us to do his will, and it is true worship that adds real meaning to our lives. (Rev. 4:11) Though the world may view us as worthless, Jehovah is not ashamed of us. (Heb. 11:16, 38) When we feel weighed down by illness, economic hardship, or old age, let us remember that nothing can separate us from the love of our heavenly Father.​—Rom. 8:38, 39. w20.01 18 ¶16; 19 ¶18-19




Tuesday, December 28

Create in me a pure heart, O God, and put within me a new spirit, a steadfast one.​—Ps. 51:10.



We can fight envy by cultivating humility and contentment. When our heart is full of these good qualities, envy will have no room to grow. Humility will help us not to think too highly of ourselves. A humble person does not feel that he deserves more than everyone else. (Gal. 6:3, 4) Someone who is content is satisfied with what he has and does not compare himself with others. (1 Tim. 6:7, 8) When a person who is humble and content sees someone receive something good, he is happy for him. We need the help of God’s holy spirit if we are to avoid the fleshly trait of envy and instead cultivate humility and contentment. (Gal. 5:16; Phil. 2:3, 4) Jehovah’s holy spirit can help us to examine our innermost thoughts and motives. With God’s help, we can replace harmful thoughts and feelings with upbuilding ones.​—Ps. 26:2. w20.02 15 ¶8-9




Wednesday, December 29

Pay constant attention to yourself and to your teaching.​—1 Tim. 4:16.



Dedication is a vow that Jehovah expects you to keep. So stay close to your congregation. Your brothers and sisters in the congregation are your spiritual family. By regularly attending the meetings, you will strengthen your bond with them. Read God’s Word and meditate on it every day. (Ps. 1:1, 2) Take some time to think deeply about what you have read. Then the words will reach your heart. “Pray continually.” (Matt. 26:41) Your sincere prayers will draw you closer to Jehovah. “Keep on . . . seeking first the Kingdom.” (Matt. 6:33) You can do that by making the preaching work a priority in your life. By sharing regularly in the ministry, you will keep your faith strong. Any hardships you may face in this old world are “momentary and light.” (2 Cor. 4:17) In contrast, your dedication and baptism will open the way to a more satisfying life now and “the real life” to come. Is it worth the expense? Absolutely!​—1 Tim. 6:19. w20.03 13 ¶19-21




Thursday, December 30

The time left is reduced.​—1 Cor. 7:29.



If your Bible student is not making steady progress, at some point you will have to ask yourself, ‘Should I stop the study?’ In analyzing the situation, ask yourself: ‘Is my student progressing at a reasonable pace for his situation?’ ‘Is he beginning “to observe,” or apply, the things he is learning?’ (Matt. 28:20) Sad to say, some students are like the Israelites of Ezekiel’s day. Of them, Jehovah told Ezekiel: “Look! You are to them like a romantic love song, sung with a beautiful voice and skillfully played on a stringed instrument. They will hear your words, but no one will act on them.” (Ezek. 33:32) We may find it hard to tell a person that we will stop studying with him. However, “the time left is reduced.” Rather than spend more time conducting an unproductive study, we need to find someone who gives evidence that he is “rightly disposed for everlasting life.”​—Acts 13:48. w20.01 6 ¶17; 7 ¶20




Friday, December 31

Let your Kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also on earth.​—Matt. 6:10.



Christendom generally does not teach the Scriptural truth that one day obedient humans will live forever on earth. (2 Cor. 4:3, 4) Today, most religions in Christendom teach that all good people go to heaven when they die. It was different, however, with the small group of Bible Students who were publishing the Watch Tower in the late 1800’s. They understood that God would restore Paradise on earth and that millions of obedient humans would live here on earth​—not in heaven. However, it took time for them to discern clearly who these obedient humans would be. Of course, the Bible Students also discerned from the Scriptures that some would be “bought from the earth” to rule with Jesus in heaven. (Rev. 14:3) That group would be made up of 144,000 zealous and dedicated Christians who had served God faithfully while on earth. w19.09 27 ¶4-5




