
February
Monday, February 1

[Jehovah] loves . . . justice.​—Ps. 33:5.



“Justice,” as used in the Bible, basically means to do what God considers to be right and to do so without partiality. Consider how Jesus’ actions revealed his sense of justice. In his day, the Jewish religious leaders hated non-Jews, despised common Jews, and disrespected women. Jesus, however, was fair and impartial in dealing with all. He accepted non-Jews who approached him in faith. (Matt. 8:5-10, 13) He preached without prejudice to all, rich and poor. (Matt. 11:5; Luke 19:2, 9) He was never harsh or abusive in his treatment of women. On the contrary, he was respectful and kind to women, including those whom others viewed with scorn. (Luke 7:37-39, 44-50) We can imitate Jesus by dealing impartially with others and preaching to all who are willing to listen​—regardless of their social or religious background. Christian men follow his example by treating women with respect. w19.05 2 ¶1; 5 ¶15-17




Tuesday, February 2

We became gentle in your midst, as when a nursing mother tenderly cares for her own children.​—1 Thess. 2:7.



Loyal elders today can likewise use tender, gentle words as they offer Scriptural comfort to those in need. Are elders the only ones who can give comfort to victims of abuse? No. All of us have a responsibility to “keep comforting one another.” (1 Thess. 4:18) Mature Christian sisters can be especially encouraging to sisters in need of comfort. Fittingly, Jehovah God likened himself to a mother who comforts her son. (Isa. 66:13) The Bible includes examples of women who provided comfort to those in distress. (Job 42:11) How delighted Jehovah is to see Christian women today offering comfort to fellow sisters who struggle with emotional pain! In some cases, an elder or two may discreetly ask a mature sister if she is in a position to help a suffering sister in that way. Of course, we are careful not to pry into matters that a fellow Christian prefers to keep private.​—1 Thess. 4:11. w19.05 16-17 ¶10-12




Wednesday, February 3

On the testimony of two or three witnesses every matter may be established.​—Matt. 18:16.



Before the elders take judicial action, why are at least two witnesses required? This requirement is part of the Bible’s high standard of justice. When there is no confession of wrongdoing, two witnesses are required to establish the accusation and authorize the elders to take judicial action. (Deut. 19:15; 1 Tim. 5:19) If the individual denies the accusation, the elders consider the testimony of witnesses. If at least two people​—the one making the accusation and someone else—​can confirm the charge, a judicial committee is formed. The absence of a second witness does not mean that the one making the accusation is untruthful. Even if a charge of wrongdoing cannot be established by two witnesses, the elders recognize that a serious sin may have been committed. The elders provide ongoing support to any individuals who may have been hurt and remain alert to protect the congregation from potential danger.​—Acts 20:28. w19.05 11 ¶15-16




Thursday, February 4

Ponder over these things . . . , so that your advancement may be plainly seen by all people.​—1 Tim. 4:15.



It is important for children to be taught how to study. They need to learn how to prepare for congregation meetings, for example, or how to do research on an issue that has arisen at school. (Heb. 5:14) If they spend some time on study projects at home, they will be better equipped to focus on the material presented at congregation meetings, assemblies, and conventions. Of course, the length of each study period will depend on the age and temperament of the children. Our Bible students also need to learn how to study. When they are new, we are happy to see them simply underline the answers in preparation for their Bible study or for congregation meetings. But we do need to teach our Bible students how to do research and how to do meaningful study on their own. In that way, when problems arise, they will know how to get practical advice for themselves by doing research in our publications. w19.05 26 ¶2; 28 ¶10-11




Friday, February 5

We are overturning reasonings and every lofty thing raised up against the knowledge of God.​—2 Cor. 10:5.



Satan is determined to change our thinking. He uses every type of reasoning to counteract the influence of the truth of God’s Word. Satan continues to ask the same question he asked Eve in the garden of Eden: “Did God really say that . . . ?” (Gen. 3:1) In the world under Satan’s control, we often hear challenging questions, such as these: ‘Does God really not approve of same-sex marriage? Does God really not want you to celebrate Christmas and birthdays? Does your God really expect you to refuse a blood transfusion? Does a loving God really expect you to avoid association with disfellowshipped loved ones?’ We need to be convinced of our beliefs. If we leave challenging questions unanswered in our minds, they can become serious doubts. Those doubts could eventually distort our thinking and destroy our faith. w19.06 12-13 ¶15-17




Saturday, February 6

All of you have unity of mind, fellow feeling, brotherly affection, tender compassion, and humility.​—1 Pet. 3:8.



Jehovah loves us deeply. (John 3:16) We want to imitate our loving Father. So we try to show “fellow feeling, brotherly affection, [and] tender compassion” to all but especially to those who are “related to us in the faith.” (Gal. 6:10) When members of our spiritual family face stressful challenges, we want to help them. How can we console someone whose marriage mate has died? An important first step is to speak to him or her, even though you may feel awkward or unsure of what to say. Paula, whose husband died suddenly, says: “I understand that death makes people uncomfortable. They worry that what they say might come out wrong. But worse than hearing something awkward is hearing nothing at all.” A grieving person probably does not expect us to say something profound. Paula says: “I appreciated it when friends would simply say, ‘I’m sorry for your loss.’” w19.06 20 ¶1; 23 ¶14




Sunday, February 7

Jehovah, give attention to their threats, and grant to your slaves to keep speaking your word with all boldness.​—Acts 4:29.



If our work is banned, the elders will arrange for you to attend meetings in a way that will not attract unwanted attention. They may direct you to meet in small groups and may change the meeting times and locations frequently. Regarding the preaching work, circumstances will vary from one location to another. But we love Jehovah and enjoy telling others about his Kingdom, so we will find a way to preach. (Luke 8:1) Commenting on Jehovah’s Witnesses in the former Soviet Union, historian Emily B. Baran said: “When the state told believers that they could not evangelize their faith to others, Witnesses chatted [with] their neighbors, coworkers, and friends. When these actions landed them in labor camps, Witnesses sought out converts among their fellow prisoners.” Despite the ban, our brothers there did not stop preaching. May you have that same determination! w19.07 11 ¶12-13




Monday, February 8

Make disciples of people of all the nations.​—Matt. 28:19.



How can we help nonreligious people to learn to love God and become disciples of Christ? We must recognize that a person’s reaction to our message may depend on where he was raised. For example, people with a European background may not respond the same way as may those who come from Asia. Why? In Europe, many know something about the Bible and are familiar with the idea that God created all things. But in Asia, the majority of people know little or nothing about the Bible, and they may not believe in a Creator. So be positive. Every year, there are nonreligious people who become Jehovah’s Witnesses. Many already had high moral standards and felt disgusted by religious hypocrisy. Others had low moral standards and many had bad habits that they needed to abandon. With Jehovah’s help, we can be sure that we will find those who are “rightly disposed for everlasting life.”​—Acts 13:48; 1 Tim. 2:3, 4. w19.07 20-21 ¶3-4




Tuesday, February 9

We do not give up.​—2 Cor. 4:16.



Whether our hope is everlasting life in heaven or on a paradise earth, we must keep pressing on toward that goal. No matter what our circumstances, we must not look at the things behind; nor should we let anything hinder our progress. (Phil. 3:16) The fulfillment of our expectations may seem to be delayed, or our physical strength may be declining. We may have endured hardship and persecution for many years. Whatever the case, “do not be anxious over anything.” Rather, let your petitions and supplications be made known to God, and he will give you a peace that is beyond your imagination. (Phil. 4:6, 7) Like a runner who exerts himself as he races down the homestretch, may we stay fully focused on the goal of finishing the race for life. To the extent that our strength and circumstances allow, may we exert ourselves and progress eagerly toward the wonderful things ahead. w19.08 7 ¶16-17




Wednesday, February 10

Weep with those who weep.​—Rom. 12:15.



We may find it hard to know what to say to someone who is overcome by grief. Sometimes our tears say more than our words. When Jesus’ friend Lazarus died, Mary, Martha, and others wept for their beloved brother and friend. Four days later when Jesus arrived, he too “gave way to tears,” even though he knew that he was about to resurrect Lazarus. (John 11:17, 33-35) Jesus’ tears reflected the feelings of his Father. They also confirmed Jesus’ love for the family, which no doubt comforted Mary and Martha. Similarly, when our brothers sense our love and concern, they know that they are not alone but are surrounded by caring and supportive friends. Sometimes we must simply be a good listener. Allow your brother to pour out his heart, and do not be offended by “wild talk.” (Job 6:2, 3) He may be under added emotional stress because of pressure from relatives who are not Witnesses. So pray with him. Beg the “Hearer of prayer” to give him strength and clarity of mind.​—Ps. 65:2. w19.04 18-19 ¶18-19




Thursday, February 11

Pour out your hearts before him.​—Ps. 62:8.



Whether we serve in the field or at Bethel, we can develop deep affection for people and even for the place where we serve. If for any reason we have to leave, our heart feels torn. We miss those who stay behind, and we worry about them, especially if we had to leave because of persecution. (Matt. 10:23; 2 Cor. 11:28, 29) Further, taking up a new assignment​—or even returning home—​often means experiencing culture shock. Some who get a change of assignment may suddenly face unexpected financial challenges. They may feel uncertain, insecure, and discouraged. What can help? Stay close to Jehovah. (Jas. 4:8) How can we do that? By trusting in him as the “Hearer of prayer.” (Ps. 65:2) Jehovah can do “more than superabundantly beyond all the things we ask or conceive.” (Eph. 3:20) He does not limit himself to what we specifically ask for in our prayers. He may do the unexpected, beyond anything that we could ever think of, to solve our problems. w19.08 21 ¶5-6




Friday, February 12

They gathered them together to . . . Armageddon.​—Rev. 16:16.



Some people apply the word “Armageddon” to a nuclear war or an environmental disaster. In contrast, the Bible says that Armageddon involves good news, a cause for happiness! (Rev. 1:3) The war of Armageddon will not destroy but save mankind! How so? By ending human rule. That war will save mankind by removing the wicked and preserving the righteous. And it will save mankind by protecting our planet from ruin. (Rev. 11:18) The word “Armageddon” appears just once in the Scriptures, and it comes from a Hebrew term that means “Mountain of Megiddo.” (Rev. 16:16; ftn.) Megiddo was a city in ancient Israel. (Josh. 17:11) But Armageddon does not refer to any literal place on earth. Strictly speaking, it refers to the situation to which “the kings of the entire inhabited earth” are gathered in opposition to Jehovah.​—Rev. 16:14. w19.09 8 ¶1-3




Saturday, February 13

She had not been able to get a cure from anyone.​—Luke 8:43.



The woman desperately needed help. She had gone to many physicians, hoping to find relief. After 12 years of misery, she still had not been healed. According to the Law, she was unclean. (Lev. 15:25) Then she heard that Jesus could cure those who were suffering, so she went to find him. When she found him, she touched the fringe of his outer garment, and immediately she was cured! But Jesus did more than heal her body​—he restored her dignity. For example, when talking with her, he used the warm yet respectful term “daughter.” How truly refreshed, or energized, that woman must have felt! (Luke 8:44-48) Notice that the woman went to Jesus. She took the initiative. The same is true today​—we must make the effort to “come to” Jesus. At present, Jesus will not miraculously cure the physical sicknesses of those who “come to” him. But he still extends the invitation: “Come to me, . . . and I will refresh you.”​—Matt. 11:28. w19.09 20 ¶2-3




Sunday, February 14

I saw . . . a great crowd . . . out of all nations and tribes and peoples and tongues.​—Rev. 7:9.



The prophet Zechariah had earlier foretold something similar. He wrote: “In those days ten men out of all the languages of the nations will take hold, yes, they will take firm hold of the robe of a Jew, saying: ‘We want to go with you, for we have heard that God is with you people.’” (Zech. 8:23) Jehovah’s Witnesses realize that for people of all languages to be gathered, the good news must be preached in many languages. We are now carrying out the greatest translation effort in history in hundreds of languages. Clearly, Jehovah is performing a modern-day miracle​—gathering a great crowd from all nations. Thanks to the availability of spiritual food in more and more languages, this diverse group is united in worship. And the Witnesses are well-known for their zealous preaching and their brotherly love. How faith-strengthening that is!​—Matt. 24:14; John 13:35. w19.09 30-31 ¶16-17




Monday, February 15

There will be great tribulation such as has not occurred since the world’s beginning until now, no, nor will occur again.​—Matt. 24:21.



During the great tribulation, people will be shocked as they see everything that they once thought to be so stable in the world begin to fail. They will be in “anguish,” fearing for their very lives as they enter the darkest period of human existence. (Zeph. 1:14, 15) At that time, life will likely get more difficult even for Jehovah’s people. Because we remain no part of the world, we may suffer some hardships. We may have to go without certain necessities. “The faithful and discreet slave” has been preparing us to stay faithful through the great tribulation. (Matt. 24:45) This has been done in many ways, but consider one example: our timely convention programs for the years 2016-2018. Through those programs, we have been encouraged to strengthen the qualities that we need as we near Jehovah’s day. w19.10 14 ¶2; 16 ¶10; 17 ¶12




Tuesday, February 16

You cannot be partaking of “the table of Jehovah” and the table of demons.​—1 Cor. 10:21.



Once we swallow food, automatic processes take over and the nutrients in the food eventually become part of our bodies. A good diet can make us healthier; a poor diet will make us unhealthy. The results may not become evident overnight, but they will become evident in time. Similarly, when we choose our entertainment, we have control over what we put into our mind. After that, automatic processes take over and our mind and heart are affected. Good entertainment can refresh us; unwholesome entertainment will harm us. (Jas. 1:14, 15) The effects of bad entertainment may not be immediately evident, but they will eventually become obvious. That is why the Bible warns us: “Whatever a person is sowing, this he will also reap; because the one sowing with a view to his flesh will reap corruption from his flesh.” (Gal. 6:7, 8) How important it is for us to reject all entertainment that promotes things that Jehovah hates!​—Ps. 97:10. w19.10 30 ¶12-14




Wednesday, February 17

Become imitators of God, as beloved children, and go on walking in love.​—Eph. 5:1, 2.



Jehovah proved his love for us by giving his Son as a ransom in our behalf. (John 3:16) How can we imitate Jehovah’s love? We view each of our brothers and sisters as valuable and precious, and we gladly welcome back “a lost sheep” who returns to Jehovah. (Ps. 119:176; Luke 15:7, 10) We prove that we love our brothers and sisters by giving of ourselves, such as by helping them in times of need. (1 John 3:17) Jesus commanded his followers to show self-sacrificing love. (John 13:34, 35) Jesus’ commandment is new because it calls for a kind of love that was not required under the Law that God gave Israel: Love fellow believers as Jesus loved you. That requires a self-sacrificing love. We are to love our brothers and sisters even more than we love ourselves. We must love them to the point of being willing to give up our life for them, as Jesus did for us. w19.05 4 ¶11-13




Thursday, February 18

Keep on asking, and it will be given you; keep on seeking, and you will find; keep on knocking, and it will be opened to you.​—Luke 11:9.



To receive the help of holy spirit, we must pray for it with persistence. (Luke 11:13) Jesus’ illustration at Luke 11:5-9 helps us to see why Jehovah will give us holy spirit. The man in the illustration wanted to be a good host. He felt compelled to serve food to his late-night visitor but had nothing to offer him. Jesus said that the neighbor responded because of the man’s bold persistence in asking for bread. What was Jesus’ point? If an imperfect human is willing to help a persistent neighbor, how much more so will our kind heavenly Father help those who persistently ask him for holy spirit! Therefore, we can pray with confidence that Jehovah will respond to our urgent request for holy spirit. (Ps. 10:17; 66:19) We can be sure that in spite of Satan’s relentless efforts to defeat us, we will be victorious. w19.11 13 ¶17-19




Friday, February 19

Come . . . into an isolated place and rest up a little.​—Mark 6:31.



Jesus knew that at times he and the apostles needed some rest. However, many people back then and many today can be likened to the rich man in Jesus’ illustration. That man convinced himself: “Take it easy, eat, drink, enjoy yourself.” (Luke 12:19; 2 Tim. 3:4) He set his heart on rest and pleasures. In contrast, Jesus and the apostles did not center their lives on pleasing themselves. Today, we try to imitate Jesus by using the time we have off from work not only to rest but also to do good by witnessing to others and attending Christian meetings. In fact, to us, disciple-making and meeting attendance are so important that we make every effort to engage regularly in those sacred activities. (Heb. 10:24, 25) Even when we are on vacation, we keep to our regular spiritual routine of attending meetings wherever we are, and we look for opportunities to have conversations with those whom we meet.​—2 Tim. 4:2. w19.12 7 ¶16-17




Saturday, February 20

Complete what you started to do.​—2 Cor. 8:11.



Jehovah allows us to choose our course in life. He teaches us how to make good choices, and he helps us to succeed when we make decisions that please him. (Ps. 119:173) The more we apply the wisdom found in God’s Word, the better we become at making good decisions. (Heb. 5:14) Even when we make a wise decision, however, we may struggle to complete what we started. Consider some examples: A young brother decides to read the entire Bible. He does well for a few weeks but then stops for some reason. A sister decides to serve as a regular pioneer but keeps pushing back the date when she will begin. A body of elders makes a unanimous decision to be more involved in shepherding those in the congregation but after many months has not acted on it. These situations differ, but they have something in common. Those decisions were not fully implemented. w19.11 26 ¶1-2




Sunday, February 21

The plans of the diligent surely lead to success.​—Prov. 21:5.



Jesus likened our time to “the days of Noah,” and there is no doubt that we are living in “critical times hard to deal with.” (Matt. 24:37; 2 Tim. 3:1) With that reality in mind, some couples have concluded that they would like to postpone having children so that they can devote more time to sharing in the Christian ministry. When deciding whether to have children and how many children to have, wise couples “calculate the expense.” (Luke 14:28, 29) Experienced parents confirm that raising children not only costs money but also costs time and energy. Thus, it is important for a couple to consider such questions as: ‘Would both of us have to work to supply the family’s basic needs? Do we agree on what our “basic needs” are? If we both would have to work, who would look after our children? Who would influence their thinking and actions?’ Couples who calmly discuss those questions take to heart the words of today’s text. w19.12 23-24 ¶6-7




Monday, February 22

These are my fellow workers for the Kingdom of God, and they have become a source of great comfort to me.​—Col. 4:11.



The apostle Paul faced one life-threatening situation after another. (2 Cor. 11:23-28) He also had to endure “a thorn in the flesh,” possibly some sort of health problem. (2 Cor. 12:7) And he had to cope with disappointment when Demas, his onetime fellow worker, abandoned him “because [Demas] loved the present system of things.” (2 Tim. 4:10) Paul was a courageous spirit-anointed Christian who unselfishly helped others, but at times even he felt discouraged. (Rom. 9:1, 2) Paul received the comfort and support he needed. How? Jehovah certainly used His holy spirit to strengthen him. (2 Cor. 4:7; Phil. 4:13) Jehovah also comforted him through fellow Christians. Paul described some of his fellow workers as “a source of great comfort.” (Col. 4:11) Among the ones he mentioned by name were Aristarchus, Tychicus, and Mark. They strengthened Paul, helping him to endure. w20.01 8 ¶2-3




Tuesday, February 23

He has enlightened the eyes of your heart.​—Eph. 1:18.



Jesus indicated that it is impossible to explain exactly to someone who has not been anointed how it feels to be “born again,” or to be “born from the spirit.” (John 3:3-8) What change in thinking takes place when Christians are anointed? Before Jehovah anointed these Christians, they treasured the hope of living forever on earth. They looked forward with great eagerness to the time when Jehovah would remove all wickedness and make the earth a paradise. Perhaps they imagined themselves welcoming back a family member or a friend who had died. But after they were anointed, they started to think differently. Why is that? They did not become dissatisfied with that earthly hope. They did not change their mind because of emotional stress or turmoil. They did not suddenly feel that they would find living forever on earth to be boring. Instead, Jehovah used his holy spirit to change the way that they think and the hope that they cherish. w20.01 22 ¶9-11




Wednesday, February 24

Let every person be in subjection to the superior authorities.​—Rom. 13:1.



Under the Law that God gave Israel, appointed men handled not only spiritual matters but also civil and criminal cases. But under “the law of the Christ,” the elders’ role is to handle the spiritual aspects of the wrongdoing. (Gal. 6:2) They recognize that the secular authorities have the God-given responsibility to handle civil and criminal cases. That includes the authority to impose such penalties as fines or imprisonments. (Rom. 13:2-4) How do elders handle the spiritual aspects of serious wrongdoing? They use the Scriptures to weigh matters and make decisions. They keep in mind that love is the foundation of the law of the Christ. Love moves the elders to consider: What needs to be done to help any in the congregation who have been victims of the wrongdoing? Regarding the wrongdoer, love moves the elders to consider: Is he repentant? Can we help him to regain his spiritual health? w19.05 7 ¶23-24




Thursday, February 25

I live because of the Father.​—John 6:57.



Jesus acknowledged that his Father was the Source and Sustainer of his life when he stated the above. Jesus completely trusted in his Father, and Jehovah supplied his physical needs. Most important, Jehovah cared for Jesus spiritually. (Matt. 4:4) Jehovah also provides for our spiritual needs. Through his Word, he has revealed the truth about himself, his purpose, the meaning of life, and the future. He showed us personal attention when we first learned the truth, using our parents or another teacher to help us come to know him. And we continue to receive kind assistance from loving congregation elders and other mature brothers and sisters. In addition, Jehovah instructs us through our congregation meetings, where we learn alongside our spiritual family. In these and other ways, Jehovah shows his fatherly interest in all of us.​—Ps. 32:8. w20.02 3 ¶8; 5 ¶13




Friday, February 26

Pursue the things making for peace and the things that build one another up.​—Rom. 14:19.



Peace cannot survive if envy is allowed to thrive. We need to weed out envy from our own heart and avoid planting feelings of envy in others. What specifically can we do to help others fight envy, and how can we promote peace? Our attitude and actions can have a big influence on others. The world wants us to make a “showy display” of the things we own. (1 John 2:16) But that attitude promotes envy. We can avoid nurturing envy in others if we choose not to talk constantly about the things we own or plan to buy. Another way we can avoid promoting envy is by being modest about the privileges we have in the congregation. If we draw attention to the privileges that we have, we create fertile ground in which envy can grow. By contrast, when we show genuine personal interest in others and acknowledge the good that they do, we help them feel content and we promote unity and peace in the congregation. w20.02 18 ¶15-16




Saturday, February 27

His invisible qualities are clearly seen from the world’s creation onward, because they are perceived by the things made.​—Rom. 1:20.



You can learn about Jehovah through his creation. (Rev. 4:11) Meditate on the wisdom evident in the designs of plants and animals. Learn a little about the wonderful way your body is made. (Ps. 139:14) And think about the power that Jehovah packed into our sun, realizing that it is just one of billions of stars. (Isa. 40:26) As you do, your respect for Jehovah will deepen. However, knowing that Jehovah is wise and powerful is only part of the foundation of your relationship with him. To build a strong love for Jehovah, you need to know more about him. You need to be convinced that Jehovah cares for you personally. Remember that “if you search for him, he will let himself be found by you.” (1 Chron. 28:9) Jehovah says, “I have drawn you to me.” (Jer. 31:3) The more you appreciate all that Jehovah has done for you, the deeper your love for him will be. w20.03 4 ¶6-7




Sunday, February 28

Since we have this ministry . . . , we do not give up.​—2 Cor. 4:1.



The apostle Paul set a good example in making the ministry the most important activity in his life. When he was in Corinth during his second missionary journey, he was low on funds and had to spend some time making tents. He worked at this trade to support himself in the ministry so that he could declare the good news to the Corinthians “without cost” to them. (2 Cor. 11:7) Although Paul had to do some secular work, he continued to give priority to the ministry, and he preached on every Sabbath. After his circumstances improved, Paul was able to give more attention to preaching. He “began to be intensely occupied with the word, witnessing to the Jews to prove that Jesus is the Christ.” (Acts 18:3-5; 2 Cor. 11:9) Later, when he was under house arrest in Rome for two years, Paul witnessed to visitors and wrote letters. (Acts 28:16, 30, 31) Paul was determined not to allow anything to interfere with his ministry. w19.04 4 ¶9




