
January
Friday, January 1

Go, . . . and make disciples of people of all the nations.​—Matt. 28:19.



All of God’s faithful servants want to learn how they can “fully accomplish” the ministry that they have been given to do. (2 Tim. 4:5) After all, this work is more important and more urgent than any other occupation in life. However, it can be a challenge to spend as much time in the ministry as we would like. Other important activities demand our time and energy. We may have to work secularly many hours a day to provide the necessities of life for ourselves and our family. We may struggle with other family responsibilities, sickness, depression, or the aches and pains of advancing age. If our circumstances limit the amount of time we can spend in Jehovah’s service, we should not feel discouraged. Jesus knew that not every one of us would be able to produce the same amount of Kingdom fruitage. (Matt. 13:23) Jehovah highly values everything we do in his service as long as we are doing our best.​—Heb. 6:10-12. w19.04 2 ¶1-3




Saturday, January 2

The Devil . . . is a liar and the father of the lie.​—John 8:44.



Satan’s lies about the dead slander Jehovah. Those lies include the false teaching that the dead suffer fiery torment. Such teachings slander God! How so? In effect, they attribute to him, the God of love, the personality of the Devil. (1 John 4:8) How does that make you feel? More important, how does it make Jehovah feel? After all, he hates all forms of cruelty. (Jer. 19:5) Satan’s lies about death undermine belief in Christ’s ransom sacrifice. (Matt. 20:28) Another satanic lie is that humans have an immortal soul. If that were true, everyone would live forever. Christ would not have had to give his life as a ransom for us to gain everlasting life. Keep in mind that Christ’s sacrifice is the greatest expression of love ever shown to the human family. (John 3:16; 15:13) Imagine how Jehovah and his Son must feel about teachings that undermine that precious gift! w19.04 14 ¶1; 16 ¶8-9




Sunday, January 3

“Who has come to know the mind of Jehovah, so that he may instruct him?” But we do have the mind of Christ.​—1 Cor. 2:16.



Where are Jesus’ teachings recorded? The four Gospels record many of the things Jesus said and did on earth. The rest of the Christian Greek Scriptures​—written by men who were inspired by holy spirit and who had “the mind of Christ”—​further help us to understand Jesus’ thinking on matters. Jesus’ teachings cover all aspects of life. So the “law of the Christ” governs what we do at home, at work or at school, and in the congregation. (Gal. 6:2) We learn this law by reading the Christian Greek Scriptures and meditating on them. We obey this law by bringing our lives into harmony with the instructions, commands, and principles found in that inspired record. When we obey the law of the Christ, we are obeying our loving God, Jehovah, who is the Source of all that Jesus taught.​—John 8:28. w19.05 3 ¶6-7




Monday, January 4

Wicked men and impostors will advance from bad to worse.​—2 Tim. 3:13.



It is sad when humans act in a way that pleases the Devil. However, Jehovah is never blind to Satan’s tactics. He is fully aware of the pain we experience, and he can provide the comfort we need. We are blessed to serve “the God of all comfort, who comforts us in all our trials so that we may be able to comfort others in any sort of trial with the comfort that we receive from God.” (2 Cor. 1:3, 4) Those who have been abandoned by parents or victimized by people close to them may especially need comfort. The psalmist David knew that Jehovah is the most reliable provider of comfort. (Ps. 27:10) David had faith that Jehovah takes in those who have been rejected by their loved ones. How? By using his faithful human servants. Our fellow worshippers of Jehovah are our spiritual family. For instance, Jesus spoke of those who joined him in worshipping Jehovah as his brothers, sisters, and mother.​—Matt. 12:48-50. w19.05 15-16 ¶8-9




Tuesday, January 5

Make sure of the more important things.​—Phil. 1:10.



What should our priorities include? We should certainly spend time each day studying God’s Word. The amount of material now scheduled for the congregation’s weekly Bible reading has been reduced in order to give us more time to meditate on what we read and to do extra research. Our goal should be, not merely to cover the assigned material, but to allow the Bible’s message to touch our hearts and to draw us closer to Jehovah. (Ps. 19:14) The Watchtower Study is a study of the Bible. Therefore, pay particular attention to the scriptures, especially those that will be read when the congregation considers the material. Take special note of how the key words or phrases in the scriptures support the point being made in the paragraph. Moreover, take time to meditate on the scriptures that you read, and reflect on how you can personally apply them in your life.​—Josh. 1:8. w19.05 27 ¶5; 28 ¶9




Wednesday, January 6

My food is to do the will of him who sent me and to finish his work.​—John 4:34.



Jesus set an outstanding example in his attitude toward the ministry. He made talking about God’s Kingdom the main focus of his life. He walked hundreds of miles to preach to as many as possible. He seized every opportunity to speak to people in public places and in their homes. Jesus’ whole life revolved around the ministry. We can imitate Christ by creating opportunities to talk about the good news whenever and wherever possible. We are willing to sacrifice personal comfort to engage in the evangelizing work. (Mark 6:31-34; 1 Pet. 2:21) Some in the congregation are able to serve as special, regular, or auxiliary pioneers. Others have learned to speak another language or have moved to an area where there is a need for more preachers. However, much of the evangelizing work is done by regular Kingdom publishers, who do the best they can. Whatever the case, Jehovah does not ask more of us than we can give. w19.04 4 ¶7-8




Thursday, January 7

May the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be pleasing to you, O Jehovah.​—Ps. 19:14.



Ask yourself: ‘Is there a trace of envy or jealousy in my heart?’ (1 Pet. 2:1) ‘Do I feel a measure of pride because of my background, education, or financial status?’ (Prov. 16:5) ‘Do I look down on others who do not have the same things I have or who are from a different racial background?’ (Jas. 2:2-4) ‘Do I feel attracted to what Satan’s world offers?’ (1 John 2:15-17) ‘Do I feel drawn to immoral and violent entertainment?’ (Ps. 97:10; 101:3; Amos 5:15) The answers to these personal questions may highlight areas that you need to work on. We are strongly influenced by those with whom we associate. (Prov. 13:20) At work or in school, we are likely surrounded by those who will not help us to develop godly thinking. However, we can find the best type of association at our Christian meetings. There is where we can be motivated, or stirred up, to “love and fine works.”​—Heb. 10:24, 25, ftn. w19.06 12 ¶13-14




Friday, January 8

It is beauty on his part to overlook an offense.​—Prov. 19:11.



Jehovah did not intend for any of us to have the problems and stresses we face today. So it is understandable if a faithful servant of Jehovah speaks thoughtlessly when under great stress. (Job 6:2, 3) Even if he says inaccurate things about Jehovah or about us, we should not quickly become angry at him or judge him for saying such things. At times, a person who is coping with a stressful problem also needs to receive some form of counsel or helpful discipline. (Gal. 6:1) How can elders handle this challenge? They do well to imitate Elihu, who listened to Job with great empathy. (Job 33:6, 7) Elihu offered his counsel only after he understood Job’s thinking. Elders who follow Elihu’s example will listen carefully and try to understand the person’s situation. Then, when they offer counsel, they are more likely to reach the heart of their listener. w19.06 22-23 ¶10-11




Saturday, January 9

Obey God as ruler rather than men.​—Acts 5:29.



How can you continue to worship Jehovah while under ban? The branch office will give the local elders instructions and practical suggestions. If the branch office cannot contact the elders, then the elders will help you and all in the congregation to continue your worship of Jehovah. They will give direction in harmony with the guidance found in the Bible and in our Christian publications. (Matt. 28:19, 20; Heb. 10:24, 25) Jehovah has promised that his servants will be well-fed spiritually. (Isa. 65:13, 14; Luke 12:42-44) So you can be certain that his organization will do everything possible to provide the spiritual encouragement you need. What can you do? When under ban, find a good place to hide your Bible and any other spiritual food you might have. Be careful never to leave such precious material​—whether it is in printed or electronic form—​in a location where it could easily be discovered. Each of us must take practical steps to remain spiritually strong. w19.07 10 ¶10-11




Sunday, January 10

I have become all things to people of all sorts, so that I might by all possible means save some.​—1 Cor. 9:22.



For thousands of years, the majority of people in the world seemed to have some form of religious belief. But in recent decades a remarkable change has taken place. More and more people do not view themselves as religious. In fact, in some countries the majority of the population describe themselves as not being religious. (Matt. 24:12) Why? Some may be distracted by pleasures or anxieties. (Luke 8:14) Some have become atheists. Others believe in God but think that religion is old-fashioned, irrelevant, and incompatible with science and logical thinking. They may hear friends, teachers, or media personalities say that life evolved, but they rarely hear logical reasons for believing in God. Others are repelled by clergy who are greedy for money and power. In some places, governments officially limit religious activity. w19.07 20 ¶1-2




Monday, January 11

Be steadfast, immovable, always having plenty to do in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labor is not in vain in connection with the Lord.​—1 Cor. 15:58.



You do not need to be physically strong in order to continue growing stronger spiritually. In fact, many whose physical strength has declined still maintain a fiery determination to keep progressing spiritually. (2 Cor. 4:16) Perhaps you have served Jehovah for many years and now find that failing health prevents you from doing as much as you once did. If so, do not despair. Be assured that Jehovah cherishes the faithful service you have accomplished in the past. (Heb. 6:10) And as for the present, remember that whole-souled devotion is not measured by how much we do in Jehovah’s service. Rather, we reveal the depth of our devotion by showing a positive spirit and by doing all that we physically can. (Col. 3:23) Jehovah understands our limitations and does not require more than we can give.​—Mark 12:43, 44. w19.08 3 ¶6; 5 ¶11-12




Tuesday, January 12

Let your light shine before men, so that they may see your fine works.​—Matt. 5:16.



Jehovah draws people to him by means of the “fine works” of the Christian congregation. (Matt. 5:14, 15; 1 Pet. 2:12) If your mate is not one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, has he or she met members of your congregation? Invite your mate to attend congregation meetings with you. (1 Cor. 14:24, 25) We hope that all our relatives will join us in serving Jehovah. However, despite all our efforts to help our relatives to become God’s servants, they may not come into the truth. If that is the case, we should not blame ourselves for their decision. After all, we cannot force anyone to accept our beliefs. Even so, do not underestimate the influence you can have on your relatives as they see how happy you are serving Jehovah. Pray for them. Tactfully speak to them. Do not hold back! (Acts 20:20) Be confident that Jehovah will bless your efforts. And if your relatives choose to listen to you, they will be saved! w19.08 18-19 ¶15-17




Wednesday, January 13

The lamp of the body is the eye. If, then, your eye is focused, your whole body will be bright.​—Matt. 6:22.



What did Jesus mean? He meant that we need to keep our life simple or focused on a single goal, or purpose, not being distracted or sidetracked from it. Jesus himself set the example by focusing his life on the ministry, and he taught his disciples to keep focused on serving Jehovah and on His Kingdom. We imitate Jesus by living a life that centers on the Christian ministry, “seeking first the Kingdom and [God’s] righteousness.” (Matt. 6:33) One way to focus on our ministry is by simplifying our life so that we can spend more time helping others come to know and love Jehovah. For example, could we adjust our secular working hours so that we can spend more time in the ministry during the week? Could we reduce some recreational activities that may be very time-consuming? w19.04 5-6 ¶12-13




Thursday, January 14

I reside in the high and holy place, but also with those crushed and lowly in spirit.​—Isa. 57:15.



In recent years, many with decades of experience have received a change of assignment. Such adjustments were not easy for these brothers and sisters to make. Obviously, they felt attached to their former assignment, in many cases one that they had cherished for years. Some went through a “grieving” process as they adjusted to their new circumstances. In time, though, they were able to adjust. Why? Above all, because of their love for Jehovah. They knew that they were dedicated to God​—not to a work, a title, or an assignment. (Col. 3:23) They are glad to continue serving Jehovah humbly in any capacity. They “throw all [their] anxiety on him,” knowing that he cares for them. (1 Pet. 5:6, 7) When we cultivate the endearing quality of humility, we benefit both ourselves and others. We are better able to deal with life’s challenges. Above all, we draw closer to our heavenly Father. w19.09 6-7 ¶15-17




Friday, January 15

The orders from Jehovah are righteous, causing the heart to rejoice; . . . in keeping them, there is a large reward.​—Ps. 19:8, 11.



Jehovah appointed David as head not only of his family but also of the entire nation of Israel. As king, David had a lot of power. At times, he misused that power and made serious mistakes. (2 Sam. 11:14, 15) But he showed his submission to Jehovah by accepting discipline. He poured out his heart to Jehovah in prayer. And he tried his best to obey Jehovah’s counsel. (Ps. 51:1-4) In addition, he was humble enough to accept good advice not only from men but also from women. (1 Sam. 19:11, 12; 25:32, 33) David learned from his mistakes and centered his life on serving Jehovah. He knew the benefits of submitting to Jehovah. Today, we can see the contrast between those who submit to Jehovah and those who reject his loving counsel. Those who do submit to Jehovah “shout joyfully because of the good condition of the heart.”​—Isa. 65:13, 14. w19.09 17 ¶15; 19 ¶21




Saturday, January 16

I saw . . . a great crowd . . . standing before the throne and before the Lamb.​—Rev. 7:9.



In 1935, Jehovah’s Witnesses came to realize that the great crowd do not literally have to be in heaven to stand “before the throne and before the Lamb.” Rather, their position is figurative. Even though they would live on earth, the great crowd could stand “before the throne” by recognizing Jehovah’s authority and by submitting to his sovereignty. (Isa. 66:1) They could stand “before the Lamb” by exercising faith in Jesus’ ransom sacrifice. Similarly, at Matthew 25:31, 32, “all the nations”​—including the wicked—​are said to be “gathered before” Jesus on his glorious throne. Clearly, all these nations are, not in heaven, but on earth. This adjusted understanding makes sense. It explains why the Bible does not say that the great crowd is raised to heaven. Only one group is promised everlasting life in heaven​—the 144,000, who will “rule as kings over the earth” with Jesus.​—Rev. 5:10. w19.09 28 ¶9




Sunday, January 17

Love Jehovah, all you who are loyal to him!​—Ps. 31:23.



Jehovah expects his worshippers to separate themselves from Babylon the Great. However, this requires more than our cutting ties with false religion. We must be determined to uphold true religion​—the pure worship of Jehovah. Consider two ways that we can do that. First, we must remain firm for Jehovah’s righteous moral standards. We cannot accept the world’s values and standards. For example, we do not approve of sexual immorality of any kind, including marriage between people of the same sex and other homosexual lifestyles. (Matt. 19:4, 5; Rom. 1:26, 27) Second, we must continue worshipping with our fellow Christians. We do this wherever we can, whether in our Kingdom Halls or, when necessary, in private homes or even in secret. No matter what happens, we cannot let up in our routine of meeting together for worship. In fact, we need to meet together “all the more so as [we] see the day drawing near.”​—Heb. 10:24, 25. w19.10 16 ¶6-7




Monday, January 18

[Jehovah] is a God who requires exclusive devotion.​—Ex. 34:14.



Jehovah wants us to enjoy life, and entertainment can help us to do that. In fact, God’s Word says that “there is nothing better for a man than to eat and drink and find enjoyment in his hard work.” (Eccl. 2:24) However, much of the entertainment in the world can have a bad effect on us. It degrades people’s moral standards, encouraging them to tolerate​—or even to love—​things that God’s Word condemns. We want to give Jehovah exclusive devotion, so we cannot eat from “the table of Jehovah” and “the table of demons.” (1 Cor. 10:21, 22) Eating a meal with someone is often a sign of friendship. If we choose entertainment that promotes violence, spiritism, immorality, or other fleshly desires and attitudes, we are, in effect, sharing a meal prepared by enemies of God. As a result, we not only harm ourselves but also damage our friendship with Jehovah. w19.10 26 ¶2; 29-30 ¶11-12




Tuesday, January 19

Men spoke from God as they were moved by holy spirit.​—2 Pet. 1:21.



To benefit from the wind, a sailor must do two things. First, he has to put his boat in the path of the wind. After all, his boat will not move forward if the sailor remains in a harbor far away from where the wind is blowing. Second, he needs to raise and unfurl his sails as fully as possible. Obviously, even with the wind blowing, his boat will move forward only if the sails catch the wind. Similarly, we will endure in Jehovah’s service only if we have the help of holy spirit. To benefit from that spirit, we must take two steps. First, we must put ourselves squarely in the path of God’s spirit by sharing in activities that bring us under its influence. Second, we need to “raise our sails” as fully as possible by being fully engaged in these activities to the best of our ability. (Ps. 119:32) Holy spirit will then push us forward through waves of opposition and trials and will help us to endure faithfully. w19.11 9 ¶8; 10 ¶11




Wednesday, January 20

I give you my peace.​—John 14:27.



On his final day as a human, Jesus was troubled. Soon he would suffer a cruel death at the hands of lawless men. But it was more than his impending death that was giving Jesus concern. He deeply loved his Father and wanted to please him. Jesus knew that if he proved faithful under the coming difficult test, he would contribute to the vindication of Jehovah’s name. Jesus also loved people, and he knew that our future prospects for everlasting life would depend on his finishing his earthly course successfully. Even though Jesus was under great stress, he was at peace. He had “the peace of God,” the calmness and tranquility that result from a person’s precious relationship with Jehovah. That peace put Jesus’ mind and heart at rest. (Phil. 4:6, 7) None of us will ever face the kind of pressure that Jesus had to endure, but all who follow Jesus will face trials. (Matt. 16:24, 25; John 15:20) And like Jesus, we will feel troubled at times. w19.04 8 ¶1-3




Thursday, January 21

Do not put out the fire of the spirit.​—1 Thess. 5:19.



We do well to ask ourselves, ‘Am I grateful to be associated with the earthly part of Jehovah’s organization?’ Jehovah has given us convincing evidence that he is blessing his people today. We truly have much to be thankful for. (1 Thess. 5:18) How can we show our support for the organization that Jehovah is using? By following the Bible-based direction we are given in our publications and at our meetings, assemblies, and conventions. In addition, we can show our support by sharing as fully as possible in the preaching and teaching work. (1 Cor. 15:58) May we obtain Jehovah’s approval for our sacrifices to be accepted. May we serve Jehovah because we are grateful to him. May we continue to give our best to Jehovah because we love him with all our heart. And may we wholeheartedly support the organization that he is blessing today. In all such ways, we can show Jehovah that we cherish the privilege we have to serve him as his Witnesses! w19.11 25 ¶17-18




Friday, January 22

Whoever exercises faith in me . . . will do works greater than these.​—John 14:12.



Jesus did not mean that we would perform miracles as he did. Rather, his followers would preach and teach in a larger territory, to more people, and for a longer period of time than he did. If you have a secular job, ask yourself these questions: ‘Am I known at my workplace as a hard worker? Do I complete my work on time and to the best of my ability?’ If you can answer yes, then you will likely earn your employer’s trust. You will also make the Kingdom message more appealing to those who are observing you. When it comes to the preaching and teaching work, ask yourself these questions: ‘Am I known as a hard worker in the ministry? Do I prepare well for initial calls? Do I return promptly to talk with interested people? And do I have a regular share in various aspects of the ministry?’ If you can answer yes, you will find joy in your work. w19.12 5 ¶14-15




Saturday, January 23

Each one of you must love his wife as he does himself; on the other hand, the wife should have deep respect for her husband.​—Eph. 5:33.



A couple who decide to have children do well to discuss two important questions: First, when do they want to have children? Second, how many children do they want? When is the best time for a couple to have such a discussion? And why are those two subjects so important? In most cases, before they get married, a couple do well to address the subject of having children. Why then? One good reason is that being of the same mind on this matter is important. Also, they will need to consider whether they are ready for that responsibility. Some couples have decided to wait at least a year or two after their wedding before having children because becoming parents will consume much time and energy. They reason that by waiting for a while, they will give themselves time to adjust to married life and draw closer to each other. w19.12 23 ¶4-5




Sunday, January 24

A true friend . . . is a brother who is born for times of distress.​—Prov. 17:17.



Around the world, many servants of Jehovah are facing stressful, even painful, situations. Some Christians are dealing with a serious illness or with the death of a loved one. Others are enduring the intense pain of seeing a family member or close friend leave the truth. Still others are coping with the effects of natural disasters. All such brothers and sisters need comfort. How can we help them? Be a loyal friend. Loyal friends make sacrifices in order to support their brothers and sisters. For example, a brother named Peter was diagnosed with a very aggressive terminal illness. His wife, Kathryn, says: “A couple in our congregation took us to the appointment where we found out about Peter’s illness. They decided not to let us go on this painful journey alone, and they have been by our side whenever we have needed them.” How comforting it is to have true friends, who can help us to endure our trials! w20.01 8 ¶1; 9 ¶5; 10 ¶6




Monday, January 25

They all became filled with holy spirit and started to speak in different languages.​—Acts 2:4.



If you were one of the disciples gathered in the upper room at Pentecost 33 C.E., there would be no question in your mind that you were anointed by holy spirit. (Acts 2:5-12) But do all those who are anointed by holy spirit receive their anointing in some spectacular manner and at the same time in their life? No. Consider the matter of timing. That group of about 120 Christians were not the only ones anointed by holy spirit on that day. Later that day, about 3,000 others also received the promised holy spirit. Their anointing occurred when they got baptized. (Acts 2:37, 38, 41) But in the years that followed, not all anointed Christians received their anointing at their baptism. The Samaritans received their anointing sometime after their baptism. (Acts 8:14-17) And in what certainly was an exceptional instance, Cornelius and his household were anointed even before they got baptized.​—Acts 10:44-48. w20.01 20-21 ¶2-4




Tuesday, January 26

I have made your name known to them.​—John 17:26.



In the four Gospels alone, Jesus used the term “Father” some 165 times in reference to Jehovah. Why did Jesus speak so much about Jehovah? One reason is that people might be convinced that Jehovah is a loving Father. (John 17:25) Consider what we learn about Jehovah from the way that he treated his Son, Jesus. Jehovah always heard Jesus’ prayers. He not only heard Jesus’ prayers but also answered them. (John 11:41, 42) No matter what trials Jesus faced, he sensed his Father’s love and support. (Luke 22:42, 43) As a loving Father, Jehovah made sure that Jesus knew he had his Father’s backing. (Matt. 26:53; John 8:16) While Jehovah did not shield Jesus from all injury, He helped him to endure trials. Jesus was assured that any harm he might suffer would be temporary. (Heb. 12:2) Jehovah proved that he cared for Jesus by listening to him, providing for him, training him, and supporting him.​—John 5:20; 8:28. w20.02 3 ¶6-7, 9




Wednesday, January 27

Do all things for God’s glory. Keep from becoming causes for stumbling.​—1 Cor. 10:31, 32.



When deciding whether to share in a custom or tradition, we should think about how our decision may affect the consciences of others, especially fellow Christians. Never would we want to stumble someone! (Mark 9:42) Also, we want to avoid needlessly offending those who are not Witnesses. Love will move us to speak to them in a respectful way, which glorifies Jehovah. We certainly would not quarrel with people or ridicule their traditions. Remember, love is powerful! When we reflect it in a considerate and respectful manner, we may even soften the hearts of opposers. Make it known in your community that you are one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. (Isa. 43:10) You will likely find it easier to handle emotionally charged situations if your relatives and neighbors know that you worship Jehovah God. May we never be ashamed of the stand that we take in defense of the truth.​—Rom. 1:16. w19.04 17-18 ¶14-16




Thursday, January 28

I am the least of the apostles, and I am not worthy of being called an apostle.​—1 Cor. 15:9.



The 12 apostles followed Jesus during his earthly ministry, but the apostle Paul did not become a Christian until after Jesus’ death and resurrection. Although he was eventually appointed to be “an apostle to the nations,” Paul did not qualify for the special privilege of becoming one of the 12 apostles. (Rom. 11:13; Acts 1:21-26) Rather than envying those 12 men and the close association they had enjoyed with Jesus, Paul remained content with what he had. If we are content and humble, we will be like Paul and show respect for the authority that Jehovah has given to others. (Acts 21:20-26) He has arranged for appointed men to take the lead in the Christian congregation. Despite their imperfections, Jehovah considers them “gifts in men.” (Eph. 4:8, 11) When we respect these appointed men and humbly follow their direction, we stay close to Jehovah and enjoy peace with our fellow Christians. w20.02 17 ¶13-14




Friday, January 29

We love, because he first loved us.​—1 John 4:19.



Before studying with Jehovah’s Witnesses, you may have formed a deep appreciation for the Bible. And you may have developed a love for Jesus. Now that you have come to know Jehovah’s Witnesses, you might love to associate with them. But loving those good things will not necessarily make you want to dedicate yourself to Jehovah and get baptized. The primary motivation that will lead you to baptism is love for Jehovah God himself. When you love Jehovah more than all else, you will not let anything or anyone prevent you from serving him. You could view love for Jehovah as both the gateway to baptism and the guardrail that helps you stay on the path of serving God. Jesus said that we must love Jehovah with our whole heart, soul, mind, and strength. (Mark 12:30) How can you learn to love and respect Jehovah that deeply? Reflecting on Jehovah’s love for us moves us to love him in return. w20.03 4 ¶4-5




Saturday, January 30

Fully accomplish your ministry.​—2 Tim. 4:5.



What does it mean to accomplish our ministry fully? Simply put, to accomplish our ministry fully, we must have as full a share as possible in the preaching and teaching work. But more is involved than the amount of time. Our motive is important to Jehovah. Because we love Jehovah and our neighbor, we work whole-souled in our Christian ministry. (Mark 12:30, 31; Col. 3:23) Serving God whole-souled means giving of ourselves, using our strength and energies to the best of our ability in his service. When we appreciate the privilege of doing the preaching work, we try to share the good news with as many people as we can. We may be limited in the amount of time we can devote to the preaching work. Yet, that is what we love to do. We strive to improve our ability to reach people’s hearts with the good news. We make the preaching work our priority. w19.04 2 ¶3; 3 ¶4, 6




Sunday, January 31

Truth is not in him.​—John 8:44.



Satan’s lies add grief and suffering to mankind. Parents who are grieving the death of a child may be told that God has taken the child, perhaps to be an angel in heaven. Does this satanic lie lessen their pain or add to it? The false teaching of hellfire has been used to justify torture, including the burning at the stake of those who opposed church teachings. According to a book on the Spanish Inquisition, some of those responsible for this cruelty may have believed that they were only giving heretics “a taste of what perpetual hellfire would be like” so that they would repent before dying and be saved from hellfire. In a number of lands, people feel compelled to pay homage to their dead ancestors, to honor them, or to seek a blessing from them. Others want to appease their ancestors in order to avoid some form of punishment. Sadly, beliefs based on satanic lies do not bring genuine comfort. Instead, they cause needless anxiety or even fear. w19.04 14 ¶1; 16 ¶10




