
July
Thursday, July 1

Let your petitions be made known to God.​—Phil. 4:6.



When others speak harshly or act unkindly, we may feel anxious. That is especially true if the one who hurt us is a close friend or relative. In dealing with anxiety, we can learn much from the Bible example of Hannah, who was severely taunted by her husband’s second wife. (1 Sam. 1:12) Like Hannah, we can talk at length to Jehovah about our anxieties and fears. Our prayers do not have to be poetic or perfectly structured. We may even find ourselves expressing bitter words that are interrupted by sobs of grief. Even so, Jehovah will never get tired of listening to us. In addition to praying about our problems, we need to remember the advice recorded at Philippians 4:6, 7. The apostle Paul specifically mentioned that we should offer prayers of thanksgiving, or gratitude. We have so many reasons to thank Jehovah​—including the gift of life, his creative works, his loyal love, and the wonderful hope that he has given us. w20.02 21 ¶3; 22 ¶6




Friday, July 2

There is . . . a time to speak.​—Eccl. 3:1, 7.



Speech is a gift from Jehovah. (Ex. 4:10, 11; Rev. 4:11) In his Word, he helps us to understand how to use that gift properly. We should always be ready to speak about Jehovah and the Kingdom. (Matt. 24:14; Rom. 10:14) In so doing, we imitate Jesus. One of the main reasons why Jesus came to earth was to tell others the truth about his Father. (John 18:37) But we must remember that how we speak is also important. So when talking to others about Jehovah, we must do so with “a mild temper and deep respect,” and we should show consideration for the other person’s feelings and beliefs. (1 Pet. 3:15) Then we will do more than just talk; we will teach and possibly reach the person’s heart. Elders should not hesitate to speak up if they see that a brother or a sister needs counsel. Of course, they would choose the right time to speak so that they do not needlessly embarrass the person. w20.03 18-19 ¶2-4




Saturday, July 3

Pray continually.​—Matt. 26:41.



What can we pray for? We can pray for Jehovah to “give us more faith.” (Luke 17:5; John 14:1) We need faith because Satan will test all who follow Jesus. (Luke 22:31) How will faith help us? When we have done all that we reasonably can to deal with a trial, faith will move us to leave the matter with Jehovah. Because we trust that he can handle matters better than we ever could, we have peace of mind and heart. (1 Pet. 5:6, 7) Prayer helps us to maintain our inner peace no matter what trials we face. Consider the example of Robert, a faithful elder who is now in his 80’s. He says: “The counsel at Philippians 4:6, 7 has helped me to cope with many trials in my life. I have had to deal with financial problems. And I temporarily lost my privilege of serving as an elder.” What has helped Robert to maintain inner peace? “I pray as soon as I start to feel anxious,” he says. “I believe that the more frequently and intensely I pray, the more peaceful I feel.” w19.04 9-10 ¶5-7




Sunday, July 4

Against you​—you above all—​I have sinned.​—Ps. 51:4.



Child abuse is a sin against God. When a human sins against another human, he also sins against Jehovah. Consider an example from the Law that God gave Israel. The Law said that a man who robbed or defrauded his neighbor was behaving “unfaithfully toward Jehovah.” (Lev. 6:2-4) Certainly, then, when an individual who is a part of the congregation abuses a child​—robbing that child of his or her security—​he is behaving unfaithfully toward God. The abuser brings great reproach on Jehovah’s name. For that reason, abuse must be condemned for what it is​—a gross sin against God. Articles in The Watchtower and Awake! have discussed how those who have been sexually abused can deal with emotional scars, how others can help and encourage them, and how parents can protect their children. Elders have received detailed Scriptural training on how to handle the sin of child abuse. The organization continues to review the way congregations handle the sin of child abuse. w19.05 9 ¶8-9




Monday, July 5

Should they inquire of the dead in behalf of the living?​—Isa. 8:19.



God’s Word is like a sharp sword that can cut through the lies that Satan promotes. (Eph. 6:17) For example, God’s Word exposes the lie that the dead can communicate with the living. (Ps. 146:4) It also reminds us that only Jehovah can reliably predict the future. (Isa. 45:21; 46:10) If we read God’s Word and meditate on it regularly, we will be equipped to reject and hate the lies that wicked spirits want us to believe. So refuse to do anything connected with spiritism. As true Christians, we never practice spiritism of any kind. For example, we do not visit spirit mediums or try to communicate with the dead in any other way. We avoid funeral customs that are based on the belief that the dead are still alive somewhere. And we do not use astrology or fortune-telling to try to learn about the future. We know that all such practices are very dangerous and that they could put us in direct contact with Satan and the demons. w19.04 21-22 ¶8-9




Tuesday, July 6

God, in keeping with the desires of their hearts, gave them up to uncleanness.​—Rom. 1:24.



People who adopt the wisdom of this world ridicule the Bible’s moral standards, claiming that they are unrealistic. Such people might ask, ‘Why would God create us with sexual desires and then tell us not to act on them?’ That question is founded on the flawed belief that humans must act on every urge they feel. But the Bible states otherwise. It dignifies us by teaching that we can choose to control improper impulses. (Col. 3:5) In addition, Jehovah has provided the gift of marriage, an arrangement in which proper sexual desires can be honorably satisfied. (1 Cor. 7:8, 9) In contrast with the wisdom of this world, the Bible promotes a healthy view of sexuality. It acknowledges that sex can be a source of pleasure. (Prov. 5:18, 19) However, the Bible says: “Each one of you should know how to control his own body in holiness and honor, not with greedy, uncontrolled sexual passion.”​—1 Thess. 4:4, 5. w19.05 22-23 ¶7-9




Wednesday, July 7

You will come against them like a storm, . . . you and all your troops and many peoples with you.​—Ezek. 38:9.



God will not allow the nations to destroy his people. They proudly bear his name, and they have obeyed his command to flee from Babylon the Great. (Acts 15:16, 17; Rev. 18:4) They have also worked hard to help others flee from her. So Jehovah’s servants will not “receive part of her plagues.” Still, their faith will be tested. (Ezek. 38:2, 8) After the destruction of all false religious organizations, God’s people will stand out like a lone tree that survived a fierce storm. Satan, of course, will be enraged. He will vent that rage by using demonic propaganda​—“unclean inspired expressions”—​to cause a coalition of nations to turn on Jehovah’s servants. (Rev. 16:13, 14) That coalition is called “Gog of the land of Magog.” When the nations launch their attack, they will have arrived at the symbolic place called Armageddon.​—Rev. 16:16. w19.09 11 ¶12-13




Thursday, July 8

The reasonings of the wise men are futile.​—1 Cor. 3:20.



In the days of ancient Israel, Satan used false religion to promote immorality. Today, he does the same. False religion tolerates and even promotes immoral conduct. Consequently, many who claim to serve God have abandoned his clear standards of morality. The apostle Paul describes in his letter to the Romans what has been the result. (Rom. 1:28-31) Among “the things not fitting” are all forms of sexual immorality, including homosexuality. (Rom. 1:24-27, 32; Rev. 2:20) How important it is for us to stick to the Bible’s clear teachings! Human philosophy ignores or contradicts Jehovah’s righteous standards. It does not nurture the fruitage of God’s spirit but, rather, “the works of the flesh.” (Gal. 5:19-23) It generates pride and arrogance, and the result is that people become “lovers of themselves.” (2 Tim. 3:2-4) These qualities are the opposite of the meek, humble spirit that God’s servants are encouraged to have.​—2 Sam. 22:28. w19.06 5-6 ¶12-14




Friday, July 9

A true friend shows love at all times and is a brother who is born for times of distress.​—Prov. 17:17.



Elijah served Jehovah during difficult times and faced serious challenges. When Jehovah told Elijah to delegate responsibility to Elisha, He provided Elijah with a much-needed companion, who no doubt helped him bear his emotional burdens. Likewise, when we confide in a trusted friend, he or she can help us carry our emotional burdens. (2 Ki. 2:2) If you feel that you do not have anyone to confide in, pray to Jehovah to help you find a mature Christian who can provide you with emotional support. Jehovah helped Elijah to cope with stress and to serve faithfully for many years. Elijah’s experience gives us hope. We may go through periods of severe stress that drain us physically and emotionally. Yet, if we rely on Jehovah, he will give us the power we need to keep serving him.​—Isa. 40:28, 29. w19.06 15 ¶4; 16 ¶9-10




Saturday, July 10

Trembling at men is a snare, but the one trusting in Jehovah will be protected.​—Prov. 29:25.



We can build up our courage now by publicly preaching the good news of God’s Kingdom. Why so? Because preaching teaches us to trust in Jehovah and overcome any fear of man. Just as our muscles are strengthened when we exercise, our courage is strengthened when we preach from house to house, in public places, informally, and in business territory. If we develop the courage to preach now, we will be well-prepared to keep preaching even if our work is banned. (1 Thess. 2:1, 2) We can learn much from the example of a faithful sister who displayed remarkable courage. Nancy Yuen stood no more than five feet (1.5 m) tall, but she was not easily intimidated. She refused to stop preaching the good news of God’s Kingdom. As a result, she was imprisoned for some 20 years in Communist China. The officials who interrogated her said that she was “the most stubborn person” in their country! w19.07 5 ¶13-14




Sunday, July 11

Go, therefore, and make disciples of people of all the nations.​—Matt. 28:19.



Some people are eager to learn Bible truths, but many we meet may seem to be indifferent at first. We may have to stimulate their interest. To be successful in the ministry, we need to have a well-thought-out strategy. Select specific subjects that will likely interest those you will meet. Then plan how you will introduce the topic. For example, you might ask a householder: “Would you mind if I ask your opinion on something? Many problems facing us today affect people around the world. Do you think that it would take a world government to solve the world’s problems?” Then you could discuss Daniel 2:44. Or you might say to a neighbor: “What do you think is the key to raising well-behaved children? I would like to hear your opinion.” Then discuss Deuteronomy 6:6, 7. Without a doubt, we feel intense joy when we help people become disciples of Christ. w19.07 15 ¶4, 6-7




Monday, July 12

Can a man make gods for himself when they are not really gods?​—Jer. 16:20.



A brother with much experience preaching to nonreligious people in the Far East explains: “Typically, when a person here says, ‘I don’t believe in God,’ he means that he does not believe in worshipping traditional gods. So I usually agree that most gods are man-made and are not real. I often read Jeremiah 16:20 and ask: ‘How could we tell a real god from man-made ones?’ I listen carefully, and then I read Isaiah 41:23: ‘Tell us what will happen in the future, so that we may know that you are gods.’ Then I show an example of how Jehovah has foretold the future.” Another brother says: “I show them examples of Bible wisdom, fulfilled Bible prophecies, and laws that control the universe. Then I show them how all of it points to a living and wise Creator. When a person accepts the possibility that God exists, I start showing him what the Bible says about Jehovah.” w19.07 23-24 ¶14-15




Tuesday, July 13

Make sure of the more important things.​—Phil. 1:10.



These important things include the sanctification of Jehovah’s name, the fulfillment of his purposes, and the peace and unity of the congregation. (Matt. 6:9, 10; John 13:35) When we build our life around these important things, we prove that we love Jehovah. The apostle Paul also said that we must “be flawless.” This does not mean that we must be perfect. Jehovah will view us as flawless if we do our very best to deepen our love and make sure of the more important things. One way in which we show our love is by doing our utmost to avoid stumbling others. The instruction to avoid stumbling others is really a warning. How might we stumble someone? We could do so by our choice of entertainment, our choice of clothing, or even our choice of employment. What we do may not be wrong in itself. But if the choices we make offend someone else’s conscience and he or she is stumbled, that matters.​—Matt. 18:6. w19.08 10 ¶9-11




Wednesday, July 14

These are the ones who come out of the great tribulation, and they have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.​—Rev. 7:14.



Since 1935, Jehovah’s Witnesses have understood that the great crowd of John’s vision is made up of a group of faithful Christians who have the prospect of living forever on earth. (Rev. 7:9, 10) In order to survive the great tribulation, the great crowd would have to be educated in Jehovah’s ways before the Millennium begins. They would need to show strong faith in order to “succeed in escaping all these things that must occur” before Christ’s Thousand Year Reign. (Luke 21:34-36) Those of the great crowd rejoice in their hope. They understand that Jehovah determines where his faithful worshippers will serve him, whether in heaven or on earth. Both the anointed and the great crowd recognize that their reward is possible only because of Jehovah’s undeserved kindness as expressed through the ransom sacrifice of Jesus Christ.​—Rom. 3:24. w19.09 28 ¶10; 29 ¶12-13




Thursday, July 15

The joy of Jehovah is your strength.​—Neh. 8:10, ftn.



Do you have a new assignment? Make it a success. Do not consider a change to be a failure or a step backward. Look for Jehovah’s hand in your life and keep preaching. Imitate the faithful Christians of the first century. Wherever they were, they “went through the land declaring the good news of the word.” (Acts 8:1, 4) Your efforts to keep on preaching may yield good results. For example, pioneers who were expelled from one country moved to a neighboring land where there also was a great need in their language. Within months, new rapidly growing groups were formed. We must find our joy primarily in Jehovah. Therefore, keep walking with Jehovah, looking to him for wisdom, guidance, and support. Remember that you came to love your former assignment because you put your heart into helping the people there. Put your heart into your present assignment and see how Jehovah helps you to love it too.​—Eccl. 7:10. w19.08 24-25 ¶15-16




Friday, July 16

Should we not more readily submit ourselves to the Father?​—Heb. 12:9.



We should submit to Jehovah because he is our Creator. As such, he has the right to set standards for his creation. (Rev. 4:11) But we have another compelling reason to obey him​—his way of ruling is the best. Throughout history, many human rulers have had a measure of power and authority over others. In comparison to them, Jehovah is the wisest and the most loving, merciful, and compassionate Ruler of all. (Ex. 34:6; Rom. 16:27; 1 John 4:8) We submit to Jehovah by doing our best to obey him in all things and by resisting the urge to rely on our own understanding. (Prov. 3:5) We find it easier to submit to Jehovah as we come to know his beautiful qualities. Why? Because these qualities are reflected in all that he does. (Ps. 145:9) The more we learn about Jehovah, the more we will love him. And when we love Jehovah, we do not need a long list of rules telling us what to do and what not to do. w19.09 14 ¶1, 3




Saturday, July 17

My yoke is kindly, and my load is light.​—Matt. 11:30.



Satan loads people down with burdens they cannot carry. For example, he wants us to believe that Jehovah will not forgive us for our sins and that we are unlovable. What a crushing burden, and what a terrible lie! (John 8:44) When we “come to” Christ, our sins are forgiven. (Matt. 11:28) And the truth is that Jehovah loves all of us deeply. (Rom. 8:32, 38, 39) The load that Jesus asks us to carry is different from other loads that we must bear. For example, at the end of a day of secular work, many feel not only exhausted but also unfulfilled. By contrast, after spending time serving Jehovah and Christ, we feel a deep sense of satisfaction. We may be exhausted and have to push ourselves to attend a congregation meeting that night. But often we come home from that meeting refreshed and energized. The same is true when we make the effort to preach and to do our personal Bible study. The reward we receive is far greater than the energy we expend! w19.09 20 ¶1; 23-24 ¶15-16




Sunday, July 18

Jehovah’s day is coming exactly as a thief in the night.​—1 Thess. 5:2.



In the short time remaining before his “day” begins, Jehovah expects us to keep busy in the preaching work. We need to make sure that we are “having plenty to do in the work of the Lord.” (1 Cor. 15:58) When Jesus spoke about all the significant things that would happen during the last days, he added: “Also, in all the nations, the good news has to be preached first.” (Mark 13:4, 8, 10; Matt. 24:14) Just think: Every time you go in the ministry, you are having a share in fulfilling that Bible prophecy! Year by year, the Kingdom-preaching work is moving ahead. For example, think about the increase in the number of Kingdom proclaimers worldwide during the last days. In 1914, there were 5,155 publishers in 43 lands. Today, there are some 8.5 million publishers in 240 lands! Even so, our work is not yet over. We must keep proclaiming God’s Kingdom as the only solution to all mankind’s problems.​—Ps. 145:11-13. w19.10 8 ¶3; 9-10 ¶7-8




Monday, July 19

In everything you are being enriched for every sort of generosity, which produces through us an expression of thanks to God.​—2 Cor. 9:11.



Jehovah used Barzillai to provide for King David. David and the people were “hungry and tired and thirsty” while fleeing from David’s son, Absalom. Along with others, Barzillai, an old man at this point, risked his life to provide for David and those with him. Barzillai did not conclude that because of his advanced age, he was no longer useful to Jehovah. Rather, he generously used what he had to help God’s servants in need. (2 Sam. 17:27-29) What is the lesson for us? Regardless of our age, Jehovah can use us to fill the needs of fellow believers, either locally or in another land, who lack basic provisions. (Prov. 3:27, 28; 19:17) Even if we cannot care for them directly, we may be able to contribute to the worldwide work so that funds are available to offer relief when and where it is needed.​—2 Cor. 8:14, 15. w19.10 21 ¶6




Tuesday, July 20

There are companions ready to crush one another, but there is a friend who sticks closer than a brother.​—Prov. 18:24.



We may find it difficult to open up to others because someone might have hurt us in the past. (Prov. 18:19) Or we may feel that we lack the time and energy to cultivate close relationships. However, we should not give up. If we want our brothers to stand by us when trials come, we must learn to trust them now with our thoughts and feelings. That is an important step toward becoming true friends. (1 Pet. 1:22) Jesus showed that he trusted his friends by communicating openly with them. (John 15:15) We can imitate him by sharing our joys, concerns, and disappointments with others. Listen carefully as someone talks to you, and you may learn that you have many thoughts, feelings, and goals in common. If you take the initiative to have warm and open conversations with others, your friendships with them are likely to grow.​—Prov. 27:9. w19.11 4 ¶8-9




Wednesday, July 21

This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says.​—Ezek. 2:4.



During the great tribulation, the message that we proclaim will likely change. Currently, we are preaching the good news of the Kingdom and we are endeavoring to make disciples. But at that time, we may well deliver a message as hard-hitting as hailstones. (Rev. 16:21) We may proclaim the impending doom of Satan’s world. In time, we will find out exactly what our message will be and how we will deliver it. Will we use the same methods or will we use some other methods? We will have to wait and see. In any case, it seems that we will have the privilege of boldly proclaiming Jehovah’s judgment message! (Ezek. 2:3-5) Quite likely, our message will provoke the nations into trying to silence us once and for all. Just as we rely on Jehovah for support in our ministry now, we will need his support then. We can be sure that our God will fill us with power to accomplish his will.​—Mic. 3:8. w19.10 16 ¶8-9




Thursday, July 22

Some have been led astray from the faith.​—1 Tim. 6:10.



The expression “led astray” indicates that we could become distracted by trying to acquire unnecessary possessions. We could then expose our heart to “many senseless and harmful desires.” (1 Tim. 6:9) Rather than allowing those desires into our heart, we must see them for what they are​—weapons that can harm us. Suppose we have the financial means to buy many material things. Are we doing something wrong if we purchase things that we want but do not actually need? Not necessarily. But reflect on these questions: Even if we can afford to buy something, do we really have the time and energy to use and maintain the item? Also, might we become overly attached to our possessions? Could our attachment to material things cause us to act like the young man who turned down Jesus’ invitation to expand his service to God? (Mark 10:17-22) How much better it is for us to lead a simple life and spend our precious time and strength in doing God’s will! w19.11 17-18 ¶15-16




Friday, July 23

The plans of the diligent surely lead to success.​—Prov. 21:5.



God can give you “the power to act” and carry out a decision. (Phil. 2:13) So pray for the strength to act. Ask Jehovah for his holy spirit to give you the power you need. Continue praying even if an answer to your request seems to be delayed. As Jesus said: “Keep on asking, and it [holy spirit] will be given you.” (Luke 11:9, 13) Also, create a plan. To complete any project you start, you need a plan. Then you need to work according to that plan. Likewise, when you make a decision, list the specific steps you intend to follow to implement that decision. Breaking larger jobs into smaller tasks can help you track your progress more easily. The apostle Paul encouraged the Corinthians to set something aside for their contribution “on the first day of every week” rather than wait and try to collect funds when he arrived. (1 Cor. 16:2) Breaking large jobs into small tasks can also keep you from feeling overwhelmed. w19.11 29 ¶13-14




Saturday, July 24

Those knowing your name will trust in you; you will never abandon those seeking you, O Jehovah.​—Ps. 9:10.



We can say that a person knows about Jehovah if he is aware of God’s name or is familiar with some of the things that He has said or done. But to know Jehovah well involves more. We need to spend time learning about Jehovah and his wonderful qualities. Only then can we begin to understand what motivates him to speak and to act. That will help us to discern whether he approves of our opinions, decisions, and actions. Once we have discerned Jehovah’s will for us, we need to act on what we have learned. Some people may ridicule us for wanting to serve Jehovah, and they may oppose us even more when we start to associate with his people. Yet, if we trust in Jehovah, he will never let us down. We will be laying a foundation for friendship with God that will last a lifetime. Can we really know Jehovah that well? Yes, we can! w19.12 16-17 ¶3-4




Sunday, July 25

Children are an inheritance from Jehovah.​—Ps. 127:3, ftn.



Parents may at times feel overwhelmed by the challenges they face, but children are a gift from Jehovah. He is always available to help. He willingly listens to the prayers of parents. And he answers those prayers by means of the Bible, our publications, and the example and advice of other mature parents in the congregation. It has been said that raising children is a 20-year project, but parents never really stop being parents. Among the very best things they can give their children are love, time, and Bible-based training. Each child will respond differently to the training. However, many of them who have been raised by parents who love Jehovah feel as does Joanna Mae, a sister in Asia: “I am so thankful that my parents disciplined me and taught me to love Jehovah. They did not just give me life, they gave me a meaningful life.” (Prov. 23:24, 25) Millions of Christians could express similar sentiments. w19.12 27 ¶21-22




Monday, July 26

Comfort others in any sort of trial with the comfort that we receive from God.​—2 Cor. 1:4.



We do not have to look far to find brothers and sisters who need comfort. We need, though, to take the initiative to act despite our fears. For instance, we may fear not knowing what to say or what to do for someone who is in a distressing situation. Yet we can be effective comforters if we show that we care. As we get closer to the end of this system of things, world conditions will deteriorate and life will become more challenging. (2 Tim. 3:13) And the problems that we bring on ourselves because of inherited sin and imperfection mean that we will continue to need comfort. The apostle Paul was able to endure faithfully to the end of his life, thanks, in part, to the comfort he received from fellow Christians. By following their example, we too can help our brothers and sisters to remain firm in the faith.​—1 Thess. 3:2, 3. w20.01 12-13 ¶17-19




Tuesday, July 27

You put to the test those who say they are apostles.​—Rev. 2:2.



Anointed ones do not expect others to treat them in a special way. (Phil. 2:2, 3) They know that when Jehovah anointed them, he did not let everyone else know about it. So an anointed person is not surprised if some do not believe right away that he has been anointed. He realizes that the Bible tells us not to be quick to believe someone who says that God has given him a special responsibility. Not wanting to draw attention to himself, an anointed Christian would not tell those whom he meets for the first time that he is anointed. And he would certainly not boast about it. (1 Cor. 4:7, 8) Anointed Christians do not search out other anointed ones, hoping to discuss their anointing with them or to form private groups for Bible study. (Gal. 1:15-17) The congregation would not be united if anointed ones did so. They would be working against the holy spirit, which helps God’s people to have peace and unity.​—Rom. 16:17, 18. w20.01 28 ¶6-7




Wednesday, July 28

As these things start to occur, stand up straight and lift up your heads, because your deliverance is getting near.​—Luke 21:28.



At some point, the people whose religions were destroyed may resent the fact that Jehovah’s Witnesses keep practicing their religion. We can only imagine the uproar that this might create, including on social media. The nations and their ruler, Satan, will hate us for having the only surviving religion. They will not have attained their goal to eliminate all religion from the face of the earth. So we will become the center of their attention. At this point, the nations will take on the role of Gog of Magog. They will band together to make a vicious, all-out attack on Jehovah’s people. (Ezek. 38:2, 14-16) It can be somewhat unsettling to think about those possibilities when we cannot be certain of the exact details. However, one thing is sure: We do not need to fear the great tribulation. Jehovah will give us lifesaving instructions.​—Ps. 34:19. w19.10 16-17 ¶10-11




Thursday, July 29

How many things you have done, O Jehovah my God, your wonderful works and your thoughts toward us.​—Ps. 40:5.



We do more than feel appreciative; we express our appreciation to Jehovah by our words and actions. This makes us stand out as different from many today. We live in a world where people do not appreciate all that God does for them. In fact, one indication that we are living in “the last days” is that people are unthankful. (2 Tim. 3:1, 2) May we never adopt that attitude! Jehovah wants all his children to get along well with one another. In fact, the love we have for one another identifies us as being true Christians. (John 13:35) We agree with the psalmist who wrote: “How good and how pleasant it is for brothers to dwell together in unity!” (Ps. 133:1) When we love our brothers and sisters, we prove to Jehovah that we love him. (1 John 4:20) How pleasant it is to be part of a family of brothers and sisters who are “kind to one another, tenderly compassionate”!​—Eph. 4:32. w20.02 9 ¶6-7




Friday, July 30

Jehovah turned his attention to Hannah.​—1 Sam. 2:21.



The cause of Hannah’s anxiety did not go away immediately. She still had to live in the same household as Peninnah did. And the Bible does not indicate that Peninnah’s attitude changed. So Hannah likely had to continue enduring her rival’s stabbing words. But Hannah was able to regain and maintain her inner peace. After leaving the matter in Jehovah’s hands, Hannah was no longer overwhelmed by worry. She allowed Jehovah to comfort and soothe her. Sometime later, Hannah was even blessed with children of her own! (1 Sam. 1:2, 6, 7, 17-20) We can regain our peace even if the cause of our anxiety remains. Even though we pray intensely and attend meetings regularly, some problems may persist. But from Hannah’s example, we learn that nothing can stop Jehovah from soothing our troubled heart. Jehovah will never forget us, and sooner or later he will reward our faithfulness.​—Heb. 11:6. w20.02 22 ¶9-10




Saturday, July 31

Share with a wise person, and he will become wiser.​—Prov. 9:9.



Elders do not hold back from sharing Bible principles that can help others to act wisely. Why is it so important that they speak up when necessary? Consider the case of Eli: High Priest Eli had two sons for whom he had deep affection. Those sons, however, had no respect for Jehovah. They held important positions as priests serving at the tabernacle. But they abused their authority, showed gross disrespect for the offerings given to Jehovah, and brazenly committed sexual immorality. (1 Sam. 2:12-17, 22) According to the Mosaic Law, Eli’s sons deserved to die, but permissive Eli merely reproved them mildly and allowed them to continue serving at the tabernacle. (Deut. 21:18-21) How did Jehovah view the way that Eli handled matters? He said to Eli: “Why do you keep honoring your sons more than me?” Jehovah then determined to put those two wicked men to death.​—1 Sam. 2:29, 34. w20.03 19 ¶4-5




