
March
Monday, March 1

“Separate yourselves,” says Jehovah, “and quit touching the unclean thing.”​—2 Cor. 6:17.



Love for God and his Word strengthens us to obey Jehovah even when well-meaning relatives or friends try to pressure us to share in unscriptural practices regarding the dead. They may try to shame us, perhaps by saying that we did not love or respect the deceased. Or they might say that our behavior will cause the dead person to harm the living in some way. In a Caribbean nation, many believe that after a person dies, his “ghost” may stay around and punish those who mistreated him. The “ghost” may even “wreak havoc on a community,” says one reference. It is a custom in Africa to cover mirrors in the home of the deceased and turn pictures to face the wall. The reason? Some claim that the dead must not see themselves! As Jehovah’s servants, we certainly do not believe any myths or take part in any practices that promote Satan’s lies!​—1 Cor. 10:21, 22. w19.04 16 ¶11-12




Tuesday, March 2

All things . . . that you want men to do to you, you also must do to them.​—Matt. 7:12.



Jesus taught principles that would help his followers to treat others fairly. Think, for example, about the Golden Rule. We all want to be treated fairly. Therefore, we should behave fairly toward others. If we do, they may be moved to treat us with fairness. But what if we have been treated unjustly? Jesus also taught his followers to trust that Jehovah will “cause justice to be done for [those] who cry out to him day and night.” (Luke 18:6, 7) That statement is, in effect, a promise: Our just God is aware of the trials we are facing in these last days, and he will cause justice to be done for us in his due time. (2 Thess. 1:6) When we follow the principles that Jesus taught, we will treat others in a just way. And if we have been a victim of injustice in Satan’s world, we can take comfort in knowing that Jehovah will cause justice to be done for us. w19.05 5 ¶18-19




Wednesday, March 3

[Be] always ready to make a defense before everyone who demands of you a reason for the hope you have, but doing so with a mild temper and deep respect.​—1 Pet. 3:15.



Are you a young person in school? Your classmates may all believe in the theory of evolution. You would like to defend the Bible’s teaching, but perhaps you do not feel qualified to do so. That calls for a study project! Your aim could be twofold: (1) to strengthen your own conviction that God created all things and (2) to improve in your ability to defend the truth. (Rom. 1:20) You might first ask yourself, ‘What arguments have my classmates used in support of evolution?’ Then using our publications, do careful research. Defending your beliefs may not be as hard as you think. Most people believe in evolution simply because someone they respect told them that it is true. If you find just a point or two that you can share, you may provide a satisfactory answer to a sincere inquirer.​—Col. 4:6. w19.05 29 ¶13




Thursday, March 4

As a mother comforts her son, so I will keep comforting you.​—Isa. 66:13.



When the prophet Elijah was on the run for his life, he was so discouraged that he wished for death. Jehovah sent a mighty angel to visit that discouraged man. The angel provided very practical help. He gave Elijah a hot meal and encouraged him to eat. (1 Ki. 19:5-8) That account illustrates a useful truth: Sometimes a simple act of practical kindness can do a great deal of good. Perhaps a meal, a modest gift, or a thoughtful card would assure a downhearted brother or sister of our love and concern. If we feel uncomfortable discussing very personal or painful subjects, perhaps we can still give such practical help. Jehovah miraculously gave Elijah the help he needed to go all the way to Mount Horeb, far out of the reach of those who sought to do him harm. What lesson may we draw? If we want to offer comfort to victims of abuse, we may need first to help them feel safe, whether at their home or at the Kingdom Hall. w19.05 16 ¶11; 17 ¶13-14




Friday, March 5

The land will wail, . . . the family of Nathan’s house by itself.​—Zech. 12:12.



Suppose that you are reading the 12th chapter of Zechariah’s prophecy, which foretells the death of the Messiah. (Zech. 12:10) When you come to verse 12, you read that “the family of Nathan’s house” would grieve bitterly at the Messiah’s death. Instead of quickly passing over that detail, you pause and ask yourself: ‘What is the connection between the house of Nathan and the Messiah?’ You do a little “detective” work. A marginal reference leads you to 2 Samuel 5:13, 14, where you learn that Nathan was one of King David’s sons. A second marginal reference, Luke 3:23, 31, reveals that Jesus was a direct descendant of Nathan through Mary. Suddenly, you are intrigued! You knew that Jesus was foretold to be a descendant of David. (Matt. 22:42) But David had more than 20 sons. Is it not amazing that Zechariah pinpoints the household of Nathan in particular as having a reason to mourn the death of Jesus? w19.05 30 ¶17




Saturday, March 6

Be transformed by making your mind over, so that you may prove to yourselves the good and acceptable and perfect will of God.​—Rom. 12:2.



What do we need to do? By regular study, we can prove to ourselves the truths we have learned from the Bible. We can be fully convinced that Jehovah’s standards are right. Then, like a tree with solid roots, we will be firmly rooted, “stabilized in the faith.” (Col. 2:6, 7) Remember, no one else can stabilize your faith for you, so continue to be made new in your dominant mental attitude. Pray constantly; plead for the help of Jehovah’s spirit. Meditate deeply; continue to examine your thinking and motives. Seek good associates; surround yourself with individuals who will help you to transform your thinking. By doing so, you will counteract the poisonous effects of Satan’s world and successfully overturn “reasonings and every lofty thing raised up against the knowledge of God.”​—2 Cor. 10:5. w19.06 13 ¶17-18




Sunday, March 7

The form of worship that is clean and undefiled from the standpoint of our God and Father is this: to look after orphans and widows in their tribulation.​—Jas. 1:27.



Just as Ruth stuck with the widowed Naomi, we need to provide ongoing support for those who lose a loved one in death. (Ruth 1:16, 17) Paula says: “Right after my husband died, I got a lot of support. As time passed, people’s lives seemed to go back to normal. However, my life had changed completely. It is a huge help when others realize that a grieving person needs support in the months​—even years—​following the death.” Of course, each person is different. Some seem to adjust to their new circumstances relatively quickly. For others, however, every activity they once shared with their loved one is a painful reminder of their loss. The ways people grieve vary from person to person. Let us remember that Jehovah gives us the honor and responsibility to care for those who have lost their mate in death. w19.06 24 ¶16




Monday, March 8

I will guard my mouth with a muzzle as long as anyone wicked is in my presence.​—Ps. 39:1.



During a ban, we must recognize when it is “time to be silent.” (Eccl. 3:7) We must safeguard sensitive information, such as the names of our brothers and sisters, the locations where we meet, how we carry out our ministry, and how we receive spiritual food. We would not reveal these facts to the secular authorities; nor would we share them with well-meaning friends or relatives in our country or in other countries. If we did fall into this trap, we would put the safety of our brothers at risk. Do not allow minor issues to divide us. Satan knows that a divided house cannot stand. (Mark 3:24, 25) He will constantly try to cause divisions among us. In that way, he hopes that we will start fighting one another instead of fighting him. Even mature Christians need to be on guard not to fall into this trap. If we work hard to overcome differences with our brothers, we will avoid the trap of disunity.​—Col. 3:13, 14. w19.07 11-12 ¶14-16




Tuesday, March 9

A slave of the Lord . . . needs to be gentle toward all, qualified to teach.​—2 Tim. 2:24.



Often, people respond well to our message, not because of what we say, but because of the way we say it. They appreciate it when we are kind, tactful, and genuinely interested in them. We do not force them to hear our point of view. Instead, we try to discern the reasons for their view of religion and to be sensitive to their feelings. For instance, when speaking with Jews, Paul reasoned from the Scriptures. However, when he spoke with Greek philosophers at the Areopagus, he made no direct reference to the Bible. (Acts 17:2, 3, 22-31) How can we follow Paul’s example? If you meet a person who does not accept the Bible, it may be best not to make direct references to it when reasoning with him. If you sense that a person might be uncomfortable being seen reading the Bible with you, try showing him scriptures in a less obvious way, such as on an electronic device. w19.07 21 ¶5-6




Wednesday, March 10

Be careful not to let your heart be enticed to go astray and worship other gods.​—Deut. 11:16.



Satan cleverly tempted the Israelites to commit idolatry by taking advantage of their need to provide food for themselves. When the Israelites entered the Promised Land, they had to change their methods of growing food. While in Egypt, the Israelites irrigated the farmland by using water drawn from the Nile. However, the agricultural system in the Promised Land was based, not on water drawn from a huge river system, but on water gained from seasonal rains, as well as from the dew that watered the vegetation. (Deut. 11:10-15; Isa. 18:4, 5) Therefore, the Israelites had to learn new farming methods. But why did Jehovah warn against worshipping false gods while he was speaking about farming? Jehovah knew that his people would be tempted to learn useful skills from the pagan people around them and that the thinking of those Canaanite farmers was affected by their belief in Baal.​—Num. 25:3, 5; Judg. 2:13; 1 Ki. 18:18. w19.06 3 ¶4-6




Thursday, March 11

This is what I continue praying, that your love may abound still more and more.​—Phil. 1:9.



When the apostle Paul, Silas, Luke, and Timothy arrived in the Roman colony of Philippi, they found many people who were interested in the Kingdom message. These four zealous brothers helped form a congregation, and all the disciples began meeting together, likely at the home of a hospitable believer named Lydia. (Acts 16:40) The young congregation soon faced a challenge. Satan stirred up enemies of the truth who fiercely opposed the preaching activity of these loyal Christians. Paul and Silas were arrested, beaten with rods, and imprisoned. After they were released from prison, they visited the new disciples and encouraged them. Then Paul, Silas, and Timothy left the city while Luke apparently remained there. How did the newly formed congregation fare? With the help of Jehovah’s spirit, the new believers forged ahead in Jehovah’s service. (Phil. 2:12) Paul had every reason to be proud of them! w19.08 8 ¶1-2




Friday, March 12

The borrower is a slave to the lender.​—Prov. 22:7.



Have you moved recently? A move can be surprisingly costly, and it is easy to get into debt. To minimize the debt, beware of buying on credit things you do not really need. (Prov. 22:3) When we are under emotional pressure, as when caring for sick loved ones, we may find it difficult to decide how much debt to take on. In such situations, remember that “prayer and supplication” can help you to make wise decisions. In response to your prayers, Jehovah can grant you the peace that will “guard your hearts and your mental powers,” helping you to think things through calmly. (Phil. 4:6, 7; 1 Pet. 5:7) Maintain good relationships. Share your feelings and experiences with good friends, especially those who may have experienced similar joys and challenges. Doing so can promote emotional healing. (Eccl. 4:9, 10) The friends you made before you moved will remain your friends. w19.08 22 ¶9-10




Saturday, March 13

They gathered them together to . . . Armageddon.​—Rev. 16:16.



Why did Jehovah connect the final great war with Megiddo? Megiddo and the nearby Jezreel Valley were the sites of many battles. On occasion, Jehovah directly intervened in those battles. For example, “by the waters of Megiddo,” God helped Israelite Judge Barak defeat a Canaanite army led by a chief named Sisera. Barak and the prophetess Deborah thanked Jehovah for their miraculous victory. They sang: “From heaven the stars fought . . . against Sisera. . . . So let all your enemies perish, O Jehovah, but let those who love you be like the sun rising in its glory.” (Judg. 5:19-21, 31) At Armageddon, God’s enemies will likewise perish, while those who love God will be saved. But there is one important difference between the two conflicts. At Armageddon, God’s people will not fight. They will not even be armed! Their “strength will be in keeping calm and showing trust” in Jehovah and his heavenly armies.​—Isa. 30:15; Rev. 19:11-15. w19.09 9 ¶4-5




Sunday, March 14

Come to me.​—Matt. 11:28.



One way to “come to” Jesus is by learning as much as we can about the things he said and did. (Luke 1:1-4) Nobody else can do this for us​—we must study these accounts for ourselves. We also “come to” Jesus by making the decision to get baptized and become a disciple of Christ. Another way to “come to” Jesus is by going to the congregation elders if we need help. Jesus uses these “gifts in men” to care for his sheep. (Eph. 4:7, 8, 11; John 21:16; 1 Pet. 5:1-3) We must take the initiative to ask for their help. We cannot expect the elders to read our minds and know what we need. Consider what a brother named Julian says: “I asked for help, and that shepherding visit turned out to be one of the best gifts I have ever received.” Loyal elders, such as the two who visited Julian, can help us to know “the mind of Christ,” that is, to understand and imitate his thinking and attitude. (1 Cor. 2:16; 1 Pet. 2:21) This really is one of the best gifts they can give us. w19.09 21 ¶4-5




Monday, March 15

I have other sheep, which are not of this fold.​—John 10:16.



Throughout the Scriptures, we read of men and women of faith who were deeply influenced by holy spirit; yet they are not part of the 144,000. John the Baptist is one example. (Matt. 11:11) David is another. (Acts 2:34) They and countless others will be resurrected to life on a paradise earth. All of them​—along with the great crowd—​will have the opportunity to demonstrate their loyalty to Jehovah and his sovereignty. Never before in human history has God united millions of people from all nations. Whether our hope is to live in heaven or on earth, we need to help as many as possible to become part of the great crowd of “other sheep.” Soon, Jehovah will bring the foretold great tribulation that will destroy the governments and religions that have afflicted mankind. What an outstanding privilege lies before all members of the great crowd​—to serve Jehovah on earth forever!​—Rev. 7:14. w19.09 31 ¶18-19




Tuesday, March 16

In the last days ridiculers will come with their ridicule.​—2 Pet. 3:3.



As Satan’s system nears its end, we can expect to face ever more difficult tests of loyalty to God and his Kingdom. We will likely continue to be the target of ridicule. This may especially happen as our neutrality is tested more and more. We must strengthen our loyalty now so that we will remain loyal during the great tribulation. During the great tribulation, a change will take place regarding the brothers who take the lead on earth. At some point, all anointed ones who are still on earth will be gathered to heaven to share in the war of Armageddon. (Matt. 24:31; Rev. 2:26, 27) This means that the Governing Body will no longer be with us on earth. However, the great crowd will remain organized. Capable brothers from among the other sheep will take the lead. We will need to show our loyalty by supporting these brothers and by following their God-given direction. Our survival will depend on it! w19.10 17 ¶13-14




Wednesday, March 17

Where you go I will go . . . Where you die I will die.​—Ruth 1:16, 17.



Naomi was a loyal woman who loved Jehovah. But after the death of her husband and two sons, she wanted to change her name from Naomi to “Mara,” meaning “Bitter.” (Ruth 1:3, 5, 20, ftn., 21) Naomi’s daughter-in-law Ruth stuck with her through her trials. Ruth not only provided practical help but also spoke consolingly to Naomi. Ruth expressed her love and support for Naomi in simple, sincere words. When a member of our spiritual family loses a marriage mate in death, he or she needs our support. A married couple can be likened to two trees that have grown up next to each other. Over the years, the roots of the trees intertwine. When one tree is uprooted and dies, the other tree can seriously be affected. Similarly, when someone loses a spouse to the enemy death, he or she may feel strong emotions for a long time. w19.06 23 ¶12-13




Thursday, March 18

Each one is tried by being drawn out and enticed by his own desire.​—Jas. 1:14.



We must carefully control not only the type of entertainment we enjoy but also the amount of time we spend enjoying it. If we do not, we may spend more time on entertaining ourselves than we do on serving Jehovah. First, find out how much time you are actually spending on it. Why not keep a record for one week? Write on a calendar how many hours you spend watching television, surfing the Internet, and playing games on your mobile device. If you feel that you are spending an excessive amount of time, try making a schedule. Assign time to the more important things first, and then allot time for entertainment. Next, ask Jehovah to help you stick to your schedule. That way you will have the time and energy you need for personal Bible study, family worship, congregation meetings, and serving Jehovah in the preaching and teaching work. You may also be less likely to feel guilty about the time you spend on entertainment. w19.10 30 ¶14, 16; 31 ¶17




Friday, March 19

I have the desire to do what is fine but not the ability to carry it out.​—Rom. 7:18.



About 55 C.E., the Corinthians made an important decision. Learning of the needs of their brothers in Jerusalem and Judea, they resolved to donate to a combined effort to help them. (1 Cor. 16:1; 2 Cor. 8:6) A few months later, though, the apostle Paul learned that the Corinthians had not followed through. As a result, their gift would not likely be ready in time for it to be taken to Jerusalem along with the contributions from the other congregations. (2 Cor. 9:4, 5) The Corinthians had made a good decision, and Paul commended them for their outstanding faith and their earnest desire to be generous. But he also had to encourage them to complete what they had started. (2 Cor. 8:7, 10, 11) Their experience teaches us that even faithful Christians may struggle to implement a good decision. Why? Because of imperfection, we may simply procrastinate. Or unforeseen events might make it impossible for us to follow through.​—Eccl. 9:11. w19.11 26-27 ¶3-5




Saturday, March 20

Take up the large shield of faith.​—Eph. 6:16.



Like a large shield that protects most of the body, your faith protects you from the immoral, violent, and godless influences of this corrupt system of things. As Christians, we wage a spiritual battle and our enemies include wicked spirits. (Eph. 6:10-12) How can you be sure that you are ready to face tests? First, you must pray for God’s help. Then, you need to use God’s Word to help you see yourself as God sees you. (Heb. 4:12) The Bible states: “Trust in Jehovah with all your heart, and do not rely on your own understanding.” (Prov. 3:5, 6) With that in mind, why not review some of the decisions you have made recently? For example, have you faced a serious financial problem? Did Jehovah’s promise recorded at Hebrews 13:5 come to mind: “I will never leave you, and I will never abandon you”? Did that promise give you confidence that Jehovah would help you? If so, that indicates that you are keeping your shield of faith in good condition. w19.11 14 ¶1, 4




Sunday, March 21

Children are an inheritance from Jehovah.​—Ps. 127:3, ftn.



A child requires and deserves considerable time and energy from each parent. So if a couple have a number of children who are close in age, the parents may find it challenging to give each child the needed attention. Some couples who had a number of young children confessed that they felt overwhelmed. A mother may struggle with feeling drained physically and emotionally. Could that have an impact on her being able to study, pray, and share in the ministry regularly? A related challenge is being able to pay attention during Christian meetings and to benefit from them. Of course, a loving husband will do what he can to support his wife when their children need attention, both at meetings and at home. For example, he could help his wife with household chores. He will work hard to ensure that all benefit from a regular Family Worship program. And Christian fathers will regularly accompany the family in field service. w19.12 24 ¶8




Monday, March 22

A Jubilee is what that 50th year will become for you.​—Lev. 25:11.



How did the Israelites benefit from the Jubilee? Well, suppose an Israelite had fallen into debt and, as a result, had been forced to sell his land to pay off the debt. During the Jubilee year, that land was to be returned to him. Therefore, the man could “return to his property,” and the future inheritance of his children would not be lost. In another case, a man who fell on hard times might have had to sell one of his children​—or even himself—​into slavery in order to pay a debt. During the Jubilee year, the slave was to “return to his family.” (Lev. 25:10) So no one would become a slave permanently with no hope! In addition Jehovah said: “No one among you should become poor, for Jehovah will surely bless you in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you to possess as an inheritance.” (Deut. 15:4) What a contrast to what is happening in the world today, where the rich often get richer and the poor, poorer! w19.12 8-9 ¶3-4




Tuesday, March 23

Be wise, my son, and make my heart rejoice.​—Prov. 27:11.



When faced with tests, Jesus prayed “with strong outcries and tears.” (Heb. 5:7) His fervent prayers flowed from a loyal heart and strengthened his desire to remain obedient. To Jehovah, Jesus’ prayers were like the aroma of sweet-smelling incense. Jesus’ entire life course deeply pleased his Father and vindicated His sovereignty. We can imitate Jesus by doing our best to live a life of integrity and of loyalty to Jehovah’s ways and laws. When faced with tests, we pray fervently for Jehovah’s help because we want to please him. We realize that Jehovah will not accept our prayers if we are involved in conduct that he condemns. However, if we live according to Jehovah’s standards, we can be confident that our heartfelt prayers will be like sweet-smelling incense to Jehovah. And we can be sure that our integrity and loyal obedience please our heavenly Father. w19.11 21-22 ¶7-8



Memorial Bible reading: (Daytime events: Nisan 9) Luke 19:29-44


Wednesday, March 24

Who really is the faithful and discreet slave?​—Matt. 24:45.



In 1919, Jesus appointed a small group of anointed brothers as “the faithful and discreet slave.” That slave takes the lead in the preaching work and gives Christ’s followers “food at the proper time.” Satan and his world have done much to make the work of that faithful slave challenging, even impossible, to carry out from a human standpoint. Despite two world wars, relentless persecution, global economic crises, and unjust treatment, the faithful and discreet slave has continued to provide spiritual food for Christ’s followers on earth. Think of the abundance of spiritual food available today, free of charge, in more than 900 languages! It is undeniable evidence of divine backing. Consider further proof of Jehovah’s blessing: the preaching work. The good news truly is being preached “in all the inhabited earth.”​—Matt. 24:14. w19.11 24 ¶15-16



Memorial Bible reading: (Daytime events: Nisan 10) Luke 19:45-48; Matthew 21:18, 19; 21:12, 13


Thursday, March 25

[Christ] was favorably heard for his godly fear.​—Heb. 5:7.



On the yearly Day of Atonement, the high priest had to burn the incense before he could offer up the sacrifices. In that way, he made sure that he would have God’s approval when offering up the sacrifices. While on earth, Jesus had to do something important​—something more important than providing salvation for mankind—​before he could offer up his life in sacrifice. What was that? By living a life of integrity and loyalty, Jesus had to prepare the way for Jehovah to accept his sacrifice. In that way, Jesus would prove that doing things Jehovah’s way is the right way to live. Jesus would vindicate his Father’s sovereignty, or way of ruling. Throughout his earthly life, Jesus maintained perfect obedience to Jehovah’s righteous standards. No temptation or trial could weaken his desire to defend his Father’s way of ruling.​—Phil. 2:8. w19.11 21 ¶6-7



Memorial Bible reading: (Daytime events: Nisan 11) Luke 20:1-47


Friday, March 26

You are the ones who have stuck with me in my trials.​—Luke 22:28.



Throughout Jesus’ challenging ministry, the faithful apostles proved to be real friends to Jesus. (Prov. 18:24) Jesus valued such friends. During his ministry, none of his fleshly brothers put faith in him. (John 7:3-5) At one point, his relatives even thought that he had gone mad. (Mark 3:21) By contrast, Jesus could say the words of today’s text to the faithful apostles on the night before his death. The apostles occasionally disappointed Jesus, but he looked past their faults and saw that they had faith in him. (Matt. 26:40; Mark 10:13, 14; John 6:66-69) On the last night with them before he was executed, Jesus said to these loyal men: “I have called you friends, because I have made known to you all the things I have heard from my Father.” (John 15:15) Without a doubt, Jesus’ friends were a great source of encouragement to him. w19.04 11 ¶11-12



Memorial Bible reading: (Daytime events: Nisan 12) Luke 22:1-6; Mark 14:1, 2, 10, 11


Memorial DateAfter SundownSaturday, March 27

The spirit itself bears witness with our spirit that we are God’s children.​—Rom. 8:16.



How does a person know that he or she has the heavenly calling? The answer is clearly seen in the apostle Paul’s words to those in Rome who were “called to be holy ones.” In addition to the words of today’s text, he told them: “You did not receive a spirit of slavery causing fear again, but you received a spirit of adoption as sons, by which spirit we cry out: ‘Abba, Father!’” (Rom. 1:7; 8:15) So by means of his holy spirit, God makes it clear to anointed ones that they have this heavenly calling. (1 Thess. 2:12) Jehovah leaves no doubt whatsoever in the minds and hearts of those who receive his invitation to go to heaven. (1 John 2:20, 27) Anointed Christians do not need anyone to confirm that they are anointed. w20.01 22 ¶7-8



Memorial Bible reading: (Daytime events: Nisan 13) Luke 22:7-13; Mark 14:12-16 (Events after sunset: Nisan 14) Luke 22:14-65


Sunday, March 28

No one has love greater than this, that someone should surrender his life in behalf of his friends.​—John 15:13.



“The law of the Christ” is built on the best possible foundation​—love. (Gal. 6:2) Jesus was motivated by love in everything he did. Pity, or tender compassion, is an expression of love. Moved by such pity, Jesus taught the crowds, healed the sick, fed the hungry, and raised the dead. (Matt. 14:14; 15:32-38; Mark 6:34; Luke 7:11-15) Jesus willingly put the needs of others ahead of his own. Above all, he showed great love by surrendering his life in behalf of others. We can imitate Jesus by putting the needs of others ahead of our own. We can also imitate him by cultivating tender compassion for people in our territory. When such compassion moves us to preach and teach the good news, we are obeying the law of the Christ. w19.05 4 ¶8-10



Memorial Bible reading: (Daytime events: Nisan 14) Luke 22:66-71


Monday, March 29

[Jehovah] sent me to proclaim liberty to the captives . . . , to send the crushed ones away free.​—Luke 4:18.



Jesus opened the way to liberty from the oppressive doctrines taught by the religious leaders. Many Jews back then were enslaved to traditions and mistaken beliefs. (Matt. 5:31-37; 15:1-11) Those who presumed to be spiritual guides were in a sense blind. In rejecting the Messiah and the spiritual enlightenment he offered, they remained in darkness and in sin. (John 9:1, 14-16, 35-41) By his correct teachings and good example, Jesus made known to meek ones a spiritual liberation. (Mark 1:22; 2:23–3:5) Also, Jesus provided liberation by freeing mankind from enslavement to inherited sin. On the basis of Jesus’ sacrifice, God could forgive the sins of those who show faith and who accept the ransom He provided.​—Heb. 10:12-18. w19.12 10 ¶8; 11 ¶10-11



Memorial Bible reading: (Daytime events: Nisan 15) Matthew 27:62-66


Tuesday, March 30

You were sealed by means of him with the promised holy spirit, which is a token in advance of our inheritance.​—Eph. 1:13, 14; ftn.



Jehovah uses his holy spirit to make it absolutely clear to all who are anointed Christians that he has chosen them. In this way, the holy spirit is “a token [a pledge or promise]” given to assure them that in the future they will live forever in heaven and not on earth. (2 Cor. 1:21, 22) If a Christian is anointed, will he automatically receive his heavenly reward? No. He is sure that he has been chosen to go to heaven. However, he must remember this admonition: “Brothers, be all the more diligent to make your calling and choosing sure for yourselves, for if you keep on doing these things, you will by no means ever fail.” (2 Pet. 1:10) So even though an anointed Christian has been called to go to heaven, he will get his reward only if he remains faithful.​—Phil. 3:12-14; Heb. 3:1; Rev. 2:10. w20.01 21-22 ¶5-6



Memorial Bible reading: (Daytime events: Nisan 16) Luke 24:1-12


Wednesday, March 31

Thoughtless speech is like the stabs of a sword, but the tongue of the wise is a healing.​—Prov. 12:18.



One reason why Job’s three false comforters lacked compassion for him is that they saw only the outward appearance of his situation. As a result, they jumped to wrong conclusions and judged Job harshly. How can we avoid making a similar mistake? Realize that only Jehovah knows all the facts about a person’s situation. Listen carefully to what the suffering person says. Do more than hear his words; try also to feel his pain. Only then will you be able to show genuine fellow feeling for your brother or sister. Compassion will hold us back from spreading harmful gossip about the problems others are facing. A gossiper does not build up the congregation; he tears it down. (Prov. 20:19; Rom. 14:19) He can injure a person who is already suffering. (Eph. 4:31, 32) How much better it is when we look for a person’s good qualities and think about how we can help him or her deal with trials! w19.06 21-22 ¶8-9




