
October
Friday, October 1

The eyes of Jehovah are roving about through all the earth to show his strength in behalf of those whose heart is complete toward him.​—2 Chron. 16:9.



We see abundant evidence that Jehovah protects his people today. Consider: We are preaching and teaching the truth in all parts of the earth. (Matt. 28:19, 20) As a result, we expose the evil works of the Devil. Surely, if Satan were able to, he would stop all our activity, but he cannot. So we do not need to be terrified of wicked spirits. If we are faithful to Jehovah, the demons cannot cause us lasting harm. However, all of us need to resist wicked spirits and trust in Jehovah. If we do that, we will receive many blessings and we will avoid being misled by Satan’s lies. Also, we will not be paralyzed by fear of the demons. Above all, we will strengthen our friendship with Jehovah. “Oppose the Devil,” wrote the disciple James, “and he will flee from you. Draw close to God, and he will draw close to you.”​—Jas. 4:7, 8. w19.04 24 ¶15; 25 ¶18




Saturday, October 2

The fruit of the womb is a reward.​—Ps. 127:3.



Your children are a sacred trust, “an inheritance from Jehovah.” It is your responsibility to safeguard that trust. What can you do to protect your children from abuse? First, educate yourself about abuse. Learn about the kind of individuals who abuse children and the tactics they use to deceive them. Be alert to potential dangers. (Prov. 22:3; 24:3) Remember that in most cases, the abuser is someone the child already knows and trusts. Second, maintain good communication with your children. (Deut. 6:6, 7; Jas. 1:19) Remember that children are often reluctant to report abuse. They may fear that they will not be believed, or they may have been threatened by the abuser to keep the abuse secret. If you sense that something is wrong, kindly draw them out with questions and then patiently listen to their answers. Third, educate your children. Teach them what to say and do if someone tries to touch them in an inappropriate way. w19.05 13 ¶19-22




Sunday, October 3

Everyone proud in heart is detestable to Jehovah.​—Prov. 16:5.



Why does Jehovah detest proud people? One reason is that those who develop and promote an inflated love of self reflect Satan’s own arrogance. Imagine, Satan believed that Jesus​—the one whom God used to create all things—​should bow down and worship him! (Matt. 4:8, 9; Col. 1:15, 16) Those with such an inflated view of their own importance confirm that the wisdom of the world is foolishness with God. (1 Cor. 3:19) The Bible, though, helps us to have a balanced view of ourselves. It acknowledges that a degree of self-love is proper. Jesus said: “Love your neighbor as yourself,” which indicates that we should give a reasonable amount of attention to our needs. (Matt. 19:19) However, the Bible does not teach that we should elevate ourselves above others. Rather, it states: “Do nothing out of contentiousness or out of egotism, but with humility consider others superior to you.”​—Phil. 2:3; Rom. 12:3. w19.05 24 ¶13-14




Monday, October 4

Stop being molded by this system of things, but be transformed by making your mind over.​—Rom. 12:2.



Think back to the changes you needed to make when you first accepted the truth of God’s Word and decided to serve Jehovah. For many of us, this involved giving up some form of wrong conduct. (1 Cor. 6:9-11) How grateful we are for Jehovah’s help in overcoming such sinful practices! However, we must never become complacent. Even though we stopped committing serious sins that we engaged in before baptism, we still need to be diligent about avoiding anything that would tempt us to return to those former deeds. A twofold action is required. First, we need to “stop being molded,” or shaped, by this world. Second, we need to “be transformed” by making our mind over. The transformation involves more than a superficial change in appearance. It touches every fiber of our being. We need to make over our mind​—our innermost attitudes, feelings, and inclinations. w19.06 9 ¶4-6




Tuesday, October 5

You, O Jehovah, are my helper and comforter.​—Ps. 86:17.



When stressed, we can regain strength by attending congregation meetings. When we are at the meetings, we give Jehovah additional opportunities to be our “helper and comforter.” There he strengthens us by means of his holy spirit, his Word, and his people. Meetings provide us with an opportunity to enjoy “an interchange of encouragement.” (Rom. 1:11, 12) A sister named Sophia said: “Jehovah and our brotherhood kept me going. Most important for me were our congregation meetings. I have found that the more involved I am in the ministry and my congregation, the better I am able to deal with stress and worry.” When we feel discouraged, let us remember that Jehovah not only promises permanent relief in the future but also offers to help us deal with stress now. He gives us “the desire and the power” to overcome feelings of discouragement and hopelessness.​—Phil. 2:13. w19.06 19 ¶17-18




Wednesday, October 6

Go, report to my brothers so that they may go to Galilee, and there they will see me.​—Matt. 28:10.



Jesus must have some very important instructions to give his disciples, for this meeting is the first thing he arranges after his resurrection! At the meeting that Jesus organized, he outlined the vital work that his disciples would accomplish throughout the first century​—the same work that we are accomplishing today. Jesus said: “Go, therefore, and make disciples of people of all the nations, . . . teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you.” (Matt. 28:19, 20) Jesus wants all his followers to preach. He did not limit this command to the 11 faithful apostles. How can we be so sure? Well, were only the apostles present when the command to make disciples was given on that mountain in Galilee? Recall that the angel said to the women: “You will see him [in Galilee].” (Matt. 28:7) So faithful women must also have been present on that occasion. w20.01 2-3 ¶1-4




Thursday, October 7

Because you are no part of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, for this reason the world hates you.​—John 15:19.



Jesus explained why we should expect opposition. He said that we would be hated because we are no part of the world. Persecution is not a sign that we lack Jehovah’s blessing. Instead, it indicates that we are doing what is right! Mere human opposers cannot stamp out the worship of the almighty God, Jehovah. Many have tried and failed. Consider what happened during World War II. At that time, governments in many countries intensely persecuted God’s people. The work of Jehovah’s Witnesses was banned not only by the Nazi party in Germany but also by governments in Australia, Canada, and other lands. Yet, note what took place. In 1939 when the war began, there were 72,475 publishers worldwide. Reports showed that by the end of the war in 1945, with Jehovah’s blessing, there were 156,299 publishers. The number of publishers had more than doubled! w19.07 9 ¶4-5




Friday, October 8

By this all will know that you are my disciples​—if you have love among yourselves.​—John 13:35.



Even if you are not presently conducting a Bible study, you can assist in making disciples in other ways. For example, you can welcome new ones and befriend them when they come to the Kingdom Hall. In that way, you can help to convince them that love identifies us as true Christians. The answers you give during the meetings, though brief, can teach newly associated ones to express their convictions in a sincere and respectful manner. You can also accompany a new publisher in the ministry and help him to use the Scriptures to reason with people. By doing that, you will be teaching him to imitate Christ. (Luke 10:25-28) Many Christians are very busy caring for important responsibilities. Still, they make time for conducting Bible studies, and they get much joy from it. w19.07 17 ¶11, 13




Saturday, October 9

Forgetting the things behind and stretching forward to the things ahead, I am pressing on toward the goal.​—Phil. 3:13, 14.



The apostle Paul did not allow himself to be distracted, either by past accomplishments or by past mistakes. In fact, he said that “forgetting the things behind” was essential to “stretching forward to the things ahead,” that is, to completing the race successfully. What were some of the things that could have distracted Paul? First, his accomplishments in Judaism were impressive. Yet, he viewed those things as “a lot of refuse.” (Phil. 3:3-8) Second, he did not allow guilt over his earlier persecution of Christians to paralyze him. And third, he did not reason that he had already done enough for Jehovah. Paul had a productive ministry despite being imprisoned, beaten, stoned, and shipwrecked, as well as lacking food and clothing. (2 Cor. 11:23-27) However, regardless of what he had already accomplished and suffered, Paul knew that he must press on. The same is true of us. w19.08 3 ¶5




Sunday, October 10

I am sending you out as sheep among wolves.​—Matt. 10:16.



Many of our brothers and sisters live in countries where they cannot preach openly or from door to door, so they find other ways to declare the good news. (Matt. 10:17-20) In one such country, a circuit overseer suggested that each publisher cover his own preaching “territory” made up of relatives, neighbors, schoolmates, workmates, and acquaintances. Within two years, the number of congregations in that circuit increased significantly. We may not live in a country where we cannot preach openly. However, we can learn a valuable lesson from the example of our resourceful brothers and sisters: Always look for ways to have a full share in the ministry, confident that Jehovah will give you the power you need to overcome any obstacle. (Phil. 2:13) At this momentous time, may we make sure of the more important things, be flawless, avoid stumbling others, and bear righteous fruit. Then we will abound in love and bring honor to our caring Father, Jehovah. w19.08 13 ¶17-18




Monday, October 11

I have seen servants on horseback but princes walking on foot just like servants.​—Eccl. 10:7.



Few of us enjoy dealing with people who always insist on their own way and who refuse to accept suggestions from others. By contrast, we find it refreshing to deal with our fellow believers when they show “fellow feeling, brotherly affection, tender compassion, and humility.” (1 Pet. 3:8) If we are drawn to such people, they will likely be drawn to us​—as long as we are humble. Humility also makes our life easier. Realistically, we may observe things in life that do not seem to be right or fair. Those who have great ability do not always receive recognition. And those with less ability sometimes receive more honor. Even so, Solomon acknowledged that it is wise for us to face reality rather than to be obsessed with negative circumstances. (Eccl. 6:9) If we are humble, we will find it easier to accept life as it is​—not as we think it should be. w19.09 4-5 ¶9-10




Tuesday, October 12

Fathers, . . . go on bringing [your children] up in the discipline and admonition of Jehovah.​—Eph. 6:4.



Those who have a measure of authority, such as fathers, have the opportunity to benefit other people. Jehovah has assigned the father as head of the family, and God expects him to train and discipline his children. (1 Cor. 11:3) But a father’s authority is limited​—he must answer to Jehovah, the one to whom every family owes its name. (Eph. 3:14, 15) Fathers show their submission to Jehovah by using their authority in a way that pleases God. Do not abuse the authority that Jehovah has given you. Admit your mistakes, and accept Bible-based counsel from others. If you do, your family will respect you for your humility. When praying with your family, pour your heart out to Jehovah​—let them hear how much you depend on him. And above all, build your life around your service to Jehovah. (Deut. 6:6-9) Your good example is one of the most valuable gifts that you can give to your family. w19.09 15 ¶8; 17 ¶14; 18 ¶16




Wednesday, October 13

Welcome [Mark] if he comes to you.​—Col. 4:10.



Mark was happy to serve others. At various times he served alongside both the apostle Paul and the apostle Peter as they fulfilled their responsibilities, with Mark possibly attending to their physical needs. (Acts 13:2-5; 1 Pet. 5:13) Paul described Mark as one of his “fellow workers for the Kingdom of God” and as “a strengthening aid” to him. (Col. 4:11, ftn.) Mark became one of Paul’s close friends. For example, when Paul was imprisoned for the last time in Rome, about 65 C.E., he wrote his second letter to Timothy. In that letter, Paul asked Timothy to come to Rome and to bring Mark along. (2 Tim. 4:11) Paul no doubt appreciated Mark’s past faithful service, so he asked for Mark’s presence at that crucial time. Mark helped Paul in practical ways, perhaps supplying him with food or items for his writing. The support and encouragement that Paul received likely helped him to endure the final days leading up to his execution. w20.01 11 ¶12-13




Thursday, October 14

Come to me.​—Matt. 11:28.



We have chosen a life of self-sacrifice and hard work. Jesus warned us that we would be persecuted. But we can expect that Jehovah will give us the strength to endure any challenge. The more we endure, the stronger we will become. (Jas. 1:2-4) We can also expect that Jehovah will provide for us, that Jesus will shepherd us, and that our brothers and sisters will encourage us. (Matt. 6:31-33; John 10:14; 1 Thess. 5:11) The woman whom Jesus cured from her “flow of blood” was refreshed on the very day that she was healed. (Luke 8:43-48) But she would receive lasting refreshment only if she became a loyal disciple of Christ. What do you think she did? If she did choose to come under Jesus’ yoke, imagine the reward​—serving with Jesus in heaven! Any sacrifices she had made to follow Christ would pale in comparison with that blessing. No matter what our hope is​—living forever in heaven or on earth—​how thankful we can be that we have accepted Jesus’ invitation: “Come to me!” w19.09 25 ¶21-22




Friday, October 15

By wisdom a house is built up, and by discernment it is made secure.​—Prov. 24:3.



Needing help, David’s men asked a wealthy Israelite named Nabal for a little food. They felt free to ask because they had been protecting Nabal’s flocks in the wilderness. But selfish Nabal refused to give them anything. David became furious and intended to wipe out Nabal and every male of his household. (1 Sam. 25:3-13, 22) However, Nabal’s wife, Abigail, was as discerning as she was beautiful. Showing great courage, she fell at David’s feet and urged him not to incur bloodguilt by taking revenge. She tactfully advised him to leave matters in Jehovah’s hands. Abigail’s humble words and discreet actions touched David’s heart. He rightly concluded that Jehovah had sent her. (1 Sam. 25:23-28, 32-34) Abigail had cultivated qualities that made her useful to Jehovah. Similarly, Christian sisters who develop tact and discernment can be used by Jehovah to build up their families and others in the congregation.​—Titus 2:3-5. w19.10 23 ¶10




Saturday, October 16

Get out of her, my people, if you do not want to share with her in her sins, and if you do not want to receive part of her plagues.​—Rev. 18:4.



All true Christians must maintain a clear distinction between themselves and Babylon the Great. Before learning the truth, a Bible student may have been a member of a false religion. He may have attended its religious services and shared in its activities. Or he may have contributed money to such an organization. Before a Bible student can be approved as an unbaptized publisher, he must break all ties with false religion. He should submit a letter of resignation or otherwise completely sever his membership in his former church and in any other organization that has ties to Babylon the Great. A true Christian must make sure that his secular employment has nothing to do with Babylon the Great. (2 Cor. 6:14-17) Why do we take such a firm stand? Because we do not want to share in the works and sins of religious organizations that are unclean in God’s eyes.​—Isa. 52:11. w19.10 12 ¶16-17




Sunday, October 17

Jehovah is merciful and compassionate . . . He will not always find fault, nor will he stay resentful forever.​—Ps. 103:8, 9.



Jeremiah wrote the book named after him, and he likely also wrote the Bible books of 1 and 2 Kings. That assignment no doubt made him especially aware of Jehovah’s mercy toward imperfect humans. For example, he knew that when King Ahab repented of his bad deeds, Jehovah spared him from seeing his entire family destroyed during his lifetime. (1 Ki. 21:27-29) Similarly, Jeremiah knew that Manasseh did even more to offend Jehovah than Ahab did. Even so, Jehovah forgave Manasseh because he repented. (2 Ki. 21:16, 17; 2 Chron. 33:10-13) Those accounts must have helped Jeremiah to imitate God’s patience and mercy. Consider how Jeremiah dealt with Baruch when he temporarily became distracted in his assignment. Instead of quickly giving up on his friend, Jeremiah helped Baruch by sharing God’s kind but frank message with him.​—Jer. 45:1-5. w19.11 6 ¶14-15




Monday, October 18

God is not unrighteous so as to forget your work and the love you showed for his name.​—Heb. 6:10.



In the book of Leviticus, we learn that an Israelite could offer a communion sacrifice “as an expression of thanksgiving.” (Lev. 7:11-13, 16-18) He made this offering, not because he had to, but because he wanted to. Like those communion sacrifices, our service to Jehovah is a voluntary expression of how we feel about him. We give Jehovah our best, and we do so because we love him with all our heart. How pleased Jehovah must be to see millions of willing worshippers serve him out of deep love for him and his ways! Jehovah sees and values not only our actions but also our motives. For example, if you are elderly and can no longer do as much as you would like, be assured that Jehovah sees beyond your limitations. You may feel that you have little to offer, but Jehovah sees the love deep within you that motivates you to do what you can do. He is pleased to accept the best that you can give. w19.11 22 ¶9; 23 ¶11-12




Tuesday, October 19

Come . . . into an isolated place and rest up a little.​—Mark 6:31.



Regarding work, balance is important. King Solomon was inspired to write: “There is an appointed time for . . . every activity.” He mentioned planting, building, weeping, laughing, dancing, and other activities. (Eccl. 3:1-8) Clearly, two fundamental aspects of life are work and rest. Jesus had a balanced view of work and rest. On one occasion, the apostles returned from a preaching tour. They were so busy that “they had no leisure time even to eat a meal.” Jesus told them the words of today’s text. (Mark 6:30-34) Even though he and his disciples were not always able to get the rest they wanted, Jesus knew that they all needed to rest. At times, some rest or some change truly is needed. We can see that from an arrangement that God made for his ancient people​—the weekly Sabbath. We are not under the Mosaic Law, yet we can benefit from considering what it said about the Sabbath. w19.12 3 ¶6-7




Wednesday, October 20

Never be anxious.​—Matt. 6:31.



Jehovah has given his word that he will care for his loyal servants, and he feels obligated to fulfill that promise. (Ps. 31:1-3) In addition, Jehovah knows that we would be devastated if he did not care for those who are part of his family. He promises to provide for us both materially and spiritually, and nothing will stop him from fulfilling that promise! (Matt. 6:30-33; 24:45) When we remember why Jehovah keeps his promises, we can face economic challenges with confidence. Consider the example of the first-century Christians. When great persecution arose against the congregation in Jerusalem, “all except the apostles were scattered.” (Acts 8:1) Think what that would have meant. Economic hardship! Christians likely lost their homes and businesses. Yet, Jehovah did not abandon them; neither did they lose their joy. (Acts 8:4; Heb. 13:5, 6; Jas. 1:2, 3) Jehovah supported those faithful Christians, and he will support us.​—Ps. 37:18, 19. w20.01 17-18 ¶14-15




Thursday, October 21

Jehovah . . . takes note of the humble.​—Ps. 138:6.



When David defended his father’s sheep from a lion and from a bear, he recognized that it was Jehovah who was helping him overcome those powerful predators. When he defeated the giant warrior Goliath, David saw clearly that it was Jehovah who was guiding him. (1 Sam. 17:37) And when he escaped from jealous King Saul, David acknowledged that it was Jehovah who had saved him. (Ps. 18, superscription) A proud man might have taken credit for those accomplishments. But David was humble, so he was able to recognize Jehovah’s hand in his life. What is the lesson for us? We need to do more than just ask for Jehovah’s help. We must also try to recognize when and how he gives us help. If we humbly acknowledge our limitations, we will clearly see that Jehovah makes up for what we lack. And each time we see Jehovah help us, our relationship with him will grow stronger. w19.12 20 ¶18-19




Friday, October 22

Those whom Jehovah loves he reproves, just as a father does a son in whom he delights.​—Prov. 3:12.



We have many reasons for believing that Jehovah values us. He has drawn us to him and taken notice of how we responded to the good news. (John 6:44) As we began to draw close to Jehovah, he drew closer to us. (Jas. 4:8) Jehovah also invests time and effort in educating us, showing that we are precious to him. He knows the kind of individuals we are now and the kind we can become. And he disciplines us because he loves us. What powerful evidence that Jehovah values us! Some considered King David to be worthless, but he knew that Jehovah loved and supported him. That thought affected David’s view of his situation. (2 Sam. 16:5-7) When we feel low or face challenges, Jehovah can help us see things differently and he can help us climb over any obstacle. (Ps. 18:27-29) When we have Jehovah’s backing, nothing can stop us from serving him with joy.​—Rom. 8:31. w20.01 15 ¶7-8




Saturday, October 23

[Teach] them to observe all the things I have commanded you.​—Matt. 28:20.



When conducting a Bible study, start the session with prayer. Generally speaking, it is best to begin opening and closing the study with prayer as soon as possible, usually within the first few weeks after starting a regular study. We must help the student to realize that we can understand God’s Word only with the help of God’s spirit. Some Bible teachers raise the subject of prayer by reading James 1:5, which states: “If any one of you is lacking in wisdom, let him keep asking God.” The conductor then asks the student, “How can we ask God for wisdom?” The student will likely agree that we should pray to God. Teach your student how to pray. Reassure him that Jehovah wants to hear his heartfelt prayers. Explain that in our private prayers, we can really open our heart to Jehovah​—expressing feelings that we might hesitate to share with any human. After all, Jehovah already knows our innermost thoughts.​—Ps. 139:2-4. w20.01 2 ¶3; 5 ¶11-12




Sunday, October 24

It depends, not on a person’s desire or on his effort, but on God.​—Rom. 9:16.



Jehovah decides when he will choose anointed ones. (Rom. 8:28-30) Jehovah began choosing anointed ones after Jesus was resurrected. It seems that in the first century, all true Christians were anointed. In the centuries that followed, most of those who claimed that they were Christians did not really follow Christ. Even so, during those years, Jehovah anointed the few who were true Christians. They were like the wheat that Jesus said would grow among the weeds. (Matt. 13:24-30) During the last days, Jehovah has continued to choose people who will be part of the 144,000. So if God decides to choose some of these just before the end, surely we should not question his wisdom. (Rom. 9:11) We must be careful not to react like the workers whom Jesus described in one of his illustrations. They complained about the way their master treated those who started working in the last hour.​—Matt. 20:8-15. w20.01 30 ¶14




Monday, October 25

My servants will shout joyfully.​—Isa. 65:14.



Jehovah wants his family to be happy. There are many reasons why we can be cheerful right now, even though we may be facing difficulties. For example, we are certain that our heavenly Father loves us dearly. We have an accurate knowledge of God’s Word, the Bible. (Jer. 15:16) And we are part of a unique family made up of people who love Jehovah, love his high moral standards, and love one another. (Ps. 106:4, 5) We can remain happy because we have the sure hope that life will get even better in the future. We know that soon Jehovah will remove all the wicked and that under the direction of his Kingdom, the earth will be restored to Paradise. We also have the wonderful hope that those who have died will be raised to life and reunited with their loved ones. (John 5:28, 29) What a joy that will be! And most important, we are sure that soon everyone in heaven and on earth will give our loving Father the honor, praise, and devotion that he deserves. w20.02 13 ¶15-16




Tuesday, October 26

Against you​—you above all—​I have sinned.​—Ps. 51:4.



If you commit a serious sin, do not try to cover the error. Instead, openly confess your sin to Jehovah in prayer. You will then begin to feel some relief from the anxiety caused by a guilty conscience. But if you want to restore your friendship with Jehovah, you need to do more than pray. You need to accept discipline. When Jehovah sent the prophet Nathan to expose King David’s sin with Bath-sheba, David did not justify himself or try to minimize the sin. He immediately acknowledged that he had sinned not only against Bath-sheba’s husband but, above all, against Jehovah. David accepted the discipline from Jehovah, and Jehovah forgave him. (2 Sam. 12:10-14) If we have committed a serious sin, we need to talk to those whom Jehovah has appointed to shepherd us. (Jas. 5:14, 15) And we must avoid the urge to justify ourselves. The sooner we accept and apply whatever discipline we receive, the sooner we will regain our peace and joy. w20.02 24-25 ¶17-18




Wednesday, October 27

Ten men out of all the languages of the nations . . . will take firm hold of the robe of a Jew, saying: “We want to go with you, for we have heard that God is with you people.”​—Zech. 8:23.



The “ten men” represent those who have the hope of living forever on earth. They know that Jehovah has blessed the group of anointed ones represented by the “Jew” and feel that it is an honor to worship him along with them. Even though it is not possible to know the name of each individual member of the anointed on earth today, those who hope to live on earth can “go with” the anointed. How? Today’s text answers. Note that the Bible verse mentions one Jew. But “you” and “you people” refer to more than one person. This means that this Jew is not just one person but represents the whole group of anointed ones. Those who are not anointed serve Jehovah along with the anointed. However, they do not view the anointed as their leaders, realizing that Jesus fills the role of Leader.​—Matt. 23:10. w20.01 26 ¶1-2




Thursday, October 28

By this all will know that you are my disciples​—if you have love among yourselves.​—John 13:35.



Jesus said that his true disciples would be clearly identifiable if they showed the same sort of love that he displayed. That statement was true in the first century, and it is true today. How important it is that we overcome any challenges and show love for one another! Ask yourself: ‘What can I learn from brothers and sisters who have continued to show love for one another despite challenges?’ Human imperfection makes it difficult for us to show intense love for one another. Even so, we must try to imitate Christ. Jesus taught us the importance of making peace with a brother who has something against us. (Matt. 5:23, 24) He emphasized that we need to maintain good relations with others if we are to please God. Jehovah is happy when we do our best to make peace with our brothers. He will not accept our worship if we hang on to resentment and refuse even to try to make peace.​—1 John 4:20. w20.03 24 ¶1-4




Friday, October 29

We distinguish the inspired statement of truth from the inspired statement of error.​—1 John 4:6.



Satan, “the father of the lie,” has deceived people since the start of human history. (John 8:44) Some of his lies include false teachings about death and about life after death. Those teachings form the basis for many popular customs and superstitions. Why are so many humans deceived? Satan’s lies about death exploit the way we naturally feel about death. Because we were created to live forever, we do not want to die. (Eccl. 3:11) We consider death an enemy. (1 Cor. 15:26) Despite Satan’s efforts, the truth about death has not been kept hidden. In fact, more people than ever now know and proclaim what the Bible teaches about the condition of the dead and the hope for the dead. (Eccl. 9:5, 10; Acts 24:15) These truths comfort us, sparing us needless fear and uncertainty. w19.04 14 ¶1; 15 ¶5-6




Saturday, October 30

Go on carrying the burdens of one another, and in this way you will fulfill the law of the Christ.​—Gal. 6:2.



Jehovah God loves his worshippers. He always has, and he always will. He also loves justice. (Ps. 33:5) So we can be sure of two things: (1) It pains Jehovah when his servants are treated unfairly. (2) He will make sure that justice is served. The Law that God gave Israel through Moses was built on love. It promoted justice​—justice for all, even vulnerable ones. (Deut. 10:18) That Law reveals how deeply Jehovah cares about his worshippers. The Mosaic Law ended in 33 C.E. when the Christian congregation was established. Would Christians be without the benefits of a law that is built on love and promotes justice? By no means! Christians had a new law​—“the law of the Christ.” Jesus did not write down a law code for his followers, but he did give them instructions, commands, and principles to live by. “The law of the Christ” includes everything Jesus taught. w19.05 2 ¶1-3




Sunday, October 31

The God of all comfort . . . comforts us in all our trials.​—2 Cor. 1:3, 4.



Humans have a natural need for comfort and a remarkable ability to provide it. For instance, when a little child falls and skins his knee while playing, he may run to Mommy or Daddy, crying. The parents cannot heal the wound, but they can comfort the child. They may ask what happened, wipe away his tears, offer soothing words and affection, and perhaps apply some medicine or a bandage. Before long, the child stops crying and may even resume playing. In time, the wound will heal. Sometimes, though, children are hurt in far worse ways. Some are sexually abused. The abuse can be inflicted on a single occasion, or it may go on for years. In either case, the abuse can leave deep emotional scars. In some cases, the offender is caught and punished. In others, the abuser may seem to escape justice. But even if justice is swift, the harmful effects of the abuse may last well into adulthood. w19.05 14 ¶1-2




