
September
Wednesday, September 1

My Father has kept working until now, and I keep working.​—John 5:17.



Do the examples set by Jehovah and Jesus in working hard imply that it is not necessary for us to rest? Not at all. Jehovah never gets tired, so he does not need physical rest. The Bible does say that after Jehovah created the heavens and the earth, “he rested and refreshed himself.” (Ex. 31:17) However, that evidently means that Jehovah paused and found satisfaction in what he had made. And although Jesus worked hard while he lived on earth, he still made time to rest and to enjoy meals with his friends. (Matt. 14:13; Luke 7:34) The Bible encourages God’s people to be workers. His servants are to be industrious rather than lazy. (Prov. 15:19) Perhaps you work secularly to care for your family. And all disciples of Christ have the responsibility to share in the work of preaching the good news. Still, you also need to get sufficient rest. w19.12 2 ¶2; 3 ¶4-5




Thursday, September 2

Christ suffered for you, leaving a model for you to follow his steps closely.​—1 Pet. 2:21.



Avoid telling stories about the demons. In this regard, we want to imitate the example set by Jesus. Before he came to earth, Jesus lived in heaven, and he knew a lot about Satan and the demons. But he did not relate stories about what those wicked spirits had done. Jesus wanted to be a witness of Jehovah, not a publicity agent for Satan. We can imitate Jesus by not spreading stories about the demons. Instead, we show by our words that our “heart is stirred by something good,” that is, the truth. (Ps. 45:1) Do not be terrified of wicked spirits. In this imperfect world, bad things may happen to us. Accidents, sickness, or even death may come without warning. But we should not think that invisible spirits are responsible. The Bible explains that “time and unexpected events” can overtake anyone. (Eccl. 9:11) As for the demons, Jehovah has shown that he is far more powerful than they are. w19.04 23-24 ¶13-14




Friday, September 3

The existing authorities stand placed in their relative positions by God.​—Rom. 13:1.



Do elders comply with secular laws about reporting an allegation of child abuse to the secular authorities? Yes. In places where such laws exist, elders endeavor to comply with secular laws about reporting allegations of abuse. Such laws do not conflict with God’s law. (Acts 5:28, 29) So when they learn of an allegation, elders immediately seek direction on how they can comply with laws about reporting it. Elders assure victims and their parents and others with knowledge of the matter that they are free to report an allegation of abuse to the secular authorities. But what if the report is about someone who is a part of the congregation and the matter then becomes known in the community? Should the Christian who reported it feel that he has brought reproach on God’s name? No. The abuser is the one who brings reproach on God’s name. w19.05 10 ¶13-14




Saturday, September 4

The wisdom of this world is foolishness with God.​—1 Cor. 3:19.



The Bible instructs the husband and wife to honor each other and their marriage vows. It encourages marriage mates to have a deep sense of commitment to each other, stating: “A man will leave his father and his mother and he will stick to his wife, and they will become one flesh.” (Gen. 2:24) In contrast, those influenced by the wisdom of the world promote a different view, saying that each spouse should focus on his or her own needs. “In some ceremonies,” notes one book about divorce, “the traditional pledge to marry for ‘as long as we both shall live’ was replaced with the more limited promise to marry for ‘as long as we both shall love.’” Such a casual view of marriage has led to countless broken families and has caused immeasurable emotional harm. Without a doubt, the world’s disrespectful view of marriage is a foolish teaching. w19.05 23 ¶12




Sunday, September 5

Stop being molded by this system of things.​—Rom. 12:2.



Paul was concerned because some Christians were apparently being influenced by the unwholesome reasonings and philosophies promoted by Satan’s world. (Eph. 4:17-19) That can happen to any one of us. In a desperate attempt to turn us away from Jehovah, Satan, the god of this system of things, uses various tactics. One of them is that of exploiting any tendency we may have toward selfish ambition or self-promotion. He may even use certain aspects of our background, our culture, or our education to bring us over to his way of thinking. Is it possible for us to root out things that are “strongly entrenched” in our minds? (2 Cor. 10:4) Notice how Paul answers: “We are overturning reasonings and every lofty thing raised up against the knowledge of God, and we are bringing every thought into captivity to make it obedient to the Christ.” (2 Cor. 10:5) Yes, with Jehovah’s help we can actually gain control over wrong reasonings. w19.06 8 ¶1-3




Monday, September 6

As for me, drawing near to God is good for me. I have made the Sovereign Lord Jehovah my refuge.​—Ps. 73:28.



Although deeply distressed, Hannah, David, and a psalmist all relied on Jehovah for help. They shared their anxiety with him through fervent prayer. They spoke freely to him about the reasons why they were so stressed. And they continued to go to Jehovah’s place of worship. (1 Sam. 1:9, 10; Ps. 55:22; 73:17; 122:1) Jehovah compassionately responded to each one of them. Hannah gained peace of mind. (1 Sam. 1:18) David wrote: “Many are the hardships of the righteous one, but Jehovah rescues him from them all.” (Ps. 34:19) And the psalmist later felt that Jehovah had “taken hold of [his] right hand,” guiding him with loving advice. (Ps. 73:23, 24) What do we learn from these examples? At times, we will be burdened with problems that cause us stress. But we can cope if we meditate on how Jehovah has helped others, rely on him in prayer, and obey him by doing what he asks us to do.​—Ps. 143:1, 4-8. w19.06 17 ¶14-15




Tuesday, September 7

Even if you should suffer for the sake of righteousness, you are happy.​—1 Pet. 3:14.



Never allow anything that mere humans say or do to make you feel ashamed of being one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. (Mic. 4:5) Consider the example set by the apostles in Jerusalem just after Jesus was put to death. They knew how much the Jewish religious leaders hated them. (Acts 5:17, 18, 27, 28) Yet, every day they continued to go to the temple and publicly identify themselves as disciples of Jesus. (Acts 5:42) They refused to cower in fear. We too can defeat our own fear of man by regularly and publicly identifying ourselves as Jehovah’s Witnesses​—at work, at school, and in our neighborhood. (Acts 4:29; Rom. 1:16) Why were the apostles happy? They knew why they were hated, and they considered it an honor to be mistreated for doing Jehovah’s will. (Luke 6:23; Acts 5:41; 1 Pet. 2:19-21) When we understand that we are hated for doing what is right, we will never allow the hatred of men to paralyze us with fear. w19.07 7 ¶19-20




Wednesday, September 8

It is lawful to do a fine thing on the Sabbath.​—Matt. 12:12.



Jesus and his Jewish followers observed the Sabbath because they were under the Mosaic Law. But Jesus showed by word and deed that keeping the Sabbath was to be reasonable and that kind and helpful actions were allowable. (Matt. 12:9-11) He did not view performing kind and helpful actions as a violation of the Sabbath. Jesus’ actions highlighted a key feature of the Sabbath. Because God’s people rested from their daily labor, they were able to focus on spiritual things. Jesus grew up in a family that must have used the Sabbath for spiritual benefit. That is reflected in what we read about Jesus when he was in his hometown of Nazareth: “According to [Jesus’] custom on the Sabbath day, he entered the synagogue and stood up to read.” (Luke 4:15-19) Also, his disciples had so much respect for the Sabbath law that they stopped preparations for Jesus’ burial until the Sabbath day was over.​—Luke 23:55, 56. w19.12 4 ¶10




Thursday, September 9

You had no hope.​—Eph. 2:12.



Every Christian minister is involved in helping to find honesthearted ones. We could liken this work to finding a lost child. In what way? Consider the real-life example of a three-year-old boy who wandered away from home. About 500 people were involved in searching for him. Finally, some 20 hours after the child went missing, a volunteer discovered the little boy in a cornfield. That volunteer refused to take credit for locating the boy. He said: “It took hundreds of people to find him.” Many people are like that child. They feel lost. They have no hope, but they want help. Over eight million of us are involved in trying to find these deserving ones. You may not personally find someone who will study the Bible with you. However, other publishers working the same territory may find someone who wants to learn the truth found in God’s Word. When a brother or sister meets someone who becomes a disciple of Christ, everyone who shared in the search has good reason to rejoice. w19.07 16-17 ¶9-10




Friday, September 10

I am pressing on toward the goal.​—Phil. 3:14.



The apostle Paul reminded the Christians in Philippi of the need to keep running with endurance. The congregation faced hostility from the start. It all began when, in response to the divine invitation to “step over into Macedonia,” Paul and Silas arrived in Philippi about 50 C.E. (Acts 16:9) There they found a woman named Lydia, who “was listening, and Jehovah opened her heart wide” to the good news. (Acts 16:14) She soon got baptized along with her household. However, the Devil was not idle. Men of the city dragged Paul and Silas before the civil magistrates and falsely accused them of causing a disturbance. As a result, Paul and Silas were beaten, imprisoned, and later urged to leave the city. (Acts 16:16-40) Did they give up? Never! And what about the brothers and sisters in the newly formed congregation? Commendably, they too endured! No doubt they were greatly encouraged by the good example that Paul and Silas set for them. w19.08 2 ¶1-2




Saturday, September 11

Be filled with righteous fruit.​—Phil. 1:11.



No doubt this “righteous fruit” included love for Jehovah and his people. That would also include speaking to others about our faith in Jesus and our wonderful hope. We bear “righteous fruit” when we actively share in the most important work of making disciples. (Matt. 28:18-20) No matter what our circumstances, we can shine as illuminators. In some cases, what seems to be an obstacle to declaring the good news may turn out to be an opportunity for us to preach. The apostle Paul, for example, was under house arrest in Rome when he wrote his letter to the Philippians. But his chains did not hold him back from preaching to his captors and to visitors. Paul preached zealously under these circumstances, and this gave the brothers confidence and courage “to speak the word of God fearlessly.”​—Phil. 1:12-14; 4:22. w19.08 12 ¶15-16




Sunday, September 12

Humble yourselves, therefore, under the mighty hand of God, so that he may exalt you in due time.​—1 Pet. 5:6.



The most important reason for us to cultivate humility is that it pleases Jehovah. The apostle Peter made this clear when he wrote the words of today’s text. Commenting on Peter’s words, the book “Come Be My Follower” says in chapter 3, paragraph 23: “Haughtiness is like poison. The effects can be devastating. It is a quality that can render the most gifted human useless to God. Humility, on the other hand, can make even the least one very useful to Jehovah. . . . [He] will . . . delight in rewarding you for your humility.” Really, could we hope for anything better than to bring joy to Jehovah’s heart? (Prov. 23:15) Besides pleasing Jehovah, we receive many benefits when we cultivate humility. Humility draws other people to us. To understand why, put yourself in the shoes of others.​—Matt. 7:12. w19.09 4 ¶8-9




Monday, September 13

Everyone proud in heart is detestable to Jehovah.​—Prov. 16:5.



Elders work hard for the benefit of their brothers and sisters. And they do not let their authority make them unduly proud. Instead, they treat the congregation tenderly. (1 Thess. 2:7, 8) Their deep love and humble attitude affect how they speak to others. Andrew, an experienced elder, says: “I have found that the brothers and sisters generally respond well to an elder’s kindness and genuine warmth. These qualities motivate the congregation to cooperate with the elders.” Another longtime elder, named Tony, comments: “I try to apply the counsel found at Philippians 2:3 and constantly work at viewing others as superior to me. This helps me to avoid acting like a dictator.” Elders must be humble, just as Jehovah is humble. Although Jehovah is the Sovereign of the universe, he “stoops down” to raise “the lowly from the dust.” (Ps. 18:35; 113:6, 7) In fact, Jehovah detests those who are proud and arrogant. w19.09 16-17 ¶11-12




Tuesday, September 14

Take my yoke upon you.​—Matt. 11:29.



To find refreshment under Jesus’ yoke, we must keep the right perspective. We are doing Jehovah’s work, so it must be done Jehovah’s way. We are the workers, and Jehovah is the Master. (Luke 17:10) If we try to do his work our way, we will find ourselves fighting against the yoke. On the other hand, we can do extraordinary things and overcome any obstacle if we follow Jehovah’s guidance. Remember that nobody can stop his will from being accomplished! (Rom. 8:31; 1 John 4:4) Our goal is to bring glory to our loving Father, Jehovah. Those in the first century who were motivated by greed or self-interest soon became unhappy and abandoned Jesus’ yoke. (John 6:25-27, 51, 60, 66; Phil. 3:18, 19) By contrast, those who were motivated by an unselfish love of God and love of neighbor happily carried that yoke throughout their life on earth, with the prospect of serving with Christ in heaven. Like them, we will remain happy by carrying Jesus’ yoke with the right motive. w19.09 20 ¶1; 24-25 ¶19-20




Wednesday, September 15

You will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.​—John 8:32.



Think of the blessings you enjoy because you have been liberated from long-held unscriptural beliefs. What a joy to have such freedom! You can expect greater freedom to come. In the near future, Jesus will act decisively to eliminate false religion and corrupt human rulership. God will protect “a great crowd” who serve him, and then he will allow them to enjoy blessings in an earthly paradise. (Rev. 7:9, 14) A vast number will be resurrected and will have the opportunity to be liberated from all the effects of Adam’s sin. (Acts 24:15) During the Thousand Year Reign, Jesus and his corulers will help to raise mankind to perfect physical and spiritual health. This time of restoration and liberation will be like the Jubilee in Israel. The result for all on earth who serve Jehovah loyally will be human perfection, free from sin. w19.12 12-13 ¶14-16




Thursday, September 16

Barnabas came to his aid.​—Acts 9:27.



In the first century C.E., a generous man named Joseph (surnamed Barnabas) made himself available to be used by Jehovah. (Acts 4:36, 37) After Saul became a believer, many of the brothers were afraid to approach him because of his reputation as a persecutor of the congregations. However, warmhearted Barnabas came to Saul’s aid. (Acts 9:21, 26-28) Later, the elders in Jerusalem saw the need to provide encouragement to the brothers as far as Antioch of Syria. Whom did they send? Barnabas! They chose well. We are told that Barnabas “began to encourage them all to continue in the Lord with heartfelt resolve.” (Acts 11:22-24) Likewise today, Jehovah can help us to become a “son of comfort” to fellow Christians. For example, he might use us to comfort those who have lost loved ones in death. Or he may move us to visit or make a phone call to someone who is sick or depressed to share a few kind words. Will you allow Jehovah to use you as he did Barnabas?​—1 Thess. 5:14. w19.10 22 ¶8




Friday, September 17

Whoever forgives a transgression seeks love, but the one who keeps harping on a matter separates close friends.​—Prov. 17:9.



Sometimes when we work closely with our friends, we become aware not only of their strengths but also of their weaknesses. What can help us deal with this challenge? Realistically, we cannot expect perfection from our brothers and sisters. Therefore, once we have formed close friendships, we need to work hard at keeping those newly formed bonds alive. If our friends make a mistake, we may need to give kind but frank counsel based on God’s Word. (Ps. 141:5) And if they hurt us, we need to forgive them. Once we have forgiven them, we must avoid the temptation to bring the offense up again in the future. How vital it is during these critical times to focus on the strengths of our brothers and sisters rather than on their weaknesses! Doing so strengthens the bond we share with them, and we will need close friends during the great tribulation. w19.11 6 ¶13, 16




Saturday, September 18

Make disciples of people of all the nations, . . . teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you.​—Matt. 28:19, 20.



As we conduct Bible studies, we have to try our best to “make disciples . . . , teaching them to observe all the things [Jesus has] commanded.” We need to help people understand how important it is for them to take their stand for Jehovah and his Kingdom. This means trying to motivate people to make the truth their own by applying what they learn, dedicating their life to Jehovah, and getting baptized. Only then will they survive Jehovah’s day. (1 Pet. 3:21) There is very little time between now and the end of this system of things. For this reason, we cannot afford to keep studying the Bible with people who have no clear intention of becoming Christ’s disciples. (1 Cor. 9:26) Our work is urgent! There are many people who have yet to hear the Kingdom message before it is too late. w19.10 11-12 ¶14-15




Sunday, September 19

He will . . . put the incense on the fire before Jehovah.​—Lev. 16:13.



On the yearly Day of Atonement, the nation of Israel came together and animal sacrifices were offered up. Those sacrifices helped to remind the Israelites that they needed to be cleansed of sin! First, though, the high priest had the task of pouring holy incense onto fiery coals and filling the room with a sweet-smelling aroma. What can we learn from that? The Bible indicates that the acceptable prayers of Jehovah’s faithful worshippers are like incense. (Ps. 141:2; Rev. 5:8) It was with great respect that the high priest brought the incense into the presence of Jehovah. Similarly, when we approach Jehovah in prayer, we do so with deep respect. We are in awe of him. We deeply appreciate that our Creator allows us to approach him and draw close to him, as a child to a father. (Jas. 4:8) He accepts us as his friends! (Ps. 25:14) We appreciate this privilege so much that we would never want to disappoint him. w19.11 20-21 ¶3-5




Monday, September 20

How many your works are, O Jehovah! You have made all of them in wisdom. The earth is full of what you have made.​—Ps. 104:24.



How do most people where you live view work? In many countries, people are working harder and longer than ever before. Overworked people are often too busy to rest, to spend time with their families, or to satisfy their spiritual need. (Eccl. 2:23) On the other hand, some people do not like to work at all and make excuses for not working. (Prov. 26:13, 14) In contrast with the world’s unbalanced attitudes, consider the way that Jehovah and Jesus view work. There is no question that Jehovah is a worker. Jesus made that clear, saying: “My Father has kept working until now, and I keep working.” (John 5:17) Think of all the work God did as he created countless spirit creatures and the vast universe. We also see ample evidence of God’s creative works on the beautiful earth where we live. w19.12 2 ¶1-2




Tuesday, September 21

I have found David . . . a man agreeable to my heart.​—Acts 13:22.



How did David come to be so close to Jehovah? David learned about Jehovah from creation. When David was young, he spent many hours outdoors, caring for his father’s sheep. Perhaps it was then that he began to meditate on the things Jehovah had made. For example, as David gazed up at night, not only would he have seen a canopy of stars but he would also have discerned the qualities of the One who made them. (Ps. 19:1, 2) When David reflected on the way humans were made, he saw Jehovah’s wonderful wisdom at work. (Ps. 139:14) As David tried to comprehend Jehovah’s works, he felt humbled. (Ps. 139:6) What is the lesson for us? In your daily life, meditate on what the creation around you​—the plants, animals, and people—​teaches you about Jehovah. Then each new day will be full of lessons about your loving Father. (Rom. 1:20) And each day you will see your love for him grow more intense. w19.12 19-20 ¶15-17




Wednesday, September 22

By faith Moses, when grown up, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh’s daughter.​—Heb. 11:24.



Moses acted on what he learned. When he was about 40 years old, Moses chose to associate with God’s people, the Hebrews, rather than to be known as “the son of Pharaoh’s daughter.” Moses gave up a prominent position. By siding with the Hebrews, who were slaves in Egypt, he risked the wrath of Pharaoh, a powerful ruler who was viewed as a god. What an outstanding act of faith! Moses trusted in Jehovah. Such trust is a foundation stone of a lasting relationship. (Prov. 3:5) What is the lesson for us? Like Moses, all of us have a decision to make: Will we choose to serve God and associate with his people? We may have to make sacrifices to serve God, and we risk being opposed by those who do not know Jehovah. But if we trust in our heavenly Father, we can count on his support! w19.12 17 ¶5-6




Thursday, September 23

Jehovah God went on to form the man out of dust from the ground and to blow into his nostrils the breath of life.​—Gen. 2:7.



Even though we are made from the dust of the earth, we are worth far more than a handful of dirt. Consider just some of the reasons why we know that we are valuable to Jehovah. He created humans with the ability to reflect his qualities. (Gen. 1:27) In doing so, he elevated us above the rest of physical creation, putting us in charge of the earth and the animals. (Ps. 8:4-8) Even after Adam sinned, Jehovah continued to value humans. He values us so highly that he gave his beloved Son, Jesus, as a ransom for our sins. (1 John 4:9, 10) Applying the benefits of the ransom, Jehovah will resurrect those who have died as a result of Adam’s sin, “both the righteous and the unrighteous.” (Acts 24:15) His Word shows that we are precious to him no matter what our health condition, financial situation, or age may be.​—Acts 10:34, 35. w20.01 15 ¶5-6




Friday, September 24

Mind your own business.​—1 Thess. 4:11.



A person does not inherit his heavenly hope from his family. He receives it from God. (1 Thess. 2:12) So avoid asking questions that could hurt others. For example, we would not ask the wife of an anointed brother how she feels about the prospect of living forever on earth without her husband. After all, we can be absolutely sure that in the new world, Jehovah will “satisfy the desire of every living thing.” (Ps. 145:16) If we do not treat anointed ones as more important than others, we also protect ourselves. How? The Bible tells us that some anointed ones might not remain faithful. (Matt. 25:10-12; 2 Pet. 2:20, 21) But if we avoid “admiring personalities,” we will never follow others, even those who are anointed or well-known or those who have served Jehovah for a long time. (Jude 16, ftn.) Then, if they become unfaithful or leave the congregation, we will not lose our faith in Jehovah or stop serving him. w20.01 29 ¶9-10




Saturday, September 25

Become imitators of God, as beloved children.​—Eph. 5:1.



As Jehovah’s “beloved children,” we do our best to imitate him. We imitate his qualities by being loving, kind, and forgiving in our dealings with others. When those who do not know God see our fine conduct, they may be motivated to learn more about him. (1 Pet. 2:12) Christian parents have good reason to imitate Jehovah in the way they treat their children. When they do, their children may want to form their own friendship with our loving Father. We are proud of our heavenly Father, Jehovah, and want others to come to know him. In our heart, we all feel as did King David, who wrote: “I will boast in Jehovah.” (Ps. 34:2) What, though, if we are timid? How can we become bold? We grow bold when we focus on how happy we can make Jehovah and how much others will benefit from learning about him. Jehovah will give us the courage we need. He helped our first-century brothers to become bold, and he will help us too.​—1 Thess. 2:2. w20.02 11 ¶12-13




Sunday, September 26

Go, therefore, and make disciples . . . , baptizing them.​—Matt. 28:19.



Many who study the Bible progress to baptism. However, some who regularly study the Bible with us seem reluctant to become disciples. They enjoy their studies, but they are not progressing to baptism. If you are conducting a Bible study, we are sure that you want to help your student to apply what he learns and to become a disciple of Christ. Jehovah wants people to serve him because they love him. So our goal is to help our students to understand that Jehovah cares deeply about them as individuals and that he loves them very much. We want to help them to see Jehovah as “a father of the fatherless and a protector of widows.” (Ps. 68:5) As your students come to appreciate God’s love for them, their heart will likely be touched and their own love for him will grow. So help your students to understand that our loving God wants them to gain everlasting life, and he is ready to help them to achieve that goal. w20.01 3 ¶7-8




Monday, September 27

I received much joy and comfort on hearing of your love.​—Philem. 7.



The apostle Paul was humble, so he sought and received encouragement from his friends. He did not worry about being viewed as a weak person if he acknowledged that he had been comforted by others during times of distress. (Col. 4:7-11) When we humbly acknowledge that we need encouragement, our brothers and sisters will gladly give us the support we need. Paul knew that the Scriptures would comfort him. (Rom. 15:4) They would also give him wisdom to face any trial. (2 Tim. 3:15, 16) When imprisoned in Rome for the second time, Paul felt that his death was near. He asked Timothy to come to him quickly and bring “the scrolls.” (2 Tim. 4:6, 7, 9, 13) Why? Because those scrolls were likely portions of the Hebrew Scriptures that Paul could use in his personal Bible study. When we imitate Paul by regularly studying God’s Word, Jehovah will use the Scriptures to soothe us​—no matter what trials we face. w20.02 23-24 ¶14-15




Tuesday, September 28

Stop judging that you may not be judged.​—Matt. 7:1.



Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar did not spend their time thinking about how they could help Job. Instead, they were thinking about how they could prove that Job had done something wrong. They made some accurate statements, but much of what they said about Job and about Jehovah was either unkind or untrue. They judged Job harshly. (Job 32:1-3) How did Jehovah respond? His anger burned hot against those three men. He called them foolish and made them ask Job to pray for them. (Job 42:7-9) We learn a number of lessons from the bad examples set by Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar. First, we should not judge our brothers. (Matt. 7:2-5) Instead, we should listen carefully to them before we speak. Only then will we be able to understand their situation. (1 Pet. 3:8) Second, when we do speak, we must make sure that our words are kind and our statements accurate. (Eph. 4:25) And third, Jehovah takes a keen interest in what we say to one another. w20.03 22-23 ¶15-16




Wednesday, September 29

Carry on prayer on every occasion.​—Eph. 6:18.



It is often when we are teaching others about Jehovah that we ourselves come to know him better. For example, we see direct evidence of Jehovah’s compassion when he guides us to those who have the right heart condition. (John 6:44; Acts 13:48) We see the power of God’s Word at work as we watch those with whom we study break free from bad habits and begin to put on the new personality. (Col. 3:9, 10) And we see proof of God’s patience as he gives many in our territory numerous opportunities to learn about him and be saved. (Rom. 10:13-15) However, no matter how long we have been serving Jehovah, we should never take our relationship with him for granted. One of the most obvious ways we can prove that we value our friendship with God is by talking to him in prayer. Good communication is the lifeblood of a strong relationship. So draw close to God by praying often, never being afraid to express your innermost thoughts to him. w19.12 19 ¶11, 13-14




Thursday, September 30

Your sins have been forgiven.​—1 John 2:12.



What relief that thought brings to us! As King of God’s Kingdom, Jesus will undo any damage Satan and his system may inflict on us. (Isa. 65:17; 1 John 3:8; Rev. 21:3, 4) What hope that inspires in us! And even though Jesus has given us a challenging assignment, he is with us, supporting us through the last days of this system. (Matt. 28:19, 20) What courage that builds in us! Relief, hope, and courage​—these are some of the solid foundation stones on which our peace of mind is built. How, then, can you retain your peace of mind when you are shaken by severe trials? You can do so by imitating the things Jesus did. First, pray and persist in prayer. Second, obey Jehovah and preach zealously even when it is difficult to do so. And third, look to your friends to help you through trials. Then the peace of God will guard your mind and heart. (Phil. 4:6, 7) And like Jesus, you will conquer any trial.​—John 16:33. w19.04 13 ¶16-17




