Remaining Fearless to the Accomplished End
TROUBLES and calamities have come upon this generation like a torrential downpour, flooding and overwhelming earth’s inhabitants with great fears. But the torturing memory of past troubles is not as great for them to bear as the fear of the future. Amid such world perplexity and distress, faithful Christians are faced with other fearful problems, for as “the children of light” they are intensely persecuted by the wicked elements of this dark, satanic world. Darkness hates the light. (John 3:19-21; 12:36) Nevertheless Jehovah counsels his people not to be discouraged or frightened.a
There is good reason why God’s people are told to be fearless. They are sent to a stiff-necked, hardhearted and rebellious people, to Christendom and her allies, and to these they are commanded to declare God’s message of warning, not diminishing a word of it. (Ezek. 2:1-8) The time is short, the final end of this system of things is near; consequently there is no time for hesitation, timidity or inactivity. For the Lord’s people to draw back, soft-pedal, or fearfully quail before the enemy would eventually mean their destruction. “The fear of man bringeth a snare; but whoso putteth his trust in Jehovah shall be safe.” Fear is an expression of selfishness, whereas “there is no fear in love, but perfect love throws fear outside”.—Prov. 29:25, AS; 1 John 4:18, NW.
Fear prevents progress, brings stagnation, cripples activity, and enslaves the mind in a state of anxiety and worry. The truth, on the other hand, sets one free from such fears. It is therefore love for Jehovah God and love for his precious Word of truth that will free the servants of God from the fears of this troubled atomic age. Hence, it is most important that you meet together for regular study of the Bible with the Lord’s people. Your love for God is proved by your works of love. Consequently, have a share with Jehovah’s witnesses in giving this final testimony to the people of all nations before the final war of Armageddon breaks.
And as you go forward and engage in proclaiming the glad news to others that the theocratic kingdom is man’s only hope, do not go in your own strength or power. No one is so strong he can stand up by himself against the onslaughts of the demons. Stay close to the Lord and his organization. Look and pray to him for grace and strength. Remember what the prophet wrote: “The everlasting God, Jehovah, . . . fainteth not, neither is weary; there is no searching of his understanding. He giveth power to the faint; and to him that hath no might he increaseth strength. . . . they that wait for Jehovah shall renew their strength.” Remember what the apostle says: “My God will fully supply all your need to the extent of his riches in glory by means of Christ Jesus.” Remember what the Almighty himself says: “Fear thou not, for I am with thee; be not dismayed, for I am thy God; I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee.” Therefore, “Jehovah of hosts, him shall ye sanctify; and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread.”—Isa. 8:13; 40:28, 29, 31; 41:10, AS; Phil. 4:19, NW.
What an unspeakable reward will go to those remaining fearless to the end! Not only will they see the wicked completely destroyed, but they will also live on into the new world free of all fears and troubles.
[Footnotes]
This subject is discussed at great length in The Watchtower, March 15, 1950.

