Champions of Kingdom Truth Assemble
JEHOVAH’S people are champions of kingdom truth. In it they take great delight. Moreover, they always rejoice when they are invited to some special gathering sponsored by the Watch Tower Society, for they know that it will be a season of fellowship, encouragement and sound counsel. The “Kingdom Truth” District Conventions of 1982 are surely bearing this out.
Kingdom Truth Emphasized
While assembling and getting settled for the Thursday afternoon opening session, expectation grew as the delegates looked over the printed program and observed the many vital topics that would be discussed. In fact, that entire afternoon “Truth” was to be highlighted​—not just truth in general but, rather, “Kingdom Truth,” embodying the purposes of Jehovah God with respect to man, the earth, the entire universe and His own grand Name.
So emphasis was laid on knowing the truth and acting in full harmony with that knowledge. True, it is necessary to gain an accurate knowledge of the elementary teachings of the Bible, but the aim is to enable Jehovah’s worshipers to teach these effectively to people encountered in the house-to-house preaching work. How important, too, to appreciate that Jehovah is the one God of truth, the very source of all truth, and that he is opposed by wicked invisible enemies who use many subtle tactics to turn men away from God and righteousness! The audience particularly appreciated learning about the stealthy, gradual methods employed by the Devil and his agents as they seek to erode our faith.
How to fight against those wicked spirits and win received due attention on the program. We must all realize that the enemy seeks to promote the spirit of selfish independence, me-ism, and also to entrap us in sexual immorality. We need to know and love God and have hatred for things he hates. If we bear his name, then we certainly will not want to bring reproach upon him or upon his congregation of loyal witnesses. Above all, we need to draw upon his strength through earnest prayer, and we need to keep close to his protective visible organization.
The keynote address of the convention pointed up the vital issue upon which each person must sooner or later take his stand. The choice is either Satan, his demon hosts and all his worldly organizations with their propaganda or Jehovah the Almighty Sovereign and his grand promises that will be fulfilled by his kingdom. The settlement of that issue is due shortly. There is no middle ground. Immediate and positive action can assure us of protection and blessings from Jehovah.
Ministers of Kingdom Truth
That was the theme of the program for Friday, and it surely helped each one to realize that Jehovah’s will is for us to be ministers of his kingdom, declaring that kingdom from house to house and thus qualifying still others to join us in such a privileged ministry. In view of the urgency of the time in which we live, it behooves all of us to seek ways and means of increasing our share in this God-given service, whether as part-time or as full-time publishers. Some demonstrations showed how earnest consideration can be given to the need for enlarging our “sacred service” as individuals and family groups.​—Romans 12:1.
During this afternoon all of Jehovah’s ministers were warned that the enemies to be on guard against are not only those obvious ones ‘on the outside’ but those who profess to be of us yet who craftily seek to weaken our faith and service. Said the speaker: “These convey the thought that, since Jehovah is such a loving God, all that he wants us to do is to be good persons, care for others in a physical way and love our neighbors.” Viewpoints like these can be dangerous, for they do not take into account the command laid upon each one of Christ’s followers, namely: “Go therefore and make disciples of people of all the nations.”​—Matthew 28:19.
Some question the need for an organization and claim that all a person needs to do is read the Bible for himself. The rank inconsistency of this position is to be observed when such ones proceed to set up their own organization and follow their own prescribed course of study, based on human wisdom.
When we are faced with such negative and opposing arguments, the counsel of the Holy Scriptures is clear: Let them be. Avoid them. Move ahead with your precious ministry. (Matthew 15:14; Romans 16:17, 18) To dispute publicly with those causing divisions would be displaying a lack of good judgment. Each of us should do his part in helping the household of faith to keep the right attitude toward those who would defame Jehovah, his organization and his organized people. The kingdom proclamation will be completed successfully, for Christ Jesus promised to be with his servants “all the days until the conclusion of the system of things.”​—Matthew 28:20.
The drama presented on Friday left few persons dry-eyed. How they were moved by observing the role that well-instructed children can have in helping uninterested ones to revise their thinking and recognize the value of accepting and following God’s counsel!
It was most appropriate that after all this fine coverage of “Ministers of Kingdom Truth” we had the opportunity to spend some time in house-to-house preaching early that evening. Many publishers later reported with joy on the good reception that was accorded them by householders. As one publisher said: “It was a satisfying conclusion of a day spent in considering our glorious ministry.”
Living by Principles of Truth
That was the theme of Saturday’s program, a theme that stressed the practical application of the things we were learning at this convention. As champions of kingdom truth, we must live by the principles of that truth.
Following the consideration of the text for the day, we enjoyed a symposium by three speakers setting forth God’s requirements for young and old, children and parents. Conducting the affairs of the family in harmony with Jehovah’s principles was seen to be the way of success. Love, a cardinal attribute of true Christians, makes it possible for children and parents to cooperate harmoniously.​—John 13:34, 35.
By discourses and demonstrations we received timely reminders of the danger of permissiveness. It has opened the door to many problems and difficulties and must be met with firm adherence to Bible principles. Hence, there has to be a tightening up on many aspects of our Christian lives. While this places restrictions on us, it was seen that in this way many very trying situations were either avoided or handled successfully.
One subject that received special attention was that of music. We learned that music can exalt the spirits or it can debase. It has been used to inculcate Satanism and immorality. The Christian, therefore, must be just as careful about what he listens to as he is regarding what he watches on the TV screen.
Saturday’s sessions were concluded by the exciting talk “The Truth That Leads to an Earthly Paradise.” The speaker reminded us of the fact that Christ Jesus pointed to the kingdom and an earthly paradise. For instance, Christ testified before Pilate that He was indeed a king and was sent forth to bear witness to that truth. Then, after the wrongdoer hanging on a stake alongside him said, “Jesus, remember me when you get into your kingdom,” Jesus replied: “Truly I tell you today, You will be with me in Paradise.” (Luke 23:42, 43; John 18:36, 37) And to those who love God and righteousness today, how real is the hope of living forever in the earthly paradise!
Holding Fast to Prophetic Truth
An early speaker on the program Sunday morning pointed out that today we are faced with a condition similar to that which faced Christians in the first century. There were those who wanted to go back to beggarly, elementary things involving philosophy of men and arguments over words​—things not upbuilding nor having to do with the gaining of salvation. (Galatians 4:9) The present-day dangers include allowing a desire for more than the necessities of life to take hold and absorb our thoughts and our time; seeking worldly entertainment, often unclean and also time-consuming; toying with sexual immorality with its many perils. Everlasting life depends on our holding fast to the truth and the way of the truth. Some long-time active champions of kingdom truth were interviewed for the benefit of all present. Their experiences showed that it is possible to remain loyal to Jehovah and his principles even in the face of trials and difficulties.
Next came the discourse entitled “Flocking Together in Battle Line,” drawing upon the scripture at 1 Chronicles 12:38. As the speaker dwelt on the fact that Christians are in a warfare and are expected to prove faithful as soldiers of Jesus Christ, enduring hardship and maintaining unity in the ranks, a clear battle call was sounded out. Since our enrollment in the Lord’s army, particularly from the time of our dedication and baptism, every other activity of life should be subordinated to our service of Jehovah’s great Field Commander, Jesus Christ. Like our Leader and Commander we must keep ever in mind that the sacred name of our God and Maker is involved in this war.
Since ours is a spiritual warfare, our weapons also are spiritual but “powerful by God for overturning strongly entrenched things,” such as vain human philosophies, things contrary to the Word of truth, crafty teachings of demons and appeals to put our personal comfort and well-being ahead of the service of Jehovah. (2 Corinthians 10:4) As the speaker wisely observed: “Surely we cannot doubt that Jehovah’s Field Marshal is fully equal to the job of caring for those he has enrolled in his army! If we are burdened and anxious about material needs, is it not an urgent reminder to cast our burdens upon Jehovah and Christ?” Our flocking together in battle line means that we are closely cooperating with the one visible organization that Jehovah is using today. Each one of us must be well equipped and active in supporting the spiritual campaign as directed by the Leader, Christ.
The morning program was then concluded with another striking drama. It portrayed the fearless service of the prophet Jeremiah as he proclaimed over many years a message that was unpopular with the vast majority of his contemporaries, including the king, the princes and the false prophets. As we witnessed Jeremiah unflinchingly facing threats and violence while encouraging others to remain loyal to Jehovah, was it not a powerful reminder that Jehovah’s people today are called upon to persist faithfully in proclaiming to this whole world under Satan the message of Jehovah’s fast-approaching judgments, a message that is truly unpopular? However, we have the joy of knowing that, as a result of our loyal service, multitudes will be saved from a doomed generation and will experience safety and survival into God’s new system of things.
The public lecture on the subject “The Truth That Can Set You Free” was scheduled early in the afternoon. A large, expectant audience was on hand as the speaker marshaled fact after fact to demonstrate that this world’s rulers and prominent men can abolish neither poverty, violence nor insecurity. He went on to point out from the Holy Scriptures that Jehovah, the Omnipotent God, has promised, and is well able to do, all of this and much more. Jehovah will remove all causes for mourning and tears, also abolishing the sickness, pain and death resulting from our inheritance from sinner Adam. More than that, He will cause the return from death of multitudes who will be given opportunity for life everlasting on a paradisaic earth.
Next, there was a brief review of the satisfying spiritual banquet that Jehovah had spread for us at this “Kingdom Truth” District Convention. Surely, our cup of blessing from Jehovah was overflowing! And with what result? We were ready then for the concluding talk that urged all of us to continue on with the proclamation of kingdom truth as long as Jehovah keeps the way open. We know we are on the right track. Our ranks are cleansed of faultfinders, complainers and independent ones. Now Jehovah is blessing us with increase, as we can observe from the reports coming in from around the world. More publishers are devoting more hours to the field ministry. Many more are engaging in auxiliary and full-time pioneer activity. Bible studies conducted in the homes of newly interested ones have increased dramatically. There is no doubt about the clear direction given us by Jehovah’s spirit and his organization.
As we departed from the convention sites and set out for our home congregations, were we not overwhelmed with the conviction that Jehovah and his King, Christ Jesus, have been with us? Are we not convinced that they have supplied us generously so that we are well equipped to move forward unitedly with the proclamation of the good news as champions of kingdom truth? All praise and glory to the God who is abundant in righteousness and truth!
[Pictures on page 22]
Christian children can persuade!
True! God’s name is Jehovah
A former opposer points out the Name
[Pictures on page 23]
Jeremiah beaten by opposers
. . . in the stocks
. . . rescued from the miry pit
[Picture on page 24]
Ordination of ministers by baptism
[Picture on page 25]
Special seating arrangements for older ones
[Picture on page 26]
Convenient food service

