Will You Ever Live in a Happy World?
THOSE who prove to be lovers of God​—“his people”—​have sound reasons to plan on living in a happy world. (Romans 15:10) Though the immediate future seems so bleak for the world of mankind, the God of heaven is having his “glorious good news” declared earth wide, and it is a heartening message indeed. (1 Timothy 1:11) Soon now, the long-promised heavenly kingdom of the Messianic King Jesus Christ will reverse the foreboding trends so evident on earth today and will eliminate the problems that now plague humanity. That kingdom is about to usher in a happy world.
What the Kingdom Will Do
Is there concern about the overpopulating of the earth? That will not get out of hand for either Jehovah God or the King Jesus Christ. God originally purposed that humans should “fill the earth,” not overfill it. By whatever means accomplished, we can be sure that the divine will in this matter will take place on earth.​—Genesis 1:27, 28; Isaiah 45:18.
Under the rule of God’s kingdom, will there be a distressing gap between the rich and the poor? No, indeed! Rather, it was reliably foretold in the Scriptures that God’s benevolent King “will deliver the poor one crying for help.”​—Psalm 72:1, 12, 13.
Are there grounds for despair over dwindling resources and the environment’s loss of “life-supporting capabilities”? Need we despair because prices are rising clear out of range for the average person? While the immediate future bodes little good along these lines, God’s Word, the Bible, promises: “There will come to be plenty of grain on the earth; on the top of the mountains there will be an overflow.” (Psalm 72:16) Does that sound like an earth bereft of resources, with an environment lacking essential “life-supporting capabilities”? Or does that Scriptural promise indicate such a lack of necessities that a satisfying life would be impossible on earth? Of course it does not.
Under kingdom rule, will the world be “more vulnerable both to natural disaster and to disruptions from human causes”? No, for soon God will ‘make wars to cease’ forever. Moreover, under kingdom administration the deserts will blossom, and harmful things no longer will threaten health and life. Unbounded happiness will replace hardship and grief.​—Compare Psalm 46:1, 9; Isaiah 35:1-10; 65:25.
Something New on the Horizon
Among the many heartening prophecies foretelling marvelous blessings for humankind is the one recorded by the Christian apostle John in these words:
“I saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the former heaven and the former earth had passed away, and the sea is no more. I saw also the holy city, New Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God and prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. With that I heard a loud voice from the throne say: ‘Look! The tent of God is with mankind, and he will reside with them, and they will be his peoples. And God himself will be with them. And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.’”​—Revelation 21:1-4.
Here some of the language is highly symbolic, but the idea of great blessings is unmistakable. The “new heaven” is the heavenly kingdom of Jesus Christ and his 144,000 associate kings and priests. (Romans 8:16, 17; Revelation 14:1-4; 20:4) Instead of a new earthly globe, the “new earth” is a new society of people on this very earth, all of them fully subject to Christ’s kingdom without racial, national or language divisions. (Compare Psalm 96:1.) This will follow the destruction of the present symbolic “heaven” and “earth.” The promised new earthly society will be righteous because, whereas the literal seas will remain, the figurative “sea” of restless, rebellious, ungodly people will exist no longer. Christ’s associate heavenly rulers constitute the “New Jerusalem,” a capital organization for righteous human society. God will tent with these people on earth representatively until they are fully reconciled with him through Christ, “the Lamb of God,” after a thousand year judgment day.​—John 1:29, 36; Revelation 20:6.
Under kingdom rule, many will be the reasons for happiness. Mourning, outcry and pain due to various causes will be taken away. Death that spread from sinful Adam, the first man, will be no more. (Romans 5:12) What a monumental worldwide cause for tears will thus have vanished! And what reasons for gladness will exist when resurrections occur instead of deaths due to Adam, when his offspring have been rescued from the effects of his sin, and when perfect human health has replaced the many ills now plaguing mankind! Then, indeed, will “the former things have passed away.”
‘Mere wishful thinking!’ someone might exclaim. Not so, for after the apostle John beheld the “new heaven” and the “new earth” that will result in great blessings for mankind, he added: “And the One seated on the throne [Jehovah God] said: ‘Look! I am making all things new.’ Also, he says: ‘Write, because these words are faithful and true.’” (Revelation 21:5) Yes, we can believe them.
Truly, a different world is on the horizon. Its existence will not depend on human changes in “public policy” designed to rescue mankind from the dire consequences of “lost opportunities.” No, but all the good things promised in the Scriptures depend on the carrying out of the irresistible, ever-successful divine will.
Happiness That Can Be Yours
Who will enjoy all these blessings from God? For whom will there be unending reason for happiness? Why, for all who avail themselves of God’s provision for eternal life! This marvelous blessing has been made possible by Jehovah, the ‘God of love,’ through his Son, Jesus Christ.​—1 John 4:8, 9; John 3:16.
It is “good news” of such grand things that Jehovah’s Witnesses endeavor to share with all honest-hearted persons. That is why they witness from house to house in the manner of Jesus’ apostles and his other disciples. (Acts 5:42; 20:20) Doubtless you can see why the Witnesses are moved to declare the joyous kingdom message with zeal and gladness of heart. It is such marvelously good news! But what will you do about such heartening news? It is possible for you to enjoy endless life in happiness on a paradise earth under kingdom rule. However, this requires accurate knowledge of the Bible. So, if you have not yet done so, why not take advantage of your opportunities to discuss the Scriptures with Jehovah’s Witnesses? Jesus said that taking in accurate knowledge of his heavenly Father and himself “means everlasting life.”​—John 17:3.
A happy world is just ahead. But right now you can have sound reasons to be glad. Not all blessings from God or causes for gladness are to be realized only in the future. At the present time it is possible to ‘serve Jehovah with a joyful heart,’ and if we please God there is no doubt that ‘we can rejoice during all our days.’ Learn why by reading the articles on pages eight through nineteen.

