Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., NOVEMBER 15,1917 


No. 22 


THE PRICE OF EXALTATION 

'Be clothed with humility; for God reaisteth the proud and giveth grace to the humble. Humble yourselves therefore under 
the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time." — 1 Peter 5:5, 6. 

Now He has come, and the kingdom is being inaugurated. Many 
have already been exalted, while others are patiently waiting 
the day of their glorification. The latter must shortly finish 
their course. The time of the exaltation of the last members 
of the body of Ohrist is drawing nigh; hence the importance 
of the words of St. Peter in our text. All truly consecrated 
desire exaltation; therefore the importance of learning well 
the rules, that pertain to the heavenly way. 

THE MAJESTY OF JEHOVAH GOD 

True humility is that condition of mind or heart which 
causes one to have a proper appreciation of his own worth and 
tho worth of others, and to realize the value to himself of the 
robe of Christ's righteousness. It is that condition of mind 
which impels one always to keep the Lord in view and himself 
out of sight. All who have the robe of Christ's righteousness 
received it only after a full consecration to give up self-will 
and to do the will of God. To continue in such position of 


Who would dare, without divine authorization, to entertain
 a hope of membership in the royal family of heaven ! Yet 
not only is this hope held out to some, but such is the positive 
promise of Jehovah to those who, having been called to that 
high position and begotten of the holy Spirit of God, meet 
the requirements, continuing faithful unto death. The nearer 
we come to the time of exaltation, the greater is the thrill in 
contemplating the marvelous change. 

The Gospel age is closing with the greatest events of all 
time. The grave import of this hour will never be fully realized 
and appreciated until it is passed; indeed, it cannot be. For 
nearly nineteen hundred years the school of Christ has been in 
operation ; and during this time God has been inviting some 
to enter this school, with the promise of full graduation and 
exaltation to those who truly learn the lesBona,that are therein 
taught, In times past some faithful one* have made progress 
in tins school, have finished their course, have been approved, 
graduated, and set aside to. await the coming of the great King. 


[6166] 


November 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(339-340) 


favor, one must continue to be submissive to the will of the 
heavenly Father. 

False humility is that condition of mind or heart which 
causes one to make an outward ^how of humility to the world, 
whereas in reality there is pride in I113 heart. Some deceive 
themselves in this very respect. 

The hand is a symbol of power. In this text, the "Hand of 
God 51 symbolizes the mighty power of God, lovingly exercised 
in behalf of his children. 

But why should any one humble himself? Is not every 
intelligent creature endowed with free moral agency, with the 
privilege of doing according to his own will? Even so! Is 
not the creature's will his chief asset? To this we also agree. 
Why, then, should we be asked to humble ourselves under the 
mighty hand of God? Who is God that we should surrender 
our wills to him? The correct answer to this question shows 
why it is for the best interests of each one to submit his will 
to the will of God, and walk humbly before him. 

The Scriptures answer that God is the great "First Cause" 
of all things, the "Eternal One," the "Immortal One." "Justice 
and Judgment are the habitation of his throne." (Psalm 89:14) 
He changes not; for he is "the Father of lights, with whom 
is no variableness, neither shadow of turning.*' (James 1:17) 
He never fails in any of his good promises. All of his promises 
are good. All of his works are perfect. 

His wisdom is perfect. He made the planets, the moon, 
the sun, the stars, and has so nicely balanced each one of these 
myriads of heavenly bodies that they move through Bpace 
without noise or hindrance. Of him the Prophet declares that 
he "measures the waters of the deep in his hand and metes out 
the heavens with the span; he comprehends the dust of the 
earth in a measure, and weighs the mountains in scales, and 
the hills in a balance; he takes counsel with no one, and no 
one instructs him or shows him what is understanding." 
(Isaiah 40:12-14) When King David caught a slight glimpse 
of the creation of God, in worshipful adoration he exclaimed, 
"0 Lord, how manifold are thy works; in wisdom hast thou 
made them all; the earth is full of thy riches!" (Psalm 
104:24) Jehovah God is so wise that he never makes a mistake
. He cannot err. His will is always right and perfect. 

The power of Jehovah is without limitation. We behold
 a mighty ship tossed by the raging waves of the sea, as 
though it were a little shell ; and we marvel at the power exhibited
. Then we are reminded that it was God who made the 
seas and shut the doors thereof, until in his own due time he 
was pleased to have the waters break forth from the heavens. 
"Thou rulest the raging of the sea; when the waves thereof 
arise, Thou stillest them. . , 1 . Thou hast a mighty arm; 
strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand." (Psalm 89:9, 
13) "Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are 
counted as the small dust of the balance: behold, he takoth 
up the isles as a very little thing. . . . All nations before him 
are as nothing: and they are counted to him less than nothing, 
and vanity." — Isaiah 40:15, 17. 

In the exercise of his power, according to his own good 
pleasure and in his own due time, God created the earth as 
a place for the habitation of his intelligent human creature, 
man. The angelic hosts of heaven watched the progressive acts 
of the great Creator; and when he laid the foundations of the 
earth, a thrill of ecstasy pervaded heaven, the morning stars 
sang together and all tfie sons of (rod (angels, cherubim and 
seraphim) shouted for joy. — Job 38:4-7. 

Love finds a perfect expression in Jehovah! God is love. 
His loving kindness goes out to all his creatures. Love is 
an unselfish desire to do good to others. The greatest expression
 of love is the putting of this desire in operation at great 
cost or sacrifice, for the benefit of others. The holy angels 
have experienced God's living kindness. At great cost he manifested
 his love to man. He sacrificed the dearest treasure of 
his heart in providing for mankind redemption and an opportunity
 for everlasting life with abundant blessings to those 
who gladly humble themselves under his mighty hand. 

Too wise to err, too good to be unkind, hi3 power always put 
to a righteous use, his promises sure, without possibility of deviation
 therefrom, his will could be exercised only for the good 
of all his creatures. Why, then, should any intelligent creature
 in heaven or in earth have any hesitancy in humbling himself
 under the mighty hand of God? 

The answer to this question discloses two opposing forces 
which have always existed; namely, good and evil. Good has 
always been active, while evil became active only after the 
creation of man. The course of evil lead**to debasement, degradation
 and death; while the course of good leads to life 
everlasting, exaltation and pleasures forevermore. Such are 
the fixed laws «f Jehovah. All of* God's intelligent creatures 


have been, or will be, given an opportunity to appreciate the 
outworkings of those laws. 

CONTENDING FOBCES OPERATING IN THE EARTH 

Behold a great drama opens with the earth aa the stage 
of action! All the intelligent creatures of heaven and earth, 
either as players or as observers, are being offered an opportunity
 to learn the lessons inculcated. The first act is 
staged in Eden, {he garden of God, the home of a perfect man 
and woman, the happy, joyful pair. — Enter Lucifer. 

The Prophet Ezekiel tells us that Lucifer was a beautiful 
creature; that every good fruit of character was his adornment
; that he held a high position amongst God's holy angels, 
and that he was appointed as the care-taker of the innocent 
pair in Eden. He was highly honored, but not the most highly 
honored. — Ezekiel 28:12-15. 

When Lucifer beheld Adam and Eve, he marked that they 
had the power of propagating their kind — a thing unknown to 
the angels of heaven. Pride and ambition soon began to 
operate. He lost confidence in God, He meditated in his heart 
that if he could capture these perfect creatures, who had the 
power to multiply their own species, in the course of time the 
earth would be inhabitatcd by a perfect race of people, and he 
could have a kingdom of his own, with all mankind under his 
control. He had not been sent to earth to carry out his own 
ambitions, but to do God's will. But he was not willing to 
humble himself under the mighty hand of God and tender 
faithful service in the place where he had been put. On the 
contrary, he said in his heart, "I will ascend into heaven; I 
will exalt my throne above the stars [spiritual hosts of God] ; 
I will sit upon the mount of the congregation [have a kingdom
 of my ownl, in the sides of the north [next unto Jehovah! ; 
I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like 
the Most High."— Isaiah 14:13, 14. 

To accomplish his purpose he resorted to fraud and deceit
. He destroyed Eve's confidence in God by telling her that 
she had certain rights; that she should stand for principle, 
and not permit God to deprive her of such rights; that God 
knew that the very day when she would eat of the fruit she 
would become as wise as himself; and that to prevent her from 
coming into her own rights God was deceiving her. Eve Vas 
deceived by Lucifer, and Adam afterwards joined in the transgression
. 

Satan's ambitious desire for exaltation resulted in his 
own downfall, and brought the curse of God upon man, entailing
 great sorrow, suffering and death upon humanity. ,, Lucifer
 then became the wicked creature since known as "that old 
serpent, Satan, the devil/' who God has decreed shall suffer 
everlasting destruction, — Elzek, 28:18; Hebrews 2:14. 

ANGELS OF HEAVEN DEBASED 

The angelic hosts of heaven had watched the development 
of the great drama, and beheld the suffering, sorrow and death 
that came to the earth. Later, by Jehovah's permission, some 
of them took upon themselves the forms of men, with the 
avowed purpose of uplifting mankind. But they soon forgot 
to be obedient to Jehovah, failing to humble themselves under 
his mighty hand. They pursued a course contrary to his will, 
by taking unto themselves wives from amongst the human 
race and debauching the human family until the earth was 
filled with violence. The course of these materialized angels 
became wicked in the superlative degree; and so vile were the 
off-spring of this unholy union that God declared his purpose of 
destroying all flesh from the earth. — Genesis 6:1-8. 

Noah, however, found favor in God's sight, humbling himself
 under Jehovah's mighty hand; and Noah's family joined 
him i» the course of righteousness. God instructed Noah to 
prepare for the coming deluge which would destroy everything 
on the earth. He attempted to proclaim to the people the coming
 end- of the then existing order. They heeded him not. The 
great deluge fell upon the earth, and all fleshly creatures were 
destroyed, except those saved with Noah in the ark. The angels 
who had materialized in human form had also the power of 
dematerialization, and therefore were not destroyed. Instead, 
they were incarcerated in darkness, restrained from further 
mingling with the human-kind, cast down into earth's atmosphere
, there to await their great day of judgment* (2 Peter 
2:4; Jude 6) They had chosen the course of pride and selfwill
, and the result was their degradation and los-s of favor 
with God. 

THE LOGOS 

After the Flood, Satan continued his opposition to God. 
To further his ambitious desire, he blinded the minds of the 
human race by deceiving them and leading them to believe 
that God is a great fiend, who would cause them to be tortured 
throughout the endless ages. He taught mankind that they 
had immortal souls which can never die, and cited himself as 


[6167] 


(341-342) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


an example. The whole human race fell under his control, only 
a few exceptions here and there who, breaking away from him, 
exercised faith in God, Satan gradually became the chief or 
head over all the hosts of demons, and continued his deceptive 
and nefarious work amongst the human family. 

The first and only- begotten creation of Jehovah was the 
Logos. After his creation he became the active agent of God 
in the creation of all things, Lucifer and all the holy angels of 
heaven included. (Revelation 3:14; Col. 1:15; John 1:1-3) 
All his works of creation were perfect. Observing the progress 
of the great drama, the Logos witnessed the result of the ambitious
 course of Lucifer and noted how it had dragged down 
from heaven many of the holy angels and had transformed the 
pure, beautiful human pair, Adam and Eve, into suffering, imperfect
, dying creatures. He marked how this wrongful course 
had plunged the entiTe human-kmd into the depths of sorrow, 
sin and death. 

For four thousand year3 the Logos beheld this course working
 injury to mankind. But he was .willing to abide Jehovah's 
own good time to take some step to undo the great wrong 
that Satan had done. The Logos was always in harmony with 
the Father's will. It was the will of God that mankind should 
be redeemed from sin and death, and that everyone be given a 
full, fair trial for life. Furthermore, before the foundation 
of the world was laid God had willed that there should be a 
new creation, which should possess the divine nature as a 
great reward for faithfulness; and that it should consist of 
one Head, or Mighty One, and 144,000 associates. The One 
who would accomplish this purpose of Jehovah must be entirely
 submissive to his will, must humble himself under the 
mighty hand of God. The Logos, being advised by Jehovah 
of his purposes, undertook to carry out God's great plan. 

Although occupying a position of great honor and glory 
with the Father in heaven, and possessing the riches of the 
spiritual realm, as an honored representative of Jehovah, the 
Logoe left the heavenly courts, and was changed from spirit 
to human nature. His humility -and full obedience are shown 
by the course he took: "Who though being in God's form, yet 
did not mediate a usurpation to be like God, but divested himself
 [of heavenly glory and power], took a bondsman's form, 
having been made in the likeness of man." JPhilippians 2; 6, 7 
— Diaglott) How unlike the course of Lucifer! The contrast 
could not be more striking. "We see Jesus, who was made a 
little lower than the angels, for the suffering of death, crowned 
wi^h glory and honor, that he, by the grace of God, should 
taste death for every man" — Jesus, who being in condition as 
a man, humbled himself, becoming "obedient unto death, even 
the death of the cross." — Hebrews 2:9; Philippians 2:8 — 
Diaglott. 

OTO LORD'S GLOBIOUS EXAMPLE 

As a man our Lord was perfect in every respect, at the 
age of thirty years. He possessed a perfect human will, which 
he might have exercised to his own glory and honor. He had 
the power to produce a perfect race of people, filling the earth 
and ultimately receiving from them all the honor, plaudits, 
homage and glory that a perfect race could bestow upon a 
perfect man. He might have accomplished the very thing that 
Lucifer ambitiously desired. But it was the will of God 
concerning Jesus that he should die upon the cross, being made 
a sin-offering in behalf of man, to the intent that man might 
be restored to life if he would render himself in full obedience 
to God's will. We hear Jesus saying, "Lo, I come, as in the 
volume of the Book written of me, to do thy will, my God." 
(Hebrews 10:7) "For I came down from heaven not to do 
Mine own will, hut the will of him that sent me." ( John 
6:38) "I seek not mine own will; but the will of the Father 
which hath sent me.*' — John 5:30. 

Jesus deviated not one jot or tittle from the will of his 
Father. For three and one-half years he was subjected to all 
kinds of indignities. He was denounced as the chief of devils, 
as a drunkard, as a liar, as a blasphemer — all of which he 
bore patiently in obedience to the Father's will. Thus the 
mighty hand of God pressed down upon him in order that he 
might be made a sympathetic high priest and be perfected 
for the further carrying forth of his Father's plan. "He was 
oppressed and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth ; 
he was brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before
 her shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth." — Isaiah 
53:7; Acts 8:32-35. 

Betrayed by one whom he had especially blessed, he was 
taken before the constituted authorities, wrongfully accused 
of crime, illegally put through a trial which was a farce, subjected
 to every manner of insult, condemned without a cause 
and cruelly crucified upon the cross — the most ignominious 
death recognized by Jehovah and known to man. Yet he 
patiently submitted to it, because it was the Father's will. 


"Wherefore, God also hath highly exalted him and given him 
a name which is above every name, that at the name of Jesus 
every knee should bow, of things in heaven and things in earth." 
—Phil. 2:10. 

Why hath Jehovah drawn such a sharp contrast between 
the two creatures — Lucifer and Jesus? For the evident purpose
 of teaching to all of his intelligent creatures his fixed 
and unchangeable law that "whosoever Bhall exalt himself 
shall be abased, and whosoever shall humble himself shall be 
exalted." (Matthew 23:12) Thus Jesus magnified the divine
 law, and proved that Jehovah is true. Thus he demonstrates
 to everyone the great value resulting to those who learn 
to humble themselves under God's mighty hand. 

NEW CBBATION TESTED BY THE SAME BULK 
Before the foundation of the world God ordained that 
Christ Jesus should have associated with him 144,000 jointheirs
 as his bride, all composing the "new creation." Each 
member of the new creation will be like the Lord, its Head. 
This side the veil such are called to be footstep followers, to 
suffer as he suffered and to be tested as he was tested. (1 
Peter 2:21; Romans 8:29; Hebrews 2:18) The great Master 
said, "Whosoever Bhall do the will of my Father which is in 
heaven, the same ia my brother." — Matt. 12:50. 

One who is called to be the brother and joint-heir of Jesus 
is greatly honored. Now he is put on trial and must be judged 
according to the fixed rule of God. God's rules change not. 
If one h proud in heart, the Lord will bring him low. If he 
properly appreciates the honor granted to him and honestly 
desires to humble himself, and does humble himself under the 
mighty hand of God, the position of honor which he has received
 from the Lord really upholds him. "A man's pride 
shall bring him low, but honor shall uphold the humble in 
spirit." (Proverbs 29:23) A striking example of this is 
shown in the seventh messenger to the church. He was greatly 
honored of the Lord and his full appreciation of this honor 
made him more humble; and this humility of mind and spirit 
upheld him and m<&de him strong. 

Many ask, Why has not God destroyed the devil long ago? 
The fact that he permits Satan to live and pursue his nefarious 
work is proof that God has some good and sufficient reason 
for so doing. Jehovah desires his intelligent creatures to learn 
the lesson , that pride and ambition lead to suffering, sorrow 
and death, and that humility of mind and obedience to the 
Lord lead to life and exaltation. The church, following in the 
footsteps of Christ Jesus, the Head, must be subjected- to this 
great test in order to prove her loyalty and to demonstrate that 
Jehovah can trust her in the ages to come. To none other could 
he give the divine nature* 

Early in the drama, Jehovah announced that the seed of 
the woman should bruise the serpent's head. (Gen. 3:15) 
From then until now Satan has sought to destroy the seed, 
beginning with the murder of Abel. Since Satan is the prince 
of devils, it follows that all the evil spirits are likewise bent 
on destroying the seed, if possible. Revelation 7:1, 2 describes 
these evil ones as the "four winds of the earth," which the 
Lord Jesus det>!a*ed should not blow until his saints are sealed 
in their foreheads. It follows, then, that as soon as the sealing
 work is completed — that is to say, when all those of the 
saintly class remaining on this side the veil shall have been 
given an intellectual understanding and appreciation of the 
plan of God — then the evil spirits will get loose. The Scriptures
 show that they must have their judgment day; and they 
could not be fully judged until they are loosed. 

"The storm is held in check until the faithful servants 
of God are sealed in their foreheads; that is, until auch 
are given an intellectual appreciation of the time, presence, 
etc., which will not only comfort them and shield them, 
but also be a mark, seal, or evidence of their sonship, 
as indicated by our Lord when he promised that the holy 
Spirit should show them things to come." — Scrtptube 
Studies, Volume 2, Page 169. 

A CBTJOIAL TEST AT HAKD 
That there will then be a great conflict between the members
 of the new creation this side the veil and the fallen angels, 
there can be little doubt. To know the will of God and to be 
submissive thereto is an absolutely certain protection; hence 
the importance of seeing what the test will involve. Where 
will be the battleground ? Surely not in the hands, or feet, or 
ears! The Scriptures answer that the battleground is in the 
mind. "Let this mind be in you which was in Christ Jeaua." 
(Fhilippian* 2:5) The mind of Jesus was to be fully submissive
 to the Father's will, humbling himself under God's mighty 
hand. "Be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind. 
(Romans 12:2) Thus the new creature is developed. 

Impressing upon the new creation the importance of the 


[6168] 


November 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(342-343) 


prize and what to do to win it, St. Paul admonishes all, saying
, "Forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching 
forth unto those things which are before, press forward 
along the mark for the prize." (Philippians 3:13, 14) Surely 
the forgetting is with the mind, and likewise the contemplation
 of the glories before. Lucifer's sin was not what he did 
with his hands, but in the meditations of his heart. Undoubtedly
 the mind is the battleground. An open battleground is one 
where all obstructions are removed, that the contending forces 
may have free access. All along there have been obstructions 
which have prevented the evil spirits from attacking the new 
creation; but it must be apparent that when they are loosed 
they will have more power than ever before. 

It was the servant of the Laodicean church who wrote: — 

"The letting loose of these winds, or air powers, would 
seem to show that God would let go his hand of restraint, 
that he will have to do with the permission of the terrible 
trouble that will come. This outside influence will exercise 
a baneful effect upon men, when finally granted the liberty. 
These fallen spirits have been under restraint for these 
many centuries, but they have exercised their influence to 
whatever extent they have had permission. If they had 
possessed unlimited power they would have wrecked the 
world long ago; but tliey have been restrained. Apparently 
God will soon cease to restrain the fallen angels; and they 
will then proceed to vent their fury upon humanity, so 
that the whole earth will be full of violence, the same as 
in the days of Noah. The power manifested by the demons 
when loosed, will, we believe, be with a view to the injury 
of mankind. We do not know but that many of our readers 
will have a share in that injury. We have every reason 
to suppose that if these fallen angels shall get loose, they 
will vent their first anger upon the Lord's people. We are 
not to fear this, however, but to take whatever the Lord's 
providence permits to come, knowing that everything shall 
work for our good." — Z '14-166. 

PEIDE REMOVES ALL PROTECTION 
Pride is an inordinate self-sufficiency or self-esteem, causing
 one to feel his own greatness and importance, and to lose 
sight of the greatness of Jehovah and of the Lord Jesus. The 
humble-minded one looks at himself soberly and realizes that 
whatever position he has the Lord placed him there; for "God 
hath set the members every one of them in the bodv as it 
pleaseth him." (1 Cor. 12:18) He realizes that within himself
 there is no perfect thing; that God does not need him; 
and that the Lord Jesus would not continue to use him unless 
he walks humbly and looks unto Jesus, and not unto himself. 
While it is true that the fallen angels will have greater freedom
 to attack the new creature as we come nearer the end 
of the way, yet those who humbly obey the lord will be 
granted a sufficient armor of protection that as valiant soldiers 
of the cross they may fight a victorious battle against their 
enemies. (Ephesians 6:10-18; Psalm 91:1-7) But suppose 
one who has been long in the narrow way becomes proud 
of mind and heart. Could he hope for such continued protection
 ? The Apostle answers, "God resisteth the proud [pushes 
them away from him], and shows his favor to the humble." 
Thus we see that when one takes his mind off from the Lord, 
fills it with criticism and fault-finding of others, magnifies 
his own greatness and importance, and fails to humble himself
 under the mighty hand of God, he deprives himself of the 
protection the Lord has provided for his faithful ones. It 
was pride that caused Lucifer to fall. It was pride, or lack of 
humility, that caused the angels to fall. It is pride, or lack 
of humility, that causes others to fall. Plainly is God's will 
expressed concerning pride and ambition thus: — "but he giveth 
more grace. Wherefore he saith, God resisteth the proud, but 
giveth grace unto the humble." "The fear of the Lord is to 
hate evil; pride, and arrogancy, and the evil way, and the 
forward mouth do I hate." "Pride goeth before destruction 
and an haughty spirit before a fall." — James 4:6; Proverbs 
8:13; 16:19. 

DAHGEE TO THE NEW CREATION 
Commenting upon the enemies of the new creation, Brother 
Russell wrote (Z '05-215): "God's people should beware of 
pride as they would avoid the most deadly plague. This rule, 
always good and well backed by Scripture, seema doubly needful
 to those who are blessed with the light of present truth. 
This may seem strange. It may be reasoned that the receiving
 of so much grander views of God's character and plan 
would make his people feel the more insignificant and humble, 
the more dependent upon divine guidance, the more trustful of 
God and the less trustful of themselves. And this should be 
the effect always and ever; but, alas, with very many this is 
not so. Many get to feel that the knowledge of the plan of 
the ages proves them especially wise or great or good. They 


seem to forget that God hides the truth from the wise and 
great, that no flesh should glory in his sight, . . . Beware of 
all such people! Sooner or later, unless they reform, they 
will fly the track entirely and injure more than they ever 
helped. God does not wish such people to serve his cause, 
and will surely permit their vanity to stumble them — however 
much their natural ability ; and it is generally the people of 
real or fancied ability who are thus afflicted with the spirit 
of pride or vanity, 'God opposeth the proud, but showeth 
his favor to the humble.' " 

Seeing, then, danger lurking in the pathway, and knowing 
that the enemy is on the alert to trip us up, what shall we 
do if we find that we are thinking too highly of self, if we 
have some ambition or pride in our heart, if we are not walking
 humbly before the Lord? The Apostle answers the question
, "Humble yourselves under the mighty hand of God, that 
he may exalt you in due time." St. James states the same 
thing, saying, "Submit yourselves, therefore, to God. Resist 
the devil, and he will flee from you. Draw nigh to God and 
he will draw nigh unto you." (James 4:7, 8) Everyone in 
the narrow way needs the strength of the Lord manifested in 
his behalf. The proud or haughty or self-willed cannot hope 
for this favor; "For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro 
throughout the earth to show himself strong in behalf of them 
whose heart 13 perfect toward him." — 2 Chron. 16:9. 

HOW WE ASCERTAIN GOD'S WILL 

There are two general ways or modes by which the Lord's 
will toward us may be ascertained: (a) By his Word, (b) 
By his manner of dealing with us. To humble one's self under 
God's mighty hand means to know his will and to do it. God 
has expressed in his Word his will toward his children, saying
, "Study to show thyself approved unto God." (2 Timothy 
2:15) This means to study his Word and study his providences
 toward us, or his manner of dealing with us. Our 
Head set us the example. Immediately after his consecration, 
Jesus went into the wilderness and there remained forty days, 
studying the plan of Jehovah, in order to know the divine will. 
We should spend much time in study and in meditation upon 
the precious promises of the Lord, that we may know his will 
We need not expect to find in the Bible specific statements of 
everything we must do. God does not tell us just how much 
to eat and when to eat it, or what kind of clothing to wear; 
but he does lay down in his Word fixed rules or laws by which 
his creatures must be governed in order to receive the reward 
of exaltation which is in store for those that love him. 

THE PUTS' OF THE HOT/B 

Those who have diligently sought to know the will of the 
Lord may see that now we are in the close of the harvest 
period. Probably only a few more months remain in which 
to prove our loving loyalty to the Lord, Thus the time is 
fully ripe for all the truly consecrated to declare the day of 
God's vengeance upon the unrighteous systems of the world, 
in harmony with his expressed will. (Isaiah 61:1-3) To 
humble ourselves now would mean to be obedient to his commands
, doing not in our strength, but in the strength of the 
Lord, what our hands find to do, realizing we are in the last 
hours of the harvest of the Gospel age. 

Clearly, then, the command from our Captain comes to us, 
"Thrust in the sharp sickle and gather the clusters of the vine 
of the earth; for her grapes are fully ripe." {Rev, 14:18) If 
we believe that this is a command from the lord, then we 
must believe that this is the Lord's will; and to humble ourselves
 under his mighty hand would mean that we would be 
obedient to his will to the extent of our opportunity and 
ability. Since the beginning of the harvest the Lord has been 
pleased to place the instrument for reaping in the hands of 
his people through his wise and faithful servant. He has 
finished his course as the Lord's servant this side the veil; and 
now the Lord promises to turn his hand upon the "little ones." 
(Zech. 13:7) God is faithful to all of his good promises. 

The sickle of the harvest is the message of truth. It is 
also called the sword. It is our opinion that the Seventh 
Volume of Studies in the Scriptures contains the message 
which is the instrument now to be used with which to reap 
the vine of the earth. 

SOME REASONS WHY 

Some, as we learn, are having difficulty in determining 
whether or not "The Finished Mystery" is the Seventh Volume 
of Studies ix the Scbiptubes. Probably they have been disturbed
 in their minds by the argument of some who have been 
developing pride and ambition. With sobriety of mind and a 
prayerful attitude, let us consider some of the reasons why 
we have the Seventh Volume. 

Revelation 16:1-17 has been understood by the consecrated 
for some time as indicating that there would be seven volumes 


[6169] 


(343-344) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


of Scbiptube Studies. Pastor Russell, as the seventh messenger
, many times stated that there would be a seventh volume 
prepared and delivered to the harvest workers; that he would 
prepare it himself if the Lord showed Jiim the key; but that 
if the Lord did not show him the key someone else would prepare
 it. He stated that the Seventh Volume would contain an 
explanation of the books of Ezekiel and Revelation. 

The Watch Towee Bible ksd Tract Society is that agency 
referred to in the words: "Another angel came out from the 
altar, which had power over fire." (Rev. 14:18) The altar is 
the place of sacrifice. The Society is maintained by the sacrifice
 of the Lord's saints. It has power (authority) over the 
publication and distribution of the prophecies that are destructive
 to Babylon. 

John the Baptist rebuked King Herod because of his unlawful
 relationship with a woman. (Matt. 14:1-12) The 
seventh messenger to the church pointed out that Herod was 
a type of the civil powers; that Herodias, the woman, was a 
type of the ecclesiastical systems composing Babylon; that 
John the Baptist typed the last members of the <?hurch this 
side the veil; and that the John class would deliver a message 
which would rebuke the unholy relationship existing between 
church and state. This message must be delivered before the 
church finishes its course in the flesh. In Revelation and Ezekiel 
Mystical Babylon, as typed by the woman, is clearly pointed 
out. The explanation of these two books as contained in the 
Seventh Volume is the message that will rebuke Babylon. If 
it is not, then one must yet be written; and it cannot be written
 without quotation from what Pastor Russell has written 
on these two books, which is already set forth in the Seventh 
Volume, 

Some have said, If the Seventh Volume contains the message
 representing the "penny", then why should it go to the 
world at all? The Prophet of the Lord, Jeremiah, "wrote in 
a book of the evil that should come upon Babylon, even all 
these words that are written against Babylon. And it shall 
be when thou hast made an end of reading this book that 
thou shalt bind a stone to it and cast it in the midst of the 
Euphrates [amongst the peoples]." (Jeremiah 51 :60-63 ) 
Surely the Seventh Volume contains an explanation of the evils 
which Babylon has practiced, and shows God's condemnation 
of her and how she shall fall ! In the type the Euphrates River 
was turned away from ancient Babylon, and the city fell. Is it 
not reasonable to conclude that when the people receive the 
message of truth concerning Mystic Babylon they will turn 
away from her, and she will fall? 

THOUGHTS TOB CAREFUL MEDITATION 

The Seventh Volume was prepared and published by and 
under the direction of Ihe Watch Tower Bible and Tbact 
Society, the messenger having power to send out truths destructive
 to Babylon. (G6; Rev. 14 : 18 ) . Pastor Russell is the 
real author, and the compilers give all the credit to him and 
to the great Lord of the harvest. From what he had written 
the compilers were enabled to understand the prophecies of 
Ezekiel and Revelation. 

It came to the church for her encouragement at a time 
of great need, as Pastor Russell had promised it should come. 

It names the seven messengers to the seven respective 
epochs of the church, giving the proof as to the correctness 
thereof. 

It proves that the key to the Seventh Volume is the Seventh 
Messenger to the church, and that for that reason he did not 
publish it. For the same reason Moses did not write his own 
eulogy.— Deut. 34:10-12. 

It names the beginning and ending of each epoch of church 
history, with the proof in support of same. 

It identifies the ancient jasper, and shows its perfect adaptation
 to the description of the heavenly Father. It shows how 
the sard represents the beauties of his character. — G-74. 

It identifies clearly the twenty-four elders.— G-76. 

It identifies the four beasts.— G-78-79. 

It shows clearly why the breaking of the seals makes 
prophecy easy to be understood, and identifies the strong 
angel inquiring who was worthy to do so. — G-97-98. 

It identifies the white horse, his rider and his weapon, 
and sh*ows where he got his crown. It identifies the red 
horse, his rider, and his butcher-knife.— G-106, 107. 

The souls under the altar are identified, and the time of 
their waiting is proven to be correct. — G-117. 

It explains and amplifies the work of the four angels holding
 the winds of the earth and the effect their blowing will 
have.-^M23-126. 

The great symbolic earthquake cannot occur until the 
Seventh Volume of Scripture Studies is published. All signs 
indicate that this earthquake is near. The Seventh Volume 
has been published. 


It shows that the Prophet Ezekiel was the prototype of 
the seventh messenger, and that the experiences of Ezekiel 
have been marvelously parallelled and fulfilled in the experiences
 of Pastor Russell. Ezekiel's prophecy, heretofore a sealed 
book, is now made clear in the closing hours Cti the harvest. It 
confirms the Lord's promise of the "faithful and wise servant/' 
and identifies him. 

It proves that Pastor Russell's seven volumes of Studies 
in the Scriptures w^re foreknown and foretold as the "thrice* 
doubled sword and its point/' and shows how it should be 
sent forth.— Ezekiel 21 ; Rev. 8. 

It shows that the clergy themselves have sown the seed of 
anarchy, and clearly outlines the reason why ecclesiasticism 
must perish. — G-5J9, 520. 

It contains the message that will set the ecclesiastical 
heavens on fire. 

The above are only a few reasons why "The Finished 
Mystery" is the long-looked-for Seventh Volume. If we believe
 that it contains the message which is the "point of the 
sword," and that we are nearing the end of the harvest, then 
surely it is the Lord's will concerning his people that they 
should use it by giving it a wide circulation. Two editions are 
practically exhausted, and the third one hundred thousand is 
on the press. 

WHAT SHALL WE IX>7 

Some are saying, "I sincerely desire to know the Lord's 
will; but how may I know it?" "Trust in the Lord with all 
thine heart, and lean not to thine own understanding. In all 
thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy path!" — 
Proverbs 3:5, 6. 

Repeatedly the Lord promises to guide us with his counsel, 
and afterwards to receive us into glory. (Psalm 73:23, 24; 
32:8) We must not only trust him in our hearts, but acknowledge
 him and confess him before others. We must have 
full confidence that since we are his, he has the deepest interest 
in our welfare, Such as are careful to ackowledge him may be 
sure that he will direct their paths in all things. He will not 
direct the path of any to the satisfying of their own selfish 
desires or wills, however; nor do we wish him thus to do. But 
he will direct according to his perfect wisdom and for the 
good of those who love him supremely. 

"Could it be the Lord's will that I should colporteur the 
Seventh Volume?" someone asks. We answer, "If the message 
it contains is from the Lord, there could be no doubt about 
what his children should do. Of course they would want to put 
it out, and get the message to others." "But," says another, 
"I have declined to accept it as the Seventh Volume. Now if 
I would take a different course, I would be putting myself in a 
false light." We answer, "Is it not pride that causes one 
to take this position? Put aside pride now, and humble 
yourself under the mighty hand of the Lord. If you have 
taken the wrong course about anything for a time, and the 
Lord discloses to you that wrongful course, such a disclosure 
is a reproof to you; and he says, 'Turn you at my reproof; 
behold, I will pour out my Spirit upon you and I will make 
known my ways unto you.' "—^Proverbs 1:23. 

FULL OBEDIENCE OF VITAL IMPORTANCE 

The greatest work for us all to do is the conquering of 
self. "This is the will of God concerning you, even your 
sanctification." (1 Thessalonians 4:3) Sanctification does 
not mean human perfection. It does not mean the changing of 
our appearance, nor the removing of blemishes from out 
bodies miraculously. On the contrary, it is a devotion or 
consecration of the will, which through Christ is accepted as 
perfect. It is the consecration of the body unto death, which 
is counted acceptable through Christ. This will must bring 
every power and talent into harmony with Christ, and seek to 
exercise an influence in harmony therewith over others. 

Loyalty of heart to God's will, and hence a submission to 
his will, means a continued effort to bring all the conduct 
of our lives, even our thoughts and intentions, into subjection, 
or full submission to the will of God. Absolute holiness must 
be the standard maintained in our mind; and we must strive 
to live up to it. True submission or obedience to his will 
would mean for us that we would carefully consider the life 
and course of our High Priest, Jesus; that we would be 
diligent in Ms service and diligent in telling the truth to 
others, diligent in building each other up in the most holy 
faith and in doing good unto all as we have opportunity and 
diligent in laying down our lives for the brethren, and particularly
 in perfecting ourselves in the love of God. 

THE TESTS FOB THE CHURCH ABE GREATER THAN FOB 
THE ANGELS 
The angels were put to a great test, and many of them 
failed. The church is being put to a far greater test; for 


[6170] 


NoVRMBtR 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(345-350) 


God purposes to give the members thereof a greater reward. 
Such test of necessity entails much suffering. Important, then, 
is the question, IJow are we receiving these trials or tests? 
If we permit the fiery trials to stir up in our hearts malice, 
hatred, envy, ill-will, fault-finding, criticism and strife, this 
means that we are not humbling ourselves under the mighty 
hand of God and learning the lessons as he would have us do. 
(Proverbs 28:25) On the contrary, if these fiery trials are 
burning away the dross and working out in us the sweetness of 
character like unto our Master — namely, gentleness, kindness, 
patience, long-suffering, tender-heartedness and love — this shows 
that we are humbling ourselves under the mighty hand of God 
and profiting by it. Let each remember that since we are sons 
of God nothing can happen to us except by his permission, and 
that these trials are evidences of our sonship. (Hebrews 12:5, 
8) Willingness to suffer special trials because of our loyalty to 
God, to the cause of righteousness and to the principles of his 
government is evidence of exceptionally fine character. God is 
dealing with the new creation with a view to perfecting their 
characters to the very highest mark. 

If some of his children find themselves imprisoned or otherwise
 deprived of their liberty because of loyalty to him and his 
kingdom, let them rejoice, remembering the faithful men of 
old mentioned with honor by St. Paul. (Hebrews 11) God's 
mighty hand may press down hard upon us at times ; and if so, 
we may be sure that we have need of this very experience. We 
may know that it is permitted that we may be prepared and 
made fit for the Master's use. We should watch for his providences
 and joyfully submit to whatsoever he sees well to 
bring to us. For us the prophet wrote, "Behold, as the eyes 
of servants look unto the hand of their master, and as the 
eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress, so our eyes 
wait upon the Lord, our God, until that he have mercy upon 
us." (Psalm 123:2) And thus we are to watch his mighty 
hand, that we might see what is his will concerning us. 

It is to be noted that Jesus voluntarily submitted himself 
to the will of God, saying, "The cup that my Father hath 
poured for me, shall I not drink it?" (John 18:11) Likewise 
his followers should say: "If these trying experiences are 
necessary for me in order that I may be exalted to the position 
of joint-heir with Christ Jesus, then with joy I receive them." 

EXALTATION IN DUB TIME 
The exaltation of each one of the Lord's "little ones" will 
take place in his due time. It will be impossible for any one 
to be exalted prior to God's due time, or in any manner except
 that which the Father provides. Through his prophet he 
said, "Lift not up your horn [power] on high ; speak not with 
a stiff neck; for promotion eometh neither from the East nor 


from the West nor from the South: but God is the judge; he 
putteth down one and setteth up another." (Psalm 75:5-7) 
It is quite clear that the prophet here refers, not to those who 
have passed beyond the veil, but to those of the church who 
are still on the earth. \\ e would not expect any one to have 
a stiff neck — a stubborn, wilful disposition — after he had been 
exalted to glory. Clearly, then, this admonition was given for 
the benefit of those who hope for exaltation because of the 
precious promises given by the Father. When James and John 
asked the Master for a position of honor in his kingdom he 
said to them, "To sit on my right hand and on my left hand 
is not mine to give; but it shall be given to them for whom it 
is prepared." (Mark 10:40) Clearly, then, exaltation comes 
only to those who willingly humble themselves under the 
mighty hand of God, that they may be shaped and prepared 
for his use. 

Again, the Psalmist makes the matter clear when he asks 
the question: "Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord, 
and who shall stand in his holy place? He that hath clean 
hands and a pure heart; who hath not lifted up his soul unto 
vanity nor sworn deceitfully. He shall receive the blessing of 
the Lord and righteousness from the God of his salvation."- — 
Psalm 24:3-5. 

The temple standing on Mount Moriah was typical of the 
glorious temple of God. The Psalmist has here asked who will 
be accounted worthy to be exalted to the high position of 
membership in that great temple — who will be permitted to 
reign with Christ in his kingdom. Then he answers, "He that 
hath clean hands, [meaning clean actions and conduct] and a 
pure heart [meaning purity of will, intention or purpose — a 
pure heart, loving righteousness and truth but hating iniquity
] ; who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity [another 
evidence that pride is an abomination to the Lord and to all 
who partake of his spirit], nor sworn deceitfully [meaning 
those who have made a covenant with the Lord and who have 
earnestly tried to keep it]." These shall receive the blessing 
that the Lord promised- in his Word, Soon the exaltation of 
the church will be completed; and then The Christ, Head and 
body, will begin the great work of reconstruction. In a thousand
 years The Christ will undo all that Satan and his associate
 evil ones have done during the past six thousand years;' 
and at the conclusion of that righteous reign Satan himself 
shall be destroyed, together with all of his wicked messengers. 
"All the proud, yea, all that do wickedly shaJl be as stubble." 
(Malaohi 4:1} Every creature will then have had. ample opportunity
 to learn the lesson that there is one mighty God 
who divideth his honor with none; and that all who render 
themselves in loving obedience to him shall be granted life 
everlasting with happiness and pleasures forevermore. 


NEHEMIAH REBUILDS THE WALLS OF JERUSALEM 

[The fourth and the last paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled "Nehemiah's Faith and Works," published
 in issue of December 1, 1905. The remainder was a reprint of an article also entitled "Nehemiah's Paith 
and Works," published in issue of November 1, 1899, Please see the articles named. 1 


EZRA AND NEHEMIAH TEACH THE LAW 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "The Power of the Word of God/' published in issue of November 15, 1899 5 which 

please see.] 


INTERESTING LETTERS 


SAME BEAUTIFUL SFIBIT IN THE TO WEE 

Deab BbetHBEN: — 

It has been a eource of wonder, as well as a great pleasure, 
to me to note the continued purity of The Watch Toweb 
articles, as well as that of their beautiful spirit. No one could 
tell by reading The Watch Toweb that Brother Russell was 
not editing it as of yore. 

In October 1st issue the leading article — "The Closing 
Work of Harvest" — is most timely, stirring, and pointed. 
I believe every word of it; and it deserves the most careful 
and honest study. 

We are studying the Seventh Volume here to great profit 
How we do thank the Lord for this further proof of His 
watch-care and love for us! Nothing will arouse us except 
the TRUTH, and nothing does arouse us like this blessed 
"point of the sword." 

Habvest Siftings, Part 11, has just fallen into my hands, 
and I am now glad it was gotten out, though it was my 


thought that "Light after Darkness" needed no reply. The 
spirit breathed by every line of the latter was its own condemnation
. It is the very spirit we have been trying to get 
away from for forty years. 

I am, your fellow-servant, O. L. Sullivan, N. J. 

bhcoueagement fob vounteers 
Gentlemen- : — 

In brief, I am a salesman; and walking into the Post 
Office of Chariton, Iowa, recently, I noticed a rack containing 
literature, about which was inscribed "Take One." Of course, 
in this day such a sign is about extinct. But I allowed my 
curiosity to be reasoned with, and took one. This sheet wa3 
Vol, IX, No. 5, of The Bible Students Monthly, treating 
the subjeet "Why Do the Nations War," etc. Greater articles 
than those contained therein are not to be found. It is convincing
 to the core, not on account of highly manufactured 
phrases of a rhetorical nature, but honest, pure, and crossexamined
 truth. Its equal cannot be found; and that I may 


[6171] 


(350-351) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyh, N. Y. 


be more familiar, and understand the real ways, causes, and 
effects of present conditions, do I wish to make purchase of 
the works therein mentioned. 

Wishing your organization the success of divine power, 
and knowing that it shall be a beacon light to all when the 
people come to understand, 

I am a faithful convert, F. G. B., Iowa. 

WOULD NOT MUKMTTB AQAINST GOD 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 
I feel that I have a greater appreciation of divine arrangement
 after considering our prayer meeting text last night-— 
"Thou shalt not tempt the Lord' thy God" — I first thought 
it was a hard text to consider, but after thinking upon the 
subject, I see what a wonderful illustration there is in it for 
all of us, especially at this time under present conditions. 
The words of our text you will recall are quoted by our 
Lord from Deuteronomy, and the context shows that the 
children of Israel "tempted God" through lack of appreciation 
of divine blessings. God had led them for forty years; He 
had fed them with Manna during this time and at the close 
of the forty years they should have appreciated divine favor. 
Since they were about to enter Canaan, the fruition of their 
hope, they were found to be murmuring against Moses and 
divine arrangement, and thus they were "tempting God." 

The result was they were bitten by that old serpent and 
died. This is where our appreciation comes in that we 
should have this text now for consideration realizing that 
it had been placed there by divine arrangement. In 1 
Corinthians 10:1-11, the great Apostle Paul delineates this 
question. He warns against idolaters, fornicators and murmurers
. Connecting this up with the type, we note that 
Pastor Russell in his comments has pointed out that idolatry 
refers to "self, wealth, pride, ambition, ease, gluttony, drunkenness
, denominationalism, etc.," while fornication is "fellowship
 in spirit with those who love not the Spirit of the Lord, 
but the spirit of the world." The Apostle adds, "Neither let 
us tempt Christ." The comparison is clear. Now as we draw 
nigh the end of our forty years of great blessing, having been 
fed with the true heavenly manna all this time, are we going 
back on our consecration vow, becoming idolatrous, fornicators 
and murmurers against divine arrangement? If so the outcome
 is just as certain and the judgment just as sure as in 
the case of the children of Israel; they were "stung," and the 
result was death. Shall we after enjoying these blessings for 
so many years, lose our appreciation of divine blessing and 
favor by allowing ourselves to murmur, that which we are 
so strongly warned against in this text, and which if we do, we 
tempt God T If so, the sting of death will be our portion ; the 
second death in our case. "Wherefore, let him that thinketh 
he standeth take heed lest he fall." I rejoice because I still 
have this appreciation of divine favor and pray for myself and 
all the dear "household of faith" that the Lord's Spirit shall 
prevail everywhere in the hearts of his children. 

I am enclosing herewith draft for Good Hopes from myself 
and family. 

Yours in the one hope, H. B. M. f Minn. 

TRANSFORMING POWER OF THE TRUTH 
Dearly Beloved Brethren: — 

We greet you in the name of the Lord Je3us Christ, the 
great and faithful Shepherd of the flock. We wish to assure 
you of our fervent love for you and our confidence in you. 
As the night draws on apace we are trying to do what we can 
to point the many, many sad hearts to the silver lining in the 
clouds; and we rejoice to see that the dear Heavenly Father 
is able to use even us in a little way to rekindle the light 
of hope that is burning very low in tne hearts of some. We 
shall relate a little circumstance that has recently come under 
our observation. 

A man whom the writer knew to be a desperate character 
had been furnished some tracts and Volume I, Studies in 
the Scriptures. Immediately he became interested, and has 
made several inquiries about certain features of the plan of 
salvation. Recently he made us a visit, and seemed very 
restless. I knew there was something he wished to tell me, 
but of course did not know what it was. Suddenly he turned 
to me, and said he had something he desired to tell me. Then 
he related one of the most daring plots he and three other 
men had planned to carry out. Everything had been systematically
 arranged to rob a bank. He had bought a heavy 
revolver, had paid twenty-one dollars for it, had oeen in the 
bank many times and had outlined the whole scheme. He had 
also told his wife about it. He said that she had clung to 
his neck in tears, and had tried to talk him out of his desperate 
intentions, but had not succeeded. He had worked hard all 
his life to care for his family, but had not been able to do 
so in a satisfactory way; and he had in his beait a burning 


hatred against the capitalist system. But with tears in his 
eyes he said that the truth had changed the whole course 
of his life, and he had sent Word to his pals that there would 
be no robbery. He also sent them some literature; and they 
are also reading with much interest. 

His wife has recently called and asked us to come and 
tell them more about the coming kingdom of Christ. Truly, 
dear brethren, there is no other God that can deliver after 
this sort. (Daniel 3:29) Pray for us, dear ones, even as we 
do for you, that we may all be able to stand in this evil hour. 

Faithfully yours in the one bright hope, H. E. P., Okla. 

APPRECIATES THE LORD'S CONTINUED BLESSINGS 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

Remembering the channel through which the knowledge of 
present truth by our Father's favor was given to us, and 
the fact that though that "faithful and wise servant" has gone 
to his reward the work entrusted to him by the Lord of the 
harvest is being faithfully and efficiently continued by the 
dear brethren appointed as overseers in his stead, we unitedly 
desire to express to you, and through you to all the faithful 
in the Lord everywhere, our continued and increasing appreciation
 of our multiplied favors from our heavenly Father and 
his royal Son in connection with the knowledge of the divine 
purposes, the illumination and transformation of our minds 
through an understanding of Jehovah's glorious attributes 
and our privilege of cooperation with you in the work of the 
harvest. 

In a blessed season of refreshment and fellowship at a 
recent testimony meeting we individually reaffirmed our vow 
of full consecration to the will of the Lord even unto death, 
at the same time reading and expressing our gratitude for 
the Morning Resolve and the Vow as being invaluable helps 
in the daily carrying out of our covenant. 

By hearty unanimous vote we collectively renewed our 
allegiance to the Society and its representatives, desiring to 
be in full harmony with the channel of blessing and its 
direction by the Lord's own choosing, and it is as an expression
 of this decision that this letter is written. Our humble 
prayers will continue to be that the God of all grace will 
make you perfect in every good work to do his will and that 
you may continue to be strong in the Lord and in the power 
of his might. We request, dear brethren, your prayers. 

Your brethren in Christ, 

Niagara Falls (N. Y.) Ecolesia. 
FBOFITINQ BY TIMELY ADMONITIONS 

Dear Friends : — 

I received The Watch Tower of August 1st, and I was 
very much interested and benefited by the article entitled, 
"Walk Circumspectly Because the Days Are Evil." I have 
read and reread it very carefully and I think it is just what 
I need at this time, i. e., I need to watch and scrutinize every 
act, seeing that I give offense to no man. The tongue is 
a little member, but if it is not guarded carefully and kept 
within bounds, what mischief it will lead you into! 

The article in question is one that can be read with much 
profit by every true believer in the wonderful truth. While 
reading it I could almost imagine I was having one of those 
wonderful heart to heart talks with our late dear Brother 
Russell. In the fall of 1902, when I obtained my first knowledge
 of the wonderful truth, I called on Brother Russell and 
told him how marvelous was the First Volume, which I had 
just finished reading. He smiled and said (and I will ever 
cherish in my memory the smile and the words), "Brother 

B , there is not money enough in the world to buy this 

wonderful knowledge of the 'Lord's plan of salvation' "which 
he has graciously permitted you to see, is there?" I answered 
"There is not!" He said, "Brother, are many of your friends 
in the truth?" and I told him there were not, then he quickly 
replied, "Brother, I caution you to be wise as a serpent and 
harmless as a dove. Do not talk; and again I say DO NOT 
TALK, but rather live, live, LIVE!" These wonderful words 
of advice given to me years ago by our beloved Pastor have 
been a great source of inspiration to me; but alas! much to 
my own hurt, I did not always follow them; and wherein I 
failed thus to do, I have always suffered a great many trials, 
which have heen largely brought about by my own wilful 
conduct. 

I am thankful for the many words of consolation which 
come through The Watch Tower so often, and asking an 
interest in your daily supplications at the throne of grace. 

Yours in the blessed hope, J. H. B., Pa. 

THE BLESSED WATCH TOWEE 

My Beloved Brethren: — 

Greetings in the glorious name of our Bridegroom and 
King, and favor from his gracious hand! Ever since our 
dear Pastor, of precious memory, left us, for a place with 


[6172] 


Novbiib«r 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(351-338) 


our Lord, I have watched with keenest interest the course 
of those whom he left in charge of The Watch Tower. It 
rejoices my heai-t unspeakably to express to you, my brethren, 
something of the deep appreciation I feel for the loyal humble 
spirit you have always manifested in this work. 

Knowing some of you personally impresses me with a 
fuller appreciation of your service. The blessed Watch 
Tower brings exactly the same kind of food to the "Household
" as our Lord sent by the hand of "that faithful and 
wise servant." We know where it comes from, my brethren, 
for no other being in the universe ever served his hungry 
sheep such food! Truly he is still leading us "in green 
pastures and beside still waters." Praises throughout the 
ages of eternity to our "Good Shepherd'* 1 

Have just read the leading article in July 1st To web and 
couldn't repress my earnest desire to say, Thank you] 

God bless and keep you, protecting you from the spirit of 
evil that is now king throughout the earth and which as a 
mighty giant is seeking to hurl his poisonous darts into the 
hearts and minds of God's dear saints. 

Holding you up before the great white throne every day 
is one of my most appreciated privileges* Be strong and of 
good courage, my brethren, for the church will surely need 
help from the strong and courageous in the very near future. 
What a privilege is yours to give the needed help from our 
Lord! 

Rejoicing with you in this privilege and earnestly asking 
an interest m your prayers, I am, 

Your sister by his grace, Mrs. C. E„ K., Texas. 

EXPBESSES HEARTY CO-OPERATION 
Dear Friends: — 

Perhaps we have been slow in writing you an assurance 
of our continued support of the Society, and of those who are 
in full harmony and cooperation therewith; but we now do so, 
and that most* heartily. We have good reason to believe that 
much of the matter appearing in all the late issues of The 
Tower is from the pen of our beloved President and from 
those in harmony with him. These messages of hope, love, 
comfort and good cheer are pure, enobling and elevating, and 
cannot be the product of one blinded to righteousness. 

Before the recent Pittsburgh convention (Sept. 29-Oct. 2), 
the secretary was instructed by the class here to make known 
to you their decision regarding the controversy about the 
'Society's management, which was reached by earnest prayer 
and careful consideration. They recognize the Lord's favor 
and blessing abiding with Brother Rutherford. Even if there 
were any misgivings at all, the lovely and memorable experiences
 at the convention entirely dispelled them. While the 
writer was compelled to be absent from the love feast on 
account of a sick brother, he felt, from the description given 
of it by the dear brethren present, that the Lord's presence 
and Spirit were never more clearly shown. 

Therefore, dear brethren, be assured of our love for and 
devotion to you and the Lord. 

Sincerely yours in him, 

New Kensington (Pa.) Ecclesia. 

WATCH TOWEB A "TOWER OF STRENGTH" 

Dear Brethren: — 

We, the Peru Associated Bible Students, do hereby extend 


to the dear brethren in the Bethel Home and all connected 
therewith our love and best wishes; and furthermore wish to 
pledge our hearty cooperation in the dear Lord's service in 
whatever capacity we may be called upon to serve. We wish 
to especially thank the management of The Watch Tower 
publication — surely it is a "tower of strength," doing a grand 
work for the Master. 

In conclusion we pray that the dear Lord will give you the 
needed strength to carry on the grand work still to be done. 

Yours in the Master's service, Peru, (Ind.) Ecclesia. 
MOST HELPFTTL CONTRIBUTION TO THE HARVEST MESSAGE 

Dear Brotheb Rutherford: — 

Just a line assuring you of my appreciation of this important
 privilege of again engaging in the pilgrim service, 
in these closing hours of the harvest. I am deeply grateful to 
you as his special representative at this time for an opportunity
 to do my "bit" toward comforting the brethren and, 
incidentally, demolishing "Babylon/' 

The brethren as a whole are abiding the tests and trials 
of the past few months remarkably well. With few exceptions
 they have concluded to let the Lord work out these 
difficulties in his own good time and way; wisely concluding 
the frantic efforts of certain "stewards" to tie your hands 
as the Society's President and reduce their efficiency is the 
last desperate attempt of the adversary to prevent the "smiting
 of Jordan." Would that all were humble enough to 
"wait on the Lord" and watch for his leadings 1 Suggestions 
of our own importance; abbreviation of our memory of the 
Lord's past dealings; impressions of personal responsibilities 
exaggerated out of all proportion ; with final possession by the 
spirit of envy, malice, slander, hatred, is truly the devil's 
favorite method in making shipwreck of one's faith. Thanks 
to Volume Seven, we are not ignorant of his devices. 

The explanation of Revelation 7 and the exposition of 
Efcekiel's Temple in the last chapter of Volume Seven are 
in my judgment the most helpful contributions to the harvest 
message, apart from the work of our Pastor. 

May the Lord continue to bless you, dear Brother, in 
your labors of love on behalf of his children. 

Yours in the Master's service, 

Wm. A. Baker, Pilgrim. 
CONVENTION REPORTS DISCONTINUED 

Brother (Dr.) L. W. Jones, of Chicago, writes us, under 
date of October 15th, as follows: 

"Pertaining to the publication of the Souvenir Convention 
Reports of the conventions of 1917, I have reached the conclusion
 that it will be for the best interests of all the friends 
for me to forego the privilege I have enjoyed in this connection
 during the past thirteen years. 

"I have also decided to abandon the publication of Pastor 
Russell's sermons in book form, as I understand the Society 
purposes a similar publication. 

"It is my sincere hope that the brethren throughout the 
world will not misconstrue this as indicating a loss of interest 
and zeal in the Lord's service and in the truth. Money 
already paid by the friends on orders is being refunded as 
rapidly as the clerical work can be done. 

"It will be muoh appreciated if an announcement to this 
effect is published in The Watoh Tower." 


PASTOR RUSSELL'S SERMONS^-TWO STYLES ONLY 


The book of sermons by Brother Russell will not be ready 
for shipment until early in December. No acknowledgement 
w T ill be made of your order until the hooks are ready for shipment
, so please do not be disturbed that you receive no acknowledgment
 sooner. 

It has been thought advisable to specialize on the clothbound
 edition of the Sermon Book, and we will, therefore, not 
publish it in the Karatol or India at this time. We will, however
, have some of our regular cloth edition put into Morocco 
covers for those who prefer a more expensive volume. The 
cloth edition, however, will be handsomely bound in dark green 
cloth, gold embossed, with gilt edges; a beautiful book. Price 
$1.00 postpaid. The stiff leather binding will be $1.50. Orders 
thus far received for the Karatol edition will be tilled with 
the cloth volume, and orders for the flexible leather will be filled 
with the stiff Morocco-bound book, unless otherwise instructed. 


The following questions have been asked, and we publish the 
answers for the benefit of others: 

Q. Am I entitled to votes for donations made several years 
ago? 

A. Yes. 

Q. I expect to attend the election. Shall I send my proxy 
to the Secretary, and what name shall I write in it? 

A. All proxies should be sent to the Secretary that he may 
insert the number of votes and certify to the same. Leave 
blank the space provided for appointment of proxy, if you expect
 to attend the election in person, but sign your name at 
the bottom of the proxy. 

Q. Does writing on the back of the proxy invalidate it? 


QUESTIONS RELATING TO VOTING 


A. No. It was suggested to write on the back of the proxy 
for convenience and the saving of paper. 

Q. Does the By-law, Section 2, published in the November 
1st Tower, page 329, relate to the recent disagreement as to 
who constitutes the legal Board of Directors? 

A. No. It particularly relates to those who oppose the 
message of the kingdom, as set forth in Studies in the Scriptures
, who deny Brother Russell as "that servant" and who 
are out of harmony with the purposes and work of the Society. 
The substance of this By-law was suggested by Brother Russell
 in 1911. A by-law intending to cover the point was passed 
at Pittsburgh on January 6th last, and approved by the lio ird 
of Directors, January 19th, and was since slightly amended, as 
published. 


VII— 23 


[6173] 


ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF THE LORD'S FAVOR 


The Society's fiscal year closes with October 31st. We take 
pleasure in acknowledging the Lord's great blessing upon the 
Harvest work for the year, evidenced by an increase in every 
branch of the service. Our trial balance shows that 1917 exceeds
 every other year of the harvest work except the phenominal
 years of 1913 and 1914. We feel sure the Triends will 
rejoice over this further evidence of the Lord's guidance and 
favor and that he is still at the helm. 

