Prosperity Under the Kingdom of God in Our Own Generation
THE world situation today is so critical that many informed persons doubt whether life will continue much longer. Said a special report to the Washington Post: “Influential men have sensed an impending danger unlike any in human experience. Futurologists call it the crisis of crises, the culmination of man’s timeless errors.”
Never has man been so bent on ruining the earth, polluting the air we breathe, the water we drink and the food we eat. Never have governments been confronted with such a mountain of national and international problems that they could not resolve. And never have those opposing God’s sovereignty made themselves so manifest. Millions deny that God exists. Even among those acknowledging his existence there are many who claim that he has no interest in mankind. So there is a great need for Jehovah God to show that he is King over all the earth.
The cheering news is that he will do so in our generation. His kingdom by Christ will soon smash to pieces all governments that stand in opposition to it and will itself administer man’s affairs without a rival. (Dan. 2:44) True prosperity will begin, and poverty, suffering and oppression will end. Why can we be so sure of this?
First of all, Bible chronology shows that since the autumn of 1914 C.E. we have been living in the “last days” of this system of things. Jesus Christ indicated that these “last days” would not extend beyond the life-span of the generation seeing their start. (Matt. 24:34) Hence, at least some people who witnessed the horrors of World War I will see the complete end of government by imperfect men and the bringing in of prosperity under the kingdom of God.
In verification of Bible chronology, we see the very conditions foretold in the Holy Scriptures as marking the “last days.” Note, for example, what 2 Timothy 3:1-5 tells us: “Know this, that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here. For men will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, self-assuming, haughty, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, disloyal, having no natural affection, not open to any agreement, slanderers, without self-control, fierce, without love of goodness, betrayers, headstrong, puffed up with pride, lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God, having a form of godly devotion but proving false to its power.” Have you not seen these very conditions? Is it not true that they are in evidence among those professing to serve God, that is, members of Christendom’s churches?
The fact that the “last days” will terminate in the complete destruction of everyone and everything standing in opposition to God’s kingdom gives reason for serious thought. A person should ask himself, Am I in a fit position to be preserved as one of the loyal supporters of God’s kingdom?
For example, have you informed yourself as to God’s moral standards, which are set out in the Bible, and are you living in harmony with them? (1 Cor. 6:9-11) Also, are you making the best of your opportunities? Are you doing your best in keeping your home neat and clean? Are you an industrious worker, striving to do what you can do to the extent of your abilities? Do you make wise use of your strength and capabilities, not wasting resources and energies on filthy habits?
Even if you are not among the poor, are you living a life in harmony with God’s will? Are you compassionate, generous and loving? Does your heart stir you to take what positive action you can to help those who are in need through no fault of their own? Are you grieved about the terrible oppressions that millions have to endure?
These things are important, for Jehovah God does not want as his subjects people who are unclean in habits, conduct, person or home. Christians are reminded: “In accord with the Holy One who called you, do you also become holy yourselves in all your conduct, because it is written: ‘You must be holy, because I am holy.”’ (1 Pet. 1:15, 16) Moreover, Jehovah God does not approve of laziness. The inspired rule is: “If anyone does not want to work, neither let him eat.” (2 Thess. 3:10) On the other hand, those who are insensitive to the needs of oppressed and afflicted people are pronounced wicked. Says Proverbs 14:21: “The one despising his own fellowman is sinning, but happy is he who is showing favor to the afflicted ones.”
It is urgent that individuals take positive action to prove that they are lovers of right and haters of bad. One should be grateful that God has been patient with mankind, giving all people an opportunity to demonstrate whether they want to live in harmony with his ways or not.
If you are among those who love truth and righteousness and keenly desire to do God’s will, we urge you to accept the invitation of Jehovah’s Christian witnesses to study the Bible with them. Thus you, too, can share the comforting hope that God’s kingdom will soon satisfy the desire of every honest-hearted person. Prosperity under the kingdom of God will become a reality in our generation.

