Do You Have a Guardian Angel?
DO YOU believe that you have a guardian angel? Many people think that they do. For that matter, a certain woman in western Canada is said to have a special gift involving angels. If you give her your full name along with $200, she claims that she will put you in touch with your guardian angel. First, she meditates by focusing on the flame of a candle. Next, she has a vision in which your angel gives her a message to pass on to you. As a bonus, the woman provides a sketch of what your angel looks like.
To some, this may seem to be on a par with a tale about French King Louis IX. He supposedly bought very expensive feathers said to have fallen from the wings of the Archangel Michael. While questioning that story, many would not for a moment doubt the Canadian woman’s claims.
Fascination With Angels
In recent years there has been tremendous interest in angels. On television and in movies, books, magazines, and newsletters, we are told about angels who comfort those seriously ill, console the bereaved, impart wisdom, and snatch individuals from death. In the United States, about 20 million viewers watch a weekly television series that portrays angelic intervention in the lives of people. One bookstore lists over 400 books that focus on angels.
A recent book relates experiences about how guardian angels have saved the lives of soldiers in combat. Automobile bumper stickers state that the drivers are protected by guardian angels. Organizations, conferences, and seminars promote the study of angels and are said to help people communicate with them.
Eileen Freeman is the writer of three books about angels and the publisher of a journal devoted exclusively to them. She contends: “I believe that for every angel in heaven there is a guardian angel on Earth, a being whose duties are not solely the praise of God in the heavenly sphere but the actual care of human beings and other forms of life on Earth. A guardian angel is assigned to each of us when we are conceived and watches over us through our growth in the womb, through our birth, through our life in this world, until the angel guides us from the confines of this world into the glory of heaven.” This well describes the popular view of guardian angels.
In these stressful and difficult times, it is appealing to believe that we have our own guardian angel, whose duty it is to protect us. What does God’s Word, the Bible, say about this? Should we try to contact angels? Do they care about our moral standards and religious beliefs? What help can we expect from them? These questions will be answered in the following article.

