Keep Your Eye Simple
 1. What does it mean to have a simple eye, and why is this important?
1 In his Sermon on the Mount, Jesus called attention to the tremendous influence that the figurative or spiritual eye can exercise on our entire life course. He said: “If, then, your eye is simple, your whole body will be bright; but if your eye is wicked, your whole body will be dark.” (Matt. 6:22, 23) A simple eye is one that is focused on a single purpose​—doing God’s will—​not being distracted by undue anxiety over material things. (Matt. 6:19-21, 24-33) What can help us to maintain a simple eye?
 2. What view of material things does God’s Word encourage?
2 Cultivating Contentment: Providing adequately for the needs of one’s household is a Scriptural obligation. (1 Tim. 5:8) But this does not require that we engage in an endless quest for the best and latest things. (Prov. 27:20; 30:8, 9) Rather, the Scriptures urge us to be content with “sustenance and covering,” the necessities of life. (1 Tim. 6:8; Heb. 13:5, 6) Heeding this counsel can help us to keep our eye in proper focus.
 3. What can help us to avoid self-imposed burdens?
3 We are wise to avoid burdening ourselves with unnecessary debt and with possessions or pursuits that require much time and attention. (1 Tim. 6:9, 10) How can we do this? When contemplating a course of action, prayerfully weigh the matter and honestly evaluate whether it will infringe on spiritual pursuits. Be determined to keep spiritual things first in your life.​—Phil. 1:10; 4:6, 7.
 4. Why should we look for ways to simplify our life-style?
4 Simplify Your Life-Style: Another aid to resisting the pull of materialism is to seek to simplify your life-style. One brother who found that his family could manage well without excess material goods said: “I can now do so much more in the congregation to serve my brothers. I am convinced that Jehovah blesses all of his servants when they put true worship ahead of personal interests.” Could you enjoy greater blessings by simplifying your life-style?
 5. Why is constant effort required to keep our eye simple?
5 Constant effort is needed to resist the influence of Satan, his materialistic world, and our own imperfect flesh. Rather than allowing our eyes to wander, let us keep them fixed on doing God’s will and on our precious hope of everlasting life.​—Prov. 4:25; 2 Cor. 4:18.

