We Must Respect Jehovah’s Authority
With what do you associate the ancient names Korah, Dathan, and Abiram? Rebellion! Against what? Godly authority. The details of their tragic course are recorded in Numbers chapter 16, and an overview of the matter is provided in the article “Loyally Submit to Godly Authority” in the August 1, 2002, Watchtower. You would find it beneficial to read this material and then view the sobering portrayal of it in the video Respect Jehovah’s Authority. You will see the conflict that developed between the faithful sons of Korah and their rebellious father, who was on a collision course with the Sovereign of the universe. (Num. 26:9-11) This true-life drama should inspire all of us to develop our loyalty to Jehovah even more fully.
As you watch the video, look for the evidence that Korah and his fellow rebels failed the test of loyalty in six crucial areas: (1) How did they disrespect godly authority? (2) How did they let pride, ambition, and jealousy affect them? (3) How did they focus on the deficiencies of those appointed by Jehovah? (4) What complaining attitude had they developed? (5) Why had they become dissatisfied with their privileges of service? (6) How did they let friends and family take precedence over loyalty to God?
Consider how the lessons learned in this Bible drama apply to our personal view of godly authority today: (1) How should we respond to the decisions of elders in the congregation, and why? (2) How can we counteract any improper motives within us? (3) How should we react to the imperfections of those appointed to take the lead? (4) What should we do if a complaining spirit begins to develop in our heart? (5) How should we feel about any privileges we have been given? (6) Who should never take priority over our loyalty to God, and when might this become a difficult test for us?
After this information is discussed in the congregation, why not watch the video again? Let it doubly impress upon your mind the reasons why we must always respect Jehovah’s authority!​—Ps. 18:25; 37:28.

