Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Reaching Greenland’s Remote Settlements
FOR many decades Jehovah’s Witnesses have used the Watchtower and Awake! magazines in the preaching of the good news. These journals exalt the wisdom of Jehovah as expressed in his Word, the Bible. They keep watch on world events that relate to Bible prophecy, and they apply the reasonable counsel of the Bible to contemporary problems.​—James 3:17.
In 1994, Witnesses in Greenland made a special effort to offer The Watchtower and Awake! to as many people as possible. During the summer, they made arrangements to visit some of the most remote settlements in Greenland. A group of Kingdom proclaimers traveled by boat more than 2,500 miles [4,000 km] up the west coast to Qaanaaq (Thule), reaching some of the northernmost communities on the globe. Their trip took seven weeks. On the east coast, a Witness couple reached the settlement in Ittoqqortoormiit and for the first time covered it systematically with the good news.
Earlier that year, during the month of April, 7,513 copies of The Watchtower and Awake! were placed with the people of Greenland. That means that, on an average, each of the 127 Kingdom publishers placed 59 magazines​—1 magazine for every 7 inhabitants. That month, Awake! featured a series of articles under the cover title “Breast Cancer​—Every Woman’s Fear.” One Witness, who placed 140 magazines, left copies of that Awake! with a television reporter. A couple of days later, a television news program featured the articles on breast cancer. The reporter displayed the magazine on camera, showing several pages as she praised the quality of the Greenlandic translation. She also highlighted the practical suggestions given by Awake! as preventive health care.
The Witness who originally placed the magazines with the reporter was interviewed on the same TV program. She answered a number of questions about Jehovah’s Witnesses and spoke about the wide distribution of the magazines that month. She also commented on the practical wisdom found in the Bible and pointed out that such reasonable counsel can help us cope with today’s problems.
The program concluded with an interview of the president of the Greenlandic Cancer Society. She noted that she had never seen such fine and informative material on this subject in her language. Then she invited all those interested in the subject of breast cancer to read the Awake! articles. She said that there was good reason to be grateful to Jehovah’s Witnesses for their initiative.
As in Greenland, Jehovah’s Witnesses around the world continue to preach the good news “in all creation that is under heaven.” (Colossians 1:23; Acts 1:8) With the use of Bible literature, including The Watchtower and Awake!, they help all sorts of people to cope with present-day problems as well as give them a hope for a better future.
[Map on page 8]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
Qaanaaq (Thule)
Ittoqqortoormiit
Nuuk (Godthåb)

