From Our Readers
Verbal Abuse  The series “From Words That Hurt to Words That Heal” (October 22, 1996) is just part of a long line of articles that have shown how much Jehovah cares for us. The articles on “Help for Alcoholics and Their Families” (May 22, 1992), “Women—Deserving of Respect” (July 8, 1992), “Help for Children of Divorce” (April 22, 1991), and “Will Domestic Violence Ever End?” (February 8, 1993) have all kept me going through years of emotional abuse at the hands of an alcoholic husband. I have read these articles with tears of joy and sadness. My heart overflows with appreciation for a God who knows our most intimate fears, pains, and traumas.
J. C., Canada
The articles moved me deeply. They exactly described the situation I was in with my husband. I can readily agree with every sentence. You treat women very lovingly, and this confirms for me that this organization is being used by Jehovah.
P. S., Germany
The articles encouraged me to continue fighting my weakness by controlling my tongue. Now I know how I should be treating my husband. I read the articles with tears in my eyes.
G. I., Austria
I have been the victim of verbal violence from my husband for years. I’ve managed to avoid falling into desperation by cultivating the fruits of God’s spirit and by busying myself in the full-time preaching work. Your articles made me feel less alone—that someone understands the problem.
M. N., Italy
I have read many of your articles before, but these touched something deep in me. Looking at the photograph on page 9 was like looking at my mother or my sister, who for many years have suffered at the hands of their husbands. I made copies of these articles and sent them to others who I know are suffering in this way. We look forward to God’s new world, where abusive speech of every kind will be done away with.
B. P., Kenya
When I gave the magazine to my uncle who abused his wife verbally, he read it several times. Afterward, we noticed that he no longer abused his wife and that there was no longer any commotion in their home. Both he and his wife keep thanking me for helping them to understand themselves. I want to pass the thanks on to Awake!
F. F., Nigeria
Former Addict  I am grateful for the article “The Truth Gave Me Back My Life.” (October 22, 1996) I am 19 years old, and even though I’m a regular pioneer, or full-time evangelizer, I have sometimes felt that I was missing out on certain things. Dolly Horry’s experience helped me to see that the world’s attractiveness is just an illusion.
R. M. A., Bolivia
I want to tell you how moved I was by this article. As I read the life story of Dolly Horry, tears rolled down my face. I pray that this article will move others in Dolly’s former way of life to turn to a meaningful life now.
O. S. O., Nigeria
As one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, I feel honored to have Dolly Horry as a Christian sister. In my teens I put Jehovah in second place in my life. My mother never gave up on me, though, and she was tremendously joyful at my baptism last year.
B. B., Australia

