From Our Readers
Saved by Awake!  Some years ago (May 8, 1984) Awake! recommended that each family discuss what to do in case of a fire and have regular fire drills. My husband and I took this advice. In January of this year, we had the chance to put our plans into practice when I awoke to find the lower floor of our house burning fiercely. We each did as we had rehearsed and got out safely. I have never been so grateful for an Awake! article!
G. E., Germany
Only Witnesses Neutral?  Your May 8, 1995, issue (“It’s No Secret Anymore”) stated: “Only Jehovah’s Witnesses have maintained their neutrality and refused to learn or practice war anymore.” In World War II, of the 11,996 men who refused to fight, only 940 were Jehovah’s Witnesses. I was a conscientious objector myself. The word “only” in your statement was used to paint a false picture that only Jehovah’s Witnesses held to this belief.
P. B., United States
We realize that some individuals have refused to participate in war, and we have acknowledged this in our publications. (See “Awake!” of September 8, 1987, page 7.) However, the statement in question specifically referred to the failure of “Catholic and Orthodox believers” to maintain neutrality in Rwanda, Liberia, the Balkans, and other places of recent conflict. Among religious organizations, only Jehovah’s Witnesses have taken a consistently neutral stand.​—ED.
Hospital Seminars  Thank you very much for the article “Seminars to Improve Relations Between Doctors and Jehovah’s Witnesses.” (March 22, 1995) I am so grateful for the Hospital Liaison Committee. I am 81 years old, and I broke my hip and shoulder while I was away from home. The local committee was at the hospital 30 minutes before I was. Since I had no family in the area, one of the brothers stayed with me through the operation. What a relief! The HLC arrangement is truly a blessing from Jehovah.
A. W., United States
Jogging Risks  I am a regular runner. Because of your article “Enjoy Jogging​—But Watch the Risks!” (March 22, 1995), I am sure many of my fellow Christians will view me as unbalanced. I am also afraid many will steer clear of running because of the negative connotation you presented. Runners are not prone to heart attacks as you allege. And endorphins occur in the brain not in body muscle nerves as you state.
C. D., United States
It was not our intention to stigmatize running. We acknowledged the benefits of exercise but encouraged readers to be balanced and not push their bodies beyond reasonable limits. More research will have to be done before it is known just how much of a health risk long-​distance running may pose for certain individuals. As to endorphins, “The New Encyclopædia Britannica” confirms that they are “distributed in characteristic patterns throughout the nervous system.” On the danger of heart attacks, “The Medical Post” acknowledges that strenuous exercise lowers the overall risk of sudden cardiac arrest; however, it states that there is “an increased risk for the exerciser during the period they are actually exercising.”​—ED.
Stamp Collecting  I loved the article “Philately​—Absorbing Hobby and Big Business.” (January 8, 1995) I am convinced that Awake! doesn’t overlook anything​—not even postage stamps. I collect stamps as a hobby and felt the article was very complete. Thank you for your valuable suggestions.
R. C., Venezuela

