From Our Readers
Friendship  I send you my sincere thanks for the article “Young People Ask . . . Why Can’t I Keep Friends?” (May 22, 1996) You have no idea how much this article helped me. It showed me that, despite obstacles, it is possible to have lasting friendships. At times, we lose friends because we postpone settling misunderstandings. This article helped me to fight my weaknesses in this regard.
A. M. P., Brazil
The article arrived at just the right time. Three months ago my cherished friendship with another girl began to cool off; we got to the point of not talking to each other anymore. When the article arrived, my friend and I both read it and realized that we had been behaving foolishly. We talked things out and clarified a whole series of misunderstandings. Now our friendship has renewed vigor.
N. T., Italy
Volcano Disaster  I remember the news reports of the eruption of Mount Pinatubo back in 1991. But I put it out of mind until reading the article “Lahars—Mount Pinatubo’s Aftermath.” (May 22, 1996) I had never heard of lahars before and found the article fascinating. The courage and helpfulness shown by the Garcia family, though in the path of a lahar, was outstanding.
S. F., Canada
The article touched me deeply. It was moving to read the experiences of Christian brothers who maintained their zeal for spiritual things, even though they found themselves in unpleasant conditions. This has encouraged me not to let little problems make me miss Christian meetings or impede me from participating in the preaching work. Thank you for the article!
S. D., Italy
My husband and I had never heard of lahars, but now we realize how serious and dangerous they are. We would like our brothers in the Philippines to know that we are praying for them and for those who were able to help them.
C. A. B., Guatemala
Green Flash  I just read the article “Have You Ever Seen a Green Flash?” (May 22, 1996) A few years ago, while flying in the Alaskan bush, I was amazed to see a blue-green flash that lasted just a fraction of a second. I had never found an article explaining this occurrence until now. I sometimes thought it must have been something that I just imagined!
G. C., Alaska
Panic Attacks  I want to express my gratitude for the article “Coping With Panic Attacks.” (June 8, 1996) I have suffered such attacks for six years. After serving as a pioneer (full-time evangelizer) for a year, I had to stop because I did not have the strength to cope with the attacks. How painful it was when because I appeared to be healthy, close friends did not understand this. It is difficult to describe how happy I was to read this article.
O. S., Ukraine
I have served as a full-time minister for eight years. But for a number of years, I have had a feeling of worthlessness and I have suffered much anxiety. When I read this article describing symptoms similar to mine, I immediately started to put its counsel into practice. My feelings have started to improve, and my heart is calmer.
K. M., Thailand
I have undergone medical treatment for panic attacks and have been helped. Yet, I have secretly been tormented by the question, ‘Am I spiritually weak or lazy?’ Reading the article lifted a tremendous burden from my shoulders.
P. P., Finland

