Are You Prepared to Defend Your Faith?
HAVE you ever faced a situation where you felt compelled to defend your faith? Consider what happened to Susana, a 16-year-old sister in Paraguay. In her high-school ethics class, a comment was made that Jehovah’s Witnesses do not accept the “Old Testament,” Jesus Christ, or Mary. It was also claimed that the Witnesses are fanatics who would rather die than accept medical care. How would you have reacted?
Susana prayed to Jehovah and raised her hand. The class was about to end, so she asked her teacher for permission to give a presentation about her beliefs as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. The teacher readily agreed. During the next two weeks, Susana prepared for the session, using the brochure entitled Jehovah’s Witnesses—Who Are They? What Do They Believe?
The day for the presentation came. Susana explained the origin of the name Jehovah’s Witnesses. She also explained our hope for the future and why we do not accept blood transfusions. Then she invited the class to ask questions. Most of the students raised their hands. The teacher was impressed with the young girl’s Scriptural answers to the questions.
One student commented, “I was in a Kingdom Hall once, and there was not a single image.” The teacher wanted to know why. Susana read Psalm 115:4-8 and Exodus 20:4. Amazed, the teacher said, “How is it that our churches are so filled with images when the Bible condemns them?”
The question-and-answer discussion continued for 40 minutes. When Susana asked the class if they wanted to see the video No Blood—Medicine Meets the Challenge, all answered yes. So the teacher scheduled another session the following day. After the video, Susana explained the alternative treatments that are acceptable to some of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Regarding that, the teacher commented: “I did not know that there were so many alternative treatments; nor was I aware of the benefits of treatment without blood. These treatments—are they only for Jehovah’s Witnesses?” When she heard that they are not, the teacher said, “The next time Jehovah’s Witnesses come to my door, I am going to have a conversation with them.”
The 20-minute discussion that Susana had originally prepared lasted for three hours. A week later, other students gave a presentation on their beliefs as church members. At the conclusion, many questions were raised, but the students involved could not defend their faith. The teacher asked them, “How is it that you are not able to defend your faith as did your fellow student who is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses?”
The response was: “They really study the Bible. We do not.”
Turning to Susana, the teacher said: “You really do study the Bible and make an effort to do what it says. You deserve commendation.”
Susana could have remained silent. Yet, in speaking up, she followed the fine example of an unnamed little Israelite girl who was taken captive by the Syrians. That girl came to be in the household of the Syrian general Naaman, who had a loathsome skin disease. The Israelite girl spoke up, saying to her mistress: “If only my lord were before the prophet that is in Samaria! In that case he would recover him from his leprosy.” The girl just could not hold herself back from witnessing about the true God. This led to her owner, Naaman, becoming a worshipper of Jehovah.—2 Ki. 5:3, 17.
Likewise, Susana could not keep herself from witnessing about Jehovah and his people. In taking the initiative to defend her faith when her beliefs were challenged, Susana was obeying the Scriptural command: “Sanctify the Christ as Lord in your hearts, always ready to make a defense before everyone that demands of you a reason for the hope in you, but doing so together with a mild temper and deep respect.” (1 Pet. 3:15) Are you ready to defend your faith and take the initiative when the opportunity arises?
[Picture on page 17]
These tools can help you defend your faith

