Vol. XXXJX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., FEBRUARY 1, 1918 


No. 3 


VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

When asked what would be the evidence of the end of the 
world ( age ) , the great Master Teacher enumerated many 
things that would come to pass at that time, proving that we 
had reached the end of the world. He admonished his followers
 to watch the development of these evidences, telling 


them, "When these things begin to come to pass then look up, 
lift up your heads, for your deliverance draweth nigh." It 
seems fitting that we here, from time to time, make note of 
these events as they transpire, which were foretold by the 
Lord Jesus, that we might be strengthened in faith and hold 
fast that which Ave have received and be better prepared to 
enter into the kingdom. 

Through a number of the prophets God long aforetime 
called attention to events corroborating the testimony given 
by the Lord Jesus, events which are now being fulfilled before 
our eyes. The prophet Elijah, in the mountain, saw a great 
wind and then an earthquake, that was followed by a fire, 
and then heard the still, small voice. (I Kings 19*: 11, 12} 
Elijah in the mount, it seems, represented the church of God, 
who, on this side the vail, are privileged to see and to understand
 events due which are happening at this time. Thus 
seeing and understanding and appreciating their privilege, 
they are further blessed with the opportunity of binding the 
religio-political "kings" with chains of restraining truth; and 
the "nobles" with fetters of iron — the beginning of the 
restraints of the coming iron rule of the kingdom of God. 

As another evidence that the Lord used Pastor Russell ns 
liis messenger to the Laodicean period of the church's development
, we note that he wrote twenty years ago foretelling 
events now transpiring. He said: 

''The four exhibitions of the Lord given to Elijah represent
, we believe, four manifestations in which the Lord is 
a>bout to reveal himself to mankind, the fiTst three of which 
will prepare men for the final one in which will come the 
desired blessing to all the families of the earth. The first was 
the blowing of the -winds, which seem to be used in the 
Scriptures for wars. Second, an earthquake. Throughout 
the Scriptures an earthquake seems always to represent revolution
, and it is not unreasonable to expect that an era of 
general warfare would so arouse the lower classes of Europe 
and so discontent them with their lot (especially with the 
conditions which would follow such a war) that revolution 
would be the next thing in order. (Rev. 16:18) But severe 
though those revolutionary experiences will be to the world, 


they are not sufficient to prepare men to hear the voice of 
God. It will require fire from Heaven." The Watch Tower, 
July 1st, 1898, Page 208. 

Already we witness the nations passing to the second stage 
foretold by Elijah's experience, namely, revolution. Already 
revolution has its grip upon Russia and threatens all the 
other kingdoms. Revolutionists have control in Russia and a 
reign of tyranny and crime is the result. Famine adds to the 
terror, and many are robbed and maltreated. The press 
despatches, on January 7th, state: 

"The new masters of the situation are laborers, factory 
hands, shop men, waiters and domestic servants, while their 
former masters have to sing small and listen to their employes
. All relationships are reversed. Socialist decrees are 
rapidly issued for this purpose every day. 

"The food situation is critical, owing to the suspension of 
railway communication. Many trainloads of food for Petrograd
 have been looted by soldiers and peasants while on the 
way. Starvation seems to stare us in the face. We receive 
a small quantity — three quarters of a pound — of black bread 
per head for two days. The black, sometimes dark brown, 
bread, doled out by a card system, is sticky, gritty stuff, only 
half baked, composed of millers* refuse with mixed straw and 
of the consistency of putty. Meat is a rare luxury. Home 
flesh is in common use. 

"Petrograd is full of dirt, disorder and crime. There has 
been no cleaning since the beginning of the war. Burglary, 
robbery and murder in audacious forms prevail to an extent 
hitherto unknown. There are no police and no authority one 
van appeal to. Men and women are stripped of overcoats and 
shoes in the streets at night, and armed marauders, in military
 uniform, enter houses under a pretext of official searches. 
Thieves in stolen motor ears hold up persons driving sledges. 
Nobody knows where to put money and valuables safely, since 
even private safes and banks are subjected to revision by 
government agents." 

AFTER THE WIND THE EARTHQUAKE 

The Bolshevik i threaten to carry the revolution to every 
country on earth. A press despatch from London, dated January
 ]2th, reads as follows: 

'"The call of Ensign Krylenko, the Bolshevik Commanderin
-Chief, for volunteers for a Russian army, was issued in 
the form of an appeal to the soldiers and workmen and aB a 
reply to the German peace proposals. 


[6206] 


FEBRUARY 1, 1918 


THE WA TCH TOWER 


(35-36) 


"In the event of a separate peace between Germany and 
Russia, the call declares the Russian republic and its councils
 will be surrounded on all sides by enemies. Krylenko 
contin ues : 

" 'American and French financiers are lending money to 
provide war material for Kaledin. The German bourgeoisie 
are quite prepared to use them as allies for stifling the Russian
 revolution. 

" 'These are conditions which raise for the Russian 
peasants and workmen the whole question of the defense of 
the conquest achieved by the revolution and of the holy war 
against the bourgeoisie, not only of Russia, but of Germany, 
France and Great Britain. 

" 'Should the bourgeoisie be victorious they will take 
vengeance in the shape of the most cruel terror and torture, 
drenching the land with blood, and which would put in the 
shade the torments inflicted by the satellites of the Czar. 

" 'It may be that a holy war on the fronts as well aa 
behind the lines s-t nnds before us as a terrible and unavoidable
 fate.' 

'The appeal concludes by declaring that there will be no 
compulsion in recruiting." 

Nicholas Lenine, the Bolshevik Dictator and Prime Minister
 of Russia, answers: 

"What are the Bolsheviks, and what do they want? The 
Bolsheviks are a communistic party representing first the 
day laborers; secondly, all such workmen as are, as Russians 
say, 'Soznatelniye,' that is, such as have a full class and 
political consciousness; and finally, the landless or nearly 
landless peasants. 

"These classes stand for immediate Socialism. Their 
notion of Socialism is a republic ruled by the Councils of 
Work men* s, Soldiers' and Peasants* Deputies. They are 
against every form of monarchy and every form of political 
power except such as reposes in the hands of the Councils of 
Deputies. They are against all governments of the type of 
the governments of LvofT and Kerensky. They intend to prepare
 our two hundred million Russians for government by the 
Councils of Deputies." 

Others, too, see and dread the wind, earthquake and fire, 
not discerning behind it all the wonders of the kingdom of 
God. Blinded by the god of this world and by his angels 
(messengers — clergymen — 2 Corinthians 11:15) who have for 
centuries posed as messengers of light, they see the events but 
do not understand their significance. Prominent clergymen, 
with ears fairly itching to know what the people want to 
hear {2 Timothy 4:3), tell their deluded flocks that there is 
no trouble ahead, more than ordinary; tint if the people will 
only trust the (blind) guides they will all land in the 
Elysian fields of a better age, not realizing that they are on 
the very brink of anarohy. When the people wake up to the 
truth of the situation, they will have no pity on those 
trusted servants who lulled them to sleep on the verge of 
the precipice. — 2 Chronicles 36:14-19. 

MEK'S HBAETS FAILING THEM TOR TEAB 

There are some watchers who are not clericals who warn 
drowsy Christendom in vain. Winston Churchill, in the 
"New York Times" of December 2nd, 1917, says: 

"The more one sees of this war, the more one is inclined 
to the belief that its real significance lies behind the battle 
lines rather than on them. Like the great war that followed 
the French Revolution, it has two aspects, the military and 
the social, and of these the social is the more serious of the 
two, as far as the future of the world U concerned. A process 
of ferment betokening profound social changes had for some 
time been going on with more or less intensity in various 
countries before the war'ibegan; and, contrary to certain 
prophecies , the war tended to hasten rather than retard the 
process. 

"The keynote of what is likely to happen in other allied 
countries in case of a German victory, or of even a pronounced
 German success, has been struck in Russia, That 
ferment has been seething for a long time. Since 1905 Russia 
has been waiting to overthrow a bureaucracy upheld by a 
mystical and fanatical Czar; the peasants, the* army, from an 
outraged sense of betrayal, supported the revolution, whereupon
 the revolt at once took on the true evolutionary colors 
of the time. The inner significance of this war has to "do with 
the emancipation of labor, just as the inner significance of 
that of a hundred years ago had to do with the emancipation 
of the shopkeeper — who has since become a plutocrat! We 
not only have to reconcile ourselves to that idea, but we 
have the immediate task before us of guiding this evolutionary 
tendency by using all our intelligence on the problem, otherwise
 we shall have portions of the world given over to 


anarchy and chaos. [We would have healed Babylon. — 
Jeremiah 51:9, Eds.] 

"Russia has had her revolution. And it is safe to say that 
in all the nations of the Western World something like a 
revolution is due: call it if you like, a profound change in 
the social fabric that will probably take place peacefully in 
all countries save Germany, where* there is no constitutional 
outlet for the people's will. 

"So far as the Allies are concerned, the probability of a 
social turnover that would paralyze a nation for the proper 
prosecution of the war is not unlikely to happen in Italy, 
France, and even in Britain, provided the w^r continues to 
drag on and on and no more reverses are experienced. The 
peace propaganda is mostly among the working classes, but 
it must be remembered that the working classes have a potential
, an economic power today far beyond the political power 
represented by their votes. 'They have a leverage of which 
they are becoming more and more aware. A great many of 
them are syndicalists. Like the Junkers — and this is not said 
detrimentally, ^ but impartially — they deem their first loyalty 
to t>e to their class, they are not inclined to reorganize 
national boundaries; they argue that the more revolutions 
take place outside of Germany the more likelihood of a revolution
 inside of Germany; that the way to stop the war is 
by revolution — peaceful if possible. 

"This may or may not be true. The question for the 
responsible Governments of the nations concerned is whether 
it is worth while to take such a chance. Wouldn't it be better 
by military means to force Germany to have her revolution 
first? That is exactly what, with her cleverness, Junker 
Germany is trying to do Avith the allies; she is sowing peace 
propaganda among their armies and their populations — now 
that Russia can no longer be kept an absolute monarchy, 
■which would have suited her better. She has done a great 
deal of that sowing in Italy. 

"The -situation, then, regarded as judicially as possible, 
appears to be this: Can we of the Entente, including 
America, 'beat' Germany to the social upheaval? — to use a 
slang expression. Can we force her, by properly co-ordinated 
military operations and the realization of a common purpose, 
to have her revolution first? If we can do this, we shall be 
in a position to guide witn more wisdom and less haste the 
evolutionary changes that are coming in our own nations." 
RESTLESS LABOR 

Pastor Russell long ago foretold the failure of the trade 
union as a bulwark for labor and the breakdown of Socialism 
as a national cure for the ills of discontent. How it is 
working out is described editorially in a recent issue of the 
"Saturday Evening Post": 

"All observers bear witness to a deep undercurrent of dissatisfaction
 among industrial wage-earners in England. We 
get glimpses of the same thing in France, Italy and Germany. 
Conservative organs like the London Times talk darkly about 
'the ferment of revolution.' 

"Workers are experiencing an extensive application of 
state socialism. The plant is controlled by the state now, 
and operated not primarily for the profit of its private 
owners, but for state service. 

"And workers find this state control something much 
more formidable and intractable than the old private control 
was. Being the -state, it changes laws at will, and a vast 
body of public opinion is unquestionably at its command. 

"Formerly the worker depended upon his trade-union; but 
that reliance is pretty largely broken down. The overwhelming
 state demands an extensive dilution of skilled labor — 
meaning that a great number of unskilled workers shall be 
admitted to the shop and taught the trade, though they have 
little or no attachment to the union and are but slightly amenable
 to its discipline. 

"The right to strike is rather effectually suspended; for 
striking against the state comes close to treason. Even the 
worker's ancient right to better his condition by leaving one 
employer and going to another is restricted. In some cases 
he is the state's industrial conscript and must have the state's 
permission before he can leave. 

"Wages have advanced greatly; but so has the cost of 
living. The worker has less effectual voice in the industry 
than ever. The new <boss is far more powerful than the old. 
He is not only the law but he is pretty largely public opinion. 
There is no one to whom the worker can take an appeal from 
him. 

"He is more remote from the worker than the old boss 
was — a far, formiidaible, invulnerable thing, which lives 
nowhere and everywhere. 

"And when the worker does meet this mighty new boss 
face to face he finds that it is really the old boss." The state 


[6207] 


(37-34) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


controls,; but an abstraction cannot sign orders and write 
checks. It must have a personal representative. And for its 
personal representative it chooses, of course, the man whose 
experience qualifies him to manage the business. 

"Practical experience of state socialism makes labor 

7*fiStlfiSS " 

GIANT GRASPING POWER 

"There were giants in the earth in those days" (Genesis 
6:4), recites the historian concerning the evil period before 
"the [first] world [state of affairs] that then was, being 
overflowed with water, perished." (2 Peter 3:6) There are 
giants in the earth (human society) today, just before the 
present evil order of things is to be drowned in a flood of 
man-made trouble. 

TheTe are several families of these giants: business giants, 
known as trusts, corporations, syndicates and cartels; financial
 giants, such as magnates of great wealth, banks, trust 
companies and investment bankers; religious giants, great 
denominations, church trusts and federations, and religious 
organizations; giant political parties and organizations, and 
giant societies of every description. All of these giants agree 
in trying, with cynical disregard of innate truth and fair 
dealing, to grasp all possible power, no matter at whose 
expense, and with the ultimate subserviance or enslavement of 
the common people in view. 

Employers are concerned not a little at the rise to power 
of the labor giant s^ Says The Iron Age, the great journal of 
the iron, steel and machinery interests, in its issue for 
November 15, last: 

"Judging from the attitude of organized labor shown in 
various strike outbreaks and in reported utterances of union 
leaders, there is a labor element in the United States that 
could even view with indifference the conclusion of a disgraceful
 peace between the United States and Germany. 

"The counsel of some labor leaders to their followers 
sounds fair enough, but there is much that is disquieting in 
current labor developments, but in actual practice the attitude
 of many representatives of organized labor has been far 
from keeping faith. 

"The spirit of many leaders has been far from the wholehearted
 support of the pledges given the President. Witness 
this from the address of the president of the metal trades 
department of the American Federation of Labor, before the 
convention of the Boilermakers* Union at Kansas City: 

" 'In our country, we took advantage of the situation as 
we found it abroad, and before the waT was declared by the 
United States we saw to it that organized labor was going 
to get proper recognition. Nothing can take place, nothing 
can be done, unless we are consulted and practically give our 
consent to it.' 

"Such utterances and the tactics in line with them which 
have been all too large a factor in current labor news suggest
 a day of reckoning for men who are thinking of everything
 but' their country's welfare in the gravest crisis in its 
history. Or is there ahead a fearful reckoning for the whole 
country as the result of such disloyalty as exists in the ranks 
of organized labor?" 

I( THE EVIL ARROWS OT FAMINE" 

From the front pn^e of the New York American under date 
of January 10 we clip the following items: 

"A spirit of angry and violent unrest prevails all over 
Europe. It springs from food shortage and deferred peace. 
It manifests itself in strikes, rioting, brigandage and clamor. 

"Austria is chiefly malcontent over Germany's persistent 
annexation policy. Germany's main cause of unease is a 
continued state of semi^starvation. Kussia is overrun with 
hiiH'jQTTy and angry workmen and soldiers who have turned 
bandits. England is disturbed over diminishing food supplies 
and favoritism in their distribution." 

That much on European conditions. Another article gives 
us the following on the situation in America: 

"Dr. Garfield's statement [in part] follows: 'Industry is 
in an unbalanced condition. We lack many essentials — food, 
clothing, fuel. We have piled up enormous stores of things 


not essential to life, but very essential to war. We have piled 
up so high on our docks and in our storehouses that the ships 
available cannot carry them away as fast as they pile up. 
For lack of bunker coal, held back by traffic congestion, the 
number of ships in our harbors increases menacingly. 

" 'The food supply is threatened to an even greater degree 
than the fuel supply. This condition is in large part due to 
the congestion that at many points holds the loaded cars in 
its grip.' " 

HEAVENS ROLLING TOGETHER 

From "The Monitor," a Roman Catholic journal, we take 
the following brief extract of a rather extended article dealing
 with the co-labors of the Y. M. C. A. and the Knights of 
Columbus in army camps — particularly in Camp Dix, N. J. 

It will be borne in maud that the Young Men's Christian 
Association has worked among all denominations of men, but 
that it is a strictly Protestant organization, in that only 
Protestants can be elected to office in the organization. On 
the other hand, the Knights of Columbus has worked mostly 
among CathoMc men, and is a Catholic organization in which 
only Catholics can hold office. The frequent and rather pronounced
 attendance of Protestant soldiers at the mass is one 
of the subjects taken up in this article. We read: 

"Ten masses are said every Sunday in the Y. M. C. A. and 
K. of C. buildings (the Y. M. C. A. permit the use of their 
building.) The bunumgs are overfilled at each mass. The 
men kneel in the aisle, on the door-steeps, and even outside 
on the ground. Protestants marvel at this. They can't understand
 it." 

The 'Hudson Dispatch" (N. J.) ran the following twocolumn
 heading: 

"Rev. Rollins and Gowen will talk tonight to boom K. of 
0. Campaign. What the Catholics did in the Y. M. C. A. 
campaign' will be the topic of an address that will be made 
thd3 evening by Rev. R. H. Rollins, pastor of the First Baptist 
Church, Union Bill, at an open meeting of the K. of C. War 
Camp Oomimittee. Dr. Rollins was chairman of the recent 
Y. M. C. A. war work fund in North Budson, when Catholics 
worked side by side with non-Catholics to put North Budson 
well 'over the top/ helping to go far beyond the allotment in 
the national campaign. 

"Another non-Catholic speaker tonight will be Rev. I. W. 
Gowen, D. D., pastor of Grove Reformed Church." 

"THE FOOT STAIN DISHONORING GOD'S HOLT NAME" 

Should anyone be in doubt as to the propriety of still 
vindicating the divine name and character from the foul 
charges of eternal torment, which have made our God of 
Love into a demon of inexorable cruelty, we suggest consideration
 of the following letter, taken, not from a monastery 
of the middle ages but from a modern church paper which 
incorporates in its heading the name of Christ and which 
bears the date of January 1, 1918. 

A minister had been obliged to quit preaching and go to 
work in the log woods in the hope of dissolving some debts 
which had accumulated during his ministry. Be could not 
tell how long it would take "to raise the $200 above living 
expenses, but long enough to leave a number of good men 
and women out of the kingdom, no doubt." The correspondent 
then adds his own plea: 

"Brethren and sisters, will w r e wake up now, or will we 
wait till it is too late and wake up in hell? Think of it! A 
brother forced to quit the field because we do not give as we 
should. Would you deliberately send a soul into endless torment
? No. In effect you are doing that very thing when you 
shut up your -bowels of compassion." 

We must at least admire the consistency here shown; even 
if one is amazed at the ignorance of the Gospel and of the 
disposition of Jehovah and his faithful son, Jesus. We must 
bear in mind that it is not long since God was pleased to 
illumine our minds respecting his character and plan and that 
we therefore have nothing of which we can boast. "But now 
ye also put off all these; anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy." 
Blasphemy in the case of eternal torment preaching lies in 
ascribing to God what should be ascribed to the devil. 


FUEL HOLIDAYS OPPORTUNE FOR SERVICE 


Fuel Administrator Garfield's order constituting every 
Monday until April 1st a legal holiday for all industries 
east of the Mississippi River, for the conservation of the 
nation's coal supply, will £ive splendid opportunities to the 
friends in genoml to do effective harvest work on those days. 
Many have advised us that thev intend to use each Monday 
for volunteering and for distributing Volume VII, thereby 


having a share in reaping "the vine of the earth." It may 
be in the Lord's providence that thousands of additional 
"sharpshooters" may thus be put into the field for at least one 
day per week during the remainder of the winter and early 
spring. Surely "all things work together for good" to those 
who love the Lord. Let us labor while it is yet day for the 
"night" cometh quickly. 


[6208] 


JESUS BRINGING PEACE 

[The first two paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled, "A Legion of Demons," published in issue of 
July 1, 1912. Paragraphs 3 to 11 were reprinted from article entitled, "He Maketh the Storm a Calm," publishod in issue of 
February 15, 1904. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled, "Clothed and In His Right Mind," published in issue 
of May 1, 1906. Please see the articles named.] 

JESUS RESTORING LIFE AND HEALTH 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled, "Christ the First to Rise From the Dead," published in issue of April 15, 1900, 
which please see.] 


A SONG OF TRIUMPH 


Standing at the portal of the opening year, 
Words of comfort meet us, hushing every fear; 
Tender, strong and faithful, making us rejoice, 
Spoken through the silence by our Father's voic 
Onward, then, and fear not, children of the Day; 
For His Word shall never, never pass away. 


He will never fail us, He will not forsake; 
His eternal covenant He will never break; 
Renting on His promise, what have we to fear? 
God ir* all-PufficieHt for the coming year. 
Onward, then, and fear not, children of the Day; 
For His Word shall never, never pass away. 


JESUS SENDING FORTH THE TWELVE 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled, "The Harvest Plenteous — The Laborers Few," published in issue of May 15, 
1900, which please see.] 


"GO YE ALSO INTO THE VINEYARD" 

[This article was a reprint of that published in issue of August 15, 1910, which please see,] 


SOME INTERESTING QUESTIONS 


TWO KITOS OF LIFE AT ONCE? 

Question. — -Is it possible to have two kinds of life at the 
same time? 

Answer, — The word life may be used in different ways. No 
one but our Lord ever had a right to two kinds of life at 
once. He had a right to human life; for having been made 
flesh, he committed no sin and never violated or forfeited his 
ri^ht to life. He was always fully obedient to the divine law. 
His life was not taken from him; as he declared he laid it 
down of himself. (John 10:17, 18) The Father's reward gave 
to him a new life, on the divine plane. Hence he had the 
right also to the divine life. He therefore had a right to two 
lives. Our Lord is to give his human life to the world of mankind
, and the offer or gift of this life will he made during the 
thousand years of his reign on earth. If he were still a man, 
and should give that human life away, he would have no life 
for himself; for when he would apply his life for Adam, he 
would lose life altogether. 

But this right to life on two planes of being has never 
been ours, as disciples of Christ. We were born under sentence
 of death. We had no right to life on any plane. God 
never recognized us as having even earthly rights. The* Apostle
 Paul says, "The life that I now live I live by the faith of 
the Son of God." Before this, he was in a dyine condition, 
and the whole world is dead in trespasses and in sins. 

The only life-right the Lord's people have is spiritual, although
 actually they still have a measure of human life. Our 
work now is the laying down of the earthly life with Christ. 
Our human body is being sacrificed. It is reckoned dead, but 
is really dying daily. As new creatures we have life and right 
to life, as recognized by God. The apostle says, "The world 
knoweth us not. even as it knew him not." So, then, we are 
dual beings while in ibhe flesh, though we are not dual-minded. 
The world does not understand this. The world did not know 
that Christ Jesus was a dual being when here on earth, after 


his consecration and baptism in Jordan. They knew not that 
he had a right to two lives, and really had two lives — the one 
which he had not yet fully laid down and the one which he 
had not yet fully assumed. 

THE "HEAVENLY THINGS" THAT ARE PURGED 

Question. — The apostle says, "It was therefore necessary 
that the patterns of things in the heavens should he purged 
with these, but the heavenly things themselves with better 
sacrifices than these." (Hebrews 0:23} What are these "heavenly
 things*' thus purged? 

Answer. — The Apostle's thought evidently seems to be that 
under the Law Covenant there was a series of types which 
all co-operated. There were the animals, the Court, the Holy, 
the Most Holy, the sacrificing of the animals by the priest, 
etc. All these things were necessary, and the blood was necessary
, to the cleansing, the purifying, which was there typically
 accomplished. Now the apostle says that the heavenly 
things, that is, the higher things, the antitypes (the word 
"heavens" meaning high, or heaved up), are purged with better
 sacrifices than these. These "better sacrifices" we understand
 to be the sacrifice of Jesus and that of the church which 
is his body; and these sacrifices purge these higher, or antitypical
 things typified by the Court, the Holy, the Camp, 
etc. — making atonement for sin as respects the church and as 
respects the world, making full reconciliation for iniquity, 
providing for the bringing in of the everlasting condition 
which God has promised. The words "heavens" and "heavenly
," used here have no reference to spiritual things. It is 
not spiritual things that are purged, but natural things — human
 nature. 

The sacrifice of Jesus purges the church, and the sacrifice 
of the body members with their Head purges the world, the 
imputed merit of Jesus making possible the acceptance of the 
sacrifice of the members of the church which is his body. 


SEVENTH VOLUME IN GERMAN WATCH TOWER 


Our German-reading brethren will doubtless be pleased to 
know that the Seventh Volume of Scripture Studies is being 
translated into German and published in monthly installment's 
in the German Watch Tower. This does not interfere with 
the sixteen page regular Watch Tower, which is made up of 
articles previously appearing in the English edition. 

Subscribers to the German Watch Tower receive this 
supplemental matter ot> their regular subscription, but to 


other than subscribers this extra edition each month is sold 
for ten cents, singly, or five cents in lots of fifty or more. 
We are printing an extra supply for such orders. 

There are many elderly people of German extraction in 
this country who read little or no English and who might be 
reached in "this way with the message of the Seventh Volume. 
It is expected that' not less than 32 Watch Toweb pages will 
appear with each issue — over and above the regular 16 pages. 


VOLUME VII IN GREEK AND POLISH 


Greek and Polish-reading brethren are receiving the 
Seventh Volume piecemeal in their respective Watch Towers. 
If you have acquaintances or neighbors who read either of 

[6209] 


these languages in preference to English, we suggest such as 
a favorable means for conveying to them the message of 
"The Finished Mystery." 


(38-45) 


LETTERS FROM THE INTERESTED 


SPECIAL CLASSES FOB CHILDREN 
Dear Brethren; — 

One of the perplexing problems confronting many of the 
larger classes, for which a solution seems generally difficult, 
is what disposition to make of the children during certain 
periods of the Sunday services. 

Frequently the themes treated are too abstruse for the 
children to grasp, and they are seldom if ever permitted to 
ask even a question in the Berean studies. To my personal 
knowledge many children are anxious to inform themselves 
along the lines of the truth but are hindered and discouraged 
by arbitrary opposition by some of the elders. 

On my own part I cannot see any grounds for objecting 
to a special Berean First Volume study for children from 
eight to fifteen years of age, if properly eond noted by a qualified
 elder. Such an arrangement in my judgment would he 
muoh better and far more helpful than" the present practice 
by many classes of allowing the children to run loose or have 
a season of play during services. 

What helpful course of action could best be suggested 
under such conditions? Your servant in him, 

Wm. A. Baker, — Ore. 
OTJB REPLY 

Having in mind the period in which Ave are living, it would 
seem that to neglect the children of the consecrated at this 
time would not be wholly pleasing to the Lord. The prophet 
of the Lord says concerning this time: "Seek righteousness, 
seek meekness; it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the 
Lord's anger." (Zephaniah 2:3) Our thought is that it would 
be well for the classes to arrange for one meeting for the children
 from eight to fifteen years of age, and have this meeting 
led by a competent elder, or other brother who possesses the 
qualifications to teach, and that the children be taught concerning
 the present-day events and the cause, and particularly 
concerning the kingdom of the Lord that shall soon be established
; and generally an outline of the divine plan in so far 
as they can understand it. 

They should be specially instructed to lead a meek and 
quiet life and walk humbly before the Lord, avoiding all troubles
 and difficulties and seeking to deal justly with every one 
and to be obedient to those to whom they are subject. Nothing
, however, in these suggestions should be understood to minimize
 the responsibility of the parents. 

CLASS SINGING, PKAYING CUSTOMS, ETC. 
Dear Brethren; — 

I find various customs prevailing amongst the brethren in 
respect to worship. Some sit when they sing and stand when 
they pray; others seem to have no regular custom. Have you 
any suggestion ? 

Another matter: What i-i your thought respecting class 
meetings — how should the different members of the class be 
called upon by the leader? 

Very truly yours, J. A. B. 

OUB REPLY 

Kvery class has, of course, the right to regulate its own 
methods of worship, since the Bible does not give any particular
 direction on the subject. Unless the class votes to the contrary
, the Society recommends that all classes rise to sing, because
 thus the lungs can have better exercise and the singing is 
apt to be the better, and it would be a restful change from the 
sitting posture. We advise that at prayer all sit with bowed 
heads, this being a reverential attitude and one conducive to 
thought on the prayer. Where the meetings are very small 
and held in a private room, kneeling would be appropriate, or 
whore the prayer is the closing one in the nature of a benediction
 and after the friends have been sitting for a good while, 
it would be desirable to stand. 

In respect to the lending of classes: We feel that we cannot
 do better than to direct attention afresh to the very particular
 suggestion along this line provided for all in Volume 
Vf. of Studies ix the Scriptures. The class leader should 
not ask each question of each one present, but merely of one 
or two or three, if necessary, until a full, proper answer has 
been heard; and then throw the question open, paying: Does 
any one have a different thought on this question? Then 
briefly, the leader might give his own expression, buttressed 
with Scripture, if possible, and read a confirmation from the 
Volume of Studies. 

GLORIOUS VOLUNTEER WORK 
My I)k-\r Brethren" ix Christ: — 

Greetings in the name of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ 
to all the dear ones at the Bethel Home, whom, though we 
do not know all personally, yet we love for their work's sake 
and because they are our brethren in Christ. 

T know that you are all busy; but allow me, please, to 

(46-47) [6210] 


take just a few minutes of your valuable time to assure you 

that Sr. M and myself aire still loyal to the \V. T. B. & T. 

Society — which we have every reason to believe is the Lord's 
instrument in the harvest work — and to the officers who by 
the Lord's providence have been elected to serve in the various 
capacities. 

We thank the Lord daily for >c t(hat servant," our dear 
Brother Russell, and for his faithful ministry and for the 
example he set before us, that he has been called to his reward
, and for the further provision of meat in due season he 
has made for us. We are rejoicing in the glorious truth. We 
also thank our heavenly Father for the many little privileges 
of spreading this glorious truth. Our part in the volunteer 
work is indeed a pleasure. We wish to relate a little experience
 we had this evening while putting out B. S. M., Vol 9, 
No. 5— "Why Do the Nations War?" 

A man to whom I had handed a paper while he was 
leisurely sitting on his porch stopped me on my way back, on 
the other side of the street. He said, "Where are you getting 
all these? Who is doing this?" I told him. He seemed to 
be very much worked up and angry about something. 

He then said, "You do not mean to tell me that God is responsible
 for this awful war and all these awful things that 
are going on now!" I told him he would have to admit that 
if God was all-powerful — as we all believe — he was in a way 
responsible in that he was permitting it to go on, and that he 
could stop it whenever he pleased. But the fact that he was 
permitting it showed that it must be for a wise and good purpose
. He replied, "Well, yes; I guess that is so. But what is 
your object in putting these out now?" I said, "Why not? 
We are trying to enlighten the people along these lines. No 
better time! These are Bible truths now due to be understood
." He said, "Well, T do not want to argue along this 
line. I will investigate the thing further." I told him that 
was what we wanted him to do. 

I think we are going to have some grand opportunities to 
witness for the truth. People are beginning to want to know 
just what we have to tell them, and some are very glad to 
have these little papers. One lady met me half way when 1 
was walking toward her house, and said, smiling, "It has been 
quite a while since we received one of these." Another lady 
told a brother that she was glad to get them, and that she wu*s 
saving all of them she could get, besides reading them. I 
want to do my part in putting the Seventh Volume into the 
hands of the people. 

Your brother in Christ, J. F. M. — Ind. 

HOW CAM THEY KEEP FROM SINGING! 
Dear Brother Rutherford: — 

Greetings in the name of him we love! Thanks for your 
loving letter. Have recently returned from another pilgrim 
tour. This time I visited one of the largest work-centres 
where about 110 of our brethren who are conscientious objectors
 to military service are confined. Though they are 
subjected to many indignities, experience much physical discomfort
, and their liberty is restrained, you will be glad to 
know that they, one and all, glory in the privilege of suffering 
for righteousness' sake. Their joy in the Lord is grand to see. 
They spend much of their leisure time in united study, and 
embrace every opportunity to present the truth to their companions
 in affliction who belong to other religious bodies. The 
Lord has blessed their efforts, and some have been brought to 
a knowledge of the truth there, while several are now reading
 the volumes. Their favorite hymn is 179 — "My life flows 
on in endless song," and it is indeed a great treat to hear 
their hearty singing. 

I wish specially to thank you for Harvest Siftings No. 
II. It clears up some matters which were difficult to understand
, and the spirit in which it is written should do much 
to comfort the brethren. The Glasgow church is loyal to you 
as their counsellor, and surely you have my own personal 
love. I greatly admire your devotion and self-sacrifice, as 
well as the gentleness, yet firmness, with whieh you set forth 
your position. It is my strong conviction that you have acted 
as the Lord would have you do. 

Your brother by his grace, Alex Tait, — Scotland. 

PRESIDENT'S REPLY 
My Dear Brother Tait: — 

Your very kind letter to hand. I am glad to hear also 
that you have visited our brethren who are incarcerated in 
prison. Surely these dear brethren are real martyrs. I am 
reminded of the experiences through which the dear ancient 
worthies passed, mentioned in the 11th chapter of Hebrews. 
They suffered all these indignities in order that they might 
have a better resurrection. Let us try to encourage the dear 
brethren, that, while they are suffering now, the Lord is 
permitting it, giving them a chance to witness by their lives 


February 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(47-51) 


to his great plan, and of their privilege to fill up that which 
is hehind of the sufferings of Christ. And soon, by his grace, 
they shall enter into their everlasting reward, far beyond 
any other creatures of the world or in heaven. Please continue
 to encourage the dear brethren all you can. If there 
is anything that we can do for them here, kindly let me 
know. 

With miucth love to yo7i and all the- dear ones in Glasgow, 
1 beg to remain, 

Your brother and servant by his grace, 

J. F. RUTHLRFOKl). 
AWAKENED BY VOLUME SEVEN 

Dkar Sirs: — 

Last week I purchased one of your books entitled "The 
Finished Mystery" — Series Vll of Studies in the Scriptures. 
I did 'not know what it was when I bought it, but I now 
thank God that it came into my possession. It is as a drink 
to one dying of thirst in a desert. 

For the past four years my heart has been full of unrest. 
I could not tell why, but I simply could not enjoy going to 
church. Try as I might, I could find no satisfaction and 
peace when I did go; finally I gave myself up as hopelessly 
lost and wondered why I had ever lived. 

But now I am awakened! I beg of you to tell me if there 
is time enough left for me to do anything in the service 
of our King whom I have always loved and longed to serve. 
I am sending for the other volumes of Studies in the Scriptures
 and for the booklet "About Hell" which you announce. 
I can distribute tracts if you have any and will send me some. 
I want to become one of you and work in the blaster's vineyard
. 

Yours in need of Christian counsel, 

Mes. T. C. Clark,— Okla. 
CHURCHES LIKE OPEEA HOUSES 
Dear Sirs: — 

Some friend has sent me a copy of Volume Seven of your 
series of Studies in tjie Scriptures. I don't know who did 
it; but I have been praying God to give me more light on 
the Bible, and when I received this book it was surely a godsend
. Our churches are getting like opera houses where 
people go just to have a good time. Six weeks ago I ceased 
going to church. I have quit ehurchianity. I told our minister
 that no church institution could serve two masters and 
spiritually prosper. 

Enclosed find Money Order for $4.60 for which please send 
me tlhe entire seven books by Pastor Russell and The Watch 
Tower for one year, as announced on the last page of this 
Seventh Volume. 

Respectfully, 1,. IT. Schulte, County Treas. — Iowa. 

WORDS INADEQUATE FOE EXPRESSION 
Dear Brethren in tiik Lord: — 

Words are totally inadequate to describe the feelings ol 
the brethren with regard to the Seventh Volume. We are 
unanimous in proclaiming it to be the work of those guided 
by God. It is really a wonderful book and, Like the Bible 


itself, there is nothing to be eliminated, nor can there be 
anything added; it is complete in itself. We join in praising
 the great Jehovah in giving us such a help through hie 
honored servants. 

Our prayer is that the heart of each one may be filled 
with a determination to continue faithful unto death. 

Your brother in Christ, A. Hunt, — Eng. 

VOLUME SEVEN JJJD HER TO CONSECRATION 
Dbar Brethren-: — 

I am truly grateful that our heavenly Father has placed 
the Seventh Volume in my hand. It has brought me out of 
darkness into the light. It has opened my eyes of understanding
 that 1 have been able to see more clearly God's wonderful
 plan. The first word of truth I received was in Octol
>or when one of our dear sisters in the colporteur work askt'd 
me to buy Volume Vll. Since then I have bought the other 
six volumes and I study every spare moment. I am now one 
of the fully consecrated children of God and I pray and trust 
that 1 may continue to be until death. I ask you to pray 
for me. Your sister by his grace, 

Caroline Sciilichenmaier, — Pa. 
WHAT THE "PENNY" SIGNIFIES 
Dbar Brethren: — 

Greetings! Please permit me to draw your attention to 
an article from our dear Brother Russell's pen, found in The 
Watch Tower of Aug. 15, 1910, page 264, entitled "Go Ye 
Also into the Vineyard" — especially that portion under the 
subhead, /'Agreed for a Penny a Day." This seems to be 
very timely just now in settling the question of the "Penny"; 
and will you not, dear brethren, prayerfully take the matter 
to the Lord, for it seems to me it is indeed "meat in due season
," and would be his will that the article be republished in 
The Tower at the present time? 

How we rejoice in our privileges of service! "The Lord 
bless thee and keep thee" is my prayer continually. With love 
and best wishes, as ever, 

Your brother in the Lord, W. M. Hersee, — Pilgrim. 

[The artiole above referred to is reprinted in this issue. | 

"The Lord has indeed multiplied my blessings this day 
by the safe and unexpected arrival of the Seventh Volume, 
My joy was so evident when the post woman delivered it 
that she had to know about it and was glad to get Volume 
One for herself. *My cup runneth over.' 

"At our Praise meeting tonight the testimonies were full 
of thanksgiving for this very precious completing volume. 
The immediate effect of the short time already given to Volume
 Seven is a heart full of gratitude to God and a reiteration 
of my consecration to hdm; also deep thankfulness to our 
Lord Jesus, who has girded himself during this harvest period
 and is serving us with so rich a feast culminating in 
Volume Seven, through that 'faithful servant,' our beloved 
Brother Russell (who seems very near to us though parted 
from us for a brief while). The preceding six volumes are 
made still more precious by the possession of the Seventh. 
Truly we are thoroughly furnished." F. H- W., — Scotland. 

