Real Protection Near at Hand!
WHAT do we mean by real protection now being at hand? Is it the type enjoyed by rich people who live in walled communities with security guards?
No, for they, too, are subject to burglaries and other forms of crime. We mean protection so complete and far-reaching that even the fear that people have of crime will vanish! No longer will anyone be afraid to walk on a street or to go into a park at any hour of the day or night. There will not be a need even to lock your doors!
How will such a change ever be achieved?
Sure Answer to the Crime Problem
The take-over by an oppressive police state is not the answer. Nor is it any other proposal for reforming the present system of things. Humans have had plenty of time to bring crime under control, but it has only grown worse. Is it not obvious that men cannot do it, that it is beyond their ability to solve the problem?
How do you think God views the situation? To whom would it be more reasonable to look for an answer to this problem than to him? Is anyone more interested in humans than their Creator?
But you may ask, ‘If He were going to solve the crime problem, as well as other problems, why has He not done so before now?’
That is a good question, deserving an answer. And in his Word the Bible our Creator answers it in a satisfying way. The Bible explains that God has permitted wicked conditions for these many years for the purpose of settling important issues that were raised at the time of the first man’s rebellion against God. One of these issues is whether humans, independently from God, can govern themselves successfully.
What has the passing of time revealed? Has it not clearly shown the truth of the Bible statement: “To earthling man his way does not belong. It does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step”? (Jer. 10:23) Surely it is to God that humans need to look for the solution to crime, as well as all other problems!
God’s sure answer is his kingdom, which is a righteous heavenly government. Jesus Christ devoted his preaching work on earth to telling people about this Kingdom government, even teaching his disciples to pray for it. You pray for that government when you say: “Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.”​—Matt. 6:9, 10, Authorized Version.
But how will God’s kingdom eliminate crime? Foretelling the very days in which we live, the Bible says: “In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin. And the kingdom itself will crush . . . and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.” (Dan. 2:44) Yes, God’s Kingdom government will completely destroy earth’s present governments, with all their crime and corruption.
When will this occur? The fulfillment of Bible prophecy shows that it will be within our lifetime! Why do we say this? Because the “sign” that Jesus said would mark the “conclusion of the system of things” is now undergoing fulfillment. This “sign” includes “the increasing of lawlessness.” And Jesus said that the generation that saw the beginning of all of this​—outstandingly since 1914—​would also see God’s government completely wipe out this crime-ridden world. What a marvelous relief when this occurs!​—Matt. 24:3-14, 34.
Real Protective Care
Can you imagine what conditions will be like following that world destruction? A Christian Bible writer says: “There are new heavens and a new earth that we are awaiting according to his [God’s] promise, and in these righteousness is to dwell.”​—2 Pet. 3:13.
The Bible, of course, is not speaking of new literal heavens, or of a new literal planet earth. The “new heavens” are God’s Kingdom government, often called “the kingdom of the heavens.” (Matt. 4:17; 10:7; 11:11) And the “new earth” is a new human society, a new world of godly people.
When we look back in the Bible to where God gave his above-mentioned promise, we receive this beautiful picture of the real protective care that He can provide. Jehovah God paints the picture in these words:
“I am creating new heavens and a new earth; and the former things will not be called to mind . . . and they will certainly build houses and have occupancy; and they will certainly plant vineyards and eat their fruitage. . . . They will not toil for nothing, nor will they bring to birth for disturbance; because they are the offspring made up of the chosen ones of Jehovah, and their descendants with them. And it will actually occur that before they call out I myself shall answer; while they are yet speaking, I myself shall hear.”​—Isa. 65:17-25.
Yes, Jehovah God will bless his people with peace. He will not allow any form of unrighteousness to mar the security of his people. The battle will have been won against crime! In that new system of God’s making there will be no cause for fear, no reason to be afraid to walk on any street or to enter any park at night. There will be no need for any locks on your doors; no need to worry about protecting yourself, or wondering where the danger lies.
Would you like to live in such a marvelous crime-free world? This can be your happy prospect, because it is based on the sure Word of our Creator himself. Jehovah’s witnesses will be happy to help you to take in more knowledge regarding this Bible-based prospect. Simply ask them and they will discuss these vital matters in detail with you and your family in your own home, free of charge. Accept this invitation, and see for yourself that God’s promises of a crime-free world have a sound basis.
[Box on page 15]
God’s sure answer to the crime problem is his kingdom. It will eliminate crime soon!
[Picture on page 16]
Complete protection is in store for citizens of God’s crime-free world. The Bible assurance is: “God . . . will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.”​—Rev. 21:3, 4

