Are You Proving What Your Own Work Is?
1 The human body is marvelously designed to work. And what a variety of work it is capable of performing! Have you not wondered at how the eyes, the hands, the nerves, ligaments and muscles all function harmoniously when you swing a hammer at a nail, sew with a needle and thread or write a word with a pen? The cooperation of body parts is so smooth, so complete in carrying out each command sent out by our remarkable brain!—Ps. 139:14.
2 Paul uses the human body as an illustration of how the Christian congregation should perform its God-given work assignment. In 1 Corinthians, chapter 12, Paul likens each one in the congregation to a member of Christ’s body. He highlights the love, unity and cooperation among them as they work at preaching the good news and make disciples of Jesus Christ, the head of the congregation. (1 Cor. 12:12) Although one body organ may perform a function different from another, each nevertheless makes a contribution to what the body as a whole is doing. (Rom. 12:4-8) We may take Christ’s spiritual body as an illustration for us to follow today.
ESTEEM YOUR PRIVILEGE OF SERVICE
3 What is your sphere of activity within the Christian congregation? Whatever it is, do you esteem it highly? Jehovah does! You may feel at times that you are a “weaker” one or that the part you play in the congregation is a “less honorable” one. Limitations caused by poor health, age or other circumstances may cause you to feel this way. Whatever the case, it is good to view matters as Jehovah does. His Word tells us: “But much rather is it the case that the members of the body which seem to be weaker are necessary, and the parts . . . we think to be less honorable, these we surround with more abundant honor. . . . Nevertheless, God compounded the body, giving honor more abundant to the part which had a lack.”—1 Cor. 12:22-24.
4 Viewing matters from this standpoint, all of us can work whole-souled in spite of our limitations, knowing that Jehovah makes up for any lack we may have. The point is, are our efforts contributing to the great preaching and teaching work now being accomplished by God’s congregation? We want our work to be for a “beneficial purpose,” and never disrupt what the “body,” the congregation, is working to accomplish.—Compare 1 Corinthians 12:7.
CAUSE FOR EXULTATION
5 So God is pleased to use us as his fellow workers and he does not compare us with one another in what we do. Rather, he lets each one “prove what his own work is, and then he will have cause for exultation in regard to himself alone, and not in comparison with the other person.” (Gal. 6:4) There is an interaction and a coordination between our body parts. One may perform a function that another cannot. Even so, there is an interdependency. One does not work against the other. How beautifully this illustrates the Christian congregation as each one operates within his sphere of activity under the direction of the holy spirit.
6 Are you personally proving that your work unites with that of all the rest of the congregation so that Jehovah’s name is honored? If so, you have “cause for exultation.” Something that has united all the operations of the body of God’s people for more than 100 years is The Watchtower. During July the literature offer will be a subscription to The Watchtower.
7 Enthusiastically present the Watchtower subscription when you engage in the house-to-house work. Also, look for opportunities to informally offer it to workmates, schoolmates, neighbors, salesmen or others. You may have the privilege to be among those who will be offering it as they spend 90 or more hours in the pioneer work. Some who are perhaps infirm or elderly may be able to spend a few hours engaging in street witnessing or other magazine work. Do not hesitate to offer The Watchtower when making return visits. Whatever you are able to do, remember that Jehovah wants whole-souled service, which means devoting what time you can, depending upon your individual circumstances.
8 Yes, the human body is marvelously designed to work. The same is true of the worldwide Christian congregation. As each one in it—each hand, nerve, ligament and muscle, as it were—proves what its own work is, this beautifully coordinated congregation will give a tremendous witness under the headship of Christ.

