Presenting the Good News—To Reach the Heart
1 Righteous-hearted, kindhearted, openhearted, good-hearted—expressions such as these are often used to describe individuals with whom we may speak about God’s kingdom and the blessings it will bring. But often in our preaching and teaching activity we have also found persons that appeared to have a bad condition of heart. And then something happened to bring about a change in their heart condition. What may serve to help change a person’s heart condition?
2 At times it may be that our kind and warm approach serves as a strong influence. Knowing that out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, Jehovah’s people continually make efforts to speak forth words of comfort and wisdom. (Luke 6:45) Their hearts overflow with a desire to share what is good with their neighbors.
3 When we speak to others, do we reflect what is in our heart? There are many things involved. One is our sincerity in showing we really are interested in those to whom we are speaking. Another is the conviction we convey that we indeed believe that what God says in his Word is true. Still another is the way we make our presentation of the message. By speaking from the heart we do not give our message by rote, as though it were a recorded announcement. No, we sincerely try to talk to the people from our heart. Do we have help in this regard? Consider the following:
4 Each month in Our Kingdom Service we have a Topic for Conversation. This suggests that we should not just talk to an individual, but as in true conversation also listen to what the other person has to say. This proves to be a far better way to get a heart-motivated response. It means his view, or argument, is given consideration as we seek to give an answer for the hope within us.—1 Pet. 3:15.
5 You may say: “But it is so difficult for me to strike up a conversation, for example, in the door-to-door work or in informal witnessing. I almost need to memorize what I will say, as otherwise I forget, and if I let the householder say something, it throws off my whole line of reasoning and I am lost.” Do you feel that way at times?
6 For some, a brief word outline is of help. Note this brief topic for conversation: “Hello! Have you ever wondered if there is a remedy for the world’s woes? [Listen to response.] The Bible foretold today’s problems and the cause. [Read Revelation 12:12.] Did you note the one causing the problems? [Listen to response.] That short period of time is about up and will be followed by everlasting peace. Romans 16:20 is comforting in this regard. [Read.]”
7 Did you note the italicized words above? Perhaps with just those words to prompt you, you can start off a conversation with a householder. Of course, after you read the last scripture, the interest shown will help you to determine how much further to carry the conversation. You may draw the person out in further discussion or go right into the literature offer.
8 Bearing in mind the words of the proverb that “Jehovah is making an estimate of hearts,” may our heart be shown to be righteous, kind and well-motivated as we present the good news. We can confidently leave the results to Jehovah.—Prov. 21:2.

