Youth—Ward Off Calamity!—Eccl. 11:10
1 What makes a person happy and fulfilled? Why, pleasing our heavenly Father, of course! As a young person there is no better time to think seriously about your Creator than now, in the prime of your life. Why? Read what Solomon says at Ecclesiastes 11:10 and Ec 12:1. You will see that the ability to do things wanes during the “calamitous days” of old age.
2 “But what does Jehovah want of me?” you might ask. Some young people feel that God takes a rigid, hard, perhaps even negative view of youthful interests and enthusiasms. They may feel that serving God keeps them from having a good time. But is this really true? Obviously not, especially when we consider such texts as Ecclesiastes 11:9, Proverbs 27:11 and Psalm 103:5. Nevertheless, you need to keep in mind that we are all responsible to Jehovah for our actions. Though allowing freedom of choice, Jehovah will not shield you from the frustration and bitter consequences of pursuing a wrongful course. If you play with fire, you get burned. (Compare Proverbs 6:27, 28.) Yet, by avoiding a reckless, debauched or even a selfish way of life, you can escape all kinds of problems.
3 Do you know persons your own age who are involved in crime, immorality or violence? Are they happy? Do you think they are pleasing Jehovah? In contrast, is it not apparent that young people who are doing Jehovah’s will enjoy more secure and happy lives? You might answer, “Yes, but that’s easier said than done.” True, but many are successfully ‘warding off calamity’ by setting wholesome goals in life.
4 Many, for example, engage in the auxiliary pioneer service from time to time. Have you tried it? If not, why not discuss with your parents and with the elders the possibility of entering the auxiliary pioneer service this summer? They would no doubt be delighted to help you. The benefits? (1) You will be pleasing Jehovah. (2) You will be using His Word, getting more acquainted with it. (3) You will learn to lean upon Jehovah in prayer, looking to him for results. (4) By giving of yourself in this way, your happiness will be increased. (5) It will give you opportunity to work closely with other zealous ones, cultivating lasting and upbuilding friendships. (6) Finally, whatever you do later in life, you will more likely succeed because of your improved spiritual outlook.—Matt. 6:33.
5 Are you thinking about what you will do when you graduate from school? Have you set any goals for yourself? Maybe you’d like to be successful at a particular secular job. Or you may even be thinking of marriage and having a family. While these goals are not wrong in themselves, would they really allow God the first place in your life? Have you seriously considered going into the regular pioneer work and possibly serving Jehovah in some foreign field as a missionary? Or what about helping us here at Bethel with the production of Bible literature? These are wholesome, worthwhile goals. Work toward the fulfillment of them, ward off calamity, and experience the joys of full-time service.
6 Of course, no one should be forced into doing something against his will. But think of what Solomon wrote under inspiration, that “youth and the prime of life are vanity.” What lesson does that convey? Simply this: A person does not always remain young. Likewise, the joys and advantages of youthful strength and vigor are uncertain as to their duration. Even young people get sick and die. The youth who ignores this fact may fail to make wise use of what he has, dissipating his physical energies and capabilities in a way of life that can make his adult years more difficult. That is obviously why Solomon wrote what he did at Ecclesiastes 12:1, 2.
7 Why not give serious thought to these matters? Discuss them with your parents or with a mature Christian friend. It is up to you to ‘ward off calamity’ in your life. We are confident that you will if you are determined to take a course of action that gives evidence of strong faith and a deep love of our Grand Creator.

