Youths Who Speak Up for Their Faith
AMONG Jehovah’s Witnesses are many young ones. They love God and strive to live by his standards as set out in the Bible. These youths are proud of their faith, and they freely speak to others about it in school. Consider some examples.
▪ When she was in sixth grade, Holly and her classmates were given an assignment to write an essay on the question “How would you solve the problem of terrorism without using violence?” Holly took advantage of this opportunity to write about her Bible-based hope for the future. She explained that throughout history “man has dominated man to his injury.” (Ecclesiastes 8:9) Then she pointed to the only real hope for mankind—God’s Kingdom. “Since Jesus is the appointed King of that Kingdom,” she wrote, “all problems, including terrorism, will be done away with.” Holly elaborated on how Jesus will accomplish what no human ruler can. “While on earth,” she wrote, “Jesus showed what kind of ruler he would be. He was loving, and he cared for people. He showed the power he had by curing sicknesses and by resurrecting the dead. No human government is able to bring back to life those who have died. But God’s Kingdom will.” Holly concluded her essay with the statement “The solution is with God, not men.”
At the bottom of the report, the teacher wrote: “Wow! Powerful writing, Holly. And very well thought out.” The teacher was also impressed with Holly’s Scriptural references. This gave Holly the opportunity to talk to her teacher about the Theocratic Ministry School, a weekly speaking and teaching program held by Jehovah’s Witnesses. Her teacher gladly accepted a copy of the textbook used in the Ministry School.
▪ Jessica has also been able to talk about her faith when composing school essays. “I have been able to write three papers regarding my beliefs,” she says. “One was about Jehovah’s Witnesses and religious rights. The teacher displayed it in the library so that those who wished to could read it. More recently I wrote a paper about my baptism and how important that day was to me. The students circulate rough drafts of their papers to each other, so my classmates had opportunity to read mine. One girl said: ‘Good job. It’s great to know the duties that come along with being one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Congratulations on your baptism!’ Another girl stated: ‘Your story was awesome! I’m happy that your faith is so strong!’ One boy simply wrote: ‘You’ve got your head on straight. Congratulations.’”
▪ When Melissa was 11, she had a unique opportunity to speak up about her faith. “The school nurse came to my science class to talk about the immune system. The subject of blood transfusions came up. After class I told my science teacher about one of our videos on blood. I brought it to school the next day, and my teacher took it home and watched it with his family. The following day he brought the video to school and showed it to two classes, including mine. He then made favorable comments about Jehovah’s Witnesses, telling the class that if it were not for us, alternatives to transfusions would not be readily available. When returning the video to me, he asked, ‘How can I get a copy for the school library?’ I gave him a copy. He was very excited about it, and so was I!”
Holly, Jessica, and Melissa are among many young Witnesses of Jehovah who follow the Bible’s admonition to remember their Creator. (Ecclesiastes 12:1) Are you doing that too? If so, you can be assured that you are making Jehovah’s heart rejoice.—Proverbs 27:11; Hebrews 6:10.
When you youths speak about your faith to schoolmates and teachers, it gives a powerful witness about Jehovah God and his purposes. It strengthens your faith as well, and it develops in you a wholesome pride in having the privilege of being among God’s servants. (Jeremiah 9:24) Witnessing at school also serves as a protection. Jessica describes it this way: “One benefit of speaking up about my beliefs is that students do not try to pressure me into doing things that are not in harmony with what the Bible says.”
[Pictures on page 12]
Holly
[Pictures on page 12, 13]
Jessica
[Pictures on page 13]
Melissa

