Slaves of Men or Servants of God?
“JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES are more or less to be admired.” So states the German book Seher, Grübler, Enthusiasten (Visionaries, Ponderers, Enthusiasts). Though somewhat critical of the Witnesses, it admits: “In general, they live blameless, middle-class lives. They are diligent and conscientious in their work, are quiet citizens and honest taxpayers. They refrain from madly pursuing riches. . . . Their discipline at conventions is praiseworthy. Their sacrificial spirit is on a par with any other religious group; as regards the ministry they top all others. But what elevates them above every other Christian church and group of our day is the absolutely unbreakable determination with which most of them proclaim their doctrines under all circumstances and in face of all risks.”a
Despite such a positive appraisal, some voices try to present Jehovah’s Witnesses in quite a different light. In most countries around the world, the Witnesses have openly performed their religious services for decades without interference. Millions of people know them, respect them, and agree that they have a right to practice their religion. Why, then, is there any uncertainty about who Jehovah’s Witnesses are?
Perhaps one reason for the uncertainty is that in recent times a number of other religious groups have become involved in child abuse, mass suicides, and terrorist attacks. Of course, aberrations like these are everywhere, not merely among those who are religious. As regards religion, however, many people have become skeptical, some even hostile.
Dangers of Following Men
A “sect” has been defined as “a group adhering to a distinctive doctrine or to a leader.” Similarly, those belonging to a “cult” have “great devotion to a person, idea, or thing.” Actually, the members of any religious group who strongly adhere to human leaders and their ideas are in danger of becoming slaves of men. A strong leader-oriented relationship can lead to an unhealthy emotional and spiritual dependency. The danger may be compounded when a person is reared in a sectarian atmosphere from childhood.
Those who have such concerns about a religion need reliable information. Some may have been told that the Witnesses belong to a religious organization that enslaves its members, exercises authoritarian control over them, unduly restricts their freedom, and throws them out of step with society as a whole.
Jehovah’s Witnesses know that these concerns are unwarranted. Therefore, they invite you to check for yourself. After careful consideration, draw your own conclusions. Are the Witnesses servants of God, as they claim, or actually slaves of men? What is the source of their strength? The two articles on pages 12-23 will provide satisfying answers to such questions.
[Footnote]
The original 1950 edition did not contain the above statement. Its appearance in the 1982 revised edition thus reveals a trend toward a better understanding of Jehovah’s Witnesses.

