page 1 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXIX JANUARY 1 No. 1 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 3 

Christendom in Survey 3 

"All Things Continue as They Were" 4 

Yet Seven Years More 4 

"A Confederacy !"-Isa. 8:12 5 

The Time of Trouble 5 

The Present Financial Spasm 6 

Travailing in Birth of New Era 6 

Outlook for the Work 7 

Two Debates Arranged For 8 

Preparing the Way of the Lord 8 

The Antitypical Elijah 9 

Finding the Lord's Jewels 11 

Seeking Fellowship with Jesus 12 

page 2 

THIS JOURNAL AND ITS SACRED MISSION 



THIS Journal is one of the prime factors or instruments in the system 
of Bible Instruction, or "Seminary Extension," now being presented in 
all parts of the civilized world by the WATCH TOWER BIBLE & 
TRACT SOCIETY, chartered A.D. 1881, "For the Promotion of Christian 
Knowledge." It not only serves as a class room where Bible Students 
may meet in the study of the divine Word, but also as a channel of 
communication through which they may be reached with announcements of 
the Society's Conventions and of the coming of its traveling representatives 
styled "Pilgrims," and refreshed with reports of its Conventions. 

Our "Berean Lessons" are topical rehearsals or reviews of our Society's 
published "Studies," most entertainingly arranged, and very helpful 
to all who would merit the only honorary degree which the Society accords, 
viz., Verbi Dei Minister (V.D.M.), which translated into English 
is, Minister of the Divine Word. Our treatment of the International 
S.S. Lessons is specially for the older Bible Students and Teachers. By 
some this feature is considered indispensable. 

This Journal stands firmly for the defence of the only true foundation 
of the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated,— Redemption 
through the precious blood of "the man Christ Jesus who gave himself 
a ransom [a corresponding price, a substitute] for all." (I Pet. 1:19; 
I Tim. 2:6.) Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver 
and precious stones (I Cor. 3:11-15; 2 Pet. 1:5-11) of the Word 
of God, its further mission is to— "Make all see what is the fellowship 
of the mystery which. ..has been hid in God,. ..to the intent 
that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of 



God"— "which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men 
as it is now revealed."— Eph. 3:5-9,10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it 
seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fullest subjection to 
the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus 
free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord hath spoken;— according to 
the divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not 
dogmatical, but confident; for we know whereof we affirm, treading with 
implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to 
be used only in his service; hence our decisions relative to what may and 
what may not appear in its columns must be according to our judgment 
of his good pleasure, the teaching of his Word, for the upbuilding of his 
people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but urge our readers 
to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference 
is constantly made, to facilitate such testing. 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH 



That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God"— peculiarly "His 

workmanship;" that its construction has been in progress throughout the 
Gospel age— ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and 
the chief corner stone of his Temple, through which, when finished, 
God's blessing shall come "to all people," and they find access to 
him.-I Cor. 3:16,17; Eph. 2:20-22; Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:29. 

That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing, of consecrated believers 
in Christ's atonement for sin, progresses; and when the last of these 
"living stones," "elect and precious," shall have been made ready, 
the great Master Workman will bring all together in the First Resurrection; 
and the Temple shall be filled with his glory, and be the meeting 
place between God and men throughout the Millennium.— Rev. 15:5-8. 

That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies in the fact that 
"Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man," "a ransom 
for all," and will be "the true light which lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world," "in due time."— Heb. 2:9; Jno. 1:9; I Tim. 2:5,6. 

That the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see him 
as he is," be "partaker of the divine nature," and share his glory as 
hisjoint-heir.-I John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for 
the future work of service; to develop in herself every grace; to be God's 
witness to the world; and to prepare to be kings and priests in the 
next age. -Eph. 4:12; Matt. 24:14; Rev. 1:6; 20:6. 

That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity 
to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom— the restitution 
of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, 
at the hands of their Redeemer and his glorified Church— when all the 
wilfully wicked will be destroyed.— Acts 3:19-23; Isa. 35. 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, Editor. 



LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 



"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



THE WOMAN'S NATIONAL DAILY 



The number of the friends subscribing for this cheap 
daily through us was not nearly as large as we had expected. 
Hence Brother Russell's sermons are not appearing in it regularly, 
as proposed. Sorry, for it meant a wide circulation of 
the Truth weekly. A kind card to the Editor of the National 
Daily from each one who has subscribed might help. But 
the best help will be large lists of new subscriptions. The 
Daily and THE TOWER both $1.60 for the year, or 60c now if 
you already are on the TOWER list. Get new subscribers for 
The Daily one year and the TOWER four months, both for $ 1 . 

R4114 : page 2 

CANADIAN FRIENDS DESIRING SERMONS WEEKLY 



Arrangements have been made for Brother Russell's sermons 
weekly in The Toronto World. We can give a clubbing 
rate of $1.50 per year (or, with TOWER, $2.50), except in the cities 
of Hamilton and Toronto, where the price will be $2.75, 
with TOWER, $3.75. Make up your lists speedily and send to us. 

page 2 



"STUDIES," INDIA PAPER EDITION 



We now have India STUDIES, Vols. 4, 5 and 6. Back 
orders will have attention at once. Price, 85c each. The 
first three volumes will be announced later— when in stock. 

THE NEW BIBLES 



The new Bibles are all gone except No. W300, the best 
grade, full seal. Price, $3.00, plus 10c postage— $3.10. 



R4109 : page 3 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

THE opening of a New Year is a most favorable 

time for special circumspection— for reviewing 

the year past, for the looking forward to the 

things coming upon the earth, and for a general survey 

of present conditions in the world, in the Church, 

and particularly in our own hearts. This circumspection 

should be taken with a view to our growth in 

knowledge and in grace— not from idle curiosity nor 

from boastful self-sufficiency. 

CHRISTENDOM IN SURVEY 

While Church and State are in many respects totally 
separate, nevertheless throughout what we term Christendom 
they are so closely related and intertwined as to 
appear one, and this oneness we believe the Scriptures to 
teach will increase until for all practical purposes they 
will be one. We surmise that this will be accomplished 
within the next three years. The Committee on Church 
Federation appointed some time ago is to meet in December, 
1908. Conditions during the present year will 
undoubtedly cause the idea of Church Federation to 
take firmer hold than ever upon the public mind, especially 
upon the clerics, and our expectation, therefore, 
is that two years later it will be an accomplished fact. 
Quite probably by that time some arrangement will 
have been effected between the Episcopal system and 
other Protestant denominations, whereby the clergy of 
the latter will all be recognized by the former— probably 
by the Episcopal clergy in some manner imparting 
the apostolic succession. Thereafter any not recognized 
by the system will be in sore straits, condemned 
as unorthodox, and without right or authority or privilege 
to preach or teach. This condition of things, as 



pointed out in these columns twenty-eight years ago, 
we look for as the fulfilment of Rev. 13:15-17. 

In the Lord's providence the increase of light and 
knowledge preparatory for the great Millennial day has 
brought to Christendom great riches. Not only have 
the millions of Christendom been more constantly employed 
than ever, but by reason of education their employment 
has yielded larger fruitage, and in combination 
with machinery the results have surely been 
five-fold. No wonder, then, that the world's wealth 
has been enormously increased. As might be expected, 
however, all have not profited equally by this great 
gain. While all have profited in great measure, the 
master minds— especially those endowed with large 
acquisitiveness— have profited chiefly by the favorable 
conditions. As a result we see that one-seventh of the 
people own six-sevenths of the wealth. If on the one 
hand this condition of things seems hard and inequitable, 
let us remember on the other hand that it is the 
legitimate fruit of the law of selfishness, under which 
the world has operated now for six thousand years. 
That the field in many respects has been a fair and 
open one is evidenced by the fact that some of the 
wealthiest people of today started life in the humblest 
circumstances. If some of these in gaining their 
wealth have used unscrupulous means, let us remember 
that they did nothing more than many of their neighbors 
who had less success in life— nothing more 
than what the majority of mankind would have done 
had they possessed opportunity and the intellectual 
talent to improve it. This being true, it behooves us 
to look with generosity upon the rich, and to note to 
their credit that many of them have been very benevolent 
both in public and in private. Let us remember, 
also, that many of the most successful have not gained 
their wealth by grinding the poor nor by treating them 
as slaves, but on the contrary have paid the best 
wages, treated their employees most honorably, and 
really have been benefactors to the world in that their 
business acumen enabled them to launch large projects, 
which gave profitable employment and large 
wages to many of their fellows, who would have been 
incapable of such management. 

LET A MAN THINK SOBERLY 

Many are able to take the reasonable, just, philosophical 
view of the subject above presented so long as 
they are doing reasonably well themselves; but when 
the pinch comes and they begin to be in want they reason 
differently. They forget a part of the truth on the 
subject— they think merely of the fact that in nature 

R4109 : page 4 

and providence we are surrounded by wonderful bounties 



and vast opportunities, and in the scramble for 

wealth which these produced others got the lion's 

share. From this standpoint they reason that the 

wealth of the world and the increment belong equally 

to the wise and the unwise, to the learned and the ignorant, 

to the ambitious and the careless, and with this 

thought in view they are inclined to demand their 

share and to hold that anyone who has more than his 

per capita portion must have stolen it from his fellows. 

But since they joined in the scramble, hoping to be 

amongst the more successful, even acknowledging thus 

the principles of selfish competition, it is with bad 

grace that they now especially find fault with those who 

have been more successful than they, instead of finding 

fault with the system which permitted, fostered and 

developed present conditions. Indeed, however strenuous 

may be the results of present conditions of the 

world, we can fully justify divine providence in permitting 

matters to take the course which has led up to 

the present condition of things— up to the time of trouble 

which will mark the consummation of this age and 

the inauguration of the Millennium. 

Without selfish ambition to spur men on, without 
the law of necessity to speed the movements of the 
slothful, the tendency of mankind would have been 
toward a barbaric indolence, contentment with a hut 
instead of a palace, satisfied with signs and grunts and 
hieroglyphics instead of an education. Undoubtedly, 
all the fallen conditions considered, the Lord did the 
best thing for the race to permit selfish ambition to 
crack the whip and drive the remainder of the world 
toward a higher civilization than that into which they 
had sunk, as described by the Apostle in 
Romans, chapters 1 and 2. 

"ALL THINGS CONTINUE AS THEY WERE" 

The Lord through the Apostle calls our attention 
to the fact that in the end of this age there would be a 
tendency on the part of the worldly wise to say that 
there would be no change of dispensation; that all 
things continue as they were from the beginning of 
creation and will so continue— that there will be no 
change. This is brought out as an answer that will be 
made to some who will claim the presence of the Lord 
and the change of dispensation— just as we are doing. 
But in accord with the Word of God, we are not heeding 
these worldly wise, but are hearkening to the voice 
of him that speaketh from heaven, which assures us of 
a great change, and that it is now at the door: (1) A 
change of rulers, the Prince of Light taking from the 
prince of darkness the sceptre of this world and binding, 

R4110 : page 4 

restraining, him for a thousand years, that during 



the same he shall not deceive the nations. (Rev. 20:3.) 

(2) The overthrow of all present institutions built up 

under the influence of the prince of darkness, and fostered 

by ignorance, superstition and selfishness, and 

the substitution of a reign of equality and love which 

shall lift all men from the depths of degradation, mental, 

physical and moral, and bring them all to a completeness 

of perfection if they will, and thus to a plane 

of equality, destroying the unwilling as mischievous 

and injurious in the Second Death. 

Emphasizing this change which he will bring 
about, the Lord through the Prophet declares that he 
will not forever plow the field and sow, but in its appropriate 
season he would do a reaping work. We perceive 
that the entire field was not sown with the good 
seed of the Gospel, but only a small, limited area, and 
that for now nearly nineteen centuries the Lord has 
watered and harrowed this sowing, and that the harvest 
time of the Gospel Age is come. True to our Lord's 
parable the Adversary was permitted to do a contaminating 
work— to over-sow the field with tare seed, and 
as a consequence the acceptable crop now to be gathered 
is a small one in comparison with what would be 
expected by those who have not been able to distinguish 
between wheat and tares, between consecrated 
believers and nominal Christians. To our understanding 
of the Bible, as set forth in the volumes of SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES, this harvest work has been in progress 
since October, 1 874, and will be completed within forty 
years— by October, 1914. Within that time we fully 
expect that all the wheat will be gathered into the garner, 
glorified, and that the tares will be gathered 
into bundles, if indeed by that time their burning will 
not have commenced. We do not understand the burning 
of the tares will be with literal fire, nor that their 
destruction will mean the destruction of the individuals, 
but merely that they will cease to exist as imitation 
wheat and take their true stand with the world as members 
thereof, without part or lot in the inheritance of 
the "saints in light." 

YET SEVEN YEARS MORE 

From the foregoing it will be seen that to our understanding 
Christendom entered upon the final seven 
years of harvest time in October, 1907. Promptly on 
time the present panic gave Christendom a convulsive 
tremor, and it is our anticipation that the entire seven 
years thus started will witness a succession of panics 
and difficulties, each pressing a little more upon the 
interests of mankind, the rich as well as the poor, and 
each bringing conditions to a little harder plane than 
its predecessor, until, with the close of the seven years, 
during 1915, according to the Bible, we expect that 
anarchy will gain the upper hand of control throughout 
Christendom, overthrowing present institutions, civil 



and religious, financial and social, and in a general 
way plunging the poor world into the most awful trouble 
it has ever experienced— a trouble so dark, so terrible, 
that in referring to it the Master said, "Except 
those days be shortened there would no flesh survive." 
But then he added, that because of the Elect the days 
would be shortened. The Elect Church, at that time 
in glory with the Lord, and assuming the authority of 
the world, will at the proper moment intervene, and 
with divine power and wisdom bring order out of the 
confusion, and establish in the world righteous conditions, 
which the Scriptures assure us will then be welcomed 
by all mankind. Those now disposed to fight 
for present conditions will then, as a result of the 
chastening experience, be glad to look for and accept 
the new order of things— the reign of righteousness and 
love under the Millennial rule of the King of kings and 
Lord of lords, with whom in his throne will be associated 

R4110 : page 5 

the Bride, the Lamb's Wife— the Elect Little Flock 
of this Gospel Age. 

We are not prophesying; we are merely giving our 
surmises, the Scriptural basis for which is already in 
the hands of our readers in the six volumes of SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES. We do not even aver that there is no 
mistake in our interpretation of prophecy and our calculations 
of chronology. We have merely laid these 
before you, leaving it for each to exercise his own faith 
or doubt in respect to them; but showing our own faith 
by our works. Even our enemies must concede, and 
many of them do concede, that the facts as they have 
developed year by year since we began these presentations 
in 1876 have most wonderfully, most remarkably, 
corroborated our expectations and continue to do so. 
For instance, the Jews had not thought of returning to 
their own land when, in 1878, we pointed out that the 
time for favor to that people had chronologically begun, 
in fulfilment of Isaiah's prophecy, "Comfort ye, comfort 
ye my people, saith my God. Speak ye comfortably 
unto Jerusalem, and cry unto her that her appointed 
hour is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned; 
for she hath received of the Lord's hand double for all 
her sins." (Isa. 40:1,2.) Zionism was not dreamed 
of at that time, and began to take practical form seventeen 
years afterward. 

"A CONFEDERACY! "-ISAIAH 8:12 

We pointed out from the Scriptures a federation of 
Protestants which would receive its life or vitality 
through association with the Episcopal Church, and 
that this combination of Protestants would be one side 
of the great scroll of the heavens while Roman Catholicism 
would be the other side of the scroll, and that 



these would not unite, but "roll together as a scroll" 

during this harvest time, and because of the shaking 

incident to the time of trouble and anarchy with which 

the age would end. But not until seventeen years later 

was the idea of federation brought forward. Formerly 

it was urged everywhere that the cause of righteousness 

was advanced by the competition between various denominations 

of Christendom. Now, however, the federation 

is surely near, and it will have an important 

part to play in connection with the trouble coming upon 

the faithful Little Flock, and later on it will receive 

by divine permission as complete an overthrow as came 

upon the Jewish institution, its prototype, in A.D. 70. 

In 1878 Christendom in general possessed faith in the 

precious blood of Christ, a ransom price: we pointed 

out from the Scriptures that a testing would come upon 

all and chiefly along this line, that a thousand would 

fall to one who would stand (Psalm 91:7); that the 

cross of Christ was set for a stone of stumbling and a 

rock of offence to both the houses of Israel— to Natural 

Israel in its harvest time, and to Spiritual Israel, Christendom, 

in this present harvest time of this age. 

As we look about today, we see, alas, how truly the 
Scriptures on this subject have been fulfilled. Not a 
college or seminary that we know of in the world 
teaches the doctrine of redemption, the very foundation 
of the Gospel. Some of them teach Evolution, 
Higher Criticism and morality; others which do not 
openly so teach give similar instruction in a private 
way— in that the professors are known to hold these 
views. Amongst the ministers of all denominations 
the same thing is true: probably not one minister in 
ten can be found who would declare unequivocally 
that it is his faith that the death of Christ was a ransom 
price for Adam and his race— that without his 
death as our Redeemer there would have been no atonement 
for sin, and no forgiveness of sin, and no future 
life for any— the plain teaching of Scripture. Moreover, 
these same errors have stumbled and overthrown 
the faith of the majority of professing Christians, remarkably 
few of whom would be found who know what 
justification by faith means, and who believe that 
Christ died for our sins and rose again for our justification, 
that by his stripes we are healed, and that the 
chastisements necessary for the securing of our peace 
with God were laid upon him who died, the Just for the 
unjust, that he might bring us back into harmony with 
God. As for the coming generation, it is growing up 
in unbelief as respects the foundation principles of the 
real Gospel of Christ. It is being instructed in "another 
Gospel," which is not another, because there is 
truly no good tidings except that which God himself 
has provided, the forgiveness of sins through the merit 
of the precious blood of Christ. Not only in the colleges, 
but also in the High Schools, and now more 
latterly in the Grammar Schools— yea, even in the 



Sunday Schools— the theories of Higher Criticism in 
respect to the Bible, and of Evolution as respects our 
race, are being taught. The one undermines faith in 
the Bible, the other puts before the mind of the youth 
another theory, the reverse of the Scriptural one, which 
—supported by teachers and professors and ministers 
and others— causes the Scriptural theory of a perfect 
Adam and his fall by original sin, his redemption by a 
Savior, and his ultimate restitution in the "times of 
restitution of all things which God hath spoken"— it 
makes all of these seem absurd, unreasonable. 

THE TIME OF TROUBLE 

Similarly the Scriptural presentation of the time of 
trouble has been found to be correct. Step by step 
the conditions have been approximating the great climax 
which the Scriptures declare. Education and general 
enlightenment and invention— blessings which 
belong to the morning of the new dispensation about 
to dawn— have awakened the world to its present rapid 
pace, and have turned the minds of the masses towards 
selfishness and the worship of Mammon in a remarkable 
degree. This Mammon worship is shared in not 
only by the wealthy but also by the poor. One man 
chases after a fortune of one thousand dollars, another 
after one of a million, another after hundreds of millions, 
but nearly all are in pursuit of wealth. If it be 
claimed that this is more true of the people of the 
United States of America than of Europe, we reply 
that this may be so, because in every sense of the word 
the people of America are awakened at least ten years 
in advance of Europe; but indications are that the 
whole world is getting awake very rapidly, and its 
awakening will be a ruder one than ours, with no less 
strenuous results. 

R4111 : page 6 

We are not faulting the people for their awakening 
in the morning time; we are not faulting them that in 
their hunger for a share of the wonderful blessings 
which God has granted in the present time they have 
been moving with selfish energy to the protection of 
their rights and the acquirement of greater privileges 
by means of labor unions and federations. We would 
be most inclined to find fault with the unjust and unreasonable 
demands and methods sometimes employed. 
And yet even here we sympathize in great measure 
when we remember that these, hungry for their pro 
rata of present blessings, have not the guidance of the 
Lord, his Word and his Spirit, to show them the wise 
and proper path. Hence some of their moves not only 
result disastrously to themselves, but sometimes inflict 
needless hardship upon some of the best-intentioned 
capitalists and employers. On the other hand, 



we must not be surprised that capitalists of keen mind, 
reckoning life as a battle and a game, have exercised 
their quick intelligence to strengthen their own position, 
to maintain advantage in their own hands, and to 
increase the same by combinations and trusts, eliminating 
competition and advantaging themselves in general. 
What more could we expect from natural men 
operating under natural laws, growing more and more 
disrespectful of the divine Word, and more and more 
into sympathy with the Evolution theory— that it is the 
law of nature to have a survival of the fittest, and that 
the unfit need not be sympathized with too much, but 
rather be allowed to drop out of the race for wealth 
and station and even for the right to live? Thus we 
find ourselves at the threshold of what we believe to be 
the last seven years of this Gospel dispensation. 

THE PRESENT FINANCIAL SPASM 

All financiers must ultimately agree that the present 
financial spasm was directly caused by selfishness 
on the part of the bankers, etc., and nearly all the 
wealthy are either directly or indirectly bankers or 
bank directors. Shrewd bankers realize that their 
business prospers in proportion as the volume of money 
currency is small in comparison to the amount of business. 
Hence the money of a country is sought to be 
restrained in volume, and at the time the present panic 
broke out amounted in this country to about $24.50 per 
capita. It has since been increased by the issue of 
more National Bank notes, etc., to about $33.00 for 
each person of population, which is larger than that of 
any other country. However, the business enterprise, 
etc., here is so much greater than elsewhere that in our 
judgment even yet we have only one-third the amount 
of money that the country really needs. The bankers 
of the world practically control the governments in this 
matter, and they advocate as small a volume as possible 
—as small as will be safe not to risk a panic. Why? 
Because they make their money on interest and discounts, 
and it is to their advantage to have the public 
short of money and needing to borrow. The scarcer 
money can be made without injuring prosperity and 
promoting a panic the greater will be the demands 
made upon them by borrowers, and the greater their 
profits. 

The enormous amount of their profits and surplus 
above the capital stock is advertised by the banks 
with pride, as showing their prosperity and soundness. 
If money were three times as plentiful interest rates 
would be about one-third what they are today, and the 
bankers would not be so much more prosperous than the 
remainder of the people. As an illustration of how the 
scarcity of money operates to the advantage of the 
banks, we note the case of a Pittsburgher who recently 
got into financial trouble and applied to an institution 



of this city whose capital and surplus amount to 
many millions of dollars. After examining his property 
they let him have $250,000 on credit, and took from 
him a mortgage for $350,000— thus clearing, because of 
the necessities of the case, $100,000. Had money been 
more plentiful that borrower would have found many 
ready to come to his assistance on much cheaper terms. 
We are mentioning this matter in detail to call attention 
to the fact that selfishness is at the bottom of nearly 
all financial troubles, and it is selfishness that 
will be to blame for the final collapse which the Scriptures 
predict and which we expect in 1915. 

We have already noted (Vol. IV., chap. VIII.) that 
the demonetization of silver was a matter instigated 
by the bankers. We have pointed out that it was inimical 
to the interests of the public. It lessened the 
money of the world by at least one-half. If silver were 
remonetized the business of the world would have none 
too much money for profitable handling, but that larger 
amount of money would make the banking business 
less profitable. Bankers tell the public that less money 
is necessary per capita than heretofore, because by our 
superior banking facilities one dollar chases around 
and, during a year, pays a thousand dollars worth of 
debts. We agree that the world has brilliant financiers, 
that our banking system in many respects is 
splendid, and that the making of one dollar do the 
work of a thousand is very wise for the bankers and 
very profitable to them. However, if the one dollar 
did one-third as much work as at present, the danger 
of panics would be proportionately decreased and the 
prosperity of the banks also decreased. Financial 
matters resemble a top, whose point is money and 
whose upper portion is composed of bonds, stocks, 
mortgages, securities representing value. So long as 
the top is kept spinning at a rapid rate it can stand 
erect upon the point, but when something occurs to 
overturn it it is difficult to get it to spin again. The 
heavy top of national debts, land values, etc., now prevailing 
throughout the world is too great in proportion 
to the world's money. But we have no thought that 
conditions will be materially changed. The bankers 
have the confidence of the public, great and small, and 
will continue to maintain their present power, and 
these and other deleterious influences will have much 
to do with bringing forward the great trouble in its due 
time, through "lack of confidence." 

TRAVAILING IN BIRTH OF NEW ERA 

We are not meaning to say that the banks of the 
country are not sound, reliable. Quite to the contrary: 
they are very rich— if their wealth be measured by the 
securities they hold. It is our expectation that the 
present stress will ere long be much relieved, but we 
do not expect to see as great prosperity as the past few 



years have witnessed; rather that there will be a down 
grade, with repeated hitchings or spasms of trouble, in 
harmony with the Apostle's illustration that this trouble 
is coming upon the world "as travail upon a woman 
with child." The final spasm, which we look for in 
1915, will give birth to the new dispensation of peace 
and blessing, the Millennial reign of Messiah, in which 
we hope to share, for the blessing and uplifting of the 
world. 

What shall we do? Quite a good many are inquiring 
as to the wisest course in view of our expectations. 
If by this query is meant, How can it be escaped? Our 
reply is that it will be impossible to escape the coming 
trouble except by death, for according to the Scriptures 
it is to be world wide, every man's hand against his 
neighbor, no peace to him that goeth out or to him that 
cometh in. We understand the Scriptures to teach that 
all of the "overcomers," the "very Elect," will be gone 
before 1915 and its terrible collapse, though they may 
pass through a considerable measure of persecution 
before that, and of course would share with others in 

R4111 : page 7 

the sorrows and perplexities of the further spasms of 
the trouble. Our advice in general would be, "Trust 
in the Lord and do good," exercise faith and the spirit 
of a sound mind. Remember the Lord's promise to 
care for all who are his, and to make all things work 
together for their good. Rely upon this and show your 
faith by your calm, quiet demeanor in the midst of 
trouble. As for those possessed of money, we offer the 
suggestion that a small home is one of the safest investments 
imaginable. 

Should the banks some years later on become entirely 
insolvent, as we expect, money in them and in insurance 
companies, etc., would be practically lost; but 
a home well adapted to one's needs would still have a 
value. Some have queried whether or not a little farm 
would be profitable in the time of trouble. We reply 
that wherever the Lord's keeping power is there is 
safety; that so far as human judgment could go there 
would be as little safety on a farm as anywhere, for in 
the time we anticipate tramps and thieves will infest 
the country districts and beset the wayfaring man as 
much if not more than the city dweller. If attempting 
to locate a family of small children our inclination 
would be to prefer a town of moderate size, not a manufacturing 
city nor a mining village, but, if possible, a 
college town, inhabited by an intelligent middle class, 
where order would be more respected and prolonged. 
But the wisest and best legacy possible to leave to 
our friends would be a good example as respects honesty, 
morality and reverence for divine things. To be 
known to have money secreted at that time would be to 
invite thieves and torture and possibly death. If in the 



small town suggested a lot could be had sufficiently 
large for a back -kitchen garden, it would be desirable. 
That will be a time, however, for demonstrating the 
truthfulness of the Lord's words: "Lay not up for yourselves 
treasures upon the earth, where moth and rust 
do corrupt, and where thieves break through and 
steal, but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven." 

OUTLOOK FOR THE WORK 

We anticipate two more good years in connection 
with the harvest work. Already we notice that some 
who have heretofore been opponents of the Truth are 
surprised by the lightning-like rapidity with which the 
present financial trouble has come upon the country 
and has spread from ocean to ocean, and may yet perhaps 
influence Europe. They seem to read in this a 
corroboration of our expectations, and to be correspondingly 

R4112 : page 7 

more willing to investigate the more spiritual 

features in our presentations. Let us be prompt 

to avail ourselves of every opportunity for putting the 

Truth into the hands of the public. Some of the colporteurs 

write us that already they have found quite a 

slackening of their work. From others we have the 

reverse report, that when they mention that the SCRIPTURE 

STUDIES they are selling explain the panic and 

show from the Scriptures the outlook for both capital 

and labor they find many thereby interested to purchase, 

and we trust to read and become more thoroughly 

informed respecting all the features of the divine 

plan. During the next two years, even if the prosperity 

be not so great as at present, we expect to see the work 

go grandly forward, and perhaps as much or more evidence 

of gathered wheat as in the past. Those who 

cannot give all of their time to the colporteur work are 

again reminded of the Volunteer work, and that in this 

department all can serve. We are already arranging 

for a large output of tracts during 1908. We will contract 

for at least two millions at first, and from present 

prospects the financial sinews will not be lacking for the 

doubling of that number. 

It remains largely in the hands of our readers to 
determine what shall be the output for the year 1908. 
Remember, that they are free and freight paid to your 
place. When writing about them give the quantity you 
would like to have, and also mention the reputed population 
of the district you hope to serve, and the number 
that will be cooperating with you in the Volunteer 
service. We think it not unreasonable to suppose that 
our Lord's estimate of treasures laid up in heaven 
would include such volunteer services, or any kind of 
service we would render to him and his cause. 



"FIERY TRIALS THAT SHALL TRY YOU" 

We come now to the most important feature of this 
view of the future— of the last seven years of the harvest. 
While, as suggested, we anticipate that the harvest 
work will go on, that the Truth will be spread 
very widely, it is our expectation also that another part 
of the harvesting work will be in progress, namely, the 
threshing and winnowing of the wheat already gathered 
from the field. Before it will be ready for the garner 
these tribulation processes of threshing and winnowing 
will be expected. If our anticipation be correct, 
it implies that there will be peculiar trials and 
testings of faith and of patience and of humility and 
of devotion to the Lord and to the brethren, upon those 
who are already in the light of Present Truth. To what 
extent have we still the chaff and straw of worldly sentiment 
attaching to us as New Creatures, as grains of 
wheat? To what extent are these earthly interests and 
ambitions holding us fast? We must be set free, and 
the experiences to be expected will be of a kind necessary 
for a complete separation from the things of 
worldliness and sin. So far as our hearts are concerned 
they must reach absolute perfection of intent and 
endeavor, however imperfectly they may be able to control 
our mortal bodies: otherwise we are not fit for the 
Kingdom, not fit to be gathered to the garner. To be 
forewarned is to be forearmed. The Apostle declares, 
"Of your own selves shall men arise speaking perverse 
things to draw followers after them." The last week 
of our Lord's ministry was the most eventful one of all, 
and the one which witnessed his greatest triumph with 
the people when they hailed him as King as he sat upon 
the ass. And yet the same week meant the severest 
trial upon all of his disciples and our Lord's ignominious 
death. So we shall not be surprised if something 
of a similar character should come to pass during these 
seven years— prosperity of the work amidst intensest 
opposition. 

The Apostle, speaking of our day, mentions "perils 
amongst false brethren," and already we learn that 
some of these are boasting how much they shall be 
able to hinder the harvest work during the coming 
year. But we hear also the Word of the Lord assuring 
us that greater is he who is on our part than all they 
that be against us. We hear his voice again saying, 
"Let not your hearts be troubled," and again, "In 
quietness and confidence shall be your strength." 
So all of the Lord's true people should feel— "None of 
these things move us"— none of these things shall hinder 
us from our own faithfulness to the Lord and to 
the harvest work. Let us be content to wait until the 
great Chief Reaper at the close shall distribute his rewards 
and blessings. Let us continually seek his approval, 
and by and by we may hear his voice saying, 
"Well done, good and faithful servant: Thou hast been 



faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over 
many things. Enter thou into the joys of thy Lord." 
It is proper here that we remind the Lord's people 
of the Master's words to the effect that there are just 
two great captains in the present conflict— that he himself 
is the Head and Leader of the one party, and the 
Adversary the head and leader of the other. He assured 
us that we cannot serve God and Mammon, selfishness. 
He implied that we might be in danger of mistaking 

R4112:page8 

which of these two masters we are serving when 
he said, "His servants ye are to whom ye render service." 
The implication is that some might be serving 
the Adversary and mistakenly think themselves the 
servants of the Lord. We urge all to think carefully 
along these lines, to note what have been the leadings 
of divine providence throughout the harvest time, to 
note the spirit that belongs to the work— the spirit of 
self-sacrifice, the spirit of loyalty to the Word, the 
spirit of love for the brethren to the extent of laying 
down life in their service. We are also to notice the 
spirit or disposition of the Adversary, that it is not to 
build up but to pull down, that it is out of accord with 
the harvest work of the great Reaper, that it is self-seeking 
and ambitious, and disposed to raillery and to 
"shoot out arrows, even bitter words," against those 
who are seeking to serve the Lord and his cause, from 
whom they receive no arrows again in return. 
-Psa. 64:3. 

Let us have in mind at the opening of this year the 
words of our Master to the apostles in his Gethsemane 
hour, "Watch and pray lest ye enter into temptation." 
Let us remember that it was zealous Peter who most 
courageously said, "Lord, though all men forsake thee 
yet will not I!" it was he who slept while he might have 
been giving some words of encouragement and joined 
with the Master in prayer, and it was he who later on 
temporarily fell from his steadfastness and joined himself 
to the enemies of the Lord by denying him. We are 
glad that he ultimately recovered himself by the Lord's 
assistance, but how much better it would have been, 
how much happier for him, if he had watched and 
prayed. And so with us— let us follow in the footsteps 
of our Lord, watching and praying, walking circumspectly; 
let us lay down our lives for one another in 
the service of the Truth, not rendering evil for evil nor 
railing for railing, but contrariwise let us bless those 
who seek to injure us and pray for them, realizing that 
not of themselves do they these things but of the Adversary's 
misleading, even as we have the assurance 
that those who crucified the Lord were under Satan's 
delusion, as the Apostles say, "I wot that in ignorance 
ye did it, as did also your rulers." "For if they had 
known they would not have crucified the Lord of glory." 



So those who now oppose the Truth do so because their 
eyes are holden and their ears are holden because of 
the Adversary, and because they have allowed themselves 
to become entangled by his delusive snares and 
ambitions. We hope and pray for their disentanglement, 
their recovery, while we shun their ways. 



R4115 : page 8 

TWO DEBATES ARRANGED FOR 

THE Editor of ZION'S WATCH TOWER is not anxious 
for debate— except where it would seem to be 
necessary for the defense of the Truth, or providentially 
indicated as likely to bring forth good fruits. 
However, as Dr. Eaton's challenge came unsolicited, 
so also, now, we have two more— both of which we have 
accepted in the name of the Lord and depending on his 
sustaining grace— as follows:— 

DEBATE WITH REV. WM. DILLON, D.D. 

VERY PROMINENT AMONGST THE "UNITED BRETHREN," 

AT ELKHART, INDIANA, JANUARY 17 AND 18 

FOUR TOPICS, TWO HOURS EACH, AFTERNOONS AND EVENINGS 

(1) "The Scriptures teach that there will be no probation 
nor opportunity for salvation after the body dies, 

nor subsequent to the second coming of Christ." Dr. 
Dillon will affirm, Pastor Russell will deny. 

(2) "The Scriptures clearly teach that only the 

'saints' of this Gospel Age will share in the First Resurrection, 
but that vast multitudes will be saved in and 
by the subsequent resurrection." Pastor Russell will 
affirm, Dr. Dillon will deny. 

(3) "The Scriptures clearly teach that the second 
coming of Christ will precede the Millennium, and that 
the object of both the second coming and the Millennium 
is the blessing of all the families of the earth." 

Pastor Russell will affirm, Dr. Dillon will deny. 

(4) "The Scriptures clearly teach that the divine 
penalty for sin— actual transgressions of God's holy 
law— eventually to be inflicted upon the incorrigible, 
will consist of inconceivably painful sufferings, eternal 
in duration." Dr. Dillon will affirm, Pastor Russell will 
deny. 

DEBATE WrTH ELDER L. S. WHITE 

SELECTED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE "CHRISTIAN 

DENOMINATION" (RADICAL BRANCH) 

CINCINNATI, O., FEBRUARY 23-28. 

SIX TOPICS, TWO HOURS EACH. PARTICULARS IN OUR NEXT 

ISSUE. 



R4112:page8 

PREPARING THE WAY OF THE LORD 

--JOHN l:19-34.-JANUARY 12- 

Golden Text:— "Behold the Lamb of God, 
which taketh away the sin of the world." 

OUR Lord declared of his forerunner, "Verily, I 
say unto you, there hath not arisen a greater 
prophet than John the Baptist." The signification 
of the word prophet is "proclaimer"— not necessarily 
a proclaimer of future things, however. For 
instance, the Scriptures refer to the prophets and seers, 
the latter-named referring particularly to the seeing of 
visions and the foreseeing of coming events. Strictly 
speaking, a prophet is one who teaches or proclaims, 
though in many instances the two qualities are combined 
in one individual. This was so in the case of 
John the Baptist. He was not only a prophet declaring 
the important message to the people that they should 
repent, etc., but he foretold coming events— as, for instance, 
in this lesson he foretold that our Lord was the 
Lamb of God which should take away the sin of the 
world. He declared also that the Lord would baptize 
people with the holy Spirit and with fire. There was 
no greater prophet than John, because none of them 
was entrusted with a more important service of the 
Lord. Others had foretold the coming of Messiah, his 
birth of a virgin, his being led as a lamb to the slaughter, 
his crucifixion, his resurrection, etc., but to John 
was given the very honorable service of being the first 
direct announcer or herald of the Son of God, the man 
Christ Jesus. 

While thinking of this honorable position occupied 
by John, let us remember the Master's word on the 
subject— "Nevertheless I say unto you, he that is least 
in the Kingdom of heaven is greater than he." (Matt. 11:11.) 
What a thought there is here respecting the 
honor that God has conferred upon the apostles and 
upon all who since their time have believed on the Lord 
through their word and come into vital relationship 

R4113 : page 9 

with him through faith and consecration. In proportion 

as we realize this honor of being ambassadors for 

God, let us be faithful in the use of the opportunities 

and privileges afforded us. It was for John's honor to 

be the herald of the Lord in the flesh; it is our distinction 

to be permitted to proclaim the parousia of the 

Son of man and his glorious reign, about to be inaugurated 

for the blessing of all the families of the earth. 

Let us be faithful even unto imprisonment, even unto 



death, even unto beheading, should such be the providence 
of God. 

John's proclamation was, "The Kingdom of heaven 
is at hand, repent"— reform, get ready for it. He foretold 
that our Lord would treat the people of Israel as a 
reaper, that he would winnow the wheat and cast the chaff 
into the fire. The same thought he expressed again, saying, 
"He will baptize [some of you] with the holy 
Spirit and [others of you] with fire." These prophecies 
were accurately fulfilled. Our Lord did a reaping 
work in that nation, as he said to his disciples, "I send 
you forth to reap that whereon you bestowed no labor." 
For three years and a half the Lord reaped and gathered 
the first-fruits of that nation as his disciples, and 
upon these at Pentecost he poured out the holy Spirit. 
Subsequently the apostles gathered others before the 
time for the burning of the chaff, the "baptism of fire" 
which occurred in the closing of their national history, 
which culminated in A.D. 70 with the utter destruction 
of the city, the temple, and their entire polity. Similarly 
we who are living in the harvest time of this age, 
and who are declaring the presence, parousia, of the 
Son of man, are aware that a reaping work is now being 
accomplished in Christendom, nominal Spiritual 
Israel, and that all the wheat will be gathered into the 
garner, beyond the vail, and that speedily there will 
come upon the world, especially upon the tare class, a 
time of trouble such as never was since there was a 
nation— the divine preparation for the establishment 
of Messiah's Kingdom in power and great glory for the 
blessing of all the families of the earth. 

"WE BE ABRAHAM'S CHILDREN" 

John's announcement that sin would bar any from 
a share in the Kingdom, and hence that all should repent 
and seek divine reconciliation and turn over a new 
leaf, came as a shock to some who had been passing as 
God's holy people— the Pharisees and the worldly-wise 
Sadducees, higher critics, unbelievers. While some of 
these hearkened and confessed their sins and reformed, 
others disputed, claiming that John's teachings were 
extreme and unreasonable. Their argument was that 
God had promised the Kingdom to the seed of Abraham. 
There is no other nation of Abraham's seed 
and none other as holy or as worthy as we, and the 
promise of the Kingdom belongs to all Jews irrespective 
of their sanctity. So those who really embraced 
John's testimony were chiefly of the poor, confessedly 
sinful. We have the Lord's word for it that if the nation 
at large had heeded, had accepted John's message, 
they would have believed in Jesus. Hence we may 
well suppose that of the 500 brethren who became our 
Lord's disciples before his crucifixion, and who were 
privileged to see him after his resurrection, many of 
them were of those who had heard and heeded John's 



message. We may suppose also that considerable 

numbers of those who believed on the day of Pentecost 

and afterward were of those who heard John and were 

baptized by him for remission of sins and reformation 

of life. Thus do divine arrangements and agencies cooperate 

for the blessing of the honest-hearted, whatever 

may be their station in life, high or low, rich or poor. 

OUR LORD'S FORERUNNER 

In the East in olden times, and still, great personages 
in their travels are preceded by heralds or forerunners 
who clear the way. Dr. Trumball describes 
the streets of an oriental city, "well filled with half-naked 
cripples, blind beggars, vain women, and men 
in bright-colored garments, donkeys trotting through 
the crowded ways. Suddenly out of all this confusion 
a sharp, clear voice was heard, 'O ah! O ah!'— meaning, 
Take care— from a young Egyptian, gaily dressed, 
coming on the run, swinging a light staff in his hand 
and repeating his cries to the throng in the street to 
make way for those who are to follow. Close behind 
him came an open carriage drawn by a span of showy 
horses, containing an official of the government. During 
my stay in Cairo one of the commonest sights was 
the carriage of a pasha, preceded through the crowded 
streets by one or more forerunners, calling aloud for 
the clearing of the way." 

John the Baptist was to be the forerunner of our 
Lord in the flesh— to clear the way, to make the announcement 
—that he might be properly received, etc. 
But John did not fulfil all of the prophecy relating to 
this clearing of the way and preparing for Messiah's 
Kingdom, which reads:— 

"Prepare ye in the wilderness the way of the Lord, 

Make straight in the desert a highway for our God. 

Every valley shall be exalted, 

And every mountain shall be made low, 

And the crooked places shall be made straight, 

And the rough places plain."— Isa. 40:3,4. 

THE ANTITYPICAL ELIJAH 

We remind our readers that in the second volume 
of DAWN-STUDIES, chapter VIIL, we have set forth the 
evidences that as John in the flesh introduced Jesus in 
the flesh and thus fulfilled the work of forerunner, so 
the Church in the flesh during this Gospel Age has been 
the antitypical Elijah, whose business it is to announce 
the second coming of Christ, the King of glory, and to 
call for the clearing of the way for his Millennial reign. 
As you all have this presentation we will not enter into 
a discussion of it here. 

Let us note the foregoing prophecy: We perceive 
that John's ministry accomplished comparatively little 
of this; it lasted less than two years and reached a 



very small proportion of one generation, of one nation. 
But this is the very message that the antitypical John, 
the antitypical Elijah, the Church of Christ in the flesh, 
has been witnessing to the world. Its message as 
voiced by the Apostle is that the world is in a wilderness 
condition and needs the presence of the great 
King to bring order out of its confusion. Its message 
is that those who hear should walk circumspectly, 
should make a straight pathway in the desert, a highway 
for the coming King. More than this, it shows 

R4113 :page 10 

that the entire reign of Jesus and the Church during 
the Millennium will be to prepare the world for the 
presence of Jehovah, that the earth may again become 
his green footstool instead of being a desert, rejected 
and condemned by him because of sin. 

Not only is the work of the Church in the flesh 
pointed out in this prophecy, but also the work of 
Christ and the Church in glory during the Millennial 
Age is foretold— "every valley shall be exalted," signifying 
that the humble shall be lifted up out of degradation, 
and those who have reached high positions of influence 
and affluence under the reign of sin shall be 
humbled under the reign of righteousness, and thus 
symbolically "every mountain shall be brought low." 
The great things which belong to the present time of 
sin and imperfection will all be straightened out, and 
the incongruous things will all be smoothed over; so 
that eventually the world of mankind, as a result of the 
work of the "Times of restitution of all things," shall 
again be in harmony with the divine will and the divine 
law of love, be ready for a return of the divine presence, 
as represented by the prophets in the words, "He 
shall make the place of his feet glorious." 

"WHO ART THOU, THEN?" 

This was the question asked of John the Baptist— 
"Art thou the Messiah?" No. "Art thou Elias?" No. 
"Art thou that prophet mentioned by Moses?" (Acts 3:21,23.) 
No. "Who art thou, then? Why do you 
come in this manner, speaking as with authority?" 
John's answer was, "I am the voice of one crying in 
the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make 
his paths straight.... I indeed baptize you with water; 
but one mightier than I cometh, the latchet of 
whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose." (Luke 3:4,16.) 
Thus did John announce the greatness of Messiah 
and his own insignificance in comparison. Surely 
we who antitype him may feel very humble in respect 
to all of our privileges in connection with the announcement 
of the glorious Kingdom. Any other attitude 
would be unworthy of us as his representatives and 
ambassadors. The poet expresses this matter, 



saying: 

"Rather be nothing, nothing— 

To him let their voices be raised; 
He is the fountain of blessing, 

Yes, worthy is he to be praised." 
How similar is this announcement to the one made 
by John. There Jesus was present in the flesh, offering 
himself to fleshly Israel. Now he is present a 
spirit being and equally unrecognized. There he was 
eventually recognized by all the Israelites indeed; here 
we expect that his presence, parousia, will be recognized 
by all Spiritual Israelites indeed before the "harvest" 
closes. It is not advisable to cast this pearl of 
precious truth before the world nor before the unconsecrated. 
The facts of the Lord's presence, that the 
harvest work is now in progress, that the wheat will 

R4114:page 10 

soon all be garnered and that the fire of trouble upon 
the tares will soon be kindled are only for those who 
are "Israelites indeed," hungering and thirsting for 
righteousness. But these truths are indeed meat in 
due season for all the wise virgins. 

"BEHOLD THE LAMB OF GOD" 

While our Lord's strength and majesty are symbolically 
referred to when he is styled the "Lion of the 
tribe of Judah," thus picturing his mighty power as the 
Millennial King, the picture of a lamb is certainly very 
appropriate to him in connection with his earthly ministry 
and sacrifice for our sins. His submission to the 
Father's will in every particular and ultimately even 
unto death, even the death of the cross, was very lamb-like. 
Furthermore, he was God's Lamb in the sense 
that his offering for our sins was the divine arrangement, 
the Father's plan. The Scriptural declaration 
is that God gave his only begotten Son to be man's 
Redeemer, that he sent his Son into the world— the Son 
delighting to do the Father's will. All these thoughts 
beautifully blend together in this expression, "The 
Lamb of God." Moreover, it brings to our minds the 
thought of the necessity for a sacrifice for our sins. In 
no other way could a lamb take away or bear the sin 
of the world. How glad we are that by the Lord's 
grace we not only have eyes of understanding to see 
him as our great Teacher, Shepherd, but also eyes to 
see and minds to understand that he was indeed the 
Lamb of God, whose sacrifice on our behalf is to cancel 
our sins, their penalty, etc. Only those who can 
recognize Jesus as the Lamb of God, the Sin-Bearer, 
can have the justification by faith proffered to believers 
in this Gospel Age. Let us never lose sight of this 
feature of the Truth, Whoever loses his robe of righteousness 
through faith in the blood, loses all so far as 



the Scriptures reveal. 

TAKING AWAY THE SIN OF THE WORLD 

How wonderful are the statements of the divine 
Word!— how exact! John, as a Jew, would not be expected 
to understand all that his words declared, for 
the Jews were especially expecting Messiah to take 
away the sins of the Jews, and that then they, as God's 
Royal Priesthood, would correct the world in righteousness. 
But John's declaration goes farther 
than this, and includes all the Gentiles as well. The 
wisdom from on high which guided this prophetic utterance 
is beyond that which the majority of the Lord's 
people today can appreciate. The general thought 
today seems to be that the sin of the world is never to 
be taken away— that the world will sink down into 
eternal torment under the weight of sin— the Adamic 
condemnation, supplemented by personal transgressions. 
Christendom, Churchianity, today knows nothing 
about a Savior that, as the Lamb of God, shall 
take away the sin of the world. Alas! alas! poor, blind 
Christendom! It has read these words and other similar 
declarations of the Scriptures without getting from them 
the real blessing which they contain. We remember in 
this connection the Apostle's statement that "the man 
Christ Jesus gave himself a ransom for all," and we 
remember his further statement that Jesus' sacrifice 
was "a propitiation for our sins [the Church's sins], 
and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole 
world." (I John 2:2.) Truly, as the Lord declared, 
As the heavens are higher than the earth so are my 
ways higher than your ways and my plans than your 
plans. How glad we are that we find God to be neither 

R4114 :page 11 

little, mean nor revengeful, but a great God whose wondrous 
plan so far transcends the thought of man. As we 
look with the eyes of our understanding we realize a 
measure of the fulfilment of the Apostle's prayer, 
which, no doubt, included us, "I bow my knees unto the 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,. ..that ye may be 
able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth 
and length and depth and height; and to know the love 
of Christ that passeth knowledge."— Eph. 3:14,18,19. 

HIS WORK IS BEFORE HIM 

John the Baptist spoke of the Lamb as being present, 
but of the cancellation of the sin of the world as 
being a future work. And this work is still incomplete. 
Our Lord did die as the Lamb, his sacrifice was 
indeed fully meritorious and satisfactory to the Father, 
as evidenced by his resurrection from the dead and exaltation 
to glory and power. But in harmony with the 



divine plan, the taking away of the sins of the world is 
divided into two parts: (1) The taking away of the 
sins of those whose hearts long for reconciliation with 
God and forgiveness, and to be in harmony with that 
which is right and true and just and good. These, 
called believers, have their sins taken away reckonedly; 
or rather, as the Apostle and the Prophet express it, 
their sins are "covered" from God's sight by the robe of 
Christ's righteousness— to be entirely blotted out or 
taken away when, by the Lord's grace, they shall have 
finished their course and as faithful ones been counted 
worthy to enter into life eternal. In that new body 
then to be granted there will be no blemish, no sin to 
cover, all will have been blotted out. Then will begin 
the reign of Christ and his glorified Church, his Bride, 
the blessing of the world— the Millennial reign, the 
Kingdom of the heavens, the rule of righteousness. 
(2) But before that reign shall begin, the Lamb of God— 
who redeemed the world more than eighteen centuries 
ago— will present the merit of his sacrifice and the sacrifice 
also of the Church, his Body members [made 
worthy, acceptable through his merit], to the Father 
as the second offering of the great Day of Atonement 
sacrifice— for all the people.— Lev. 16. 

As the Lord's presentation of his sacrifice when he 
ascended up on high was accepted of the Father and 
the blessing came upon the Church, the household of 
faith, so surely will the second presentation in the end 
of this age when offered by the great High Priest be 
acceptable to the Father for the sins of the whole world 
—all the people. Divine forgiveness for all, the obliquity 
of Adamic guilt and weakness, will then be made 
applicable to every creature, and only for such portions 
of transgressions as have been in the nature of wilful 
wrong doing will receive "chastisements," "stripes." 
(Luke 12:47,48.) All the influences of that Millennial 
Kingdom will be exercised for the blessing, uplifting 
and assistance of all who will then be brought to a 
knowledge of the Lord and his gracious plans. Even 
stripes, chastisements, judgments are amongst the 
assistances for the world and their correction in righteousness. 
So, then, by the end of the Millennial Age, 
the blessing of God— through the Lamb of God which 
taketh away the sin of the world— shall have accomplished 
such wonderful, gracious blessings for mankind 
that all shall have reached the full perfection of restitution 
to human nature except the incorrigible, who 
will be "utterly destroyed from amongst the people." 
-Acts 3:23. 

JOHN'S FAITHFUL WITNESS 

We see in John's message an utter absence of selfishness, 
that stumbling stone which has kept so many 
of the Lord's people from themselves progressing and 
from being used of the Lord as a blessing to others 



and witnesses to the truth. John's confession was that 
Jesus was far greater than himself, and should be preferred 
before him because he was before him. He was 
not only before him in the sense of having had 
a preexistence with the Father, but he was before him 
in the sense of always having had a higher station and 
being perfect, while John himself was compassed with 
imperfections of the flesh like other men. 

The declaration, "I knew him not," should not be 
understood to mean that he was not acquainted with 
Jesus, for the record shows that they were full cousins. 
Rather the thought is that he knew not that Jesus was 
the Messiah: he knew him as his cousin, he knew him 
as a wonderful boy and a wonderful man, he knew him 
well enough to at first protest that he was not one of 
the kind that should be baptized— he was not a sinner. 
But after Jesus had insisted that by his baptism he 
would be accomplishing the Father's will— "fulfilling 
all righteousness"— then John baptized him in water. 
There, he tells us, at that moment he received from God 
the evidence that Jesus was the Messiah. He had already 
been informed that he was to announce Messiah 
and the Kingdom, and that he would know the Son of 
God by beholding the descent upon him of the holy 
Spirit as a dove, but he had not expected that this demonstration 
should take place in connection with any 
whom he baptized. He himself, then, was astonished 
when he beheld the descent of the Spirit upon the Lord, 
and he announced then to the people that Jesus was 
the Messiah, the Son of God, the Lamb of God. John 
did not announce that Jesus was the Father, but that 
he was the Son of God. This was our Lord's own declaration, 
the declaration of the apostles, and our testimony 
must be in harmony with this. We are not 
to ignore the Father nor the Son nor the relationship 
between the two, nor the oneness which exists between 
them, which our Lord explained in his prayer, when he 
prayed for the Church that they all might be one even 
as he and the Father are one— not one in person, but 
one in unity of heart and purpose. 



R4115 :page 11 

FINDING THE LORD'S JEWELS 

-JOHN 1:35-51. -JANUARY 19.- 

Golden Text:— "We have found him of whom Moses in 
the Law and the Prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth." 

OUR last lesson showed us Jesus at the time of his 
consecration and its symbolization by baptism, 
when he received the holy Spirit, which to John 
the Baptist was the token that he was the Messiah. It 



was after this that Jesus was for forty days alone in 
the wilderness studying the divine plan, and particularly 
his own share therein, under the enlightening 
influences of the holy Spirit which he had just received. 
This, we see, brought also testing and temptation from 
the Adversary, suggestions of other and different ways 
from that which the Lord's Word indicated and which 
the holy Spirit now showed. Our Lord having passed 
through those temptations successfully, a victor, began 
his ministry of three and a half years of self-sacrifice 
even unto death. Naturally enough he went back to 
where John had been baptizing and preaching. How 
much fellowship he enjoyed with John is not stated, 
or how long he remained in that vicinity. Only the 
most perspicuous incidents are noted. 

It was while Jesus was away in the wilderness that 
the Pharisees and Scribes asked John whether or not 
he was the Messiah and received bold testimony that he 

R4115 :page 12 

was not, and was not even worthy to be the menial servant 

of the great Messiah, who was to accomplish the 

fulfilment of the prophecies. This was just before our 

Lord's return, and on the next day (v. 29) Jesus— having 

returned from the wilderness— mingled amongst 

the people listening to John's preaching, etc., and it 

was at that time that John said, "Behold the Lamb of 

God which taketh away the sin of the world," and acknowledged 

him publicly, and that he had the witness of 

the Spirit in seeing the dove resting upon him at his 

baptism. It was on the following day, as we read 

in our lesson, that John, standing with two of his disciples, 

pointed to Jesus in the distance walking and said, 

"Behold the Lamb of God." 

"THERE COMETH ONE AFTER ME" 

The beautiful simplicity and honesty of John the 
Baptist is remarkable because it is rare. The majority 
of even the noble-minded seem to have such a selfish, 
grasping disposition as to unfit them for a service 
of this kind committed to John. Apparently the majority 
would find it absolutely impossible to avoid the 
extolling of their own position and service and dignity 
in connection with whatever they would say in respect 
to another, but John seems to have been utterly oblivious 
of himself— he thought only of his responsibility 
as the Voice that should cry in the wilderness to them, 
announcing Messiah. Disowning all honor and distinction 
for himself, he directed the reverence of all 
hearts toward Jesus. Let us emphasize this, each in 
his own heart, as being the proper attitude for all of 
the Lord's honored servants. We are not to honor 
ourselves, but to honor him whom the Father has honored, 
our Lord and our Head. In proportion as we 



shall be faithful in this service and seek not our own 

but our Master's praise and honor, pointing him out as 

the one in whom is centered the divine plan— in this 

same proportion will we be exhibiting the spirit, disposition, 

which our Lord can approve and reward with 

a share in the heavenly Kingdom and glory. If we did 

not cultivate this spirit and have it in our hearts we 

would be unfit for the Kingdom— unfit to be entrusted 

with so great power, honor and glory and with immortality. 

"He that honoreth me I will honor," "He that 

is ashamed of me and of my words, of him will the Son 

of man be ashamed," "He that exalteth [praises] himself 

shall be abased; he that humbleth himself shall 

be exalted. "-John 5:23; Luke 9:26; 14:11. 

"ALL MEN WERE IN EXPECTATION" 

The Scriptures inform us that at this time the 
whole Jewish nation was in expectation of Messiah. 
The records show this in connection with the time of 
our Lord's birth, the solicitude of Herod, the killing of 
the babes of Bethlehem, the journey of the wise men, 
etc. Doctor Farrar remarks on this same line:— 

"We are informed by Tacitus, by Suetonius, and 
by Josephus, that there prevailed throughout the entire 
East at this time an intense conviction, derived 
from ancient prophecies, that ere long a powerful monarch 
would arise in Judea, and gain dominion over the 
world." 

It was in harmony with this general expectation of 
the people that John's preaching drew such large 
crowds when he announced that the Kingdom of Messiah 
was nigh, and that all those prepared for a share 
therein should confess their sins, repent of them and 
reform— inviting them to symbolize this by baptism, 
but applying it only to Jews, and not in reference to 
their original sin— which under the Law was atoned 
for year by year with the blood of bulls and goats— 
but referred to repentance for all personal transgressions, 
misdeeds against the Law. We have our Lord's 
testimony for it that in proportion as the people believed 
John's message and acted thereon, in that same 
proportion they were ready for his ministry and the 
further truth of the Gospel. Hence we are not surprised 
that those who became the Lord's disciples 
were in some manner intimately and sympathetically 
acquainted with John and his preaching. Is it not a 
rule in divine providence that one step of knowledge 
and devotion leads to another? It was in harmony 
with this that the disciples of John the Baptist had the 
Messiah first pointed out to them, and thus the door 
was opened for their becoming Jesus' disciples. 

SEEKING FELLOWSHIP WITH JESUS 

The two disciples to whom John the Baptist made 



the remark, "Behold the Lamb of God," at once concluded 

that if they had found the Messiah whom John 

was introducing it was time to seek his fellowship, and 

if possible identify themselves with his ministry. Nor 

does John the Baptist seem to have offered the slightest 

remonstrance against their leaving off cooperation 

with him. The name of one of these is given in the 

narrative, Andrew; the name of the other is omitted, 

but it is presumed that it was John, the writer of this 

Gospel, whose modesty in such matters is indicated by 

the withholding of his name on another occasion also 

—when he refers to himself as "that disciple whom Jesus 

loved." How beautiful this modesty, how much it 

endears the character of John to all of us. A less modest 

man in writing of the matter would probably have 

told of how he first thought of following Jesus and invited 

Andrew to accompany him. But we can not only 

have much more love for John because of this characteristic 

of humility, but it gives us correspondingly 

more confidence in all he has written— that ambition 

did not warp or color any of his descriptions of the 

matters recorded by him. 

The modesty of the two men is further exemplified 
by their course of conduct in following the Lord instead 
of approaching him boldly and saying, "Sir, we 
have the honorable distinction of being amongst the 
most prominent disciples of John the Baptist, and now 
introduce ourselves to you." On the contrary, they followed 
quietly, wondering where our Lord resided and 
how they might have an opportunity without obtruding 
themselves to become acquainted with him. Their reverence 
for him and their modest opinion of themselves 
restrained them from improprieties. However, after 
they had followed the Lord probably a considerable 
distance on his journey toward his abode, he turned to 
them saying, "What seek ye?" or, as we might translate 
it into the form of today, "Is there anything I can 

R4116 :page 13 

do for you?" Taken by surprise, they merely answered 

the Master, "Rabbi, we are wondering where you reside." 

Our Lord answered, "Come and see," and they 

went with him and spent the remainder of that day 

(for this was about four o'clock in the afternoon) in 

his company. Their queries and our Lord's answers 

during that afternoon and evening are open for our 

imagination, for no record is given us. Doubtless 

they explained to the Lord what they had heard respecting 

him from John the Baptist, and made inquiries regarding 

his future work and Kingdom. We may be 

sure that our Lord told them only part of the truth, in 

harmony with his subsequent statement to all of 

the disciples, "I have many things to tell you, but 

you cannot bear them now."— John 16:12. 



LESSONS FOR THE NEW CREATION 

There are several lessons here that may profit us: 

(1) The humility of the disciples in their approach; 

(2) Their proper ambition to have all that God had 
provided for them and to make use of their opportunity 
—to progress from being the disciples of John to 

the discipleship of Jesus; (3) Their seeking in this unobtrusive 

manner to have fellowship with the Lord and 

to become better acquainted; (4) Our Lord's generous 

reception of them and hospitable invitation to his 

home; (5) His wisdom in not telling them the whole 

truth— neither about the heavenly things nor about the 

earthly trials and difficulties. Meat in due season is 

the Scriptural order— milk for babes, strong meat for 

those who are more developed, as the Apostle 

recommends. 

How much need all the Lord's dear followers have 
for applying these various lessons each to his own 
heart and experience and practice! How many of us 
have had a zeal without wisdom, and have fed new beginners 
with strong meat, which has troubled and hindered 
them if it did not choke their interest. But we 
are all pupils, and let us all learn more and more to be 
wise as serpents and harmless as doves, as earnest in 
showing the pearls to those ready for the sight as in 
withholding them from those who are swinish and 
unprepared. 

"WHAT ARE YOU SEEKING?" 

There is peculiar force in this query, and no doubt 
our Lord used it with the intention of awakening this 
very thought in these two who first sought his companionship. 
It is a good question for each one of us to put 
to himself, and for us to suggest at a proper time to all 
others who are manifesting any interest in Present 
Truth. What are we seeking? What are we looking 
for? We know what the world is seeking— wealth, 
honor, fame, ease, etc.— and we know that many who 
turn toward the Lord still have the spirit of the world. 
They would like to be the Lord's disciples and still 
have and cultivate and enjoy the hopes and ambitions 
that are more or less worldly. It is appropriate that 
we should give heed to the Master's words as though 
they were addressed to each of us individually, What 
are you seeking? Let us answer our Master in our own 
hearts and in prayer; and before we make answer, let 
us consider well that it may be a truthful one, for we 
might indeed deceive ourselves, but could not deceive 
him with whom we have to do. It is right that we 
should seek the Kingdom and that we should know 
that there is a great honor and glory and dignity associated 
with it by divine arrangement, and that thus we 
should "seek for glory, honor and immortality." But 
in conjunction with this seeking of the Kingdom we 



should remember our Master's words on another occasion, 
that we should seek chiefly the Kingdom of God 
and his righteousness. 

We are to remember that the Kingdom is not to be 
reached by an unrighteous path, that injustice, iniquity, 
lawlessness, self-indulgence, selfishness in any 
form are paths which lead in other directions. We are 
to remember that the Master by word and by example 
indicated to us that to live godly in this present time 
would involve us in a measure of persecution, as it did 
him, and that the servant must not expect to be above 
his lord in the world's favor. Hence to say we are 
seeking the Kingdom means that we are taking the 
path leading thereto— the narrow way of self-denial. 
It means that we have enlisted under the banner of the 
Lord, with a full knowledge that our loyalty to him 
will mean to us opposition from the world, the flesh 
and the Adversary, as we seek to be good soldiers of 
the cross and to endure hardness in fighting against 
sin. It is those who seek the Lord with sincerity, with 
honesty, without guile and without selfishness, who 
find him, have fellowship with him and become his 
true disciples, and eventually will have joint-heirship 
with him in his Kingdom. 

"FIRST FINDETH HIS OWN BROTHER" 

One of the two who heard John and followed Jesus 
was Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter— "He findeth 
first his own brother Simon." The revised version may 
be understood to imply that both disciples sought 
their brothers, but that Andrew found his brother first. 
If, as is supposed, John was the other disciple, we 
know that he had a brother, James, and that the latter 
also was brought to the Lord. The particular thought 
we wish to emphasize here as worthy of special commendation, 
embodying a proper lesson for us, is the 
fact that these disciples in beginning the service of the 
Truth went first to their own brethren. This implies 
that they had brotherly love in their hearts, as we 
should properly expect all would have who would be 
found worthy to be disciples of Jesus. It implies that 
they had influence with their brethren along religious 
lines, which probably would not have been true if they 
had not been recognized by their relatives as men of 
character and principle. If, therefore, any of the 
Lord's people should feel impelled to first go to strangers 
with the good tidings it would be a less favorable 
sign as respects the esteem in which they are held. 
However, let them not feel discouraged if they have not 
this favorable evidence to begin with. Let us remember 
the Apostle's assurance that amongst those the 
Lord is choosing for his disciples there are not many 
great, noble, influential— that they are mainly the 
ignoble. 

The very fact that the Lord has granted us the 



privilege of his fellowship is an assurance that there 
was something in us that he did not despise, and was 

R4116 :page 14 

willing to take over, that he might mould and fashion 
it by his truth and grace, and finally present it beautiful 
and irreprovable before the Father through the glorious 
change of the First Resurrection. Again, however, 
let us emphasize the propriety of loving those who 
are our kin to the extent that we will do all in our power 
for their assistance. As this is a rule that should 
prevail amongst brethren it should also be a rule 
as between husband and wife, parents and children. 
If a wife should receive the Truth, her first joy should 
be, if possible, to bring the matter to the attention of 
her husband. If a husband receive the Truth it should 
be his first joy and privilege to bring the matter to the 
attention of his wife, and so between the parents to the 
children. We confess that we have been surprised at 
times to find that this course, which seems so natural 
and so proper, has not always suggested itself to those 
who have come into the light of Present Truth. 

We advise that where a different course has been 
followed it is time for a change. Let the husband plan 
for the welfare of the wife and assist her in arranging 
the home matters, so that she may have time for studying 
the Truth, attending meetings, etc. Let the wife 
coming into the Truth give diligent attention to arrange 
matters most favorably for her husband, that he 
also may enjoy the blessings, the privileges of study, 
etc. The old adage, that "Charity begins at home," is 
as true of religious charity as of other kinds. "Husbands, 
love your wives"— do all in your power to bless 
them, especially in their highest spiritual interests, 
and to bring to them this highest of all joys. "Wives, 
reverence your husbands"— appreciate them, and desire 
that they shall have all of the good things obtainable, 
and use your best influence for their assistance. 

"WE HAVE FOUND THE MESSIAH" 

With this message they greeted their brethren, 
and, as explained in the text, the Hebrew word Messiah 
corresponded to the Greek word Christ. They 
knew that for long centuries Messiah had been promised, 
and that their whole nation, through varying vicissitudes, 
had been looking, hoping, praying for his coming 
and for the blessings which he would bring to their 
nation as their king, delivering them from all evil and 
exalting them with the power of God to be the light of 
the world, and thus through them shedding blessings 
upon all nations. The afternoon spent by these two 
with Jesus had convinced them that the words of John 
the Baptist were correct, that Jesus was "the Lamb of 
God, which taketh away the sin of the world." 



It is not explained how Peter received the message, 
but judging him from his subsequent course of conduct, 
we must assume that he came with haste to see, 
to know, to judge for himself on the subject. The nature 
of the evidence given him by Jesus is not related, 
but he believed, became a disciple, received a new 
name— an added name. He was Simon Bar-Jona, or 
Simon, son of Jonah; now, henceforth, he would be 
more particularly known as a disciple by the name of 
Simon Peter, that is, Simon, a stone. Thus early did 
Jesus indicate his knowledge of the man, recognizing 
him as one of the living stones for the glorious Temple 
of the future, as this Apostle himself afterward explained. 
-I Pet. 2:4,5. 

R4117 :page 14 

"GO FORTH INTO GALILEE" 

On the day following Jesus would go forth into 
Galilee, and en route found Philip, whom he personally 
invited to become his follower, and then speedily Philip 
found Nathanael, known also in the Scriptures as 
Bartholomew. 

This finding of the disciples is described to have 
been at Bethabara, where Jesus was making his home, 
and which by the revisers is called Bethany— thus giving 
the suggestion that our Lord was acquainted with 
the family of Lazarus and Martha and Mary before he 
began his ministry, and that it was to this point that 
the disciples followed him from the fords of the Jordan, 
where John had been baptizing. Evidently our Lord 
tarried in the vicinity of John's mission for a time, 
there to find some of the most earnest ones whom 
John's preaching had gathered together. 

It will be noticed that the disciples here mentioned 
all came from Galilee, John and James, Andrew and 
Simon Peter, Philip and Nathanael. (Judas alone was 
a Judean.) What were these men doing so far away 
from their homes? We can only suppose that they 
were amongst the masses who heard of John and his 
preaching, and who were so deeply interested in the 
coming Messiah that they came what was considered 
in those days a considerable journey, leaving their business 
that they might hear what John had to say, and 
join with him as his disciples in helping to prepare the 
way for Messiah. How the Lord does use one ministration 
of the Truth to prepare our hearts for a later 
and fuller illustration of it! This corroborates the 
statement of our Lord's prayer to the effect that these 
disciples were true, God-fearing consecrated men before 
they came to Jesus. In the prayer Jesus says, 
"Thine they were and thou gavest them to me." (John 17:6.) 
A lesson to us in this is that if we are faithful 
and zealous to every portion of truth that comes to us, 
according as we receive and act upon this we will be 



prepared for another. Had these men not had the 
spirit of consecration they never would have left their 
affairs to join with John in his ministry, and then they 
might not have been so well prepared to be the honored 
apostles of Jesus. 

"WHENCE KNOWEST THOU ME?" 

The story of the call of Nathanael is a specially 
interesting one. Our imaginations have little difficulty 
in filling in the items omitted by the narrative. Philip 
himself had come within the charmed circle of our 
Lord's influence, and had realized that it was a blessed 
privilege to become his disciple and that he must be 
indeed the long-looked-for Messiah. Full of this confidence 
he looked for his friend Nathanael, whom he 
recognized as being of one mind and heart with himself 
in the desire to serve the Lord and to be ready for 
Messiah's Kingdom. Finding him his salutation was, 
"We have found him of whom Moses in the Law and 
the Prophets did write— Jesus of Nazareth, [adopted] 
son of Joseph." Nathanael was apparently a man of 
keen intellectual power. He felt that his friend Philip 
had accepted something too hastily, and that he was 
being deceived by a pretender, and his prompt objection 
was, "Can any good thing come out of Nazareth?" 
As though he had said, "That is a mean city of itself; 
no great people of any reputation would ever come from 
thence; no prophecies, so far as we know, make any 
reference to that city. What you tell me of your Messiah 
rather tends to prejudice my mind against him." 

And so it is today with some of the Lord's true 
followers who are expecting the second coming of the 
Lord as the great King of glory. When we tell them 
that we have found the truth on this subject and that 
the Law and the prophets all corroborate the fact that 
we are now living in the harvest time, in the parousia 
of the Son of man, they are disposed to sneer at our 
zeal and enthusiasm and to bid us be very careful lest 
we be deceived. They ask, Whence comes the message 
of the parousia? and when they are told that it is not 
from the great, the wise, the mighty of this present 
time, not from the Doctors of Divinity, but from humble 
sources that the message reaches them, they ask, 

R4117 :page 15 

"What could you expect from such a source?" intimating 
that rather we should look to the Scribes and 
Pharisees and Doctors of the Law today. 

Let us answer such doubting brethren as Philip 
answered Nathanael, "Come and see!" Investigate, 
test the matter by the Word of God. Apparently Nathanael 
would not go with Philip. The latter may have 
gone his own way dejectedly, because one whom he esteemed 
to be a true servant of God was apparently unwilling 



to hearken and to investigate. But Nathanael 
had his own reasons for not at once complying with the 
invitation. He felt that the matter was one of great 
importance; that it affected not only his own interests 
but the interests of his friends and of the Lord's cause 
in general. He must be cautious. He had already 
heard of Jesus, and had been considering and praying 
about this very subject before Philip came to him; he 
had asked to be kept from delusions and snares— that 
his judgment might be guided of the Lord, that he 
might not be deceived by a pretender. He would follow 
a little later, and, free from all prejudice, would 
endeavor to judge of the merits or demerits of the case, 
relying upon the Lord's blessing, which he had sought. 

How glad we would be if all our dear friends who 
give evidence, so far as we are able to judge, of being 
true, loyal servants of the Lord, were to take the course 
that Nathanael took to seek the Lord and his protection 
and guidance, and then to investigate, proving all 
things by the Word of God! And while we may be sure 
that though some may not as promptly take this course 
as did Nathanael, all who are of the truly overcoming 
class will ultimately take it and ultimately be guided, 
that they may indeed come in contact with Present 
Truth and realize the parousia of our Lord and his 
work of harvesting the Church and gathering the ripe 
grains into the garner preparatory to their shining 
forth with him in the glory of the Kingdom for the blessing 
of all the families of the earth. -Matt. 13:43. 

BLESSED ARE YOUR EYES AND EARS 

As we notice in this lesson the reception that our 
Lord gave Nathanael, we are forced to contrast it with 
the very different reception he gave to some of the 
Scribes and Pharisees and Doctors of the Law when 
they approached him in a caviling spirit. To these he 
spoke in parables and dark sayings which he did not 
expect them to appreciate or to understand, but to such 
as Nathanael our Lord was most gracious, because 
knowing the hearts of all he could wisely discriminate. 
We may not exercise such a liberty because such a 
knowledge is not ours; it is for us to be patient and 
courteous to all, and to do our best to assist all to an 
understanding of the Truth, whether they shall hear 
or whether they shall forbear— convinced, however, 
that only the Israelites indeed will hear effectually, 
will receive the call and be profited thereby to the attainment 
of the prize. 

Before Nathanael had quite reached Jesus and 
those who were with him, the Master said, in his hearing, 
"Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no 
guile." A wonderful tribute this! No wonder Nathanael 
was fit to be of the Little Flock and one of the 
apostles! No wonder Philip wrestled with him, praying 
him to come and see. His honesty of heart made 



him worthy of the blessings of which the mass of his 
nation were not then worthy. As we read in John 1:11,12, 
Jesus "came unto his own and his own received 
him not; but to as many as received him to them gave 
he liberty [privilege] to become the sons of God." 
And he helped those who were in the right attitude of 
heart to receive him; he assisted their faith and encouraged 
their confidence, saying to one, as we remember, 
"Be not faithless, but believing."— John 20:27. 

But Nathanael, although he realized that he was 
an honest, true Israelite, seeking for whatever God had 
to give to his faithful, was not satisfied with this testimony 
—such an expression might be given by another 
in flattery. He would cross-question the Lord, and he 
said, "Whence knowest thou me?" You have made a 
statement; what is your authority for it? I do not 
know that we have ever met before. Jesus replied, 
"When thou wast under the fig-tree, before Philip called 
thee, I saw thee." Ah, well did Nathanael remember 
how he had crept under the low-spreading boughs of 
the fig-tree and how he had prayed to the heavenly 
Father for wisdom and for the proper evidences on the 
subject of concern. Here he had the very answer to 
his prayer. The one who could know about that 
prayer and could thus answer it and reveal himself 
must indeed be superhuman— all that he claimed, the 
Messiah. Nathanael's faith operated quickly, and he 
responded, "Rabbi [Master], thou art the Son of God: 
thou art the King of Israel." 

And is not our Lord's dealing practically the same 
today? Is it not true that those who now in faith and 
prayer seek for enlightenment respecting the times and 
the seasons and the features of the divine plan, and 
information respecting the harvest work— is it not true 
that these are specially helped of the Lord? that the 
Truth is made specially clear before their minds? 
whereas others coming to the subject through idle curiosity 
perhaps, or with a half faith fear a coming trouble 
and are desirous of knowing how to escape it, are 
left comparatively in darkness? Let us who have discerned 
these beautiful traits and qualities in the class 
of disciples whom the Lord chose at his first advent, 
see to it that we cultivate similar characteristics, and 
that we expend our special energies to bring the Truth 
to the attention of others who give evidence of meekness 
and faith and loyalty to God. 

"THOU SHALT SEE GREATER THINGS" 

As soon as Nathanael had confessed his faith our 
Lord assured him that what he had already come to 
appreciate was insignificant in proportion to the still 

R4118 :page 15 

greater things which as his disciple he would gradually 



come to know and to understand. And is not this true 
with us today? The joy, the confidence, the hopes 
which filled our hearts at the beginning, as we came to 
recognize the Lord and to have a clearer understanding 
of the divine plan— have these not continually been 
added to by the Lord, so that what we first saw and enjoyed 
seems but small in comparison with the riches of 
grace and loving kindness and tender mercies revealed 
to our eyes of understanding. As our mental vision 
widens we behold lengths and breadths and depths 
and heights of the love of God surpassing all of our 
expectations.— Eph. 3:18,19. 

And by faith we can see Jesus as the antitypical 
Jacob's ladder, as our Lord intimated to Nathanael. 
As Jacob in his vision saw a ladder reaching from 
earth to heaven and communications carried on thereby, 
so we, in the light of the divine plan now unfolding, 
see that our Lord Jesus and the Church associated 
with him constitute the ladder of communication between 
God and the world of mankind, which, during 
the Millennial Age, will serve as the channel of favor 
by which all the families of the earth shall be blessed 
—by which the glory and blessing of the Lord shall be 
brought down to earth, even as now the Elect, firstfruits 
of his human creatures, are being gathered from 
amongst men, that they may ascend to God as heirs of 
God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ their Lord by 
means of the glorious change which shall come to them 
in the First Resurrection, in a moment, in the twinkling 
of an eye. 



page 17 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXIX JANUARY 15 No. 2 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

The Cincinnati, O., Debates 19 

Reports from Harvest-Fields Abroad 20 

Great Britain 20 

Germany 21 

Australasia 21 

Jamaica 22 

Berean Bible Study in Tabernacle Shadows 23 

What Constitutes Teaching? 23 

A Plea for the Sisters 23 

A More Excellent Way 24 

Cleansing the Temple 25 

Regeneration and the Kingdom 27 

An Interesting Letter 31 



page 18 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



FRIENDS USING "MISSIONARY ENVELOPES" will please 
put their return address on corner for return if not called for. 
This will save you and us and the P.O. annoyance. 



THE WOMAN'S NATIONAL DAILY 



The number of the friends subscribing for this cheap 
daily through us was not nearly as large as we had expected. 
Hence Brother Russell's sermons are not appearing in it regularly, 
as proposed. Sorry, for it meant a wide circulation of 
the Truth weekly. A kind card to the Editor of the National 
Daily from each one who has subscribed might help. 

CANADIAN FRIENDS DESIRING SERMONS WEEKLY 



Arrangements have been made for Brother Russell's sermons 
weekly in The Toronto World. We can give a clubbing 
rate of $1.50 per year (or, with TOWER, $2.50), except in the cities 
of Hamilton and Toronto, where the price will be $2.75, 
with TOWER, $3.75. Make up your lists speedily and send to us. 

"STUDIES," INDIA PAPER EDITION 



We now have India STUDIES, Vols. 4, 5 and 6. Back 
orders will have attention at once. Price, 85c each. The 
first three volumes will be announced later— when in stock. 

R4119 :page 18 

NO DEBATE WITH DR. DILLON 



Rev. Wm. Dillon, D.D., found it impossible to keep his 
appointment at Elkhart, Ind., and so notified us in advance 
of the date set. 



R4118 :page 19 

THE CINCINNATI, O., DEBATES 

SOME time ago the Editor of this journal was approached 

by Elder A. A. Bunner, who urged a 

debate on six questions of difference. We replied 

that we were too busy, and, besides, preferred to state the 

Truth and leave it to the people— particularly as we now 

have the eyes of nearly a million readers every week. He 

demurred, and finally we agreed to debate with him if he 

could get the endorsement of the Christian denomination of 

Pittsburgh. He was unable to do this. He explained that 

the "Disciples" hereabouts are known as Progressives, while 

he is attached to the Radical wing of the same denomination. 

The matter was finally taken up by the Editor of The 
Leader and the Way of the same faith. He found in 
Texas Elder L. S. White, supposed to be one of the ablest 
men of their connection. We have mutually agreed upon 
all the particulars for six debates at Cincinnati, O., in which 
we trust the Truth will be vindicated and caused to reach 
new ears and eyes. The entire "Disciple" Church seems to 
be aroused. It is expected that some of the railroads will 
grant concessional rates of fare. Probably some Cincinnati 
newspaper will publish stenographic reports of the debates. 
The following copies of correspondence may be of interest: 

Dallas, Tex., Nov. 15, 1907. 
ELD. C. T. RUSSELL, Allegheny, Pa. 
Dear Sir and Brother:— Our correspondence has 



been delightfully pleasant (for which I am truly grateful), 
and as we are agreed on all details for the coming 
discussion, am sending you copy of all the propositions 
we are to discuss, properly signed by myself, and hereby 
extend to you, as per your request, formal invitation 
to meet me in the discussion of these propositions in 
Cincinnati, Ohio, beginning Sunday evening, February 
23, 1908, and continuing six consecutive evenings, of 
two hours each, with one evening to each proposition. 
I suggest that you make due announcement in your paper. 
I also trust that the discussion may be in the 
same good spirit of our correspondence, and that the 
same may redound to the glory of God. 
Truly and fraternally, (Signed), L. S. WHITE. 



PROPOSITIONS FOR DISCUSSION IN CINCINNATI, OHIO, 
BEGINNING SUNDAY EVENING (7.30), FEBRUARY 23, 
1908, FOR SIX CONSECUTIVE EVENINGS: 

(1) The Scriptures clearly teach that all hope of 
salvation, today, is dependent upon accepting the Gospel 
of Christ as revealed in the Scriptures, and that 

such acceptance is confined to this present life. 
(Signed) L. S. WHITE, affirms. 
C. T. RUSSELL, denies. 

(2) The Scriptures clearly teach that the dead are 
unconscious between death and the resurrection— at 
the second coming of Christ. 

(Signed) C. T. RUSSELL, affirms. 
L. S. WHITE, denies. 

(3) The Scriptures clearly teach that the punishment 
of the (finally incorrigible) wicked will consist of 
conscious, painful suffering, eternal in duration. 

(Signed) L. S. WHITE, affirms. 
C. T. RUSSELL, denies. 

(4) The Scriptures clearly teach that the First 
Resurrection will occur at the second coming of Christ, 
and that only the saints of this Gospel Age will share 

in it; but that in the resurrection of the unjust (Acts 24: 15) 
vast multitudes of them will be saved. 

(Signed) C. T. RUSSELL, affirms. 
L. S. WHITE, denies. 

(5) The Scriptures clearly teach that immersion in 
water, "in the name of the Father and of the Son and of 
the holy Spirit," of a believing penitent is for, in order 
to, the remission of sins. 

(Signed) L. S. WHITE, affirms. 
C. T. RUSSELL, denies. 

(6) The Scriptures clearly teach that the second 
coming of Christ will precede the Millennium; and that 
the object of both— the second coming and the Millennium 

R4119 :page 19 



-is the blessing of all the families of the earth. 
(Signed) C. T. RUSSELL, affirms. 
L. S. WHITE, denies. 



Allegheny, Pa., Nov. 26, 1907. 
ELDER L. S. WHITE, Dallas, Tex. 

Dear Sir and Brother:— I am in receipt of your formal 
invitation to a public discussion of our doctrinal 
differences along Scriptural lines. I accept the invitation, 
with the assurances of the Editor of the Leader 
and the Way, that you are a widely known and highly 
respected representative of the Radical branch of the 
Christian or Disciple denomination, and yourself a 
Christian gentleman. 

I, too, have enjoyed the spirit of Christian courtesy 

R4119 : page 20 

which has pervaded our correspondence, leading up to 
the final statement of the propositions to be discussed. 
I share with you the hope you express, that the result 
of our meeting may be to the glory of God and to the 
enlightenment, and therefore the blessing, of his 
people. 

I might here remark respecting the first proposition, 
that I accept it as you prefer to have it, but only 
with the understanding that it is not two propositions, 
but one; for I would not be prepared to deny the first 
part of the same, "That the Scriptures clearly teach 
that all hope of salvation today is dependent upon the 
acceptance of the Gospel of Christ, as revealed in 
the Scriptures." I continually affirm that, but it is the 
after part of this proposition that I deny, viz., "That 
such acceptance is confined to this present life." 

Your letter makes no reference to chairmen for the 
six sessions. I shall assume, therefore, that you will 
agree to my previous suggestion, viz., that the duties of 
the chairman shall consist in preserving order, and in notifying 
each speaker as to the termination of his limit of 
time; and that, if possible, ministers of Cincinnati, of 
various outside denominations, be secured as chairmen 
—if possible, a different one for each session. Your letter, 
while stating that the discussion shall be limited to two 
hours at each session, offers no suggestion respecting 
the division of the time. I shall assume this to be an 
oversight, and that my previous suggestion on this 
subject has your approval, viz., that the first fifty minutes 
shall be at the disposal of the affirmative; the second 
fifty at the disposal of the negative, to be followed 
by ten minutes for the affirmative and then ten minutes 
for the negative. 

As respects rules for the controversy: I suggest 
that each speaker be allowed full liberty to order his 
subject according to his best judgment, and that it 



shall be in order for him to present his argument as 
may please him best. The language and conduct of 
each of the disputants shall represent to his opponent 
and the auditors in general his conception of the divine 
rules and standards governing Christian courtesy. 

With Christian regards and prayers for divine 
guidance of us both in the interests of truth, 

Yours in the Lord, C. T. RUSSELL. 



R4119 : page 20 

REPORTS FROM HARVEST-FIELDS ABROAD 
REPORT FROM GREAT BRITAIN, 1907 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have now the pleasure of sending the report of the 
British work for the past financial year. You will see that 
this year we are able to show a general increase in the work. 
We are glad to do this, not only because it is more pleasant 
than if we had to report decrease, but because it shows that 
the work of the Lord goes forward, and that there is yet 
much opportunity to work in the Harvest field. A review 
of the work and the prospects show that there is, apparently, 
an almost unlimited field for the "harvesters," and unlimited 
scope for their energies; the fields are "white unto 
harvest," and there are but few months for the reaping. Of 
late we have had abundant proof that the multitudes will 
listen to the message of the Kingdom and to the various 
features of the Plan; they are glad to have the "stones 
gathered out" of the way. The year has been one of continued 
activity, and, with the exception of the shortage of 
books we have experienced, there have been no hindrances. 
When you come next year you will find very much to give 
you cheer and encouragement, and grateful and willing 
hearts who share with you in the joys and sorrows of the 
harvesting. 

This year we are able to report an increase in the circulation 
of the DAWNS and STUDIES. We have sold nearly 
8,000 more books, and this would have been increased to 
nearly 10,000 but for the shortage. The greater portion of 
the increase is in Vol. I., but a good proportion is in Vols. 
II., III., through some of the Colporteurs selling sets of three 
or six. There is a great mining and manufacturing population 
yet in almost absolute ignorance of the Truth, and the 
small towns and villages of England are yet as virgin soil to 
the workers. During the year the possibility of a colporteur 
of good address being able to dispose of the books in difficult 
ground, and that in sufficient numbers as to provide a living, 
has been proved several times; while in the ordinary way 
the average colporteur can always get on. There is no reason 
for a person of good address and a readiness of manner 



failing in the work of a colporteur, nor for thinking that 
there is any part of this country where the work cannot be 
made self-supporting. 

The visit of Brother Williamson was specially enjoyed 
and it did much to cement the already close relationship 
between us and our brethren in America. The Conventions 
were happy and good times, and were surely blessed of the 
Lord. 

You will see that the "Volunteer" work has gone on 
about as usual, and that the British friends show much activity 
in this work. We have yet a good supply of tracts 
upon which the brethren can call, and we shall be glad to 
have them make request. 

The donation to the TRACT FUND is not quite so high 
as last year's total: it is good to share in the joys of the 
dear brethren in their giving to the Lord whether of means 
or of service. I continually thank the Lord for the privilege 
of being used to serve with them in this way. 

The meetings all over the land seem to grow in zeal 
for the work, and we would that this should be the case 
with us all, and that at the same time we may grow in the 
grace of the Lord. While so much waits to be done it is a 
pity to spend any energy of mind or body in that which is 
merely wasted in the doing. The Lord gives us the privilege 
of building up each other, and thus of building up that 
holy city, and also of witnessing to the world, and we can 
do these things only as we are intent upon the work. May 
his grace help us to bind ourselves upon the altar and thus 
to each other and to the Lord. 

With brotherly love and affection, and conveying the 
love of the British brethren, 

I am yours in his grace, J. HEMERY. 

SUMMARY OF THE BRITISH WORK FOR 1907 

Total number of DAWN-STUDIES sold at cost 34,575 

Booklets, Manna, etc. " 7,876 

Tracts distributed free 1,394,500 

" stated in pages 35,933,000 

" Letters received 8,130 

" sent out 6,825 

R4119 : page 21 

FINANCIAL STATEMENT, 1907 

Cost of tracts distributed free, including L. s. d. 

postage, freight, etc 1,564 6 4 

The above, stated in U.S. money $7,556.20 

Pilgrim and Convention expenses 109 2 7 

The above, stated in U.S. money $527.1 1 



Totals $8,083.31, or 1,673 11 

Tract Fund and "Good Hopes" $4,179.77 or 861 4 7 

Deficit for 1907 3,820.13 or 811 4 7 



REPORT FROM GERMANY, 1907 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

By the Lord's grace we have reached the end of another 
year of harvest work in Germany, ending Nov. 1st, and 
it seems only too short a period to have accomplished very 
much. At least we could wish it had been a great deal 
more, but we know it is a day of small things which the 
Lord does not despise. Neither will we think little of the 
possible blessing he is abundantly able to give to the large 
quantities of tracts scattered all over Germany. We no 
doubt see only a small fraction of it in our mails: much of 
it will no doubt be seen later, when the seed sown on the 
"dry land" will be plowed in by the great time of trouble 
impending and afterward caused to sprout by the showers 
of blessings and times of refreshing from the presence of the 

R4120 : page 21 

Lord. We take courage and lift up our heads in rejoicing, 

knowing that deliverance is nigh for the world as well as 

for God's people. The great Adversary seems to be aware 

of it here in Germany, and is stirring up the most religious 

bodies of Christian people and deceiving them with his imitation 

"speaking in tongues," and the secular press is not 

slow to make light of it and to reproach Christianity as the 

source of this unchristian spirit. The intelligent Christian 

public is fast drifting into open infidelity or what they are 

pleased to call a religion— "Monism"— the disbelief of the 

supernatural and of the future existence of the individual. 

An organization under this name has rapidly gained thousands 

of members and is flooding the country with highly 

enticing and well-written leaflets. Surely it seems that the 

devil and his angels are fighting hard, but we have the assurance 

of the Scriptures that our Lord will be victorious, 

and that Satan will be bound for the thousand years. 

Praise God and his well-beloved Son, our Lord Jesus! 

Following is a brief statement of the literature circulated 
during this year, and a financial statement of the Volunteer, 
Tract and Pilgrim Work:— 

DAWNS, BOOKLETS, TOWERS AND TRACTS DISTRIBUTED 

DAWN Volumes, cloth 2,556 

Vol. I., TOWER form 4,000 

Booklets 3,576 

Copies German TOWER, monthly 1,800 

" " " for year 21,600 

8 page Volunteer Tracts 4,000,000 

8-page TOWERS 30,000 

16-page " 16,700 



Total in tract pages 41,521,600 

Letters and cards received 4,254 

" " sent out 2,550 

FINANCIAL STATEMENT OF THE TRACT & PILGRIM WORK 

Printing, postage, freight, etc Mks. 33,340.05 

Pilgrim expenses " 1,524.12 

Rent, light, heat, living expense of office 
force Mks. 4,064.14 

Total " 38,928.31 

Receipts, Tract Fund, from friends in 

Germany " 6,034.80 

Deficiency supplied by the home office, 

Allegheny ($7,832.26) " 32,893.51 

I should remark with regard to the above amount of 
cash received from America in the interest of the Lord's 
work in Germany, that the friends generally are very appreciative 
of this generous help and the self-sacrificing it implies 
on the part of their American brethren. They feel like 
saying: Be assured, your labor of love is not in vain in the 
Lord's cause. 

We notice with gladness your great conventions in 
America, and long for that greatest Convention of all, beyond 
the vail. But while we still sojourn here, we are glad to have 
what seasons of refreshing the Lord sees best to grant us, and 
so we are looking forward with much pleasure to your proposed 
visit in the spring. May the Lord prosper you and all of his 
dear people in his service, and help us all to finish the work he 
has given us to do. And may God, our Father, according to 
his own good pleasure, now in the end of the age, glorify 
his dear Son, our Lord, and with him his Elect, to the end 
that his own holy name may be glorified.— John 17:1-3. 

We all send much love in the Lord to you and your 
co-laborers one and all. 

Your brother in the blessed service, O. A. KOETITZ. 



AUSTRALASIAN REPORT, 1907 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Another year of opportunities and privileges in the Harvest 
service has closed, and the report of the Society's Australasian 
Branch is due. 

As we consider the events of the past twelve months, 
we feel constrained to acknowledge, with gratitude to the 
Lord and appreciation of the zeal and energy of his people, 
that some progress has been made in bringing the Harvest 
message to the attention of God's people in this part of the 
"field;" yet we could wish that more energy had been used, 
more zeal displayed and perhaps more accomplished. The 



time is short and shortening, but the dimensions of the 
"field" show no signs of decrease. 

The Colporteurs have been blessed and a blessing during 
the past year. As shown in the summary, a few hundred 
more cloth-bound volumes were put out than during 
the year before. This increase would doubtless have run 
into thousands, had we not been deprived, during the greater 
portion of the time, of the labors of three very efficient 
workers. There are signs of others about to engage in the 
service, and we may still pray for more laborers. As heretofore, 
a goodly proportion of the newly interested have been 
found by the colporteurs. 

The Volunteers have been considerably more active 
than formerly, in some directions, in methodical free tract 
distribution. Nearly twice as many tracts were distributed 
this year as last, totalling over nine and a half millions of 
pages. Naturally, our figures are small, compared with 
those for other English-speaking countries; at the same 
time, we take a little comfort in the thought that only about 

R4120 : page 22 

one-fortieth (perhaps less) of the total number of Z.W.T. 
readers live in Australasia, and that if we circulate one-fortieth 
of the total number of DAWN-STUDIES and free tracts by 
colporteuring, volunteering and otherwise in this territory, 
we are at least keeping in line with the rest of you in this 
respect. Yet we know that more, much more, can be done 
here, so we feel free to exhort the friends to "work while it 
is called day." The Lord has done much for us; at best 
we can do but little for him. 

There is some increase in the voluntary donations, too, 
yet not sufficient to keep pace with Tract Fund expenditures, 
to say nothing of overtaking our deficit. But as it was in 
former times, so it is now and here— "not many rich" have 
been called. Nevertheless, we are glad to testify to an increasing 
appreciation of this feature of the service of Present 
Truth by those who are able to take part in it, and this 
without exhortation of any sort. 

It was the writer's privilege to visit the brethren in 
Adelaide and Western Australia last June, a journey of about 
5,000 miles, and we hope to make other visits during the 
coming year. 

Desiring a continued interest in your prayers and in 
those of the brethren everywhere in behalf of the work and 
workers in this part of the vineyard, I remain, dear brother, 

Yours in the Redeemer's service, E. C. HENNINGES. 

AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH SUMMARY 

Publications Circulated 

Copies of DAWNS and STUDIES 21,903 

" TOWER-DAWNS 1,220 

" Booklets 1,315 



Total 24,438 

Copies of Tracts and Z.W.T. sent free 418,450 

These represent in tract pages 9,509,000 

Letters and cards received 1,864 

sent 3,843 



Total 5,707 

FINANCIAL SUMMARY 

Expenditures 

L. s. d. 

Deficit from last year 606 17 1 

Printing, paper, postage, freight (in and 

out), rent, gas, etc 161 4 11 

Pilgrim work 43 17 



Total 811 19 

Voluntary donations from Australasia 

Good Hopes realized L. 31 17 11 

From other sources 136 13 2 

168 11 1 



Deficit owing to Head Office 643 7 1 1 



REPORT FROM JAMAICA, 1907 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Once again we have the pleasure of sending you a general 
report of the work— for the year 1907. 

We are glad to note how our hearts are growing in 
thankful appreciation, while the loving kindness of our God 
toward us is ever increasing. Indeed the year's experiences 
remind us of the general conventions— the last is the best. 
And considering that wine (the fruit of the vine) symbolizes 
the spiritual refreshment of the Lord's people on this 
side the vail, as well as the "glory to follow" (Matt. 26:29), 
we are thinking that the incident at the marriage in Cana 
might be a suggestion that we should expect the last to be 
the best until we drink it new. 

The Pilgrim service has been more extensive than last 
year and has done much to establish the Lord's people in 
out-of-the-way places; indeed, we are realizing more and 
more how important a part it plays in assisting us to put on 

R4121 : page 22 

the whole armor of God to withstand the temptations of this 



"evil day." 
The amount of work done for the year is as follows:— 

Total Pilgrim visits 53 

Total miles traveled 2426 

Public meetings 10 

Home meetings 212 

According to the present outlook this will be the most 
important service for the year begun. 

The Colporteur service has circulated over 600 volumes 
more than last year, and this we consider as doing very well, 
when we take into account the earthquake, the eight months 
drought following and the resulting financial depression. 
These have produced much starvation in various parts of 
the island and the scarcity of food is still felt. 

The number engaged in the Colporteur service during 
the year was 24, eight of whom devoted all of their time. 
Some of these and many others who did "sharpshooting" 
were stimulated to enter the service by the hint given out in 
the TOWER that every reader should try to put out at least 
six volumes for the year. These dear brethren and sisters 
are receiving much favor at the hand of the Lord for the 
spirit of self-sacrifice which prompts them. 

The number of tracts distributed was much less than 
last year, owing to the unsettled condition of things, and 
yet these "swift messengers" have done some effective work 
in silence, revealed to us through correspondence. 

Newly interested friends are growing phenomenally. 
The public seems desirous of hearing something better and 
many are in earnest. We believe the recent experiences of 
the island have much to do with the spirit of investigation 
which has become a stimulus to the reapers to thrust in the 
sickle. 

We were unable to hold a General Convention this 
year, but there were three local ones which were sources of 
great blessing to all. Some enjoyed them even better than 
all that went before. 

We think that our TOWER list just now is a fair representation 
of good interest. The Lord is working all things 
after the counsel of his own will to the spiritual advantage 
of his dear children, and in this we rejoice. 

We pray, for you and for all, the Lord's continual guidance. 
Pray for us. 

Yours in fellowship and service, J. A. BROWNE. 

OUTPUT FOR 1907 

Total output of DAWNS, STUDIES, etc 2,823 

Total output of Booklets 1,539 

Tracts, sample TOWERS, etc 16,800 

FINANCIAL STATEMENT 

L. s. d. 

Pilgrim service 96 16 

Freight, etc 43 7 7-1/2 



Sundries, current expenses, etc 119 19 9-1/2 

Total expense 260 3 5 

Voluntary contributions 29 12 9 

Deficit for 1907 ($1,100) 230 10 8 



page 23 
BEREAN BIBLE STUDY IN TABERNACLE SHADOWS 
OTHER SIGNIFICANT TYPES 
FEBRUARY 2 

23. Describe the Mercy Seat and state what it symbolized. 
I Cor. 1 1:3; Psa. 80:1; I Sam. 4:4; 2 Sam. 6:2; 

Isa. 37:16. T.123, par. 3,4. 

24. Can humanity enter Jehovah's presence? I Tim. 6:16; 
T.124, par. 1. 

25. Why was the Mercy Seat called the "Propitiatory"? 
and what particular attribute of God's character 

was represented in it? Psa. 89:14; Job 36:17; 37:23; 
Isa. 56:1; Rev. 15:3. T.124, par. 2. 

26. Is this word "Propitiatory" ever applied to our Lord 
Jesus? and why? Rom. 3:25,26; T.124, par. 3. 

FEBRUARY 9 

27. What was represented by the two cherubim? And 
what was shown by their being of the same piece 

as the "golden slab"? T.125, par. 1. 

28. Was the blood of the sacrifices placed by the High 
Priest on the Cherubim? And, if not, where was 

it placed? and why? T.125, par. 2. 

29. What attribute of Jehovah led to the plan of redemption? 
I Pet. 1:20; T. 126, par. 1. 

FEBRUARY 16 

30. When will love and power act for the accomplishment 
of God's wonderful provision for mankind? 

T.126, par. 2. 

3 1 . How is the relationship and oneness of Christ and 
his Bride to the Father shown in the Ark? and 

how is the supreme headship of Jehovah represented? 
I Cor. 11:3; John 17:9,21; T.126, par. 3. 

FEBRUARY 23 

THE PRIEST UNBLEMISHED 

32. Could a man who had a blemish of any kind fill the 
office of High Priest, in the type? And what was 



prefigured in this? T.126, par. 4; T.127, par. 1, first 
six lines. 

33. What solemn lesson is contained in this for us? 
Rev. 3:11; T.127, par. 1, 6th line on. 

THE MYSTERY HID FROM AGES AND GENERATIONS 
-COL. 1:26- 

34. Why were the beauties and glories of the Tabernacle 
kept so securely hidden from the people? 

What does this mean in the antitype? T.127, par. 2. 



R4121 : page 23 

WHAT CONSTITUTES TEACHING? 
A PLEA FOR THE SISTERS 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Before entering upon this subject, I wish to apologize 
for writing at all. 

This question with the impression to write has haunted 
me with great persistence for many weeks and will not be 
suppressed. I have striven to crush it, to forget it, to relegate 
it to oblivion, arguing that it in no wise concerns me 
anyhow: when "Am I my brother's keeper?" seems to ring 
in my ears, as it were; and it still follows me and will not 
be side-tracked. I have taken it to the Lord and prayed 
him to guide my pen. 

First— There is a tendency (unconscious, no doubt) 
among some to make very frequent mention of the subjugation 
of the wife and the lordship of the husband, enlarging 
greatly upon these points, but utterly failing (at least in my 
hearing) to call attention to the duties of the latter, except, 
indeed, his lordship— always forbearing to point to the command, 
"Husbands, love your wives as Christ loved the 
Church," "giving honor to the wife as the weaker vessel," 
etc. This one-sided application of Scripture leads a certain 
type of man, unfortunately not rare, to become a petty tyrant, 
ever reminding the wife that she must obey him, swelling 
himself that he is lord over somebody, while ignoring 
entirely his side of the question, degrading her, if she be 
degradable, into the position of a slave. Having forced her 
there he ceases to respect her. It is such teaching that is 
developing men of certain mental calibre (and there are 
many) into characters such as "Tennessee" describes in his 
letter in the WATCH TOWER of Nov. 15th. 

Lest it be inferred that I have a grievance along the 
above line, I beg to say I have not. My husband is one of 
the noblest of Christian gentlemen, fulfilling, it seems to me, 
as nearly as is possible for fallen humanity, the conditions 
of a typical head, crowning my life with tenderest love, protection 



and care. 

Second.— All educators, even those of indifferent ability, 
are well aware of, and appreciate the value of questioning 
the students (my husband and I were both in this work 
for upwards of twenty years, he in the medical colleges, I 
in the public schools), yet in a simple class, which meets for 
Bible study with the DAWNS or Tabernacle Shadows, never a 
question is asked a sister. She has toiled, it may be, all 
the week, Sunday included, at tasks that would appal a 
masculine mind— washing, ironing, scrubbing, baking, garment-making 
cooking for husband and children, half a 
dozen of the latter, more or less, and a thousand and one other 
things incidental to housework— with no leisure to read or 
study, yet when she is privileged to attend a Bible class this 
important aid is denied her. Never a question to lead her 
to think, to call out interest, or to draw out her mind and fix 
her attention. Think of it! No wonder the meeting drags 
uninterestingly, as one remarked to me. 

Pastor Russell, I will not believe, unless I see it over 
your own signature, that you approve of thus depriving the 
members (a part of them) of Christ's Body of this valuable 
aid to gaining knowledge. Personally, it is of little or no 
consequence to me whether or not I am ever asked a question. 
I have leisure to think, read, study and pray, and, 
thank God, always have had, but I plead for those whose 
hands are fuller and for the principle involved. 

Again, lest it be thought that I write as above because 
I wish for prominence in our meetings or for display of 
attainments, I beg to state that if I care for those things 
they are within my reach: it is not necessary to look for 
them in our little class. I have never wished for more 
privileges in the Church than are shown in the Scripture. 
Never thought a woman should be bishop or deacon; 1 Tim. 1:13 
excludes her, also many men. There is likewise something 
inherent or God-implanted in the nature of womanly 
women which makes such usurpation repugnant to them. 
My work in the Church in the past, in which I know I had 
the Spirit and God's blessing, consisted in taking part in 
prayer meetings or evangelistic meetings ("praying and 

R4121 : page 24 

prophesying," as I see it) and teaching in the Sunday 
Schools. 

Hoping attention will be called to the above-mentioned 
evils, I am, yours in Christ, M. E. 



IN REPLY TO THE ABOVE 



We must admit that there is much unmanliness and 
tyranny in some men, and much unwomanliness and tyranny 
in some women— as results of the fall. Even amongst those 



favored by the Lord with the High Calling these ignoble 

qualities are manifest; because God is not calling chiefly 

the noble, but the mean. Not many rich, not many wise, 

not many noble hath God chosen, but mainly the mean 

things to confound the mighty, and things that are naught 

to bring to naught the things that are prominent. (1 Cor. 1:26-28.) 

We see the reason to be that the noble and the 

great usually trust too much in themselves and are unready 

to implore and accept forgiveness and aid through the only 

name. Hence the seeing of unmanliness and unwomanliness 

must not offend us, nor hinder our love for the brethren 

—for all whom the Lord has called. 

But, on the other hand, all those accepted to the School 
of Christ have the greatest of all teachers, and should become 
the noblest of the noble in their sentiments; for it is 
written, "They shall be all taught of God." These lessons 
of the Spirit, inculcated through the Word, develop in all 
the Elect the graces of the holy Spirit, namely, meekness, 
gentleness, patience, brotherly kindness, love. Some grow 
these fruits of the Spirit more promptly and more luxuriantly 

R4122 : page 24 

than others, but all must attain them in heart (and 
hence, surely, in some good degree outwardly) ere they can 
be accepted as heirs of the Kingdom. As it is written, they 
must all be copies of God's dear Son, their Redeemer. 

But, how comes it that amongst the more advanced 
there are sometimes acts, such as are referred to in the letter 
foregoing, which seem to some to be tyrannical? For instance, 
the passing by of the sisters in the asking of the 
Berean Study questions. We suggest that this need not be 
ascribed to an ignoble motive so long as we can think of a 
noble one that would meet the conditions. For instance, the 
leader of the meeting may have had in mind as a God-given 
rule the Apostle's words, "I suffer not a woman to teach." 
And possibly he reasoned that to ask a sister a question 
would be inviting her to teach, and hence be on his part a 
violation of the apostolic injunction. Possibly he thought 
that in giving the sisters a chance to answer by saying, 
"Has anyone else an answer to suggest?" he was going 
to the extent of his conscientious privilege— leaving it to the 
conscience of each sister to decide and act accordingly. 
This plan certainly does divide the responsibility. The 
chief difficulty about it seems to be that it implies an impropriety 
on the part of the sisters who answer, in the judgment 
of the more prominent brethren. 

We trust that none of the brethren takes the view that 
the sisters have no good thoughts; nor that they are 
incapable of expressing these; nor that they cannot 
teach well their own sons and daughters. All must 
admit that women have displayed wonderful powers in 
teaching, reasoning, managing, etc. And all noble 
men, and especially all developed brethren, must desire to 
"render honor to whom honor is due"— and therefore must 
greatly honor noble mothers, sisters, wives and daughters, 



and womankind in general, for their many noble and gentle 
traits. This certainly is the writer's attitude of heart. 

As for the noble Apostle Paul, we cannot think of him 
as a woman-hater or as a woman-despiser. Surely his 
epistles clearly show that he, too, honored true womanhood. 
Who ever expressed the esteem for woman more pointedly 
than he, when he wrote, "As Christ loved the Church and 
gave himself for it, so ought men also to love their wives 
as their own bodies"? (Eph. 5:25,28.) His reason for 
writing as he did respecting woman's sphere of activity in 
the Church was undoubtedly loyalty to God— to duty. Our 
Lord declared of his apostles, "Whatsoever ye shall bind on 
earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall 
loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." (Matt. 16:19.) 
And surely the Lord used St. Paul more than any other 
Apostle to declare the loosing from the Law and the obligations 
and responsibilities binding upon the "New Creation." 

A MORE EXCELLENT WAY 

After giving the subject considerable prayer and meditation 
we feel that a more moderate view than the above 
might be attached to the words, "I suffer not a woman to 
teach." It is as follows: 

Teaching is not within the province of all the brethren, 
either; but only for those specially indicated by divine 
providence. This is shown by several Scriptures. For instance, 
to the Elders of the Church at Ephesus St. Paul 
said: "Take heed, therefore, unto yourselves and to all the 
flock over which the holy Spirit hath made you overseers 
[elders, shepherds, bishops] to feed [teach] the Church of 
God." (Acts 20:28.) Again, note the Apostle's statement 
that God hath set the various members in the Body as it 
hath pleased him, and that amongst those so set he mentions 
"teachers." (1 Cor. 12:18,28.) Again, note St. James' 
words, "Be not many of you teachers, brethren." (Jas. 3:1, 
Diaglott.) Again, one of the qualifications to be sought 
when electing elders was that they should be "apt to 
teach." (1 Tim. 3:2.) Again, respecting the priestly or 
teaching service we read, "No man taketh this honor to himself, 
but he that was called of God, as was Aaron." (Heb. 5:4.) 
The Lord, speaking through the Church his Body (including 
males and females, bond and free— all one in 
Christ), chooses for the eldership certain brethren "apt to 
teach"; and, as the Apostle indicates, there is a special responsibility 
resting upon these as respects the feeding of the 
Lord's flock. Again he asks, "Are all teachers."— 1 Cor. 12:29. 

Now, then, may we not interpret the Apostle's words, 
"I suffer not a woman to teach," to mean— I never sanction 
a female Elder in the Church. If we may, one difficulty 
is removed; and it would be well in accord 
with this view that we read, "If a woman pray or prophesy 
[speak publicly] in the Church. ..let her head be covered"; 
because, in the Church, the woman figuratively represents 
the Church, while the man represents the Lord, the 
Head of the Church. 



This would settle the matter complained of in the 
letter above published. Then it would surely be as proper 
to ask the Berean questions of the sisters as of the brothers; 
because in this view of the matter, none of those answering 
would be a teacher nor considered as teaching, but 
a learner, reciting what he or she had learned or thinks had 

R4122 : page 25 

been learned from the Lord through his instruments or 
teachers. 

To the Editor's mind this is most satisfactory and he 
trusts that it will be so to all WATCH TOWER readers. If some 
of the dear sisters have been pained in the past by a too 
rigid following of the Word, we trust they will be magnanimous 
and credit the strictness not to a lack of love for women, 
but to a greater love for the Lord and his Word. Whoever 
has been "rightly exercised" by the stricter view will, 
we believe, receive a corresponding blessing, for our Lord is 
able to make all things work together for good to each and 
all of his faithful. 

"Let him that is taught in the Word communicate unto 
him that teacheth in all good things."— Gal. 6:6. 



R4122 : page 25 

CLEANSING THE TEMPLE 

-JOHN 2:13-22.-JANUARY 26.- 

Golden Text:— "Holiness becometh thy 
house, O Lord, forever."— Psalm 93:5. 

WE are aware that there are many scholars who 

believe that there were two cleansings of the 

Temple by our Lord. It is admitted by all 

that one cleansing occurred at the last Passover which 

Jesus attended a few days before his crucifixion. This 

is well attested by Matthew 21:12; Mark 11:15; Luke 19:14. 

Our lesson is taken from John's Gospel, and 

because this incident is grouped with others which occurred 

in the beginning of the Lord's ministry it is 

assumed, we believe without sufficient authority, that 

there were two cleansings, the one at the beginning, 

the other at the close of our Lord's ministry. It is 

acknowledged, however, that John's Gospel was written 

long after the others, and apparently with the intention 

of supplying certain details that were overlooked 

by the other historians. To our understanding Jesus 

began his teachings in a rather quiet manner, reserving 

many of his mightiest works for the last, amongst 

others the calling of Lazarus from the tomb, the triumphal 

entry into Jerusalem on the ass, and the cleansing 

of the Temple. This latter act has a peculiar significance 



when we remember that it followed our Lord's 

assumption of the office of King— which he did just 

five days before his crucifixion, when he rode upon the 

ass in fulfilment of the prophecy, "Behold, thy King cometh 

unto thee: he is just and having salvation; lowly 

and riding upon an ass." (Zech. 9:9.) Thus recognized 

by the multitude as the King of the Jews, our 

Lord exercised kingly authority in the cleansing of the 

Temple, and was no doubt backed up in the matter by 

the sentiment of the throng which had just acclaimed 

him the son of David with hosannas. It was under 

these circumstances that none attempted resistance. 

It was a requirement of the Jewish Law that the 
devout of the nation should assemble at the Passover 
season to keep the Feast of Passover in celebration of 
their deliverance from Egypt and the sparing of their 
firstborn on the preceding night. Josephus tells us 
that sometimes the population of Jerusalem on such an 
occasion was swelled to the number of two millions. 
Far more than half of these must have camped outside 
the city, unable to find lodgings within. It was the 
custom on such occasions to offer sacrifices, some representing 
thankfulness, some consecration and others 
contrition. Of course the multitude of strangers from 
afar rarely brought with them the doves or pigeons or 
lambs, etc., which they presented in sacrifice. The 
supply of these animals for sacrifice became quite a 
business on such occasions. Moreover, there was a 
certain Temple tax levied, which must be paid in a 
particular kind of money called the "shekel of the sanctuary." 
The last coinage of these was in B.C. 140, 
hence they were quite scarce in our Lord's day and sold 
at a premium. Roman coin was circulated throughout 
Palestine in general merchandising, so that when the 
time came at the Passover for the paying of the Temple 
tax with the Temple money not only visitors from 
foreign lands needed to purchase shekels of the sanctuary 

R4123 : page 25 

but also the home folk. 

"TAKE THESE THINGS HENCE" 

In consequence of these conditions the Temple area 
became quite a house of merchandise and money-changing, 
and as the necessities of the people were 
taken advantage of and high prices charged, our Lord 
called the place a "den of thieves." (Matt. 21:13.) In 
imagining the scene we are not to think of money-changers, 
sheep and dove-traders, etc., in the Temple 



PLAN OF THE TEMPLE IN OUR LORD'S DAY 



proper, but in its outer courts, the whole of which was 
designated the Temple or the house of God. This trading 
was probably carried on in what was known as 
the Court of the Gentiles. Into the holiest precincts 
of the Temple proper only the priests were permitted 
to enter; into the enclosure where the altar was located 
the Levites were also permitted; outside of this was 

R4123 : page 26 

the Court of the men of Israel, and still further out a 

Court of the women, and beyond this enclosure the 

Court of the Gentiles, provided to the intent that all 

nationalities might there congregate for worship. Our 

Lord referred to this fact saying, "It is written, My 

house shall be a house of prayer for all nations." (Mark 11:17.) 

Probably the Court of the Gentiles was little 

used, as few Gentiles had become sincere converts to 

Judaism. The size of the court apportioned to them 

was probably symbolical of the larger proportionate 

numbers who should ultimately come into the Lord's 

favor and become true disciples and fellow-heirs with 

the Jews of divine favor. 

It is claimed that any Jew under the Law had the 
right to do as Jesus did in the matter of driving out the 
traders, but very evidently no Jew had previously attempted 
it. The scourge of small cords could not have 
done serious damage to anyone, but we do not know 
that our Lord used it upon humanity. He may have 
driven out the animals, whose owners would follow 
them, and it will be noticed that he did not set at liberty 
the doves, which could not so easily have been recovered, 
but permitted their owners to take them away. 
The overturning of the tables of the money-changers 
would not only stop their usurious exchange business, 
but keep them busy looking after their coin. We may 
be sure from the fact that our Lord lived under the 
Law and obeyed it that his conduct on this occasion 
was quite within the recognized proprieties, even 
though it was unusual, and even though he himself had 
visited the Temple time and again as a Jew, and had 
witnessed these same scenes but had not interfered 
with them. This we consider to be a proof that the 
occurrence took place but once, and that after our Lord 
had assumed the office of King— just before his crucifixion. 
Thus the statement, "The zeal of thine house 
hath consumed me," was fulfilled. 

THE CLEANSING IN THE ANTITYPE 

When we remember that the Law was a shadow of 
better things coming, that the Jewish people typified 
Spiritual Israel, and that their Temple typified the 
Gospel Church with its various classes, then we begin 
to see how we may look here for a parallel of that 
cleansing work of the Jewish harvest. Those familiar 



with Volume II., STUDIES, will remember that the Jewish 
dispensation is the parallel to the Gospel dispensation 
in very many particulars, including that of time 
and the fact that it ended with a harvest period, and 
that our Lord at his first advent was the chief reaper in 
the Jewish harvest, as he is to be the chief reaper in 
the Gospel harvest at his second advent. We have 
noted also the fact that the time parallel of October, 
1874, corresponds to the beginning of our Lord's ministry 
at the time of his baptism, and that April, 1878, 
corresponds to the time of our Lord's acceptance of the 
office of King, riding upon the ass and receiving the 
shouts of the multitude, and then proceeding to the 
Temple cleansing work. Our thought is that the antitypical 
cleansing of the Lord's Temple has been in 
progress since the spring of 1878. 

Within the hallowed precincts of the nominal Temple 
of today are many who have long been making merchandise 
of their privileges, opportunities and knowledge. 
All intelligent people well know that religious matters 
are to a large extent made merchandise of. Amongst 
the Roman Catholics everything possible is hedged 
about with penalties and prohibitions and limitations, 
so that the people are led to believe that they can present 
nothing acceptable to God except as they receive 
it through their priesthood. They are expected to pay 
the priesthood for every birth and the baptism of the 
child; they are expected to pay at every service, that 
they may be participants in the blessings of the common 
mass; they are expected to pay for every blessed 
scapular sprinkled with holy water; they are expected 
to pay for every funeral service and for every prayer, 
as well as for the privilege of being buried in holy 
ground. In all this we have a close counterpart to that 
which our Lord denominated a den of thieves, making 
merchandise of divine things. 

As for Protestants, there are many evidences of the 
same spirit amongst them, but as they represent a 
more intelligent class, the exactions upon them by the 
clergy are the more refined. With few exceptions the 
payment for baptisms and funerals and marriages is 
apparently left optional. This is the wisest way with 
this class of worshipers. Neither are there attempts 
made to collect money for saying masses for the dead, 
to exact a specific fee from each one occupying a place 
at a service, though the collection plate is passed with 
regularity, and frequently strong appeals are made for 
money, and sometimes with the announcement that 
nothing inferior to a silver piece will be acceptable. 
It is to the credit of Protestants that they do not tax 
the living for prayers and masses for the dead, as do 
the Roman Catholics. Nevertheless strong impression 
is sought to be made upon all, that membership, either 
in a Catholic Church or in some one of the numerous 
Protestant ones, is necessary to salvation, and that 
liberality to the Church of one's choice is also a necessity. 



Although rarely so stated, it is implied that 

eternal torment is the alternative. We are not inveighing 

against charity and liberality for the spread of the 

Gospel of Christ: neither did Jesus say one word 

against liberal giving on the part of the Jews for the 

support of the Temple. Our Lord's condemnation fell 

upon those who were making merchandise of the opportunity, 

circumstance and conditions. It is our belief, 

indeed, that Christian people have been blessed in their 

response to the numerous demands: nevertheless the 

principle is all wrong. Whatever is given to the Lord 

should be voluntarily done, with love for him, with a 

desire to render unto him the first-fruits, the best of 

all that we possess, time, influence, money, etc. 

"THE TEMPLE OF HIS BODY" 

The Jews demanded of the Lord by what authority 
he set up so high a standard as he required of them in 
the cleansing of the Temple. He answered them, "Destroy 
this temple and in three days I will raise it up." 
Of course they could not understand that it was one of 

R4123 : page 27 

our Lord's dark sayings, which is fully comprehended 
even yet by only a few. The Jews thought our Lord 
spoke slightingly of the Temple of which they were so 
proud, which just recently had been finished, after being 
in process of construction for forty-six years. 
They were incensed at him, and we recall that this was 
one of the charges against him a few days later. When 
he was arraigned before the High Priest it was said 
that he had blasphemed the Temple, spoken slightingly 
of it in declaring that he would raise it up again, if 
destroyed, within three days. "But he spake of the 
Temple of his Body." The disciples evidently got the 
thought that he referred to his fleshly body as the Temple 
of God, and supposed that our Lord's prediction 
was fulfilled three days after his crucifixion. But we 
cannot so view the matter. To our understanding the 
Lord spake of the Temple of his Body— of the Church, 
his Body— of the Temple of which the Apostle Peter 
subsequently wrote, that we as living stones are built 
together upon Christ for a habitation of God through 
the Spirit. To suppose that our Lord spoke of the 
fleshly body as the Temple, and to suppose that that 
fleshly body was raised on the third day, would be to 
suppose that our Lord did not fully pay over the price 
necessary for our redemption. 

Such a view would contradict his own statement, 
"My flesh I give for the life of the world." (John 6:51.) 
He gave his flesh not only for three days but forever, 
and he was raised by the Father's power from the 
grave the Lord of glory. As the Apostle declares, "Now 
the Lord is that Spirit" (2 Cor. 3:17); and again, "He 



was put to death in the flesh but quickened in the 
Spirit" (I Pet. 3:18); and again, "Though we have 
known Christ after the flesh, now know we him so no 
more." (2 Cor. 5:16.) The flesh was consecrated to 
death at the beginning of our Lord's ministry, and this 
great sacrifice was symbolized in his baptism. It was 
the New Creature that was there begotten of the holy 
Spirit (to which fact John bore witness), which grew 
during the Lord's three and a half years of ministry; 
and it was the New Creature, the Spirit begotten, that 
was born of the Spirit on the third day, when our Lord 
arose from the dead. Our Lord's change was but a 
sample of that which is to come to all of his true followers, 
as the Apostle explains, saying, It is sown in 
weakness, raised in power; sown in dishonor, raised 
in glory; sown an animal body, raised a spiritual body. 
(I Cor. 15:43,44.) So, then, our Lord's body of flesh, 
destroyed by the Jews at Calvary, was not restored on 

R4124 : page 27 

the third day. No restitution work was accomplished 
in him, but a complete change, because, as the Apostle 
declares, "Flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom 
of God."-ICor. 15:50. 

But, on the other hand, we have the Scriptural declaration 
that the Church is the Body of Christ, of which 
the consecrated faithful are "members in particular." 
(I Cor. 12:27.) We see that as human beings our Lord 
the Head, and all the members of his Body, have been 
suffering the destruction of the flesh, have been sacrificing 
their human nature throughout this Gospel Age, 
and we see that in due time this glorious Church, the 
New Creation, will in the First Resurrection come 
forth a glorious Temple of God, composed of living 
stones and filled with the glory of God. This will be 
on the third day also, for if we consider the six thousand 
years past as six days of a great week, and the 
Millennial Age as the seventh or Sabbath day of that 
week, we find that it was early in the fifth of these days 
that our Lord sacrificed, that many of his followers suffered 
likewise during that and the following sixth day, 
and that the seventh day, into which we have chronologically 
entered since 1872, is thus the third day, in 
which, very early in the morning, the entire Body of 
Christ, the King of glory, will be perfected. Then the 
great Temple of God will be complete and ready for the 
great work of the Millennial Age, the blessing of all the 
families of the earth, and through it they all may have 
the opportunity of coming into full harmony with God 
and gaining the blessing thereof— eternal life. 



R4124 : page 27 



REGENERATION AND THE KINGDOM 

-JOHN3:l-21.-FEBRUARY 2.- 

Golden Text:— "For God so loved the world that he gave 
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth on him 
should not perish but have everlasting life."— John 3:16. 

THIS lesson well illustrates the wrong, unscriptural 
trend of thought and of Biblical interpretation 
which has come to prevail so generally throughout 
Christendom. The peculiar, the strange thing connected 
with the matter is that people of apparent 
capacity for reasoning on other subjects seem to abandon 
all logic in the study of God's Word. The usual 
interpretation of this lesson is that Jesus taught Nicodemus 
that he was about to establish a Church, which 
he called the Kingdom of God, without its having any 
likeness to the Kingdom or bearing any rule in the 
world. It is claimed that our Lord meant Nicodemus 
to understand that his Church was to be considered the 
Kingdom because eventually it would so prevail 
throughout the earth that God's will should be done on 
earth even as it is done in heaven. Then, to make this 
interpretation the more absurd, they acknowledge that 
our Lord here declared that no one could appreciate 
this Kingdom or enter into it except he were first begotten 
of the holy Spirit. Now note the absurdity of 
all this:- 

After nearly nineteen centuries the total number of 
both Catholics and Protestants in the world is about 
four hundred millions, including the ring-streaked, the 
speckled and the black— the rough, the scuff, the 
tough of all civilized lands— improperly styled Christendom. 
The remainder of the race, twelve hundred 
millions, either never have heard of the Lord Jesus at 

R4124 : page 28 

all or, having heard, repudiated him. The number 
of the heathen, therefore, today is many times 
as large as the entire population of the earth at the 
time when the Lord conversed with Nicodemus. If the 
world is the Kingdom is it conquering itself in any 
sense of the word? Surely not! But now let us look 
at the four hundred millions called "Christendom," and 
judge as best we may be able who and what they really 



DIAGRAM SHOWING PROPORTION OF HEATHEN TO VARIOUS RELIGIONS TODAY 



are, aside from their profession. How many of them 
make the slightest profession of having been born 
again, begotten again, born from above, and to have 
the renewing of the holy Spirit? Practically none— 



surely, as in our Lord's day, only a "Little Flock." 

If any one is in doubt on this subject let him inquire 
amongst his Christian friends and neighbors on 
the subject of the new birth, the begetting of the holy 
Spirit. Let him explain what he means by a full consecration 
or devotion of time, strength and all that we 
possess to God and his service, and the change of heart 
signified by the begetting and anointing of the holy 
Spirit, and then ask how many of his friends and neighbors 
have either made the consecration involved or 
have received the holy Spirit. He will not have gone 
far into this inquiry until he be fully convinced that 
there is a great mistake in this ordinary view of the 
Kingdom— that it is thoroughly untenable and cannot 
be our Lord's meaning. 

Thus satisfied that the general concept of this lesson 
is radically wrong, let us note carefully and prayerfully 
every word of our lesson with untrammeled 
minds, that we may know the truth and the truth may 
make us free from error, from superstition, and may 
bring to us light, joy and assistance. 

NICODEMUS AND THE GREAT TEACHER 

Nicodemus, an influential man amongst the Jews, 
a member of the Sanhedrin, and widely known as a 
professor of holiness— of full consecration to God— a 
Pharisee, came to Jesus by night; not necessarily from 
fear, possibly wisdom guided him, a prudent recognition 
of the interests of others as well as of his own. 
Possibly he came by night because then he might have 
a better opportunity for private conversation with the 
Master. In any event we find him very reverential and 
courteous. He addressed our Lord as Rabbi, or Teacher, 
and declared his belief that he was from God, a servant 
of God, in whom God evidently delighted, as manifested 
by his miracles. Only a mere portion of the 
conversation of the evening is given. We may reasonably 
presume that Nicodemus came to ask questions 
respecting the Kingdom of God, which he knew John 
and his disciples had been preaching, and which Jesus 
and his disciples subsequently also preached. As a 
student of the Scriptures he knew to expect the Kingdom, 
and that it was God's provision for the blessing 
and uplifting of Israel and ultimately the fulfilment of 
a promise to Abraham, "In thy Seed shall all the families 
of the earth be blessed." Having confidence in 
Jesus he wished to learn particulars respecting this 
Kingdom, for neither John the Baptist nor Jesus had 
manifested anything to indicate how the Kingdom was 
to be brought about— where the soldiers were to be obtained, 
how drilled and officered, where the implements 
of warfare were to come from and the large amount of 
money necessary to equip and provide for an army. 
Such a question is implied by our Lord's statement, 
"Verily, verily I say unto you, except a man be born 



again [anew] he cannot see the Kingdom of God." 

We can imagine the perplexity of Nicodemus, who 
was looking for a King and a glorious retinue, more 
grand than any monarch of the past, inasmuch as the 
Messiah King expected was to represent heavenly 
authority and power amongst men. Judge now of his 
perplexity on being told that no one could see this 
Kingdom unless he were born again— born over. The 
chaos of his thoughts is shown by his rejoinder, How 
can a full-grown man, advanced in years, be born 
again? With our Lord's answer he began to get a little 
light on the subject: Jesus said, "I say unto thee, 
except a man be born of water and of the spirit, he 
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. That which is 
born of flesh is flesh and that which is born of Spirit is 
spirit."* 

Nicodemus got some very "strong meat" in very 
few words. From this statement he would understand 
that the Kingdom would not be a fleshly or earthly one, 
but a spirit Kingdom, a heavenly Kingdom. He could 
perceive that the natural birth of the flesh is a figure 
or symbol illustrative of a new birth, a spirit birth, and 
that our Lord meant that the Kingdom of God would 
be on a higher plane than any earthly Kingdom— it 
would be a spirit Kingdom which mankind in general 
could not see and could not enter into or become members 
of. The only ones who would really see the spiritual 
Kingdom or enter into it would be those begotten 
of Spirit and born of Spirit. But our Lord added, 
"Born of water and of Spirit." The reference to water 
would probably, in the mind of Nicodemus, recall the 
water baptism for the remission of sins, and as a sign 
of repentance which John the Baptist and his disciples 
had been preaching. 

To us who live since Pentecost— and who may, 
therefore, have a clear conception of the deep things of 



*We have quoted this correctly, for the article "the" does 
not appear in the Greek text. 

R4125 : page 29 

God under the guidance and instruction of the holy 

Spirit— our Lord's mention of water may have a still 

fuller significance. We see that symbolical water represents 

Truth, and that our begetting of the holy Spirit 

is said by the Apostle to be also a begetting "through 

the Word of truth." (Jas. 1:18.) We remember also 

that the same thought is expressed by the Apostle 

Paul, who declares (Titus 3:3-5), "his mercy saved us 

through the washing of regeneration and the renewing 

of the holy Spirit." Putting these matters together we 

have the thought that our regeneration or begetting 

again of the holy Spirit and our renewing by it come to 



us in conjunction with the washing or cleansing which 
is effected in us by the operation of the Truth— the 
divine message. This is beautifully symbolized in Israel's 
Tabernacle service, in which the priests, before 
entering the Holy and thus typically becoming New 
Creatures, first washed at the laver which represented 
the Word of God, the Truth, the water of regeneration, 
by which we come into that condition of consecration 
to the Lord in which he is pleased to accept us, to grant 
us the spirit of adoption into his heavenly or spiritual 
family. 

"SO IS EVERY ONE THAT IS BORN" 

Nicodemus was astonished at such a presentation 
of the Kingdom and of the methods and conditions 
upon which it could be seen and entered into. Our 
Lord rejoined, Marvel not at the words, Ye must be 
born again. Then he gave him an illustration of what 
one would be like who would be born of the Spirit. He 
drew his attention to the invisibility of spirit beings 
and yet their reality. He took as an illustration the 
wind— invisible, we know not whence it comes, we 
know not whither it goes; but we do know of its power, 
we can hear the sound, can see its effects. This, our 
Lord declared, would give Nicodemus an illustration of 
those born of the Spirit; they would be intangible, invisible, 
while present and powerful. Such would be 
the Kingdom when it should be established. We must 
notice very carefully our Lord's language, else ere long 
these erroneous thoughts will bring us into confusion. 
We must not allow any of them to twist and turn the 
Scriptures, and to say that our Lord said something 
here that he did not say. We must repel the suggestion 
that he meant that the Spirit of which we would be 
begotten is invisible, for although that is true enough 
it is not what our Lord is saying. Neither must we 
allow our minds to be misled into supposing that the 
Lord means that the holy Spirit passes hither and 
thither throughout the world, begetting some and passing 
others by, and that we know not who may be begotten 
of the Spirit and who not. All this is confusing 
and wholly out of accord with what is written. Whoever 
would have clear, proper conceptions of the Master's 
teaching must give strict heed to the Word. We 
have been in darkness long enough through our inattention 
and through our allowing other people to read 
into the Word of God what is in no sense of the word 
there. We are neither to add to nor to take from the 
Word of God, and whoever does so adds to his own 
confusion, and is as well an unfaithful minister of the 
Truth, and an unfaithful ambassador, spokesman, for 
the Lord. 

Astounded at what he had heard, Nicodemus exclaimed, 
"How can these things be?" Is it possible 
that those who have been studying the Law and the 



Prophets for centuries have erred so egregiously? 
Our Lord replied that as a master in Israel he 
should be able to discern these matters when once 
they were brought to his attention. As a thoughtful 
student of the Law and the Prophets Nicodemus 
should have seen that there were insurmountable 
difficulties connected with the prevailing 
thought that God's Kingdom would be an earthly one. 
He therefore should have been quite prepared for the 
announcement that the Kingdom of God would be a 
spiritual one which, as the Lord on another occasion 
explained, would come not with outward show, and of 
which the people would not declare, "Lo, here it is," or 
"Lo, there it is," but it would be in the midst of mankind, 
invisible but all-powerful. 

We have elsewhere shown* that there is a particular 
fitness to our Lord's words in this connection when 
he declares that that which is born of flesh is flesh and 
that which is born of Spirit is spirit. As there cannot 
be any birth of the flesh without first a begetting of the 
flesh, so there can be no birth of the spirit without first 
a begetting of the Spirit. The begetting of the Spirit 
comes in connection with the washing of regeneration 
through the Word, and belongs to this present life. As 
New Creatures we develop spiritually until we reach the 
quickening stage of activity in the Lord's service; and 
those thus begotten and quickened, in whom the new 
will remains faithful unto death, in the resurrection are 
born of the Spirit— raised from the dead spirit beings. 
Thus our Lord was begotten of the holy Spirit at the 
time of his baptism, but in his resurrection he was 
born of the Spirit— the first-born from the dead— the 
first-born from among many brethren. Similarly his 
brethren and joint-heirs in the Kingdom are now begotten 
of the holy Spirit at the time of their washing 
of regeneration and begetting, and their birth, if faithful, 
will be in the resurrection change, when that which 
is sown in weakness will be raised in power, sown an 
animal body, raised a spiritual body— sharers with our 
Lord in the First Resurrection to spirit nature, glory, 
honor, immortality. It is proper to notice here that 
confusion has come to many because of their failure to 
notice that the same Greek word gennao is used in referring 
to both the begetting and the birth. 

"WE SPEAK THAT WE DO KNOW" 

In answer to Nicodemus' doubts our Lord assured 
him that this testimony respecting the Kingdom, that 
it would be a spirit Kingdom, was no idle speculation 
—that he knew what he testified to be true, that the 
trouble with Nicodemus was that he was not ready to 
be taught. He had called our Lord Master, Teacher, 
and declared that he believed him to be sent of God, 



*DAWN-STUDIES, Vol. V., pp. 189, 192. 

R4125 : page 30 

and yet he was so bound to his preconceptions that he 
was unready to receive the testimony of the only one 
who was capable of giving him the instruction. Our 
Lord intimated that he could tell much more about the 
heavenly Kingdom, but it would not be proper to do so, 
since his hearers were not in a condition to appreciate 
spiritual things. "If I have told you earthly things 
and ye believe not, how could you believe if I explained 
to you heavenly things?" In the light of the Apostle 
Paul's exhortation we see that our Master's words were 
not chiding, but rather a declaration of facts, because, 
as the Apostle declares, it is impossible for the natural 
man not begotten of the holy Spirit to understand 
spiritual things. The most, therefore, that Jesus was 
able to teach either to his disciples or others during 
his ministry were earthly things. He left the explanation 
of the deeper things of the divine plan until after 
his followers at Pentecost received the begetting of the 
holy Spirit and were thus fitted and qualified, prepared, 
enabled to understand the spiritual things, the heavenly 
things. --I Cor. 2:14. 

Undoubtedly this is the trouble with the great majority 
of the people today also— they have not been 
begotten of the holy Spirit, they have not been begotten 
again, and hence are unable to understand spiritual 
things. We reiterate, therefore, our recommendation, 
frequently made, that when any are found who 
have not the hearing ear for the Truth we should not 
seek to pound it into them, but rather should take a 
different tack and seek their consecration— present to 
them the reasonableness of a full consecration to the 
Lord and his service in view of what they have already 
seen and are able to grasp. If they make the consecration 
and receive the begetting of the holy Spirit the 
deep things of the Lord will then be for them and may 
be understood by them. Hence the wisdom of not 
casting the pearls of divine Truth, the deeper, spiritual 
things before the unregenerate— the wisdom, on the 
contrary, of preaching merely the outlines of the divine 
plan of the ages to the world in general, of exhorting 
them to receive not the grace of God in vain, and assuring 
them that wisdom from on high and an ability 
to appreciate the deeper things come only to and are 
only for those who have come into the spiritual covenant 
relationship of the sons of God as New Creatures. 

"NO MAN HATH ASCENDED UP TO HEAVEN" 

This statement by our Lord would cause no particular 
surprise to Nicodemus, for nothing in the Law or 
in the prophets or in the teachings of orthodox Judaism 



ever held to the idea prevalent amongst the heathen 

that the dead were alive— more alive than ever before. 

They knew that the dead were dead and that the hope 

for them lay in the resurrection, when Messiah should 

come forth for the banishing of the curse and the establishment 

of the Kingdom of heaven amongst men for 

their uplift and reconciliation to God. But today the 

heathen error, Plato's philosophy, that the dead are 

more alive than the living, with all the absurdity that 

is implied in such a statement, has fastened itself upon 

Christendom. People otherwise sane and logical will 

tell us that they believe in the resurrection of the dead, 

and in the same breath tell us that the dead are not 

dead. They fail to tell us how the dead could be resurrected 

if none is dead. Let all who study this lesson 

with a desire to learn from the Master rather than to 

instruct him, take heed to the words, "No man hath 

ascended up to heaven." (The last four words of this 

verse 13, "which is in heaven," are not found in ancient 

Greek MSS., and evidently were no part of this 

conversation.) 

"THE SERPENT IN THE WILDERNESS" 

The remainder of this lesson, in our judgment, was 
not spoken to Nicodemus, but combined various of our 
Lord's teachings which the writer here brought together 
conveniently. 

R4126 : page 30 

The reference of verse 14 to the lifting up of the 
brazen serpent in the wilderness and the declaration 
that it was intended to be a type of the crucifixion of 
our Lord is a very important item. We remember the 
story of the Israelites bitten by the fiery serpents because 
of sin, and how they were suffering great pain 
and were dying in large numbers until Moses by divine 
direction erected on a pole a serpent made of brass. 
Thenceforth every Israelite, looking toward that serpent, 
by faith was healed. The antitype of this we see. 
The whole world has been bitten by sin, and, as the 
Apostle declares, all are groaning and travailing in 
pain, all are dying. (Rom. 8:22.) Eighteen centuries 
ago Jesus the Son of man was lifted up on Calvary, he 
was treated as a sinner, our sins were laid upon him 
that he might thus have the right to impute his righteousness 
to all who desire it, and to grant them healing 
and life eternal. 

Our Lord, in explaining the matter, declared that 
the Son of man would be lifted up, to the intent that 
everyone believing on him should not perish but have 
eternal life. Only the few have yet had the opportunity 
of believing in him— the great mass in our Lord's 
time and ever since have been in utter ignorance of the 
Redeemer and his sacrifice, and of the blessings secured 



by looking to him. But will they never see? Will 
they never know? Will they never gain eternal life? 
Will only the Church, the specially favored of this Gospel 
Age, the Elect, have this great opportunity? 
Surely not! In due time God will cause the knowledge 
of his grace to reach every member of the race. Surely 
this is the import of our Master's words following, 
"For God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten 
Son, that whosoever believeth on him should 
not perish but have everlasting life." (v. 16.) Ah, 
yes! This is a blessed assurance. We are glad that 
by the grace of God Jesus "tasted death for every man." 
(Heb. 2:9.) We are glad that he was a propitiation for 
our sins, the Church's sins, but we are also glad that 
he is a propitiation for the sins of the whole world (I John 2:2), 
and that eventually the whole world shall 
have the privilege, opportunity, of having their eyes 
and ears opened that they also may see and understand 
the riches of God's grace in Christ. 
With what pleasure we read that "God sent not his 

R4126 : page 31 

Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the 
world through him might be saved." The world had 
already been condemned, for it had shared in Father 
Adam's condemnation as his race. It needed no more 
condemnation but it did need salvation from the Adamic 
condemnation resting upon it; — it did need to be 
delivered from the bondage of corruption, mental, 
moral and physical, and it was this that Jesus came to 
accomplish. How different the story as the Master 
gives it from the way in which it is told in the creeds. 
The theory claimed during the "dark ages" was that 
all who were not of the Elect Church were condemned 
to eternal torment. It was recognized that the race as 
a whole had as yet received none of God's grace, nor 
opportunity for the same, because of blindness and ignorance 
and superstition; and it was claimed that it 
never would have favor— that God never meant the 
world to be saved, and that Christ did not die for the 
world but for the Church, the Elect. How glorious the 
lengths and breadths and heights and depths of divine 
love and wisdom as now displayed through the divine 
Word in this harvest time!— showing us that the election 
of the Church is merely the prelude to the great 
work of blessing and enlightening, uplifting and restoring 
the world in general— all who will— "in due time." 
Nevertheless there is a measure of increased condemnation 
in proportion as the light is seen by any one and 
rejected; as our Lord said, "This is the condemnation, 
that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness 
rather than light because their deeds were evil." 
(John 3:19.) The meaning is evident: Our Lord's first 
advent was not with a view to increasing the Adamic 
condemnation but the reverse of this, to effect the sacrifice 



by which it might ultimately be canceled. Nevertheless 

his presence then in the world, and the light 

which then shone and which has since shone through 

his followers, has carried with it a measure of responsibility 

—a measure of condemnation to all who have 

resisted the light. 

This condemnation, however, is quite separate and 
distinct from the Adamic condemnation, which was inherited, 
and which because of Christ's sacrifice for our 
sins will ultimately be completely canceled; this condemnation, 
resulting from an intelligent rejection of 
light, bears an individual penalty, which will bring the 
unfaithful one stripes either in the present or in the 
future. In the giving of these stripes we are assured 
that full allowance will be made for inherited weaknesses, 
temptations, etc.— everything that can be justly 
charged up to the Adamic fall will be canceled 
through the merit of the sacrifice of Christ. The 
stripes merely represent the individual's own perversity, 
and should the opposition to the light of Truth be 
persisted in to the full degree, the penalty would be 
the Second Death. 

THE SELECTIVE PROCESS 

From the foregoing we perceive that wherever the 
light of the Gospel shines there is proportionately responsibility 
and more or less of a selective condition. 
As our Lord declares, all who do evil intentionally, 
in the light, thereby manifest their hatred of the 
light, and such will avoid the light, realizing that it 
makes manifest the error, the sin with which they are 
identified and which, to some extent, at least, they 
love. They hate and avoid the light because it reproves 
their darkness, their error, their sin. On the 
contrary (v. 21), all who would serve the Truth, the 
light, are glad to come to more and more light as they 
may discern it. They desire that their course in life 
shall become manifest, that all shall know that to the 
extent of their ability they are seeking to do the Lord's 
will. And if, perchance, something contrary to God's 
will may be exposed in their own conduct or theories, 
they are glad of this also that they may have an opportunity 
for correcting the same. 

This selective, separative work is not going on 
amongst the heathen but in Christendom, nor is it specially 
going on amongst the masses of Christendom, 
but chiefly amongst those who have professed to be 
God's people, who profess to have turned from darkness 
to light, as did the Jews of our Lord's day. Realizing 
the true situation, let us be very zealous for every 
ray of light which can be shed upon the divine plan or 
upon our own hearts and lives. Let us more and more 
desire to know the Truth, that it may make us free 
from every bondage and bring us more and more into 
captivity to the will of God in Christ. Children of the 



Light, we can have no fellowship with any of the unfruitful 
works of darkness, doctrinal or otherwise! Let us 
maintain our stand more and more loyally as the divine 
Word increasingly clarifies our vision and distinguishes 
for us between light and darkness, truth and error, 
righteousness and sin! 



R4126 : page 31 

AN INTERESTING LETTER 

MY DEAR BRETHREN: - 

Since entering the Colporteur work I have not 
worked more than two ten-hour days at the most, this 
being due to having but Saturday afternoons and holidays 
for this purpose. During this time I sold 73 
volumes— 17 on the Fourth of July morning, when I 
even parted with my sample book. I expected to be out 
all day on the 4th, but hereafter when I go out to spend 
a whole day I shall see to it that I have my wheel better 
loaded. One week later I took another day for the 
work, but was rather disappointed by rain. However, 
it cleared off by noon and allowed me to take another 
missionary trip. In that afternoon I sold 18 volumes. 

This, dear brethren, is the grandest privilege I ever 
enjoyed. I rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of 
glory, and can say with the Psalmist, "Praise the Lord, 
O my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy 
name." May we all hold fast that which we have already 
that no one take our crown is my earnest prayer 
for all. Cannot say more at present, but with deepest 
and tenderest Christian love, I remain. 

Yours in the Lord's vineyard, 

HARRY W. DAVIDGE,-New Jersey. 



page 33 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXIX FEBRUARY 1 No. 3 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

The Passover in the First Month 35 

The Memorial Supper, 1908 36 

"Christ Our Passover is Sacrificed for Us".... 37 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 38 

"Not Ignorant of His Devices" 39 

A Query Answered 40 

"Give Me to Drink" 41 

Tactfulness Exemplified 41 

Salvation is of the Jews 42 

The Rewards of Faith 44 

Chuza's Manifestation of Faith 45 

Faith Cometh by Hearing— the Message of God... 46 

The Cincinnati Debates and Convention 47 

The Woman's National Daily 47 

page 34 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R4126 : page 34 

COLPORTEUR BAGS AND WHEELS 



Dear Sister Brown of Washington City, finding that canvas 
bags, to hang on the shoulder and under the coat, are a 
great convenience to Colporteurs, has gladly assumed the 
service of supplying these to the regular Colporteurs of our list 
free. She has supplied us with a lot, which we will be glad 
to forward to those not yet supplied. 

Brother Cole has invented a two-wheeled, neat, nickel-plated 
attachment which may be added to any suit-case. By 
it a load of say 20 or 30 STUDIES can be transported with very 
little effort. We have given orders for 300 of these, because 
by taking this quantity they can be supplied at $2 each, plus 
express charges. Ready Feb. 15. 

page 34 

CANADIAN FRIENDS DESIRING SERMONS WEEKLY 



Arrangements have been made for Brother Russell's sermons 
weekly in The Toronto World. We can give a clubbing 
rate of $1.50 per year (or, with TOWER, $2.50), except in the cities 
of Hamilton and Toronto, where the price will be $2.75, 
with TOWER, $3.75. Make up your lists speedily and send to us. 

VOLUNTEER TRACTS FOR 1908 READY FEBRUARY 15 



Send in orders at once, as we shall be able to ship 
promptly. 



R4127 : page 35 

THE PASSOVER IN THE FIRST MONTH 

CONSIDERABLE difficulty is experienced by many 

in harmonizing our solar calendar with that 

of the Jews, which is built upon an association 

of lunar and solar time. We tender assistance to such 

by quoting an extract from Smith's Bible Dictionary on 

the subject— followed by an extract from the Hebrew 

chronologist Lindo on the same subject. 

Smith's Bible Dictionary says:— 

"The characteristics of the year instituted at the 



Exodus can be clearly determined, though we cannot 
absolutely fix those of any certain year. There can be 
no doubt that it was essentially tropical, since certain 
observances connected with the produce of the land 
were fixed to particular days. It is equally clear that 
the months were lunar, each commencing with a new 
moon. It would appear, therefore, that there must 
have been some mode of adjustment. To decide what 
this was, it was necessary first to ascertain when the 
year commenced. On the 16th of Abib ripe ears of 
corn were to be offered as first-fruits of the harvest. 
(Lev. 2:14; 23:10,11.) The reaping of the barley commenced 
the harvest (2 Sam. 21:9), the wheat following. 
(Ruth 2:23.) It is therefore necessary to find when the 
barley becomes ripe in Palestine. According to the 
observation of travelers, the barley is ripe, in the warmest 
parts of the country, in the first days of April. The 
barley harvest, then, commences about half a month 
after the vernal equinox, so that the year would begin at 
about that tropical point, were it not divided into lunar 
months. We may conclude that the nearest new moon 
about or after the equinox, but not much before, was 
chosen as the commencement of the year. The method 
of intercalation can only have been that which obtained 
after the Captivity— the addition of a thirteenth month 
whenever the twelfth ended too long before the equinox 
for the first-fruits of the harvest to be offered in the 
middle of the month following, and the similar offerings 
at the times appointed." 

Extracts from Lindo: 

"The Jewish year is luni-solar, for although the 
months are lunar, our calculations being founded on 
the lunar cycle, every 19th year we come to the same 
date in the solar year. The cycle contains 235 lunations, 
which we divide into twelve years of 12 months, 
and seven (termed Embolismic) of 13 months. 

"The celebrated mathematician Meton of Athens, 
who flourished B.C. 432, which was in the reign of 
Zedekiah, A.M. 3328, made the same division of time, 
but by making every third year embolismic, the 18th 
and 19th were both of 13 months; by our arrangement 
the solar and lunar years are better equalized. 

Days Hrs. Min. Sec. 
19 years, according to Rab Ada.. ..6939 16 33 3-1/3 
235 lunar months 6939 16 33 3-1/3 

"The year is of three kinds, perfect, common and 
imperfect. The perfect has 355 days, and is when 
the months of Hesvan and Kislev have each 30 days. 
The common, 354 days, when Hesvan has 29 and Kislev 
30. The imperfect, 353 days, when both have only 
29. The embolismic year is formed by the introduction 
of an intercalary month, immediately after Adar, 
which is called Ve-adar, or Second Adar. The year then 
consists of 385, 384, or 383 days, according to the rule 
above. The reason of the introduction at that period 
is that the Passover may be kept in its proper season, 



which is the full moon of the vernal equinox, or after 
the sun has entered Aries; it is indifferent at what 
period of it the full moon happens, but it must be kept 
while the sun is in that sign. That a time was fixed 
for its observance is shown in Numbers 9:2, 'Let the 
children of Israel also keep the Passover at its appointed 
season.' 

"That our months have always been lunar is shown 
by I Kings 6:38, 'And the eleventh year in the month 
Bui, which is the eighth month,' etc. By a reference 
to the Hebrew text it will be seen that the two words 
translated month are different, the first being derived 
from the word 'moon,' the latter from 'innovation.' 
Our months are the following:— 

Tisri 30 days Nisan 30 days 

Hesvan 29 or 30 " Yiar 29 " 

Kislev 29 or 30 " Sivan 30 " 

Tebet 29 " Tamuz 29 " 

Sebat 30 " Ab 30 " 

Adar 29 " EM 29 " 

"In the embolismic years, Adar has 30, and the intercalary 
month Ve-adar 29. 

"As a lunation from one conjunction to another, 

R4127 : page 36 

termed a synodical month, has 29:12:44:3-1/3, being 29-1/2 
days and about 3/4 hour, it could not be better arranged 
than by making one month 29 and the following 30 
days. When a month has 30 days, the last day of the 
month and the following day are both kept as New 
Moon, on the principle that a holiday cannot be kept 
part of a day. The 30th day being half in the preceding 
month and half in the new moon, the whole day 
is made a holiday, and the following as a matter of 
course, from its being the first whole day of the new 
moon. That this rule was followed in ancient times, 
is to be seen in I Sam. 20:5,27. 

"It will have been seen that by this arrangement 
there is yet a deficiency every month of 44 min., 3-1/3 
sec, making nearly 9 hours in years of 12 months. To 
make up this deficiency one day is added to Hesvan 
every second or third year, by which that month then 
consists of 30 days. When Hesvan has 30 days, Kislev 
invariably has the same. Without Hesvan having 30 
days, Kislev is sometimes made 30, which is done to 
prevent Passover happening on Monday, Wednesday 
or Friday, for as that festival regulates all the other 
holidays, it is arranged that none may fall on days on 
which they could not be properly observed. On the 
same day of the week as the 

1 st day of Passover are the fasts of Tamuz and Ab 
2nd " " is the first day of Sebuot and Hosana Raba 

3rd ' " New Year and Tabernacle 

4th " " " Rejoicing of the Law 

5th " " " Kippur, the day of Atonement 



"Consequently, were the first day on Monday, Purim 
would be on Saturday and Kippur on Friday, days on 
which neither could be observed. If it were on Wednesday, 
Kippur would be on Sunday, on which it could 
not be kept; the reason is that as Kippur has the same 
strict ordinances as Sabbath, it cannot precede or follow 
the Sabbath. If it were on Friday, Hosana Raba would 
be on Saturday, a day on which the ceremonies of it 
could not be observed. By the above regulation, it will 
be seen that Rosh Ashana can never fall on Sunday, 
Wednesday or Friday. 

"This holiday is to be observed on the day of the 
conjunction, with the following exceptions:— 

"1. If the conjunction takes place on Sunday, Wednesday 
or Friday, the holiday is to be kept on the following 
day, as in 5604. 

"2. If the conjunction should happen after noon, 
the following day is to be observed, and if that should 
happen to be Sunday, Wednesday or Friday, the next 
is to be kept, as in 5601. 

"3. If the conjunction takes place in an ordinary 
year on Tuesday, on or after 9h., 1 lm., 20S. A.M., it is 
not to be observed thereon, and as it may not be kept on 
Wednesday, it will be observed on Thursday, as in 
5616. An objection may be made to this, as New Year 
should be observed on the day of conjunction, but were 
it to be so kept, the preceding month of Elul would 
only be of 27 or 28 days, and a month can never be less 
than 29. 

"4. The conjunction being on Monday, on or after 
3:30:52 P.M., in a year immediately following an embolismic, 
the holiday is to be kept on Tuesday, as in 5617. 
This occurs but seldom. 

"Our embolismic years are Nos. 3, 6, 8, 11, 14, 17, 19 
of each cycle. 

"Although the Gregorian calculations have been 
made with great nicety they are still imperfect, and 
other alterations must take place in future ages. As a 
proof the Council of Nice ordered that Easter should 
not be kept on the same day as the first day of Passover, 
in order that there might be no appearance of Judaism 
in it; 'Ne videantur Judaizare,' to prevent 
which they ordered its observance on the Sunday after 
the full moon, Passover being always kept on the day 
of the full moon; and yet in 1825 both were kept on the 
same day." 



From the foregoing it will be seen that, with every 
endeavor to reach exactly the date specified in their 
Law for the Passover, the Jews have difficulty, and 
often there is of necessity a choice between two days 
equally appropriate. However, they follow the guidance 
of their leaders in this matter and have a uniformity 
of celebration, instead of each one trying to fix the 



date and celebrating according to his personal knowledge, 
convenience or preference. And this measure 
of subserviency to leaders was endorsed by our Lord, 
who said, "The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses' 
seat; whatsoever therefore they bid you observe, that 
observe and do." (Matt. 23:3.) The Apostle indicated 

R4128 : page 36 

the same course to the Gospel Church. (Heb. 13:17.) 

Two essential features of the celebration of the Passover 

were: (1) uniformity, and (2) that it begin as 

exactly as possible at the full of the moon— which symbolized 

the fullness of favor to Israel. 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER, 1908 

Following the custom of the early Church, we celebrate 
the "Last Supper," not weekly, nor monthly, nor 
quarterly, as do our fellow-Christians, but annually. 
Nor do we celebrate it in the forenoon, but as a supper. 
To our understanding we thus better preserve the letter 
and spirit of our Master's request— "Do this in remembrance 
of me." 

There still persists amongst Christians in general 
a hallowed respect for our Lord's death-day, celebrated 
as "Good Friday," but the precious Memorial Supper 
of the preceding evening they overlook. The reason for 
this is evident. Catholicism, which long held almost 
universal sway, introduced the "Sacrifice of the Mass" 
as a substitute for the Memorial Supper; and when the 
Reformers rejected the Mass as a sacrifice for sins and 
resumed a more proper celebration they styled it "the 
Holy Communion." They failed, however, to note that 
the original Supper was given to celebrate the antitypical 
fulfilment of the eating of the Passover Lamb— and 
that its force and beauty would be dimmed by observing 
it oftener than on its anniversary. 

The writer and many others would incline to celebrate 
the Memorial Supper annually on the Thursday 
night most closely corresponding to the original celebration, 
for several reasons. (1) That would bring the 
celebration into its proper relationship to Sunday, 
which is the remembrancer of our Lord's resurrection. 

(2) At that season Easter Sunday is quite generally 
celebrated as a special memorial of our Lord's resurrection. 

(3) The celebration of the Memorial Supper 

on the evening of what is by many styled "Holy Thursday" 

R4128 : page 37 

would of itself be a powerful lesson to many of 
our dear Christian friends who now think us "odd," or 
"followers of a Jewish custom," because, without study, 
which they will not give, they cannot understand our 
position. (4) Instead of copying anything "Babylonish," 



we would be calling attention to something long 
lost to Babylon. The finding of this sometimes means 
an investigation and appreciation of other truths lost 
or buried under human traditions. 

But we pass by all these advantages, fearing that 
some could not appreciate them, and that therefore a 
schism might ensue. We prefer to remember the Apostle's 
words that there be no schism; that we seek to 
"preserve the unity of the Body in the bonds of peace." 
Hence we do not announce as the Memorial date the 
Thursday night nearest to the first full moon following 
the spring equinox. We again announce, as heretofore, 
the Memorial date as the evening of (preceding) Nisan 
14— the day before the commencement of the Jewish 
Passover Feast-week; viz., April 14, 1908, after 6 P.M. 
The Jewish Passover begins Thursday, April 16 (Nisan 
15); but in Jewish reckoning it begins after sundown 
of April 15. Consequently Wednesday, April 15, is 
Nisan 14, beginning at sundown of Tuesday, April 14. 

"CHRIST OUR PASSOVER IS SACRIFICED FOR US, THEREFORE 
LET US KEEP THE FEAST" 
-I COR. 5:7- 

What a meaning is in these words when seen in 
connection with the Memorial Supper as the remembrancer 
of the Jewish Passover! How the light of the 
type illuminates the antitype. As the first-born of Israel 
were exposed to death, so "the Church of the 
First-born whose names are written in heaven" (Heb. 12:23) 
are now on trial for life or death everlasting. 
As then all the typical first-born were safe so long as 
they remained in the house and ate of the lamb whose 
blood was sprinkled upon the door-posts and lintel, so 
we who abide in the household of faith under the better 
"blood of sprinkling" and who eat of our Passover 
Lamb, Jesus, are safe from death— sure of life everlasting 
under God's providence. 

We do not now recognize the typical lamb, but 
instead Jesus, "the Lamb of God, which taketh away 
the sin of the world." On him we feed; not eating his 
flesh literally, but by faith partaking of the merit of 
his sacrifice and appropriating it to ourselves. All 
through this night of the Gospel Age do we thus feast 
on our Lamb— until the morning of the Millennium, 
when we shall be delivered. The annual Memorial 
Supper is not our feast, but an illustration or archetype 
of it— a remembrancer— most beautiful, most solemn, 
helpful. Let us keep the feast of faith and also the 
Memorial Supper. "As oft as ye do this [annually] ye 
do show forth the Lord's death— till he come again."— 
I Cor. 11:26. 

In accord with our usual custom let us, then, on 
Tuesday night, April 14th, at 7.30 P.M., assemble ourselves 
and memorialize the great Redeemer's death 
and our release from condemnation to destruction. 



Yea, more, as we break the loaf of unleavened bread, 

let us remember the later suggestion of the Apostle 

that all the consecrated followers of Jesus are so counted 

in with him by the Father that we are "all one loaf" 

(I Cor. 10:17) and all have participation not only in our 

Lord's sacrifice or breaking on our behalf, but are to 

be broken with him as "members of his Body," the 

Church of the First-born. And as we partake of "the 

cup" of "the fruit of the vine" let us recognize it as not 

only representing our Lord's blood, his life sacrificed 

for us, but also as the cup in which we join— our communion 

or fellowship in the sufferings of Christ, as the 

Apostle explains. (I Cor. 10:16.) And let us remember 

further the Apostle's words that "we fill up that 

which is behind of the afflictions of Christ for his Body's 

sake [service], the Church." Thus "we ought to lay 

down our lives for the brethren"— our moments and 

hours and talents and strength and convenience.— Col. 1:24; 

I John 3: 16. 

We recommend that unleavened bread be used. 
Jewish Passover bread (crackers) may be obtained in 
many cities, but otherwise "Uneeda" biscuit or soda 
biscuit would serve every requirement. As for the cup, 
"the fruit of the vine," we advise that grape-juice or 
raisin-juice be used, if agreeable to all, but if any require 
regular wine we advise that such be accommodated 
also. 

We advise that the celebration be in classes or congregations 
as they usually meet for worship every Sunday: 
that friends do not desert the little gatherings on 
this occasion in order to celebrate with larger groups 
—unless all can thus unite, which is improbable. 
Do not forget the Lord's words, "Where two or three of 
you are met in my name there am I in your midst." 
And if there be sick or solitary brethren or sisters who 
cannot possibly meet with even one other, let them celebrate 
alone with the Lord. All such who have no 
means of preparing the Memorial emblems, if they apply 
to us by April 1, will be supplied freely. 

For those who think of no better method, we advise 
the reading of selections on the subject from DAWN-STUDIES, 
Vol. VI., with prayer and praise. As for the 
ministers or servants for the occasion: they should be 
those ordained or set apart by the congregation by vote, 
"by the stretching forth of the hand"— the Elders. If 
the class is small and no Elder has been chosen, a servant 
for the occasion should be first chosen by consent 
of the majority of the consecrated believers participating. 
It is requested that some one be appointed to 
communicate to us on a post-card a brief report of each 
celebration, giving the number of participants. We 
urge that all of the consecrated shall thus renew before 
the Lord their vow of loyalty and devotion to him and 
his brethren and his cause. There is a blessing in so 
doing which each one needs. Such participator will be 
strengthened and blessed, as the Lord and the Apostle 



indicate. Address all of these cards (even from foreign 
lands) to the Society at Allegheny, Pa., U.S.A. 



page 38 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V. (E) 

Questions on Study I.— The Fact 
and Philosophy of the Atonement. 

MARCH 1 

1. Is it because Justice and Love are the basis of the 
divine government that atonement for man's sin 

is made the foundation of the Christian religion? 
Or what does differentiate the religion of the Bible 
from all other religions? Page 15. 

2. Do Christian believers generally understand this 
or appreciate the philosophy of the Atonement set 
forth in the Bible? If not, why not? What is 

their disadvantage, and what should they do to 
put on this part of the armor of God, to be ready 
for the testings of "the evil day"? Page 15. 

3. State the so-called "orthodox" view of the Atonement. 
Page 16. 

4. State the unorthodox but growingly popular view 
of the subject. Page 16. 

State the Bible's teaching on this subject and quote 
the Scriptures supporting same, under the following 
divisions of the subject: 

5. Did man fall into sin so as to need an atonement 
for his sin? What Scriptures prove this? Page 

17, par. 2. 

6. Was it right on God's part to condemn Adam and 
to allow the death penalty to follow and to involve 
all of Adam's race? Page 17, par. 3. 

7. What provision did God's love make for mankind? 
Page 17, par. 4. 

MARCH 8 

8. Was not the providing of a ransom all that was necessary? 
What more could God do? Page 17, par. 5. 

9. What prevented our Lord Jesus from uplifting our 
race without redeeming it by his death? Page 18, par. 1. 

10. If the sins of the past had all been cancelled would 
further work for man be necessary? What? Page 

18, par. 2. 

1 1 . What has Satan had to do with the fallen race? 
and how does this affect its future? And does he 
even now hinder the blessing from reaching the 



masses? Page 18, par. 3. 

12. Was God's provision of Atonement merely for the 
few who now hear of and accept it? Support 

your reply with Scripture quotations. Page 19, par. 1. 

13. What is the divine order for extending the blessings 
of the Atonement to every creature? Page 19, par. 2. 

14. Do any now enjoy the blessings of the Atonement? 
Who? Why do not all share this blessing now? 

Page 19, par. 3. 

15. Will not present hindrances always prevent the 
majority of the race from sharing the benefits of 

the great sin-atonement? If not, why not? Page 
19, par. 1. 

MARCH 15 

16. Is there more than one phase of Atonement? If so, 
state the other phase and show the harmony between 
these as one Atonement work. Page 20, par. 1. 

17. What will be the final result of this Atonement 
work, which God has purposed and has begun? 
Page 20, par. 2. 

18. Is the Bible doctrine of Atonement for man's sin 
and his reconciliation to God in accord with the 
modern theory of Evolution? Page 20, par. 3. 

19. The Bible teaches a fall of man from divine fellowship. 
Can the Evolution theory be harmonized 

with this? Page 21, par. 1. 

20. Would it have been justifiable on God's part to 
punish mankind for evoluting, if that was the law 
of his organism? Page 21, par. 1. 

21. Could Justice have demanded a ransom or any sin-sacrifice, 
had Adam not been intelligent and a 

transgressor and justly under the sentence of 
death? Page 21, par. 1. 

22. Is the belief or disbelief of Evolution optional with 
Christian believers? Or is it so radically opposed 

to the divine revelation that to accept the one intelligently 
must mean the repudiation of the other? 
Page 21, par. 2. 

23. Are Christians generally aware of this conflict and 
of the importance to themselves of a correct faith? 

Or are they generally so overcharged with the 
cares of this life that they are not worthy to be 
counted of the "Very Elect," and are intended 
to be sifted out by the "strong delusions" which 
are to make the close of this age "perilous"? 
Page 21, par. 2. 

MARCH 22 

24. Do the Scriptures teach that God created Adam in 
the image of God or in the image and likeness of 

a chimpanzee? Page 22, par. 1. 

25. Do the Scriptures teach that Adam's perfection implied 
a perfection of knowledge— that he knew 



everything? Or, merely that he had a perfect organism 
and with sufficient knowledge for the tests 
of obedience imposed? Was Adam deceived into 
sin? Page 22, par. 1. 

26. What has uniformly been God's methods for revealing 
knowledge in the past— to Abraham and others? 

Page 22, par. 1. 

27. Do the angels of heaven have all knowledge? Matt. 24:36. 

28. Will the saints ever know perfectly— "know as they 
are known"? Will that which is perfect in knowledge 
ever be our portion? I Cor. 13:10,12. 

29. What penalty was pronounced on Adam and shared 
by his posterity? Page 22, par. 2. Rom. 5:12. 

30. What does salvation from sin and its death penalty 
imply? Page 22, par. 2. 

3 1 . What was predicted as respected Messiah and his 
work? Page 22, par. 2. 

32. How would the Evolution theory agree with St. 
Peter's declaration respecting coming glorious 
years, or "times of restitution"? Page 23, par. 1. 

MARCH 29 

33. To what three important matters, past and future, 
do the Scriptures point us, in explanation of sin, 
redemption and salvation? Page 24, par. 1. 

34. When did sin enter the world, or was it always 
here? Page 24, par. 2. 

35. Is it correct or incorrect for us to speak of the 
world as "children of wrath"? and why? Rom. 5:8,9; 
Eph. 2:3. 

36. Is it correct or incorrect for us to speak of "the 
fatherhood of God" to all humanity and "the 
brotherhood of all mankind"? John 8:44. 

37. If the relationship of sons of God belongs only to 

R4128 : page 39 

believers, and if such are "brethren" in the true 
sense, who is our "neighbor" if we are to do "good 
unto all men as we have opportunity, especially 
to the household of faith"? Gal. 6:10. 

38. Has reconciliation, or at-one-ment, yet been completed 
between God and any of Adam's race? 

Page 25, par. 1. 

39. What evidences have we that such a reconciliation 
will ultimately reach beyond the Church of this 

age to the race in general? Page 25, par. 1 and 2. 



R4128 : page 39 

"NOT IGNORANT OF HIS DEVICES" 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 



I am sending under separate cover the little book, 
"Practical Methods," which I am told is being widely circulated, 
that you may appreciate the subtle bait the wily Adversary 
is using to entrap the pure-minded. You must see 
that the author is evidently sincere and honest and hence 
the more powerful tool of Satan. You must see that an 
advanced point of knowledge is indeed given, but, like the 
Bible symbol, it is water from the mouth of the dragon. 

I am told that this counterfeit "regeneration" is the 
secret, underlying teaching of Seventh Day Adventism, New 
Thought and Theosophy, Christian Science and Spiritism, 
and indeed every outgrowth of the "three unclean spirits" 
now boldly masquerading under the guise of purity and 

R4129 : page 39 

righteousness. I feel sure, Brother Russell, unless you note 

carefully certain facts you will fail to appreciate the severity 

of the temptation under which such a book comes to one 

of the Lord's true-hearted and pure-hearted. The religious 

errors are so apparent that one such earnest searcher for 

knowledge would not, could not, fail to distinguish them, 

and for this reason fail to see its danger. But failing to see 

that the Word of the Lord was sufficient, that the man of 

God may be thoroughly furnished unto every good work, 

and still under the delusion that light on these matters, considered 

secular, should properly come through secular channels, 

a book like this is read as secular knowledge, and unconsciously 

the principles of Theosophy are absorbed and do 

their vitiating work. 

No human mind, as such, is capable of devising the 
subtle deception that underlies this book. Passing by the 
easily detected errors, from which the unwary reader feels 
himself perfectly safe, and, sure that he is gleaning only 
needful secular knowledge, he is not prepared to see how 
certainly and surely he has been led to enter a realm of 
thought, which adherence to the Word of the Lord would 
have saved him from entering. That DAWN, Vol. VI., gives 
explicit information I am fully aware; that the Lord's people 
have only tasted of this "heavenly gift" I am equally 
aware. 

I feel sure, Brother Russell, that danger to the Lord's 
people from this source has never before been seen. You 
have on several occasions said the words to me, but I have 
never before so fully appreciated their force, that "human 
knowledge is defiled"— wisdom from beneath, earthly, sensual, 
devilish. I appreciate as never before that no channels 
are clean except such as are divinely provided. 

Do you appreciate, Brother Russell, that a pure-minded 
person could take this book and read into its words that 
which is pure and good, and yet be defiled by a certain 
clearly discernible spirit after its results are manifest, but 
not discernible previously? Perhaps the discernment came 
by means of light now due, but which was not due before a 
recent date. 

I wondered when, in the WATCH TOWER, you warned 



the friends against mechanical manifestations of spirits, 
through raps and Ouija boards, that you were silent on so 
powerful Satanic weapons as scientific books. Literary and 
professional brethren are surely more open to danger from 
this source than from material sources. Does not one come 
more directly in contact with the spirit of the Evil One 
through a book than through a mechanical device? Is this 
danger of the Lord's people confined to the physicians and 
the teachers? Does not the very hunger of the mind of all 
for knowledge, with the plausible necessity for its employment, 
constitute a most powerful temptation to every intelligent 
child of the Lord? Does not our great Adversary 
know this fact, and is he not specially designing to attack 
this point, surely vulnerable in so many? Is it not time to 
sound the alarm in a new direction? "Be in health" surely 
was timely, but have all heard? 

I feel sure that the circumstances under which I am mailing 
you this are sufficient reasons for the earnestness of my letter, 
and I know my heart has grown into a sympathy for the 
severity of the temptation under which the Lord's holy ones 
encounter our wily foe, and I surely cannot do less than 
communicate to you that which has now become so plainly 
evident. 

Yours sincerely, M. L. HERR. 



To be perfectly balanced physically is to be almost 
immune to disease. In other words, those who digest 
well what they eat, and who eat sufficiently and who 
work proportionately are so healthy that colds and 
other ailments pass them by. Those attacked by every 
passing ailment are usually either the under-nourished 
or the slothful. (See Vol. VI., pp. 559-562.) 

This is true also of the New Creation. Some 
"babes" in Christ are always "catching" something in 
the way of false doctrine— usually because under-nourished 
in the Truth, but sometimes because their labors 
for the Truth have been insufficient to properly utilize 
the nourishment they have taken. 

Whoever has studied the Word to good effect has 
learned that its standard is the correct one; namely, 
that we must grow in knowledge and the graces of the 
Spirit by our daily walk in life. We put forth first the 
faith foot and then the works foot, and thus proceed to 
more faith and more works. These "rightly exercised" 
make us strong in the Lord and the power of his might. 
It is to such obedient children of God that the promise 
applies, "The wicked one toucheth him not." Surely 
this is the only safe condition for any of the Lord's 
people to occupy. 

The Lord has provided for his household the long-promised 
"meat in due season"— "things new and old." 
Some have repudiated and violently opposed these harvest 



R4129 : page 40 



blessings; others of us have embraced them and 
feasted on them and hungered and thirsted for more 
and more of the same kind, declaring with the poet:— 
"I love to tell the story, 

Because I know it's true; 
It satisfies my longings 

As nothing else would do." 

We want more of the same, but since tasting of the 
heavenly manna we have no appetite for other things. 
If the class thus described is rightly exercised by their 
good nourishment they will be active in distributing it 
to others. They will neither be slothful nor be busy 
making a new brand of their own. They prefer to use 
and to recommend to others the very kind and brand 
which the Lord has provided. These, thankful and 
active, are in no danger from all the various snares and 
poisons prepared by the great Adversary— and permitted 
by God as tests to his people. As the Apostle 
Peter declares: "If ye do these things ye shall never 
fall." 

But there are others who are sure to fall away in 
this evil day, as the Scriptures declare: 

(1) Those who received the Truth with joy— those 
glad to learn that there is not a hell of torment, but a 
blessing provided by the Lord for all the families of the 
earth. These, without the proper loving zeal, are indolent 
as respects labors of love and self-denial on behalf 

of the Lord, the Truth and the brethren: the Truth 
they have rather inclines to puff them up and makes them 
fit subjects for any malaria of error which the Adversary 
may blow their way. The more knowledge of the Truth 
such have had and have not properly used to the glory 
of God the more sure they are to "catch" some error; 
and the severer and more hopeless will be their case. 
Is this not both true and just? Does it not speak 
loudly to all of us to strive, to labor, to sacrifice, if we 
would be accepted as "overcomers"? 

Nor is it enough merely to "beat the air"; we must, 
as the Apostle declares, "strive lawfully if we would be 
crowned." (2 Tim. 2:5.) And lawfully means: in harmony 
with our Lord, the great Chief Reaper, and the 
arrangements he has provided. It is noticeable that 
the "slothful servants," when entrapped by the Adversary, 
seem to become very energetic for the error. 
With sorrow we say it: we know of some who have 
long been favored of God with a knowledge of the Truth, 
who seem less clear in it than they were ten or twenty 
years ago, and who show less fruitage than they then 
did. Such, unless they become awakened, will be just 
in the condition to be ensnared. Would that we could 
arouse such. But if they are deaf to the Lord's words 
how little may we hope that ours would influence them. 

(2) The under-nourished spiritually are liable to 
"catch" errors, or rather to be caught by them, at any 
time. We may well suppose that, "as new born babes," 



they have the Lord's special care for a time, that they 
may grow strong in the Lord. But we must also expect 
that such as refuse and neglect the various provisions 
and exhortations of the Master for their development, 
will not be counted worthy of a share in the 
Kingdom, and will therefore be permitted to stumble 
and fall "with the hypocrites," though they are not 
hypocrites and eventually will have a different portion. 
First one thing and then another will be permitted of 
the Lord to prove and test and sift his true people; 
whom he will thus refine and purify for himself, for his 
companionship in the coming glory. 

A QUERY ANSWERED 

"Is this poison?" asks one dear reader, who sends 
us a postal-card recently received from "The Home 
Preacher." The card alludes vaguely to "the third 
watch of harvest," "the midnight cry" and "a cake of 
barley bread." Yes, dear sister, it is intended to poison 
many and may poison an occasional one here and 
there, of such as are of the "catching" sort described 
foregoing. But it will not poison those who are truly 
the Lord's, for "they shall never fall." 

The inconsistency of confusing the third watch of 
the morning with a midnight cry is not enough— the 
harvest in the night only adds to the confusion and leads 
to wonderment as to the mental calibre and make-up 
of the "Home Preacher." It is time, high time, that some 

R4130 : page 40 

one gave him a real barley cake, for he evidently needs 
more substantial food than he has yet had. 

Briefly: this effort of the Adversary to hinder the 
Truth and to ensnare the Lord's followers is served by 
two who were once in the Truth slightly. The one was 
in "mission work" some years ago in St. Louis. The 
mission failed and he became interested in Present 
Truth. Later he got into conflict with the St. Louis 
Church, because he entertained the idea that God had 
appointed him its lord and master, regardless of the 
will of the Church as expressed in its vote. The racking 
and splitting of the Church ran over three years 
and resulted in its standing fast in the liberty wherewith 
Christ hath made us free. As the Editor of this 
journal could not support the brother in his unscriptural 
endeavor to lord it over God's heritage, he became 
our enemy and maligner and has for a year or 
more been doing what he can to destroy the harvest 
work. But he can have no power at all except as permitted 
by the Father. 

The other "Home Preacher" professed considerable 
interest in the Truth some years ago. He would have 
been glad to be one of the "Pilgrims," but the Society 
could not conscientiously aid his aspirations. He 



started to do Colporteur work, but made no success of 
it. He objected to being styled a Colporteur— preferred 
to be called a minister, etc. We assured him that we 
regard all servants of the Lord as "ministers," but that 
"Colporteur" merely signified a minister who served 
the cause in a special manner, and hence that we preferred 
that cognomen. We were, however, quite agreeable 
to his striking his pen through the word colporteur 
on the Order and the Report blanks. Later on his 
accounts got behind, because, instead of colporteuring, 
he undertook the writing of a novel "along the lines of 
the 'Truth,'" he explained. We objected, and urged 
that consecrated time and money could be more wisely 

R4130 : page 41 

used. Unable to pay his own way, he concluded to get 
married; but of course this made matters worse. He 
became very bitter toward the Society and its President, 
because we could not supply him with all the 
financial aid he thought was his due. 

These gentlemen having found that their past 
methods have not prospered, are now practising on the 
gullibility of the Truth people, selling five-cent pamphlets 
for fifty cents each and attracting the money 
their way by sending out to all of our addresses obtainable 
postal-cards referring to the Dawns, Midnight 
Cry, Harvest, etc. Compare 2 Tim. 3:8-13. 



R4130 : page 41 

"GIVE ME TO DRINK" 

-JOHN 4:19-29.-FEBRUARY 9- 

Golden Text:— "If any man thirst let him 
come unto me and drink."— John 7:37. 

JOHN the Baptist had testified of Jesus, "He must 

increase, but I must decrease." (John 3:30.) It 

is in harmony with this that we read that Jesus 

(at the hands of his disciples) baptized more than did 

John and his co-laborers. (John 4:1.) The growing 

popularity of Jesus aroused to bitter opposition the 

Scribes and Pharisees, and they sought to kill him. 

Hence, we read that "He would not walk in Jewry, because 

the Jews sought to kill him." (John 7:1.) They 

had greater animosity toward Jesus than toward John, 

for in him they recognized a superiority over themselves, 

and because the ignorant, common people heard 

him gladly and said, "Never man spake like this man." 

Thereafter we hear little of Jesus being in Jerusalem 

except on festival occasions, when great multitudes 

gathered in accordance with the requirements of the 



Law. 

En route to Galilee, the home country of the majority 
of his apostles, the journey took them through the 
country of the Samaritans, concerning whom we remember 
that our Lord charged the disciples, saying, 
"Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city 
of the Samaritans enter ye not; but go rather to the 
lost sheep of the house of Israel." (Matt. 10:5,6.) The 
Samaritans are thus classed with Gentiles— aliens, 
strangers, foreigners from the commonwealth of Israel. 
We recall their history— that at the time when the king 
of Babylon took the Israelites captive into Babylonia, he 
planted some Gentiles in the land of Israel— immigrants. 
Cut off from their former idolatries, these people 
became interested in their new home country, its 
theology, traditions, religious sentiments, etc. Furthermore, 
some of the careless, ignorant and vicious 
amongst the Jews, disregarding their divine Law on 
the subject, intermarried with the Samaritans. Thus 
an element of Jewish blood was intermingled amongst 
them. They called themselves the children of Jacob, 
and trusted that this meant some special blessing for 
them. 

A sharp religious controversy was thus established 
between them and Jacob's natural progeny, the Jews. 
The latter, following the Law given by Moses, recognized 
Jerusalem and the Temple as the centre of all 
acceptable worship to God. The Samaritans, being 
thus excluded, claimed that they had something better 
—that right in their own country they had the very 
mountain in which Jacob worshiped God, and towards 
this mountain they went or looked in their worship of 
God, esteeming it as a great natural temple and superior 
to anything else on earth. These facts account 
to us for some of the Lord's expressions connected 
with this lesson, and also show us why his message 
excluded the Samaritans, as well as all Gentiles, from 
the call which he was giving, the Kingdom invitation, 
which was exclusively for the Jews. It was not until 
the Jews had as a people neglected their opportunity 
that the special privileges of the Kingdom were taken 
from them and subsequently tendered to such as would 
have an ear to hear in every nation, people, kindred and 
tongue of the earth— including the Samaritans. 

"GIVE ME TO DRINK" 

The road leading to Galilee branched off at Jacob's 
well, and the disciples went to the nearby Samaritan 
village, Sychar, to purchase food, while Jesus rested 
at the well, which was 75 feet deep and whose mouth 
was so walled up as to form a circular seat at its top. 
A Samaritan woman, laboring in the fields nearby, 
came to draw water, and was intensely surprised 
when Jesus asked her the favor of a drink. So 
tightly were the lines of social etiquette drawn that under 



ordinary circumstances no self-respecting Jew 

would ask a Samaritan for any favor, and especially 

for a drink of water. A gift of water or of 

food, extended or received at that time, signified fellowship, 

a covenant of good will. The woman asked 

an explanation of the Lord's peculiar conduct, but he 

gave none. We perceive in the entire Gospel narrative 

the humility of our Lord, that he was quite ready and 

willing to mingle with any class, that he shunned no 

opportunity for doing good to any class, publicans or 

sinners— and that he reproved and rebuked the Scribes 

and Pharisees for their aloofness. One of his parables 

was especially directed towards the self-righteous sentiment 

which feared even to touch garments with the 

outwardly more degraded. Our Lord, without approving 

of the outward degradation, showed that God looketh 

upon the heart, and that some of those highly approved 

amongst men were more abominable in his 

sight than some despised of men. 

TACTFULNESS EXEMPLIFIED 

Our Lord displayed great tactfulness. Instead of 
replying to the woman's query, he attracted her attention 
to a deeper truth. This lesson of tactfulness many 
of the Lord's people need to learn. We know some 
who mistakenly believe that they must use no 
tact— that to do so would be dishonest. Hence, they 
are frequently blunt to the extent of injuring the feelings 

R4130 : page 42 

of others, and hindering their own usefulness. 
Such should note in this lesson, and in many others, 
our Lord's tactfulness. He did not feel that it was 
necessary for him to answer the woman's question. 
On the contrary, he said, "If thou knewest the gift of 
God, and who it is that saith unto thee, Give me to 
drink, thou wouldst have asked of him, and he would 
have given thee living water." (John 4:10.) Similarly, 
let us in all the affairs of life try to turn the attention 
of those with whom we have contact towards the 
heavenly, the spiritual things— not that we should obtrude 
religious matters on every occasion, nor that we 
suppose our Lord would have done so. Quite probably 
he saw something in the way of honesty of character in 
the woman he addressed, else he would not have conversed 
with her. So we should be on the lookout for 
every opportunity to speak a word in season, to be 
helpful to others, to honor the Lord. 

The woman understood the expression "living water" 
to mean fresh water, as distinguished from stagnant 
water. The woman perceived that our Lord was 
not provided with the necessary lowering bucket and 
camel's hair cord, and said, If you had ever so much 



R4131 : page 42 

desire to give me to drink, it would be useless 
for me to ask you, since you have nothing to 
draw with, and the well is deep, and there is nowhere 
else that you can hope to procure better water than 
this. Where would you get it? "Art thou greater than 
our father Jacob, which gave us the well, and drank 
thereof himself, and his children and his cattle?" 
(John 4:12.) Again our Lord tactfully ignored the 
question in the woman's interest— not to deceive her 
or take advantage of her, but for her benefit. He was 
instructing her, and leading her mind up from the natural 
water to the spiritual, and from the natural foundation 
to the spiritual. He said, "Whosoever drinketh 
of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst," 
for that water "shall be in him a well of water springing 
up into everlasting life." (v. 14.) 

That our Lord talked to no ordinary woman is evidenced 
by the quickness with which she grasped his 
presentation, and her earnestness to get the living water 
he had described. She said, "Sir, give me this water, 
that I thirst not, neither come hither to draw." 
(v. 15.) Again we note our Lord's tactfulness. He 
turned the subject. It was necessary that the woman 
should appreciate the fact that she was a sinner and 
under the death sentence and needed water of eternal 
life, which God alone could give, and which he has 
provided only in Jesus, the Fountain. Our Lord turned 
her thoughts inward very quickly by saying, "Go, call 
thy husband." (v. 16.) The answer was, "I have no 
husband" (v. 17), and with that reply came a flood of 
thought, which our Lord riveted upon her by declaring, 
You have well said that you have no husband, for you 
have had five husbands, and he whom you now have is 
not your husband. The woman was now thoroughly 
aroused. She perceived that she was in the presence 
of one who knew her very deepest heart secrets. Yet 
she feared him not. She fled not from him. His kindliness, 
his gentleness, his willingness to talk to a 
Samaritan woman, indicated that she had "found a 
friend, oh, such a friend." Her answer was, "Sir, I perceive 
that thou art a prophet." 

Shrewdly then the woman led the conversation 
away from matters too personal to herself, and too solemn 
and too tender for discussion, and our Lord did 
not follow up the subject, but left it. Many of 
his followers need to learn this lesson of first awakening 
in the hearts of their hearers a consciousness of 
sin, and then leaving it to work for them, at greater 
leisure, sorrow and repentance and reformation. It is 
not for us to break the hearts of those around us, but 
to find those who are broken-hearted. The command 
is, "Bind up the broken-hearted." (Isa. 61:1.) In 
many instances, as in this one, the broken heart needs 
to be touched in connection with the binding-up process, 



in the application of the healing balm of grace 
and truth, but the touches should be gentle. If more 
breaking of the heart is necessary, it is not for us to do. 

SALVATION IS OF THE JEWS 

Not only would the woman escape a discussion of 
her personal character and affairs, but she would embrace 
this opportunity of settling in her own mind, with 
the aid of this one whom she had proven to be a great 
prophet, a question which had long troubled her— were 
the Jews or were the Samaritans right as respected religion 
and worship? Before her was a proven prophet, 
and one in whose words she could have great confidence; 
hence her inquiry, Who are right— our fathers, 
who claim that this mountain is the place of worship, 
or you Jews, who say that Jerusalem is the only place? 
Our Lord was not bent upon making of her a Jewish 
proselyte: the time for that was past; the harvest 
time had come. He would tell her something that 
would be to her advantage, and through her to the 
advantage of others in the near future, when the middle 
wall of partition would be broken down which still 
separated the Jews, in God's favor, from all others. 
His answer, therefore, applied to the Gospel dispensation 
in general, and this was already beginning so far 
as some of the Jews were concerned, and would later 
reach Samaritans and all Gentiles. He said, "Woman, 
believe me, the hour cometh when ye shall neither 
in this mountain nor yet at Jerusalem worship the 
Father."— v. 21. 

That hour began after the Jewish house had been 
left desolate, after the new dispensation had been inaugurated, 
and it still continues. Believers do not 
have to go to a certain place, a certain mountain, a certain 
city, a certain house, but may approach the 
living God, through the great Redeemer, at any 
place and find him. That coming hour had already 
begun, since our Lord himself was the first of 
the Spirit-begotten ones; and his disciples, accepted 
of the Father through him, were taught to 
pray, to seek, to knock, to find. Those who worship 
under this Spirit dispensation will not be accepted 
along the lines of former worship and places— not in 
families, or nationally. Their acceptance will be as 

R4131 : page 43 

individuals, and because they come unto the Father 
through his appointed way, the Redeemer, and come 
"in spirit and in truth: for the Father seeketh such to 
worship him." (v. 23.) During past times he did indeed 
prescribe forms of worship and times and places, 
but now all that come unto the Father "in spirit and in 
truth" through Christ are accepted. 
While it is most absolutely true that forms and ceremonies 



are not commanded, but the true worship of 
the heart, nevertheless we feel that some still maintain 
too much of a relationship to forms and ceremonies, 
and thus lose much of the spiritual blessing of prayer 
and communion. But, on the other hand, we seem to 
see a danger into which some of the Lord's dear people 
fall, through ignoring all regularity in prayer, and 
sometimes through too little formality in approaching 
the throne of heavenly grace, without a sufficiency of 
humility and reverence for him who has granted us so 
great a favor as to receive us into his presence and to 
hearken to our petitions. While thankful that we can 
call upon the Lord in every place and at any time, let 
us approach his courts with reverence, with an awe of 
heart befitting to us in our humble, lowly condition, 
and to him in his great exaltation. Thus we enter into 
the real spirit of prayer, which should recognize our 
complete dependence and the greatness of the 
Almighty. 

"WE KNOW WHAT WE WORSHIP" 

Very pointedly, though we are sure in no rude manner, 
our Lord declared the truth to the woman when he 
said, "Ye worship ye know not what: we know what 
we worship: for salvation is of the Jews." (v. 22.) 
The Samaritans, not being of the stock of Israel, were 
in no sense of the word heirs of the Abrahamic Covenant. 
Not discerning this cardinal truth in its true 
light, they were confused as to every feature of the divine 
plan. The Jews, on the contrary, understood that 
they were the natural seed of Abraham, and that from 
them must come the great Messiah, and that eventually, 
through him and some of their nation associated 
with him, all the families of the earth should receive a 
blessing. Our Lord said, "Salvation is of the Jews." 
He did not say, For the Jews, nor, To the Jews, exclusively. 
It was of them in the sense that the Master 
was of that nation according to the flesh. It was of 
them in the sense that the promises were exclusively 
to that nation, so that Messiah could not have been 
born of any other nation and yet inherit those promises. 
It was of that nation also, in that from them 
our Lord selected the earliest members of his Church, 
his Body, through whom the invitation to membership 
in that Body has during this age been extended to 
every nation, people, kindred and tongue. 

We would not say that the Samaritans were typical 
of a certain class of people here— typical would be too 
strong a word. We would see, however, that as there 
were true Israelites there in the type, and a class of 
people somewhat resembling them, who were not of 
them, so here in Spiritual Israel we find some like the 
Samaritans, who are strangers from the Covenant and 
promises, because not of the same family— not begotten 
again of the holy Spirit. Some of these are estimable 



people, honorable, and with a form of godliness, 
but denying its power. Then amongst the true Israel, 
all begotten of the holy Spirit, all therefore related to 
the Lord and the promises, there are two classes: the 
Little Flock of Israelites indeed, whose love and zeal 
the Lord approves, and a Great Company whose love 
and zeal are not sufficient to gain them the distinguished 
title, "More than Conquerors"— joint-heirs. 

In our conversation on religious subjects with those 
corresponding to the Samaritans, it may not be using 
the wisdom of serpents for us to say, "Ye worship ye 
know not what," even though this be strictly true. 
Nevertheless, to those of this class who give evidence 
of desire to know the Truth, it would be proper for us 
to kindly attempt to show them this matter— to show 
them how different are the hopes and aspirations and 
promises which apply to the consecrated saints of Spiritual 
Israel from anything they have ever known or 
thought. In all of our dealings with the Israelites and 
others, let us remember the Master's words, "Be ye 
wise as serpents and harmless as doves."— Matt. 10:16. 

WHEN MESSIAH COMETH 

The mind of the Samaritan woman swept forward 
in thought. She recalled the expectation of her own 
people and of the Jews that God would provide a great 
Messiah, an Anointed One, who would be all-wise and 
all-powerful to the relief of all perplexity and to lift out 
of all difficulty. She wondered whether the Messiah 
could be more wonderfully wise than the prophet, the 
teacher, to whom she talked. She did not like to ask 
the question direct, but suggested it sidewise, saying, 
"I know that Messias cometh, which is called Christ: 
when he is come, he will tell us all things." (v. 25.) 
Seeing her readiness of mind, our Lord expressed to 

R4132:page43 

her— more plainly, perhaps, than to any other person 
during his ministry— the great fact that he was the 
Messiah: "I that speak unto thee am he." (v. 26.) 
The disciples, returning at this time, marveled 
that he talked with the woman, but had too great respect 
for him to question him; and many since, all 
through the Gospel Age, reading the account, have 
marveled at the Master's humility thus displayed. 
It has brought a good lesson to many of the Lord's followers 
—that they are not to despise opportunities for 
service, for preaching of the Truth, even though they 
have an audience of but one. And indeed the opportunity 
of speaking to one earnest listener should be 
esteemed far greater than that of addressing a thousand 
inattentive ones. Doubtless our Lord saw in this woman 
something that indicated her worthiness of the 
time and energy thus bestowed upon her. 



But from another standpoint, what worthiness 
could she have? what worthiness do any of us possess 
by nature? Fallen and imperfect, the only thing remaining 
that could in any way be pleasing to 
the Lord would seem to be our honesty of heart. 
Honesty this woman evidently had, and hence we believe 

R4132:page44 

she was favored, and many of the Lord's dear 

people have received this message since. Here, too, 

we have another illustration of the importance of using 

every opportunity that may come to us. Time and energy 

spent in the assistance of some worthy one may, 

as in this case, flow out in widening influence to many. 

Eternity alone will show the value of some of the little 

things, the feeble efforts put forth in the name of the 

Lord; and this reminds us that our Lord is judging 

us by our faithfulness in little things and small 

opportunities rather than by our great achievements. 

His own words are, "He that is faithful 

in that which is least is faithful also in much: 

and he that is unjust in that which is least is unjust 

also in much." (Luke 16:10.) Remembering this, let 

us be careful in the little things, little opportunities, 

the hours and the moments, that we may show ourselves 

zealous for the Lord and his cause, and have his 

eventual approval, as well as his present blessing. 

THE MISSIONARY SPIRIT 

The character of this woman is further displayed 
in the fact that, leaving her water-bucket, she hastened 
to the city to tell her friends and neighbors that she 
had found a great teacher, possibly the Messiah, and 
to ask them to come and share the privilege of hearing 
him. The selfish spirit, which would have bidden her 
to keep the information to herself, or the slothful, careless 
spirit, which would have led her to say, I would be 
pleased if my friends might know, but will not bestir 
myself to inform them— either of these would have 
marked the woman as unworthy of the Lord's favor; 
and had such been her disposition, we doubt if the 
Lord would have entered into conversation with her. 
And so it is with those who have been reached with 
Present Truth; they are, as a rule, not only the honest 
and sincere, but the generous, who love to give the good 
things to their neighbors, and who, having heard now 
of the second presence of the Son of man, and the Kingdom 
about to be established, and having come to a 
clearer knowledge than ever before of the truth of the 
Divine Plan— these rejoice to lay down their lives in 
its service— the promulgating of "good tidings of great 
joy, which shall be unto all people." (Luke 2:10.) This 
is the true missionary spirit, and home missions come 
first. 



"COME UNTO ME AND DRINK" 

Our Golden Text is quite in line with the lesson 
intimated— that before anyone can come to 
the Lord he must thirst, he must have an appreciation 
of that which the Lord has to give— the water, the refreshment, 
of eternal life. This means that he must 
learn that he is a sinner, and under sentence of death, 
and that there is no hope for a future life except 
through Christ. The coming to the Lord is the approach 
of faith. Our thirst is our desire. We drink, 
or appropriate to ourselves the divine message. 
"Sanctify them through thy truth: thy Word is truth" 
(John 17: 17)— and water is the symbol of truth. The 
promise of a blessing to those who "hunger and thirst 
after righteousness" is in full accordance with this. 
And the promise is, "They shall be filled." This, too, 
is in harmony with our Lord's statement in our lesson, 
"Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him 
shall never thirst."— v. 14. 

In the present time our thirst is in one sense of the 
word insatiable— we are never satisfied— in the sense 
that the Lord's blessings are so great and so good that 
we can never in the present day and in present conditions 
have enough of them. We shall be satisfied 
thoroughly when we awake in his likeness (Psa. 17:15) 
—when the "change" of the First Resurrection shall 
have completed our transformation as New Creatures 
into our Lord's likeness— "from glory to glory." (2 Cor. 3:18.) 
Nevertheless, there is a measure of satisfaction 
to our drinking, even in the present time— just 
as with a thirsty one at a fountain, he drinks with relish, 
with appreciation, with satisfaction, only to take 
more and more. So with those who are the Lord's. 
He pours into their cup blessings rich and satisfying, 
and fills the cup repeatedly, even while they are in their 
present tabernacle. Let us appreciate more and more 
the Truth, the water of life, and let us see to it that we 
get it pure from the fountain, and that we recognize no 
other fountain than the Lord Jesus, however much 
we may appreciate the channels through which the supply 
may have come to us. 



R4132:page44 

THE REWARDS OF FAITH 

-JOHN 4: 43 -5 4. -FEBRUARY 16.- 

Golden Text:— "The man believed the word that Jesus 
had spoken unto him, and he went his way."— John 4:50. 

AFTER spending two days with the Samaritans 



at Sychar, our Lord proceeded on his journey 
to Galilee. We have already noticed 
that this was contrary to his instructions to his disciples, 
and that the Samaritans, not being Jews, could 
not at that time receive special blessings— not until the 
seventy weeks of divine favor set apart for the Jews 
had been fulfilled, and the door opened to the Gentiles. 
We can imagine, however, that there was some special 
reason why the people of this little city were distinctly 
favored by our Lord, particularly when we remember 
that on another occasion he declined to go into a village 
of Samaria, and the people of that village refused to sell 
the disciples food, and thus incensed James and John 
to the extent of their suggestion to the Master that fire 
be called down from heaven to consume the village and 
its inhabitants. (Luke 9:54.) In Acts 8 and 9:31 we have 
clear indications that the work of grace flourished 
amongst the Samaritans very promptly after the door 
of opportunity swung open to them. No doubt that 
later fruitage developed from the words of grace and 
truth which our Lord dropped on the occasion of the 
visit here referred to. 
Our Lord and his disciples went into Galilee, notwithstanding 

R4132:page45 

the fact that the Lord corroborated the 
proverb that a prophet has no honor in his own country; 
but while he would have less honor there in one 
sense, it was a better field for labor in another sense, 
because the people, while outwardly less religious than 
those of Judea, were really in a better attitude of heart 
to receive the Lord and his truth than those of Judea, 
who were shackled with sectarianism and the burdens 
of the Law imposed by the teachings of the Pharisees. 

Although our Lord's first miracle was performed 
in Galilee, his first reputation was gained in Judea and 
at Jerusalem, and now on his return to his home country, 
he had proportionately more honor than if he had 
remained, for many Galileans, attending the feasts at 
Jerusalem, had been witnesses of his teachings and 
miracles there. Thus he returned again to Cana, the 
scene of his first miracle, with added honors. We remember 
that on the occasion of his first miracle, the 
people said, Is not this Jesus, the carpenter, whose 
kinfolk we know? How, then, is he a prophet, a 
teacher? (Mark 6:2,3.) Now, however, his fame was 
spread abroad, so that a nobleman living at Capernaum, 
twenty-five miles distant, learned of his presence 
at Cana, and made the journey to present a special request 
for the healing of his son, who was at the point 
of death. The word rendered nobleman in this text 
might more literally be rendered king's officer, and the 
supposition of some is that this was Chuza, Herod's 
steward or chamberlain, whose wife, Joanna, was 
one of the women who subsequently ministered to 



Jesus.— Luke 8:3. 

CHUZA'S MANIFESTATION OF FAITH 

The essence of this lesson is faith, and it well illustrates 
degrees and development of faith. Knowledge 
is necessary as a basis for faith, and this Chuza possessed. 
His faith was manifested in his coming to the 
Lord and publicly acknowledging his confidence in the 
Lord's ability to heal his son. We may well consider that 
this indicated a good measure of faith to begin with, but 
our Lord— with no lack of sympathy for a father's interest 
in his dying son, but with a desire to develop 
Chuza's faith— hesitated to go with him, and seemingly 
objected to so doing, saying, "Except ye see signs and 
wonders, ye will not believe." (v. 48.) Had Chuza's 
faith been small, or had he been lacking of humility, 
he might have had opportunity for a manifestation of 

R4133 : page 45 

incredulity and indignation. 

He might have said, I did not believe in you anyway. 
It was merely a haphazard matter, because the 
physicians can do nothing further for my son, and I 
thought that your coming might possibly accomplish 
something. But now, sir, I see your hesitancy, 
and interpret it to mean that you occasionally pick out 
cases where you can effect a healing, where you can 
apparently effect a miraculous cure; but that in the 
general run of diseases, where death is at the door, 
you are as helpless as our physicians. I have at least 
demonstrated the fraudulency of your general claims. 
Adieu. But no; Chuza's attitude of heart was different. 
Our Lord's delay merely increased his urgency. He supplicated, 
and finally said, "Sir," Rabbi, "come down 
ere my child die." Don't, please don't wait to discuss 
a matter of faith if you realize my position as a father 
and my interest in the subject, but do come now, and 
render me the assistance, and discuss the philosophy 
of faith and tell me of my further needs subsequently. 

Our Lord's point had been gained. He had tested 
the nobleman's faith, and had led his mind upward 
from the mere healing operation to something higher, 
to the divine power behind it, and to the fact that our 
Lord's miracles were merely intended to introduce him 
as the Messiah. But the test of faith was not yet finished, 
for our Lord, instead of accompanying Chuza to 
his son's bedside and there performing a cure, merely 
told him, "Go thy way; thy son liveth"— he will not die 
at the present time, he will recover, (v. 50.) The 
word was believed, the importunity ceased, and instead, 
no doubt, gratitude, thankfulness, was expressed. 
It is noted that the miracle took place in the seventh 
hour— 1 p.m. It may be presumed that Chuza came 
the twenty-five miles on horseback that very morning 



in great haste. It is notable, however, that while he 
might have returned the same evening at the same 
speed, that he did not arrive at home until the next day 
—evidently taking the journey leisurely. Meantime, 
his servants met him with the pleasing information 
that his son was out of danger. He inquired particularly 
for the time, and they promptly answered, "Yesterday 
at the seventh hour the fever left him;" so 
Chuza knew that the recovery was the result of our 
Lord's word and power. 

ANOTHER KIND OF FAITH 

We read that Chuza "believed, and his whole 
house." But did he not believe before, when he started 
to see the Master, when he was speaking with him, 
when he accepted his reply and started home? Yes, all 
of those were steps of faith, of belief and obedience in 
harmony therewith, and attesting the same; but when 
he arrived home and realized the miracle, it led to a 
belief in the Lord of a still higher and of a still deeper 
kind. He now believed, not only that Jesus was able 
to work miracles, but that he was indeed the Redeemer, 
the Messiah. His faith at last had reached the heart. 
No doubt it was as a result of this that his wife, Joanna, 
in harmony with his wishes, became one of the 
active supporters of our Lord's ministry. 

What lessons of faith can be learned today along 
the lines of this lesson? We answer that faith today 
has its various gradations or steps. First of all, we 
could have no faith except as some knowledge would 
serve as its foundation. It is written, "Without 
faith it is impossible to please him [God]" (Heb. 1 1:6), 
and only those who please God, who have his approval, 
will have eternal life. Hence, we know that the heathen, 
who have no faith in God because they have no 
knowledge of him, are not accepted, are not justified, 
are not in any sense of the word saved or approved of 
God as worthy of eternal life. This settles at once, to 
all who are guided by the Scriptures, the erroneous 
supposition that the heathen are going to heaven, because 

R4133 : page 46 

of their ignorance. As the Apostle points out, 

"How can they believe in him of whom they have not 

heard?" and how could they hear without some proclamation, 

either oral or printed? and how can the proclamation 

reach them except as God be back of the matter 

and direct it to them, and grant the opening of the 

eyes of their understanding? 

But an elementary knowledge and an elementary 
faith built upon it is not sufficient— faith must grow, 
and before it can grow it must lead to some kind of 
works. Chuza's primary faith led to his journey to our 
Lord, by which he attested his faith. But generally 



there must be a necessity, as in Chuza's case— his son's 
illness. Some might hear of Christ, though they might 
never approach did they not realize the necessity; but 
the same message that tells of Christ points him out 
as a Savior, and implies that all men are sinners. 
Only those who realize that they are sinners, only those 
that desire to escape from sin and death, will be led to 
investigate and approach the Lord, that they may find 
relief from their burden of soul. 

FAITH COMETH BY HEARING-THE MESSAGE OF GOD 

In the first approach of a soul to the Lord it may 
be necessary that the feeling of need should be intensified; 
and hence, although the Lord is very merciful 
and compassionate and forgiving, he permits the penitent 
one to supplicate, and delays his assurances of 
forgiveness until matters seem vital to the one who is 
hungering and thirsting for the divine favor he seeks. 
Then, as in the case of Chuza, the Lord does not do 
something outwardly, miraculously proving to us that 
our prayer has been answered and that we are forgiven, 
but he merely tells us so, saying, "Thy sins be forgiven 
thee!" 

Where the proper faith is, the results will be similar 
to those in the case of Chuza— the penitent one will 
believe, trust, and go his way, thankful and rejoicing. 
Whoever cannot trust has not yet come to the place 
where it is proper for him to have the relief. He must 
first cultivate more faith in the Lord, and to this end 
he may need a larger knowledge of the Lord and his 
goodness. He may need to call to mind the Lord's 
character, that he is very merciful and of tender compassion; 
that while declaring that we are sinners, he 
declares also that he so loved us while we were yet sinners 
as to give our redemption price. (John 3:16.) He 
must consider how graciously the Lord has already 
dealt with many in the forgiveness of their sins, and in 
the granting to them of his holy Spirit, whereby has 
been wrought in them the glorious transformation of 
character, so that the things which they once loved 
they now hate, and the things they once hated they now 
love. With these lessons before the heart, and with 
confidence that the Lord changes not, that he is the 
same yesterday, today and forever, all sincere seekers 
of divine favor have an abundance of foundation for 
faith in their forgiveness and acceptance, and are 
authorized to have "strong consolation."— Heb. 16:18. 

What should be the result of a true faith which after 
various difficulties has reached the degree of justification 
and come to realize the forgiveness of sins, reconciliation 
to the Father, and the merit of the precious 
blood, covering all blemishes, future as well as past? 
As in Chuza's case, his faith bringing him to a condition 
of discipleship— to a position of believing on a 
still higher plane than ever before— so it should be 



with us. A realization of the grace of God in the forgiveness 

of our sins should lead us to that faith in him, 

that confidence in his Word, that acceptance of him as 

the great Teacher, the Messiah, which would believe 

in him to the extent of accepting all of his gracious 

provisions and propositions. This would mean that 

we would turn from the world to become his disciples, 

to lay our little all on the altar of sacrifice, with full 

confidence that he who has begun a good work in us 

is both able and willing to complete it in the day of 

Christ, in the Millennial Age— early in the morning 

of which the Church, the Bride, is to be helped, delivered, 

"changed."-Phil. 1:6; I Cor. 15:51,52. 

We trust that the majority of our readers will be 
able to trace in this lesson their own experiences of 
justification and sanctification. And what further remains? 
We answer that next in order comes the testing 
—a testing of the degree of our consecration, of its 
genuineness, of the sincerity of our consecration. 
This is the Christian's life. The earlier steps of faith 
and justification were merely primary to our standing 
upon this plane of sanctification— begetting of the 
holy Spirit to a new nature. The Lord's special dealing 
during this Gospel Age is with these New Creatures, 
Spirit-begotten— not that they are many as compared 
with the world, or even as compared with those 
that take the first step of faith unto justification. They 
are a Little Flock, to whom it is the Father's good 
pleasure to give the Kingdom— to as many of them as 
prove faithful. (Luke 12:32.) The Apostle declares 
of them, 

"ALL THINGS ARE FOR YOUR SAKES" 
-2 COR. 4:15- 

Everything in the realm of nature and of grace 
must for the time so operate as to be most favorable 
to this class, for the Lord has declared that all things 
shall work together for good for these— "the called according 
to his purpose." (Rom. 8:28.) Whatever cannot 
be overruled for their good must be hindered, must 
be stopped, cannot proceed. Little does the world 
realize the important place in its affairs and interests 
occupied by this Little Flock; indeed the world knoweth 
them not, even as it knew not their Lord (I John 3:1) 
—the world reckons them as a part of the filth and off-scourings 
of all things, knows them as fools for 
Christ's sake. But by and by the veil will be lifted, 
and the whole world shall understand the mysterious 
workings of divine providence, for, as the Apostle declares, 
God, in the ages to come, will "shew the exceeding 
riches of his grace in his kindness toward us 
through Christ Jesus."— Eph. 2:7. 

Whoever has a sufficiency of faith to be accepted 
of the Lord in this class and to be begotten of the holy 
Spirit, will still need to grow in grace, to grow in 



R4134:page47 

knowledge and to grow in faith, but he will find in the 
divine provision everything needful to these ends. 
Hence the Scriptures declare that God is faithful in the 
matter, and that if any of these Spirit-begotten ones shall 
fail to reach the glorious outcome of the call, it will be 
their own fault— because they have neglected or not 
properly used the divine grace in harmony with the divine 
injunction. Let our faith abound, dear brethren, 
and grow stronger and stronger, and to this end let us 
feed upon the heavenly manna provided us, and make 
use of the various opportunities for growth, and be not 
slothful, but fervent in spirit, serving the Lord. 



R4134:page47 

CINCINNATI DEBATES AND CONVENTION 

DEBATES were announced in our last issue, to be 

held in Cincinnati, O., for six consecutive nights, 

beginning Sunday night, Feb. 23, between Mr. 

White of the Christian or Disciple denomination and the 

Editor of this journal, C. T. Russell. At once we began to 

receive letters suggesting that a WATCH TOWER CONVENTION be 

held in Cincinnati at the same time, as quite a number of 

the friends desired to attend the debates anyway. 

Accordingly we have arranged for an eight-day Convention 
—Feb. 23-March 1, inclusive. This will give us two 
Sundays. We anticipate a spiritual feast at the Lord's table 
in company with many of his "little ones." Of course many 
more will be present in spirit than can arrange to be personally 
present; but these, too, will share the general blessing 
of the Lord by reason of their spirit of fellowship. 

MUSIC HALL SECURED 

Our latest information is that Music Hall has been secured 
for the debates. It is Cincinnati's finest auditorium, 
with a seating capacity of 3600. Further announcement of 
the Convention arrangements will appear in our next issue. 
Meantime we remark that the railroads south of Cincinnati 
will give excursions on the Certificate plan if requested. 
When buying ticket at full single fare ask for a certificate 
which will entitle you to a return ticket at one-third of full 
fare when properly endorsed. These rates will be open to 
anybody. Arrangements will be perfected for securing clean 
rooming accommodations at 50 cents to $1 per night each person. 
If you desire us to secure such for you give full particulars 
before Feb. 15th, that the address of your room may be 
mailed to you. Restaurant accommodations in Cincinnati 
are abundant and reasonable. 



NEWSPAPER REPORTS OF THE DEBATES 

One of the Cincinnati newspapers proposes to give stenographic 
reports of the debates. We have arranged to receive 
subscriptions for the period covered by the reports- 
four copies to one address, and later six copies of the entire 
six debates, all for $1.00. Order at once! 

A party of friends will leave Chicago for Cincinnati in 
special car Saturday night, Feb. 22. Any desiring to accompany 
them write Dr. L. W. Jones, 2024 Washington Boul., Chicago. 



R4134:page47 

THE WOMAN'S NATIONAL DAILY 

CONFIDENT that thousands of WATCH TOWER readers 
would be glad to get Brother Russell's sermons 
weekly, at the very cheap clubbing rate of 60c 
per year above the TOWER price, we arranged accordingly. 
As the subscriptions did not come in as rapidly as we had 
expected, we advanced the subscription price for some Tract 
Fund contributors and some on our poor list, in order to 
make good our promise to the National Daily. 

But the National Daily is not publishing the sermons 
as they proposed; hence we are holding subscriptions received 
for it within the last two weeks. We have requested 
that they stop all subscriptions sent in by us and return the 
pro rata amount of money as agreed. They decline to do 
so; but say that they will stop subscriptions and refund 
money on request of the subscribers. We request that all 
who have been receiving the National Daily send postal 
cards requesting that their papers be stopped and their 
money refunded unless Pastor Russell's sermons appear 
weekly: as it was on this understanding that the subscription 
was given. Address cards to Woman's National 
Daily, St. Louis, Mo. 

Those who have sent us their subscriptions are being 
temporarily supplied the sermons otherwise. We suggest, 
however, that those who desire this cheap, clean daily, but 
who are not now receiving it, might also help by writing 
postal cards: saying, that their subscriptions and those of 
their friends are awaiting an assurance that Pastor Russell's 
sermons will appear in their journal every week. 



R4134:page47 

AN INTERESTING LETTER 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I had in mind to write many times, but put it off for 
one reason or another. I can assure you, however, that, 
although my letters are few and far between, I nevertheless 



think of you every day, many times a day— thinking of your 
many kindnesses to me, and the fact you were the means in 
God's hand of leading my wife and me into the light of 
Present Truth, which we still love, we are glad to say, with 
the same fervency as the day we received it. 

The field here seems white unto the harvest, and we 
encounter less prejudice than in the States. In the two 
years and six months of our stay in the colonies my wife 
and I have been privileged to circulate about 20,000 volumes 
of DAWN, and our hearts have been caused to rejoice in 
hearing of some fruit to our labors— some brought to the 
light and knowledge of the Present Truth through the books 
thus scattered. It has given us pleasure to see the work of 
Brother and Sister Henninges so abundantly blessed by the 
Lord in Melbourne. Some of the friends there who have 
become interested have developed into efficient colporteurs. 

Sister S , who has been with us since Christmas, is 

exceptionally so, taking orders for as high as seventy volumes 
in one day. I mention this, because I know it will 
give you pleasure to hear of the zeal and earnestness of 
those who in this part of the world have been brought to a 
knowledge of the Truth. 

Yours in him, S. J. RICHARDSON.-Australia. 



page 49 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXIX FEBRUARY 15 No. 4 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 51 

The Financial Stress World-Wide 51 

Wants Permission to Preach Truth 51 

Scientist Claims He Has Talked With the Dead.. 52 

Doctors Differ— Both are Right 53 

Fragment of Gospel Valueless 54 

Failed to Keep His Appointment 54 

Cincinnati Debates and Convention 54 

He Went About Doing Good 55 

Himself Bare Our Sicknesses 56 

"Give Ye Them to Eat" 57 

Giving Thanks Always for All Things 58 

Discouragements from Error 60 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers 62 

page 50 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 



WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



COLPORTEURS will please address all correspondence re their 
work to the COLPORTEUR DEPT., and be sure to give full 
address and number at the top of each letter or order. 
On their Report Sheets they will please separate the names 
at different P.O.s, writing the name of P.O. very distinctly 
above its list— in colored ink, if convenient. These names 
are used in sending samples of our literature, and inaccuracy 
involves loss of literature, postage and the good that might 
be done. Denominational proclivities of purchasers need not 
be noted on Reports, except when they happen to be learned. 

THE WOMAN'S NATIONAL DAILY, ST. LOUIS, MO., 

proposes to refund subscriptions sent in by us only upon the 
request of the subscribers themselves. We request that all of 
our friends who have been receiving the WOMAN'S DAILY for 
the past month or more write to it at once a post card, saying 
that their chief interest in it was in Pastor Russell's sermons, 
and that if these will not appear regularly hereafter, they will 
please drop your name, returning their subscription money to 
you personally, or through the WATCH TOWER B. & T. Society. 

Those who have subscribed, but have received only a sample 
copy of the DAILY will understand that we have been holding 
their subscriptions pending this decision. Unless otherwise 
directed we will apply their money for some other paper 
which does publish the desired sermons. Such might, however, 
send postals to the WOMAN'S DAILY, saying that they 



had subscribed through us and were disappointed, and must 
now take a paper which does publish the sermons weekly. 



R4134:page51 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
THE FINANCIAL STRESS WORLD-WIDE 



SO intertwined are the finances of the world that 

our recent disturbance from lack of circulating 

currency is affecting all Europe. Precipitated 

by a battle between financial giants, which obliterated 

one party and crippled the other, the panicky sentiment 

spread to every quarter of this land and its waves 

are now causing disturbances afar, whilst New York, 

the original center, has become more calm. That there 

was not sufficient money for the vast business enterprises 

of our land was seen by many financiers, and 

warning signals were given a year in advance. But 

nobody moved to produce the needed extra currency 

(which silver would have supplied had it not been demonetized). 

Unless this new blood (more currency) be 

supplied speedily no rapid recovery need be expected. 

This means further depression along some lines, notwithstanding 

the great prosperity within grasp. 

Much is being said in a partizan spirit, charging 
that the panic was deliberately brought on by the very 
rich, to show their power and to take a stronger hold. 
This is surely erroneous, as the very rich have suffered 
most. The President and Mr. Lawson are also blamed 
unjustly for precipitating the panic by exposing the 
disapproved methods of some financiers. Public distrust 
did extend to railroad bonds and some railroad 
shares and justly; but this would have produced no 
panic had there been sufficient currency (money) for 
the country's needs. Congress and the bankers are responsible, 
though they do not realize it. 

However, from our standpoint we need blame none 
of them. Rather we may say that in divine providence 

R4135 : page 51 

their eyes have been holden as respects the real seat of 
the difficulty— that the panic might come just when it 
did— at the opening of the last seven years of "Gentile 
Times." We advise the Lord's people to do nothing 
to provoke strife, discontent or panic, but that each 
"set his house in order" in financial matters, and with 
hearts full of confidence in the Lord give all the 
more attention to the promulgation of the "harvest" 
message to all who have the hearing ear. And you 



will find these ears increasing in numbers and keenness 
to hear the good tidings which alone can satisfy 
and give peace in time of storm and stress. 

THE POLITICAL EFFECT OF THE PANIC 

Undoubtedly Socialistic ideas will thrive now as 
never before. Indeed the President and several aspirants 
for the office are boldly saying what only Socialists 
would have uttered a few years ago. 

Now is a time for patience and for remembering 
that Socialism cannot do for the world what it desires 
and teaches. Now is the time for remembering that 
God has a plan that is surely working itself out. "In 
your patience possess ye your souls." (Luke 21:19.) 
"Wait ye upon me, saith the Lord, until the day that I 
rise up to the prey: for my determination is to gather 
the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour 
upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce anger: 
for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my 
jealousy. Then will I turn to the people a pure message, 
that they may all call upon the name of the Lord 
to serve him with one consent."— Zeph. 3:8,9. 

WANTS PERMISSION TO PREACH TRUTH 



New York, Feb. 3.— Staunch Church members of 
Bayonne awoke this morning after a night of restlessness 

following a strange sermon by Rev. [we omit 

the name lest the reverend gentleman should feel hurt 

by our comments], pastor of the Church, one of 

the largest in the town. The minister had made the 
statement that he would ask the authorities of his 
Church for "permission to preach the truth for two 
years as an experiment." It apparently followed from 
his statement that during at least a large part of the 
twenty years which the doctor had spent in the ministry 
he had been preaching what he believed was not 
true— in fact, the preacher himself said as much. He 
declared that had he known what he was doing 
when he entered the ministry he would not have gone 
into it.— Press Dispatch. 



We wonder if any other profession contains as 
many foolish men as does the (nominal) Christian ministry. 

R4135 : page 52 

Doubtless there are men in all the professions 
equally dishonest; but they seem to be wiser than 
to thus parade their dishonesty before the public with 
the expectation that it will be appreciated and that 



they will be esteemed ideally honest men— martyrs for 
the truth's sake! No doubt many doctors are connected 
with a popular school of medicine which they believe 
is not the best;— no doubt some let their patients 
die rather than break with their endorsed system, its 
honorable reputation and lucrative returns; but they 
are not so foolish as to tell of their chicanery and expect 
the people to applaud their "honesty." 

But ministers tell us freely that they never did believe 
the Westminster Confession of Faith which they 
confessed and promised to teach. And now this reverend 
gentleman intimates to his congregation that he 
does not believe the Bible and the messages he has 
been giving them for the past twenty years: His great, 
honest soul is tortured until he cries out for liberty to tell 
the truth. 

The Bible assures us that God desires truth in the 
inward parts— in the heart. In our opinion, if the 
Lord had some new revelation to send to the world 
(which we deny) he would not select for his channel 
the man who confesses himself to have been dishonest 
for twenty years in his most public utterances. 

And, pray, what are the bonds by which this truth-loving 
soul is held back from preaching what he believes 
is truth? They evidently are two: (1) Love of 
money, and (2) Love of the esteem of men. He has 
so much loved his salary and his title and "authority 
to preach" that as chains they have held him 
fast to the preaching of what for twenty years he believed 
to be a lie. Now these chains have finally worn 
through a callous surface until they have reached the 
quick, and he squirms and writhes in pain, crying out, 
Let me keep my salary and title while I tell the people 
what a fraud I have been. 

SCIENTIST CLAIMS HE HAS TALKED WITH THE DEAD 



(CABLE DISPATCH TO THE NEW YORK SUN) 

London.— Serious statements by Sir Oliver Lodge 
command respectful attention, even when he abandons 
science for mysticism. It was therefore with something 
like amazement rather than skepticism that a meeting 
of the Psychical Research Society heard the distinguished 
scientist practically affirm that communications 
were received from the dead in secret and exhaustive 
tests recently conducted by certain members of 
that society through spiritualistic mediums, or automatists, 
as Sir Oliver called them. Referring to what 
happened at the seances Sir Oliver said: 

"The most important set of phenomena are those 
of automatic writing and talking, and what do we find? 
We find the late Edmund Gurney, the late Richard 
Hodgson and the late F. W. H. Myers, with others less 



known, constantly purporting to communicate with us, 
with the express purpose of patiently proving their 
identity by giving us cross correspondence between 
different mediums. 

"We also find them answering specific questions in 
a manner characteristic of their known personalities 
and giving evidence of knowledge appropriate to them. 
Not easily or early do we make this admission. In 
spite of long conversations with what purports to be 
the surviving intelligence of these friends and investigators, 
we were by no means convinced of their identity 
by more general conversation, even when it was of 
a friendly and intimate character, such as in ordinary 
case would have been considered amply sufficient for 
identification of friends speaking, say, through the telephone 
or typewriter. 

"We required definite and crucial proof, a proof 
difficult even to imagine as well as difficult to supply. 
The ostensible communicators realize the need of such 
proof as fully as we do and have done their best to satisfy 
the rational demand. Some of us think they succeeded. 
Others are still doubtful. 

"Cross correspondence— that is, the reception of 
part of a message through one medium and part 
through another, neither portion separately being understood 
by either— is good evidence of one intelligence 
dominating both automatists, and if the message is 
characteristic of some particular deceased person and 
is received as such by persons to whom he was not intimately 
known, then it is fair proof of the intellectual 
activity of that person. 

"If, further, we get from him a piece of literary 
criticism which is eminently in his vein, which has not 
occurred to ordinary people, then I say the proof, already 
striking, is tending to become crucial. These 
are the kinds of proof which the society has had communicated 
to it. The phenomenon of automatic writing 
strikes some of us as if it were in the direct line of 
evolutional advance. It seems like the beginning of a 
new human faculty." 

Sir Oliver continued impressively: "I am going to 
assume in fact that our bodies can under certain exceptional 
circumstances be controlled directly or be temporarily 
possessed by another or foreign intelligence 
operating either on the whole or some limited part of 
it. The question lying behind such an hypothesis, 
and justifying or negativing it, is the root question of 
identity, the identity of the control. 

"Some control undoubtedly exists, and it is not the 
normal consciousness of the person owning the body. 
Every one who knows anything about the matter is 
quite certain that this question of identity is a fundamental 
one. The controlling spirit proves its identity 
mainly by reproducing the speech or writing facts which 
belong to his memory, not the automatist's memory." 



Well do the Scriptures declare of our day and people, 
"The wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and 
the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid." 
(Isa. 29: 14.) Here we have a fresh illustration of how 
the things that are naught may and can and do confound 
those who are great and learned. "The secret 
of the Lord is with them that reverence him." Hence 
the Christian of low degree, from the standpoint of 
service, may, through the instructions of the Bible, 
know clearly things that the famous and learned in 
other wisdom cannot know. He knows that the dead 
are actually dead and cannot know or communicate 
anything until made alive by our Redeemer in the 
resurrection morning. He knows, too, that the demons, 

R4136 : page 53 

who personate the dead to deceive, are wholly unreliable, 
and that anyway the Lord's people are forbidden 
to have any communication with them under any 
pretext. 

Thus the Lord keeps his own who trust him and 
follow his instructions. The Scriptures say: "The 
wise are taken in their own craftiness." And so it will 
appear ere long to all; that the world's brightest, wisest 
men in this its wisest epoch will be found to have 
been foolish, in that they trusted to their own wisdom 
and neglected God's Word. We caution all of our 
readers against all occultism— against every revelation 
and manifestation or reputed special communion with 
their dead friends, or even with the Lord or his angel. 
These are fraudulent: attempts to entangle you. 
Look for guidance to the voice behind— the Lord's messages 
through the apostles and prophets. (Isa. 30:21.) 
Expect your guidance as it has been sent all down this 
Gospel Age by the holy Spirit's supervision and 
through the members of Christ— I Cor. 12:11-29. 

DOCTORS DIFFER-BOTH ARE RIGHT 



"The Rev. Dr. Newman Smyth, a member of the 
Yale Corporation, and for twenty-five years pastor of 
the Center Church, New Haven's largest and most conservative 
Congregational Church, electrified his congregation 
yesterday morning by declaring that the age 
of Protestantism is past, that it is no longer needed. 
He said that the churches are all split up and are becoming 
more so every day. They no longer have power 
over the people or the state. He said that the time for 
a new Catholicism is at hand and that the sooner people 
realize it the better."— Waterbury American. 

"At the Second Church yesterday morning the Rev. 



Dr. Davenport preached a second sermon on Protestantism 
and Catholicism, answering the question, "Is 
organized Protestantism to perish?" He took for his 
text Matt. 16: 18, 'And I also say unto thee that thou 
art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church, 
and the gates of Hades shall not prevail against it.' 

"After discussing the bearing of this text on the 
theological controversies of the past, declaring that in 
the Church thus predicted Protestantism was included 
no less than Catholicism, and recounting the struggles 
out of which evolved Protestantism as we know it today, 
Dr. Davenport reached this conclusion: 

'"How is it with the Protestant churches in their 
relation to the life of today? Do they on the whole 
seem weak, inefficient, dying? I see nothing of this 
as I look out upon their hundreds of thousands in all 
the world; with their hundreds of millions of constituents. 
They represent in this land and in other lands 
a vast amount of cultured manhood and womanhood, 
of wealth, of learning, for they are in closest alliance 
with the advanced thought of the time, the founders of 
innumerable colleges and the patrons of great and numerous 
universities from Cambridge and Oxford to 
Harvard and Yale.'"— Waterbury American. 



The two gentlemen quoted above seem to be taking 
opposing views; but in reality they agree. Protestants 
are becoming individual thinkers, instead of class or 
sect thinkers. They are dropping all doctrine and 
merely maintaining "a form of godliness." They maintain 
the form partly as a "fire insurance" and partly as 
a protection against anarchy. Doctrinally, therefore, 
there are fewer and fewer Protestants as the days go 
by. Few know enough about doctrines to protest 
against any of the doctrines of the Church of Rome or 
any other. 

Dr. Smyth is right when he insists that all are becoming 
Catholic— if that word be taken according to its 
broad meaning, signifying general. The term Christian 
has become so general as to include all who live in civilized 
lands and act decently and cooperate with the majority 
along the lines of moral reform— without opposing 
or denouncing false theology or anything that is popular. 
In this sense the Catholic spirit is growing. 

The other man is right in claiming that Protestantism 
is established and prospering; for the Catholic 
spirit we have just described is a Protestant spirit also 
in the sense that, doctrines being ignored, the practices 
of Catholicism today are just such as Protestants 
specially cried out for four centuries ago. The 
protest of the past was doctrinal on the part of some, 
but to the masses it never meant more than liberty of 
conscience and freedom from persecution. Thus whilst 
Protestantism has failed doctrinally it has succeeded 



as respects human liberty. 

True, there are many Catholics and Protestants 
who have the old Catholic spirit— a desire to stifle conscience 
and to persecute dissenters— but they are in 
the minority; the civilized world protests against that. 

However, according to our understanding of the 
Bible, it will not be long until the Catholic spirit of coercion 
and persecution will again dominate Christendom; 
with the awful result of provoking the anarchy with 
which this age will close and the new age be 
introduced. 

THE HIPPOPOTAMUS TOOTH 



IOWA DISCOVERY MERELY CONFIRMATORY OF SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES, VOLUME VI., CHAPTER I. 

"In recent newspapers there is a news item, to 
which considerable display is given, concerning 
the finding of the fossil tooth of a hippopotamus in 
Iowa. The item goes on to say that the finding of the 
tooth, coupled with the former finding of skeletons of 
elephants in that state, gives the first evidence of the 
existence of a tropical climate in North America in the 
period immediately preceding the present geological 
age of the world. 

"Allow me to suggest as modestly as possible that 
the professors are again, as usual, wrong. The evidence 
is unvarying that the climate of the earth in the 
period immediately prior to the present one was universally 
mild, and that in every zone of latitude there 
were no frosts, no rainstorms, no winter, and no torridity 
of heat. At the mouth of the Mackenzie river in 
Alaska, where now the temperature falls to 109 degrees 
below zero (F.), there was found the trunk of a cinnamon 
palm, a tree that can endure no frost. This trunk 
was rooted in the soil out of which it grew; it was 
killed by the change of climate which suddenly swept 

R4136 : page 54 

over the earth in the month of November, about 2548 
B.C., when the collapse of the ancient protecting canopy 
of water surrounding the earth first permitted the 
cold of space to reach its surface. 

"In 1884 Tolle and Bunge examined some animal remains 
on Liakoff island in the Arctic and there found 
that the remains of an incredible quantity of so-called 
tropical animals were heaped together in such a manner 
as to indicate that this island, equal in area to the 
state of Illinois, was composed in equal parts of their 
bones and of the ice and sand in which they were 
imbedded. 

"Beneath the clay, sand and carbonaceous mud, 



which our geologists take to be drift from the glaciers 

which never existed except in the imagination, there 

lies all over the world alike the remains of the lost climate 

of the golden age, when, in common with other 

creatures, human beings attained an enormous age. 

In Louisiana are found in rock-cut caves human skeletons 

(of the white race) which from the flattening of 

the tibia and the femora, and from the variation of the 

grinding surfaces of their teeth, must have attained 

the age of 1,000 years approximately."— W. V. Cooling 

in Chicago Inter-Ocean. 

HIGHER CRITICISM INFIDELITY IN NORWAY 



The Lutheran Church in Norway finds herself 
obliged to make front against the influence of "The 
New Theology." The "Lutheran Kirketid" made 
known in October of last year an appeal for the founding 
of a theological Church faculty that would stand 
fully on the foundation of the Word of God and the 
Lutheran Confession. By the term Church faculty we 
are to understand a seminary for ministers. In the appeal, 
together with other things, is said: "The time is 
urgent. A new spiritual stream presses with ever-increasing 
strength and self-consciousness and grasps 
the foundation truths of Christianity— not alone the 
Church doctrines, but it also menaces the Christian life 
at the roots, respecting both present and future. In such 
times there rests on our churches a peculiar responsibility. 
Therefore we must most decidedly come to the 
support of this movement, which seems to us fully justified, 
and this by money contributions as well as by 
encouraging the youth to whom the call of service in 
the Church appeals. To the extent of our ability we 
must stimulate and support them." The appeal was 
signed by 276 men, among them sixty-five ministers. 

FRAGMENT OF GOSPEL VALUELESS 



As "news" and to fill space, newspapers are publishing 
lengthy accounts of "a fragment of a Gospel found 
in Egypt." It is of no value, being of unknown authorship, 
and in style quite different from our Lord's 
authenticated words, and out of harmony with the 
Truth in general. 

FAILED TO KEEP HIS APPOINTMENT 



The friends who went to Elkhart, Ind., to attend 
the debates and were disappointed have our sympathy. 



A week before the date Dr. Dillon wrote that he could 
not keep his appointment because of a "quarterly meeting" 
at that time, of which he probably had forgotten 
when he suggested the date for our acceptance. Or 
possibly its importance seemed greater later on, as he 
thought of the questions for debate. We wrote and 
also telegraphed to him, urging matters, because the 
announcement had gone forth, but we received no reply. 



R4137 : page 54 

CINCINNATI DEBATES AND CONVENTION 

INTEREST grows in the Cincinnati Convention and the 
Debates between the Editor of ZION'S WATCH TOWER 
and Elder L. S. White, representing the Christian denomination 
(Radical branch). The prospects now are that 
there will be a good representation of the brethren and sisters 
from every direction. Pittsburgh friends will have special 
cars on the Pennsylvania R.R. 9 a.m. and 10 p.m. Feb. 
22. The Chicago* friends have made special arrangements 
for a large party over the Monon Route and C.H.& D. 
R.R., leaving Chicago February 22, 11 p.m. Nearby friends 
or those en route will be welcomed with either excursion 
party. 

"Music Hall," Elm St., cor. 14th, Cincinnati, is one of the 
finest auditoriums in the world. It has been secured for eight 
days— Feb. 23 to Mar. 1, inclusive, except Friday afternoon and 
Saturday evening. The Debates will of course have full 
control of the hall for their six evenings— the Christian denomination 
people having equal rights with us— but during 
the remainder of the time our Society will have full possession 
for Convention purposes. 

Ministers of various denominations and attorneys have 
consented to act as chairmen of the Debate sessions. Various 
speakers will address the Convention, Brother Russell 
being on the program for both Sundays, as well as in the 
Debates. Those who cannot personally be present will have 
the privilege of remembering us all at the throne of grace, 
and we feel sure will do so. Full reports of the Debates 
have been arranged for by one of the principal papers of 
the United States. Many orders are being received on terms 
mentioned in our last issue— $1 subscriptions, representing 
several complete reports of all the Debates. We will publish 
no reports of our own, believing that the public will be 
better satisfied as to the fairness and truthfulness of a newspaper's 
stenographic report than with a specially edited report 
from interested parties. 

RAILROAD EXCURSION RATES 

The South-Eastern R.R. Association has granted excursion 
rates on Certificate plan. You pay full fare going and 
get a certificate, which, when properly signed at the Convention, 



secures you a return ticket at one-third of full fare. 

Any party of ten can secure a concessional rate, except 
where the regular fare is already reduced to 2c per mile. 
The party fare from Pittsburg will be $6.25 each way. 

Friends from considerable distances are reminded of the 
mileage books, which now are not usually restricted to the 



*Address, Dr. L. W. Jones, 2024 Washington Blvd., Chicago. 

R4137 : page 55 

use of one person. On roads charging 3c per mile quite a 
saving can be effected by the purchase of the 1,000 mile 
books. 

ACCOMMODATIONS AT CINCINNATI 

We have effected very favorable terms with two fine 
hotels— $1.50 and $2.00 per day (and upward, of course). 
And we have secured clean lodgings in private homes at 50c 
per night— two in a bed. Restaurants are numerous, and 
their terms various. However, it would be unwise to reckon 
expenses less than $1.60 per day. Notify us at once of your 
desires. 

"GOD SPEED THE TRUTH!" 

Come praying, "God speed the Truth," and as free as 
possible from a sectarian spirit of envy, hatred, strife, prejudice. 
See that the love of God is shed abroad in your heart 
and shines in your face. 



R4137 : page 55 

HE WENT ABOUT DOING GOOD 

-JOHN 5:l-9.-FEBRUARY 23- 

Golden Text:— "Himself took our infirmities, 
and bare our sicknesses."— Matt. 8:17. 

THE records show that our Lord during his ministry 

wrought thirty-six miracles, separately described, 

and beside these many others not individually reported, 

but in groups. The Apostle Peter testifies of 

this, that he "went about doing good." (Acts 10:38.) 

Some, however, gain the erroneous view that our 

Lord's chief work amongst men was to heal their sicknesses. 

Many who hold this view argue that the chief 

work of the Church, as his footstep followers, should 

be the healing of diseases through prayer, etc. This 

is a serious mistake and betokens a thorough misunderstanding 



of the Divine Plan of the Ages. Our Lord's 
mission was primarily to make the great sacrifice 
for sin, which was the redemption price, and to 
secure ultimately the release of mankind from the sentence 
of original sin. As an incidental feature connected 
with the world's salvation through his sacrifice, 
he preached the good tidings and called for followers 
to walk in his steps and to be joint-sacrificers with 
him, and thus ultimately to be joint-heirs with him in the 
work of distributing the blessings and favor of God, 
secured through his death. The miracles of healing 
which our Lord performed were incidental to his preaching 
—as a means of convincing those whom he would 
invite that he was indeed the Son of God, the Messenger 
of the Covenant, the Messiah, that they might hear 
his message, believe it, and become his followers. 
Did he heal all the sick? Did he cast out demons 
from all who were possessed? Did he awaken all the 
dead? Assuredly not. He merely gave illustrations 
of the divine power which he possessed, and which he 
declared would be manifested more fully, more completely, 
later on— at his second coming. Hearken to 
his words: "Marvel not at this; for the hour is coming 
in the which all that are in their graves shall hear 
his [the Son of man's] voice, and shall come forth." 
Again it is written respecting our Lord's miracles: 
"This beginning of miracles did Jesus. ..and manifested 
forth [in advance] his glory"— the glory and 
power which he will possess and exercise to the full in 
the time appointed of the Father. (John5:28; 2:11.) 
Of that future time, when the earth shall be filled with 
the glory of the Lord, St. Peter speaks, saying, "Times 
of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord 
[Jehovah]; and he shall send Jesus Christ, which before 
was preached unto you: whom the heavens must 
receive [retain] until the times of restitution of all 
things which God hath spoken by the mouth of all 
his holy prophets since the world began."— 
Acts 3:19-21. 

A GREAT MULTITUDE OF IMPOTENT FOLK 

These suggestions are amply confirmed by the records 
of our present lesson. Jesus had returned to 
Jerusalem on a festival occasion, when, by reason of 
the multitudes gathered from every part, the Jewish 
leaders who sought his life would think it unwise to 
make any demonstration against him for fear of a riotous 
disturbance. Near the city was a pool of water 
possessed of certain peculiarities, and bathing in this 
was reputed to be curative for some ailments. Our 
common version declares that an angel troubled the 
waters at certain times, and that it was immediately 
thereafter that the sick bathed to advantage. This portion, 
however, is not accurate, is not found in the oldest 
manuscripts, and is appropriately omitted from 



the Revised Version. It is presumed that the spring 
which supplied the pool was connected with a reservoir 
of gas, which really imparted to the water some 
curative property. Or possibly it was connected with 
a siphoning spring which overflowed at times. And the 
mental impressions upon the bather may have been helpful 
in many cases. At all events, the record is clear 
that a great multitude of impotent folk crowded the 
five porches of this pool. Their infirmities are indicated 
to have been something akin to rheumatism, 
paralysis and other muscular or nervous ailments, 
causing lack of vital power, withering or wasting of the 
muscles. 

It is worthy of note that our Lord did not hunt up 
and cure all the diseased of Palestine, and that even 
when he came across them in his journeyings, as in 
this case, he made no effort to heal all of them. He 
singled out one individual who had in vain waited for 
an opportunity to test the virtue of the pool, and who 
had been ailing for thirty-eight years. Of him alone 
he inquired, "Wilt thou be made whole?"— Is it your 
desire to be healed? The answer was that he had the 
desire, but had not the ability to take the further steps, 
nor had he assistance. By these words the Lord awakened 
in the mind of the poor man desires, aspirations, 
which had almost died out. He was almost heartsick 
from deferred hope. Here was a stranger manifesting 
some interest in his case— a thoroughly new experience. 
We can imagine the brightening of his eyes, the 

R4137 : page 56 

general alertness in connection with his conversation. 
Thus he was prepared for our Lord's words, "Rise, 
take up thy bed and walk." Immediately he realized 
in his muscles and nerves the surging of strength and 
vitality, and forthwith, almost mechanically, he obeyed 
and went his way— too much dazed, astounded, to think 
of inquiring the name of his benefactor, or to offer 
him his thanks. 

We may be inclined to think of his cure as accidental 
—to suppose that he was thus blessed merely 
because our Lord happened to pass that way and happened 
to see him and happened to take compassion 
upon him. Or we might surmise an arbitrary election 
in his case. However, we may assume that a still 
more reasonable view presents itself, viz., that this man 
in his affliction had been led to a repentance of sin and 
to a desire for harmony with God, and that as a consequence 
of this attitude of his heart he was specially 
favored of God. As corroborating this view, we find it 
recorded that, shortly after, Jesus found him in the 
Temple, praying, thanking God for his recovery— 

R4138 : page 56 



probably also offering a gift to the Lord as an evidence 
of his confession and devotion and thankfulness. 

"GO AND SIN NO MORE" 

We do well to take note of the broad kindness and 
generosity of the Master, as exemplified in this case. 
He did not first discuss the man's sins and inquire respecting 
his repentance and his turning over of a new 
leaf. He did not give him the blessing of healing on 
condition that he would become a servant of God. 
He healed him and permitted him to go his way, 
to take his own course. It was when he had gone 
voluntarily to the Temple to prayer or to sacrifice, 
that the Lord came to him, and without chiding 
for the past, counselled him for the future, saying, 
"Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee." (v. 14). 
Would that all of those who are "followers of the 
Lamb" might learn of the great Teacher how to forgive 
nobly, with generosity, and when and how to inculcate 
lessons of reform and admonition for the future. 

"HIMSELF TOOK OUR INFIRMITIES" 

In these words, the prophet foretold a part of our 
Lord's mission. We believe that we are justified in 
supposing that all of our Lord's miracles caused him 
a measure of self-sacrifice, loss of vitality— that he 
thus daily, little by little, laid down his life. We could 
suppose divine power granted to him in such measure 
that by the mere speaking of the word, at no cost 
to himself, any miracle could have been performed; 
but our Lord came not into the world merely to exhibit 
the divine power amongst men, it was also a part of 
his mission to taste of human sorrows, to learn to sympathize 
with the afflicted, and to lay down his life on 
man's behalf. Our supposition is well borne out by 
the above prophecy— that he would bear our infirmities. 
(Matt. 8:17; Isa. 53:4.) Additionally, it is confirmed 
by St. Luke's statement that "Virtue [vitality, 
strength] went out of him and healed them all."— 
Luke 6: 19. 

Our Lord's miracles are much more precious to us 
from this standpoint than from any other. The gift 
which costs nothing cannot be so highly esteemed as 
that which costs much; and since life is our most valuable 
possession, the giving of it in any sense of the 
word is the giving of the greatest of gifts. That the 
three and a half years of our Lord's ministry did impoverish 
his strength is abundantly testified to: for 
instance, when at Jacob's well he was wearied, but his 
disciples were not; and again at the close of his ministry, 
on the way to Calvary, when he was unable to bear 
his own cross, while the two thieves apparently were able 
to bear theirs. (John 4:6; Luke 23:26.) His weakness 
was not the result of inherited blemish or sin, nor the 



weakness of imperfection, but of sacrifice. From the 
beginning of his ministry he kept pouring out his life 
in the interest of those who had an ear to hear, and 
taking upon himself of the infirmities, the weaknesses, 
of those he healed. 

HIMSELF BARE OUR SICKNESSES 

We do not know that our Lord was sick with any 
of the ordinary maladies. His perfect organism would 
apparently be proof against the intrusions of special 
diseases. Rather it would appear that his healing of 
diseases merely exhausted his vitality, and thus left 
upon him the weight of our sicknesses. All of the 
sick, the afflicted of the Lord's followers, can look up 
to him with a realization of his sympathy, for it is 
written, "In all their affliction he was afflicted." (Isa. 63:9.) 
"Surely he hath borne our griefs and carried 
our sorrows"; but we are not to receive the mistaken 
view entertained by some that our Lord bore the sicknesses 
of all those who would ever be his disciples, so 
that it would never be necessary for them to be sick or 
feel any pain. Quite to the contrary of this, the sicknesses 
which our Lord bore were those of the world, 
and not those of his special friends and disciples. We 
have no record that he healed any of his followers. 
The lesson therefore is to the contrary, that as he bore 
the infirmities and cares and griefs of others, his followers 
are to emulate his example and his Spirit, and 
from similar motives of generosity and kindness are 
to be burden-bearers, helpers, self-sacrificers. As the 
Apostle suggests, "We ought [also] to lay down our 
lives for the brethren."— I John 3:16. 

The Scriptures clearly show that, so far from the 
followers of Christ being exempted from persecution, 
affliction, sorrows, trials, difficulties, they are to know 
indeed that the Father "scourgeth every son whom he 
receiveth." (Heb. 12:6.) We are to understand that 
as it was expedient that the Master should pass through 
such experiences of self-denial and self-sacrifice, it is 
expedient also that all who would be acceptable to God 
as members of the Bride should be similarly touched 
with a feeling of the world's infirmities, and have 
sufficient sympathy to voluntarily bear some of the 
sorrows and griefs of those about them. (Heb. 4:15.) 
Thus it is written, "If we suffer, we shall also reign 
with him." (2 Tim. 2:12.) Those who anticipate that 
the followers of the Lamb are to be borne to Paradise 

R4138 : page 57 

on flowery beds of ease, and not a wave of trouble roll 
across their peaceful breasts, are surely mistaken. 
Generally they have not read aright the Master's description 
of the experiences of those who would be his 
footstep followers, who are enjoined to take up their 



cross and follow him.— Mark 10:21. 

SPIRITUAL INFIRMITIES AND SICKNESSES 

But while we may properly enough apply the prophetic 
testimony to the infirmities and sicknesses of 
those whom Jesus healed at his first advent, we should 
not think of these as having the full import of the prophecy, 
but rather indeed as a small part thereof. What 
were all the sicknesses and infirmities that Jesus 
healed at his first advent in comparison to all the sicknesses 
of the twenty thousand millions of the world's 
population? What was the awakening of the three 
from the dead in comparison to that of the mighty host 
which shall be brought forth from the prison-house of 
death, the grave? Surely there is a deeper, a wider 
significance to this prophecy. The infirmities and 
sicknesses of the whole world are part and parcel of 
the penalty of original sin. That penalty is death, and 
it rests upon the whole human family; and the infirmities 
with which we are born and the sicknesses acquired 
are merely so much of death working in our race. Our 
Lord bore all of this for the whole world in the sense 
that he by the grace of God tasted death for every 
man. (Heb. 2:9.) As the Apostle Paul explains, 
death passed upon our race as the result of sin; and 
hence, all being sinners, all have infirmities, sicknesses 
and dying conditions.— Rom. 5:12. 

It is when we get this broad Scriptural view of the 
Divine Plan of the Ages that we find satisfaction for 
head and for heart, and a harmony which touches and 
explains every feature of the divine revelation. 
Through the first Adam sin, condemnation, was precipitated 
upon the entire human family— and his bride, 
mother Eve, was a participant with him in the entire 
matter. So in due time God provided Jesus, the Redeemer, 
who paid Adam's penalty with the sacrifice of 
his own life. He in consequence was highly exalted 
to be a Prince and a Savior, a King and Restorer, a 
Priest upon his throne, to grant forgiveness and uplifting 
influences to Adam and all involved through him. 
And now, preparatory to that general blessing of the 
world in harmony with the divine plan, a Bride for 
Christ is being selected from amongst mankind; but 
before she can share with her Lord the glories of the 
spiritual plane, the divine nature— glory, honor and 
immortality— she must be tested, and the test is that 
she must manifest the same spirit that actuated, that 
controlled her Lord, the Redeemer. For this reason 
it is that her call is during this present evil age- 
that the trials, the difficulties, the sorrows, the pains 
attendant upon sin shall serve to test her loyalty to 
righteousness and her spirit of devotion and of love. 
Under her Redeemer's guidance she is being taught 
the necessary lessons to fit and prepare her for the glorious 
joint-heirship. Yet nothing connected with her 



call is compulsory— and hence, many have been called 

in comparison with the few that will be chosen. Therefore, 

all who would make their calling and election 

sure must be faithful in following in the footsteps of 

the Redeemer, heeding carefully his counsel, and availing 

themselves of his assistances by the way.— Matt. 22:14; 

2 Pet. 1:10. 



R4138 : page 57 

"GIVE YE THEM TO EAT" 

-JOHN6:l-21.-MARCH 1- 

Golden Text:— "He shall feed his 
flock like a shepherd."— Isa. 40:11. 

THE incidents of this lesson are accredited to the 
early part of the third year of our Lord's ministry, 
in the spring, nearing the time of the Passover. 
John the Baptist had been in the prison at Macherus 
for about a year and had just been beheaded 
by King Herod. The ministry of John, followed by the 
ministry of Jesus, had greatly awakened the Jewish 
mind on the subject of the imminence of the Kingdom 
of Messiah. The imprisonment of John had more or 
less surprised and stunned the people. John himself, 
after being imprisoned nearly a year, had sent some of 
his disciples to inquire whether or not Jesus was the 
Messiah, whether or not he was merely the forerunner 
of some greater one. This was the truth: Jesus in 
the flesh, the Lamb of God to take away the sin of the 
world, was merely the forerunner of the heavenly Lord, 

R4139 : page 57 

who, after gathering from amongst mankind his Elect 
Bride, will come in power and great glory and assume 
the reins of the world's government for their blessing 
and uplifting out of sin-and-death conditions. But 
Jesus did not enter into an explanation of these things, 
because they were not meat in due season then. He 
contented himself with sending the message that the 
sick were being healed, the devils were being cast out. 
The good message of the Gospel was being freely 
preached— all that could then be done, all that was 
possible to do up to the time of the finishing of the 
sacrifice at Calvary and its acceptance on the part of 
Jehovah when our Lord ascended up on high to appear 
in the presence of God on behalf of believers— to make 
atonement for their sins, to effect a reconciliation for 
them with the Father, and to secure for them the begetting 
of the holy Spirit, which began at Pentecost. 
Subsequently the beheading of John the Baptist 



spread a measure of consternation amongst those who 
had appreciated his ministries, including those who 
recognized the Lord as the Messiah. The religious 
sentiment of the most religious people was greatly 
shocked, and considerable excitement prevailed. What 
might not Herod do next? Would our Lord be safe? 
Would his apostles, those who trusted in him to save? 
The matter aroused greater interest and drew larger 

R4139 : page 58 

crowds to the preaching of Jesus, for, according to the 

Jewish custom, hundreds of thousands were en route 

to the usual Passover festival at Jerusalem. Business 

was practically suspended by a considerable proportion 

of the population, and as some departed others were 

coming, and thus our Lord and his apostles were 

kept for a time extremely busy. It should be remembered, 

too, that during the year of John's imprisonment our Lord 

sent forth his disciples and afterward the seventy 

also, two by two, into various cities of Judea and Galilee, 

and that they preached repentance and the 

Kingdom of heaven at hand, and incidentally referred 

to their Master Jesus as the Messiah. No wonder, 

then, that hundreds hung upon the Master's words 

and queried respecting his Messiahship, Is this indeed 

the very Christ, the true Messiah? 

DEPARTED INTO A DESERT PLACE 

It was under these circumstances that our Lord 
with his disciples withdrew in their boat to a desert 
place across a portion of the Lake of Galilee. They 
went not to a sandy desert, but to a desert part of the 
coast, away from the cities and from the large multitude 
which had gathered. They landed near Bethsaida, 
the home of Philip, one of the disciples, at the north 
end of the Lake. Some of the multitude were so deeply 
interested that, noting the direction in which the 
boat was steered, they traveled afoot, a considerable 
distance, to the same place. Other multitudes coming 
along the road towards Jerusalem heard also of the 
presence of the great Teacher in that vicinity and tarried. 
Presumably our Lord discoursed to them on various 
topics not recorded. The point of our lesson, the 
incidents upon which our lesson is based, occurred toward 
nightfall. The people evidently were so engrossed 
in what they heard that they were forgetful of their 
own physical necessities, and our Lord was also apparently 
neglectful in that he continued to preach to them 
until the disciples, realizing the situation, suggested 
telling the people that he would talk to them no more, 
that it was time for him to move on to the next village, 
Bethsaida, for refreshment. Apparently the people 
supplied their simple wants from village to village 
instead of carrying provisions with them. 



"WHENCE SHALL WE BUY BREAD?" 

We note our Lord's wise method of instruction. 
He stimulated thought. Instead of sending the multitude 
away he proposed to Philip, whose home town 
was nearest and who therefore would be supposed to 
be best acquainted with the vicinity, that out of their 
common funds they would do well to purchase a free 
luncheon for the multitude, and inquired where the 
purchase could best be made. Philip was very matter-of-fact, 
and evidently had a good business head, 
replying at once, "Two hundred pennyworth [thirty-two 
dollars' worth] of bread is not sufficient for them, that 
every one of them may take a little." His suggestion 
was that this would be a considerable sum for them to 
spend, and that less would do no good. The apostles 
all joined in this sentiment, according to Luke's account, 
saying, "Send the multitudes away, that they 
may go into the towns and country round about and 
lodge, and get victuals." Pressing the point a little 
closer Jesus said, They need not go away; give ye 
them to eat. To this the apostles remonstrated according 
to Mark, "Shall we go and buy two hundred 
pennyworth of bread and give them to eat?" Is this 
what you wish us to do? We are ready to do it if you 
tell us plainly. Jesus replied, according to Mark, 
"How many loaves have you? Go and see." Andrew, 
returning from investigating and speaking for all said, 
"We have found a lad here who has five barley loaves 
and two fishes, but what are these among so many?" 
The loaves of that country and time were about the 
size of a small flat pie and very similar in shape, and the 
kind of fish described by the Greek word used implied 
very small fish like herring. 

Jesus directed that these supplies be brought to 
him, and probably they were purchased from the boy. 
The process of questioning had the effect of stimulating 
the minds of the disciples, so that by this time, 
when Jesus said, Cause the multitude to sit down in 
ranks or rows, in groups of fifties and hundreds upon 
the grassy slopes, the disciples were ready to obey, 
even though they could not as yet comprehend fully 
the purpose of the command; and the confidence of 
the people in Jesus and his apostles is clearly manifested 
in the fact that at the late hour they were willing 
thus to be directed. They had confidence in the Lord 
up to the point of credulity, and their faith had its 
reward. 

GIVING THANKS ALWAYS FOR ALL THINGS 

First of all our Lord gave thanks, lifting up his 
eyes to heaven. What a lesson he thus set for his disciples 
and for the multitudes and for all since who regard 
him as the Sent of God. If the Master himself 



thus acknowledged that every good and perfect gift 
cometh down from the Father of Lights, how much 
more should all we, who by nature were children of 
wrath but have been reconciled through the precious 
blood— how much more should we remember the message, 
"In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he will 
direct thy paths." (Prov. 3:6.) Our blessing of the 
bread does not indeed increase its quantity, its bulk, 
but surely it does increase its value, its efficiency. The 
peace, the rest, the contentment which comes from a 
proper acknowledgment of divine mercy is of itself a 
good preparation for our nerves and all our energies 
as we partake of food. Proportionately the thankful 
Christian should be less troubled with nervous dyspepsia 
than are others of the same physical and nervous 
temperament. Besides this we advise that the Lord's 
consecrated little ones everywhere, so far as conditions 
will permit, should follow the custom of the Bible 
House family, and break together the spiritual manna 
and feast thereon at the same time that they partake 
of the earthly food. 

The Lord's blessing was followed by the breaking 
of the barley loaves and fishes and the distribution of the 
same to the twelve apostles, who in turn delivered them 
to the multitude, probably through chosen representatives 

R4139 : page 59 

of each company of fifty and a hundred. Thus 

the distribution was quickly accomplished and a bountiful 

luncheon enjoyed. But the lesson did not end 

there, for our Lord instructed the apostles to take their 

handbags or baskets and gather the fragments, that 

nothing be wasted, and a sufficient supply was found 

to fill the twelve baskets. The miracle astonished all 

and especially impressed, we may be sure, the apostles. 

It is not for us to explain the miracle, though miracle 

it would still be even if we were able to explain it. It 

is for us to recognize that God is the Giver of every 

good and perfect gift, and that miracles are in operation 

about us every day: the seed germinates and 

grows, we know not how; but seed sowing and harvesting 

are intimately associated, and we can trace the results, 

but the process by which the five loaves and two 

fishes were so increased in bulk we cannot trace; hence 

we speak of this as a miracle— that is, an operation of 

divine power beyond our comprehension more than are 

the average affairs of life. It is well for us to note how 

little we know at best, and how many miracles are 

happening about us all the time. We can analyze a 

grain of wheat and could construct something very 

closely corresponding, but we could give it no life, no 

germ, no power to produce. We see the corn and the 

oats and realize that they are valuable for food for 

man and for beast, but it is beyond our power to comprehend 

their transformation into human flesh and 



form, as well as into the flesh and form of swine 
and cattle of all kinds with their various peculiarities 
of skin, hair, feathers, hoofs, horns, etc. These are 
miracles, too, but so common that we overlook them. 

THE LESSON OF SUPERNATURAL POWER 

A lesson which undoubtedly came to the disciples 
and to the multitude in connection with the miracle we 
are considering was that Christ had superhuman powers 
which attested him as Messiah, the Sent of God, 
for "no man can do these miracles which thou doest 
except God be with him." Again, it was, especially to 
the apostles, a lesson of the Lord's ability to care for 
them as his followers, under all circumstances, under 
all conditions, and this lesson continues with all of his 
followers since. Our Master is still able both in temporal 
and in spiritual matters to do for us exceedingly 
abundantly more than we could ask or think— "No 
good thing will he withhold from those that walk uprightly," 
from those who are his true followers. Their 
best interests will be preserved and conserved. We may 
safely take from this matter a lesson in faith— "Greater 

R4140 : page 59 

is he that is on our part than all they that be against 

us." As the apostles learned this lesson, the very fear 

of Herod and what he might do to Jesus or to them 

gave way, and they were ready by nightfall at the command 

of our Lord to return again to the vicinity of 

Capernaum. Jesus himself appears to have retired for 

secret communion with the Father. He sent the disciples 

before, not only as a test of their obedience, but 

also that he might give them a still further demonstration 

of the divine power which attended him. The sea 

was boisterous; they were delayed in reaching port, 

and were rowing— presumably because of contrary 

winds— when behold Jesus approached the ship walking 

upon the waters. He quieted their fears by the 

declaration, "It is I, be not afraid." They received him 

into the ship and immediately they were at land. 

Was there a picture in this experience? Did it represent 
the boisterous and troubled experience of the 
Church throughout this Gospel Age? Did it represent 
that at the end of the age, in the midst of a great 
storm, the Lord would appear to his people, and that 
upon being received by them their outward troubles 
and difficulties would completely vanish, only by reason 
of their fellowship with him and the grace and 
peace which he would give through his message, "Be 
not afraid"? 

NOT A MISSIONARY LESSON 

The committee arranging these International lessons 



designed and requested that this lesson should be 
used as a missionary lesson to the intent that the 
cause of foreign missions might be brought prominently 
to the attention of the Lord's people everywhere. 
We are glad of this; we have great sympathy with 
every sentiment and effort looking toward the uplift of 
mankind out of degradation and sin into the light and 
the truth, and thus into harmony with God. 

Many have misinterpreted our views respecting 
missionary work in foreign lands. We think it much 
to the credit of missionaries that they have been willing 
to leave their homes and money-making opportunities 
to engage in the missionary work, even though 
many of them have gone with full assurances of as 
good or better comforts than they enjoyed at home, 
and even though the greater part of missionary work is 
no more religious than is the teaching of the public 
schools in their home land, or the practice of medicine 
and hospital work done by many physicians in civilized 
lands. Surely the poor heathen greatly need civilizing 
influences, medical assistance and better education. 
We are glad that they are getting them. 

What we object to in respect to these foreign missions 
is:— 

(1) That the same imperfect Gospel, or mixture of 
truth and error, is presented to the heathen that is 
presented here in the home land; and (2) because the 
idea prevails that this is God's method for fulfilling 
the item of our Lord's prayer which declares, "Thy 
Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is done 
in heaven." We object to this view because it is thoroughly 
unscriptural, and, as we have repeatedly pointed 
out, is thoroughly irrational. Our Post-Millennial 
friends, while telling us that they are striving to convert 
the world and thus to establish the will of God on 
earth even as it is done in heaven, prepare statistics 
which show to everybody that the number of the 
heathen in the year 1800 was approximately 600,000,000, 
and that their number today is approximately 1,200,000,000 
—just double. Is it not foolishness to insist on 
mission work from this standpoint? Let the mission 
work go on, but let it be viewed from the right standpoint. 
Who is so blind as not to be able to see that if 

R4140 : page 60 

the whole heathen world were converted to the same 
measure of civilization and Christianity as is possessed 
by so-called Christendom, it would still be in a 
wretched plight, as witness our Lord's address to the 
latter in its last stage, the Laodicean period, I counsel 
thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, and white raiment 
that thou mayest be clothed, that thy nakedness 
do not appear, and anoint thine eyes with eyesalve, 
that thou mayest see, for thou art poor and miserable 
and blind and naked.— Rev. 3:17,18. 



Let us have the right Scriptural view of matters, 
namely, that God during this Gospel Age is seeking a 
"Little Flock," the "Very Elect," and is gathering them 
from every nation, people, kindred and tongue. These 
are to constitute with their Lord and Bridegroom the 
Seed of Abraham, through whom all the families of 
the earth are to be blessed. Let us see that this is what 
the Apostle says, "If ye be Christ's then are ye Abraham's 
Seed and heirs according to the promise." (Gal. 3:29.) 
Let us see that the Kingdom is to be given to 
this Seed of Abraham; that Christ and his Elect 
Church, his Bride, are to constitute the Kings and 
Priests who shall reign on the earth (Rev. 5:10), and 
through whom, as the Melchizedek order of priesthood, 
every son and daughter of Adam may have fullest opportunity 
of attaining a full salvation from sin and 
from death— a full release from the bondage of corruption 
into the glorious liberty of the sons of God! Let 
us see that those who shall ultimately prove incorrigible 
shall not be eternally tormented, but, as the Scriptures 
declare, shall be "punished with everlasting destruction," 
"destroyed from amongst the people!" 
(2 Thess. 1:9; Acts 3:23.) Those whose eyes are anointed 
with the unction from the Holy One to thus see the 
divine plan, realize well that God is not now engaged 
in the work of saving the world, but merely, as the 
Scriptures put it, "taking out of the nations a people 
for his name"— to bear his name, to be the Bride of 
Christ; and they all know that the Gospel can have no 
other meaning to the heathen than it has to the Christian 
nations. 

DISCOURAGEMENTS FROM ERROR 

No wonder thinking people who do not see the 
true plan of God in respect to the gathering of the Elect, 
and who have previously been zealous for the heathen 
under the erroneous belief that all except the converts 
of Christianity were doomed to an eternity of torture, 
are now ceasing to believe in eternal torment, 
and are going to the other extreme in supposing 
that nearly all the heathen go to heaven when they die, 
and that heaven has a vast slum district for their reception 
and education— no wonder that these are losing 
their zeal for foreign missions, that the money is 
coming proportionately more slowly, and much of it 
from those who are interested in the heathen from a 
humanitarian rather than from the religious 
standpoint! 

It is pathetic to notice how otherwise honest and 
intelligent people have deceived themselves and others 
respecting the true situation of affairs in the world. 
We reproduce a diagram, published by "The Young 
People's Missionary Movement," which shows the abject 
darkness of the heathen, enlightened only here 
and there by missionary endeavors, represented by 



stars. It is shown as a cause for further missionary 
effort. But look at the other half, represented in pure 
white:— 

Protestants 166,066,500 

Roman Catholics 272,638,500 

Easterns, Greek Catholics, etc 120,157,000 

Jews 11,000,000 

Mohammedans 216,630,000 

Total 786,492,000 

But how fair is this statement? How true is 
it? On the diagram it is represented as one-half, 
yet the total of the world's population today is recognized 
as about 1,700,000,000, so that really a much 
larger proportion of the picture should show black. 
But let us examine more carefully who are the Mohammedans. 
We regret to say that a good many Christian 
people would not know but that they were another denomination 
of Christians— like the Mormons, for instance. 
But instead they are heathen in the sense of 
not recognizing Christ, respecting whom the Apostle 
says, "There is none other name given under heaven 
and amongst men whereby we must be saved." (Acts 4:12.) 
Are they not as much unsaved as are the ones 
represented by the black portion? Are they not as 
much in the dark? Have we any reason to suppose 
that they are any more honest? And what about the 
Jews? Are they saved from the Christian standpoint? 
On the contrary both Catholics and Protestants deny 
this, and missionaries and mission stations are now in 
operation amongst both Jews and Mohammedans with 
a view to their conversion, just as with the heathen. 

Examining still more closely we find that the nearly 
400,000,000 of Roman and Greek Catholics are also 
subjects for mission work by Protestants, that Protestant 
missions are maintained even in the city of Rome 
itself and in various Catholic countries at the expense 
of the Protestants residing in Great Britain and the 
United States, with a view to counteracting, they tell 
us, the influence of "Anti-christ." How does it come 
that the good, honest people, so zealous to save others, 
have presented so misleading a picture of the state of 
the world? We answer, it is because their theology 

R4140 : page 61 

is wrong. After nearly nineteen centuries of endeavor 
they can scarcely give up their position that God 
has appointed that the truth shall in this way reach and 
convert the whole world, thus bringing about a reign of 
righteousness in which God's will shall be done on 
earth as in heaven. Their theory has been badly shattered 



and shaken by the truth on the subject. They 

want to make the picture as favorable as possible for 

their theory. They are scarcely conscious of the dishonesty 

they are thus practicing in the name of the 

Lord. 

But look still more closely at the only division of 
the diagram we have not yet considered, the section 
showing the Protestants. Surely, says some, you will 
concede that at least this portion of the diagram is 
right. Alas, we reply, we wish that we could think of 
the Protestants of the world (166,066,500) as being 
saints of God, in whom his will is done on earth as in 

R4141 : page 61 

heaven— or even to the extent of their imperfect ability. 
We cannot so think; we cannot delude ourselves thus. 
We regret the lack of conscience on the part of those 
who made the diagram, and on the part of many others, 
which hinders them from being honest with themselves 
on the subject. For the purposes of such 
enumeration not even Church membership is taken, 
although everybody of reasonable judgment would admit 
that nominal Church membership would be a 
poor proof of saintliness. The number is made up 
of everybody living in civilized lands who is neither 
a Jew nor a Roman Catholic. As Bishop Foster once 
suggested it includes not only the black but the ring-streaked 
and speckled, the number of the white, the 
saintly, being extremely small. 

AWAKE, OH ZION, PUT ON THY STRENGTH! 

"Blow ye a trumpet in Zion!" It is time that all of 
God's true people, whoever and wherever, Catholic or 
Protestant, should awake to a realization that we have 
been living under a great delusion— under a total misapprehension 
of the divine Word first started in the 
"dark ages." It is time that all the saints should come 
clearly to understand that their hope is not in the conversion 
of heathendom, but in the second coming of 
the Lord and the gathering of his saints, and their 
change to his likeness in the First Resurrection, and 
in the Kingdom, the dominion over the earth which 
will then be established through them— the Millennial 
Kingdom. Then and by that power Satan will be bound 
for the thousand years, that he may deceive the nations 
no more, that the blindness that has been upon not only 
heathendom but Christendom may pass 
away, and that the true light may shine forth— the Sun 
of Righteousness, with healing in its beams. It is for 
this Kingdom that we are to pray, with the realization 
that when it shall come the result of its rule shall be 
the complete abolition of sin and death and the establishment 
of a reign of righteousness in the world, even 
as it is in heaven. 



The present mission of the Church is, as the 
Scriptures declare, to "make herself ready." This includes 
a knowledge of Christ, and the extending of this 
knowledge as far as possible, a knowledge of our justification 
through faith in his blood, and a knowledge of 
our call to joint-heirship with him in his Kingdom, and 
a knowledge that faithfulness to this call will mean a 
full consecration on our part to serve the Truth, to 
live the Truth, to suffer for the Truth, and that to the 
called, the chosen and the faithful the Kingdom is to 
be given at the second coming of our Lord, and that 
the attainment of that position of joint-heirship in the 
throne is dependent upon our willingness to stand for 
the Truth and for the Lord, to endure hardness as good 
soldiers, and to lay down our lives for the brethren, 
thus suffering with Christ that we may also be glorified 
together. 

The Church's mission is not different from that of 
her Master, except that it is world-wide instead of being 
confined to the Jewish nation. Each one who receives 
of the holy Spirit is represented by the Lord as 
being a candle, a little light in the world, and each is 
to let his light shine before men. It is for the Lord to 
supervise the general interests of these lights, and to 
send them hither and thither as it may please him unto 
"even so many as the Lord your God shall call." (Acts 2:39.) 
It is quite proper that Christian people everywhere 
should have their attention called to the real significance 
of their justification, their sanctification, and 
the proper characters they should develop in order to 
make their calling and election sure. Whoever is thus 
engaged is about the Master's business, and is therefore 
one of his mission workers. Each should now be 
laboring in that corner of the harvest field where he has 
the best opportunity for serving the cause, and this 
would mean that after witnessing for the Truth in our 
own neighborhoods we may carry the message as much 
as possible into other neighborhoods, into other cities, 
into other states, into other lands. Thus, as the number 
of lighted candles increases under the Lord's providential 
arrangement, some would probably be lighted 
for other lands— not to convert all but, as the Scriptures 
declare, to bear witness to the Truth. 

OUR LESSON'S MISSION PICTURE 

The lesson represents well the view we have set 
forth, but does not at all represent the view of mission 
work generally entertained. It will be noticed that 
those who were fed were not heathen but Israelites, the 
people of God— then in covenant favor. It should be 
noticed secondly that Jesus dealt first with his disciples, 
who represented the Elect, his chosen ones. To 
these he gave the bread he broke, which, after the multitude 
were seated, was distributed amongst them. So 
the Lord has now called the Church to be his Elect, 



and broken for them the bread of life or Truth, and by 
and by in his own due time the whole world of mankind, 
including those who have gone down into the 
prison-house of death, shall all come forth— every man 
in his own order, in his own rank, in his own company, 
and then the multitude will be ready for the food, and 
it will be given them, and they shall have an abundance 
and to spare. 



R4141 : page 62 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

I desire to make a suggestion regarding the Volunteer 
work and have little doubt but that it would add many 
opportunities for serving the Truth by some of our brethren, 
besides carrying light to some hungering souls in Babylon's 
darkness. It has often occurred to my mind that there must 
be some method whereby the scattered country folk could 
be reached by the Truth literature, and yet 'twas out of the 
question to think of sending colporteurs to them. Last 
Thursday I think the question was partly answered. On 
that day I found hundreds, it might have been thousands, of 
vehicles being driven into town, and learned that they belonged 
to country people who were going to the State Fair. 

Found but very little interest in F and no meetings arranged 

for, and having done what I could and still having 

some hours at my disposal, I took my tracts and went out to 

the fair grounds. There I found on the various adjacent 

streets hundreds of vehicles of every description, while inside 

the grounds were hundreds more. My supply of tracts 

was not sufficient to go around among all carriages outside, 

so I did not go within. I found it was quite easy to put a 

tract in each conveyance in such a way that it would not 

blow out, and yet so that the owner would not be likely to 

find it until he reached home. With the buggies one could 

readily raise the little oil cloth cover behind seat over body 

of buggy and drop tract in. Probably not one of these belonged 

to town people who would be reached by regular 

Volunteer work. In the middle west State Fairs and Chatauquas 

are becoming more numerous each year and they 

both draw large numbers from the country. Of course it is 

too late now for adoption this year, as the season is about 

over, but why not take advantage of these occasions next 

year? I think it is also better than to put the tracts in 

their hands, as in the excitement of sight-seeing many would 

drop the tracts after a glance. There are also some towns 

where the vehicles about the market place on market day 

would afford a similar opportunity. 

I have written at some length, as I was not sure the 
suggestion had been considered before, and this brings another 
thought to mind also. There is an increasing number 
of brethren who are neglecting Volunteer work, etc., with 



the idea that the work is about done and all the wheat in 
their town has been gathered. I am afraid that in many 
of these cases the brethren are not desirous of doing their 
part and are merely using this as an excuse, trying thereby 
to soothe their consciences and to deceive themselves into 
believing this neglect is pleasing to the Lord. If some of 
them are not soon quickened I fear they will have to hear 
the "slothful servant" condemnation. If they could only 
realize it, the door will not be shut until they cannot use 
such opportunities, and as long as there are such opportunities 
to be used the door is open. When we can get no more 
literature to circulate, and when our effort to speak orally 
will deprive us of our liberty, then it will be time enough 
to conclude the door is shut, the work is done. 
Yours in the most blessed bonds, 

BENJ. H. BARTON,-Pilgrim. 



DEAR BRETHREN:- 

Under the Lord's providence and blessing the work 
here has prospered far beyond what we had hoped. Indeed, 
as far as visible results are concerned, the past few 
months, I believe, will outweigh all of our past experience. 
We have had parlor meetings thus far at eight different 
homes, with varying attendance. At the last meeting sixteen 
were present, some of whom had been previously interested, 
but had not been meeting regularly except at Pilgrim 
services. Thinking it might be of interest to you, will 
say these meetings were conducted as a "reading circle" (or 
DAWN Circle) beginning with chapter IV. of Vol. I., and using 
the large wall chart for illustration. When a new place 
opened up for meetings we would start them on Chapter 
IV., and after three successive weekly meetings invite 
them to the general DAWN Circle meeting on Sunday. 

In making our deliveries we keep a list of names of 
those who give evidence of being "wheat" and express the 
desire to have us call again after they have read the books. 
This always insures a cordial reception when we return, and 

R4142 : page 62 

paves the way for a discussion of the Truth as far as they 
have read. We aim to devote at least one evening a week 
for such calls. The class has now progressed so that outside 
help seems quite superfluous. Among the newly interested 
ones is the superintendent of one of the local Sunday 
Schools, who is contemplating his escape from "Babylon" in 
the near future, and who has already led several of the 
meetings in our absence, with good results. 

We have thought that perhaps it would not be presumption 
on our part, since the dear Lord has already favored 
us to the extent that he has, if we should turn to 
another field in which no regular meetings are being held, 

and we have thought of S . I remember that, while doing 

Volunteer work at that place about two years ago, the 



dear friends there did not have meetings except when the 
Pilgrims came. If there is still no gathering of the Lord's 
people there, and if the territory has not been canvassed 
just recently, we would like the assignment of that territory. 
Or, if you have any suggestion to offer, we shall be 
glad to have the same. We have taken the matter to the 
Lord in prayer, and trust for his guidance in this as in all 
matters. 

With much Christian love, in which Bro. VanOrsdel joins, 
as ever, yours in the Lord, 

C. H. S. KUEHN,-Colporteur. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Inclosed find report for first half of January, 1908. 
Undoubtedly much good has been accomplished, for which I 
rejoicingly praise the Lord. 

Inclosed also is a very harmful tract, which is being 
circulated from Cincinnati. There is undoubtedly an avalanche 
of this stuff coming now and from every quarter; 
and every piece of it is aimed directly at the "Truth people." 
This in itself is very significant. The Adversary has 
beyond doubt been given more power to discomfort us, and 

R4142:page63 

he is now, in an increasing manner, turning the artillery of 
the world against us. It is also clearly to be seen that the 
Lord of the Harvest is endeavoring to remove every "root of 
bitterness," every sympathy with these various dispositions 
of the fallen nature, viz., pride, ambition, envy, revenge, 
self-aggrandizement in any form, from our hearts; 
endeavoring to bring about that perfect sympathy and love, 
that care for and cooperation with himself, the great Head, 
and each other, the fellow-members of the same Body, that 
exists between the various members of our own mortal bodies 
—thus producing that perfect harmony and oneness so 
absolutely necessary. There is no doubt that the most tremendous 
conflict is going on in every true son and daughter 
of God. All these things only emphasize to me the shortness 
of the time and the sharpness of the conflict. 

That the work is progressing sharply in my own life 
and character is clearly observed, for which I praise him. 
For the privilege of service and fellowship with his precious 
struggling little ones during this supreme moment I praise 
him! My constant prayer is for you, dear Brother Russell, 
and for all the faithful co-laborers at the Bible House, and 
for all everywhere that trust in the name of the Lord our 
God in deed and in truth— that are praying for and hastening 
unto the coming of the Kingdom. 

In very much love to yourself, to the Bible House family 
and to all, I am truly your servant in love and service of 
our Lord and King, O. L. SULLIVAN-Pilgrim. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am glad to report the continued progress of the Truth 
in Glasgow. We have been greatly blessed by dear Brother 
A. E. Williamson's visit among us, and are looking forward 
with anticipation to your own visit, which we trust, God 
willing, will be in the near future. 

In the course of a recent newspaper correspondence it 
was stated by one writer that the Greek word "horama," 
translated "vision" in Matt. 17:9, means properly a sight or 
spectacle, and does not signify a vision but a reality. This 
caused me to enquire into the matter, with the result that 
I find that the word "horama" occurs altogether twelve times 
in the New Testament, and that on every occasion the context 
shows that the thing seen is not real, but is a vision. The 
instances are: Matt. 17:9; Acts 7:31; 9:10,12; 10:3,17,19; 
11:5; 12:9; 16:9,10; 18:9. 

To take an example, we read in Acts 9:11,12: "The 
Lord said unto him [Ananias], Arise and go into the street 
which is called Straight, and enquire in the house of Judas 
for one called Saul of Tarsus, for behold he prayeth and 
hath seen in a vision [Greek-horama] a man named 
Ananias coming in and putting his hand on him that he 
might receive his sight." The man seen by the blind Saul was 
obviously not a reality but a vision. Again, in Acts 12:7,9, we 
read, "Behold an angel of the Lord came upon him and a 
light shined in the prison, and he smote Peter on the side 
and raised him up, saying, Arise up quickly.. ..And he 
[Peter] went out and followed him, and wist not that it 
was true which was done by the angel, but thought he saw 
a vision [Greek— horama]." Peter thought that what he 
had seen was merely a vision, not a reality. 

From these examples it is abundantly evident that 
in New Testament usage the word "horama" signifies 
"vision," and is, therefore, correctly translated in both the 
common English versions, and as shown in DAWN-STUDIES II., 
p. 255, and in WATCH TOWER, '98, p. 1 1 1 . In using the expression, 
"Tell the vision to no man," Jesus apparently desired 
to reassure us that the Bible is not contradictory. To 
say that Moses appeared in reality on the holy mount would 
be to deny those Scriptures which state that Jesus was the 
first to rise from the dead (Acts 26:23; 1 Cor. 15:20), and 
that the time when the prophets and others will be rewarded 
will be at the return of our Lord Jesus (Rev. 11:18; 
Matt. 16:27). 

Trusting, dear brother, that the Lord will continue to 
use you abundantly in his service and for our spiritual 
profit, I am, your brother in the one hope of the calling and 
with much love in the Lord. JOHN EDGAR.-Scotland. 



DEAR BROTHER:- 

While you do not know of me, I, through your writings, 
it seems, am well acquainted with you. I would not infringe 
on your time to have you read anything I could write 



you, but I do want to tell you of the joy I have had in reading 
your books, booklets, tracts and journal. About ten 
months ago your MILLENNIAL DAWN series with some tracts 
were given me by a sojourner, who did some Volunteer 
work. Considering them as Adventist literature, containing 
doctrines I could not believe, I began to read with much 
distrust; but I soon became interested and read with increasing 
interest, until it seemed I could read and never tire 
of it. I have often wished to express to you my gratitude 
for the pleasure and profit I have had in the reading. It 
has filled a long -felt vacancy in my heart, and inspired a 
joy unspeakable. And now words fail me with which to 
properly express my appreciation and thanks to you. I 
think of you as that faithful steward whom the Master made 
ruler over all his household to give meat in due season, and 
that you have been strictly true to your charge; for surely 
no such heaping dishes of the most wholesome food have 
been set before the Lord's servants since at the first. 
Yours in Christ, our Redeemer, 

(MRS.) S. K. STORY,-- Arkansas. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Many even of the most consecrated friends, I fear, do 
not fully appreciate their privilege of the present favorable 
times for tract distribution and the "Volunteer" work. I 
have thought, therefore, it might stir some up by suggesting 
that in addition to the regular "Volunteer" work of next 
year, each and every WATCH TOWER subscriber might find 
great delight in distributing at least 100 tracts each month 
of 1908; that is, hand out three or four every day to individuals 
sitting next to them in street cars, railroad trains, 
restaurants, or anyone they may meet on the street, or in a 
store, etc. 

May the Lord's richest blessings continue to abide with 
you. Your servant in the King's work, 

E. W. BRENNEISEN.-Pilgrim. 



page 65 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXIX MARCH 1 No. 5 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 67 

Socialism Spreading in Great Britain 67 

Socialism at Home Also 68 

"Go to, Ye Rich Men, Weep and Howl" 69 

Anarchists in Small Minority 69 

"Man Elects God Now, Not God Man" 69 

Cincinnati Debates and Convention 70 

Berean Study on the Atonement 71 

"I am the Bread of Life" 72 

"We Eat His Flesh" 73 

Justified by our "Eating" 74 

The Stone Witness (Poem) 76 

"I Was Blind, Now I See" 76 

The Light of the World 78 

page 66 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R4145 : page 66 

THE CINCINNATI DEBATES COMPLETE 



The Cincinnati Enquirer found quite an interest in the 
White-Russell debates, and gave them all the space required 
after the first one, and it was abridged only to 
the extent of failing to print some of the Scriptures in 
full. A few texts which formed no part of the speakers' 
arguments were referred to by citation only. 

The Enquirer printed the debates in its weekly edition as 
well as in its daily: and now it has in preparation a Special 

R4146 : page 66 

Edition containing all the debates and two extra sermons 
delivered by Brother Russell. We have purchased a large 
supply of these at a wholesale rate which permits the below 
very low rates to you— specially favorable to those who desire 
to circulate them amongst their friends. Being a special 
issue postage must be paid in stamps, hence there is a saving 
of labor and postage on quantities. 

Single copies to any address, .05 

Ten copies to one address, .30 

Forty copies to one address, $1.00 
Some will read these Debates which present both sides of 
these important questions who would not read our side 
alone. We have confidence that those who have "ears to 
hear" the Master's voice and spiritual "eyes of understanding" 
to discern will be blest. Such will see through the 
sophistries presented by Elder White and will realize that 
brag and bluster are not arguments, but prove that real 
arguments were scarce with him. We are not ashamed of 
the Truth from whatever standpoint viewed. "I am not 
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ." 



page 66 

THE WOMAN'S NATIONAL DAILY! Are you receiving it 
through us? If so please write it a postal requesting discontinuance 
and a return of the price to us. We will send 
you instead another paper publishing the desired sermons. 

THE NEW BIBLES are all gone. We hope for the new 
edition about June. Due notice will appear. 



R4143 : page 67 



VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
SOCIALISM SPREADING IN GREAT BRITAIN 



THAT Socialism is growing rapidly in Great Britain 
is attested by the fact that at a recent convention 
of the British Labor Party at Hull, England, 
a split occurred over a socialistic resolution- 
more than half representatively voting for the resolution, 
which read as follows:— 

"Resolved, That in the opinion of this conference 
the time has arrived when the Labor Party should have 
as a definite object the socialization of the means of 
production, distribution and exchange, to be controlled 
by a democratic state in the interest of the entire community, 
and the complete emancipation of Labor from 
the domination of Capitalism and Landlordism, with 
the establishment of social and economic equality 
between the sexes." 

The reporter adds: 

"Each delegate voted for the whole number of 
union men he represented, and the final vote on the 
resolution stood: For Socialism, 514,000 votes; against 
Socialism, 469,000 votes. The result was hailed as a 
great victory by the Socialists, who put the convention 
in an uproar by their frantic cheering." 



Of course these leaders may not on either side fully 
reflect the sentiment of all whom they represented as 
delegates; but the proportions are probably nearly 
correct. At all events this shows the rapid growth of 
Socialism in quarters where it had almost no influence 
ten years ago. The importance of this item is seen 
when it is remembered that the British Labor Party is 
represented by more than forty members in the present 
Parliament. 

That statesmen are quick to measure the influence 
of this growth of Socialism is shown by the comments 
on it by the Hon. Arthur Balfour, ex -prime minister and 
now leader of the Conservative party of Great Britain. 
He sees in Socialism the foe of present institutions and 
fears, just as the Scriptures foretold, "Men's hearts 
failing them for fear and for looking forward to the 
things coming upon the earth." He prophesies the 
reformation of all parties along that line— for Socialism 
or against it. He is reported thus:— 

"Mr. Balfour, on learning of the vote of the Labor 
Party, at once declared that henceforth in England the 



political fighting would be between Conservatives and 
Socialists; and that the old-time Liberals and Radicals 
would disappear, as they are already rapidly disappearing 
in France and Germany." 

The reporter continued:— 

"Since then nearly all the British papers have 
thrown their columns open to the discussion of Socialism. 
As yet the laboring men are a good deal divided, 
while several secessions from the Labor Party are noted. 
It is said that the name of the Labor Party will not be 
changed, and that the extreme Socialists will still keep 
a separate organization. England is the last country 
in Europe where Socialism has secured a foothold. As 
yet but one man has ever been led to Parliament on a 
straight Socialist platform. Whether the Labor Party 
will gain or lose by its connection with Socialism the 
next general election will show." 

A dispatch from London to the Chicago Tribune 
on the same subject says:— 

"In all the political movements of England possibly 
no such sudden and remarkable swing of the pendulum 
of public opinion has ever been witnessed as that 
recorded this week, when in a conference at Hull representatives 
of millions of British workingmen, forming 
the Labor Party, hoisted the flag of Socialism. 

"The English public is still so dazed over the suddenness 
of the avowal that only a few newspapers seem 
to grasp the real significance of the new situation. 
Persons who expressed astonishment and fear when 
the lonesome figure of John Burns— since raised to a 
seat in the cabinet— entered Parliament as a representative 
of a labor constituency many years ago have now 
a real reason to fear for the traditional conservative 
trend of British legislative institutions. 

"Among other things, the latest move of the Labor 
Party really means that the cry of Socialism will not 
only be raised with a strong voice in the House of Commons 

R4143 : page 68 

but that the present Labor members of Parliament, 
who have so suddenly changed their political 
complexion, will be backed in pushing the socialistic 
propaganda by the strong organization and wealthy 
treasury of the Labor party, though it is true that since 
the Hull meeting some non-Socialist members of the 
party have condemned its action and threatened to 
break away. 

"Impartial observers in some quarters declare the 
middle and upper classes of England, who have such 
good ground to fear the present socialistic movement, 
have only themselves to blame for the Labor party's 



sudden change of front. In other words, laboring men 
seem to be practically driven to take their latest radical 
step from sheer desperation at their deplorable 
plight, the growing rarity of employment and the rise 
in the cost of living. The percentage of hungry men, 
women and children begging bread throughout England 
this winter is greater than for twenty years, and the 
desolation in many towns and villages, to say nothing 
of the larger cities, is appalling. 

"Labor leaders, while acknowledging the splendid 
efforts made to relieve suffering, point to the utter impossibility 
of preventing starvation and the utter indifference 
of the great mass of people to the condition 
of the poor. A typical illustration of their ground for 
resentment against the more fortunate portion of the 
community was shown this week, when the county 
council voted a liberal sum of money to purchase flagstaffs 
to be set up on the public schools rather than 
vote money to feed those thousands of London school 
children who average less than one meal a day and always 
go to school hungry. 

"Labor leaders have wisely taken into consideration 
the economic conditions of the country in framing their 
accusations, and by so doing they strengthen the 
charge of criminal callousness against the prosperous 
sections, that are always willing to open their checkbooks 
to aid sentimental measures— monument funds, 
funds to preserve old buildings, etc.— but who refuse 
to interest themselves in the demands of charity." 

KING'S PARK FOR FARMS 

Surrounding Windsor Castle is a large park, which 
a lot of idle men at Manchester, Eng., think would be 
more useful to them if cut up so that a section of it 
might furnish them with small truck and garden farms. 
They have no objection to being close neighbors to 
their ruler. It is proposed that a small army of the 
unemployed shall besiege and beseech their king on 
this subject, and a cablegram says, "That the movement 
is most serious is certain." 

SOCIALISM AT HOME ALSO 



The following extract from a letter to the Editor 
speaks for itself:— 

R4144 : page 68 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-"Let him that is taught 
in the Word communicate unto him that teacheth in all 
good things." (Gal. 6:6.) If I bother you again with 
a letter please accept the above Scripture as my excuse. 
Thinking that perhaps you have not noticed what 



has come under my observation, I write you about it. 
In a Socialist paper about ten days ago there were several 
articles reporting that in different places in this 
country Socialist speakers have been invited into 
churches to address the congregations and debate the 
subject of Socialism. Right here in Dayton that has 
been the case in a church of whites and also in a 
church of colored people— with what results you can 
see in the newspaper clipping I send you herewith. 
Last week I noticed a statement in the Fort Wayne 
News that one Fort Wayne (Ind.) minister had been 
accepted as a member of the Federation of Labor, and 
that ministers all over the country are contemplating a 
similar move— "to keep in touch with the working people," 
was the statement. 

Through the Socialist press we learn that the Federation 
of Labor is adopting Socialism— just what we 
look for in the near future, that the masses will be carried 
away with that doctrine. Now, dear brother, do 
you think it likely that Babylon will accept that teaching 
when she sees that the greater bulk of the people 
will be carried away with it? Does it not look as 
though they will be compelled to do so if the image of 
the beast is to exercise all the power of the first beast? 
(Rev. 13:12.) How else could they do that— unless they 
have the majority of the people with them? The masses 
surely will be Socialists before long. And would not 
that be in harmony with the Scripture that "the kings 
of the earth have committed fornication with her," 
Socialism being the next king? 

, Dayton, O. 



Just so: the press and the pulpit and the colleges 
have been on the one part preaching Higher Criticism 
Infidelity and Evolution, and destroying faith in a personal 
God, and in the Bible as his revelation; and on 
the other part preaching that "doctrine of devils" respecting 
eternal torment as the divine provision for 
the mass of our race and thus alienating men from the 
true God of the Bible; and now they wonder at the results 
—Socialism and later on anarchy! Surely, as the 
Scriptures declare, the wisdom of their wise men 
has perished and the understanding of their prudent 
men is not visible.— Isa. 29:14. 

But now to the query of our Brother's letter we 
reply: No. Socialism will never become King of 
mystic "Babylon." The Scriptures most clearly teach 
that Babylon will be on the side of the chief captains 
and mighty men and kings of the earth and their armies 
in the struggle with which this age will close. 
(Rev. 18:9-15.) Just for a time Socialism will be popular 
with a few ministers who, sympathizing with "the 
submerged tenth," will seek their uplift thus— not seeing 
the better way of the divine plan and Word. But 



the majority of ministers "look every man to his own 
quarter," and finding that their supporters are from the 
other side they will trim their sails accordingly. This 
does not mean that they will antagonize the laboring 
class; but that ultimately they will oppose Socialism 
to the limit. Our own position is well known to our 
readers: we sympathize with many of the aims of Socialism, 
but deny the practicability of it, directing 
all mankind rather to the plan of God— "Thy Kingdom 
come, thy will be done on earth even as in heaven." 
We assure the sober, intelligent Socialists that beyond 

R4144 : page 69 

question the end of Socialism will surely be that most 
terrible of all calamities— anarchy. 

"GO TO NOW, YE RICH MEN, WEEP AND HOWL FOR THE MISERIES 
THAT SHALL COME UPON YOU."-JAS. 5:1 

The present panic has been called "the rich man's 
panic"; because primarily it was the rich who suffered 
most. In previous panics as a rule the public held the 
railway and industrial shares which crafty rich speculators 
had sold out to them at high prices: so that 
when the crash of prices came the rich speculators 
were safe and the public suffered. But this time it has 
been the reverse, the rich speculators held the stocks 
and have suffered the losses. But the influence, "lack 
of confidence" and "deficiency of circulating medium," 
has spread to safe and prosperous enterprises and 
caused a temporary check. This has affected day-laborers 
in particular. And this class now is composed 
chiefly of Polish and Italians— mostly ignorant, and 
many of them vicious, the very scum of Europe: it 
includes, however, some as honest and faithful as could 
be asked. These now number millions, and the vicious 
of them are responsible for the dastardly "black-hand" 
lawlessness of the past year, which has been directed 
mainly against the better-to-do of their own 
countrymen. 

Now, however, the "black-hand" methods of extorting 
money by terrorizing letters and circulars are 
being extended to other wealthy people; and anarchists 
are adopting "black-hand" methods, hoping to 
arouse public sentiment against the "predatory 
rich." Thus public prints tell us of a gathering of 
hundreds at the City Hall, Philadelphia, to demand 
from the mayor work or bread. And the New York 
World tells of a "black-hand" circular directed against 
the rich men of the Wall Street Stock Exchange. It 
says, Feb. 20:— 

"KILL THE RICH," SAY ANARCHISTS 

"What is believed to have been the real cause for 



the closing of the visitors' gallery of the Stock Exchange 

to the public became known yesterday, when 

Police Commissioner Bingham made public an anarchistic 

circular that has been sent broadcast through the 

city. 

"The circular calls upon all workingmen to arm 
themselves and begin the slaughter of all rich men. 
Copies of the circular were sent into the Wall street 
district, and it is said that several members of the 
Stock Exchange received the notices with accompanying 
letters of warning. 

"The explanation given when the visitors' gallery 
of the Stock Exchange was closed was that repairs 
were being made. There is not a bit of work being 
done on the gallery. The report is persistent that 
members of the Stock Exchange became aware of a 
"black-hand" plot to throw a dynamite bomb upon 
the floor of the Exchange while the members were 
trading. 

'"We are determined to take along some of those 
who are to be blamed for our misery,' the circular says. 

"Another part reads: 

'"Brothers, let us put an end to this unbearable 
misery! Come on the street and let us show those 
criminal gamblers in Wall street how we are starving 
and suffering from untold misery.' 

"The police think the circular was printed in Paterson, 
N.J., which is an anarchistic hotbed. Detectives 
have been sent there. 

"Deputy Commissioner Woods said: I cannot 
make the circular public just now, as it is of such an 
inflammatory nature that it might do harm. I have 
never seen a paper so threatening and vicious in my 
life. It is likely to cause a great deal of trouble.' 

"Copies of the circular were sent to labor organizations 
in New York and Brooklyn. Several of these 
organizations have notified Commissioner Bingham of 
the receipt of the circular and have asked him to discover 
and punish the authors of it. 

"There can be no doubt that the circular has 
caused a scare in Wall street. None of the members 
of the Stock Exchange will admit having received a 
copy of it, but they know about it. Secretary George 
W. Ely declared that the visitors' gallery was not closed 
on account of the circular." 

There is trouble nearer home, too. In Sewickley 
Heights, one of the suburbs of Pittsburg, the residence 
district of some very rich and very estimable people, 
a "black-hand" scare has caused many of the most 
aristocratic establishments to be deserted except by 
watchmen, while detectives are searching for the lawless 
threateners. 

ANARCHISTS IN SMALL MINORITY 



None should think from these things that the majority 
of laborers are "thugs." Quite to the contrary; 
the anarchists are few and may safely be set down as 
victims of mental aberration, the result of unfortunate 
birth, intensified by an unfavorable environment, by a 
false secular education and an entire ignorance of the 
true character and Word of God. Now these anarchists 
are few in number but with fanatical zeal make a stir 
far, far beyond their relative strength: the real trouble 
will come when the now bewildered but well-meaning 
masses shall have become fully inoculated with the 
infidelity of the Evolutionists and Higher Critics, and 
fully persuaded respecting the inalienable rights of 
man and fully convinced that these cannot be obtained 
for all except by a radical change of present institutions. 
Then Socialism will appear to the masses the 
only peaceable way for obtaining social and financial 
equality: then Socialism will spread like wild-fire. 
But Socialism will fail; because money and brains 
will cooperate against it from selfishness and fear. 
Then, maddened by their failure, Socialists will en 
masse turn anarchists, and the direct results will ensue: 
"A time of trouble such as was not since there was a 
nation." 

"MAN ELECTS GOD NOW, AND NOT GOD MAN" 

DECLARES DEAN OF CHICAGO DIVINITY 
SCHOOL 



"In an address on 'The Gospel and the New Age,' 
Shaler Matthews, dean of the divinity school of the 
University of Chicago, noted for his commentaries on 
the Bible, before Haverford College students recently 
traced the decline of Christian faith and showed how by 

R4145 : page 70 

a reconstructive process it can still be made to meet the 
spiritual needs of the age. 

'"Man elects God now, not God man,'" said the 
speaker. 'We have outgrown conceptions of God as a 
king and a father. Our deity is a personality endowed 
with the qualities the god of an advanced people must 
have. We think in terms of scientific progress, and 
since Darwin propounded his theories on evolution we 
have been living under their controlling concepts, and 
come to look at Christianity in this light.' 

"The Church must modernize the gospel, restate 
the Testament teachings, or it will incur in the future 
the hostility of labor and science, and find in its diminished 
ranks only the mediocre." 

"Dr. Matthews ridiculed the religious attitude which 
accepts outworn beliefs because 'they were good 



enough for a sainted mother or father,' saying that in 

the natural order of things children must break with traditions 

and get away from the religious decadence due 

to sentiment. He depicted the two factions at work 

trying to mould the religion of college men. On the 

one hand, old school teachers telling the youth to stop 

thinking and accept blindly their crude faiths and intellectual 

inheritance; on the other, strong men trying 

to adjust their faith to their judgment."— The North 

American. 



A very rich man, whom we have every reason to regard 
as a Christian in the ordinary sense of that title, 
even if not a "saint," endowed the college whose 
teachings are represented by the head of its faculty in 
the above address. That rich man, already paying his 
employees liberally, gave liberally of his surplus to 
enlighten them or others of his fellow-creatures. Not 
vastly learned himself, he supposed that he was acting 
wisely, for the good of all mankind, when he entrusted 
so vast a fortune to the care of the learned ministers 
and professors of theology of his own (Baptist) denomination. 
Alas! he probably did not suspect that under 
the name of Christian influence and education his millions 
would be used to propagate Evolution doctrines 
contrary to the Bible, and to instil Higher Criticism 
of the Bible to utterly destroy the Bible's influence. 
The size of his generous gift and the size of the 
resultant college give increased weight and influence 
to the infidel doctrines which are flooding Christendom. 

We do not blame Mr. Rockefeller, but concede 
his good intentions; neither do we condemn the 
professor whose words we quote above. Ensnared of 
the Adversary, he is probably honest in the utterance 
of his convictions. The point we do make is that the 
wealth and learning of Christendom have for the past 
thirty years been carrying forward the Adversary's 
work— destroying faith in a personal God and in the 
Bible as a revelation from him. 

Now the fruit of their "sowing to the wind" is 
appearing and shortly they with others will reap the 
whirlwind of anarchy. Yet they are so blind to this 
as to fancy that the education they are giving the rising 
generation is the antidote for anarchy. Alas! they 
cannot see that "The reverence of Jehovah is the beginning 
of wisdom." Their educational program ignores 
this foundation and hence is proving injurious 
to the race. Discontent and not happiness is the 
result of such education, and its influence extends to 
the uneducated. 



Note how the campaign of destroying faith in the 



Bible and heeding infidelity which will soon lead to 
anarchy, progresses. A Wheeling, W.Va., paper says:- 
"In the reading of his paper Rev. Clayton consumed 
the larger part of the evening, and the large 
congregation present accorded him rapt attention. He 
pointed out how man originally existed in the form of 
a worm, and how he later developed into the form of 
an ape, and how even today he bears a close relation 
to the gorilla. Each one of his theories Rev. Clayton 
backed up with proofs obtained from the science of 
evolution." 



R4145 : page 70 

CINCINNATI DEBATES AND CONVENTION 

ANOTHER splendid "Convention of Bible Students, 
believers in the Atonement of the Precious Blood, 
a 'Ransom for all,'" has just closed. It was very 
enjoyable. Many said it surpassed all previous ones, due 
to the debates, due to the sharp contrasts manifested between 
Truth and Error and their different spirits. About 
600 attended— from Canada on the North to the Gulf on the 
South; from the Atlantic on the East to the Rocky mountains 
on the West. Some of those who came first could not 
stay until the close, but others got in at the finish who were 
unable to come earlier. Probably at no time were there less 
than 500. We heard excellent reports of the Convention 
discourses; and some told us that the Testimony meetings 
were up to the highest notch and filled with the spirit of 
love. Prayers were offered for both of the disputants— for 
Brother Russell that his mouth might be widely opened to 
declare the lengths and breadths of God's love, and for 
Brother White that his eyes of understanding might be opened 
to see the real plan of God and its harmony and beauty. 

Elder White, on learning of our Convention, made objection 
to it. This surprised us. We assured him that we 
would have been glad to have a large convention of people 
of his faith present to hear the debates. We discovered 
finally that his fear was that we purposed running the debates 
like a political convention— to cheer our own side and 
to howl and hiss down our opponent. We assured him that 
he much misunderstood us all; that nothing would be farther 
from our sentiment and purpose; that he would be treated 
with the greatest courtesy by all of us, both in public and 
in private. 

The last day of the Convention was a rainy one, nevertheless 
the enthusiasm continued and the last public session 
(Sunday afternoon, March 1) was attended by about 2100 
to hear concerning Life, Death and the Hereafter as portrayed 

R4145 : page 71 

in the Abrahamic Covenant. That a good impression 



was made on the minds of many was testified to personally, 
some saying, We came here fully in sympathy with Elder 
White's side of these questions, but we now see differently 
and rejoice accordingly. Some of these were immersed. On 
the day following the debate on Baptism 37 (18 males, 19 
females, all adults) symbolized their consecration by water 
immersion, understanding clearly that it was not for "remission 
of sins" nor for admission into God's Kingdom or 
Church, but merely a symbolical testimony that their sins 
were already freely forgiven through faith in Christ's blood 
and that their heart consecration, whenever it occurred and 
was accepted of the Lord, admitted them to the Church of 
the living God whose names are written in heaven. 

We opine that Elder White's course of boasting and 
misrepresentation during the debates did him little good. 
We understand that a part of his program and that of his 
fellow-believers was to "follow with a revival." We of course 
hope that they will not succeed in reviving their errors in the 
minds of the people. There is plenty of room for all the 
preachers of righteousness, but the poor world already has 
too many preachers of error. Elder White's meetings opened 
on Sunday, March 1, and the total attendance, as reported 
to us, was 31, including himself. 

BELIEVING AND TEACHING 

Elder White's various statements respecting "sheol" 
and "hades" seemed so peculiarly inconsistent that one 
evening after the close of the debate Brother Johnson spoke 
to him on the subject, saying, What is your view of sheol 
and hades? I really do not understand you. Elder White, 
he says, answered rather vaguely and, being further pressed 
for a reply, his fellow-minister and assistant in the debate, 
Elder Kurfees, spoke up and said, We hold that "sheol" 
and "hades" refer to the tomb. Then Elder White said, 
Never mind what I believe! What I have publicly uttered 
is what I teach ! 

ONE GENERAL CONVENTION AT PITTSBURG 

It was remarked incidentally that this year would 
probably witness one large Convention at Pittsburg, about 
the time of the G.A.R. Encampment at Toledo, Ohio, and 
and if possible be so arranged as to gain for us some of the 
advantages of their usually low railroad rates. This would 
bring it about September 1, but definite announcement may 
be looked for soon in these columns. 



page 71 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V. (E) 



Questions on Study I.— The Fact 
and Philosophy of the Atonement. 

APRIL 5 

1. Do the Scriptures teach that the Church is so separate 
from the world that her hopes and ambitions 

spiritual are not discerned? Page 26, par. 1. 
Matt. 11:27; John 15:15; 1 Cor. 2:11; 1 John 3:1. 

2. What are the "earnest expectations" of humanity 
and when will these be more than realized? Page 
26, par. 1. Rom. 8:19-23. 

3. What great promise did the Lord make, prior to 
the First Advent of our Lord Jesus, in which are 
included all the hopes for the Church and the 
world and which was subsequently elaborated by 
our Lord and his apostles? Page 26, par. 1. 

4. Since "condemnation passed upon all men, because 
all are sinners," and since God changeth not, what 
grounds have we for faith or hope as respects the 
salvation of Adam and his race? Page 26, par. 2. 

5. What difference is there between the Little Flock 
and the world as respects God's love and its redemption 
from the curse— the death penalty? 

Page 26, par. 2. 

6. What inference may properly be drawn from the 
fact that the Church is referred to as a "first-fruits"? 
James 1:18. 

APRIL 12 

7. Are there two parts to the work of Atonement? If 
so, name them and describe their operation. 

Page 27, par. 1. 

8. Are the members of the Little Flock included in 
the first part of the Atonement work— the reconciliation 
for iniquity? 

9. Will the Little Flock share with the world in its 
experiences under the New Covenant? Or will 

this class be counted "not of the world," but chosen-out 
ones for association with their Redeemer, 
as members of the Body of the great Mediator between 
God and mankind in general. Z. page 7, '07. 

10. Does the invitation to the Church to follow the 
Lord in sacrifice, to drink of his cup of the New 
Covenant, signify the privilege of joining with our 
Lord in providing the blood (sacrifice) wherewith 
the New Covenant will by and by be sealed? 

11. If by nature "we were children of wrath even as 
others," whence and how does this privilege come 

to us? "Who hath made us to differ?" and how 
were we made acceptable as joint-sacrificers with 
Christ? Page 28, par. 1. Rom. 12:1; 1 Cor. 4:7; 
Eph. 2:3. 

12. Will the world's justification be instantly or gradually 



effected? and how? and when? Page 29. 
APRIL 19 

13. How long a time will the mediation of the New Covenant 
God-ward require? And how long man-ward? 

Page 29, par. 2. 

14. When did our Lord Jesus become the Head of the 
world's Mediator? At his birth, or at his baptism, 

or at his resurrection? 1 Tim. 2:5,6. 

15. When was it that our Lord "gave himself a ransom"? 
Was it at his consecration? and did he 

fulfil the giving even unto Calvary? 

16. When do we join our Lord as members of "his 
Body"? At birth, at justification, at consecration 
and acceptance of the Spirit, or in the 
resurrection? 

17. Does this "His Resurrection" begin when the 
Lord accepts our consecration? and is it finished 
when we experience our final "change"? 

Phil. 3:7-11. 

18. Will the mediatorial work of Messiah (his Millennial 
reign) ever have an end? When? Why? 

page 72 

What will by that time have been accomplished? 
Why will it not be prolonged? Page 30, par. 1,2. 

APRIL 26 

19. Accepting Abraham as typifying God, and Isaac 
as typifying the Christ, and the three wives of 
Abraham (Sarah, Hagar and Keturah) as typifying 
the three great covenants between God and all 

from the human family who shall eventually become 
blest with the full liberty of the sons of God, 
which represented the "Law Covenant"? which the 
"New Covenant"? and which the original or "Everlasting 
Covenant"? Gal. 4:22-31; Jer. 31:31-34. 

20. Is there room for doubt as to which were the 
children of Agar or Hagar, the people under the 
Law Covenant? 

2 1 . Is there room for doubt as to which are the 
children of Sarah, "the Seed of Abraham according 
to promise," or children of God under the Original 
Covenant or Everlasting Covenant? Gal. 3:16,17; 4:28; 
Heb. 13:20; 11:17; Jas. 2:21. 

22. Is there room for doubt that the "New Covenant" 
cannot have been the oldest or the original 

and "Everlasting Covenant," nor the "Law Covenant" 

added four hundred and thirty years after 

it, but must be the one typified by Keturah, Abraham's 

last wife, accepted after the death of Sarah? 

(Gen. 25: 1-4.) Is there any doubt that the promise 

of a New Covenant and its effects belong to 



the future? Jer. 31:27-34. 

23. Is it not the New Covenant that the Apostle refers 
to in Rom. 1 1:27? If not, what Covenant is 
signified? 

24. How could Israel partake of restitution except 
under the New Covenant? and how could this 
signify their obtaining mercy through the Church's 
mercy, except as the Church as the Spiritual 

Seed of the original promise (Gal. 3:29) becomes 
partaker with her Lord in the sealing of the New 
Covenant? Rom. 11:26,31. Pages 30, 31, 32. 



R4146 : page 72 

"I AM THE BREAD OF LIFE" 

--JOHN 6:26-37.-MARCH 8.- 

Golden Text:— "Jesus said unto 
them, I am the Bread of Life." 

AFTER partaking of the miraculously provided 

supper, the multitude, evidently according 

to their habit, lay down in the fields, wrapping 

themselves in their outer garments. Indeed, 

this is even today a prevailing custom in Palestine 

with the poorer people when on a journey. In the 

morning they looked about for their benefactor, evidently 

expecting to find Jesus in the same vicinity, 

and no doubt also expecting that he would miraculously 

provide for their breakfast. But not finding him 

nor the boat in which the disciples had come they journeyed 

onward towards Jerusalem, but still on the lookout 

for the reputed Messiah. When finally they came 

upon the Lord and his company they told of their 

search— and our lesson for today begins with our Lord's 

reply, You seek me not because of the miracle, but because 

of the satisfactory and free supper which you received. 

Here we perceive the wisdom of the Lord in 

not pressing matters too earnestly. He preached no 

sermon when he performed the miracle, but allowed it 

to have its effect; but now, instead of working another 

miracle, he preached a sermon, using his miracle as a 

text. 

His reproof was not harsh, although it was quite 
pointed: Strive not for the food which perisheth, but 
for that kind which will produce everlasting life. This 
is the kind which the Son of man is prepared to give 
unto you, for him the Father, even God, hath sealed, 
indicated, marked as his appointed channel for blessing. 
The lesson contained in these words is obvious, 
and is as applicable today as then. The trouble with 
the whole world is that they have either earthly aims 
or no aims at all, and of the two conditions the latter 



is the worse. It is the people with aims, with purposes 

in life who are accomplishing something in themselves 

and for others. These are the worldly wise, 

who make two blades of grass grow where one grew 

before, who build factories and works and conduct 

large enterprises, and to whom in large measure civilization 

owes so much. They have ambition to be rich 

or to be wise or to be famed, and these ambitions spur 

them on to works. 

But, alas! the great majority of mankind are in a 
much worse case, for without ambition they are 
merely eating to live and living to eat— merely animals 
of a higher intelligence. They labor for the meat that 
perisheth— it is their aim, their goal, and sometimes 
includes the inebriating cup, which steals from them 
whatever of sense they may have. Our Lord would have 
his hearers, including all his followers down through 
the age, note this message from his lips: that although 
the meat that perisheth is necessary under present 
conditions, those who are his followers will remember 
that their heavenly Father knoweth they have need of 
these and will not suffer them to come to serious want. 
And thus being without anxious care for the bread 
that perisheth they might turn their entire attention 
not to earthly but heavenly ambitions— the noblest, 
the grandest of all they might aspire to, because such 
blessed children come within the range of divine blessing 
of life everlasting. The meat, the food that would 
develop in them such an ambition and lead to its satisfaction, 
would be food indeed and well worthy of every 
exertion to obtain it. 

WHAT SHALL WE DO? 

The discourse had its effect; the people realized 
that they were leading comparatively aimless lives, or 
that their aims were earthly and therefore would 
perish with their dying, and they asked the Lord 
what kind of work or labor he meant they should 
perform to secure the food that would bring the divine 
favor and gain them eternal life. What do you mean 
by works that would please God? This is just the 
point that Jesus wished to bring them to and that he 

R4146 : page 73 

wished to answer. He replied that the work for them 
to do at once was to exercise faith in him as the Sent 
of God— the Messiah. But they replied, What reason 
have we to think of you as the Messiah? Work for 
us some conclusive sign that will prove that you are 
Messiah and we will believe. The fact that you fed 
five thousand of us last evening with five loaves and 
two small fishes does not prove your Messiahship. 
Messiah is to be like Moses, only greater than Moses, 
and the miracle you performed is not as great as some 



that Moses performed. You furnished five thousand one 
meal and had the loaves and fishes to start with, but Moses 
fed our fathers for years in the wilderness without any 
bread as a start. The manna which he provided came 
down from heaven; as it is written, "He gave them 
bread from heaven to eat." They were good reasoners in 
some respects— they were not going to be too easily 
converted, they wished to be thoroughly convinced before 
they would believe Jesus to be the Messiah; they 
had heard of others who had been deceived by false 
Messiahs; they were intending to stick close to the 
Scriptural record and to see that the one they would 
accept as Messiah must be greater than Moses, able 
to feed them and all the people every day— and with 
bread superior to that which Moses gave in the 
wilderness. 

Then was Jesus' turn to expound his teaching and 
to show that the comparison as between himself and 
Moses was not as to who would give a finer kind of 
earthly food and more of it, but that he would give a 
heavenly food, a spiritual food, which would secure to 
them a heavenly life. He therefore called attention 
first of all to their mistake in thinking the giving 
of the manna to be the work of Moses, saying 
plainly, It was not Moses that gave the bread from 
heaven, but my Father; do not credit that to the wrong 
source. Moses was indeed an honored servant of the 
Lord as the Lawgiver of Israel, but he neither gave 
the manna nor sent it. My Father who sent that manna 
in the wilderness has now sent another kind of bread, 
another kind of food, another kind of manna from 
heaven— not literal, but symbolical. The bread which 
God is now about to send to his people, also comes 
down from heaven and is intended to be the Bread of 
life for the whole world— not merely day by day for 
a few years, but for life everlasting. 

"EVERMORE GIVE US THIS BREAD" 

The lessons were going home to their hearts, as we 
know by their reply, "Lord, evermore give us this 
Bread." We note the similarity of expression here with 
that used by the Samaritan woman to whom the Lord 
mentioned the gift of life under the figure of the water 
of life— "Evermore give me this water." The answers 
in both cases show us the longings of the people of 
that time, both Jews and Samaritans, for something 
superior to what they had. As the poet has declared, 
"There are longings infinite in the human mind"— 
longings for life eternal. From remote times history 
tells us of how people in every clime have sought for 
health-springs and health-foods that thus they might 
have a longer continuance of the present life and, if 
possible, an annulment of death entirely. All realize 
that this has not yet been attained, and the war still 
goes on. It is on the strength of such longings of the 



soul for continued life that patent-medicines thrive. 
We are glad that there is such a longing in the human 
mind for a perpetuation of life; it becomes, as in this 
case and in the case of the Samaritan woman, a basis 
for further investigation for the eternal life which the 
Lord proffered. 

Our Lord replied, "I am the Bread of life: he that 
cometh to me shall not hunger, and he that believeth on 
me shall never thirst." Again our Lord's words would 
undoubtedly be beyond the depth of the people's understanding. 
We can imagine their consternation, and to 
assist us in sympathizing with them we should remember 
that they were not Spirit-begotten, because Pentecost 
had not yet come, "the holy Spirit was not yet 
given because Jesus was not yet glorified." (John 7:39.) 
Indeed, we find that this question is a very abstruse 
one with many of the Lord's people today, and 
few comprehend it with any clearness except the Spirit-begotten. 

R4147 : page 73 

Let us make the matter as plain as possible 
by continuing the investigation of the context. Therein 
Jesus explains that he himself had come down from 
heaven— not merely like the manna from the clouds, 
but from heaven itself, having laid aside the glory 
which he had with the Father before the world was, 
having humbled himself to an exchange of his previous 
spirit nature for the earthly nature in which he 
was then addressing them— the man Christ Jesus. 
But they could not eat him while he was alive, nor 
could they even understand what he meant when he 
said, "My flesh is meat indeed and my blood is drink 
indeed," and they reasoned, Will this man give us his 
flesh to eat? Is that what he means? The lesson 
was too deep for them; but, thank God, not too deep 
for us. As then some of the disciples forsook Jesus 
and walked no more with him, saying, "This is a hard 
saying, who can receive it?" so today there are some 
who cannot receive this teaching, which is the fundamental 
one of the Gospel of Christ. Whoever cannot 
receive this lesson cannot receive the other lessons 
which are built upon it. Our Lord further explained, 
"My flesh I will give for the life of the world." He had 
not yet given his flesh, though he was in the process 
of giving it; he was drawing out its vitality, its 
strength, in their service, but would complete the work 
of his sacrifice by surrendering his all to death— even 
the death of the cross. And this he did later. 

"WE EAT HIS FLESH" 

We do not eat the flesh of Jesus literally— we eat it 
by faith; that is to say, we appropriate by faith to ourselves 
the merit, the efficacy which was in his flesh and 
which he surrendered to death on our behalf. But 



why was this, and what did he surrender, and how do 
we partake of it? We answer that Adam as the head 
of the race had forfeited his life through disobedience 
and hence, instead of being able to propagate a race of 
perfect beings in harmony with God and privileged to 

R4147 : page 74 

have eternal life, his offspring was like himself, dying, 

unworthy of eternal life. In God's arrangement a redemptive 

sacrifice was necessary— some one must take 

Adam's place, suffer death for him in order to release 

him and to justify his race from the original sentence. 

No human being could be found who was perfect and 

who could give to Justice a ransom for his brother— 

for all were sinners, coming short of the glory, 

the perfection, which God recognizes as essential to 

eternal life. It was to meet these requirements that 

God made the arrangement with his Son by which the 

latter freely, gladly, for the joy set before him, died, the 

Just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God. (1 Pet. 3:18.) 

So, then, it was our Lord's flesh or human nature 

that was given for Adam and his race, and hence 

given for the life of the world, that the world of mankind 

might be recovered from under the sentence of 

death. Thus Jesus, by the grace of God, tasted death 

for every man and we are all redeemed, not with corruptible 

things such as silver and gold, but with the 

precious blood [life] of Christ, as a lamb without spot 

or blemish. -1 Pet. 1:18,19. 

We see, says one, how it was necessary for Christ 
to be made flesh and how it was necessary for him to 
give his flesh for the life of the world by going into 
death, but how shall we eat his flesh? is the question. 
Ah, we answer, the matter, as put in that figurative 
form, is beautifully simple and meaningful when we 
understand it. The eating of the Lord's flesh must be 
an individual matter on the part of all those who would 
benefit by his sacrifice. The eating represents the appropriating 
by faith. Thus, when one comes to an 
understanding of the fact of the redemption and believes 
therein and goes to God in prayer and by faith 
accepts the forgiveness of his sins and reconciliation 
with God, he in so doing is eating the flesh of the Son 
of man; he is partaking of those benefits or advantages 
which our Lord's flesh or sacrifice secured. 

JUSTIFIED BY OUR "EATING" 

The result of such eating by faith signifies the appropriation 
to one's self of all the blessings and privileges 
which our Lord possessed as a perfect man; it 
implies our justification on the human plane, our relationship 
to God as those whose sins are graciously 
overlooked or covered and who have joy and peace and 
fellowship with God through faith in the precious 



blood. We are to continue to eat that we may grow 

stronger and stronger— that we may be able to appropriate 

more and more the wonderful blessings and privileges, 

relationships and divine favors which belonged 

to our Lord, but which he surrendered on our behalf 

and on behalf of all the members of Adam's race. Additionally, 

those who are rightly influenced by the eating 

—those who are drawn nearer to the Lord and led 

to a full consecration of their all to him— these receive 

a special invitation during this Gospel Age to 

drink of his blood. The blood is the life in Scriptural 

language, and hence ordinarily the Jews were not 

to drink blood; to do so would make them guilty or 

responsible for the death of the person or creature. 

Thus the Jews said of our Lord, "His blood be upon 

us"— we assume the responsibility of his death. 

And thus also the Apostle explains that those who 
partake of the blood of Christ symbolically in the communion 
cup are symbolically representing themselves 
as being guilty of the blood of Christ, guilty of the 
death of Christ— unless they partake of it with the 
proper, the intended signification. What is that intended 
signification? We answer that our Lord stated the 
matter at the last Supper, saying to his disciples, 
"This is the cup of the New Covenant in my blood- 
drink ye all of it." This cup of the fruit of the vine represents 
my blood, my death; by it the New Covenant 
will eventually be sealed, and I invite you who believe on 
me to partake of this with me, to partake of this not as 
those who caused my death, but as those who voluntarily 
gave up their own lives and joined with me in this 
death, in this self-sacrifice. As you partake of this 
cup with me it signifies that you lay down your lives 
as I laid down mine and that you become participants 
with me in this cup which speaks, which means the 
great sacrifice, the great life given through which the 
New Covenant will be established, under which all the 
families of the earth will be blessed. 

So, then, under the guidance of the holy Spirit 
through the words of the Apostle we may see a depth 
of meaning in our Lord's words which the people whom 
he addressed did not comprehend. Indeed, we believe 
that while our Lord addressed these words to the Jews 
he intended them more particularly for us to whom 
they have been communicated and by whom they have 
been more fully understood. We rejoice, then, in the 
justification which we have through partaking of his 
flesh— through being justified by the sacrifice of his 
humanity— our appropriation of our share of human 
justification. And we rejoice also that eventually the 
whole world shall be privileged to eat of that flesh— to 
accept the grace of God in the cancellation of their human 
sins and weaknesses, and to realize that all those 
blessings of restitution times, the blessings of the Millennium, 
will come to them because Christ died for 
their sins, because he gave to them his flesh to eat. 



The whole world is to eat of that Bread, and, as the 
Apostle intimates, the Church is now privileged to be a 
part with the Lord in the Loaf that is being broken, as 
well as to be participants in the cup of ignominy and 
self-sacrifice which the Father poured for him and 
which he permits us to share with him— for if we suffer 
with him we shall also reign with him, if we be dead 
with him we shall also live with him, if we drink of his 
cup we shall also share in his joys in the Kingdom by 
and by.— 2 Tim. 2:12. 

WHOM THE FATHER GIVETH SHALL COME 

The multitude who had eaten of the bread the night 
before, and who now had received the explanation respecting 
the higher food necessary to eternal life, did 
not believe, although they recognized Jesus as a very 
wonderful personage indeed, and probably, like another 
multitude, were ready to declare, "Never man spake 
like this man." (John 7:46.) Was our Lord disconcerted 

R4147 : page 75 

and disappointed because these thousands of 
Israel, heirs of the promises, received him not, heeded 
not his message? Nay, verily! Nor should we his 
followers think strange of it that in this harvest time 
the divine message should be incomprehensible to the 
great majority of the household of faith of our time. 
We read nothing of our Lord's becoming excited to a 
frenzy and appealing to the people and teaching them 
that they were about to fall into an eternity of torture 
if they did not receive him. We read nothing about 
the apostles going out amongst them and urging them 
to a mourner's bench. Quite to the contrary of all this. 
Jesus evidently expected that few would believe; he 
even turned to his disciples and said, "Will ye also go 
away?" But they answered, No; to whom should we 
go? from you we have the message of eternal life which 
comes from nowhere else. Master, we will stand by 
you; we could not do otherwise, our every interest is 
bound up in this glorious message which we have 
heard from your lips. We are ready to die with you, to 
drink of your cup. 

Instead of manifesting any perturbation our Lord 
said to the multitude, This is what I told you before; 
ye have seen me, ye have believed not. Why? Because 
ye are not of the flock of sheep whom my Father 
hath given me to lead at the present time. Other 
sheep I have which are not of this flock; by and by I 
will attend to them. But now, "All that the Father 
hath given me shall come to me; and him that cometh 
to me I will in no wise cast out"— reject. What is this 
if not an election, a selection? How much in harmony 
it is with what our Lord uttered in his prayer on the 
night before his crucifixion, "I pray not for the world, 



but for those whom thou hast given me. ..that they 
all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me and I in 
thee, that they also may be one in us; that the world 

R4148 : page 75 

may [then, later] believe that thou hast sent me!" 
(John 17:9,21.) As our Lord was not expecting all to 
come to him and to accept of his gracious offer and 
God's gracious provision in him and thus to be justified 
through eating his flesh, so he could not expect either 
that many would go on still further and make the consecration 
to walk in his steps in the narrow way and 
thus be partakers of his cup and prospective joint-heirs 
with him. Oh, no! these in all, from first to 
last, are but a Little Flock, but a very blessed Little 
Flock to whom, as the Master declared, the Father will 
give the Kingdom. (Luke 12:32.) And when they 
shall be changed and are like their Master and shall receive 
the Kingdom power and glory and dominion- 
then will come through that Kingdom the overthrow of 
the prince of darkness, the prince of this world; the 
overthrow of sin and the work of blessing, enlightening 
and uplifting all the poor world of mankind who 
are not now called and drawn by the Father! 

Note our Lord's words in this connection, "No 
man can come unto me except the Father which sent 
me draw him." (John 6:44.) There is an exclusiveness 
about this: the time had not yet come, mentioned 
in Revelation, when the water of life shall flow freely, 
and whosoever will may come. (Rev. 22:17.) That 
glorious time belongs to the Millennial Kingdom and 
not to the present time, which is devoted to the election 
or selection of the Bride class of joint-heirs which 
the Father is now drawing, calling, sealing. Mark the 
distinctive difference between this drawing of the present 
time by the Father and that later drawing of the 
Millennial Age, which will not be by the Father but by 
the Son, and which will not be exclusive but inclusive, 
including all mankind. Hearken to our Master's words 
to this effect, that "I, if I be lifted up, will draw all 
men unto me." (John 12:32.) All men are not yet 
drawn to the Lord. Why? Because the lifting up is 
not yet complete. The Head was lifted up not only at Calvary 
but was subsequently highly exalted as a reward, 
and the members of his Body, the members of the 
Bride class who follow in his steps, must finish their 
course and also be highly exalted as his joint-heirs before 
the lifting-up process will be complete. 

With that glorious "change" of the First Resurrection 
the Millennial Kingdom will be ushered in and during 
that wonderful reign of righteousness, that shining 
forth of the sun of light and truth for the blessing of 
the world, all mankind will be drawn away from sin 
and selfishness, away from sickness, pain and sorrow, 
away from everything that is evil, toward the Lord, 



that they may partake of his flesh indeed and have 
eternal life with all the blessings of restitution which 
God has provided through the great Redeemer. We 
are not in this teaching Universalism, for as many of 
those who are called and drawn now to be of the Bride 
class can, and many do, resist the drawings, or, as the 
Apostle says, "receive the grace of God in vain." So it 
will be possible to resist the drawings of the Millennial 
Age, as is pointed out in the Scriptures in various 
statements, of which this may suffice, "It shall come 
to pass that the soul that will not hear [obey] that 
Prophet, shall be destroyed from amongst the people" 
—in the Second Death, without hope of any recovery. 
Note again the Lord's promise to these Elect ones 
whom the Father now draws and who now come and 
feed upon our Lord's flesh and who drink of his cup, his 
blood, and participate with him in his sacrifice. Their 
hope is stated in these words, "I will raise him up at the 
last day." The last day, the great seventh day, the Millennial 
day. Ah, yes! We remember it is written respecting 
the Church, the Bride class, "God shall help 
her right early in the morning" (Psa. 46:5.)— the morning 
of that Millennial day. The six days, epochs of 
one thousand years each, from Adam have passed, the 
seventh is already dawning and the time is near at 
hand when the Bride, all glorious, shall be presented to 
the great King, the Father, by the great King, his Son, 
our Lord— "with gladness and rejoicing shall she be 
brought: they shall enter into the King's palace."— 
Psa. 45:15. 

"I WILL IN NO WISE CAST OUT" 

How glad we are that our dear Master added these 
words. Without them we might have doubted the efficacy 
of the calling and the drawing which we receive; 

R4148 : page 76 

and some might have said, Yes, I was indeed drawn, 

but evidently the Lord Jesus did not count me worthy 

of a place amongst his followers. He here assures us 

that the drawing of the Father which brings us to him 

with a desire to be his disciples will insure for us his 

aid, his succor, his assistance, his acceptance. Thus 

we may know that if we fail of the grace of God now provided 

for us in the high calling, it will be our own fault, 

because of failure to give heed to the voice of the Shepherd 

and to walk in his steps. 

R4142 : page 76 

"THE STONE WITNESS" 

In a dark, dreary land, 
In a wilderness lone, 



In a desert of sand 

Stands the Witness of Stone. 
So ancient, so vast, 

So majestic its plan, 
It speaks from the past 

Of a strength not of man. 

So perfect the whole, 

So true the design, 
It speaks to the soul 

Of a Builder divine. 
Behold how it towers 

In its grandeur alone ! 
"God's ways are not ours," 

Saith the Witness of Stone. 

R4143 : page 76 

It is awful to go 

When the world is asleep, 
And stand 'neath the glow 

Of the star-studded deep, 
And gaze at that tower 

With its secret unknown,— 
For great is the power 

Of the Witness of Stone! 

They have scoffed at the Truth 

Which is written in ink, 
They have deemed it uncouth 

For the brain which can think; 
But they will awake 

When they see it defined 
In figures which make 

An appeal to the mind! 

The Book of the soul, 

The Book of the heart- 
There is naught on that scroll 

For the shrewd or the smart! 
And so there must be 

A witness for such, 
A thing they can see 

And a thing they can touch. 

'Tis a book for the wise, 

If the meek and the just; 
'Tis a chart for the eyes 

Long blinded by dust. 
'Tis a proof for the sage 

Whose god is the known- 
There is truth for the age 

In the Witness of Stone. 

—Grace P. Bronaugh. 



R4148 : page 76 

"I WAS BLIND, I NOW SEE" 

-JOHN9:l-41.-MARCH 15.- 

Golden Text:— "I am the Light of the world."— V. 5. 

OUR Lord was in Jerusalem on the occasion of the 

Feast of Tabernacles, in the fall of the third 

year of his ministry— just six months before his 

crucifixion. No doubt there were then as now many 

blind men sitting by the wayside soliciting alms, especially 

at that season of the year, when the crowds gathered 

for worship and were apt to feel benevolent. Our 

Lord did not heal all of these blind; the recorded instances 

are just six. His mission was not for the healing 

of the sick, but for the preaching of the Gospel, 

the power of healing being exercised merely to point 

to the Gospel message, as in the instance given in this 

lesson. 

As our Lord and the apostles passed one of 
these blind men it was noted that he was blind from 
birth. Probably his asking for alms led to a discussion 
of a very important question raised by the apostles 
—"Lord, which did sin, this man or his parents, 
that he was born blind?" It may be that the apostles 
were less clear in their logic than usual, else they 
might have known that the man could not have sinned 
before birth; but it is barely possible that some of the 
heathen ideas respecting the transmigration of souls 
had come to their attention. Satan has deluded many 
of the heathen into the supposition that they lived before 
in some other form or condition and that having been 
born into the world they were merely having life renewed 
under changed conditions, either better or worse than 
previously. This view is held by millions of Buddhists 
and also by the Mormons. The Scriptures, however, 
are very explicit to the contrary, teaching that Adam 
was a direct creation of God and that all the human 
family have sprung direct from him by natural processes 
of birth. 

Our Lord's reply that neither this man nor his 
parents had sinned is not to be understood as meaning 
that he and his parents were without blemish, without 
a share in the condemnation which came upon Father 
Adam and which, through him in a general way, has 
come to all of his posterity. Of this the Apostle says, 
"By one man's disobedience sin entered into the world 
and death as the result of sin, and thus death passed 
upon all men." (Rom. 5:12.) This blind man and his 
parents as members of the Adamic race were under the 
death sentence, the same as ourselves and others. Our 
Lord evidently meant and was understood to mean that 
it was not because of any special sin committed by this 



man and his parents that he had been born blind. 
Similarly on another occasion he said, speaking of 
those upon whom the Tower of Siloam fell, "Think ye 
that these were sinners above other men? I tell you, 
Nay; but unless ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish" 
—not all perish in the same manner, but all shall 
die. (Luke 13:4.) The death sentence is over all, and 

R4148 : page 77 

only by getting into relationship with the Life-giver 
can any of us hope to escape it. 

AFFLICTIONS NO PROOF OF GOD'S DISPLEASURE 

The principal point of this lesson, therefore, is 
that calamities are not necessarily marks of divine disapproval. 
It was not so in this man's case; it was not so 
in the case of Job nor in the instance of the burial under 
the Tower of Siloam. Nevertheless, our Lord did imply 
that with the Jews special sickness often meant 
stripes or punishment for personal sin. Thus in the 
case of the impotent man at the pool of Bethesda; in 
a previous lesson we noted our Lord's words to the 
healed one, "Go thy way, sin no more, lest a worse 
thing come upon thee." It is undoubtedly true that 
many of the ailments that afflict mankind are the results 
of improper living on their part or on the part of their 
forefathers. Scrofula is such a disease, often being 
transmitted through several generations; gout is another. 
Indeed we could mention scores. It is proper, 
therefore, when we find ourselves in sickness, that we 
examine carefully to what extent we ourselves have 
been responsible through careless living, either through 
eating or drinking too much, or by the use of foods unsuited 
to our condition. If we find the cause of such 
an ailment in such a direction it is well that we repent 
thereof and take such steps in an opposite direction 
as may be possible to us, while with prayer we resolve 
that with the Lord's assistance we shall be more consistent 

R4149 : page 77 

in the future; that our eating and drinking and 
whatsoever we may do may be to his glory and for the 
best possible preservation and usefulness of the mortal 
body we have consecrated to his service. 

But if on investigation we cannot find that our experience 
and sickness were the result of self-gratification 
nor the result of hereditary disease beyond our 
control, it would be well, then, for us to examine carefully 
and note whether or not our experiences had resulted 
from our activity in the Lord's service. If so, 
we should glory in them; we should rejoice that we 
have been enabled to lay down some of life and health 
in the service of him who did so much for us. Nevertheless 



as wise stewards we should seek to note whether 
or not we could accomplish as good results or better 
by a different course, one which might be less exhausting, 
less debilitating. Even then, however, the thought 
before our minds should not be self -protection, for he 
that loveth his life to an improper degree will lose it. 
Our thought should be our responsibility as stewards, 
that we might accomplish in our bodies that which 
would be most pleasing and acceptable in his sight. If 
none of these suggestions seems to fit our case we still 
have two others to examine:— 

(1) Might our sickness be a chastisement for a 
course displeasing to the Lord? Might it be in the 
nature of stripes? If in our minds we can find sin at 
the door of our hearts— a wrong course of life, it would 
be safe to accept the experience as a chastisement and 
to seek to profit thereby. But otherwise, (2) finding 
none of these things to fit the case we should consider 
that our affliction, as in the case before us in this lesson, 
is simply for our welfare, to assist us to the application 
of some valuable spiritual lesson, or, as our Lord 
expressed it, that the works of God might be made 
manifest. It should be our pleasure to glorify God in 
our bodies and in our spirits [minds] which are his, 
either by receiving good lessons ourselves or by pointing 
good lessons to others. As we shall see this was 
much the experience of the blind man; his case was 
one which operated as a blessing for himself and as a 
manifestation of the Lord Jesus and his power and as 
a testing to the Pharisees and others of his time and 
as a valuable instruction to many of the Lord's people 
from that day until the present time. 

"THE WORKS OF GOD" 

We emphasize the fact that the works of God were 
not merely in the healing of one out of thousands of 
sick and blind, but the manifestation of Jesus as the 
Light of the world and the influence and testing which 
that would mean to the Jewish people— gathering out 
of them a little handful of Israelites indeed for membership 
in the Bride class and the rejection of the great 
mass of that nation as unfit for a share in the heavenly 
Kingdom. This work our Lord proceeded to do in the 
healing of this blind man, saying, "I am working the 
works of him that sent me while it is day. The night 
cometh when no man can work." Our Lord's day of 
opportunity was rapidly drawing to a close. This miracle 
and others, especially the awakening of Lazarus, 
brought him so prominently before the eyes of the people 
that there was a division amongst them concerning 
these things, some accepting, some rejecting, and this 
division must necessarily proceed throughout the 
whole nation. It was the test, and it must culminate 
in a night time in which the Light of the world, Jesus, 
would be for a time entirely extinguished— before the 



Israelites, before Pilate, at Calvary. Similarly with 
each one of the Lord's followers we might say that 
there is a day time of opportunity when his time and 
talent and zeal may bring forth fruitage to the Lord's 
praise, and that the opportunities then afforded should 
be exercised to the fullest, for to each will come a night 
time when the opportunities will pass from him as he 
passes into death. 

In harmony with this is the prophetic statement, 
"Do with thy might what thy hand findeth to do: for 
there is no work nor device nor knowledge nor wisdom 
in the grave [sheol] whither thou goest." (Eccl. 9:10.) 
And there is another application still which we should 
not forget, namely, that the Church as a whole has had 
varying experiences. Beginning at Pentecost there 
was quite an illumination upon the early Church; but 
it was not morning time, it was evening time. The 
glow of light which was upon them was from the setting 
sun; gradually the darkness came and throughout 
the long epoch of this Gospel Age gross darkness has 
prevailed and in it the Lord's people have been able to 
see only a little of the pathway at a time; as it is written, 
"Thy Word is a lamp to my feet and a lantern to 
my footsteps." That epoch in general has been called 
the "dark ages," and now we are approaching the dawning 
of the morning and the path before shines more and 
more. 

R4149 : page 78 

The light now shining more closely resembles that 
which shone upon the early Church, and in both instances 
it is the light of the parousia, the light of the 
presence of the Son of Man. But even in this morning 
of dawning light we are to expect another time of deep 
darkness: a night time in a certain sense will intervene, 
an overcasting of the skies, a great morning storm, as 
the Lord has foretold through the Prophet, "The morning 
cometh, a night also." (Isa. 21:12.) The morning 
is here, but before it is ushered in in the full splendor 
of Millennial brightness the great storm of the time of 
trouble will break— "a time of trouble such as was not 
since there was a nation." (Dan. 12:1.) Therefore we 
may well say to ourselves, individually and as the Body 
of Christ, we "must work the works of him that sent 
us"— who commissioned us while it is day, while the 
light of the sun is upon us, because the night of trouble 
cometh when no man can work, when our opportunities 
for serving the cause and the brethren and for 
the public dissemination of the Truth will be forcibly 
closed by the powers that be. 

THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD 

Our Lord added, "As long as I am in the world, I 
am the light of the world." The light shone amongst 



them to reprove the evil and to encourage the good for 
another six months, up to the time of our Lord's crucifixion, 
but he left behind him some who were receptive 
to the influence of the light, his Spirit, and who were 
illuminated by the Pentecostal blessing. Of these he 
said, "Ye are the light of the world." "Let your light so 
shine before men that they, seeing your good works, 
may glorify your Father in heaven." Thus, as the Apostle 
says, "As he was, so are we in this world"— lights 
shining in darkness, appreciated not, comprehended 
not, understood not, refused, repulsed by the great 
mass, even by those who claimed to be the people of 
God, but whose hearts were not in such sympathy with 
the light as to permit them to receive the holy Spirit's 
illumination. For be it noted that there is quite a distinction 
between having the holy Spirit and being illuminated 
by it so as to let our light shine, and on the 
other hand being of those upon whom such illumination 
shines. Our Lord let his light shine upon many, 
and so we have opportunity to let our light shine upon 
many. But no one has the light within him except he 
is begotten of the holy Spirit.— Heb. 10:32. 

ANOINTING THE EYES OF THE BLIND 

This little discussion was probably within the 
hearing of the blind man and intended not merely for 
him but also for the disciples and all who have since 
believed on the Lord through their words. Afterwards 
our Lord spat upon the ground and made an ointment 
with the dust and saliva, with which he anointed the 
eyes of the blind man. All this implies some assistance 
from the blind man. His assent is also implied in 
his going at our Lord's bidding to wash in the waters 
of the pool of Siloam. Faith was first followed by 
works and this attested a degree of perfection. If he 
had not believed he would not have submitted to the 
anointing, neither would he have left his seat as a beggar 
to go and wash. The ointment which our Lord 
made and used, we may safely say, had no particular 
virtue in it, neither had the waters used any virtue in 
them, and this fact is recognized in the whole narrative; 
it was merely an aid to the blind man's faith, but 
did not in his mind perform the cure; he recognized 
that it was a miracle, as did the Pharisees. The great 
weight of this miracle lay in the fact that this man was 
born blind, and as he said subsequently no one up to 
that time had ever heard of the opening of the eyes of one 
born blind. Indeed, oculists today tell us that with all 
the advancement of science since on this line those who 
are born blind are beyond hope of relief, except in the 
one ailment, cataract. And in this case the remedy is 
but partial, through a surgical operation; removing 
the lens, for which an artificial one is substituted. 

The miracle was evidently the talk of all in the 
vicinity of the man's home; neighbors and friends 



congratulated him, but some were unable to believe 
that it was the same person, unable to believe that one 
born blind should ever be able to see. It became quite 
an advertisement for Jesus, for the man when asked 
how it came that he could see told that a person named 
Jesus had performed the miracle. The Pharisees, already 
envious and seeking occasion to kill our Lord, 
had, we are told, formulated a resolution that if any 
one confessed Jesus as the Messiah he should be excluded 
from the synagogue and its privileges as unworthy 
of the honor and liberty and privileges belonging to a 
true Jew. Lest the matter should spread, and, if possible 
to corner it and head it off, they made an investigation. 
Going to the man's father and mother, the 
parents simply told the truth and avoided anything 
further, saying that they knew him to be their son and 
that he was born blind and that now he saw; but how 

R4150 : page 78 

they could not say, for they did not see; he was of age 
and able to speak for himself. The once blind man 
was again interrogated: How? When? Where? as 
though to entrap him in an untruth. His own heart 
honest, he perceived that these so-called holy men 
were so opposed to Jesus that they were trying every 
way to disprove or belittle the miracle. 

Turning to the healed man the Pharisees said to 
him, Thank God for your sight, even though it came 
through a bad channel, for we know that this man Jesus 
who healed you is a sinner, is a hypocrite, is a falsifier 
in claiming to be Messiah; he is a bad man. 
This was more than the once blind man could or should 
endure; he must not hear the character of his best 
friend traduced without speaking a word in his defense; 
he therefore said, This is a very remarkable 
case that a miracle should be performed such as never 
before was heard of, and that the man to perform the 
miracle should be a sinner with whom God would have 
no dealings; this is indeed remarkable. It has been a 
teaching amongst us Jews that God would not even 
hear the prayer of sinners; how then could this man, a 
sinner, have performed so stupendous a miracle? 
Then they began to cross-question him again respecting 
the how and when and where. But perceiving their 
dishonesty of heart he said to them, Why are you asking 

R4150 : page 79 

again? You remember what I told you; are you 
anxious to become his disciples that you want me to 
explain further, or what is your motive? Perceiving 
that their hypocritical designs were discovered, they 
railed at the man, saying, No, we are not Jesus' disciples; 
you are one of his, we are Moses' disciples. 
We know that God appointed Moses, and by his Law 



we stand; as for this man, who knows anything about 
him? He is said to come from Nazareth, but is not of 
wonderful parentage, and is not the kind of a Messiah 
that we have been expecting, with power and great 
glory and ability to deliver our nation from the hands of 
the Romans. You had best follow him, we will have 
nothing to do with you or him; do not come again to 
our synagogue. Consider yourself an outcast from 
the religious people of your own nation. 

Jesus heard that they had cast him out and found 
him and said to him, Dost thou believe on the Son of 
God? In answer to the man's desire to know more our 
Lord revealed himself to him as the Messiah. Then he 
worshiped Jesus. Notice the exercise of the Lord's 
providential care over this man and his interests. He 
did not spare him from being cast out of the synagogue, 
but turned the same into a special blessing of instruction 
of much advantage to the man in every way. 

In the various features of this incident we today 
find a lesson along higher lines. Some of us were born 
blind— blind to the Lord and his true character, blind 
to the truth of the divine Word. The blindness upon 
us was neither our own fault nor the fault of our parents. 
They as well as we were honest-hearted toward 
the Lord. Our blindness, therefore, was not a chastisement 
for sins. The darkness, the blindness, which 
so long has overspread Christendom entrapped us as 
well as others, but the Lord had mercy upon us and 
passed our way and made ointment and eyesalve for 
us. He took of the clay of human agency and mixed 
it with his Word, the fruit of his lips, and with that 
combination he gave us the anointing of the eyes of 
our understanding and bade us wash in the waters of 
Siloam, his Word of truth and grace. We followed his 
prescription and now we see. A new world is opened 
before us, "Wonderful things in the Bible we see!" 
The Scribes and Pharisees of our day wonder, 
criticise and try to account for the blessing which has 
come to us, and of course will find fault with every 
agency which the Lord has used in connection with our 
blessing, for their hearts are not in the right attitude 
to appreciate the light of the favor of God. 

It is for us now to take a similar stand to that 
which this blind man took, to confess the truth, confess 
the light, confess the miracle which the Lord has 
wrought upon the eyes of our understanding and to 
give him our hearts. And it is also for us to find that 
this will bring against us the anger, the chagrin, the 
malice of the Scribes and Pharisees of our day. It is 
for us to find that this will lead men to separate us from 
their company, to cast us out of their synagogues. 
Through the Prophet the Lord has foretold this, saying, 
"Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out, 
said, The Lord be glorified [we do this casting out for 
the good of the Lord's cause that we may glorify him]. 
But he shall appear to your joy and they shall be 



ashamed." (Isa. 66:5.) How many of the Lord's people 
have found that the major part of their blessing 
comes after they have acknowledged the Truth, stood 
up for it and endured some persecution on its account! 
Then the Lord findeth them, he knows where they are 
and all about them all the time, but then he reveals 
himself to them specially that they may know him, 
that they may have fellowship with him, that they may 
receive from him a blessing, as in the case of this blind 
man. 

"ARE WE BLIND ALSO?" 

The last two verses of our lesson call our attention 
to the theological pride of the Pharisees. And, alas, 
in this also, we must concede that they represent fitly 
some of their successors in Spiritual Israel who are 
spiritually proud. Our Lord had declared that his 
coming into the world would prove a judgment or testing 
to that order of things, that some of the blind 
would be made to see and some of those who had been 
seeing would become blind. That is to say, the truth 
would prove a testing to many, some coming out of the 
blindness and darkness and ignorance and superstition 
to an appreciation of the grandest of God's blessings, 
and others, who had a larger measure of favor previously, 
lapsing into a blind condition. Those who 
received the Lord received enlightenment at Pentecost, 
and the Apostle remarks that the remainder were 
blinded and are to remain blind until the close of this 
Gospel Age. 

Hearing his remark about the blind ones seeing 
and the seeing ones becoming blind the Pharisees said 
to the Lord, In what list are you placing us? not 
amongst the blind, we hope? Jesus replied that it 
would have been better for them if they had been blind, 
if their course had been actuated by total ignorance, 
but the case was different. They did have considerable 
enlightenment and therefore corresponding responsibility, 
but because of their pride and self-sufficiency 
in taking what they did see as the whole truth and rejecting 
the real message of the Lord they were hardening 
themselves against the light, against the truth, 
and their sin was fastening itself upon them, shackling 
them so that they could not and would not and did not 
receive the light that was then due. 

Are there not a good many in this situation today, 
prominent Christian people boasting of their enlightenment 
and yet afraid of the light of God's Word and 
afraid, ashamed to acknowledge either their own ignorance 
of it or the light that is now shining upon it by 
the Lord's presence and through the channels which 
he is using for the scattering of the light in this present 
time? Let us be prompt to acknowledge that we 
have nothing of our own, neither light nor wisdom, 
and let us receive at the Lord's hands the true wisdom, 



the true enlightenment which comes from above. If 
all could come to this position rapidly the truth would 
spread. The great opposition comes from those who 
claim to know but do not really know; whose boastfulness 
and pride not only hinder them from entering 
into the light, but lead them also to hinder others from 
appreciating it. 



page 81 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXIX MARCH 15 No. 6 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 83 

Our Losing Fight with the Criminal 83 

The Pre-Existence of Jesus 83 

Higher Criticism-Infidelity Not Satisfied 84 

Paid Music in Churches 84 

Popular Religion vs. Bible Religion 85 

"Miracle Wheat" 86 

The Memorial, April 14 86 

Holding Fast at the Mark 87 

Quarterly Review Lesson 88 

The Progress of Total Abstinence 90 

"Within the Vail" (Poem) 92 

The Shepherd, the Door, the Flocks 92 

page 82 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R4153 : page 82 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S SERMONS WEEKLY 



THE CINCINNATI WEEKLY ENQUIRER, a clean paper of 
very large circulation, proposes to publish Brother Russell's 
sermons every week, and offers us a special clubbing rate. 
This enables us to supply it with the WATCH TOWER for $1.50 
per year. If you have already sent in your TOWER subscription 
send merely the balance, 50c. Moneys returned by the 
Woman's National Daily will be applied on the Enquirer. Act 
promptly. Order extra copies for your friends if you so desire. 

Humanly speaking, it seems quite unfortunate that the 
Woman's National Daily accepted subscriptions with the understanding 
that Brother Russell's sermons would appear weekly, 
and then discontinued them. Although it received nearly 
5,000 subscriptions through us, it declines to refund the money 
unless the subscribers so demand. We have asked you to send 
postcard demands for the stoppage of the subscriptions and 
the refund of the money through us, but evidently few of you 
have done this, for only a few have been refunded. Were 
you all to insist no doubt the sermons would be published. 

page 82 

GIVE PROMPT ATTENTION, PLEASE 



The Post Office Dept. is unwilling to restore second-class 
privileges to our Old Theology Quarterly unless we can show a 
larger list of specifically paid subscriptions. We suggest, therefore, 
that individually or in groups, classes or ecclesias, you 
send us bona fide paid lists for as many copies as you can use. 
The rate will be 6c per year; or, 10 to one address (40 tracts), 
20c; 50 to one address (200 tracts), $1; or more at the same 
rate. You may send personally, or bunch your orders 
through one of your number as your agent. Tract Fund subscriptions 
and Good Hopes may be applied on this account 
by explicitly authorizing us so to do. Please act promptly. 



R4150 : page 83 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
OUR LOSING FIGHT WITH THE CRIMINAL 



"COMMISSIONER Bingham reports 4,470 arrests 

made by the Bureau of Detectives for felonies 

in 1907, against 2,091 in 1906. Convictions 

totaled 1,330. The increase in arrests for misdemeanors 

is still more startling: the total was 3,889, while in 

1906 it was 910. There were 1,566 convictions. Chief 

Wilkie of the United States Secret Service reports 216 

arrests, of which 160 were for counterfeiting. A substantial 

decrease in this crime is shown, largely due to 

the conviction of Irving Tolley, now confined in Atlanta, 

Ga., who was responsible for 50 per cent, of the 

raised notes. The most significant item in the report 

of J. C. Graveur, chief probation officer of the New 

York Court of Special Sessions, discloses 565 persons 

placed on parole. Only twenty failed to meet the requirements 

of their release. 

"Society not only fails to hold its ground but it is 
losing in its warfare against the criminal. In 1901 the 
Government published the conclusion of Eugene Smith 
that our annual tribute to crime was $600,000,000, and 
criminologists have recently computed a substantial 
increase. To our eternal disgrace, the United States 
leads all civilized countries in the number of homicides. 
Over 8,000 yearly is the average. William C. 
Clemens fixes New York City's quota at 240. In six 
years over 300 murderers have gone undetected. The 
Alabama State Bar Association has shown that in proportion 
to population there are twelve murders in New 
England to one in London; in California seventy-five 

R4151 : page 83 

to one; in Nevada 245 to one."— New York World. 



The above is from an editorial and we have no 
reason to doubt its correctness. The facts set forth 
are open to speculation as to why they are true. It is 
well that we remember that this indictment relates 
to the most favored and most prosperous, most 
wealthy, most awake and most generally educated nation 
on earth. Looking at the ghastly figures, let us 
learn the lesson that worldly prosperity does not spell 
happiness, contentment, peace and joy. We have 
every reason to believe that similar results would show 
in every civilized land under similarly prosperous 



conditions. 

The lesson to us is to emphasize the Bible's 
teaching that God alone can satisfy the soul;— that the 
Spirit of Christ is "the spirit of a sound mind." True, 
something should be credited to the fact that many of 
these murders, etc., were committed by emigrants suddenly 
transported into new conditions and unable to 
balance and adjust themselves to the new conditions. 
But why is it that the greater intelligence and opportunity 
do not make for peace and holiness instead of sin and 
crime? We reply, Because the chains of ignorance and 
superstition have been the blasphemous misrepresentations 
of the divine character and plan! These have 
caused the masses to fear and to hate God and his Book, 
which, it is claimed, reveals his plans as diabolical. 
Increased knowledge to such means doubt of all religious 
teaching— practically atheism or universalism, according 
to the bent of the mind. 

While zealous missionaries are teaching heathen 
children our civilization and our popular travesties 
upon the religion of the Bible, they fondly dream of 
thus converting the world and fulfilling our Lord's 
prayer, "Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth 
as in heaven." Alas! how blind we all have been not to 
have noticed these two facts: (1) That the numbers 
of the heathen in proportion even to the nominally 
Christian doubled last century; (2) That if we could 
bring all the heathen up to the standard of our most 
civilized and most progressive nation it would mean 
that God's will would be less done the world over than 
it is now. 

Let us console ourselves with the Bible's teaching, 
that the evils of our day, induced by greater worldly 
light and ambition, will end in their own destruction 
and prepare the way for the Kingdom of God's dear Son. 

THE PRE-EXISTENCE OF JESUS 



The Christian Commonwealth of London is firmly 
committed to "The New Theology." It publishes Rev. 

R4151 : page 84 

Morgan Campbell's sermons and now one of its editors, 
Rev. J. Warschauer, M.A., D.Phil., thus answers, in the 
columns of the Commonwealth, a correspondent's question 
on the preexistence of Jesus:— 

"In answer to a Scottish correspondent— to whom, 
by the way, I want to send a word of cheer, more even 
than a theological answer— I quite agree with his view, 
viz., that Jesus 'preexisted' only in the sense in which 
all men do, that is to say, in the mind of God, for 
whom there is neither past nor future, 'for all live unto 
him.' That our Lord had a conscious, individual 



existence prior to his birth some nineteen centuries 
ago, I see no reason for supposing. Having come into 
the world— with no more control over that event, as I 
hold, than other infants— and having reached maturity, 
he voluntarily adopted a certain course of action; 
but that he had determined upon that course in some 
previous heavenly existence, I simply do not believe." 



Thus the pendulum swings from one extreme to 
the other while the central truth is ignored. From 
holding and teaching that Jesus was one of three Gods, 
one of a trinity of Gods, the next step usually is to the 
above extreme— the claim that he was merely a 
member of the sinner-race. Oh! how much more 
rational is the Scriptural teaching that our Lord was 
Jehovah's "only begotten Son," "the first and the last," 
by and through whom angels and men were created, in 
fulfilment of the Father's wondrous plan. How this, 
the Bible presentation, glorifies the Lord Jesus more 
than any other! As the Apostle declares, "To us there 
is one God the Father, of whom are all things; and one 
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things." See afresh 
the proofs in DAWN-STUDIES, Vol. V., "The Atonement, 
Chapters III. to VII. 

HIGHER CRITICISM-INFIDELITY NOT SATISFIED 



In the Educational Review Mr. Chas. E. Witter 
complains that agnosticism is not progressing rapidly 
enough in the Sunday-schools of the world. We quote: 

"There can be no doubt that in many cases the 
teaching lags behind the real knowledge of the teacher. 
Many who have outgrown the crude and literal interpretations 
of earlier years, into whose minds religious 
truths have entered in new forms, are seemingly afraid 
to impart their real light to their young hearers. When 
they come before their classes in the Sunday-schools 
they feel obligated to give them, not the fresh views 
that have proved more satisfactory to themselves, but 
the traditional statements of orthodoxy in which most 
of them were reared. This may be due to a strained 
sense of loyalty to their church organization or to a 
feeling that these older views are commonly reputed to 
be safer for children, but in any case the results can be 
only bad. They are bad first of all because of the insincerity 
in the teacher himself. No amount of juggling 
and trimming for the sake of expediency can 
justify one in teaching as true what he knows to be 
false, in teaching as fact what he knows to be myth. 
In the second place, such teaching is in the end ineffective. 
One cannot teach satisfactorily and effectually 
that which he only half-heartedly believes himself. 



The secret of the wonderful power that the religious 
teaching and preaching of the fathers had over their 
hearers was just in this fact, that they believed with 
all the intensity of conviction every word which they 
uttered. The results are bad, moreover and chiefly, because 
of the great wrong that is thus done to the child's 
future. The time must inevitably come to those young 
people who read and think when they will awake to the 
superficiality and falsity of such teaching, and when 
that awakening comes the reaction will probably be 
more radical than it would have been had they been 
properly enlightened in the first place. The pendulum 
will swing so far that in rejecting these feeble and narrow 
views of spiritual truths they will in many cases be 
led to reject all versions of them. That this is a real danger 
can be seen by daily observation. It accounts for 
the absolute skepticism and agnosticism of many, and 
it also accounts for the fact, often noted, that the most 
confirmed infidels frequently spring from just those 
narrow denominational schools and influences that 
refuse obstinately to open to the light of more modern 
and better conceptions of the religious life." 



Alas! this modern infidelity, styled "New Theology," 
is all too rapidly gaining a footing in our Sunday-schools! 
Are not children deliberately taught that the 
Genesis account of creation is a falsehood contradicted 
by "Science"? Are they not taught that the flood of 
Noah's day is a myth, and that Jonah never was 
swallowed by a whale? Are they not taught to give no 
heed to what the Apostle Peter calls "the more sure 
word of prophecy to which we do well to take heed, as 
unto a light shining in a dark place until the day dawn"? 

True, these underminers of Biblical faith do not 
deny that there once was a great Teacher named Jesus, 
whose teachings have influenced the most enlightened 
quarters of the globe. That would be worse than 
wasting breath. Besides they want Jesus for a figurehead 
or rallying center for their "New Theology." But 
it does not take the honest child-mind long to draw the 
conclusion that when Jesus mentioned the flood of 
Noah's day and the fact that Jonah was three days and 
three nights in the belly of the great fish, and that he 
quoted from the prophets as inspired writings— that if 
these be false Jesus must have been a fraud and not 
the Son of God, else he would not have declared these 
truths. Not only so, it would imply that he was much 
less inspired and wise than were these modern wise men 
who claim to know so much. Alas! they are taking 
away from the children what little faith yet remains. 
"When the Son of man cometh shall he find the faith on 
the earth?"-Matt. 12:40; 24:38; Luke 18:8. 

PAID MUSIC IN CHURCHES 



Rev. Charles M. Sheldon writes in The Congregationalist 
against the spending of money for Church 
music, as follows:— 

"I see no reason why the finest singer or player in 
the parish should receive compensation for service rendered 
any more than the best teachers in the parish 
should receive money for teaching in the Sunday-school. 
I have in my parish a man who is a graduate 

R4151 : page 85 

of one of the best colleges in this country, who spent 
very many years in acquiring his education, who is a 
thorough scholar and a splendid teacher. He has a 
class in my Sunday-school. I do not think the thought 
of compensation for teaching that class ever entered 
his head. He is giving, however, out of the ripeness of 
his knowledge what it cost him many years and many 
hundreds of dollars to acquire. If he does not 
expect anything for his service to the Church, which he gives 
as service, why should the man or woman who has spent 
years acquiring a musical education in learning to play 
or sing expect money compensation for it? 

"I have always felt proud of the fact, I hope in a 
right way, that in our average Church for eighteen 
years we have never paid a cent for the service of musicians, 

R4152 : page 85 

either for playing or singing, accepting what 
was offered as service, and very many times it has been 
of the very best that the parish afforded. I know of a 
Church which has in its parish one of the finest lawyers 
in the State, and whenever that Church wants a public 
address or an inspiring talk to its young men it calls 
upon this member of the Church for service. He does 
not ask for pay, although he can get the highest price 
in the lecture-field when he goes out to give a public 
lecture. I think the more we dignify the service in the 
Church by drawing into it the finest talent we possess, 
and offer it as service, we increase the Church's 
efficiency, and very often the money that is spent for 
musical service or for flowers or decorations could be 
better used, it seems to me, directly in doing missionary 
work or in adding to the real effectiveness of the 
Church in ways where the money is more needed. 

"I hope I shall not be misunderstood in all this. 
What I mean is that the Church has a right to the 
finest service that can be rendered to it by its members. 
There is no man or woman so talented or so 
gifted in the parish that he ought not to feel that the 
finest he has can and should be offered upon the altar 
of religion." 



Very good! Very true! But why not return to 
apostolic usage also in the matter of a paid ministry? 
If singers and Sunday-school teachers should serve 
from love and not for pay, should not as noble a spirit 
actuate the preachers? Why not have the abler members 
of every congregation give public addresses on 
the Scriptures or conduct Bible studies which would 
bring out more of the true teachings of the Word and 
stimulate research? 

POPULAR RELIGION VS. BIBLE RELIGION 



The editor of the Christian Advocate (New York) 
tells us that he has been looking at the signs of the 
times and finds hardly a single point of harmony between 
the common standards and those of the Gospel. 
This he thinks "should awaken every sincere Christian 
to a thorough self-examination by Gospel standards 
and to determine to keep as far from evil as possible." 
We quote:— 

"It would be wise for every member of a Christian 
church and every minister thereof to read carefully 
what Christ said of his religion, his disciples, the 
method of preparing for the future life, and the intimations 
that he gives of the judgment and eternal destiny, 
instead of occupying themselves entirely or 
chiefly with the contemplation of great church edifices, 
great organs, great colleges, great Sunday-school 
parades, great hospitals, great congregations, great 
movements and great statistics. 

"Popular religion today avoids all conflict with the 
world. Against the grosser immoralities, indeed, it 
lifts up its voice; for it is respectable to do so, and a 
large proportion of all connected with the Church are 
above the more degrading forms of vice. But against 
pride-producing and extravagant fashions of the world 
it utters but a faint protest, or none. 

"Popular religion seeks wealth with as much 
greediness, and grasps as eagerly after honor, and 
runs as swiftly after pleasure as does the world. A 
large majority of the professors of Christ's religion 
seek their intimate associations in worldly society, and 
never think of lifting up their voices against the prevalent 
folly and dissipation. It is not in the least embarrassing 
for the most gay and thoughtless to be thrown 
into the company of Christians of the popular religion 
type. Days and weeks may pass away and no mention 
be made of Christ or of anything he ever did or said, 
or which might lead persons to think of his religion. 

"Popular religion has a very easy conscience, as is 
shown by many things. It makes a distinction between 



equally binding duties, performing those which 

are convenient, agreeable, and in harmony with the 

natural instincts or dispositions, and neglecting others 

which require self-denial. Thus there are many possessed 

of large incomes who will pray and sing, but 

will not contribute their means to the support of the 

Gospel. Others are willing to contribute liberally but 

pay no attention to the spiritual work of the Church. 

Popular religion enters upon doubtful enterprises if 

they promise large pecuniary rewards. It makes every 

form of excuse for neglect of duty. The merchant and 

mechanic declare themselves to be too busy. The contradiction 

between this and Christ's religion is expressed 

in the words, 'Seek ye first the Kingdom of 

God and his righteousness.' 

"Popular religion professes timidity whenever called 
upon to take part in the services of the sanctuary, 
a timidity never shown in performing conspicuous, 
remunerative or honorable public duties or functions 
of importance in the Church. Popular religion disregards 
the most solemn vows. Every member of the 
Christian Church has assumed the weightiest obligations. 
Every baptized person in the Methodist Church 
vows to 'renounce the devil and all his works, the vain 
pomp and glory of the world, with all covetous desires 
of the same.' When there is a controversy between 
them, popular religion places temporal interests before 
spiritual. It evinces this in the kind of preaching 
it likes and in the mode of its life. It would rather attend 
public amusements, political meetings, social 
companies, or spend the evening in business calculations 
than to discharge the plainest Christian duty. 
Popular religion never agonizes before the Lord in 
secret, never sets apart hours for meditation, never 
reads the Bible for devotional or life-regulating purposes; 
seldom observes family prayer, never does 

R4152:page86 

anything really inconvenient for Christ's sake, and 
almost wholly eliminates the element of self-denial." 



Alas! how true is this arraignment of Babylon of 
every denomination. The fault lies in false doctrines, 
which, under the lash of fear, have gathered to the 
Christian standard millions whose credulity is now giving 
place to a refined infidelity. 

Note the contrast in those who are the Lord's true 
sheep and who are now hearing the Great Shepherd's 
voice in the Millennial morning dawn. How zealous, 
how self-sacrificing, how willing to give their time, influence, 
money— yea, life itself— in the service of the 
"good tidings of great joy which shall be unto all 
people." 



Yet we do not boast! Nay, we admit that we can 
never do enough to show our appreciation of the God 
of love and his wonderful plan of the ages. We realize 
that we are not profitable servants, but on the contrary 
are our Lord's debtors to a degree that an eternity of 
his service will only continually increase. 

"MIRACLE WHEAT" 



The public press is telling of the origin of "Miracle 
Wheat" in answer to prayer. The description has the earmarks 
of truth to it, in that it gives the address of the 
man whose prayers are said to have been answered— 
"K. B. Stoner, a farmer of Fincastle, Botetourt county, 
Virginia." It would appear from the account that the 
original stalk of wheat appeared in the midst of a crop 
of the ordinary kind, but with " 142 heads of grain." 
We quote:— 

"Mr. Stoner was amazed. It seemed incredible. 
When a Frenchman, in 1842, announced that he had 
discovered a species of wheat in the Mediterranean 
country which produced four heads to the plant, people 
said he was crazy. 

"But here was a plant with 142 heads! 

"Naturally Mr. Stoner carefully preserved the 
heads, and the next year sowed the seed, continuing to 
do this each year, for he realized he had discovered 
a phenomenal brand of grain. And each year his 
amazement increased. 

"That first year after discovering the plant he got 
2000 grains. In 1906 he got sixteen bushels, and has 
now raised the crop of wheat, all carefully preserved 
for seed, to 800 bushels. 

"What is most remarkable about the wheat is this: 
Whereas there is produced in the wheat sections of that 
country an average at the best of seventeen bushels to 
an acre, the average yield of the "miracle wheat" during 
the last three years has been fifty-six bushels to 
the acre; and whereas from eight to ten pecks of seed are 
required to plant an acre in Virginia, Mr. Stoner uses 
only two pecks, and, in comparison to the yield of ordinary 
wheat in the neighborhood, which is eight bushels 
for each bushel of seed, Mr. Stoner gets about 
seventy-five bushels for one. An ordinary stalk of 
wheat covers about four inches of space. The miracle 
wheat covers twelve. 

THE GOVERNMENT REPORT 

"Last year United States government officials became 
interested in the remarkable wheat and sent Assistant 
Agriculturalist H. A. Miller to examine it. In 
his report he declares: 

"The wheat, which came from an unknown source, 



has been grown in the nursery every year since that 
time, and also has been grown under field conditions 
the last two years, giving excellent results. The yield 
has been from two to three times the yield of other 
varieties grown on the farm under the same condition 
of culture, except the rate of seeding, which was two 
pecks to the acre, while other varieties were sown at 
the rate of eight to ten pecks per acre, which is the 
common practice of farmers in the vicinity. 

'"Milling tests have been made of this wheat, and 
its quality seems to be as good as, if not superior to, 
other varieties of winter wheat.' 

R4153 : page 86 

"The average height of the wheat, according to the 
report, is four feet four inches. 

"It is said that the Russian government has secured 
an option on the wheat, and will buy a consignment 
of 80,000,000 bushels when that quantity shall 
have been raised. During the next year the seed will 
be distributed among farmers in Virginia and North 
Carolina, who will raise it and preserve the seed, keeping 
the seed only for planting until the required 
amount will have been produced. By next fall, it is 
believed, 30,000 bushels will have been produced." 

IS IT RESTITUTION WHEAT? 

If this account be but one-half true it testifies 
afresh to God's ability to provide things needful for 
the "times of restitution of all things which God hath 
spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the 
world began."— Acts 3:19-21. 



R4153 : page 86 

THE MEMORIAL, APRIL 14 

AFTER six o'clock on Tuesday evening, April 14th, 
readers of this journal in all parts of the world 
will gather as ecclesias of Christ to memorialize 
his death with "unleavened bread" and "fruit of the vine" 
as emblems of his broken body and shed blood. The largest 
of these will probably assemble at Allegheny Carnegie 
Hall— not a great multitude meeting anywhere— while the 
little ecclesias will be numerous— for, as the Master said, 
"Wherever two or three are met in my name, there am I in 
their midst. "-Matt. 18:20. 

We urge that none neglect this annual privilege, for 
any reason. There is a special blessing in its observance. 
If you incline to feel discouraged, go partake of the broken 
loaf, asking the Lord for a fresh realization of your justification, 
and a fresh appreciation of your consecration to be 



broken (sacrificed) with him, as reckoned members of the 
one loaf— his Church, his Body. Then as you taste of "this 
cup" remember that it speaks of our Lord's sufferings on 
our behalf— his tasting death for every man. Remember, 
also, that this is "our high calling"— "to suffer with him 
that we may also reign with him." This is the significance 
of his words, "drink ye all of it." And, as the Apostle declares, 

R4153 : page 87 

it is the com[mon]union in his sufferings.— 
1 Cor. 10:16. 

Let us not forget that the Memorial is meaningless or 
worse unless thus accepted and appreciated. But let nothing 
hinder us— neither sins, nor coldness, nor feelings of unworthiness. 
Go to the Lord and make a clean breast of all 
your shortcomings. Go to your brethren or any whom you 
have wronged— make full acknowledgment, whether they 
acknowledge faults toward you or not. Get yourself 
right with your Lord and so far as possible with every man, 
and then eat— yea, feast upon the rich provision the Lord 
has made for all who accept, now or in a later "due time." 

Such a heart-searching and cleansing, we remember, was 
shown in the Passover type given to the Jews. Before they 
gathered to eat their Passover-lamb they searched everywhere 
throughout their habitations for anything containing 
leaven or putrefaction, bones, crusts, everything. These all 
were burned— destroyed. So must we fulfil the antitype 
and "put away the old leaven" of anger, malice, hatred, 
strife.- 1 Cor. 5:7,8. 

But remember that this kind of leaven of sin cannot be 
thoroughly put away unless it be burned; and only love 
can burn it out— heavenly love, the love of God. If we 
have that love shed abroad in our hearts it will consume 
everything of the opposite character— jealousy, hatred, evil 
speaking, etc. Put off all these, urges the Apostle, and put 
on Christ and be filled with his Spirit. Do not be discouraged. 
True, for the time you ought to be further along, 
nearer to perfect love. But learn the lesson and start again 
with fresh resolutions and increased appreciation of the fact 
that of yourself, without the Master's aid, you could never 
gain the prize. He knows this better than do we, and says 
"Without me ye can do nothing." It was because of our 
need that the Father thus arranged for us. "Be of good, 
courage!" is the Master's word to all who are longing and 
striving to be of the class called "Conquerors." 

YOUR ADVERSARY THE DEVIL 

Temptations seem to be specially permitted at this season 
of the year. "Roots of bitterness" seem to sprout and 
grow always, but at this season with ten-fold vigor. Let us 
remember that Love, not Knowledge, is the final test of our 
discipleship. "A new commandment I give unto you, that 
ye love one another." It was because the apostles had not 
enough love for one another that they disputed as to which 



should be the greatest in the Kingdom, and were so determined 

not to stoop to one another that they neglected also 

to wash the Master's feet, and gave him the opportunity even 

in menial things to be servant of all. It was this wrong 

spirit— this lack of the Lord's Spirit— that made them susceptible 

to the Adversary's power and led Judas to betray 

and Peter to deny the Lord's Anointed. 

Let us then take heed to ourselves and watch and pray 
and be very humble and very loving, lest we fall into temptation. 
Not since that time probably has our great Adversary 
been more alive than now to do injury or to entrap or 
to stumble the followers of Jesus. 

For the benefit of readers "at the ends of the earth" 
we published as early as in our February 1st issue a treatise 
on this Memorial subject; and again in our March 1st 
issue we discussed the Bread of Life. We commend a fresh 
examination of those presentations and of our treatment of 
the subject in DAWN-STUDIES, Vol. VI., page 457. 



R4153 : page 87 

HOLDING FAST AT THE MARK 

THERE is no doubt that in the divine schooling 

there is a mark or standard of fitness for graduation 

to the Church in glory. When first we 

surrendered our wills to the Lord it was necessary that 

the consecration should be a whole or perfect sacrifice 

of our wills to the Lord's will; but our wills were not 

at the mark or standard of perfect love. And if our 

experiences could be imagined as cut short in death 

immediately after our consecration we could not think 

of ourselves as "fit for the Kingdom," because the rewards 

are not promised to consecrators, but to "him 

that overcometh." Thus in the case of the Master himself, 

our forerunner, it was necessary that he should 

suffer and thus be proven worthy of entering into his 

glory. In a word, as the child cannot be graduated 

the day he enters school, no more can we who enter the 

school of Christ. 

The rapidity of progress in learning the lessons 
depends greatly on our temperament and our zeal. 
Some evidently make as much progress in one year as 
others do in twenty, and very many never graduate 
at all— never reach the mark or standard which God 
demands, perfect love. The Word of God, our textbook, 
informs us that "Love is the fulfilling of the 
Law" (Rom. 13:10); that "The end or purpose of the 
divine commandment is love out of a pure heart and a 
good conscience." (1 Tim. 1:5.) "As many, therefore, 
as be perfect [-willed, at the mark of perfect love] 
should be of this mind."— Phil. 3:15-17. 

R4154 : page 87 



Those who have "thus learned Christ," he has 
taught the meaning of (1) perfected love toward God, 
which would prompt them to do and to dare anything 
in his service; (2) of perfected love for the "brethren," 
which would prompt the laying down of life itself in 
their service; (3) of perfected love for the world, yea, 
even for enemies, which would lead to do good to them 
that hate us and despitefully use us, and say all manner 
of evil against us falsely. 

Alas! we cannot suppose that many of the consecrated 
have reached this standard or mark; hence we 
must expect that few have graduated as "fit for the 
Kingdom"; hence also the intimation of Scripture that 
the left-overs— non-graduates— will be "a Great Company" 
as compared with the Little Flock of overcomers 
who do attain to the mark, the fixed standard. Here, 
however, it is well to remember that this "mark" or 
standard of love is not of the flesh but of the mind or 
heart. As the Apostle says, "We cannot do the things 
that we would." Our blemishes of the flesh sometimes 
momentarily stumble us into an unloving word or act, 

R4154 : page 88 

which if repented of will not be reckoned against us 

nor put us away from the mark and the loving acceptableness 

of our Lord, which the mark represents. 

"LET NO MAN TAKE THY CROWN" 

"Hold fast that which thou hast; let no man take 
thy crown," seems logically to refer specially to those 
who have reached the mark or standard of perfect love, 
and not merely to those who have taken the first step 
of consecration, entrance into the school of Christ. The 
words, "Hold fast that which thou hast," implies a previous 
effort and attainment, and that the attainment 
has had something to do with the right to the crown; 
and that the position attained must be held if the crown 
would be ultimately possessed. The intimation is also 
clear that the holding fast will be at the cost of a 
severe struggle. 

This may be a new and a somewhat startling 
thought to some who have erroneously supposed either 
that consecration alone was necessary, or that to attain 
the mark or standard of perfect love would end the 
struggle. Apparently, the severest struggles, tests, 
temptations, assail those who are at that mark, and 
this is in accord with our Master's promise that we 
shall "not be tempted above that we are able to bear." 
The stalwarts at the mark should be able to bear 
most and they will be most severely tried. Mark 
the exhortations to these, "Watch ye, stand fast, quit 
you like men." No longer "babes in Christ," "no longer 
children," their special test is as men, strong in the 



Lord and panoplied in the whole armor of God. Hearken 

again to the Word: "Having done all, stand!" 

These words do not fit one entering the school or entering 

the race; they are most appropriate to those 

who have reached the standard of perfect love. Those 

who have "done all," who have attained the mark of 

character and "put on the whole armor," are the ones 

who are cautioned, warned, to "hold fast" and "stand 

fast" and "fight a good fight." 

"WHO SHALL BE ABLE TO STAND?" 

These fundamental truths have been true and applicable 
to the Lord's people throughout this Gospel 
Age, and hence the narrowness of the way and the few 
there be who have found and walked therein— in all a 
little flock. But now, more particularly than ever before, 
this warning applies and probably to a larger number 
of the Lord's people than at any time in the past; because 
we are in the "harvest" time, when the ripening 
and gathering seems chiefly to apply. It is doubtless 
for this reason that so many Scriptures seem to specify 
our time in connection with these warnings. For instance, 
we read, "Take unto you the whole armor of 
God, that ye may be able to stand in the evil day, and 
having done all to stand!"— Eph. 6:13. 

The logic of this situation implies that during the 
few years immediately before us will come the severest 
of trials and the most subtle tests of our love: (1) For 
God as represented by our love for his Truth and the 
honor of his name; (2) our love for the Lord's 
brethren; (3) our love for our enemies. And whenever 
the "brethren" (of whom so much might be expected) 
become our enemies the test of our love will be 
the severer. In view of these things, "What manner of 
persons ought we to be, in all holy living and God-likeness?" 
In view of the solemnity of the situation, how 
"circumspect" we all should be! How we should scrutinize 
our every act and word and thought! And our 
thoughts require our special care, because by the 
thoughts and intents of the heart we are being judged. 
And words and acts proceed therefrom. How often 
ambition hides its envious desires under the cloak of 
duty! How many of the fires of the "Holy Inquisition" 
were lighted by the torch of "duty!" Let us each be on 
guard. Ourselves or others we might deceive, but not 
God, who says, "Be not deceived, God is not mocked; 
he that doeth righteousness is righteous"— not merely 
he who professes. He whose acts and words are loving, 
gentle, kind, considerate under trying conditions 
gives evidence of being begotten of the God of love 
and of having developed much Christ-likeness! Consider 
our Lord's love for his enemies and his forbearance 
for them when railed at, "Come down from the 
cross!" Consider how, when reviled and slandered, he 
reviled and slandered not in return! Consider how 



gentle was his reproof of the perfidious Judas and how 
he merely hinted a reproof to Peter, who denied him 
with cursings! In his case surely Love was ready to 
cover a multitude of faults. Let us not be easily offended 
nor of implacable spirit. Let us with generous 
and forgiving spirit say with the Apostle, "None of 
these things move me"— from my stand at perfect love; 
it shall grow more rooted and grounded in proportion 
as it is tested. Let us also be on guard against the 
spirit which is envious of the honors, privileges and 
blessings granted to another. Contrariwise let us have 
so much of the spirit of love that we will rejoice with 
all who rejoice in the Lord and will mourn with all in 
distress. To feel even a coolness of sentiment in connection 
with the prosperity of a brother or a lack of 
interest in his welfare is a sign of serious danger— 
that we have slipped from the mark. This should 
alarm us and lead to fresh energy. 



R4154 : page 88 

QUARTERLY REVIEW LESSON 

-MARCH 22- 

Golden Text:— "In him was life; and the 
life was the light of men."— John 1:4. 

WE leave the review of the Quarter's lessons to 
each according to his time and preferences, 
merely suggesting that the entire subject of 
our Lord's life and ministry is well summed up in our 
Golden Text. It divides itself into two parts, the one 
the result of the other. (1) In him was life, (2) the 
life that was in him was the light of men. 
A strange statement, "In him was life." Is there 

R4154:page89 

not life in every man? We answer, No ! From the 

divine standpoint a death sentence passed upon Adam 

and was inherited by all of his descendants, and from 

this, the divine standpoint, the legal standard, the 

whole world is dead, under the sentence of death, because 

of transgressions and sins, the tendency to which 

was inherited when, as the Scriptures declare, we were 

all born in sin, shapen in iniquity. (Psa. 51:5.) The 

statement, therefore, that in Christ there was life implies 

much. It implies that he did not receive his life, 

as did other men, from an earthly father. It corroborates 

the testimony of the Scriptures that our Lord was 

begotten from above, that his life was transferred from 

a higher plane, that he left the glory which he had with 

the Father before the world was and humbled himself 



and took the bondman's form and was found in fashion 
a man.— Phil. 2:8. 

It was because Jesus had life in this special sense 
which no other man had that he could be the Redeemer 
of man; as was written of him prophetically, Let go 
the prisoner out of the pit, for I have found a ransom. 
(Job 33:24.) No member of Adam's race was able to 
give a ransom for his brother, because all were under 
condemnation, and one condemned life could not be 
substituted for another condemned life. Hence the 
necessity of sending God's Son in human likeness and 
nature that he, by the favor of God, as the perfect one, 
having life, "might give his life a ransom for many." 
Thus, as the Redeemer of the world, our Lord's life 
was given for father Adam's life, a substitute, and 
since all of Adam's posterity shared in his death sentence, 
therefore naturally, justly, properly all who 
shared thus in his condemnation shared through Jesus 
in Adam's redemption. Hence a redemption for all has 
been provided, and God's assurance is that in due time 
all shall learn thereof and receive a blessing therefrom, 
an opportunity to return to harmony with God. This 
opportunity cannot come except through knowledge, 
and hence it has come first to those who have the hearing 
ear and are blessed of the Lord thereby. Blessed 
are your ears for they hear and your eyes for they see. 
-Matt. 13:16. 

IN HIM WAS SPIRIT-LIFE 

But there was another sense in which this text applies 
to our Lord Jesus and to him alone. When he 
had laid down at Calvary his life and finished the work 
which the Father had given him to do, that life was 
gone and could never be taken back, except by rescinding 
the entire contract of redemption. We are glad 

R4155 : page 89 

that this was not done. We remember, however, at 
the particular time when our Lord made his consecration 
to death, namely, at the beginning of his ministry, 
when he was immersed in the symbolism of death, that 
he received of the Father a begetting of the holy Spirit 
—he was begotten to a newness of life, to a spirit life. 
We perceive that the spirit life or new nature progressed 
and developed during our Lord's earthly ministry, 
and that at his resurrection from the dead it was 
this New Creature, this spirit being, that was raised 
up to perfection, so that our Lord is not a glorified 
man but, as the Apostle says, "Now the Lord is that 
spirit."— 2 Cor. 3:17. 

Our text has a special application to this New 
Creature— "In him was life," the new life, life as a New 
Creature, partaker of the divine nature. It is this life 
which the followers of Jesus in the present time are 



invited also to share. The promise is made to them 
that if they are baptized into his death, they shall also 
be in his resurrection. In the divine program all the 
Church's spiritual rights and interests were thus made 
to center in Christ; as the Apostle declares, "When he 
who is our life shall appear, we also shall appear with 
him in glory." (Col. 3:4.) It is this divine nature 
which our Lord has that he has been privileged to 
give to his followers. Thus it is written, "As the Father 
hath life in himself, so he has given unto the Son to 
have life in himself," and that he should give this life 
of a divine nature unto as many as he would, according 
to the Father's good pleasure. (John 5:26; 17:2.) 
He has promised it to those who love him, who follow 
in his footsteps and become overcomers of the world. 
Thus the Church throughout this Gospel Age is to be 
a partaker of the divine nature and is being gradually 
transformed in harmony with this new life, prepared 
for the glorious resurrection change at the end of this 
age, that by this resurrection of the just they may be 
made partakers of the divine nature and elevated to 
joint-heirship with their Lord in his Kingdom. 

THE LIFE WAS THE LIGHT OF MEN 

This second part of the text is applicable to both 
of the lives of Jesus, to the perfect human life which 
was his as a man, and also to the perfect life as a 
New Creature which became his as a result of the 
begetting of the holy Spirit. The Apostle apparently 
refers to our Lord's human life when he says, 
"He was made flesh and dwelt among us and we 
beheld his glory, the glory [honor] as of the only 
begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth." 
(John 1:14.) This seems to picture our Lord Jesus 
as the man and refers to the glory and dignity 
of his manhood; as the same is again referred to 
in the eighth Psalm in the words, "What is man, 
that thou art mindful of him? and the Son of man, that 
thou visitest him? Thou madest him a little lower than 
the angels, thou didst crown him with glory and honor 
and didst place him over the works of thy hands." It 
is evident from this that there is a glory and an honor 
which belong to perfect manhood, and that our Lord 
possessed these is evident not only from this statement 
of the Apostle John, but also from the testimony of 
John the Baptist, who knew him before he was anointed 
and who at first declined to baptize him, declaring 
that he was in no sense of the word a sinner, and saying, 
I would rather need to be baptized of thee; and 
do you come to me for baptism? He recognized our 
Lord as holy, harmless, undefiled and separate from 
sinners, aside from his begetting of the holy Spirit. 
In this manner the life that was in him, the perfection 

R4155 : page 90 



of manhood in him, was the light of men in his day. 

We cannot doubt that it had much to do with his popularity 

with the common people. He was full of grace 

—not only graceful in form, in manner and in speech, 

but in every other sense of the word he was a favored 

man. This was the result of his perfection, of his having 

an unlimited life from an unimpaired source— by 

reason of his not having had a human father or life-giver. 

He was full of truth in the sense that his life 

was not biased or warped; he was not born in sin or 

shapen in iniquity.* 

We come now to the power of the holy Spirit which 
was in our Lord Jesus— the new life, the divine life. 
This, shining through our Lord in perfect accord with 
his perfect flesh, made him a most wonderful one. 
This indeed was the light of men. It not only shone 
forth as a burning lamp to reflect the divine character 
in all of our Lord's doings and words, but it enabled 
him to speak out to his followers, who had ears to 
hear the wonderful words of life. It enabled him to 
grasp the divine plan and to appreciate the pathway 
leading to the glory, honor and immortality, and to 
point it out to his followers, saying, "He who would 
be my disciple must take up his cross and follow me." 
Thus our Lord illustrated in himself to all who would 
be his followers the glorious words of the prophecy, 
"Thou wilt show him the path of life." (Psa. 16:11.) 
By the holy Spirit our Lord was shown that the path 
of sacrifice meant the path to glory, and similarly he 
pointed out to his followers that the light which was in 
him became the light of his followers. 

It is in full harmony with this double application 
that we read elsewhere that our Lord "brought life and 
immortality to light through the Gospel." (2 Tim. 1:10.) 
As the man he showed, illustrated, the perfection 
of human life and made it possible for the whole 
human family, sold under sin but redeemed by the precious 
blood, to come eventually to that grand standard 
of human perfection which he personally represented. 
This he also told us in his declaration that the Son of 
man came to seek and to save that which was lost. 
(Luke 19:10.) Thus we see in our Lord the manifestation 
of the perfection of restitution life, and we see in 
his sacrifice how he secured that restitution life for all 
who will have it at his hand, for the entire human family, 
and that thus he became the author of life, the 
Life-Giver to all who would obey him. The great mass 
of the world have not yet had opportunity to hear him, 
because their blind eyes and deaf ears have not yet 
been opened. But in due time they shall have the opportunity 
of gaining by restitution, through the Redeemer's 
merit, the life which he brought to light, 
which he manifested and which he declared he had 
provided for them. 

But what did he provide for the Church? Ah, we 



answer, the great Deliverer has provided some better 

thing than restitution life and blessing for the Church 

—wonderful, grand, as are those provisions for the 

world in general. For the Church he has provided 

immortality, the highest form or condition of life, the 

divine nature, life on the divine plane. This thought 

is too wonderful for us, it is incomprehensible; we 

must merely take it without hoping to grasp it or comprehend 

it fully as yet. It is a testimony to the unspeakable 

gift of God through Christ Jesus our Lord 

to all those who obey him, to all of his Little Flock. 

It is this, the very highest conceivable plane of life, to 

which our Lord is inviting his followers now, and 

everything in the divine plan is being made to wait until 

the Very Elect shall have been gathered from the 

four winds of heaven, until the Bride of Christ shall 

have made herself ready, until the polishing processes 

shall have made the jewels meet for the Master's use, 

and then by the resurrection change these may pass to 

glory, honor and immortality. "Sown in corruption, 

raised in incorruption; sown in weakness, raised in 

power; sown an animal body, raised a spiritual body!" 

"We shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, 

and share his glory." 



*See SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Vol. V., Chap. IV., "The Undefiled 
One." 



R4155 : page 90 

THE PROGRESS OF TOTAL ABSTINENCE 

-MARCH 29.-PROV. 23:29-35- 

Golden Text:— "At last it biteth like a 
serpent, and stingeth like an adder." 

WE shall not attempt a special analysis of this 
lesson, believing that all of our readers are 
thoroughly competent to do this, each for himself. 
We do, however, with pleasure call attention to 
the fact that total abstinence has been making great 
progress recently, especially in our own land. Our 
readers are well aware that we do not admit that there 
is a total abstinence Gospel and that it is the duty of 
the Lord's people to be preaching it. On the contrary, 
while we have much sympathy with reforms along the 
lines of temperance and every other direction, we recognize 
the fact that only one Gospel commission has 
been given to the Lord's followers, namely, Go thou 
and preach the Gospel, good tidings of great joy which 
shall be unto all people. We are not turning aside 



from this divine commission to teach temperance, total 
abstinence, but we do take the passing opportunity of 
registering our sympathy with the cause, and the joy it 
would give us to see this great evil of intemperance 
put down. 

So surely as the Lord's people pray, "Thy Kingdom 
come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven," 
they are hoping the time will come when the 
liquor evil in its various multiplied forms will be 
thoroughly overthrown and banished as a part of 
the devil's instrumentality of evil whereby countless 

R4156 : page 91 

millions have been caused to mourn and 
helped into further sin and degradation. Whoever 
looks forward to the coming Kingdom and its 
work of blessing mankind, in the manner suggested 
and other ways, must also at heart be very much in 
sympathy with every endeavor on the part of the poor 
world to help itself and to get free from this terrible 
bondage. And such in turn in their own hearts and 
lives must feel like putting on restraints which would 
not only keep their bodies suitable temples of the holy 
Spirit but keep them ready, meet for the Master's use, 
and at their very highest degree of usefulness for his 
service. It would be in vain surely for any of this 
class to pray for God's Kingdom to come and not 
strive to have that Kingdom operative in themselves 
and illustrated in their own daily lives to the best of 
their ability. 

From letters received we perceive that the question 
of license or no license is being very widely discussed 
and made an issue. Our readers know that in general 
we advise that as followers of the Lamb it would be to 
the advantage of the Lord's dear people to avoid 
complications with political questions and that our 
privileges as citizens of this country of casting our 
votes at the polls be generally ignored as being 
to our disadvantage spiritually. Furthermore we 
have suggested that voting brings a measure of 
responsibility for the upholding of the party 
with which we have affiliated and voted and a 
partial responsibility for its right or wrong use of 
power, and might imply a certain responsibility to bear 
arms, etc. Our advice, therefore, has been that we 
who are seeking the heavenly city, the heavenly country, 
and who are praying, "Thy Kingdom come," should 
wait for that Kingdom, and not meddle with earthly 
affairs, politics, voting, etc. Now the question arises, 
Would it be right or wrong for us to vote on the question 
of local option? Our thought, dear friends, is 
that it would be perfectly right for us to express 
our sentiments on this subject at the polls. It is a special 
question and the law invites every citizen to express 
his preferences and we do well to express ourselves, 



not in a partizan manner, not in denunciation 
of those who think differently, but quietly, meekly, 
to say by our vote at the polls that we are quite willing 
to forego our own personal liberties in connection with 
spirituous liquors for the good which would thereby 
be accomplished for the masses. And if at the same 
election a choice were being made for a School Board, 
we see no objection that could reasonably be urged to 
an expression of one's preferences there that the best 
men might be chosen to supervise the school work. 
But we suggest to all that there is danger of being absorbed 
by the worldly and political spirit and of having 
our time and attention taken from other important 
matters. We would advise that politics in general be 
left to the children of this world who believe nothing 
and care nothing for our Kingdom for which we pray, 
"Thy Kingdom come." 
It may not be amiss to give a few quotations from— 

ADVOCATES OF TOTAL ABSTINENCE 

Mr. Andrew Carnegie, answering a question on this 
subject, replied, "The best temperance lecture I have 
delivered lately is my offer of ten per cent, premium on 
their wages to all the employees of my Scottish estates 
who will abstain from intoxicating liquors." 

The Brotherhood of Railroad Engineers, we are 
informed, "will do all they can to help a man to overcome 
the evil habit. They will bear with him, encourage 
him, but if he continue to drink they must for the 
safety of the public report him to the authorities and 
have him discharged." So says one of them. 

A military man, an inmate of an institution for 
reformation of those addicted to the liquor habit, when 
questioned respecting the necessity for his being there, 
told that he had tried hard to stop the periodical 
"bouts," but that he might as well have tried to stop 
an express train. He said that the helpers at the institution 
had succeeded in stopping his craving so that 
he refused a glass of whiskey after the fourth day. 
The minister who was questioning him said, "But were 
you not on your honor not to drink it?" "True," replied 
the major, "but if the craving had come I might 
have been on fifty honors and they would not have mattered 
a straw." 

A business man at the same institute said, "I came 
here because I was always telling myself that I could 
give up drinking just when I wanted to; but one day I 
was startled to find how my periods of sobriety had 
shortened from three months to three weeks." 

A BUSINESS FIRM RUINED 

"A number of years ago a certain firm of four men 
in Boston were rated as Al.' They were rich, prosperous, 
young and prompt. One of them had the curiosity 



to see how they were rated at Dun's agency and 
found the above rating and was satisfied; but at the 
end these words were added, 'but they all drink.' He 
thought it a good joke at the time, but a few years later 
two of them were dead, another was a drunkard, 
and the fourth was poor, living partly on charity. That 
little note at the end of their rating was the most important 
and significant of all the facts connected with 
embodied in their description." 

President Lincoln was once criticised by a friend 
for his seeming rudeness in declining to test some rare 
wines provided for his use. He answered, "I meant no 
disrespect, John, but I promised my precious mother 
only a few days before she died that I would never use 
anything intoxicating as a beverage, and I consider 
that promise as binding today as it was the day I 
gave it." 

ATHLETES CONSIDER LIQUOR INJURIOUS TO THEM 

Mr. Giannini, director of the New York Athletic 
Club, says, "Alcoholic liquors as a beverage, moderate 
or otherwise, are entirely tabooed by athletic trainers 
everywhere and under all circumstances." 

Mr. H. S. Cornish, director of athletics in the new 

R4156 : page 92 

Manhattan Club, says, "I have never used intoxicating 
liquor in training, and never will. I do not believe in 
it. I don't allow a man whom I am training to drink 
any liquor whatever, or to smoke either for that matter; 
it stimulates and affects unfavorably the action of 
the heart. " 

Total abstinence may be much more necessary today 
than it was centuries ago, because the race is gradually 
becoming weakened. It is the same in this as in 
the matter of marriage. Marriage between blood relatives, 
even of second cousins, is not sanctioned today 
because of the weakness of the race, whereas in Adam's 
time there was the closest of intermarriage, between 
brothers and sisters, without the slightest deleterious 
effect. Those who are strong ought to bear the infirmities 
of the weak, says the Apostle, and this argument 
should especially appeal to all who belong to the Lord's 
army, who are battling for righteousness and truth and 
for the uplifting of their fellow-men. Surely those who 
have their all upon the altar of consecration can well 
afford to deny themselves liberties in this direction in 
the interest of others so that their influence may be on 
the helpful side of this as well as every other 
question. 

R4156 : page 92 

"WITHIN THE VAIL" 



Homesick for heaven? and longing for its rest? 

And does the way seem long that leads thee there? 
Lift up thine eyes, the "vail" is growing thin 

That separates us from its glories rare. 
But yesterday a dear one passed beyond— 

"Within the vail"— and entered into rest; 
And as she passed we caught a radiant glimpse, 

As when effulgent glory shineth in the west. 

Another link is added to the chain 

Of precious gold that draws us surely home, 
Another strand is twined with the cord 

Of love that holds us that we may not roam. 
Yes, one by one his saints are passing o'er, 

His loved from shadows into heaven's pure light, 
Into the joy of his dear presence, where 

They feel no more the darkness of earth's night. 

But sweeter, grander still, "within the vail" 

That almost grows transparent to our gaze, 
We see our Master, our beloved Lord, 

And lift to him our rapturous songs of praise. 
So near we are, we almost catch the strains 

Of heavenly music from celestial choirs. 
Can we not bide with patience one more hour? 

We've almost reached the goal of our desires! 

Then let us not go mourning on our way, 

But let our hearts be light, our faces glad, 
These pressing burdens we shall soon lay down 

Forevermore; why, then, should we be sad? 
"A cloud of witnesses" behold our course 

With interest intense, and shall we fail? 
Our race is almost run;— Lord, nerve our hearts, 

And scatter every doubt that doth assail. 

So clarify our clouded vision, Lord, 

So lift our thoughts and hearts to things above, 
That earthly woes shall have no power to vex, 

Nor separate us from thy grace and love. 
While still we toss on life's tempestuous sea, 

Shield from the rocks our tiny barques so frail, 
Stand at the helm, and guide us safely till 

We, too, are anchored safe "within the vail." 
—Alice G. James. 



R4157 : page 92 

THE SHEPHERD, THE DOOR, THE FLOCKS 
-JOHN 10:1-18.-APRIL 5- 

Golden Text:— "The Good Shepherd 



giveth his life for the sheep."— V. 11. 

THE Scriptures assign many very beautiful and expressive 
titles to our Lord as descriptive of his relationship 
to his faithful. Amongst the most beautiful and 
impressive of these is the Good Shepherd, or, more literally, 
the grand Shepherd, the ideal Shepherd. Likewise amongst 
the various names applied to our Lord's followers, the term 
"sheep" is the one most familiar as well as one of the most 
fitting. Surely it would never occur to the natural man to 
use such an illustration. In illustration of what we mean 
note the fact that the barons and lords of England have 
adopted various signets, coats of arms, etc., on many of 
which animals or animals' heads appear. Did any one ever 
see a sheep's head on any of these? We think not. If we 
could imagine any earthly lord as adopting a symbol of a 
sheep, it would surely represent a surly-horned ram. Lions' 
heads, tigers' heads, eagles' heads, and nondescript heads of 
ferocious aspect, dragons, etc., are what are usually 
chosen. This represents the natural mind and the desire 
that the natural man has to appear strong and ferocious 
and to intimidate others. He who represented himself as 
the Good Shepherd and his followers as sheep had a very 
different idea of the whole matter from that of the natural 
man, and we who have become his followers should take 
note of this, and, appreciating it, should cultivate more and 
more of the sheep-like nature in our relationship to him as 
the Shepherd. 

THE DOOR INTO THE SHEEPFOLD 

The parable of our lesson divides itself into two parts, 
representing Jesus first of all as the door into the sheepfold 
and secondly as the Shepherd. The fold described in the 
parable is well represented in the accompanying illustration. 
It was a place of safety, of rest, of protection from prowling 
wild beasts and from robbers. There was but one doorway 
into these folds and it was supposed to be guarded by a 
porter who would know the true shepherd and admit him 
and no other. Our Lord declared himself to be the true 
Shepherd of Jehovah's flock, the only one to whom the porter 
would grant admission and the only one, therefore, who 
had the right to control the sheep and who alone could provide 
for their safety. The porter who could thus discriminate 
between the true and the false was the Law Covenant. 

R4157 : page 93 

Those who could not answer the Law, who could not fulfil 
its demands, could not substantiate their claims to being the 
Shepherd, the Messiah. But our Lord did meet the demands 
of the Law fully, completely— "in him was no sin, 
neither was guile found in his mouth." He was already 
holy, harmless, separate from sinners. He is thus identified 
to us as the rightful Shepherd. Others had come in his 
name, professing to be the Messiah— false Messiahs— and 



had endeavored to attract the sheep; but our Lord declares 
of them that they were fraudulent, "thieves and robbers," 
who were merely assisting to steal the sheep, and who were 
actuated not with a desire to profit the sheep but by personal, 
selfish ambitions. 

There was but one way to become the true Shepherd 
of the Lord's flock and to have a right to lead his flock- 
out to the green pastures and still waters of truth and grace 
and into the rest and security of the fold. That way was 
the way of the cross— to give himself a ransom for all. 
This our Lord did and thus he became the door to the sheepfold, 
opening up a new and living way, or, more correctly, a 
new way of life. Nevertheless, this is not the making of a 
new door into the fold, but the opening of the door which 
had previously been closed. The door was the Law, which 
could not open except by obedience to the Law; and now 
our Lord Jesus, having kept the Law, has made it possible 
for all of his true sheep to enter in by the same door, by the 
keeping of the Law— not, however, the letter of the Law, 
which would be impossible to us, but its spirit. Thus the 
Apostle says of the true sheep and their entering into the 
fold, "The righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us who 
walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit," (Rom. 8:4); because 
our Shepherd has made an appropriation of his grace 
on our behalf which makes up for us all that we lack. 
So long as we are his and are striving to walk in his ways 
every deficiency is compensated out of his abundance. To 
him the porter openeth, to him the Law and the prophets 
bear witness. 

"BUT THEY UNDERSTOOD NOT" 

It is supposed that this parable was uttered in the hearing 
of the man born blind, who had been expelled from the 
synagogue, and in the hearing also of the Pharisees, who 
had so much to do with his expulsion. No doubt the man 
was feeling discouraged, downcast, because of his excommunication 
from the supposed fold of the Lord's people. The 
presumption, then, is that the Lord gave this parable to illustrate 
the fact that he had not really been cast out of the 
Lord's fold, but merely out of a human organization by 
those who had no power in respect to the matter. Our Lord 
would have him and the Pharisees and his disciples and us 
see that there is no flock of the Lord except that of which 
he is the Leader and Shepherd; that there is no way into 
that flock except through him, through the work which he 
would accomplish by his sacrifice and through our acceptance 
of the same by faith. But verse 6 says the hearers understood 
not the meaning of the parable, therefore the Lord 
repeated it in slightly different terms, proclaiming himself 
as the doorway by which any could enter into divine favor 
as members of the Lord's flock. Thus the man who had 
been cast out of the synagogue might perceive that he really 
had lost nothing, but that on the contrary he had been assisted 
toward the right door of the true fold, in which rest 
indeed could be obtained. Now he was invited to see that 



the Lord alone was the avenue to rest and salvation and to 
the spiritual refreshment of divine instruction. Others had 
selfishly sought to steal or to destroy the sheep, if thereby 
they could advance their own personal interests; but he, as 
the true Shepherd, instead of seeking his own welfare, was 
seeking the welfare and advantage of the sheep that they 
might have life and have it more abundantly. 

What a lesson for us! The Master did not say that he 
came to deliver the sheep from eternal torment, but that he 
came to deliver them from death. He does not say that they 
already have a life which they must spend somewhere either 
in joy or anguish, and that he had come to assist them, so 
that it should not be spent in anguish; his language, on the 
contrary, teaches that the sheep could have no life except 
through him, the Life-Giver; that he had come to give back 
in due time by restitution processes, to as many as would 
receive it, the life which was lost by father Adam's disobedience 
—human life. Yea, he declares that he intended to 
give life more abundant than that which was lost! How 
could this be, if father Adam was perfect and as such had 
everlasting life according to divine arrangement? We answer 
that the life which the Lord proposes to give to those 
who are his sheep of this Gospel Age, this Little Flock, is a 
still higher form and degree of life, namely, immortality, inherent 
life. These he proposes to make partakers of the 
divine nature by giving them a share with himself "in his 
resurrection," the "First Resurrection."— Phil. 3:10. 

HE GAVE HIS LIFE FOR US 

This is the central point of our lesson. The Good 
Shepherd, so far from self-seeking, gladly laid down his life 
for the sheep, and it was by virtue of thus purchasing the 
sheep by his own precious blood that their eternal life is 
possible; without his purchase there would be no flock, 
and it is by this that he becomes the Shepherd of the flock. 
How clear, how beautiful the thought, "Ye were bought 
with a price"! (1 Cor. 6:20.) No one else could give this 
ransom for us, no one else could purchase us or grant us 
life everlasting, no one else, therefore, could legally become 
our Shepherd or be able to lead us into the rest and peace 
of God, into the knowledge of the truth and ultimately into 
the heavenly fold, the rest that remaineth for the people of 

R4157 : page 94 

God. Worthy the Lamb that was slain to receive glory, 
honor, dominion and power! 

"THE SHEEP HEAR HIS VOICE" 

The tales told respecting the shepherds of eastern 
countries and their flocks are remarkable and illustrate well 
our Lord's declarations of this parable. Let us examine a 
few of these that we may sympathetically enter into the 
spirit of the Lord's words. Those who heard him were familiar 



with these facts. One writer says:— 

"It is one of the most interesting spectacles to see the 
number of flocks of thirsty sheep water at a fountain. Each 
flock in obedience to the call of its own shepherd, lies down 
awaiting its turn. The shepherd of one flock calls his sheep 
in squads, and when the squad has done drinking, orders it 
away by sounds which the sheep perfectly understand, and 
calls up another squad. The sheep never make any mistake 
as to who whistles to them or calls them. In a flock of 
hundreds or thousands each individual sheep has a name, 
knows it and is known by it. The Greeks had a similar 
custom. The names frequently corresponded to certain defects, 
as for instance, 'Torn' or 'Broken-Legged,' 'One Eye,' 
'Curly Horn,' 'Bald Head.' As lambs they are taught to 
answer to their names by patient drill, being led back and 
forth from the rest of the flock and not allowed to go to 
their mothers for food until they respond properly to the 
calls. The shepherd never drives his sheep in the East, but 
goes before them, they follow him, they run after him if he 
appears to be escaping from them and are terrified if he is 
out of their sight or any stranger appears instead of him. 
He calls for them from time to time to let them know that 
he is at hand, they listen and continue grazing, but if anyone 
else attempts to produce the same peculiar sounds they 
look around, startled, and begin to scatter. A Scotch traveler 

R4158 : page 94 

changed clothes with a shepherd, and thus disguised 
began to call the sheep; they remained motionless; then 
the true shepherd raised his voice and they all hastened to 
him in spite of his strange garments." 

"HE CALLS HIS OWN SHEEP BY NAME" 

The foregoing illustrations help us to appreciate this 
statement and assist us in applying it to the true sheep of 
the Lord's Little Flock. "The Lord knoweth them that are 
his," and it is also true that those who are his know him. 
"He goeth before them and the sheep follow him, for they 
know his voice and a stranger they will not follow, but will 
flee from him; for they know not the voice of strangers." 
The voice of the Lord is the voice of justice, of truth and of 
love, and all who are his sheep are expected to be able to 
discriminate between his message and the various false messages 
which more or less particularly represent the Adversary, 
who seeks to mislead the flock, using human instrumentality 
to accomplish the purpose. We have the Lord's 
assurance that none of the true sheep will be satisfied with 
the false Gospel; it will not appeal to their hearts, and 
equally we have the assurance that the true sheep will be 
satisfied with the true Gospel, because it will satisfy their 
longings as nothing else will do. This is an important 
point to keep before our minds. It indicates to us the importance 
of becoming fully, truly, emphatically the Lord's 



sheep, of entering into covenant relationship with him and 
thus making sure his protecting care and instruction. 

"I KNOW MY SHEEP" 

It becomes an important question then as to how and 
when we become the Lord's sheep. Are all the wise and 
the learned, the rich and the great, the Lord's sheep? The 
Apostle answers, No, and says further that not many of 
those will be found amongst the sheep— not many wise, not 
many great, not many learned, not many noble, not many rich, 
but chiefly the poor of this world, rich in faith. (1 Cor. 1:26-28; 
Jas. 2:5.) Are all of the poor, then, the Lord's sheep? We 
answer, No ! These different flocks do in a general way indeed 
hold the name of Christ. But surely not many of them 
give evidence of being his disciples, his followers. Many of 
them know little about his Word, his voice; many of them 
know nothing about his leading into green pastures and by 
still waters of divine truth and grace, many of them know 
nothing about the real fold with its rest and peace and protecting 
care. Their lack in these respects shows that they 
are not of the true flock whom the Lord is leading, though 
true sheep of the Lord may be found in each denomination. 
But wherever they may be, if they are his, they are being 
led and being fed and know him and know his voice, his 
Word, and are dissatisfied with the husks of human 
tradition. 

"THE HIRELING FLEETH" 

Many, indeed, might have been glad of the honor of 
being the Shepherd, the caretaker of the Lord's flock, but 
the test, the cost, was too great for them. We may well suppose 
that many of the angels would have been glad to occupy 
such a position— but would they have been willing to 
undertake it at the cost involved? Many amongst men 
have coveted the office of a shepherd both before our Lord's 
day and since; but while none of them could have bought the 
sheep, since all were under condemnation, we have no reason 
to suppose that any of them would have been willing to purchase 
them at the cost of his all. The Lord's words seem 
to imply this. Only the true Shepherd was willing to make 
the sacrifice and to lay down his life for the sheep. We 
may remark here that while there is but one Shepherd of 
the Lord's flock, he, in his absence, has made provision for 
his flock, that he would give them pastors and teachers who 
were to feed the flock of God and to watch for their souls, 
for their lives, to protect their interests. 

It is in line with the Master's teaching that we find 
that he expects all who would be worthy of this position of 
feeding this flock, shepherding them, must have his spirit, 
his willingness to lay down their lives for the sheep, and in 
their defense, as his representatives, to protect them from 
the Adversary and his various snares and machinations and 
from the wolves in sheep's clothing who would make merchandise 
of them that they might bring them into bondage, 



into human pens separate and apart from the true fold 
opened by the true Shepherd and who would feed them 
upon the husks of human tradition, instead of leading them 
to the green pastures of "Present Truth." As the true sheep 
know the true Shepherd and are known by him, so the true 
Shepherd should know the true under-shepherds and they 
should know the sheep intimately. Those who utter a voice 
or call of their own cannot be recognized by the true Shepherd 
or by the true sheep; the faithful under-shepherd will 

R4158 : page 95 

speak not only the words but also in the tones, in the manner 
of the true Shepherd. 

How comforting the assurance of verse 14, "I know 
mine own and mine own know me, even as the Father 
knoweth me and I know the Father" ! (R. V.) What a 
beautiful description we here have of the precious relationship 
between the Lord and his own! The comparison between 
his knowledge and that of the Father is forceful, 
and, as our Lord elsewhere pointed out, they that know not 
him know not the Father. How important from the divine 
standpoint is knowledge, not merely head knowledge, but 
heart knowledge, intimate acquaintance with the Lord and 
his glorious plan! 

ONE FLOCK AND ONE SHEPHERD 

An important truth is set forth in v. 17: There is only 
the one fold now provided for the Lord's sheep, and in it all of 
his true ones of this Gospel Age find rest and peace through 
faith and obedience. This is the Little Flock, to whom it is 
the Father's good pleasure to give the Kingdom. Many have 
supposed in the past that this Elect Little Flock which will 
receive the Kingdom glory, honor and immortality will be 
the only ones ever recognized of the Lord as his sheep, that 
all others will be consigned to purgatory or to eternal torment. 
But the erroneousness of this view is abundantly 
shown in this verse where our Lord distinctly declares that 
he has other sheep not of this fold, others who have not yet 
entered into its rest of faith which we have entered, hoping 
for the glories of the Kingdom beyond. Let us have a good 
view of the lengths and breadths and heights and depths of 
divine love and provision in Christ: that the whole world 
was lost in sin and death through father Adam's disobedience, 
and that the whole world was redeemed by the precious 
blood of Christ! Let us see that as yet only a special class 
has been called out of darkness into the Lord's marvelous 
light and into the privileges of the present sheep-fold conditions! 
Let us note that the great mass of mankind are 
without God and have no hope in the world, because their 
eyes are blinded and their ears are stopped and they know 
not of the grace of God and have not yet received of the 
blessings! 

But let us hearken also to the declaration of the Lord 
that in due time all the blind eyes shall be opened and all 



the deaf ears shall be unstopped! Let us hearken to his 
declaration that the Little Flock now being selected are to 
constitute his Bride and joint-heirs in the Kingdom and that 
then, through him and his glorified Bride, the blessing of 
the Lord shall be extended to every member of the race. 
The Sun of Righteousness shall shine forth with healing in 
his beams, every knee shall bow and every tongue confess. 
Then the gathering of the sheep of the other flock will begin, 
as recorded in John 10:16. At that time the present 
flock will have passed beyond the vail into the Kingdom 
and its glories. Then the present fold will be at an end 
and there will be no use for such a fold in the future, for 
thieves and robbers will not be permitted then— "nothing 
shall hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain [Kingdom]." 
(Isa. 1 1:9.) Then the great Adversary shall be bound for 
a thousand years that he may deceive the sheep no longer 
until the thousand years are finished. Meantime the 
whole world of mankind will be under the instruction of the 
Lord and his Bride class, and the knowledge of the glory of 
God shall fill the whole earth. (Hab. 2:14.) The effect 
will be a test of humanity, and some will come gladly, voluntarily, 
into accord with the Lord as his sheep and be accepted 
to his right hand, to his favor, as the kind upon 
whom he is pleased to bestow everlasting life. Others under 
the same favorable conditions will manifest the goat-like, 
the wayward disposition and be gathered gradually to the 
left hand of disfavor as of those who have the spirit of the 
Adversary, which cannot be favored of the Lord. These 
ultimately with Satan, at the close of the Millennial Age, 
will be utterly destroyed in the Second Death. Their punishment 
will be everlasting, because their death will be 
everlasting; they will never be resurrected, theirs will be 
the Second Death— symbolically Gehenna, destruction. 
None will deny that throughout the Gospel Age there 
is a large class who have never heard of the only name 
given under heaven and amongst men whereby they must 
be saved and who, therefore, have never had an opportunity 
of becoming members of the Lord's flock. That they have 
gone to heaven without a knowledge of the "only name" is 
unscriptural as well as unreasonable, and that they have 
gone to eternal torment without an opportunity for salvation is 
equally unscriptural and unreasonable. That the Lord intends 
to use the Very Elect Little Flock of this Gospel Age as his 
kings and priests during the Millennium, to carry his mercy 
and favor to all of these and to give them an opportunity 
of becoming members of the human flock to whom he will 
be pleased to give eternal life, is both reasonable and 
Scriptural. 

ONE FLOCK, BUT NOT ONE FOLD 

Our common version declares, "There shall be one fold 
and one Shepherd," but this is not borne out by the Greek 

R4159 : page 95 



text, which is more properly rendered in the Revised Version 
and in the Diaglott— "There shall be one flock and 
one Shepherd." This is in full agreement with the Apostle's 
statement (Eph. 1:10) that in the dispensation of the 
fullness of times he might gather together in one [literally, 
under one head] all things in Christ, both which are in 
heaven and which are on earth, even in him. Ultimately 
all of God's creation will be under the headship of this 
great Shepherd, who is now the Head of the Church, the 
Little Flock, and who in future will be Head over angels 
also and over restored humanity. The flock will be one, 
but the sheep will be of various natures on various planes 
of being; as it is written, "In my Father's house are many 
mansions," many apartments, many planes, but all harmonious, 
grand. But the highest of all these planes, the plane 
of glory, is that to which the Lord has invited the Little 
Flock, the Bride class of this Gospel Age. Let us hear his 
voice, let us follow in his footsteps, let us make our calling 
and election sure! 



page 97 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXIX APRIL 1 No. 7 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 99 

Faced by a Social Crisis 99 

Demonism Attributed to Superstition 99 

Are Not Anarchists Demented? 100 

Was It Not Necessary? 100 

"I Go that I May Awake Him" 102 

"Friends Sorrowing and Jesus Glad" 103 

"Thy Brother Shall Live Again" 104 

Jesus Anointed at Bethany 106 

Love Begins at Home 108 

"Humble Yourselves, Therefore" 109 

Self-Seeking a Mistake 109 

Humility Despised by the Wrong-Headed 110 

Berean Studies on the Atonement Ill 

page 98 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R4163 : page 98 

1908--VOLUNTEER MATTER--1908 



FOR TRACT DISTRIBUTION we always recommend the 
January issue of the "Old Theology Quarterly." Thus the 
same matter is being circulated everywhere. We still advise 
that the distribution be from house to house except where 
Catholics or Jews are predominant. The tracts are "nested" 
—four different kinds folded together— so that when they are 
unfolded in a home several persons may be served and exchange 
with each other; and one of the four tracts is pretty 
sure to interest some one. We have orders with the printers 
for over 4,000,000 of these quadruple tracts and some of them 
are already being shipped. Order all you can and will use 
wisely as free samples. We prepay freight charges. Remember 
to co-operate with other WATCH TOWER readers in regard 
to this work. Confer, lay out the territory and order together, 
stating population you can serve as well as quantity desired. 

page 98 

DISCIPLES AND BAPTISTS 



We desire the co-operation of such of the friends as live in 
cities and towns where "Baptists" and "Disciples" reside. If 
you are willing to assist address us so stating, and reporting 
how many of their churches are in your town and the attendance 
at each, as well as the number who would co-operate 
with you in the service. "He that reapeth receiveth wages." 

FRIENDS NEAR POLISH CHURCHES 



We have some Polish literature for those who desire to 
serve the Polish of their vicinity. Write us, saying how many 
of these churches you could serve and the attendance at each. 



R4159 : page 99 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
FACED BY A SOCIAL CRISIS 



REV. WASHINGTON GLADDEN, D.D. (Congregationalist), 
expressed himself as follows a 
little time ago:— 

"It is idle, it is fatuous to hide from ourselves the fact 
that we are facing here in the United States of America a 
social crisis. The forces which are at work mean destruction. 

"The swollen fortunes that many are gloating over are 
symptoms of disease. They are not the reward of social service, 
they are the fruit of plunder. We have made them possible 
only by permitting the gate of opportunity to be made 
narrower and the burden of toil more unrequiting for millions 
of people. They exist only by our acts. A society which tolerates 
such conditions cannot live. 

"It is because we have begun to have some dim conception 
of this truth that we are moving now toward the correction 
by law of these great injustices. We must exterminate 
them; that is the fight in which there must be no faltering. 
If we would not be destroyed we must destroy the destroyer. 
This is the truth which our brave President, by word and deed, 
is always enforcing upon us, and he is entirely and everlastingly 
right about it. 

"What has the Christian Church been doing while the 
powers of piracy and plunder have been gathering their forces 
and spreading their net and heaping up their spoils? Where 
was the Christian Church when the grafters were ravaging 
the cities, and the rebaters and the frenzied financiers and the 
insurance sharks were getting in their work? For the most 
part she has been standing by and looking on, winking her 
eyes and twiddling her thumbs, and wondering whether she 
had any call to interfere. Indeed she has gathered into her 
communion many of the most conspicuous of the perpetrators 
of the injustices— they are nearly all church members— and 
has made herself a pensioner upon their bounty, and has been 
content with preaching to them the simple gospel that such 
men always love to hear. 

"The fact is plainly apparent that the Church has lost its 
grip on the world, and she is not going to regain it until she 
finds out what is her real business in the world. Let her address 
herself to that with faith and courage and she will soon 
find her resources returning." 

DEMONISM ATTRIBUTED TO SUPERSTITION 



We must not blame intelligent people for considering 
witchcraft, spiritism, clairaudience and clairvoyance 
to be merely products of superstition and imagination. 
We, too, would have been so inclined but 
for the Word of God on the subject and various corroborating 
experiences. And herein lies a part of the 
danger. When the unbelieving are suddenly made 
aware that there is really an intelligent occult influence 
at work, they are amazed that they have been favored 
to have demonstrations of and to appreciate a truth of 
which so few know. They delve into its mysteries 



as they would not have done had they not previously 
considered it all a fake— especially if the proofs reach 
them along innocent, amusing or ludicrous lines. Note 
the testimony of our home city, which is doubtless 
paralleled in other cities. The extract is from The 
Pittsburg Post: 

A WAVE OF SUPERSTITION 

Superintendent Bell, of the Humane Society, made the 
startling statement that he is daily besieged with requests 
to arrest and punish supposed sorcerers who have cast "spells" 
about their victims and are driving them to the verge of 
lunacy. 

It is to be expected that with such a great cosmopolitan 
population as Allegheny enjoys, superstitions transplanted 
from faraway lands would flourish among the foreign and 
negro elements. The negro and Latin races will probably 
always be inclined to superstition. Traces of the doctrines of 
the voodoos or witch-doctors of Africa, the legends and folklore 
of Europe and the fantastic superstitions of the Orient 
are to be found within the very shadows of our churches and 
in the midst of our civilization. Even educated Italians are 
to be found who believe profoundly in the influence of the 
"evil-eye," and almost every race has its pet superstition, but 
it is neither the negroes nor foreign classes who have alarmed 
the officials by appealing from the evils of superstition, as the 
many cases which have been brought to the attention of Superintendent 
Bell are almost without exception native-born 
white persons. 

Mr. Bell said: 

"It seems almost ridiculous to talk of persons being literally 
ruined by 'hoodoos' and evil 'spells' cast upon them 
by mysterious conjurers in these enlightened times, and if I 
had not the evidence of my own eyes I would doubt the truth 
of many of the cases which are to be found upon our records. 
Never before in my long experience in the Humane Society 
have I known evil superstition to be so prevalent and to have 

R4159 : page 100 

such alarming results. The epidemic is growing worse every 
day and it is time for some radical action to be taken. 

"One of the first cases called to my attention seemed to 
me to be particularly distressing, as I had known the victim 
of the delusion before she came under the 'influence' of some 
alleged evil spirit. An attractive young woman and exceedingly 
capable stenographer who had been employed for years 
by a well-known alderman came to me and told me that she 
had been forced to give up her employment, as she could not 
work on account of a 'spell' having been cast upon her; she 
said that voices came to her while she was at work, calling 
upon her to 'come, come, come,' and whispering strange things 
in her ears, driving her to distraction. 



"I laughed at the girl when she asked me to stop the 
people who were hounding her, but she came back again and 
again, and as she seemed to be a nervous and mental wreck 
from harping on the one subject and brooding over the ever-present 
spirit voices, I resolved to investigate the case and 
if possible arrest and make an example of the person who had 
so worked upon her mind as to wreck her life. She said that 
she had been to spiritualistic circles and a certain medium 
had cast the spell upon her. My investigation secured no evidence, 
as every person she mentioned professed entire ignorance 
of the matter. 

PUZZLING CASES COME TO LIGHT 

"The affair puzzled me, as I saw that the girl was really 
seriously affected by the delusions. She was unable to keep 
any position, not even where only the simplest housework was 
involved, and she is today sinking lower and lower in the 
social scale. Other cases which have been brought to my 
notice in great numbers during the past few months are just 
as puzzling. Although such investigations are really outside 
of my jurisdiction, I am willing to make every effort to have 
a test case of the prosecution of the persons responsible for 
this deplorable condition of affairs if I can secure the evidence. 
Positive proof must be secured, however, that some 
person is responsible for the wrecking of a life in this manner. 
An attempt to try a case with little evidence would only 
result in failure, as such a case is sure to seem ridiculous to 
the skeptical. In no one of the many cases has such evidence 
been produced, but still the victims come with their complaints, 
and they are increasing in number every day. 

"Not only women, but men come to me, and one and all 
complain of being mesmerized, hypnotized or enchanted in 
some manner by persons who wish to persecute them. 

"Just last week a nice little woman and her husband 
came to me and asked that I stop the people who had cast 
a spell over them and were hounding them to death by sending 
spirits constantly about with them wherever they went. 
The man was a big, husky fellow, and I inquired particularly 
if he drank. I thought it might be some other kind of spirits 
which was annoying him, but they stuck to their story and 
seemed to believe firmly in the delusion. 

"Persons of all walks of life are among the complainants, 

R4160 : page 100 

but the majority of them have been attending spiritualistic circles 
and associating with mediums before the 'voices' begin to 
bother them. One man who was a solicitor was forced to 
give up his work, as a 'voice' constantly whispered to him, 
and it apparently was not the 'still, small voice' of his 
conscience. 

"Probably the saddest of these cases which I have had 
called to my attention was that of a young girl whom I had 
aided years ago when she came under my jurisdiction. She 
was a healthy, strong girl then, but when she came to my 



office the other day she was a physical wreck, nervous, shivering, 

with fear depicted in her every expression. I was told 

by the people whose home she was leaving that they did not 

care to have her there any longer, as she imagined that someone 

was talking to her all the time. In her tearful story she 

told me the 'voices' never leave her." 

ARE NOT ANARCHISTS DEMENTED? 



The most charitable view of the following news 
item from the public press is to suppose the writer and 
his friends demented. Of foreign birth, born under 
unfavorable conditions, their minds seem to be 
poisoned. And yet many Socialists feel aggrieved 
when we point out that the end of Socialism will be 
anarchy! Unsuccess, want and hopeless despair will 
eventually produce just such dementia in very many. 
The item reads: 

Court action will probably follow the publication of a "call 
to arms" printed in LaQuestion Sociale, the leading organ of 
the anarchists in Paterson, N.J., and given wide circulation. 
The attention of Prosecutor Emly has been called to the article 
and he said today that he is looking up the law to see if 
legal steps can be taken against the editors because of the 
publication. 

Among other things the article says: 

"We invite everybody to get together and arm themselves. 
Seventy-five per cent, have only a knife in the house which 
will cut only onions. It will be a good thing for everybody 
to have a gun. When we are ready the first thing to do is 
to break into the armory and seize rifles and ammunition. 
The next thing is to get help of the police station and then 
the chief of police will ask for soldiers. 

"Even at that the dynamite is easy to get. Twenty-five 
cents worth will blow a big iron door down. We don't want 
to forget that dynamite will help to win. Two or three of 
us can defy a regiment without war. We will start when no 
one is thinking anything about it. Then we can beat them 
man for man. 

"At that time show no sympathy for soldiers. As soon 
as we get hold of the police-station it is our victory. The 
thing is to kill the entire force. If not, they will kill us." 



R4160 : page 100 

WAS IT NOT NECESSARY? 

"And he said to them, O thoughtless and slow of heart to believe 
all that the prophets have spoken! Was it not necessary 
for the Messiah to have suffered these things, and 



to enter his glory? And beginning at Moses 
and through all the prophets, he explained to 
them in all the Scriptures concerning himself." 
Luke 24:25-27-Diaglott. 

THE OCCASION of this utterance will be remembered: 
our Lord thus addressed two of 
his disciples on the way from Jerusalem to 
Emmaus after his resurrection. They were discussing 
the strange and wonderful event of the few days previous, 
when a stranger suddenly drew near and, walking 
with them, said, "What manner of communications 
are these that ye have one to another as ye walk 
and are sad?" And, not recognizing the stranger as 
the Lord himself, one of them said, "Art thou only a 
stranger in Jerusalem, and hast not known the things 
which are come to pass there in these days?" And he 
said unto them, "What things?" And they said unto 
him, "Concerning Jesus of Nazareth, which was a 
prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all 
the people, and how the chief priests and our rulers 

R4160 :page 101 

delivered him to be condemned to death, and have 
crucified him. But we trusted that it had been he 
which should have redeemed Israel; and beside all 
this, today is the third day since these things were 
done. Yea, and certain women, also of our company, 
made us astonished, which were early at the sepulchre, 
and when they found not his body, they came saying 
that they had also seen a vision of angels who said that 
he was alive. And some of those with us went to the 
sepulchre and found it even as the women had said; 
but him they saw not." 

Then follow our Lord's words, "O thoughtless and 
slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken. 
Was it not necessary for the Messiah to have 
suffered these things, and to enter his glory?" The 
necessity of those things was the great lesson which he 
endeavored to impart to these confused and bewildered 
but earnest disciples. 

From the standpoint of Christians today, the 
necessity of those things is much more easily discerned 
than from the standpoint of the early disciples in close 
proximity to those marvelous events. But, nevertheless, 
there are some now who thoughtlessly stumble 
into very erroneous conclusions, drawn from a 
reckless and heedless interpretation of the Master's 
plain teaching. They say, Yes, it was necessary for 
Christ to suffer because the path of suffering is the 
only path to glory. Christ had to suffer and so all must 
suffer; and the glory will follow as a natural consequence, 
as these words of the Lord teach. This is a 
very plausible argument to many who lean too much 
to their own understanding. A more reflective mind 



would say, No, that is not sound logic; for the glory of 

Jehovah was not attained through suffering; neither 

was that of the angels, nor of the Son of God in his 

pre-human existence. And a more attentive mind 

would say, No, that was not the ground of necessity 

for his sufferings to which the Lord referred; for he 

called attention to the divinely inspired prophecies 

which of necessity must be thus fulfilled; that the suffering 

was necessary, because it was a feature of Jehovah's 

plan for human redemption, and was so expressed 

by the prophets; and we know that unless it were a 

feature of that plan, Jehovah would not have required 

it. The Apostle Paul tells why it was necessary to the 

plan, saying that it was in order to manifest Jehovah's 

righteousness in remitting the sins of the already condemned 

world, showing that he is just, and yet the 

justifier of the condemned ones who believe in Jesus, 

whom God sent forth to be a propitiation, a satisfaction, 

a substitute for them— who also freely gave his 

life as a man, his humanity, a ransom for the many— 

for the numerous posterity of Adam who had inherited 

his sin and condemnation.— Rom. 3:26. 

Hear again the significant query of the Master, 
"Was it not necessary for the Messiah to have suffered 
these things?" The query is designed to awaken 
the thoughtless to a close observance of the justice and 
wisdom of Jehovah's course in this matter. Suppose 
for a moment that God had promised mankind salvation 
from death without this, which our Lord terms a 
"necessary" provision, what would have been the result? 
Thoughtful minds will at once see that such a 
course would have proved: (1) That God is a changeable 
God, declaring at one time that the wages of sin is 
death, and afterwards reversing his decision and granting 
life to the condemned; (2) That either in the first 
or in the second case he was unjust— either that the 
penalty of death was too severe and, therefore, unjust, 
or else, if it were not unjust but a righteous penalty, 
that he was unjust in reversing such a righteous decision; 
(3) Such a variable course would unsettle all 
confidence in God. We would be led to question continually 
his righteousness and wisdom, and could never 
feel assured against a sudden and unaccountable 
change of his attitude and dealing toward us. If he 
promised us life and happiness today, we could not 
know that tomorrow he would not take back his word 
and consign us to misery or death. 

Such would have been our sad condition had not 
this necessity to which our Lord referred been fully 
met by the sufferings, even unto death, of "the man 
Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all," in 
compliance with the wise and just plan of God for 
human redemption. (I Tim. 2:6.) By this means mankind 
is justly released from the just penalty which God 
pronounced against us; for a loving, benevolent Redeemer 
took our human nature and then sacrificed it 



in our behalf— thus bearing, in our stead, the 

exact penalty due to Adam and inherited from him by 

all his posterity. Thus our debt was paid, and all who 

have faith to believe in the promise of life through 

Christ are now legally free from the condemnation 

under which they were born, though the appointed 

time for their actual release has not yet come. They 

hold in their possession a promissory note— the sure 

covenant of Jehovah— sealed with the precious blood 

of Christ, and payable at the "time appointed," the Millennial 

Age. Thus they are free men in Christ; they are 

saved by faith, though they still "walk through the 

valley of the shadow of death." And, comforted by 

the rod of divine discipline and the staff of divine 

counsel and favor, they fear no evil, knowing that in 

due time the promise of everlasting life shall be fully 

verified to them. 

But there was another feature of necessity in the 
divine plan, to which our Lord referred— "Was it not 
necessary" also "for the Messiah to enter his glory?" 
The question is to you and to me, as well as to those 
early disciples; and the fact of its being propounded 
implies our ability to discern the necessity. Yes, it was 
necessary. Why? Because we needed, not only a redeemer 
to assume and cancel our past indebtedness, but 
also an able teacher and leader— a prophet and king- 
to break the fetters of sin and death and lead us out 
of our bondage. If the promise of life and liberty were 
given alone, without such help, we would still be in the 
same sad state; for the prison-doors of death are 
strong and securely barred and bolted, and we cannot 
burst them open; and the fetters of sin and sickness, of 
mental, moral and physical imbecility, are firmly 
clasped about us, and we have not the power to shake 
them off. And so we feel the necessity of a mighty 
deliverer, as well as of a loving redeemer. And, thank 
God, in his only begotten and well beloved Son we 
have both. He is our Deliverer, as well as our Redeemer, 
our Saviour, our Prophet, our Priest, and our 
King— strong to deliver and mighty to save; for 
though as a man he sacrificed all that he then had— his 
humanity— even unto death, God, accepting that sacrificed 

R4160 : page 102 

humanity as the price of our redemption, renewed 
his existence in a higher nature— even in his own 
divine likeness. And thus this second necessity of the 
divine plan is met in the provision of one who has "all 
power in heaven and in earth given unto him," and 
who is therefore abundantly able, not only to awaken 
the redeemed race from the silence of death, but also 
to establish fully all of those who desire and will accept 
of his favor in everlasting righteousness and consequent 
worthiness of eternal life. Thus, through the 
blessings of his kingly and priestly office, he will, in 



due time, present all the willing and obedient faultless 
before the presence of Jehovah's majesty, to receive 
his benediction and to enter fully into the eternal joys 
of his loving favor. "In his presence is fullness of joy, 
and at his right hand [in his favor] there are pleasures 
forevermore."— Psa. 16:11. 

Consider, then, oh thoughtless ones, how necessary 
it was that the Messiah should both suffer death, and 
also enter his glory. Both the humiliation and the exaltation 
meet our necessities in such a marvelous way 
that we clearly recognize the fact that only divine wisdom 
and love and benevolence and grace could have 
planned the wondrous scheme. "Thanks be unto God 
who giveth us the victory, through our Lord Jesus 
Christ." 

Not only was the death and resurrection and exaltation 
of Christ thus necessary to God's plan of salvation 
as viewed from a philosophical standpoint, which 
the Lord would have us thoughtful enough to observe, 
but as viewed from the standpoint of prophecy the 
necessity is also clear; and we should not be slow of 
heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken. 

Beginning at Moses, the Lord traced this line of 
prophesy for the two with whom he conversed, showing 
how it had been fulfilled in himself; and though 
his words are not recorded, we still have Moses and the 
prophets and can read them for ourselves. Moses said 
to Israel, "The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a 
prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like 
unto me; unto him shall ye hearken." (Deut. 18:15.) 
And here, in the risen Christ, was the beginning of the 
fulfilment of that promise. Moses had also in the 
typical ceremonies of the Day of Atonement prefigured 
both the sacrificial sufferings and the subsequent 
glory of Christ. The sacrifice of the bullock 
(Lev. 16:11) prefigured the former, and Aaron— in 
his robes of typical glory and beauty coming out of the 
tabernacle after the sacrifice had been accomplished 
and the blood presented in the "Most Holy" as 
a typical propitiation for the sins of Israel, and 
lifting up his hands and blessing the people, 
who until then were lying prostrate on the 
ground to represent the whole human race in 
death— prefigured the resurrection glory of Christ 
and his coming out of the Most Holy presence of 
Jehovah to bless the whole world in the Millennial Age. 
(See "Tabernacle Shadows of Better Sacrifices.") Was 
it not indeed necessary to the fulfilment of these divinely 
instituted types, says our Lord, for the Messiah 
to suffer these things and to enter his glory? 

Again, Moses testifies of Christ in recording the 
incidents of the typical sacrifice of Isaac by his father, 
Abraham, who received him again from the dead in a 
figure (Gen. 22:1-18; Heb. 11:19), thus prefiguring 
Jehovah's offering of his only begotten Son and receiving 
him again from the dead. 



Again, there were all those prophecies which so 
particularly described the circumstances of his death— 
"He is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a 
sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not 
his mouth;" "He made his grave with the wicked (the 
sinful human race), and with the rich (in the tomb of 
the rich man, Joseph of Arimathea— Matt. 27:57-60), 
in his death" (Isa. 53:7,9); "He keepeth all his bones; 
not one of them is broken" (Psa. 34:20); "Thou wilt 
not leave my soul in hell (sheol, the grave), neither 
wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption" 
(Psa. 16:10); "They pierced my hands and my feet;" 
"They part my garments among them, and cast lots 
upon my vesture;" "They gave me also gall for my 
meat, and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink." 
(Psa. 22:16,18; 69:21.) How minutely all of these 
have been fulfilled! 

And Isaiah (53:5) said, "He was wounded [not 
for his own, but] for our transgressions, he was 
bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement for our 
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are 
healed." And Daniel (9:26) said, "Messiah shall be 
cut off, but not for himself." And Zechariah (13:1) 
said, "There shall be a fountain opened to the house of 
David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and 
uncleanness." Then they told of his glorious reign, 
saying, "When thou shalt make his soul an offering 
for sin,... .the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper 
in his hand," "He will swallow up death in victory."— 
Isa. 53:10; 25:8. 

Yes, it was necessary to the fulfilment of all these 
prophecies that Christ should both suffer death and 
that he should also enter his glory; and in these blessed 
facts all thoughtful believers may rejoice. A little 
while and all the faithful, as members of his Body, 
shall have filled up the measure of his sufferings and 
shall enter his glory. Then shortly his glory will be revealed, 
and all flesh shall see it; for the mouth of the 
Lord hath spoken it.— Isa. 40:5. 



R4160 : page 102 

"I GO THAT I MAY AWAKE HIM" 

-JOHN ll:l-57.-APRIL 12- 

Golden Text:— "I am the resurrection 
and the life."- V. 25. 

TOWARD the conclusion of our Lord's ministry 
the opposition of the rulers of the Jewish 
Church became very bitter, causing Jesus to 
leave Judea for Berea. He remained for some little 
time near the place where John was preaching at 



the time of his own baptism. It was while he was 
there that word was received from Martha and Mary 
at Bethany, saying, "Lord, behold he whom thou 
lovest is sick." From this we know that Lazarus, 
their younger brother, was a very dear friend of Jesus. 
The message was brief; it did not urge him to come nor 
ask a miraculous intervention; it merely stated the fact. 

R4160 : page 103 

In some respects it was a grand model of a Christian 
prayer. The Lord's people may always go to him with 
full confidence in his sympathy and loving interest in 
all of their affairs, temporal and spiritual. At first 
they may feel disposed to ask that their own wills 
be done on earth if not in heaven, but subsequently, 
if their spirit of consecration and growth in 
grace continue, they should reach the place where, like 
Mary and Martha, they would be content to state their 
troubles to the Lord and wait for him, thankfully 
accepting as wisest and best whatever he may be 
pleased to grant. 

Then Jesus said, doubtless in the hearing of the 
messenger that he might report the same, "This sickness 
is not unto death, but that the Son of God may 
be glorified thereby." We are not to suppose that our 
Lord was mistaken, that he expected that Lazarus 
would not die, rather that the result would not be 
continuous death, knowing that he would awaken 
him. When, two days later, Jesus proposed returning 
to Bethany in Judea, and the disciples 
were fearful, our Lord indicated to them 
that there would be no particular danger. He 
foreknew all the circumstances and perceived that 
the miracle he intended to perform would disconcert 
his enemies long enough to permit of his return 
to Berea a little later. He explained to them the reason 
for the visit saying, "Our friend Lazarus sleepeth, 
but I go that I may awake him out of sleep." Later 
he brought this statement down to their comprehension 
by saying to them plainly, Lazarus is dead. 

There is so much in the view point on every subject. 
From the standpoint of actual fact, barring the 
divine purpose of mercy and resuscitation, it would 
have been proper to speak of Lazarus as being dead 
in the same sense as we would speak of a brute as 
being dead. But from the standpoint of faith in God 
and in the promise made to Abraham, that in his Seed 
all the families of the earth should be blessed— from 
this standpoint Lazarus was not dead as a brute beast, 
but was merely inanimate for a time, awaiting the 
Lord's due time to call him forth, to re-animate him, 
to awaken him from the sleep of death. Our Lord 
stated this on another occasion to the Sadducees, who 
denied a future life, denied a resurrection, saying, 
"That the dead are to be raised, Moses showed at the 



bush, when he called the Lord the God of Abraham, 

and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob." (Luke 20:37.) 

Our Lord's argument on this is that if Abraham, 

Isaac and Jacob were dead in the sense that 

a brute beast is dead, without hope of an awakening, 

a resurrection, he would not call himself their God. 

Our Lord closes up the argument by saying that from 

God's standpoint all live unto him. 

And our standpoint must be the divine standpoint; 
we must learn to think in harmony with this 
divine testimony. Hence we have hope, not only for 
Christians, saints who have died in Christ, but we 
have also hope for the world of mankind— "asleep in 
Jesus." Their condition would indeed be actual death, 
the same as a brute beast, were it not that the Lord 
has provided in Jesus for their resuscitation. But 
since such provision has been made, we are to think 
of the world of mankind as not being extinct, but 
merely asleep. All those, therefore, who accept the 
teaching of the divine Word, "sorrow not as others 
who have no hope; for if we believe that Jesus died and 
rose again, let us also believe that those who sleep in 
Jesus [those who are included in the benefit of his 
sacrifice, those who are redeemed by the precious 
blood, all the race of Adam] will God bring from the 
dead by him." (I Thess. 4:13,14.) By him the 
Church will first be raised up, to be made partakers 
of his resurrection, the First Resurrection, the Chief 
Resurrection, sharers of his glory, honor and immortality. 
By him, then, during the Millennial Age, all 
the families of the earth shall be awakened, brought 
forth from sheol, from hades, brought to a knowledge 
of the truth— yea, and if they will receive the message 
into good and honest hearts, they will be lifted entirely 
out of sin and death conditions up to the full perfection 
of restitution and life everlasting through him. 
Well, indeed, may all those who trust in Jesus rejoice 
in him and sorrow not in the presence of death, as do 
others. 

"FRIENDS SORROWING AND JESUS GLAD" 

The celebrated Charles Spurgeon, preaching on 
this subject, took this as the title of his discourse from 
the text, "I am glad for your sakes I was not there, 
to the intent that ye may believe; nevertheless let me 
go unto him." It is well for the Lord's people, when 
in a time of stress and trouble, sickness, pain and sorrow, 
to look with faith toward the Lord, remembering 
that their tears and troubles may be made to them, 
under the Lord's providence, a great blessing. We 
have an illustration in this lesson: Martha and Mary, 
ministering to their sick brother, thought of how the 
Lord loved him and sent him a message respecting 
Lazarus' condition, leaving the matter in 
his hands, trusting to his wisdom and grace, 



and yet were allowed to pass into the still darker 
shadows of the sepulchre. The brother died and 
was buried. Yea, the Master whom they trusted 

R4161 :page 103 

in as the Messiah had not alleviated the sickness, had 
not hindered the dying, had even allowed several 
days to elapse without a message to them, and Jesus, 
speaking of all this, said, "I am glad." How shall we 
understand this? The explanation is given further in 
our Lord's words, "I am glad for your sakes." So 
with us it may likewise be true that the Lord will be 
glad to permit our trials and sorrows and tears and 
difficulties for our sakes, that we may thus receive 
some important lessons which we could not otherwise 
so well learn. One of our lessons is that we must 
trust the Lord where we cannot trace him, that we 
must remember his promise that "all things shall work 
together for good to them that love him." In the case 
under consideration the sickness and death of a brother 
were part of the all things, and doubtless were inscrutable 
providences to the two sisters. Nevertheless, 
these very experiences no doubt helped in the working 
out of valuable lessons, and no doubt were preparations 
for closer communion with the Lord and for the 
eternal things. 

The noble devotion of the Lord's apostles is well 
illustrated in the words of one of them: Thomas, addressing 
his fellow-disciples, urged that they should 
not abandon the Master, that if he intended to go to 
Judea they should go with him— "let us also go, that 
we may die with him." This was the spirit of courage 
which the twelve shared when they accompanied 
the Lord, and it helps to reconcile us to their apparent 
cowardice on the night of his betrayal, a cowardice 
which was incited by our Lord's own refusal to accept 

R4161 :page 104 

assistance. It was these men who risked their lives to 
accompany the unpopular Prophet, as they supposed, 
to death, and who later forsook him and fled. The 
lesson to us in this connection is that some of us who 
feel courageous for the Lord and his cause and ready 
to die therefor, need indeed to watch and pray that 
we maintain this disposition and not succumb in the 
hour of stress. 

THE JEWS WAILED, JESUS WEPT 

It was the custom of the time to have a funeral 
service of mourning for seven days. Apparently 
Martha and Mary and Lazarus were of a wealthy, influential 
family and on the occasion of their bereavement 
many friends came to sympathize with them, 



to mourn with them. Jesus did not consider it the 
part of wisdom to go to the home, which he knew 
would be crowded with mourners, and then go to the 
tomb, so he remained a little distance from Bethany 
and sent word. When the word came that Jesus was 
nearing, Martha went out to meet him; but Mary, 
bowed with her grief and perhaps disappointed that 
the Lord's word, "This sickness is not unto death, but 
unto the glory of God," had seemingly failed, still sat 
in the house, went not to meet him, as though by her 
actions she would say, "We hoped much, Lord, down 
to the very last, but now it is too late; you allowed 
the favorable opportunity to pass. We are in the 
midst of our sorrow. How could anything now avail 
us? Lazarus is dead." Martha's greeting, when she 
came to the Lord, was, "Lord, if thou hadst been here, 
my brother would not have died; but I know that even 
now whatsoever thou shalt ask of God, he will give 
thee." There was in this remark something of a suggestion 
of chiding, as though she had said, Why did 
you not come? but still I have faith in you, I realize 
that you are the Messiah. Our Lord's reply was, 

"THY BROTHER SHALL LIVE AGAIN" 

It should be noticed that our Lord did not say, 
Thy brother is not asleep, thy brother is not dead, but 
that he pointed her mind to the resurrection. Are we 
wiser than he? May we, as his disciples, teach anything 
different or in contradiction to what he said? 
Martha's answer showed that she understood him well 
and that she had the general view of all believing Jews 
at that time, namely, that there was a hope for the 
dead, both of the just and of the unjust, in the resurrection, 
at the last day, at the end of the age when the 
last great day of the great seven-thousand year week 
shall be ushered in. Our Lord did not contradict her 
thought, but wished to lead her gradually to a realization 
of what he desired to do on this occasion and 
therefore explained that the resurrection power by 
which all the dead should be awakened in due time 
was lodged in himself— "I am the resurrection and 
the life." Every believer in him, even though he were 
dead, shall yet live, and whosoever then shall live and 
still believe in him shall never die. Our Lord inquired 
of Martha if she believed this view of his power and 
future work. She replied that she did, that she accepted 
him as the Messiah, the Son of God foretold 
to come. Then she went secretly to her sister Mary, 
saying, "The Master is here and calleth for thee." 

Whatever disposition Mary had to resent our 
Lord's apparent indifference and carelessness of their 
interest, it all vanished now when she heard that the 
Master had called for her. She went forth to the 
place where he was, which evidently was in the direction 
of the tomb, for the Jews who were mourning with 



her in the house followed her, saying, "She is probably 
going to the tomb to weep there." And so when later 
on our Lord inquired, "Where have you laid him," we 
are not to take it as an indication that he did not know, 
but rather that it was his polite manner of saying, 
Shall we now go to the tomb? Lead the way. Truly 
he who saw Nathanael under the fig tree not only 
knew that Lazarus had been dead four days, but also 
knew where he was buried. He who "needed not that 
any man tell him what was in man" would surely know 
of lesser matters more easily discerned. 

When Mary saw the Lord all thought of resentment 
fled; she fell at his feet and embraced them and 
through her tears merely said, "Lord, if thou hadst 
been here my brother would not have died." The occasion 
was a soul-stirring one— our Lord's beloved 
friend in tears at his feet, numerous Jews weeping with 
her, or, according to the Greek original, wailing. What 
effect did this have upon our Lord? Was he cold, 
stern, forbidding? No! True to the record, he was 
"touched with a feeling of our infirmities." (Heb. 4:15.) 
He was full of sympathy, he fully appreciated 
the real meaning of death— that it is a curse, an awful 
curse, which rests upon our race. He said nothing by 
way of assuring Mary that Lazarus was in heaven, 
for he spake the truth, declaring on another occasion, 
"No man hath ascended up to heaven."— John 3:13. 

On the contrary, entering deeply into the affliction 
that is resting upon our race, under which the 
Apostle says "the whole creation groaneth," our Lord 
wept. This verse, "Jesus wept," the shortest in the 
Bible, brings to us a wealth of assurance that our 
Lord is sympathetic, that he knoweth our frame, that 
he remembereth that we are dust; and it is one of the 
best assurances that he appreciates all that he has 
promised us in the declaration that our trials shall all 
work together for good to us if we are his and if we 
are rightly exercised thereby. It is worthy of note 
here that while the word used in connection with the 
weeping of the others indicates wailing, it is not so 
with the Greek word which refers to our Lord's weeping; 
he shed tears, but lifted not up his voice in grief; 
he groaned in spirit and was troubled, he heaved sighs, 
he entered fully into the sorrow of his friends. And 
is not this a lesson to all of his followers, that they, 
with propriety also, may weep with those who weep, 
as well as rejoice with those who rejoice? 

The Jews who were with Jesus noted and commented 
upon his sympathy, saying, "Behold how he 
loved him," but others criticised him saying, This is 
the miracle-worker. Could he not have helped his 
friend if he really loved him? 

So there are some to day inclined to criticise the 
Lord for permitting sickness, sorrow and death and 
who inquire whether the power of God is lacking or 
the willingness of God lacking that he does not overthrow, 



restrain these adverse influences now afflicting 
the human family. The language of faith is,— 

"Judge not the Lord by feeble sense, 

But trust him for his grace; 
Behind a frowning providence, 

He hides a smiling face." 

The tomb was a grave with a stone at its mouth, 
and Jesus directed that this should be moved. Of 

R4161 :page 105 

course, the same power that could awaken the dead 
would have been quite sufficient to roll away the stone 
also, but it seems to have been a rule with our Lord 
never to do anything by miraculous power that could 
as well be done by human agency. We may profitably 
apply this lesson to all the affairs of life and, in 
harmony with it, when we come to our Lord with our 
griefs and troubles and perplexities and ask for his 
blessing and overruling providences, should not expect 
any special intervention in matters that are possible to 
us. Indeed, we doubtless would lose a blessing thereby. 
Who can doubt that the men who rolled away the 
stone from the mouth of that sepulchre had a blessing 
afterward in connection therewith as they thought 
over the matter or told others that they themselves had 
rolled away the stone! Who can doubt that it helped 
to impress the importance of the miracle upon them! 
Let us, then, do with our might whatever we may be 
able to do and wait patiently for the Lord in connection 
with things for which our arm is too short. 

"HE HATH BEEN DEAD FOUR DAYS" 

It was the same Martha who a little while before 
had said, Even now I know that whatsoever thou 
shalt ask of God, he will hear thee, and who now protested 
against the moving of the stone from the sepulchre, 
saying, "Lord by this time he stinketh, for he 
hath been dead four days." She probably knew that 

R4162:page 105 

the Lord had awakened Jairus' daughter and the 
widow of Nain's son, but those were cases in which 
the animation had been suspended but a little while. 
In this case, after putrefaction set in, neither she nor 
others would expect that any power imaginable could 
recover the dead. It was with this in view, doubtless, 
that our Lord said beforehand, "I am glad for your 
sakes that I was not there, to the intent that you might 
believe." It was to be a special lesson not only to his 
dear friends, Martha and Mary, but also to his dear 
disciples, and more than this, to all those who would 



believe through his Word. It was a most stupendous 
miracle! 

Before commanding Lazarus to come forth our 
Lord prayed audibly before his disciples and before 
the multitude of mourners. Here our Lord gave sanction 
to public prayer, showing that when he objected 
to the prayers of the Pharisees on the street corners, it 
was because the time and place, etc., were unsuitable 
and because they prayed to be seen and heard of men. 
But in his own case he was acknowledging the Father 
that all those who stood by might take knowledge that 
not by his own power, but by the Father's power, as 
the Finger of God, he worked these miracles. 

"I know that thou hearest me always, but because 
of the people which stand by, I said it, that they may 
believe that thou hast sent me." After this brief 
prayer he cried with a loud voice, or commanded in a 
loud voice, "Lazarus, come forth"— not secret mumbling, 
not incantations, not legerdemain. Quite to the 
contrary. And this miracle in various particulars evidently 
foreshadowed our Lord's coming glorious 
work, when, surrounded by his glorified Church, the 
message from on high shall be to all that are in their 
graves, "Come forth." (John 5:28.) Then Lazarus 
came forth bound hand and foot, wrapped with linen 
cloths. We can imagine better than describe the wondrous 
awe of those who stood by. And it was necessary 
that Jesus should call them to a realization of 
their privilege, saying, "Loose him and let him go," 
for in his burial his jaw had been bound, his limbs 
wrapped, etc. The miracle was well timed, not only 
for the benefit of the sorrowing sisters, but also for the 
benefit of their Jewish friends, many of whom, seeing 
this miracle, believed on him; and in the interest of 
the apostles, also, who would be better prepared thereby 
for the tests which were to come to them a little 
later in connection with our Lord's crucifixion. 

Meantime, some of the witnesses went their way 
and related matters to the Pharisees, with the result 
that the latter became all the more determined that our 
Lord must die— not because he had done evil works, 
not because they believed him a bad man, but because 
they were so thoroughly wrapped up in their own plans 
and purposes in connection with their nation. Their 
argument was that if Jesus proceeded with his work 
it would not be long before the masses of the people 
would be ready to flock to him, with the result that 
the Roman government, which had given them much 
liberty in the control of their national and Church affairs, 
would take matters entirely out of their hands 
and thus their rebellion and their government would 
be entirely overthrown. It seemed to them to be an 
emergency case which called for drastic treatment. 
Similar, we believe, will be the attitude of ecclesiasticism 
a little later on in the present harvest time toward 
the last members of the Body of Christ. What 



the Sanhedrin there did in determining to oppose 
Jesus, the federation of churches will probably do in 
the way of opposing "Present Truth"— after the federation 
shall have become thoroughly organized and 
vitalized. (Rev. 13:15.) The plea was that we must 
do this for the good of the cause. Their mistake was 
in too much self-confidence, too much self-reliance 
upon their own theories as to how the Kingdom of 
heaven was to be established. The mistake which will 
be made by the Sanhedrin of our day will be along 
similar lines. Praying for centuries, "Thy Kingdom 
come, thy will be done," they have entirely misconceived 
the meaning of the words, so that the preludes 
to the Kingdom will appear to them inharmonious and 
as causing destruction. 

WHERE WAS LAZARUS? 

We have our Lord's word for it that Lazarus was 
not in heaven, for he said, "No man hath ascended up 
to heaven." Indirectly we have the Apostle Peter's 
testimony also to the same effect, for, speaking of the 
Prophet David, he declares, "David has not ascended 
into the heavens." (Acts 2:34.) Where was Lazarus? 
What account did he give of himself? Not a word is 
there written on the subject. He had no account to 
give of himself; he was nowhere, he was dead. Our 
Lord lifted his eyes in addressing the Father in heaven, 
but afterwards, when he spoke to Lazarus, he addressed 
the tomb, "Lazarus, come forth," and the dead 
came forth from the tomb. This, as we have seen, is 
a picture, a demonstration, of the power of the Lord 
to testify in advance of how he eventually will be the 
resurrection power to the whole world. And he himself 
describing that coming exercise of power represented 
it in the same general tenor, saying, "Marvel 
not at this: the hour is coming in the which all that 
are in their graves shall hear his voice and shall come 
forth" (John 5:28), some to full perfection in the 
First Resurrection, the remainder to be merely awakened 

R4162:page 106 

as was Lazarus, but, unlike him, to be then granted 
an opportunity for anastasis, raising up completely 
out of sin and death conditions to the full perfection 
of human nature— a resurrection by judgments 
or disciplines, rewards and stripes. 

According to the erroneous view which has become 
so popular throughout Christendom, Lazarus, who was 
a special friend of Jesus and one whom he loved, 
must have been in heaven— not in either purgatory or 
hell. But how strange it would be, if after he had been 
in heaven for several days, Jesus should do him the 
unfriendly act of calling him back to earth life— and 
with what haste he must have returned if he laid 



aside a crown or palm or harp! No! no! All this belongs 
to the foolish imagination and is thoroughly out 
of harmony with the precious lesson of our Golden 
Text— that Jesus is the resurrection and the life. By 
his death he secured for Adam and his race a right to 
re-live and the resurrection power is that by which he 
will bring mankind forth from under the dominion of 
death. Lazarus lost consciousness in his sickness at 
the time of his death, and received consciousness again 
at the moment of his awakening. In this interim of 
four days he was in death, asleep; as Jesus said, "Our 
friend Lazarus sleepeth." He was not awake in any 
sense of the word; as Jesus testified, "I go that I may 
awake him," and, as the Scriptures elsewhere declare, 
"The dead know not anything," "There is neither 
wisdom, knowledge nor device in sheol [hades, the 
tomb, the sleep of death], whither thou goest."— 
Eccl. 9:5,10. 

We can fancy the awakening of the whole world, 
and what a joyful occasion it will be, as one after another 
they all come forth from the great prison-house 
of death to be received and welcomed by their friends, 
and to find the earth enjoying a large measure of restitution 
blessings and progressing gradually toward the 
full perfection of Eden, and their friends so far advanced 
along the way toward perfection and themselves 
surrounded by the blessings and privileges and 
opportunities which the Kingdom will afford, with the 
light of the knowledge of God flooding the whole 
earth! Oh, how different this will be from what the 
heathen have been taught and imagined respecting the 
crossing of the river Styx or their re-incarnation in 
other forms of animal life! Oh, how different it will 
be for many who have heard the false doctrine of 
eternal torment or purgatorial anguish and who died 
in terror lest this should be their portion! What 
thankful hearts toward God they will have! Perhaps 
Satan's lie may eventually redound to the glory of 
God, and perhaps this is why the Lord has been silent 
for so long and has permitted his holy name to be so 
smirched and slandered and his character so traduced! 

"THE RESURRECTION AND THE LIFE" 

There is a still deeper thought connected with 
our Golden Text which we must not pass by. It is 
this: We who now believe in the Lord and are thereby 
justified through faith in his blood, and who have 
heard the call to glory, honor and immortality and 
who have accepted the same by a full consecration to 
the Lord— we are sometimes spoken of as already 
having a new life, the resurrection life, as already 
having passed from death into life. This, of course, 
is a figurative use of the words resurrection and life. 
Reckonedly, we have left the old nature and received 
the new nature from the Lord through the begetting 



of the holy Spirit, and it is this new nature which is 
to be perfected in the First Resurrection. And since 
our human natures are reckoned dead from the moment 
that we are begotten of the Spirit, it is quite reasonable 
and proper that the Scriptures should speak 
of our present condition as a resurrected condition; 
that we have risen out of the old order of life and 
hope and aim to new conditions; that we have started 
on the new way to life; that the present experiences 
are transforming, and that the grand consummation of 
all this transformation will be the actual change from 
weakness to power, from the natural body to a spiritual 
body, from dishonor to glory, when we shall participate 
actually in the glorious change of the Lord's 
resurrection. 

Let us strive to enter into this rest, this blessing! 
Faithful is he who has called us to so high a station 
and privilege, he will also do for us exceedingly, 
abundantly better than we could ask or think, 
according to the riches of his grace. "All things are 
yours, for ye are Christ's and Christ is God's." (I Cor. 3:21,23.) 
In the meantime, to us who live this 

figurative resurrection life, the Apostle's words are applicable, 
For me to live is for Christ to live, for he is 
represented by us; we are his ambassadors. Meantime 
we are also to remember that our resurrection 
hopes are in him; as it is written, "Your life is hid 
with Christ in God," and, "when he who is our life 
shall appear, we also shall appear with him in glory." 



R4163 : page 106 

JESUS ANOINTED AT BETHANY 

--JOHN 12:1-11.-APRIL 19- 

Golden Text:— "We love him, because 
he first loved us."— 1 John 4:19. 

THE last week of our Lord's earthly ministry was 
a busy one. The sixth day previous to the Passover 
was the Jewish Sabbath, which ended at six 
o'clock in the evening, and it is possible that it was at 
that time that our Lord and his disciples were entertained 
by Martha and Mary at "the house of Simon the 
leper"— probably their father. Lazarus, their brother, 
whose recovery from death was noted in the previous 
lesson, was also one of the table-guests. 

Our Lord knew that the time of his death was near 
at hand, and he had given intimations of this to his beloved 
disciples, but they were so accustomed to having 
him say wonderful things beyond the power of their 
comprehension that they probably failed to realize their 
closeness to the great tragedy of Calvary. This need 



not surprise us when we remember the Scriptural declaration 
that our Lord spake in parables and dark sayings 
—"and without a parable spake he not unto the 
people." For instance, his declaration, "Destroy this 
temple, and in three days I will raise it up." And 
again, "I am the living bread which came down from 
heaven; if any man shall eat of this bread he shall live 

R4163 : page 107 

forever." And again, "Except ye eat the flesh of the 

Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in 

you." (John 2:19; 6:51,53.) Having in mind such 

unusual language, the apostles would be entirely excusable 

in doubting the proper meaning to be attached to 

our Lord's declaration, "The Son of man must be lifted 

up," and other similar expressions foretelling his 

death. 

Before coming to the consideration of the Bethany 
supper and the anointing on that Sabbath evening, let 
us have before our minds the incidents of the days following 
it, that we may be able to appreciate our Lord's 
declaration that the anointing with the spikenard was 
preparatory to his burial. The next morning (the first 
day of the week, now usually called Sunday), having 
sent after the ass, our Lord rode upon it to Jerusalem. 
The people, recognizing the wonderful miracle wrought 
upon Lazarus, congregated and hailed him as Messiah, 
the Son of David, fulfilling the prophecy of Zechariah (9:9), 
and strewed clothing and palm branches in the 
way (hence this is generally known as Palm Sunday). 
It was on this occasion that our Lord wept over Jerusalem, 
and declared, "Your house is left unto you desolate."— 
Matt. 23:38. 

It is supposed that it was on the second day (Monday) 
that our Lord scourged the money-changers out 
of the temple, and taught the people there; and we 
gather from the narrative that it was in his journey on 
this day that he pronounced the curse upon "the barren 
fig tree," supposed to represent the Jewish nation— barren 
of fruit and therefore rejected. It would appear 
that the third day (Tuesday) was again spent teaching 
in the temple, answering questions, etc., and that evening, 
as they returned again to Bethany, he discoursed 
with his disciples respecting the great events near at 
hand. The fourth day (Wednesday) apparently was 
spent quietly at Bethany, and on the fifth day (Thursday) 
the disciples made ready the Passover supper 
which was eaten after six o'clock that evening— the beginning 
of the sixth day (Friday) according to Jewish 
reckoning— the 14th of Nisan. The Gethsemane experiences 
followed that night and the trial before Pilate 
the next morning, and the crucifixion later. 

"BE NOT FORGETFUL TO ENTERTAIN" 



Now we come back to witness the hospitalities extended 
to our Lord six days before the crucifixion, at 
the house of Simon the leper, the home of Martha and 
Mary and Lazarus. We are to remember that our Lord 
was a visitor in those parts— his home, to the extent 
that he ever had one, being in Galilee, where the most of 
his time was spent. "He would not walk in Jewry, 
because the Jews sought to kill him." (John 7:1.) But 
now the time for his sacrifice had come, and in harmony 
therewith he came amongst his enemies— although 
it was known that prominent Jews sought to kill him 
and also sought the death of Lazarus, who was a living 
witness to his Messianic power. 

We may suppose that this was no ordinary supper, 
but in the nature of a feast or banquet in our Lord's 
honor. Nevertheless, one incident connected with it 
so outshone all its other features that the narrator mentions 
it alone— the anointing of our Lord with the 
"spikenard ointment, very costly." Our Lord himself 
declared, "Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached 
throughout the whole world, this also which this woman 
hath done shall be spoken of for a memorial of 
her." (Mark 14:9.) It is entirely proper, therefore, 
that we should examine with some particularity the 
details of this service so highly esteemed by the 
Master. 

Prof. Shaff says, "By the 'ointment' we are to understand 
rather a liquid perfume than what we commonly 
know as ointment." The alabaster box was rather in 
the shape of a flask or vase, and the breaking of the 
box (Mark 14:3.) signifies the opening of its tyings and 
seals by which the precious odors were confined. Judas' 
words of dissatisfaction furnish us a clue respecting 
the costliness of this perfume, for he says that it 
"might have been sold for three hundred denarii." A 
denarius, translated "penny" in v. 5, is represented as 
being the average daily wages at that time— "a penny 
[denarius] a day." (Matt. 20:2.) If we compare these 
values with present money values, counting farm labor 
at fifty cents a day (which is certainly a moderate valuation), 
the three hundred denarii would be the equivalent 
in wages of one hundred and fifty dollars of our 
money. Thus we see that the perfume was indeed 
"very costly." There was nearly a pint of the perfume, 
a Roman pound being twelve ounces. Nor need we 
question the possibility of perfumes being so expensive, 
for even today we have a counterpart in value in 
the attar of roses made in the far East. It is claimed 
that four hundred thousand full-grown roses are used 
to produce one ounce of this perfume, which, in its purity, 
sells as high as one hundred dollars an ounce, or 
twelve hundred dollars for the quantity used by Mary 
in anointing our Lord. It is said that Nero was the 
first of the Emperors to indulge in the use of costly 
perfumes for his anointing; but one much more worthy 
of tribute, homage and anointing with a sweet perfume 



was the One whom Mary had the honor to anoint. He 
was— 

"PRINCE OF THE KINGS OF THE EARTH" 

Judas was first to object to this as a waste, the 
difficulty with him being that he loved the Lord too 
little and money too much. The amount that love is 
willing to expend for others is, to some extent, at least, 
a measure of the love. Another Evangelist informs us 
that several of the disciples, under the influence of 
Judas' words, took the same view of the matter and 
spoke disapprovingly of Mary's action. The Apostle 
John, however, takes this opportunity to throw a little 
sidelight upon the character of Judas— more than is apparent 
in the common translation of v. 6. His declaration 
is, "Now he said this, not because he cared for the 
poor, but because he was a thief, and had the box, and 
stole what things were deposited in it."— Diaglott. 

Our Lord's words, "Let her alone!" were in the nature 
of a severe reproof to those whose sentiments of 
love had no other measure than that of money. It was 
indeed true that there were plenty of poor, and there 
would still be plenty of poor, and plenty of opportunities 

R4163 : page 108 

to minister to them; but the opportunity to specially 

honor the Lord, and to pour upon him the fragrant 

odors so beautifully expressive of Mary's love and devotion, 

would not be for long, and our Lord declares 

that the circumstances fully justified the costly expenditure. 

He shows himself out of sympathy with the 

sentiments which balance themselves too accurately 

with money values. Moreover, we may esteem that in 

many instances like the one here recorded the persons 

who are so careful lest money should be spent except 

for the poor are often like Judas, so avaricious that 

very little of whatever money gets into their possession 

reaches the poor. 

On the contrary, it is the deep, loving, benevolent 
hearts, like that of Mary, which delight in costly sacrifices 
at times, which also are likely to be deeply sympathetic 
and helpful to the physically poor. And in 
our ministrations to others we are not to forget that 
money is not the only thing of which people are sorely 
in need— some need love and sympathy who do not 
need money. Our Lord was one of these: his own heart, 
full of love, found comparatively little companionship 
in the more or less sordid minds of even the noblest of 
the fallen race represented amongst his apostles. In 
Mary he seemed to find the depth of love and devotion 
which was to him an odor of sweet incense, of refreshment, 
of reinvigoration, a tonic: and Mary apparently 
appreciated, more than did others, the lengths and 
breadths and heights and depths of the Master's character; 



she not only delighted to sit at his feet to learn 

of him, but now delighted, at a great cost, to give him 

some manifestation of her devotion, her love. 

She poured the perfume first upon our Lord's head 
(Mark 14:3), the usual custom, and then the remainder 
she poured upon his feet. But the Apostle John, in 
recording the matter, seems to have forgotten entirely 
the anointing of our Lord's head, so deeply was he 
impressed with the still more expressive devotion manifested 
in the anointing of the feet and the wiping of 
them with the hairs of her head. It is indeed a picture 
of love— a devotion well worthy of being told as a 
memorial. 

ACTIONS LOUDER THAN WORDS 

Some one has said:— 

"She took 'woman's chief ornament' and devoted 
it to wiping the travel-stained feet of her Teacher; she 
devoted the best she had to even the least honorable 
service for him. It was the strongest possible expression 
of her love and devotion. She gave her choicest 
treasures in the most self-devoted manner. She was 
bashful and retiring, and could not speak her feelings, 
and therefore she expressed them in this manner." 

We are not surprised to learn that the whole house 
was filled with the odor; and we doubt not that the 
odor remained for a long time: but far more precious 
than that was the sweet odor of Mary's heart-affections 
which the Lord accepted and will never forget, and the 
sweet odor of her devotion which has come down 
through the centuries to us, bringing blessing to all 
true hearts who have honored her service and desired 
to emulate her conduct. 

"UNTO ONE OF THE LEAST OF THESE" 

It is not our privilege to come into personal contact 
with our dear Redeemer, but we have, nevertheless, 
many opportunities for doing that which to some extent 
will correspond to Mary's act— it is our privilege 
to anoint the Lord's "brethren" with the sweet perfume 
of love, sympathy, joy and peace, and the more costly 
this may be as respects our self-denials, the more precious 
it will be in the estimation of our Elder Brother, 
who declared that in proportion as we do or do not unto 
his brethren, we do or do not unto him. (Matt. 25:40,45.) 
Moreover, he represents these "brethren" in a 
figure as "members of his Body"; and from this standpoint 
we see that, while it is not our privilege to pour 
the perfume upon the Head of the Body— now highly 
exalted far above angels, principalities and powers, and 
every name that is named, next to the Father— it is 
our privilege to pour the perfume upon the feet of 
Christ, the last living members of his Church of this 



Gospel Age. 

We know not to what extent the closing years of 
this Gospel Age may correspond to the closing days of 
our Lord's ministry; we know not how similar may be 
the experiences of the "feet" of the Body of Christ to 
the experiences of the Head of the Body; we do know, 
however, that in any event it is our blessed privilege 
to comfort one another, to encourage one another, to 
sustain one another, in the trials incident to our "filling 
up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ." 
(Col. 1:24.) And to whatever extent we would improve 
these opportunities as did Mary, we must first appreciate 
them as she did. 

"LOVE BEGINS AT HOME" 

Nothing in this suggestion is intended to imply any 
neglect of the members of our natural families "according 
to the flesh"; attentions to these are proper always, 
and are generally so understood, and should more and 
more be appreciated and used in proportion as the 
Lord's people receive freely and fully of his spirit of 
love— kindness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering. 
But we emphasize that which the Scriptures emphasize, 
namely, that our interest and efforts are not to be confined 
to those of fleshly tie, but, on the contrary, are to 
be "especially to the household of faith." (Gal. 6:10.) 
There will be other and future opportunities of doing 
good to mankind in general, but the opportunity for 
serving "the Body of Christ" is limited to the present 
age. 

Apropos of this propriety of doing good to others 
—expressing our love by our conduct as well as by our 
words, to the members of our families as well as to the 
members of the Body of Christ— we quote the words of 
another: 

"The sweetest perfume that the home circle ever 
knows arises from deeds of loving service which its 
members do for each other. The sweetest perfumes of 
our homes do not arise from elegant furniture, soft 
carpets, elegant pictures, or luxurious viands. Many a 
home, having all these, is pervaded by an atmosphere 

R4163 : page 109 

as tasteless and odorless as bouquets of waxen 
flowers." 

Another has said:— 

"If my friends have alabaster boxes full of fragrant 
perfume of sympathy and affection laid away, which 
they intend to break over my body, I should rather they 
would bring them out in my weary and troubled hours, 
and open them, that I might be refreshed and cheered 
with them while I need them. ...I would rather have 



a plain coffin without a flower, a funeral without a eulogy, 
than a life without the sweetness of love and sympathy. 
...Flowers on the coffin cast no fragrance 
backward on the weary road." 



R4163 : page 109 

"HUMBLE YOURSELVES, THEREFORE" 

--JOHN 13:1-15. -APRIL 26.- 

Golden Text:— "A new commandment I give unto you, that 
ye love one another, as I have loved you."— John 13:34. 

OUR Lord's ministry was about ended. He met 

with his twelve chosen disciples to celebrate 

the Passover supper, declaring, "I have 

greatly desired to eat this Passover with you before I 

suffer." (Luke 22:15.) The passover lamb which they 

were to eat typified our Lord himself, and the eating of 

it by his disciples represents how believers of the 

Gospel Age feed upon Christ in their hearts, and 

by faith appropriate to themselves the blessings secured 

to them through his death, "For even Christ our Passover 

[Lamb] is sacrificed for us; therefore let us keep 

the feast." (I Cor. 5:7,8.) But, inasmuch as Jesus 

was the antitypical Lamb, it was appropriate that the 

type should be discontinued; and hence it was that our 

Lord, following this last typical Supper, instituted the 

Memorial Supper of unleavened bread and fruit of the 

vine as representing the antitype— his broken body and 

shed blood. 

According to the Jewish custom the Passover supper 
was celebrated by families, and the twelve apostles, 
specially chosen by our Lord and giving their allegiance 
to him as their Head, constituted the nucleus of the 
family of God— whose hearts and hopes and aims were 
one— for "ye are all called in one hope of your calling." 
(Eph. 4:4.) Judas was not excluded, although our 
Lord evidently knew beforehand that it was he who 
should betray him. This furnishes us the lesson that, 
as followers of Christ, we should not judge one another's 
hearts, nor surmise evil. After the evil of the 
heart has manifested itself in words or deeds is quite 
time enough to separate ourselves from others who 
profess the Lord's name and desire to fellowship with 
us. True, the evil begins in the heart, before the outward 
act, but we should always hope that the brethren 
may gain the victory, and should seek to do nothing to 
stumble any, but everything to help them to overcome 
the influence of the Adversary and the weaknesses of 
their own flesh. 

John does not give a particular account of the 
Passover supper, but seems to bring in merely certain 



valuable features and lessons connected therewith 
and omitted by the other evangelists. His declaration 
is that our Lord knew beforehand that he had reached 
the end of his earthly career and was specially solicitous 
of improving the closing hours with his particular, 
chosen friends and companions by inculcating some 
good lessons. "He loved them to the end"— completely, 
fully; his own sharp trials, present and approaching, 
did not distract him nor absorb his attention. He 
was, as heretofore, still thinking of and endeavoring 
to bless others. Nor need we suppose that this love 
for the twelve applied to them exclusively; rather that 
he viewed the twelve as the representatives of "them 
also which should believe on him through their word" 
—as he expressed the matter in his prayer to the 
Father. With this view in mind we can realize that 
what our Lord said and did to the apostles was intended 
to be applicable and instructive to all who have 
been his since then.— John 17:20. 

SELF-SEEKING A MISTAKE 

From Luke's account it would appear that on this 
occasion there was a strife amongst the apostles, a 
contention respecting which of them should be esteemed 
greatest. (Luke 22:24-31.) This strife may not have 
been solely one of selfishness, in the evil sense of the 
word, but, partially prompted by love for the Master, 
it may have been in respect to their several positions 
at the table, the coveted position possibly being closeness 
to our Lord's person. We remember how James 
and John had made request that they might be on the 
right and on the left of our Lord in the Kingdom, and 
we remember that in connection with this narrative it 
is declared that John was next to our Lord, and leaned 
upon his bosom. 

Quite possibly this dispute respecting greatness 
arose in part from the fact that they were not in this 
instance treated as guests, but merely had the upper 
room put at their disposal; having no host, no provision 
was thereby made for the usual washing of the 
feet, and it was neglected. The matter of feet-washing 
in eastern countries, when sandals were worn, was not 
merely a compliment, but a necessity, the heat of the 
climate, the openness of the sandals, and the dust of 
the roads, making it almost indispensable to comfort 
that the feet be bathed on arriving at the house after a 
journey. Apparently this question as to which of the 
twelve was greatest, and as to which should perform the 
menial service of feet-washing for the others, had developed 
the fact that none of them was anxious to take the 
servant's position. 

Apparently our Lord permitted them to thus disagree, 
without settling their dispute, without appointing 
any of their number to the menial service. He 
allowed them to think the matter over— time to relent 



and reconsider— and they even proceeded to eat the 
supper, contrary to custom, with unwashed feet. 

Then it was that Jesus arose from the supper, laid 
aside his outer garment, and attaching a towel to the 

R4163 :page 110 

girdle of his under-garments, took a basin and a ewer 
for the water, and began to pour the water and wash 
the feet of his disciples. It was not the custom of the 
East to pour the water into the basin and put the foot 
into the water, but to pour the water upon the foot being 
washed; thus each had clean water, and little was 
wasted— for water is much more scarce and precious 
there than with us. We are to remember also that in 
the East at that time tables and chairs such as we use 
were not in vogue. On the contrary, the tables were 
low and shaped somewhat like a horseshoe, and those 
who sat really reclined, lying upon the table, with the 
left elbow resting upon a pillow or divan, their heads 
toward the inside of the horseshoe, where there was a 
space provided for the food, and also a space for a servant 
to enter and place the food. Thus it will be seen 
that the feet extended backward, and could quite easily 
be reached without disturbing those who were 
eating. 

"YE ARE CLEAN, BUT NOT ENTIRELY" 

Our Lord very evidently had already washed the 
feet of several of the disciples before he came in turn 
to Peter. Seemingly none of them offered objection, 
although no doubt the thought of their own contentions 
upon this subject, and unwillingness to serve one 
another, brought them blushes of shame and confusion 
of face. But when it came to Peter's turn he protested. 
It would never do, he thought, to permit our Lord to 
perform so menial a service. He asks, "Lord, dost 
thou wash my feet?" But our Lord did not stop to reprimand 
Peter— to give him a thorough "setting down" 
and scolding, as some of his followers might be inclined 
to do under such circumstances: he merely insisted on 
continuing, and treating Peter the same as the others, 
saying that he would explain the matter later, and that 
if he washed him not, he could have no part with him. 

One cannot help admiring the noble traits in Peter's 
conduct, even though with the same breath we be forced 
to acknowledge some of his weaknesses; and herein all 
the Lord's followers find a lesson of encouragement, 
for though they find weaknesses and imperfections, if 
they find also the heart-loyalty to the Lord which was 
in Peter, they may continue to have courage and hope 
and to press on as did he, from victory to victory, and at 
last to have the prize, the reward of faithfulness. 

When Peter learned that there was more meaning 
to the washing of the feet than merely its kindness and 



comfort, and its reproof of the lack of the spirit of humility 
amongst the disciples, he wanted, not only his 
feet, but also his hands and his head washed. Noble, 
thorough-going, whole-hearted, fervent Peter! But our 
Lord explained that this was not necessary, saying, 
"He who has been bathed has no need except to wash 
his feet, but is wholly clean." (V. 10— Diaglott.) Public 
baths were in use at that time, but even after having 
taken a general bath, on return to the home it was 
customary to complete the matter by washing the feet; 
and this seems to be the inference of our Lord's remark. 
The apostles had been with our Lord, for three 
years, and under the influence of his spirit of love, 
meekness, gentleness, patience, humility, had been 
greatly blessed— by "the washing of water through 
the Word" spoken unto them.— John 15:3; Eph. 5:26. 

HUMILITY DESPISED BY THE WRONG-HEADED 

There is an intimation in the Lord's words that 
the spirit of pride which had manifested itself among 
them had been inspired to some extent by their treasurer, 
Judas,— as evil communications always are corrupting. 
(I Cor. 13:33.) This final lesson from their great 
Teacher was a very impressive one upon the eleven, 
whose hearts probably were in the right condition to 
receive the reproof and the lesson; but upon Judas, 
although his feet also were washed, the effect evidently 
was not favorable. The spirit of evil which had entered 
into him before the supper— the desire to obtain 
money, and the proposition to obtain it by betraying 
the Lord, evidently continued with him, and instead of 
being moved aright by our Lord's humility and service, 
he was the more moved in the opposite direction— to 
think little of him. So it is with all who have professed 
the Lord's name in every time. Those instructions, 
examples and experiences, which are working out 
blessing and proving beneficial to some, are proving 
injurious to others. The Gospel, in its every phase, is 
either "a savor of life unto life, or of death unto death." 
As it was God's goodness and mercy that hardened 
Pharaoh's heart, so it was the love and humility of 
Jesus that hardened Judas' heart, and these principles 
are still at work, and may be witnessed in the harvest 
siftings today.— 2 Cor. 2:16; Exod. 7:13. 

After accomplishing the work of washing the feet 
of all, our Lord resumed his outer garment and reclined 
again at the supper (this was the Passover Supper— 
the Memorial Supper of bread and wine being instituted 
afterward). Our Lord now improved his opportunity 
and explained to them the meaning of what he had 
done. He pointed out to them that this menial service 
did not signify that he was not the Lord and Master, 
but signified that as Lord and Master he was not 
unwilling to serve the lesser members of Jehovah's 
family, and to minister to their comfort, even in the 



most menial service; and that they should not have 
been unwilling, but glad to render such service one to 
another. 

The example which our Lord set was not so much 
in the kind of service (feet-washing) as in the fact of 
service. Nothing in this example, as we understand it, 
was in the nature of a ceremony to be performed by the 
Lord's people annually, weekly, monthly or at any 
other time; but the principle of his service constituted 
the example, and is to be observed amongst his followers 
at all times— they are to love one another and to 
serve one another, and to consider no service too menial 
to be performed for each other's comfort and good. 

Those who have interpreted this to signify a ceremony 
similar to the symbolical ceremony of the Memorial 
Supper and the symbolical ceremony of Baptism 
are, we think, in error. There seems to be nothing 
symbolical in it. It is merely an illustration of the 
principle of humility which is to attach to every affair 
of life. If any of the Lord's people need washing, or 
need any other assistance of a menial character, their 
brethren should gladly and joyfully serve them; and 
whosoever possesses the spirit of the Lord will surely 
render such service; but to insist, as some do, that 
each of the Lord's people should first wash his own 

R4163 :page 111 

feet and have them clean, and then that each should 
wash one another's feet ceremoniously, is contrary to 
his example which he instructs us to follow. The example 
was a service, and not an inconvenience and 
ceremony. 

Once a year, on the day before "Good Friday," the 
pope washes the feet of twelve aged paupers, who are 
brought from the streets and duly prepared by a preliminary 
washing in private. The pope's ceremonious 
washing is done in the presence of many notables. 
A similar ceremony is performed annually by 
Emperor Francis Joseph of Austro-Hungary. Neither 
of these ceremonies, however, is, to our understanding, 
according to our Lord's example, but contrary to it— 
likewise the ceremonious washing performed by some 
denominations of Christians. 

All who are truly the Lord's followers should heed 
carefully and follow exactly the true example of the 
Master's spirit of meekness, humility and service to 
the members of his Body. The whole thought is contained 
in his words, "The servant is not greater than 
his Lord, neither he that is sent greater than he that 
sent him. If ye know these things [if you appreciate 
these principles applicable to all the affairs of life], 
happy are ye if ye do them [if you live according to 
this rule, loving and serving one another]."— Vs. 16,17. 

Feelings of emulation, strife and vain-glory seem 
to specially beset those of the Lord's people who are 



possessed of any degree of talent or ability or honorable 
situation in life, and especially those who are in 
influential places in the Church. These, therefore, 
need to be specially on guard against these besetments 
of the flesh, remembering that, as some one has said, 
"There is a pride that looks up with envy, as well as a 
pride that looks down with scorn." The Lord's followers 
are to remember that pride in any person, in any 
station, respecting any matter, is highly reprehensible 
in God's sight and displeasing to him. "The Lord 
resisteth the proud, but showeth his favor to the humble." 
Hence, all who would abide in the Lord's love 
have need to be very careful along this line— to keep 
very humble, very lowly in conduct, and particularly 
in mind.— Jas. 4:6; I Pet. 5:5. 



page 111 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE IS 
SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V. (E) 

Questions on Study II.— 
The Author of the Atonement. 

MAY 3 

(1) Was the arrangement for an atonement for human 
sin an afterthought or an original purpose? Who was the 
author of the arrangement? Has he accomplished his purposes? 
Page 33, par. 1. 

(2) Are the prevalent views on the relations between 

the Father and the Son correct? If not, wherein is the error? 
Page 33, par. 2. 

(3) State the proper view of the question. What is 
God's relationship to the plan of atonement? And what 
Christ's? Page 34. 

(4) State the error of the view that our Lord Jesus 
stands weeping for sinners and importuning the Father for 
their forgiveness and, as the hymn declares, 

"Five bleeding wounds he shows, 
They intercede for me." 

(5) Let us have five texts on the subject from the apostolic 
writings, with a brief explanation in each case showing 
how they apply. Page 35. 

(6) Quote from our Lord Jesus' own words on this subject 
eleven texts and show briefly the application of each. 
Page 35, last par., and 36. 

MAY 10 

(7) What does the "scroll" of Rev. 5 represent? Whose 
was it originally and in whose possession was it when Christ 



died? Page 36, par. last. 

(8) What is signified by the giving of the "scroll" to 

the Lamb of God, for him to open it and fulfil its provisions? 
Page 37. 

(9) Did that "scroll" represent the Abrahamic promise 
or Oath-bound Covenant or "Everlasting Covenant"?— 
Heb. 6:17-20. 

(10) Is it because of the Father's honoring of his Only 
Begotten Son that we as well as angels should honor him? 
Page 37. 

(11) If the Scroll is the Covenant, how is our Lord Jesus 
the servant or "Messenger of the Covenant"? And how 
does he fulfil this service of the Covenant? 

(12) Has Christ through his Spirit, the holy Spirit, made 
known to some the "hidden mystery"— "Christ in you the hope 
of Glory"? Has he shown us "things to come"?— Rev. 1:1; 4:1; 
John 16:13-15; Psa. 16:11; 25:14. 

MAY 17 

(13) What divine law was illustrated in the exaltation 
of our Lord? Page 38, par. 1. 

(14) Cite some Scriptures showing that our Lord's exaltation 
was dependent on his faithfulness to the Father's will, 

and that his exaltation is a proof of his faithfulness even unto 
death. Page 38, par. 2. 

(15) What was our Lord's reward and what is the proof 
thereof? Page 39. 

(16) Give the meaning of the name Jehovah. Page 40. 

(17) Cite some Scriptures and elucidate them in proof 

of the heavenly Father's excellent glory and honor and dignity 
and power. Pages 40 and 41. 

MAY 24 

(18) To whom is the great name Jehovah applied in the 
Bible? Page 41, par. 2. 

(19) By many it is supposed that the name Jehovah belongs 
also to our Lord Jesus. Is this correct or not? Page 

42, par. 1. 

(20) How about the term Jehovah-Tsidkenu found in 
Jeremiah 23:5,6, apparently applicable to our Lord Jesus? 
Explain its significance and application. Page 42, par. 2. 

(21) Are other Hebrew words used in the Bible showing 
compounds with the word Jehovah? Page 43, par. 1. 

(22) Is the fact that our Lord appeared amongst men 
before he was "made flesh" (before he assumed the human 
nature) a justification for the application of the Father's exclusive 
name, Jehovah, to him? Page 43, par. 2,3. 

MAY 31 

(23) The Apostle styles our Lord Jesus "The Lord of 
Glory" (I Cor. 2:8); and in Psa. 24:7-10 Jehovah is mentioned 
as "King of Glory." Does this justify the thought that 

Jesus is Jehovah? Page 44, par. 1. 



(24) A fifth proof that our Lord Jesus is Jehovah is 
educed from the comparison of Isa. 2:2-4 with Micah 4:1-3. 
What is the proper answer? Page 44, par. 2,3. 

(25) What is the proper thought respecting the sixth 
objection based on a comparison of Psa. 90:1,2 and Micah 5:2? 
Page 45, par. 1,2,3. 

(26) What is the seventh claim on this subject and how 
should we understand Isaiah 25:6-9? Page 45, last par., and 
46, par. 1. 

(27) Consider the eighth text offered in proof— Isa. 9:6. 

Do the titles, Wonderful, Counsellor, Mighty God, Everlasting 
Father and Prince of Peace prove that Jehovah is another 
proper name or title for our Lord Jesus? Page 46, par. 
2,3. 

(28) Do the Scriptures which refer to Jesus as the Arm 

of Jehovah prove that Jehovah is the proper title for our Lord 
Jesus? If not why not? Page 46, par. 4, to 47, par. 5. 



page 113 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXIX. APRIL 15 No. 8 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

The Church of the Living God 115 

A Church "Trust" Undesirable 118 

Three Views of the Church 119 

The True Church 120 

The Church of the First-Born 121 

Christian Fellowship 122 

The True Church Not a Sect 123 

A Parable of False Sheep-Folds 124 

"Come Out of Her, My People" 125 

A Suggested Letter of Withdrawal 127 

page 114 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R4163 :page 114 

1908--VOLUNTEER MATTER--1908 



FOR TRACT DISTRIBUTION we always recommend the 
January issue of the "Old Theology Quarterly." Thus the 
same matter is being circulated everywhere. We still advise 
that the distribution be from house to house except where 
Catholics or Jews are predominant. The tracts are "nested" 
—four different kinds folded together— so that when they are 
unfolded in a home several persons may be served and exchange 
with each other; and one of the four tracts is pretty 
sure to interest some one. We have orders with the printers 
for over 4,000,000 of these quadruple tracts and some of them 
are already being shipped. Order all you can and will use 
wisely as free samples. We prepay freight charges. Remember 
to co-operate with other WATCH TOWER readers in regard 
to this work. Confer, lay out the territory and order together, 
stating population you can serve as well as quantity desired. 

page 114 

DISCIPLES AND BAPTISTS 



We desire the co-operation of such of the friends as live in 
cities and towns where "Baptists" and "Disciples" reside. If 
you are willing to assist address us so stating, and reporting 
how many of their churches are in your town and the attendance 
at each, as well as the number who would co-operate 
with you in the service. "He that reapeth receiveth wages." 

FRIENDS NEAR POLISH CHURCHES 



We have some Polish literature for those who desire to 
serve the Polish of their vicinity. Write us, saying how many 
of these churches you could serve and the attendance at each. 



R4163 :page 115 

"THE CHURCH OF THE LIVING GOD" 

-I TIMOTHY 3:15.- 

"As the body is one, and hath many members, and all the 

members of that one body, being many, are one body, so also is 

Christ; for by one spirit are we all baptized into one body." 

..."There is one body, and one spirit; even as ye 

are called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one 

Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all."... 

"After the way which they [many] call heresy, so 

worship I the God of my fathers. "..."Am 

I become your enemy, because I tell you the 

truth?" If so, then, "I have become a fool for 

Christ's sake."~I Cor. 12:12,13; Eph. 4:4-6; 

Acts 24:14; Gal. 4:16; I Cor. 4:10. 

THAT during the Gospel Age God has been 

selecting a Church is admitted by all Christians 

except Universalists; and that all thus 

selected constitute the one Church, and that a membership 

in that one Church can be secured only during 

the present life— during the Gospel Age— are also generally 

admitted to be the teachings of the Bible. 

And many will admit, also, that our present union 
with Christ's Body, the Church, though precious, is but 
a probationary membership, which will be confirmed 
and made everlasting only by introduction into full 
membership in the Church triumphant, at the close of 
this probationary period of the present life.— John 15:5,6; 
Phil. 3:12-16. 

But, while we and other Christians agree that the 
Church triumphant is to be one Church, and not many 
churches, there are parts and bearings of the subject 
regarding which we are not agreed. 

We hold that the conditions of the present trial, 
of all accepted as probationary members of the heavenly 
Church, are very severe and exacting, and that the 
selection is consequently much smaller than Christian 
people generally suppose; that only a "little flock" is 
now being selected. (Luke 12:32.) Many suppose that 
the object of our God in calling the Church and promising 
her high exaltation was merely to save them 
from everlasting torment. We claim, and find and 
produce abundant Scripture proof of it, that God's 
object in this selection, training, discipline and final 



exaltation of the Church, is for the ultimate purpose 
of blessing through them all his fallen, sin-stricken 
creatures (human and angelic), by granting to all a 
full, perfect judgment or trial under most favorable 
conditions, of which perfect knowledge and sufficient 
help will be the chief elements of favor. Thus seen, 
the Church is being selected for the great work to be 
accomplished during the Millennial Age, of restoring 
"whosoever will" of the fallen ones back to their former 
estate, and of consigning the wilfully unholy to 
the Second Death— everlasting punishment— everlasting 
destruction. 

Nor can it be denied that this Scriptural view is 
much more elevating than the common, selfish view 
which originated in the great Papal apostasy. Those 
called out by the hope of sharing in God's plan for 
doing good to others— blessing "all the families of the 
earth"— are sure to be few, and spiritually above the 
masses, who are moved only by a selfish hope of 
escaping torment. 

We also differ from most Christians in that we 
regard the Church in its present condition as merely 
in a probationary state. And we further claim that 
there is only one Church now, even as there will 
be but one Church in glory; that our Lord and the 
apostles never recognized any but one Church on 
earth; that so far from establishing many, or recognizing 
many, they denounced all efforts to separate 
into different parties and under different names, as 
schismatic, sectarian, and contrary to God's will; as 
injurious, and as an evidence of carnality in all who 
consented to or aided such divisions of the probationary 
Church. 

Paul's able and pointed reasoning upon this subject 
is partially obscured by the common translation, 
yet even there, when attention is called to it, the trend 
of the Apostle's reasoning is clearly discerned; much 
more so in that valuable and generally very faithful 
translation, the Emphatic Diaglott. He exhorts that 
those teachers who favor divisions in the flock of 
Christ be "watched," and turned away from; because 
they are not following the Lord's will, but their own. 
And he adds, by kind and complimentary words they 

R4163 :page 116 

mislead the unsuspicious. (Rom. 16:18.) He reproved 

the Corinthian Church because of a tendency 

toward sectarianism among them. (I Cor. 1:10-13; 3:3-6.) 

They were dividing into Paulites, Apollosites 

and Peterites, while a few rightly clung to the name 

Christian. 

Each of these teachers had his peculiarities of 
manner in teaching, which caused some to esteem one, 
and others another, most highly. But they all had the 
one Gospel— the one Lord, the one faith and the one 



baptism. The spirit of favoritism, which led to factions 
and divisions, and to the exaltation of sectarian 
or party names, or to the name of an individual teacher, 
to be the standard around which to rally, the Apostle 
declared was an evidence of carnality— proof of a 
worldly spirit. 

While the taking of different names was wrong, 
it was an evidence of a deeper wrong— of a selfish, 
party spirit. It was an evidence that those Corinthians 
who took the party names had never appreciated the 
oneness of the Body of Christ; that they did not really 
appreciate that Christ is the only Head, leader and 
standard; and that his is the only name by which his 
followers should recognize themselves and each other. 
Where scoffers apply a name in derision, it is not the 
fault of the faithful; but the true, loyal soldiers of the 
cross should never own or recognize such a name. Instances 
of names so originating are "Methodist" and 
"Baptist," both of which were given in derision, but 
were afterwards adopted as party names, representing 
sects, factions or divisions in the Body of Christ. All 
true teachers are not only sent by Christ, but receive 
their instructions from him; and any man who attempts 
to put his own or any other name upon all or 
any portion of the Church is an opponent, and adversary 
to the true and only Lord and Head of the 
Church. He is a mis-leader and an evildoer, no matter 
what his claims or motives may be. 

The Apostle, upbraiding the Corinthians and 
seeking to show them their error in owning any other 
teacher besides Christ to be their head and standard 
and leader, asks, "Has Christ been divided?" Are 
there several seeds of Abraham now, each an heir of 
a promise? Is this the reason you countenance divisions 
into different parties? Or, is it because one of 
these leaders— Paul, Apollos or Peter— has specially 
favored you and put you under obligation to him, that 
you requite him by calling yourselves his servants and 
followers, bearing his name? Was Paul crucified for 
you? or were you baptized in his name? 

Nay, nay, dearly beloved; one, and only one, deserves 
all the honor of the Church, both now and forever, 
and that one is her true Lord and Master; and 
his name only should she own in any manner. He 
leads, he teaches, he feeds; and the various human 
agents used by him, as channels for his blessings to 
his espoused, should neither take his place in her heart 
nor share his honor before the world. We may, however, 
and should, honor his servants "for their works 
sake," and count those who serve well as worthy of 
double honor; but we must always "hold the Head," 
and render him supreme reverence and obedience. (I Thess. 5:13; 
I Tim. 5:17; Col. 2:19.) Our esteem for 
others should be "in the Lord." 

For a long time, in fact until very recently, Christians 
recognized this true principle, that there is but 



one Body or Church on earth, even as there will be but 

one in glory. And, following this idea, each sect 

claimed to be that one, the only true Church, and persecuted 

others. But by and by each began to see in 

the other certain good features of doctrine and practice, 

and gradually their ideas changed, until today 

they claim boldly, and in opposition to the word of our 

Lord and of the apostles, that sects are a decided advantage; 

that the human mind is so constituted that a 

common faith, which Paul urges upon the Church, is 

an impossibility; and that the various sects of today 

with their contradictory diversities of faith are necessary 

accommodations to human prejudices and 

imbecility. 

Yet, still clinging to the idea that somehow there 
should be but one Church, they are anxious to reunite 
all the larger sects so as to make (nominally) one 
Church, while each sect therein may retain its own special 
features of faith or disbelief as at present. All in 
such a union (of which the Evangelical Alliance was a 
beginning— advanced a stage, now, in this country, by 
the organization of the "Federation Council of the 
Churches of Christ of America," representing thirty 
different denominations) merely agree to disagree, 
live and let live, and to recognize each other, in this 
general way, because of an increased influence, power 
and protection which the association will bring to each, 
and because it would detract from the influence of other 
sects not so associated, and thus hinder independence 
of thought. This would serve to fix and establish an 
"orthodox" boundary line, inside of which there would 
be bounds to individual liberty, and yet a measure of 
freedom— a permission to choose a preference among 
the forms and doctrines of these associated sects, and 
still permit them to be recognized as "orthodox." 

This is, in fact, the case now, among the so-called 
"liberal minds" of all denominations; and it is being 
urged that an organization of this sort, already founded 
in the Evangelical Alliance, be fully consummated, 
and that an attempt be made to have such a composite 
Church in some degree recognized by the government. 

But, even when fully consummated, this could be 
no more than a union in name, with the same divisions 
and differences in fact— one church nominally, but 
many sects really. 

The first danger against which the Apostle warned 
the Church was sectarianism; and he was evidently 
heeded at the time at least, for no great sects of Paulites 
or Apollosites developed. But, as usual, the great 
enemy, thwarted in one direction, moved to the opposite 
extreme, and attempted to insist upon a oneness 
very different from what our Lord or the apostles ever 
taught. This attempt was to have every recognized 
member of the Church think exactly alike, on every 
minutia of Christian doctrine. This attempt finally developed 
into Papacy, where every matter of doctrine 



was decided by the popes and councils; and every man 

who desired to be considered a church member was 

obliged to accept such decisions fully, and to profess 

that such decisions were his belief, his faith; whereas 

they were not his in any sense but that of adoption. 

They were generally either blindly received or hypocritically 

professed with mental reservations. 

This was not at all the oneness urged by Paul. 
He urged a oneness of heart and mind, and not a 
thoughtless, heartless or hypocritical profession. He 
urged a oneness such as naturally results from the 

R4163 :page 117 

proper exercise of the liberty which we have in Christ 
—to search and believe the Scriptures, and to grow in 
grace and in knowledge, every man being thus fully 
persuaded in his own mind, and firmly rooted and 
grounded in the one faith as set forth in the Scriptures. 
The oneness of faith which Paul urged was 
not that elaborate faith which touches and embraces 
all subjects, heavenly and earthly, divine and human, 
revealed and unrevealed. Quite the contrary: Paul's 
letters, weighty with logical reasoning, do not even 
mention the subjects upon which sectarians do most 
insist, and which are by them generally made tests of 
fellowship. 

Paul said nothing about an everlasting torture of 
sinners; he said nothing whatever about a mysterious 
trinity, in which three Gods are incomprehensibly one 
God and at the same time three Gods; he said not a 
word about man being of a nature such as could not 
die but must live everlastingly, in a place of either 
pleasure or woe; he said nothing, either, about the 
present life ending all trial for all classes; and he 
entered into no entangling discussion about the bread 
and wine used in commemoration of the Lord's death 
—as to transubstantiation or consubstantiation; yet it 
can easily be discerned that he was not in harmony 
with any of these errors. 

Notice particularly, however, that without so 
much as mentioning a single one of these sectarian 
tests of fellowship, Paul declares— "I have not shunned 
to declare unto you the whole counsel of God." 
(Acts 20:27.) From this it is very evident that none 
of these points, which are today regarded as the very 
essence and substance of Christian doctrine and as the 
proper tests of faith is the one faith, or in any sense 
or degree part of "the faith once delivered unto the 
saints."— Jude 3. 

The one faith, which all should hold, was a very 
simple one; one so simple that all, the learned and the 
unlearned alike, could grasp it and comprehend it, and 
be "fully persuaded in their own minds" concerning it. 
It was not a dose of incongruous mysteries, inconsistent 
with themselves and inharmonious with reason as 



well as with the Bible, to be swallowed by the ignorant 
with credulity, and by the learned with hypocritical 
mental reservations; but it was so simple, so clear, so 
reasonable, that any and every honest follower of 
Christ could be fully persuaded in his own mind regarding 
its truth. 

What is this one faith? The basis of it is stated 
by Paul, thus: "I delivered unto you first of all, that 
which I also received [first of all— as a foundation 
truth or doctrine, upon and in harmony with which 
all other doctrines must be built], how that Christ died 
for our sins, according to the Scriptures; and that he 
was buried; and that he rose again the third day, according 
to the Scriptures." (I Cor. 15:3,4.) "There 
is one God and one Mediator between God and men, 
the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for 
all, to be testified in due time."— I Tim. 2:5,6. 

This, in a word, confesses sin and utter helplessness; 
it acknowledges God's loving plan for our redemption; 
it owns that our Lord's death was our ransom 
price; and that forgiveness (justification), and 
reconciliation to God, and the restitution of believers, 
come as a result of faith in this Redeemer, when in 
due time that place is made known to each and all. 

These brief statements contain the whole Gospel, 
in the same sense that an acorn contains an oak tree. 
Without this Gospel kernel, the true Gospel can never 
be possessed; hence this must be insisted on as a test 
of Christian fellowship. This must be received, else 
the Gospel is not received. When it is received, the 
Gospel is received. Then a work of growth begins— a 
development of this Gospel. It may vary in rapidity 
of growth according to temperament and surroundings; 
it can develop into a sprout, a sapling, a sturdy 
oak successively, but the nature of the seed will appertain 
to it in every stage of its development. So is 
faith— the true faith; it must begin with the one kind 
of seed-faith in all, no matter what stage of development 
each may attain. This one gospel acknowledges 
man's fall and sinfulness, and God's mercy and love 
manifested through Christ's great work of redemption, 
forgiveness and final restoration of all the willing 
and obedient, but of no others. All theories, and they 
are many, which omit any of these items are spurious. 

Some deny God's love in the matter, and claim 
that all the love was Christ's and that he interposed 
and thwarted the Father's original plan; but those of 
the one faith are guided by our Lord's own testimony, 
that God so loved the world that he devised the plan 
as it is being carried forward, and sent his only begotten 
Son to do what he has done and is yet to do for 
the world. (John 3:16,17.) Others deny that any redemption 
was accomplished by the death of our Lord 
Jesus, deny that his life was substituted as a corresponding 
price or "ransom for all," and claim that the 
Father does all by simply pardoning the sinners. But 



again the one faith is clearly pointed out by the words 
of Paul— "There is one mediator between God and 
men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom 
[corresponding price] for all." 

When received into honest hearts, this simple Gospel, 
the true Gospel, will gradually open up and spread 
its roots of reason and its branches of hope in every 
direction, feeding upon the promises of God, building 
itself up as he designed, and grasping, as it progresses, 
the "one baptism" and every other feature of the Gospel 
in its fulness. 

Note the difference between this, God's test, on 
the simple first principles of the Gospel, and the wrong 
course of men who attempt to enforce upon all an entire 
system of faith (and that when they are the merest 
babes in Christ), so fettering them, then, that their 
growth is hindered. To ask babes in Christ to assent 
to thirty or forty articles of faith arranged by fellowmen, 
and to agree to take those as the infallible truth, 
and to promise never to believe either more or less 
than they contain, is like selecting in an orchard one 
gnarled and crooked tree, as a standard, and requiring 
all the other trees to be padded out to make them look 
as thick and as gnarled as the sample, and to be bound 
with iron bands that they might never grow larger or 
straighter. 

This true Gospel, this simple faith, easily understood 
and confessed by the weakest babe in Christ, 
must also be, and always, and equally, the faith of the 
most developed sons of God. This one faith (and not 
the endless ramifications and details of faith which lead 

R4163 :page 118 

out from it) Paul placed as a standard or test of all 
claiming the name Christian. All the consecrated who 
agreed on this one standard, or foundation truth, Paul 
counted as in and of the one Church. While each 
member was to grow in grace, knowledge and love, 
there would always be harmony and oneness in the 
faith and fellowship of the Church, if all growth were 
kept in line and harmony with this foundation truth. 

Here was a perfect basis of union, which allowed 
for all the various stages of individual development in 
the truth, and which most effectually guarded against 
errors. For if this simple creed were to-day made the 
standard by which all doctrines should be tested, it 
would speedily lead to the discarding of every error 
and to the true union of the Church in the "one Lord, 
one faith and one baptism." 

The endeavor to compel all men to think alike on 
all subjects, culminated in the great apostasy and the 
development of the great Papal system; and thereby 
the "gospel," the "one faith," which Paul and the other 
apostles set forth, was lost— buried under the mass of 
uninspired decrees of popes and councils. The union 



of the early Church, based upon the simple Gospel and 
bound only by love, gave place to the bondage of the 
Church of Rome— a slavery of God's children, from 
the degradation of which multitudes are still weak and 
suffering. 

The Reformation movement of the sixteenth century 
came as an effort to regain liberty of conscience; 
but, deluded by the idea of an elaborate creed, insisted 
upon for so many centuries, the reformers and their 
followers formed other systems of bondage very similar 
to that of Papacy, though slight modifications gave 
liberty to fuller ideas on some subjects. And so it has 
been ever since: each new reform movement has made 
the failure of attempting to make a creed just large 
enough for its prime movers. 

A "CHURCH TRUST" UNDESIRABLE 

But while divisions in the Church of Christ are 
very wrong, and very contrary to the will and Word of 
our Lord, they are better far than a union in bondage 
under Papacy's system, creed, etc. Instead, therefore, 
of attempting to get all the sects to combine in a sort 
of "Church Trust," an image or likeness of the Papal 
system of oneness (though on a higher plane), to regulate 
and restrict further investigation and further 
growth, we need to do the very opposite— to abolish 
all sects and all elaborate creeds and confessions of 
faith. Instead of being further bound (by such a 
Church Trust Union— or wheel within a wheel, double 
imprisonment), all bondage should be set aside, except 
the simple tests first imposed in the one faith once delivered 
to the saints; and all party sectarian names 
should be repudiated, and the name of Christ should 
be the only name borne by his Church. 

Such a breaking down of sectarian fences would 
leave the true children of God willing to accept the 
original and simple test— "all one in Christ Jesus"; 
and this is what is needed. It would destroy sectarian 
pride, which so often counterfeits true Christian zeal 
and love, but it would tend to develop the truth, and 
thereby to develop the real zeal for the truth which our 
Lord desires in his followers. The term Church of 
Christ would no longer mean to any "our denomination," 
but, when they would sing, 

"I love thy Church, O God, 

Her walls before thee stand, 
Dear as the apple of thine eye, 

And graven on thy hand," 

they would think, instead, of the one, true and only 
Church. 

Under such conditions, recognizing the true and 
only test, as above quoted from Paul, those who formerly 
championed opposite sides of the various questions 



of doctrine would join heads and hearts in carefully 
weighing the various statements of the Scriptures; 
and, truly seeking the divine plan, they would 
ere long, as promised, be guided into all truth. 

They would join hearts and hands as Christians, 
and while their heads might not at once agree on certain 
points, it would be a question of only a short time; 
for the unbiased study of God's plan, with no sectarian 
theory and organization to uphold, would bring the 
heads of all into union and general harmony, even 
though, as at first, the growth of faith-roots and faith-branches 
might vary. All would believe the "same 
things," even if some could see and believe more elaborately 
than others. -Phil. 3:15,16. 

This freedom, and yet harmony and union, which 
is the result of a full acceptance of God's will and 
Word, will not be attained in the present age except 
by the few, the "overcomers." Others, the Scriptures 
show, will continue in sectarian bondage, and even increase 
their bondage-union by a Church Trust or "confederacy" 
(Isa. 8:12), until, in the close of this time 
of trouble, all this is corrected by the fall of sectarian 
systems as well as of present political governments.— 
Dan. 12:1; Rev. 18:2-5. 

In the next age, during the world's trial, such 
great deceiving systems will not be permitted; but now 
they are permitted in order to accomplish the testing 
and manifesting of the "overcomers." 

Let the dear saints who now walk the narrow 
way, and whose names are "written in heaven" as probationary 
members of the one, true Church of Christ, 
patiently persevere in worshiping God after the manner 
which others term "heresy"— closely studying and 
believing all that is written in the inspired Word, however 
it may conflict with human creeds and the opinions 
of so-called great theologians. Be simple enough 
to take God at his Word, however church monopolies 
or trusts may seek, either willingly or unintentionally, 
to wrest it to their own advantage. Flee all so-called 
unions, which are merely bondages. What is needed 
is fewer of such unions, not more. Each individual 
needs to feel and exercise the same liberty on doctrine 
that each sect now claims. From this standpoint the 
bondage-union of the Church under Papacy was the 
worst and most complete enslavement of the individual 
Christian; and the full breaking up of all sectarianism, 
so that no two persons will be bound to hold one 
faith (except on first-principles) is the most desirable 
condition. The breaking of Papacy into a hundred 
sects, each free from the other, was a good work, 
tending to the realization of the liberty wherewith 
Christ makes free. Though at first regarded as a calamity, 
it soon came to be known as the Reformation. 

R4163 :page 119 



And now the breaking up of these numerous sects, so 
that each individual will be free, is essential to a fuller 
growth in grace, knowledge and love than is at present 
possible. This breaking up of sectarianism, now regarded 
as a calamity, will by and by be recognized as 
truly the greatest of all religious reformations. The 
signs of the times indicate that such a reformation is 
impending, and the Scriptures declare it. A little more 
light, a little more knowledge, and these sectarian 
shackles upon the individual conscience will fall. Then 
whatever union shall exist will be upon right principles 
—a union of hearts and principles and not merely a 
heterogeneous confederacy. Recognizing each other's 
personal liberties, each disciple of Christ will be bound 
to the other by his love of the Lord and of his Word 
alone; and others will be separated. 

Sectarianism has woefully distorted that beautiful 
figure of Christian union given by our Lord, recorded 
in John 15:1-6. To fit it to sectarianism, and to make 
their error in this appear to be supported by God's 
Word, it is claimed that the "vine" is the whole Church, 
and that the various denominations of "Christendom" 
are the branches. But that the Lord's words will bear 
no such construction must be evident to any one who 
will give the passage candid consideration. The 
branches are the individuals, and "any branch" is defined 
by our Lord's own words to be "any man." Let 
this, our Lord's illustration of the proper union of all 
the branches in One Vine, connected and nourished by 
the same sap, from the same roots, teach us of true 
union and personal freedom in the Body of Christ. 



Suppose that the salaries and "livings" of all ministers, 
bishops, priests, etc., were cut off, all churches, 
chapels and cathedrals destroyed, all theological seminaries 
broken up, and their professors turned to other 
pursuits, all religious guilds and societies disbanded, 
including all sectarian organizations— what would be 
the effect? 

Who can doubt that it would be a real blessing 
under the disguise of a great and terrible catastrophe? 
The effect would be to bring true Christians together 
as the family of God, and not as sectarian bands; to 
study God's Word, and not human traditions and 
creeds formulated in the dark ages. Very soon, unhindered, 
God's Word would be heard by all truly his; 
and one Lord, one faith and one baptism would soon 
be the result, while the worldly mass would speedily 
drift apart, and the true distinction between the Church 
and the world would be discernible. The Scriptures 
seem to indicate that very much of this sort of destruction 
of present systems must take place before all the 
"wheat," the true Church, will be separated from the 
"tares," the mere professors. Party spirit and love 



of sect are so strong that, apparently, nothing short of 
a complete wreck of all the sects will suffice to set free 
all of God's children now bound and blindfolded in 
and by them. 

This catastrophe— sectarian destruction, the fall 
of Babylon— is what is referred to in the Book of 
Revelation under the symbol of the seven last plagues. 
(Rev. 15-18.) The pain from these will consist largely 
of mental chagrin, the disappointment of sectarian 
hopes and plans, and the wounding of sectarian pride. 
When the Master said, "Watch ye, that ye may be accounted 
worthy to escape all these things coming upon 
the world," he included the pain of these plagues, as 
well as other annoyances to which the world will be 
subject because of ignorance of the real plan of God. 
It is of escape from these plagues that the Revelator 
(our Lord— Rev. 1:1) speaks to us, saying, "Come out 
of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, 
and that ye receive not of her plagues."— Rev. 18:4. 

THREE VIEWS OF THE CHURCH 

A dear brother sent us the following clipping, 
with the remark, "Two views well stated. Please give 
us the third and true one, Brother Russell." 

"There are two conceptions of the Church, which, for convenience, 
I shall designate as the Protestant and Catholic conceptions. 
The Protestant idea of the Church is that it is a 
voluntary association of believers in Christ; that those who 
think alike upon religious subjects join together in a society 
and choose their pastor, who derives his commission and his 
authority from them. Consequently they are at liberty to prescribe 
what he shall and shall not teach, or to unmake their 
church and make another, precisely as the members of a club, 
or of a political party, have a right to withdraw and form a 
new organization. The Protestant theory of the Church is 
that of an aggregation of individuals, 'who can rearrange 
themselves at will, and thus create new churches at every rearrangement.' 
(Ewer.) The Catholic theory, on the other 
hand, is that it is an organization which God Almighty has 
founded once for all, to last to the end of time, and into 
which he invites men; it is his family, his household, his kingdom, 
his city. Its officers are commissioned by him and hold 
their authority as teachers only from him. In a word, the 
Catholic Church is not a democracy but an empire, not a republic 
but a kingdom. As such, it comes to man with divine 
authority; its officers are under oath to the Eternal King, and 
they are to minister to man in his name, and for him."— The 
Living Church. 

In presenting the true view of the Church, we 
labor under the disadvantage that for fifteen hundred 
years people have been taught one or the other of the 
above views, or combinations of both, while the true 
idea has been generally lost sight of since the second 
century. The true view, as we conceive it, is as 
follows:— 



God's Church, when completed and organized, 
will be all that is given above as the Catholic or Episcopal 
view. But it is not yet completed, and hence not 
yet organized. When organized, it will be clothed with 
power, and will be, "not a democracy, but an empire; 
not a republic, but a kingdom. As such it [will] come 
to man [the world— during the Millennium] with divine 
authority [and with power to back up that authority]. 
Its officers are [then to be] under oath to 
the Eternal King, and they are to minister to man in 
his name, and for him." All this, it is to be noted, fits 
exactly to the coming reign of the Church, when it 
shall "bless all the families of the earth"; but it does 
not fit at all to the present state or condition. There 
is no organization today clothed with such divine authority 
imperiously to command mankind. There is no 
organization doing this today; though we are well 
aware that many of them in theory claim that they 
ought to be permitted to do so; and many more would 
like to do so. 

This was the fatal mistake into which the Church 
began to fall in the second century; and the effort to 

R4163 : page 120 

realize this false conception culminated in the boastful, 
imperious counterfeiting of the coming Kingdom 
in Papacy, which for centuries sought to dominate the 
world, by claimed "divine authority." This idea has 
more or less pervaded and poisoned the ideas of all 
the Protestant "clergy" as well; who, copying Papacy's 
false ideas of the Church, claim also that the Church 
of Christ is now organized, though they make less 
boastful claims to "divine authority," to teach and rule 
mankind in general, than Papacy does. 

God's Church is not yet organized. On the contrary, 
the Gospel Age has been the time for calling out 
and testing the volunteers willing to sacrifice and suffer 
with their Lord now, and thus prove themselves 
worthy (Rev. 3:4,5,21; 2 Tim. 2:11,12; Rom. 8:17) 
to be organized as joint-heirs in his Kingdom at the 
close of the Gospel Age, when he shall "set up" or 
organize his Kingdom in power and great glory, to 
bless and rule the world with "divine authority." 

In the meantime, these unorganized but merely 
called out ones, who are seeking to make their calling 
and election sure, that they may obtain a share in the 
Kingdom (2 Peter 1:10; 2 Cor. 5:9), are "a voluntary 
association of believers," drawn together for mutual 
assistance in seeking to know and to do the Master's 
will, that they may be accounted worthy the honors 
and glories promised, and not now to rule men by divine 
authority; for they have as yet no such authority. 
In this "voluntary association" of the consecrated, 
there is no imperial authority of one over another; 
and no lording over God's heritage should be permitted; 



for the one and only Lord has left the instruction, 
"Be not ye called Rabbi; for one is your Master, even 
Christ, and all ye are brethren."— Matt. 23:8. 

Instead of the kingly and lordly rule prevailing in 
the customs of the world, the Master gave all another 
and an opposite rule, saying, "Ye know that they which 
are accounted to rule over the Gentiles exercise lordship 
over them; and their great ones exercise authority 
upon them. But so shall it not be among you; but 
whosoever will be great among you, shall be your minister 
[literally, servant]; and whosoever of you will 
be the chiefest, shall be servant of all [or greatest 
servant]; for even the Son of man came not to be 
ministered unto [to be served], but to minister [to 
serve], and to give his life a ransom for many."— 
Mark 10:42-45. 

The Lord was chief servant; and those among the 
apostles who served the Church at greatest cost to 
themselves— Paul, Peter, John and James— are esteemed, 
by those who have the spirit of the truth, in proportion 
to their service, and not in proportion to their 
titles, their priestly vestments, or their praise among 
men, etc., of which they had none. 

The Church, or company of believers, probationers 
for coming glory, in its "voluntary association," 
was indeed to recognize "teachers," "helps," "apostles," 
etc., but not to make them. If they recognize a man 
"mighty in the Scriptures," "apt to teach," able to 
make clear the divine plan, and specially qualified to 
build them up in the most holy faith, they gladly acknowledge 
God's favor in raising up among them such 
a servant of all to assist them in the understanding of 
his Word. But they should be careful always, even 
while rejoicing in and thanking God for such a servant, 
to require a "thus saith the Lord" for every point 
of doctrine, and to search the Scriptures daily to see 
whether these things be so— whether the deductions 
and arguments of the teacher agree with the whole 
testimony of God's revealed plan. 

Thus the Lord is the teacher of his followers, 
sending, now and again, of their own number, certain 
ones to call attention to truths being overlooked, or to 
injurious errors being entertained. The "meek" among 
the probationers will hear the Master's voice by whomsoever 
he speaks; and these will be guided into the 
truth, and prepared in due time for organization as 
his Kingdom. "The meek will he teach his way."— 
Psa. 25:9. 

Thus seen, both the Catholic and the Protestant 
views of the Church are erroneous. The Catholic view 
gets the future organization applied to the present 
time, and the Protestant view, though ridding itself of 
some of Papacy's error, carries along enough of it to 
injure itself; for, instead of admitting all consecrated 
believers into a "voluntary association," in which God 
would raise up his own teachers, Protestantism attempts 



also to organize and bind with creeds and confessions 
into various sects, each of which, anxious to 
perpetuate itself and its ideas, selects and makes its 
own teachers in its own seminaries. 

THE TRUE CHURCH 

Today there are many organizations claiming to 
be the Church, and having various bonds of union; 
but we wish now to show, upon the authority of God's 
Word, first, what Church our Lord established, and 
what are its bonds of union; second, that every Christian 
should belong to that Church; third, the injurious 
effects of joining the wrong church; and fourth, having 
joined the right Church, what would be the results 
of losing our membership. 

First, then, the Church which our Lord Jesus began 
to gather during his ministry, and which was 
recognized by the Father at Pentecost, after the ransom 
price for all was paid, was the little company of 
disciples who had consecrated earthly time, talents and 
life, a sacrifice to God. Theirs was a "voluntary association" 
for mutual aid; and this society was under 
the laws and government of Christ, its Head or recognized 
ruling authority. The bonds were bonds of love 
and common interest. Since all were enlisted under 
the captaincy of Jesus, the hopes and fears, joys and 
sorrows and aims of one were those of the others; 
and thus they had a far more perfect union of hearts 
than could possibly be had from a union on the basis 
of any man-made creed. Thus their only union was 
of the spirit; their law for the government of each was 
love; and all, as a whole, were put under obedience to 
the "law of the spirit," as it was expressed in the life, 
actions and words of their Lord. Their government 
was the will of him who said, "If ye love me, keep my 
commandments." 

There are two senses in which the true Church of 
Christ may be considered: All who, like the early 
Church, are fully consecrated to the doing of our 
Father's will, amenable only to Christ's will and government, 
recognizing and obeying none other— these, 
the saints, from the beginning of the Gospel Age down 

R4163 :page 121 

to its close, when all of this class are sealed— 
constitute 

THE CHURCH OF THE FIRST-BORN 

[whose names are] written in heaven." These are all 
one in aim, hope and suffering, and in due time will 
be joint-heirs with Christ Jesus to the great "inheritance 
of the saints in light"— joint-heirs with him of 
the Kingdom which God has promised to them that 



love him. 

The other sense, in which this same class is recognized, 
is by counting a part for the whole. Thus all 
the living of this class may be spoken of as "the 
Church"; or, again, any part of this class of living followers 
who may meet together may properly be called 
the Church; for, wherever two or three are assembled, 
the Lord has promised to be among them. Consequently, 
that would be a Church meeting— an assembly 
of "the Church of the First-born." The general 
assembly will be when all the Church are made like 
their Head, and glorified with him. 

Such, then, is our definition of the Church of 
Christ. It is perfectly illustrated by Paul (Rom. 12:4,5), 
when he compares the Church to a human body. 
In this figure the head represents our Lord, and all 
who are his constitute the body, over which the head 
rules. Jesus has been and always will be the Head 
over his Church as a whole; he is likewise the Head 
and ruler of the entire living Church; and in every 
assembly where two or three meet in his name (when 
his Word is sought and heeded), he is the Head, ruler 
and teacher.— Eph. 1:20-23. 

If it be asked, In what sense does he teach? we 
answer, by exercising the qualities of the Head or 
teacher; by using one or more of those present as his 
mouth-pieces in unfolding truth, strengthening faith, 
encouraging hope, inspiring zeal, etc., just as the head 
of the human body calls upon one member to minister 
to another. But here a word of caution: If one become 
as useful a member as a right hand, he should 
take care that he assume not the position and authority 
of the Head, to put forth his own words and ideas 
as truth. He must ever remember that his highest 
honor is to be an index-finger to point out, or a mouthpiece 
to express, the will of the one Lord and Master. 
Be not puffed up: pride will paralyze and render useless. 
"Be not ye called Rabbi [master, teacher], for 
one is your Master [head], even Christ, and all ye are 
brethren." And let not the least member despise his 
office, "for if all were one member, where were the 
body?" "Nay, those members of the body which seem 
to be more feeble are necessary"— "God hath set the 
members, every one of them, in the body, as it hath 
pleased him."— I Cor. 12:12-31. 

How simple, beautiful and effectual is God's plan 
of the "voluntary association" of his children! 

This brings us to our second proposition, viz.: 
that all Christians should be joined to this association 
or incipient organization. In the light of what has just 
been said as to the class constituting the Church which 
our Lord is calling, it is evident that if you have given 
up all your will, talent, time, etc., you are recognized 
by the Lord as a probationary member of the Church, 
of which he is the Head, and whose names are written 
in heaven. Thus, by consecration, we join the true 



Church, and have our names recorded in heaven. But, 
says one, must I not join some organization on earth, 
assent to some creed, and have my name written on 
earth? No: remember that our Lord is our pattern 
and teacher, and in neither his words nor acts do we 
find any authority for binding ourselves with creeds 
and traditions of men, which all tend to make the 
Word of God of none effect, and bring us under a 
bondage which will hinder our growth in grace and 
knowledge, and against which Paul warned us, saying, 
"Stand fast, therefore, in the liberty wherewith Christ 
hath made you free, and be not entangled again with 
the yoke of bondage."— Gal. 5:1. 

Another says: If it is not proper to unite with 
any of the present nominal churches, would it not be 
well to form a visible association of our own? Yes, 
this is what we have— a society modeled after that of 
the early Church. We think we have come back to 
primitive simplicity. The Lord Jesus alone is our 
Head or law-giver; his Word is our rule of faith and 
practice; the holy Spirit is our interpreter and guide 
into truth; our names are all written in heaven; and 
we are bound together by love and common interest. 

Do you inquire— How shall we know one another? 
We ask, How can we help knowing one another when 
the spirit of our Master is made manifest in word and 
act and manner and look? Yes, the living faith, the 
unfeigned love, the long-suffering meekness, the childlike 
simplicity, coupled with the constancy and zeal 
of maturity, make manifest the sons of God, and we 
need no earthly record, for the names of all such are 
written in the Lamb's book of life. 

Do the sick need visiting or assistance? These 
stand ready with consecrated time. Does the Lord's 
work require money? These stand ready with consecrated 
means. Does his work bring upon them the reproach 
of the world, and of a degenerate nominal 
church? These have also sacrificed reputation and all 
else to God. 

But, again, do you inquire, How shall we deal 
with one who walks disorderly in our midst? if we 
have no organization such as we see about us, how 
can we free ourselves from such, as the Lord requires 
us to do? We answer: Do just as the Scriptures 
direct. 

Now, as in the early Church, there are various 
degrees of advancement among the individual members, 
and, Paul says (I Thess. 5:14), some are feeble-minded, 
comfort them; some are weak, support them; 
but, while you should be patient toward all, warn the 
disorderly (those who are drifting away from the true 
spirit of Christ). Don't mistake the disorderly for 
the weak, and comfort them, nor for the feeble-minded, 
and support them; but patiently, lovingly, warn the 
disorderly. Whom does he call disorderly? There 
are many-ways of walking disorderly. In 2 Thess. 3:11, 



he speaks of some who work not at all, but are 
busy-bodies, and says they should do as he did— work, 
that they be not chargeable to any; and if any will not 
work, neither should he eat. Thus he said he did, that 
he might be an example to others; and (verse 14), 
after you have warned such a one, if he "obey not, 
...note that man, and have no company with 
him, that he may be ashamed.... Yet count him 
not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother." He 
warns us also against immoral and unjust persons, and 

R4163 :page 122 

those who wrest (twist) the Scriptures, and thus turn 
the truth of God into a lie. And the following citations 
clearly show that, in the Apostle's estimation, 
doctrinal disorders are among the chief.— 2 Thess. 3:6-14; 
I Cor. 5:11; Eph. 5:6-11; Rom. 16:17; 2 John 9-11; 
Gal. 1:8,9; Tit. 3:10. 

Our Lord gives explicit directions where there is 
a matter of offense between two brethren (Matt. 18: 15,17): 
"If thy brother shall trespass against thee, go 
and tell him his fault between thee and him alone. If 
he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother; but 
if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or 
two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses 
every word may be established. And if he shall neglect 
to hear them, tell it unto the Church [the company 
of brethren who assemble together]; but if he 
neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an 
heathen man and a publican." If, under the captaincy 
of our Head, we heed his commands, which we will do 
if we love him, how few will be the misunderstandings 
and difficulties among the brethren. And if the true 
brotherhood in Christ is in any degree realized, the 
admonition of the Apostle will be gladly heeded— 
"Not forsaking the assembling of yourselves together, 
and so much the more, as ye see the day drawing on." 
-Heb. 10:25. 

And if new converts be properly begotten by the 
Word of Truth, they will be far more eager to meet 
with two or three possessed of the right spirit and 
seeking to understand the Word of the Lord, than they 
would be to mingle with those whose religion consists 
chiefly of forms of godliness. And here will be the 
opportunity for those who are strong (in the faith and 
love of God) to bear the infirmities of the weak and 
not to please themselves merely— in the choice of subjects, 
studies, etc. 

Should the newly enlightened one know none with 
whom he can meet personally and regularly, let him 
not forget his privilege of communion with the Father 
and the Son in prayer, and with the WATCH TOWER 
by mail; and let him seek for others of the truth-hungry 
among his neighbors— "holding forth the Word of 
life," the Truth. 



This association has its evangelists, pastors and 
teachers, appointed and directed by the Lord. (I Cor. 12:28.) 
They need no laying on of hands by the so-called 
"apostolic succession"; for the "Spirit of the 
Lord hath anointed" all the members of the Body "to 
preach," etc. (Isa. 61:1), and it is the duty of every 
member of the Body to exercise his office for the edification 
of the other members. All the true Church are 
priests, an association of priests, and not an association 
under the control of a clerical or priestly class. (I Pet. 2:9.) 
There is one great Bishop or overseer, who, 
from time to time, raises up and sends his own special 
messengers to uncover truths, overthrow errors, etc. 
—Luther seems to have been one of these, and Wesley 
another. But our Lord retains the Bishopric himself. 
(I Pet. 2:25.) How complete is the voluntary union 
of the Church of Christ, with its heaven-written, love-bound, 
Spirit-ruled membership, and how sad the error 
of mistaking the nominal for the real Church! 

The importance of our fourth proposition need 
not be urged. It would, indeed, be a dreadful calamity 
to lose our membership in the true Church or Body of 
Christ. And no member is out of danger except when 
keeping a vigilant watch over the old nature, counted 
dead, lest it come to life again, and assert itself in the 
form of pride, selfishness, envy, evil-speaking— or 
what not? But, filled with love (the love that prompts 
to sacrifice), and clothed with humility, and under 
cover of the redeeming blood, we are safe in the 
Church (the Body), having the assurance that it is our 
"Father's good pleasure to give us the Kingdom." 

Yes, the Kingdom is the glorious destiny of the true 
Church— the "little flock"— now treading the pathway 
of humiliation, and drinking the bitter cup of death. 
The glory that shall be revealed in us does not yet appear, 
except to the eye of faith, but the temptations 
and trials are very apparent on every hand. "Let us, 
therefore, fear lest, a promise being left us of entering 
into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of 
it."-Heb. 4:1. 

Thus Paul warned others, and thus he feared, lest 
even after having preached to others, he himself should 
be a castaway. (I Cor. 9:27.) We may have our 
names cast out as evil by those of the nominal church, 
and yet "rejoice and be exceeding glad because our 
names are written in heaven." They may frown upon 
us and despitefully use us and say all manner of evil 
against us falsely, or they may seek to win us back by 
flattery, saying they cannot afford to lose our influence, 
we could do so much good by remaining among 
them, etc.; but we must let none of these things move 
us; but, rather, rejoice that we are counted worthy to 
suffer (Acts 5:41,42) for his name's sake. Oh, how 
necessary in this "evil day" is the faith 

"That bears unmoved the world's dark frown, 



Nor heeds its flattering smile; 
That seas of trouble cannot drown, 
Nor Satan's arts beguile." 

Dearly beloved, let us again repeat the warning: 
"Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made 
you free, and be not again entangled with the yoke of 
bondage." 

CHRISTIAN FELLOWSHIP 

Humanity longs for fellowship; and, of recent 
years, the morally inclined have very generally found 
this in the nominal, Protestant churches— in their committees, 
socials, prayer-meetings, etc. Such fellowship 
and such influences have done much to elevate the 
tone and moral and respectable standard of the world; 
but such fellowships are seldom worthy of the name 
Christian fellowship; because, not Christ and his 
Word, but worldly ambitions, pride, dress, show and 
social gossip are generally the grounds and subjects of 
fellowship. Hence, while disapproving church organizations 
as churches, we do esteem them as the highest 
order of worldly diversion. For, although they are 
often schools in which pride, envy, hatred and scandals 
are cultivated, these evils are less gross than the 
many vices which flourish outside these schools of 
morality. 

But, however beneficial these social clubs, called 
churches, may be to the world, as tending to tone down 
murder to malice and envy, and to moderate theft to 
slander— the really consecrated believer, who has passed 
from death unto life, finds in them but little real 
fellowship, except as he discovers here and there a 
kindred spirit, similarly begotten to newness of life— 

R4163 : page 123 

to new motives, thoughts, words and deeds. Nevertheless, 
custom draws them together, and the very 
thought of disturbing that social union is dreadful, because, 
poor as it is, it is all they have. 

Then, to many, there comes the thought of influence 
—upon wife or husband or child or sister or 
brother or friend. What if their withdrawal and the 
admission that their church and all others are really 
worldly and unsatisfying should hinder some one from 
joining some church, and thus, outwardly at least, from 
confessing Christ? What then? Perhaps next winter 
their social club will get up a revival of religion, and, 
by dint of an imported revivalist, and hymns, and 
prayers, and sermons, hot with descriptions or inferences 
of the everlasting torment awaiting all who do 
not join some sect, some might be induced to assume 
the outward forms of godliness without the power; 
and, by withdrawing now you would be debarred from 



helping them in this work.— What then? 

So much the better, we answer. If we have found 
that God's name and character are dishonored and 
misrepresented by every denomination of Christendom, 
why should we want our children and friends to join 
a society under those dishonoring confessions of misbelief? 
Why should we want to join in such work- 
so contrary to all that our Lord and the apostles taught 
and practiced?— which so seriously misrepresents, to 
the seeker after God, the real way to find him, and 
which so deceives the penitent as to what is the real 
"Church of the living God"— "whose names are written 
in heaven"? Why should not every one who finds 
the Truth, or, rather, who is found by the Truth, in this 
time of harvest, be glad to use every atom of his influence 
for the Truth, and against those errors which 
bind so many of God's dear saints? 

Surely the more conscientious we are the more we 
must regret the influence already given in years past 
toward error, to God's dishonor and to the enslavement 
of his children; and the more must be our 
anxiety to reverse our influence as rapidly as possible, 
in order that our future influence for the truth may 
as far as possible counteract past influence given to 
error. And, if we find the bonds of sectarianism difficult 
and painful to burst, we should the more jealously 
seek to spare our children similar pain. An outward 
confession of full consecration to Christ, not 
lived up to, and of faith in a creed not really believed, 
is an injury to whoever makes it. Better far teach 
your children to be honest with themselves, with 
others, and above all with God, than teach them to 
stultify themselves by dishonest professions. It will 
be to their advantage now, as well as in the purgatory 
of the future. See TRACT NO. 58-Purgatory. 

But, still, we shall need fellowship. And the 
scarcity of the proper sort in the nominal churches 
should lead us nearer to the Lord, that we may the 
more appreciate and value his love, his Word, his fellowship, 
and the love and fellowship of all who are of 
his true family and spirit. Soon you will learn to appreciate 
the words of our Master— as true respecting 
the worldly church today, as in his day— "Marvel 
not, if the world hate you; ye know that it hated me 
before it hated you"; "for the friendship of the world 
is enmity against God." Thus, separated more and 
more from the worldly-spirit, you will learn what 
the Apostle meant when he said, "Hereby we know 
that we have passed from death unto life, because we 
love the brethren." Your love for Jesus, our Elder 
Brother, will grow more intense, affecting your every 
thought, word and deed, and begetting a love for all 
who bear his likeness; and this love will not depend 
upon wealth or personal beauty or social conditions. 
But only those somewhat grown in the Spirit and likeness 
of our Redeemer can appreciate such counsel or 



such fellowship. Others love the worldly because the 
love of the Father has not been developed in them, and 
because they do not hate every evil way. 

THE TRUE CHURCH NOT A SECT 

The Church of Christ is neither a sect nor an aggregation 
of sects: it is one and indivisible. It is 
Christ and all who are united to him— joined by a 
living faith in his redemptive work for them, and in a 
full consecration to him, his will and his work, even 
unto death. This true Church is represented by our 
Lord himself under the simile of a vine, of which and 
in which all truly his are, individually, branches. 

Webster's Dictionary defines the word "sect" to 
mean, "A part cut off,. ..hence a body of persons 
who have separated from others by virtue of 
some special doctrine, or set of doctrines, which they 
hold in common." 

This description fits all the various denominations 
of Christendom. All separate themselves from other 
Christians; all do so by virtue of some doctrine or set 
of doctrines which they hold in common. But the 
members of the true Church are each individually 
united to Christ, and not to each other. As the spokes 
of a wheel are each separately fastened in the hub, so 
each member of the Body of Christ is, in his inner or 
spiritual life, bound only to Christ. And as the tire 
steadies and gives unity of operation to the spokes at 
their extremities, so love, the bond of perfectness, is 
the only bond that should be permitted between those 
whose wills are buried into Christ's. 

Our Lord declared that he did not come to put 
a patch or amendment upon Judaism, nor to put the 
new wine of his teaching into the old bottles of Judaism. 
It follows that Christianity is not a schism or 
sect or split off from Judaism. It is, on the contrary, 
a new system of religious teaching, introducing a New 
Covenant between God and man by Christ, the Mediator, 
whose blood seals that New Covenant and makes 
it operative. 

The only test of fellowship therefore is,— to be a 
Christian; one truly united to Christ by faith and consecration; 
—not without a real consecration, nor without 
the true faith. But the meaning of a full consecration 
of thought, word and deed is readily understood 
by some who doubt and question what is the 
true faith necessary to the true membership in Christ 
—the faith at first delivered unto the saints by our 
Lord and his apostles. This true faith is— that all 
were sinners, justly under God's condemnation to 
death through the fall; that Christ Jesus our Lord died 
for OUR SINS according to the Scriptures, and that he 
was raised from the dead by the Father, who thus 
gave assurance to all that Christ's sin-offering 
on our behalf was complete and fully satisfactory, 



under which those of Adam's race who 

are sick of sin and desirous of harmony with 

R4163 : page 124 

God can be justified and return to his love, favor 
and blessing. (I Cor. 15:3,4; Rom. 5:1,6,12,18.) 
Whoever holds this simple faith is a believer, a 
member of "the household of faith." Whoever with 
this faith fully consecrates himself to the Lord's service 
is a baptized believer, a probationary member of 
the one, true Church, whose names are written in 
heaven. If he run the Christian race as he has covenanted 
to do, he will win the prize, and be one of the 
Elect Church in glory, granted a place with the Lord 
in his throne. 

This is the basis of our hope: the only foundation 
—the one which no man ever could lay, but which God 
laid for us (I Cor. 3:11); for, "while we were yet sinners, 
Christ died for us" (Rom. 5:8), the "just for the 
unjust, that he might bring us to God." (I Pet. 3:18.) 
Realizing that we are sinners under condemnation to 
death, and that we may have peace with God and be 
justified to life by appropriating to ourselves the merits 
of his death, we gladly accept him as our Redeemer. 
"We have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness 
of sins." (Eph. 1:7.) This is justification; 
and, being thus justified by faith, we have peace with 
God. Then, realizing, further, that those who are 
thus redeemed should not live the remainder of their 
lives to themselves and their own pleasure, but to him 
who died for them (2 Cor. 5:14,15), we consecrate 
ourselves to his service. 

Built upon this foundation are the minor doctrines 
and those principles which must be worked out in the 
life. Thus we are admonished by the Apostle (2 Pet. 1:5-8) 
to add to this faith various graces and further 
attainments— of virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, 
godliness, brotherly-kindness and charity (love). 

This was the faith of the early Church; and this 
is the faith of all who acceptably bear the name of 
Christ; and such only are properly termed Christians. 
True, the early Church progressed beyond these first 
principles, to the use of the "strong meat," and a comprehension, 
with all saints, of the deep things of God; 
but the "babes in Christ," and those "who, by reason 
of use, had their senses exercised," were together one 
family— "all one in Christ Jesus." They were not to 
leave these principles by displacing them with other 
theories, but by adding to them as above explained. 
The more advanced in grace and doctrine bore the infirmities 
of the weak, each and all seeking to grow in 
grace and knowledge, more and more. Where this 
apostolic rule was observed, there could be no sect, no 
division in this Body. It was only when error began 
to develop in the congregation that Paul wrote to 



some: I hear that there are divisions (sects) among 
you, and I partly believe it; for it is evident from 
what I learn of the worldliness and error coming in 
among you, that there would of necessity be divisions; 
for those true to the Lord could not have fellowship 
with such unfruitful works of darkness, but must 
rather reprove them.— I Cor. 11:18,19. 

Divisions were objected to in the one true Church, 
and all the apostles taught that there is one Lord, one 
faith and one baptism. There is one fold and one 
Shepherd. (I Cor. 12:25.) Christians are a separated 
class— separate from the world, separate from sinners, 
separate from all others— in that they accept salvation 
through the redeeming blood of Christ. Their sympathy 
and co-operation are not of force, doctrinal or 
other, but merely of love and common interest, as fellow-pilgrims 
and fellow-heirs. The doctrine of the 
ransom serves to guard each one thus in Christ against 
all professing Christ's name but denying or ignoring 
this fundamental part of his work. Neither collectively 
nor individually should the saints have fellowship 
with works of darkness.— Eph. 5:11. 

It is not remarkable that Satan should seek to 
divide and separate the sheep, and to put up fences, 
such as the denominational creeds prove to be, which 
would hinder some of the sheep from following the 
Shepherd into green pastures of fresh and living truth. 
This would be but wisdom on his part. But it is 
strange that he should be able to fetter the reason of 
so many, that they should think it a mark of spirituality 
to say, I am of Luther, a Lutheran; I of Calvin 
or Knox, a Presbyterian; I of Wesley, a Methodist, 
and so on. The Apostle Paul, on the contrary, said to 
some of his day, who were in danger of this spirit of 
sectarianism: While one saith, I am of Paul, and I of 
Apollos, and I of Peter, are ye not carnal? Is it not 
in direct opposition to the Spirit of Christ to think or 
act thus? "Is Christ divided?" Did Paul or Peter 
or Knox or Calvin or Wesley or any one else than 
Christ die for your sins, and redeem you? They, as 
servants of Christ and the Church, should be esteemed 
very highly for their works' sake, but to name the 
Bride after any other than the Bridegroom is manifestly 
improper. 

Oh, that all could see that in God's sight there is 
but one Church— whose names are written in heaven 
—and that God cannot and does not sympathize with 
or recognize any split in the real Church! He does not 
recognize the narrow creeds in which so many of the 
sheep are confined and starving. As we have shown, 
he has placed but one fence around his fold. Inside 
of it there is plenty of room, for both the lambs and 
the fully matured sheep. 

A PARABLE OF FALSE SHEEP-FOLDS 



Picture in your mind a fine, large pasture, surrounded 
by a strong and high fence (the Law of 

God), which keeps all the sheep within, but which recognizes 
no means of access to that fold (justified condition), 
except Christ, the door, faith in whose sacrifice 
for sin is the only way into the fold. All climbing 
into the fold by any other way are thieves and 
robbers. This is the pasture provided by the Good 
Shepherd for his sheep, for whom he once laid down 
his life. Into the true fold of Christ quite a flock of 
sheep have entered. They belong to the true Shepherd; 
but, as we look before us at the grassy slopes, 
only a few sheep, a little flock indeed, seem to be enjoying 
the liberty of the fold— the liberty wherewith 
Christ hath made them free. Where are the others? 
We look, and see inside the door, on either side of the 
pathway, small enclosures. Over each is written a 
peculiar name— Presbyterian, Methodist, Baptist, Second 
Adventist, Roman Catholic, Greek Catholic, Episcopalian, 
Lutheran, etc. Looking at these pens we find 
they differ. Some are built like prisons with iron 
frames and bars and chains, others less strong, and 

R4163 : page 125 

some are merely marked out "dead lines," over which 
the sheep understand they must not go. 

These pens are full of sheep, but they are weak, 
delicate and sickly for lack of proper exercise and 
fresh, nourishing food. They are regularly fed, but 
only upon husks, with occasionally a little milk, but 
they eat without relish and get no good from it. Many 
of them are leaner and poorer than when they first 
entered the fold, and some have become blind. Strange 
to say, all seem to be perfectly satisfied, each with his 
own pen, and very seldom does one attempt to escape. 

We also noticed that under-shepherds had been 
appointed to help to pasture the sheep, and that they 
had constructed these pens, but apparently without 
the Chief Shepherd's permission. 

Perplexed to know why the sheep thus submitted 
to be penned, we watched to see how they were induced 
to enter the various enclosures. As they entered 
the fold through the only door (faith in Christ), 
each under-shepherd tried to impress upon them, as 
they passed, the necessity of getting into one of the 
many pens, and the desirability of the particular one 
he represented. As a consequence, nearly all the sheep 
which entered the fold got penned, for they trusted 
the under-shepherds and followed the majority; and 
only a few passed on to enjoy all the liberty of the 
fold. The under-shepherds sought continually to impress 
upon their sheep that the free sheep were 
heretics and en route to destruction. 

We watched to see the end of this matter, for we 
learned that the Chief Shepherd was expected by some, 



and we knew that his coming would soon demonstrate 
whether he approved this dividing and imprisoning of 
his flock. Nearly all the under-shepherds claimed that 
he would not come for a long time yet. 

Presently we heard great rejoicing among the free 
sheep. We looked, and found that the Chief Shepherd 
had come quietly, unobservedly ("as a thief"), and 
was now recognized by some of the sheep; and hence 
the rejoicing. Some of those imprisoned heard the 
Shepherd's voice; they looked and listened, yet could 
scarce believe. It was indeed the voice of the Shepherd 
as he tended and ordered his flock. His true sheep 
seemed to hear his voice condemning the penning 
process, and saying to his sheep, "Come out!" 

Some leaped the fences and thus gained liberty 
and food from the Shepherd's hand, while others were 
so weak and faint for lack of nourishment that they 
trembled with anticipation, but did not come out 
through fear of the under-shepherds. We noticed, outside 
the fences, that some of the free sheep brought 
food to the bars, thus nourishing the weak ones until 
they were strong enough to leap the fence. The under-shepherds, 
meanwhile, were alert with redoubled vigilance, 
and by varying policies sought to keep control 
of their (?) flocks. Some denounced and scoffed at 
those without, and threatened the sheep within; and 
others redoubled the customary exercises— the "forms 
of godliness." 

We waited to see the outcome, and saw the unfaithful 
under-shepherds bound and beaten with 
stripes, the prison-pens all destroyed, and the fold used 
as designed— the flock one, its name one, and its Head 
—the true Shepherd who gave his life for the sheep 
—Christ Jesus. 

"COME OUT OF HER, MY PEOPLE" 

In Revelation 18:4-8, we have most emphatic instructions 
from our Lord, respecting our proper course 
at the present time. This advice was not always applicable; 
not until mystic Babylon's fall under divine 
condemnation, which prophecy shows was in A.D. 
1878. As shown in the Scriptures, Babylon, the 
mother of abominations, had long misrepresented the 
truth and the true Church, which to a large extent was 
in her and in her daughter systems (See SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES, VOL. II., pages 271-282, VOL. III., pages 135-197); 
but her sentence of rejection was reserved until 
the time of "harvest." 

The expression, "Come out of her, my people," 
indicates clearly that some of God's true saints have 
been in Babylon, and that, up to the time of her fall, 
God did not object to their being in the nominal 
church systems, and did not call on them to come out. 
Indeed the Lord himself sometimes spoke to and 
through Babylon up to the time when, having knocked 



at the door, he declared his presence, and, being unheeded 
by the self-conscious, but really blind and miserable 
Laodicea, he spewed her out of his mouth (to 
be no longer his mouth-piece) forever.— Rev. 3:14-22. 

But now the judgment of the great Millennial day 
has begun; and its beginning is with the Church— to 
separate the true from the false or nominal. 

To accomplish this separation, the truth— "the 
sword of the spirit"— sharper than any two-edged 
sword, is unsheathed. The conflict now in progress between 
truth and error, light and darkness, is for the 
very purpose of testing, sifting and separating the 
"children of light," who love the truth, from the children 
of darkness, who love the error. As heretofore 
shown, the second advent of our Lord is in this respect 
like his first advent; and his words, "Think not 
that I am come to send peace on earth; I came not to 
send peace, but a sword" (Luke 12:51), are applicable 
now— until his Church has been gathered and 
glorified, and his Kingdom set up in glorious authority. 

The expression, "that ye be not partakers of her sins, 
and receive not of her plagues," implies that, in this 
time in which they are called out, God's people will be 
brought to a clear knowledge of the truth;— they will 
see clearly what constitute Babylon's sins— errors of 
doctrine and of life. And, when so enlightened, those 
who are God's people, having his Spirit, his love for 
right and truth, will hate the error and darkness in 
which for so long they have been. Such will be ready 
and anxious to know their duty toward the nominal 
church. The effect of the light of truth upon their 
hearts will be such that they will instinctively feel and 
ask themselves, "What communion hath light with 
darkness?" and they will look to the Lord to indicate to 
them his wisdom and will. To such the Lord answers, 
through his Word, "Come out of her, my people." 

The expression, "that ye be not partakers of her 
sins," is in the nature of a reminder, as well as a 
threat. It is a reminder that, when in ignorance of the 
truth, they had no responsibility for the errors and the 
wrong course of Babylon, mother and daughters; but 

R4163 : page 126 

that now since they see those errors— those sins— they 
are responsible; and that if now they stay in these 
systems they, by intelligently assenting, are as responsible 
as those who formulated those errors, or more 
so, and will surely and justly partake of the 
consequences. 

But, for various reasons, some seem anxious to 
excuse themselves, and to stay in Babylon. Such indicate 
that they lack the proper spirit of the truth, or 
else that they have not yet digested a sufficiency of the 
"meat in due season" to give them the necessary perception 
of her sins, which in the Lord's estimation are 



piled up to heaven. Another confusing thing is that 
some of the daughters of the Roman Mother have put 
away many of the mother's outward marks and forms, 
while retaining much of her spirit and doctrines. 

For instance, Baptists, Congregationalists, Second 
Adventists, Disciples, and a few other denominations, 
claim to be without bondage; claim that the Bible is 
their creed and that each group or congregation has 
charge of its own affairs, and that the meetings in 
which these independent congregations of each denomination 
unite are merely voluntary associations, in 
which denominational supervision or bondage finds no 
recognition. Then, especially with the "Disciples," the 
confession demanded is very simple. But they mostly 
mention the doctrine of the trinity, or eternal torment, 
or both. And where these are not specified, they are 
understood, and if attention be called to these subjects, 
or to the manner of our Lord's second coming, 
or to "the times of restitution," there is always a strong 
current of opposition, and, whether written or unwritten, 
a creed will be found which admits no Biblical examination 
or criticism; and, unless you assent, you 
must either keep quiet or get out. 

The word "creed" comes from credo, and means 
I believe. It is entirely proper that every Christian 
have for himself a creed, a belief. And, if a number 
of Christians come to a unity of faith upon the lines of 
the Word of God, their assembling together for fellowship 
and communion is both proper and helpful, as 
the Bible declares. The general difficulty is that, when 
groups of Christians meet as brethren, they either 
make a written or an understood creed which goes beyond 
the Word of God and includes human tradition; 
or else they ignore all faith, and make morality— good 
works— the only basis of fellowship. But, as the name 
indicates, Christians are believers in Christ, and not 
merely moralists. While, therefore, a creed is necessary, 
and he who has none has no belief, and would 
therefore be an unbeliever, and while in Christian fellowship 
harmony of faith is necessary to communion, 
all should see that the fellowship and faith of the early 
Church, under divine direction, were built upon the 
first principles of the doctrine of Christ; and nothing 
more or less should be the basis of Christian fellowship 
here and now. 

We will suggest a safe way to judge whether your 
present associations in the name of Christ are part of 
Babylon or not, and whether, therefore, you are one of 
those called to "Come out." It is this: If there is no 
meeting of the congregation at which believers can call 
up a passage of Scripture for discussion, in which discussion 
you, with others, can present your views of 
God's Word, there is something wrong. You cannot 
long have fellowship there. Your light is under a 
bushel, and will go out, unless you give it more liberty. 
You must come out of such condition or your light will 



become darkness. 

But if there be meetings at which you have an 
equal opportunity with others of calling up any portion 
of Scripture and expressing your view of its meaning 
on a par with others, you may conclude that you have 
found at least some evidence of Christian liberty; for 
no Christian has the right to refuse to give, when 
asked, a reason for the hope that is in him. And since 
the credo or belief of each Christian professes to be 
built upon God's Word, it follows that each should be 
not only willing but ready at all times to change his 
belief for one more Scriptural, if such can be pointed 
out to him. 

Having found those who follow Berean methods, 
rejoice— but with fear, until you have tested them further. 
Do not abuse their hospitality by attempting to 
monopolize the time; be content and thankful to get 
your proportion of it. And, when your choice of a 
subject comes up, see (1) that it is wisely chosen, one 
that will strengthen, and not strangle, your hearers. 
(2) Pray that, as a minister (servant) of the truth, 
you may be "a workman that needeth not to be 
ashamed." (3) Let nothing be done through strife, 
contention or vainglorious effort to display yourself or 
your knowledge of the Word; but (4) "speak the 
truth in love," while you speak it none the less clearly 
and forcibly. 

So long as you have such opportunities to hear 
others and to express yourself, you may conclude that 
you are in a safe place. As you progress, in hearing 
from others, and in expressing yourself to others 
freely and candidly, either you or they will be likely to 
come into harmony with the spirit of the truth. If 
your views be Scriptural and theirs not, they will doubtless 
come to hate you and the truth, and soon you will 
find no fellowship with them. 

But in a majority of cases no such proving of 
spirits will be necessary. Generally you will find that 
congregations have formulated a creed to which each 
member is obliged to subscribe— if not in writing or 
by voice, at least by silent assent. In such a case, get 
such creed or confession, and see whether or not it 
fairly, frankly and truthfully represents your faith. If 
it does not, you should lose no time in repudiating it, 
however conscientiously ignorant of it you may have 
been for years past. Now you know, and now if you 
remain in, intelligently, you belie yourself, and thus 
prove yourself not a lover of the truth and a pleaser of 
God, but a lover of error and a pleaser of men. 

It does not matter at all that you may have told 
the minister and some or all of the elders of the church 
of your disagreement and disbelief. They have no authority 
with God or men to absolve you from your 
public confession. If, for instance, you are a Presbyterian; 

R4163 : page 127 



it is not the minister, nor the Session, nor the 
local congregation merely that you have joined, but as 
well the entire body of Presbyterians, everywhere. 
And so long as you are professedly a member, you are 
obligated in your belief and conduct to them all. And 
before the whole world you stand numbered as one of 
them, and as a partner in all that is professed by them 
all in common. If you do not believe as they do, it is 
your duty to them all, and to the world, to withdraw, 
and thus set yourself and others right before all. If by 
the Lord's mercy you are one of the few who have 
passed from darkness into his marvelous light, you will 
now feel ashamed of the doctrines you once delighted 
to confess, and will delight to reduce by one the number 
of errorists, and to add one to the number of the 
despised little flock— disowned, indeed, of men, but 
owned and loved and cherished of God. 

As you did not join the minister or Session 
merely, but the congregation and the entire denomination, 
your dissolution of your membership should, if 
possible, be as public as was your joining. And, in reply 
to many inquiries, we suggest below a general outline 
for a letter of withdrawal which such as desire 
are at liberty to copy and use. If possible, it should be 
read aloud at some general congregational meeting, at 
which general speaking, remarks, etc., are in order- 
such as a prayer-meeting. After being read, it should be 
handed to the leader of the meeting as the representative 
of the congregation and officers. If by reason of 
sickness or from any other cause this course be not 
possible, we advise that a copy of the letter be sent to 
each member of the congregation, that there be no 
room for misunderstanding or misrepresentation. We 
will gladly supply copies of this letter printed in typewriter 
type, together with envelopes, and tracts to accompany 
same— free, upon being advised of the number 
necessary. 

THE SUGGESTED LETTER: 

Dear Brethren and Sisters, 

Members and Officers of the 

Church. The Lord has of late been teaching me some 
wonderful things out of his Word, whereof I am glad. 
The Bible has become a new book to me, so widely 
have the eyes of my understanding been opened. God 
is now my Father, Christ my Redeemer, and all believers 
my brethren, in a sense never before 
appreciated. 

I would not have you understand that I saw a vision 
or had a special revelation; I merely have God's 
Word, "written aforetime for our learning;" but God 
has recently made it clearer to my understanding, 
through some of his servants. Nor do those servants 



claim special inspirations or revelations, but merely 
that God's due time has now come to unseal and make 
known his glorious plan, wisely kept secret in the past, 
as the Scriptures themselves declare.— Dan. 12:9. 

Of these blessed things I might mention a few, 
very briefly: I find that the Scriptures do not teach 
the eternal torment of all except the saints. I find 
that the full penalty of willful sin against clear knowledge 
will, in the language of the Apostle, be "everlasting 
destruction from the presence of the Lord." But, 
still better, if possible, I find that, while so many of 
our race (indeed by far the majority) have died in 
total or partial ignorance of God and his offer of life 
everlasting through Christ, God has graciously provided 
that during the Millennial Age all such of the 
families of the earth shall be blessed with the needed 
knowledge, and granted opportunity for obedience 
unto eternal life. And, further, I find its teaching to 
be, that we, the Gospel Church, as joint-heirs with 
Christ our Lord, are to be God's agents in bestowing 
that great Millennial blessing. And, finally, it appears 
that this time of blessing for which God's people 
have so long prayed, saying, "Thy Kingdom come, thy 
will be done on earth as it is done in heaven," is very 
near at hand, and even now wheat and tares are being 
separated, and soon a great time of trouble will overthrow 
existing institutions and usher in Christ's Kingdom 
of peace and equity. 

I shall be glad to furnish the Scriptural evidences 
of these things to any who may desire to search the 
Word, and to prove whether these things be so. 

But now, dear friends, comes an unpleasant duty. 
I find that many of these gems of truth are in direct 
conflict with our views as held and taught and confessed 
in our denominational literature; and hence, in 
honesty to you and myself, I must withdraw from 
membership with you in this church. To remain would 
be to misrepresent your views, and to have you misrepresent 
my views— the doctrine of the eternal torment 
of nine-tenths of our race being now in my judgment 
horrible— indeed a blasphemy against the God of 
love, whose Word, when understood, teaches quite the 
contrary. 

For nearly. ..years I have tried faithfully to 
keep my engagements with you as a fellow-member of 
this church, and have learned to love some of you very 
dearly— some for social qualities and some for saintliness 
— Christlikeness. It is, therefore, with pain that 
I announce to you my withdrawal, and I owe you this 
explanation. Let me assure you that it is not because 
my love is less than formerly, for, by God's grace, I 
believe it is expanding toward him and his, and, sympathetically, 
toward all our race. This action, therefore, 
is not to be understood as a withdrawal from the 
Church of Christ, whose names are written in heaven, 
but merely a withdrawal from the.... Church, 



whose names are written on earth. I withdraw in 

order that I may be more free in my conscience, toward 

God and men, and that I may most fully fellowship 

all who are heartily the Lord's people— not only 

such in this congregation and denomination, but in all 

others as well. I ask no letter of dismission, for I 

could not hope to be better suited elsewhere. So far 

as I am concerned, I wish to remove every barrier between 

myself and fellow-pilgrims. So then, to all of 

you who are in Christ Jesus— members of his Body— I 

still am a fellow-member, a branch in the true Vine 

(Christ), whom nothing can separate from the love of 

God in Christ, my Lord.-John 15:5; Rom. 8:38,39. 



page 129 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXIX MAY 1 No. 9 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 131 

Capitalists Warned by Miners 131 

Ministers of Christ Hypnotists 131 

The Egotism of Higher Critics 132 

Will Episcopalians and Greek Catholics Unite?. 132 
"In My Father's House" 132 

The New Way of Life 133 

"Greater Works Shall Ye Do" 134 

Yearly Requests for Pilgrim Visits 135 

The Holy Spirit Promised 136 

"He will Reprove the World" 137 

Our Lord Betrayed and Denied 139 

"The Hour of Temptation that Shall Try" 140 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 143 

page 130 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R4164 : page 130 

NEW POSTAL REGULATIONS 



A new postoffice ruling should be known to all our readers. 
Hereafter newspapers and magazines will not be allowed 
to keep on their lists the addresses of expired subscriptions 
—except for a few months: semi-monthlies, such as the 
WATCH TOWER, three months; quarterlies, such as the Old 
Theology, six months. If your papers stop coming you will 
know the reason why. 

Subscription lists hereafter must contain the addresses 
of only those who (1) have paid their money, or (2) have 
definitely asked for credit, or (3) whose subscriptions have 
been paid for them at their request. The majority of our subscriptions 
come under either the first or second of these rules, 
and we here remark that the publishers are at liberty to extend 
a credit for another and another year, if the subscriber so 
requests, but not otherwise. As for the third class; these subscriptions 
of the Lord's poor are paid for them gladly by 
Tract Fund donations of those more favored financially. But 
do not forget that these also under the new regulations must 
write us yearly requesting this. Look at the address label on 
your paper and note thereon the time of expiration of your 
subscription and act accordingly. We prefer to have the "Lord's 
poor" write us in May each year. As paid subscriptions come 
at the close of the year this helps to divide the office labors. 
Remember that we like to have on our List the names of all 
the interested. Those who donate to the Fund which pays your 
subscription are delighted to have the privilege of thus serving 
the fellow-members of the Body of Christ. Therefore let 
no feeling of false modesty hinder you from making request 
under these terms if you need so to do. You can no 
more afford to do without the spiritual food than to starve 
naturally. 



R4163 :page 131 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
CAPITALISTS WARNED BY MINERS 



THE United Mine Workers' Journal, of February 
25th last, under the caption, "A Portentous 
Outlook," says:— 

"No one who is able to read the signs of the times can 
fail to be impressed with the portentous features that loom up 



from all sides of the industrial horizon. It does seem that 
the 'captains of industry' are determined to force a crisis in 
the affairs of this nation. 

"Those who look behind the superficial, see in all this an 
attempt to punish the laboring classes, thus striking President 
Roosevelt over their heads, in order to discredit his policy. 
If in order that industry shall go on unchecked the food poisoner, 
the bank and railroad wreckers must be permitted to 
carry on their schemes unchecked and unopposed that fact cannot 
be too quickly known. The ruthless reduction in wages, 
the provocative methods employed to exasperate the working-men 
into strikes seem to point, as true as a needle to the pole, 
to the fact that we are facing an industrial and political crisis. 

"They are making the mistakes of their lives. They are 
but a drop in the bucket, as they will learn to their sorrow, 
should they press this matter to a head. It is well for these 
men to remember that the creature is never greater than the 
creator. If they knew what was fermenting under the surface 
they would come to their senses at once, a thing they should 
do before it is too late. 



In publishing this item, the WATCH TOWER is not 
to be understood to endorse all of its statements. Much 
can be said on both sides of every controversy, and not 
infrequently both sides are extreme and wide of the 
truth, which lies between their extremes. The rabid, 
bitter utterances of many laboring men are much to be 
deplored. Calmer words and arguments and votes at 
the poles would be the more sensible course. Likewise, 
capitalists are sometimes credited with very unwise 
and provocative language, calculated to stir up 
strife. But what can we expect? These people, rich 
and poor, are listed on the world's census reports as 
"Christians" of various denominations; yet but few of 
them know even the first principles of the doctrines of 
Christ. How can we expect of them the fruits of 
God's holy Spirit— meekness, gentleness, patience, 
brotherly kindness, love? 

A brother, a railroad engineer, who is in close 
touch with fellow-laborers, tells us that the spirit of 
unrest and of bitterness toward the wealthy is growing. 
He cited as an illustration the fact that while one 
department of the railroad business was closed recently 
to curtail expenses, and although the employees 
were given work at another place, nevertheless, the official 
in charge of the transfer so realized the spirit of 
animosity prevalent that he took two trusted men as a 
guard each visit while superintending the transfer. 

MINISTERS OF CHRIST HYPNOTISTS 



"Faith and hypnotism will be used by the Rev. Dr. Robert 



MacDonald, pastor of the Washington Avenue Baptist Church, 
Brooklyn, to cure hysteria, insomnia, neurasthenia, drunkenness, 
religious melancholia and suicidal mania. 

"Dr. MacDonald announced his intention to his congregation 
and will begin his work today. 

"The faith-in-God-hypnotic-suggestion idea was given to 
Dr. MacDonald by the Rev. Dr. Worcester, of Boston. Dr. 
Worcester has accomplished some almost miraculous cures by 
this method, and he explained it to Dr. MacDonald, who spent 
ten days with him."— N.Y. Journal. 



We cannot prove our fears that hypnotism is a 
demoniacal power, but as previously set forth in these 
columns, such is our belief. All so-called "psychic 
powers" by which wonders can be worked associate 
themselves more or less distinctly with Spiritism, respecting 
the source of which we have no room for 
doubt. 

This does not signify that the ministers above 
named (and all others who practice hypnotism), are 
intelligently serving satanic interests. God forbid! Our 
thought is that "the god of this world has blinded their 
(mental) eyes." We are, as our readers well know, expecting 
wonderful developments along all "occult" and 
"black art" and spiritist lines during the next few years, 
as a part of the great "hour of temptation that shall try 
them that dwell upon the face of the whole earth."— 
Rev. 3:10. 

To be forewarned is to be forearmed. Too great 
carefulness respecting every word and act and plan is 
not possible. Temptations may come along the line of 

R4163 : page 132 

our natural weaknesses, but may be even more effective 

against us along the lines of our greatest 

strength of character, because less carefully guarded. 

The Apostle says, "When I am weak, then I am 

strong"— because more carefully leaning on the everlasting 

arms in the face of such besetments. Let us 

consider it the reverse way— when I am strong, then 

am I weak, because less likely to be on guard and to 

be relying on our Lord's assistance. "Without me ye 

can do nothing." 

THE EGOTISM OF HIGHER CRITICS 



The editor of a local journal, without pretending 
any special skill as a theologian, sees clearly one 
thing at least, that the Higher Critics are quite conceited 
when, although unable to agree among themselves, 
they invite the world to allow them to make a 



new Bible out of the old one. They claim that what 
others do not possess in the way of spiritual intuition, 
they each do possess: not only enough for their own 
needs, but a supply, also, for the whole world. He says: 

"Either Higher Criticism is a good thing or it is not— 
either desirable or undesirable. At any rate it has become the 
great issue of the day in theology. Disturbing or otherwise 
it is too prominent in the thoughts of the world for a paper 
that pretends to reflect public opinion to ignore it. Our exchanges 
almost without exception contain letters and editorials 
upon this most important subject. In the meantime, what 
are we to do with it? It is being said more and more by 
clergymen that only the technically proficient are at all qualified 

R4164 : page 132 

to express an opinion upon the correctness or otherwise 
of criticism high or low. 

"With the Higher Critics and their followers the development 
of man is still proceeding. What it may result in is not 
yet foreseen. So far, however, it has resulted in a critical attitude 
toward a book called the Bible, out of which by dint of 
paring and padding they propose to make the real Word of 
God. They feel themselves inspired so to do by the inward 
unfolding to them of the Divine purpose. The lower critics 
regard all this as presumption, as an extra-biblical attempt to 
give to the world a true revelation. 

"There is no one to say, however, where it should at any 
time end. The reason of the individual reader, these critics 
maintain, is necessarily that reader's final court of appeal. Yet, 
as we remarked before, even this does not seem to be permitted 
by them, since they also maintain that the individual reader 
may not be qualified. We have then in the last analysis a 
constituted hierarchy of Higher Critics who do not agree 
among themselves and cannot agree farther than to say that 
their theory in manner of interpreting is identical, even if their 
interpretations prove contradictory." 

WILL EPISCOPALIANS AND GREEK CATHOLICS 
UNITE? 



The Toronto Mail and Empire prints the following 
report and sees in it a prospect of a great church 
union: 

"The first organization of the Anglican and Eastern Orthodox 
Union in this country was perfected at an enthusiastic 
meeting held this afternoon at the parish-house of the Transfiguration 
and attended by many well-known Episcopalian 
churchmen and laymen, and has, it is understood, the entire 
sympathy of Bishop Potter and other high Church officials, 
and is said to be the culmination of a movement which originated 
in the house of the bishops of the Protestant Episcopal 
Church. It follows closely upon the return to this country 
of the Rev. Dr. Charles C. Grafton, Bishop of Fond du Lac, 



Wis., who made an extended trip through Russia and the 
East, carrying the greetings and kindly expressions of the 
Protestant Episcopal Church of America. 

"The Church at large, which is not advised of the deliberations 
of the House of Bishops, has always understood that 
Bishop Grafton was sent abroad to learn the attitude of the 
Eastern Orthodox Churches toward closer union with the 
Protestant Episcopal or Anglican Church. Since Bishop 
Grafton's return he had made it plain that his reception from 
the high officials of the Russian and Greek Catholic Churches 
was most cordial, and that their sentiment was strong in 
favor of closer union." 



R4164 : page 132 

"IN MY FATHER'S HOUSE" 

-JOHN 14: 1-14. -MAY 3- 

Golden Text:— "In my Father's house are many mansions." 

AFTER the Lord had washed the disciples' feet, 
and had given the sop to Judas, who then 
went out, and he had told the disciples that 
they all would be offended that night because of him, 
and had answered Peter that he would deny his Lord 
thrice before the cock crew, we may well suppose that 
the hearts of the eleven were heavy, disturbed, troubled 
with fearful forebodings. Had they indeed been deluded 
or had they misunderstood the Master when he told them 
that he was the Messiah, the heir of the Kingdom, and 
that they should sit with him in his throne? How could 
they interpret his language, seeing that only five days 
before he had received the hosannas of the multitude 
as the Son of David, the King of Israel, when riding on 
the ass? What could it mean that the Master was now 
"exceeding sorrowful" and spoke of betrayal, and of 
their dispersion and of his own death? 

It was in answer to these their troubled thoughts 
that our Lord spoke to them the beautiful words of 
comfort and consolation recorded in the 14th, 15th, 16th 
and 17th chapters of John's Gospel, beginning— "Let 
not your hearts be troubled: ye believe in God, believe 
also in me." 

The apostles were already consecrated to God as 
his servants, before they came in contact with Jesus; 
they already believed in God, trusted in him, were Israelites 
indeed without guile. This is testified to further 
by our Lord's prayer, in which he says, "Thine 
they were and thou gavest them me." The trouble in 
their hearts was not in respect to the foundations of 
their hopes, for these were all established. They not 
only knew and trusted God, but knew and trusted also 
the promises of God respecting the Kingdom and the 



blessing that should come to all the families of the 
earth through it. The whole question before their 
minds was respecting Jesus: Was he indeed the Messiah, 
or had they built some false expectations upon 
his wonderful words and deeds? How should they 
understand it if now, after three and a half years of 
ministry, he should die at the hands of his enemies, instead 

R4164 : page 133 

of establishing his Kingdom and subduing all 
things to himself, as they had expected? He had said 
that he was going away, and that whither he would go 
they could not come. How could they understand these 
matters and harmonize them? 

"YE MUST BE BORN AGAIN" 

They had not yet learned the meaning of the words 
which, early in his ministry, our Lord had addressed to 
Nicodemus— "Except a man be born again, he cannot 
see the Kingdom of God"; "Except a man be born of 
water and of spirit he cannot enter into the Kingdom of 
God." (John 3:3,5.) But these were spiritual truths, 
and could not be appreciated until Pentecost would 
bring them the anointing of the holy Spirit, and permit 
them to "comprehend with all saints the lengths and 
breadths and heights and depths" of the divine plan. 
But they did need some comfort, and the Master proceeded 
to give them the best and the strongest spiritual 
food, instruction, that they were able to receive. He 
had many things to tell them, but they could not bear 
them then, could not understand them, until the anointing 
of the holy Spirit should prepare their hearts. 

Our Lord began by reviving in them their faith in 
the Father and in his plan, saying, Ye believe in God, 
—believe also in me: recognize the fact that all of the 
Father's plan will be accomplished, and inasmuch as 
you have seen my loyalty to the Father in word and in 
deed, and inasmuch as you have seen the Father's 
power unto good works manifested in me, let faith's 
anchor hold; continue to trust me, continue to have 
confidence, and you shall have a blessing; wait for the 
development of the divine plan, and it will more than 
satisfy your highest expectations. You are perplexed 
because I said that I am going away— going to the 
Father, but let me explain to you that my going is in 
your interest: I go to prepare a place for you in my 
Father's house of many apartments; and as surely as 
I do this I will come again and receive you unto myself, 
that we may henceforth be together forever. 

Thus, in a few words, the Master declared the 
work of the Gospel Age, pointing to his second advent 
and the glorification of the Church at the end of the 
age. He did not here stop to give them detailed explanations 
of the trials of faith and of patience through 



which they must pass; this he had done on other occasions, 
warning and cautioning them (Matt. 24); now 
their hearts were troubled, and he would merely console 
them with the assurance that his going away was 
necessary, that his second coming would be certain, 
and that the gathering of all to everlasting fellowship 
with him in the mansions prepared was assured. 

THE FATHER'S HOUSE IS REALLY THE UNIVERSE 

Figuratively speaking, heaven is God's throne, the 
earth his footstool. Divine providence has made abundant 
arrangement for the everlasting blessedness of all 
the sons of God. In the divine arrangement a provision 
had been made for man when in harmony with 
God, before the fall, but by reason of sin all of man's 
rights to a place in the everlasting abode of the just 
had been forfeited, and at the time of our dear Redeemer's 
discourse he was in the world for the very purpose 
of redeeming man and all his forfeited rights and possessions. 
(Luke 19:10; Eph. 1:14.) The purchase had 
not yet been completed— our Lord intended to finish 
the arrangements therefor at Calvary within a few 
hours. But this would cost the sacrifice of himself— the 
full surrender of the man Christ Jesus as a man, and 
he could be with them no longer as a man. The hope 
was that by his obedience to the divine will he should 
not only redeem Adam and his race by the sacrifice of 
himself, the man Christ Jesus, but that he should be 
raised from death to a new nature on a higher plane— 
the divine nature. Thus it was necessary that he should 
go away from them as the man Christ Jesus, and that 
they should see him no more as a man, but that in 
due time, at his second coming, they also should be 
"changed" from human conditions to spirit conditions, 
and "be like him and see him as he is."— I John 3:2. 

It was necessary also that, after laying down his 
life, he should ascend to the Father and present his 
sacrifice on man's behalf— as man's ransom— and 
this he did: the Pentecostal blessing was the divine 
attestation that the sacrifice for sins was accepted of 
the Father on man's behalf, and that the blessings 
which came forth upon all who accepted Jesus as their 
Redeemer were the result. 

The interim between our Lord's death and his 
second advent is not long from any standpoint of faith. 
(1) It is not long from God's standpoint, for, as the 
Apostle Peter declares, "A thousand years are as one 
day" with the Lord. (2 Pet. 3:8.) (2) It is not long 
from the standpoint of true believers, for to none of 
them is the average of life and waiting above fifty 
years. We are not to take the longest and most incongruous 
view of this period— not to feel as though we had 
been living for eighteen hundred years in expectancy: 
"Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof," 
and sufficient to each individual is his own share in the 



trials, polishings and preparations for the coming of the 
Bridegroom to receive him unto himself. While it is 
an affair of the Church as a whole in one sense of the 
word, it is an individual affair in the most important 
sense of the word to each of the Lord's followers. 

THE NEW WAY OF LIFE 

"And whither I go ye know, and the way ye know." 
For three years our Lord had been making himself 
known to his disciples, and also making them acquainted 
with the Father's character; and hence, when he 
now informed them that he was going home to the 
Father, they were to feel that they knew the Father 
better than ever, and could better than ever appreciate 
such a home of righteousness and true happiness as he 
would provide and maintain. Moreover, their experience 
with the Lord, including his instructions and 
leading, had made them acquainted with the way to 
God, even though they did not recognize it as such. 
Hence our Lord's declaration, "I am the Way, the 
Truth and the Life— no man cometh to the Father but 
by me." 

Our Lord was the "Way" in that only through his 

R4164 : page 134 

sacrifice, the "ransom," imputing his merit to sinners, 

could they be made acceptable to the Father or be received 

back again into fellowship with him. He was 

the "Truth" in the sense that only through his words, 

his instructions, his guidance, could there be any hope 

of coming into harmony with the Spirit of God, the 

Spirit of truth. He was the "Life" in that all the race 

was dead, under divine sentence— had forfeited the 

rights of life— and none could come again into life conditions 

except through him, through the life which he 

gave for ours. Thus he is our Ransom or Way; our 

Teacher or Instructor in righteousness, in the truth, 

and our Life-giver— "Neither is there salvation in any 

other." "No man cometh unto the Father but by me" 

—no man need hope for any place in any of the mansions 

of the Father's house by any other way, by any 

other truth, by any other life.— Acts 4:12; John 14:6. 

And so also Christ will be the Way, the Truth and 
the Life to the world of mankind in the Millennial Age. 
And as the Lord, by his sacrifice and offering, opened 
for the Gospel Church, his Bride, an abode in the heavenly 
division of God's mansion or house, so by the 
same sacrifice he redeemed and will restore and give to 
mankind (to as many as obey him— Acts 3:23) a home 
in the earthly divisions of the Father's house, which 
will then again become a Paradise of God. 

Much as the apostles esteemed the Master, it was 
difficult for them to grasp the thought of his perfection 
—that he was the very image of God in the flesh. (I Tim. 3:16.) 



They had heard him tell, and indeed knew also 

from the Law, that "God is a spirit"— not flesh, and 

hence not visible. They had heard him declare previously, 

also, "No man hath seen God at any time; the 

only begotten Son,. ..he hath revealed him." (John 1:18.) 

But they had never grasped the thought that in 

seeing Jesus they saw the most that was possible to be 

seen of the divine character— its likeness, its perfect 

image in flesh. It was therefore necessary that the 

Master should call their attention to this fact, saying, 

"He that hath seen me hath seen the Father." He did 

not mean them to understand that he was the Father, 

for this he had distinctly disclaimed repeatedly, telling 

them that the Father was greater, and that the works 

which he did were done by the Father's power. (John 14:28,10.) 

Nor did he mean them to understand that 

in seeing him they had seen an invisible being, as God 

is invisible. He did mean them to understand that 

in seeing his character, his motives, his love, they had 

seen a true expression that most faithfully represented 

the Father in all these particulars. 

He would have them understand the unity subsisting 
between the Father and himself; his will was buried 
into the Father's will, he would have no other: "Not 
my will but thine be done." He would have them understand 
that the Father, by his power, by his Spirit, 
dwelt in him also, so that his words and works fully 
and completely represented the Father. He declared 
to them that the works which they had witnessed during 
his ministry fully attested this power of the Highest 
resting upon him and operating through him. And 
this seems to have fully satisfied the apostles, and to 
have brought rest to their hearts. 

"GREATER WORKS SHALL YE DO" 

As a further explanation of the necessity for his going 
to the Father, our Lord declares that as a result 
of his going his followers should do greater works than 
he had done. It may perhaps be proper to think that 
some of these "greater works" will occur after the 
Kingdom has been established— the great work of awakening 
the world of mankind from the sleep of death 
and restoring the willing and obedient to the full perfection 
of human life. That, truly, will be a greater 
work than our Lord Jesus accomplished at his first advent, 
for then his greatest work was the awakening of 
some sleeping ones without bringing them to the full 
perfection of human nature. 

But in our opinion this is not the only sense in 
which the Lord's followers are to understand that their 
works shall be greater than those of the Master. The 
Lord's works were on a fleshly plane as a matter of 
necessity. The holy Spirit had not yet come— could 
not come until after he had given the ransom price and 
had presented it to the Father, and it had been accepted. 



Consequently, those to whom he ministered 
(even his disciples, not being begotten of the Spirit) 
could not be instructed from that standpoint. Their 
ears were heavy as respected earthly things, but in regard 
to heavenly things they could understand nothing; 
for, "The natural man receiveth not the things of the 
Spirit of God, neither can he know them, because they 
are spiritually discerned." It is since Pentecost that 
"God hath revealed them [spiritual things] unto us by 
his Spirit," which "searcheth all things, yea the deep 
things of God."-I Cor. 2:10,14; John 3:12. 

In the midst of the house of servants— none yet begotten 
of the Spirit, none yet granted the privilege of 
sonship (John 1:12)— our Lord could do and teach on 
no higher plane than the earthly, except as he "spoke 
unto the people in parables and dark sayings," which 
in due time the Church should understand, under the 
leading of the holy Spirit. It was in consequence of 
this that our Lord's miracles were all physical, and 
that his plain, understandable teachings were all on a 
plane appreciable by the natural man. 

But when the holy Spirit was come, after Pentecost, 
the Lord's people, in his name and as his representatives, 
began to do greater, more wonderful works than 
those which he himself had performed. Did the Lord 
open the eyes of the blind? His followers were privileged 
to open the eyes of men's understanding! Did 
the Lord heal the physically sick? His disciples were 
permitted to heal the spiritually diseased! Did the 
Lord cure physical leprosy? It was the privilege of 
his followers to heal spiritual leprosy, sin. Did our 
Lord revive the dead? It was the privilege of his followers 
to preach a Gospel by which many "passed from 
death unto life" in a much higher sense. And the 
privileges of these still greater works are yet with the 

R4164 : page 135 

Lord's people. Blessed are those who appreciate their 
great privileges, and are about the Father's business 
with energy, with zeal! But those who, having received 
a talent of the Lord, bury it in the earth— in business, 
in pleasure, in society— cannot expect to be received of 
the Master at his second coming, nor to hear him say, 
"Well done, good and faithful servant, enter thou into 
the joys of thy Lord." 

As indicating how fully he would still continue to 
be the active agent of the Father in all things relating 
to the Church, our Lord assures us that such things as 
we ask of the Father he (Jesus) will do for us, that the 
Father may be glorified in the Son. The Father hath 
committed all things into the hands of the Son; nevertheless, 
in everything the Son acknowledges the Father 
and gives glory to his name. 



page 135 

YEARLY REQUESTS FOR PILGRIM VISITS 

WE request a careful consideration of the following 
suggestions by all who are desirous of 
securing the services of our "Pilgrim" brethren 
during the ensuing year. The "Pilgrim" branch of 
the work is increasing in importance each year, and 
we find it necessary to husband carefully our resources 
and use the best information obtainable in order that 
we may secure the best results. 

The brethren chosen for this service are not sent 
forth as perfect, though the Society considers them 
worthy brethren in every way— ensamples to the flock 
in doctrine and practice. They travel continuously, as 
per announcement on last page of TOWER, all their expenses 
being met by the Society. They do not solicit 
money or anything else, either for themselves or for the 
Society. The service is free, the expenses being borne 
by the contributors to the Tract Fund. We seek divine 
guidance as to who shall be engaged in this service 
and where it shall be rendered. 

The routine of the "Pilgrims" is in circuits arranged 
in harmony with the interest shown and requests received, 
and, since many changes occur during a year, 
we desire that requests for "Pilgrim" visits be made 
yearly in May. Please answer the following questions, 
or as many of them as apply in your case. These responses 
are filed for our information for twelve months. 
If you have already written us this year requesting 
"Pilgrim" visits, we should be pleased to have you repeat 
your request in harmony with the following questions. 
As new conditions arise we find it advisable to 
alter slightly the questions in order that we may be 
properly advised as to the condition of each locality as 
far as possible. You need not repeat the questions, 
but merely indicate them thus, (a), (b), etc. A postal-card 
will serve our every purpose and can be readily 
filed for reference. Please attend to this matter at 
once, in order that there may be no disappointment 
should a "Pilgrim" be coming your way. All letters referring 
to "Pilgrim" work should be noted on envelope, 
thus, "Pilgrim Department." 

(a) How many Bible students reside in your vicinity? 

(b) Are weekly meetings held? 

(c) How many are usually in attendance? 

(d) Where do you now meet? (Give full street 
address.) 

(e) At what hours are the Sunday meetings held? 

(f) Was a vote taken on the "Pilgrim" invitation? 

(g) How many voted for the invitation to be sent? 
(h) How many, if any, voted against the invitation? 
(i) Would a suitable place be found for a public 
meeting? 



(j) What attendance do you think could be secured 

for the public session by such notification and 

advertising as your class would give? 

(k) Would a suitable place be found for semi-private 

meetings for the interested? 

(1) Have the members of your class chosen leaders in 

accordance with DAWN, VOL. VI., chaps. 5 and 6? 

If so, give names and full addresses of each. 

(m) Give full names and full addresses of the two (2) 

to whom notices of a coming "Pilgrim" should be 

sent, and notify us as to any change or removal. 

(n) If your town is not on a railroad give the name of 

proper railroad station at which to stop. 

(o) How many miles from station is meeting place, 

and which direction from station? 

(p) Would "Pilgrim" be met at station? 

(q) If not, how could "Pilgrim" get from said station? 

(r) Give writer's full name and address. 

(s) Any additional remarks. 



R4164 : page 135 

THE HOLY SPIRIT PROMISED 

-JOHN 16:4-15. -MAY 10- 

Golden Text:— "I will pray the Father, and he will send 
you another comforter, that he may abide with you forever. 
-John 14:16. 

OUR Lord, on the way to Gethsemane on the night 
of his betrayal, gave the discourse of this lesson 
to his disciples. He had been telling them 
what they must expect as his followers; that they 
would be misunderstood, persecuted, reviled, because 
of their faithfulness to him and to the brethren whom 
he represented— "But these things have I told you that 
when the time shall come ye may remember that I told 
you of them." (v. 4.) He had not told them of all that 
they might expect, intimating this when he said, "I have 
many things to tell you, but ye cannot bear them now." 
The same may be said to be true of all that ever become 
the Lord's disciples. They see a sufficiency of light 
for one step at a time, but the trials and difficulties 
future are graciously held from them that they 
may not be overwhelmed by them. "Sufficient unto the 
day is the evil thereof." This was not deception, not 
the alluring of his disciples into doing something contrary 
to their wills. At the very outstart the Master 
assures us that unless we take up our cross and follow 

R4164 : page 136 

him we cannot be his disciples. If we take this step 



honestly and sincerely we see plenty of difficulty in 
connection therewith, without knowing particulars of 
the troubles to come. Indeed, if we knew of our future 
trials we should be unjustly overwhelmed thereby, since 
at first we could but imperfectly appreciate the meaning 
of our Lord's words, "My grace is sufficient for 
thee; my strength is made perfect in your weakness," 
and the assurance that he will not suffer us to be 
tempted above that which we are able, but will with 
every temptation provide a way of escape. (2 Cor. 12:9; 
I Cor. 10:13.) Hence, as the Lord's people take 
one step after another they find these promises quite 
true; they find themselves sustained, they find they 
have no more than they can bear, and that although 
their trials are indeed severer than at the beginning of 
the way, yet these can be overcome, because of growth 
in grace and knowledge. 

The power by which the Lord would grant his 
aid to his persecuted followers during his personal absence 
was something difficult for them to understand. 
In our lesson the Master makes the matter as plain as 
possible, calling the power, the influence which he 
would exert on their behalf the holy Spirit, the Spirit 
of God, the Spirit of Christ, the Spirit of the truth. As 
the influence thus to be exerted upon them would be 
sustaining and comforting, the Lord denominated this 
Spirit or power a comforter, a sustainer, a helper. He 
did not say that he would send another person to deal 
with them; no other person could deal with them better 
than himself. It was a spirit, an influence, a power 
which he would send, and this would fully represent the 
Father and fully represent himself, so that in having 
the holy Spirit they would be having the fellowship of 
the Father and the fellowship of the Son. This holy 
Spirit is properly enough spoken of in the masculine, 
even as the Father and the Son are represented in the 
masculine. As it stands the propriety is obvious. 

THE HOLY TRINITY 

During the "dark ages" a great deal of confusion 
of thought prevailed and the clear teachings of the 
Scriptures were lost sight of. Indeed, the Bible for a 
time was little in use. The Bishops were credited with 
being the equals of the apostles in inspiration, under the 
doctrine of the Apostolic Succession. Hence, when 
these met in councils their vote or decision on a doctrine 
was accepted as apostolic, authoritative. Seemingly 

R4165 : page 136 

it was overlooked that the Lord chose but twelve 
apostles and said nothing about any successors to them, 
and that in Revelation he intimated there would be no 
successors when he pointed out the New Jerusalem 
with twelve foundations only, and in those twelve 



foundations the names of the twelve apostles of the 
Lamb. --Rev. 21:14. 

Quite early in the second century the influence of 
the Grecian philosophy upon the Church is quite noticeable, 
and various errors became prominent. One of 
these especially related to our Lord, practically putting 
him on a par with the Grecian philosophers, Socrates 
and Plato, and denying his special birth and his pre-human 
existence. In combating those errors some, 
loyal to the Lord, went to the other extreme and declared 
him, contrary to his own words, equal to the 
Father. (John 10:29; 14:28.) Next came disputation 
respecting the holy Spirit, and these same extremists 
took the ground that there are three gods, the Father, 
the Son and the holy Spirit, "equal in power and glory." 

Peculiarly enough, after claiming that they were 
equal, which implies that they are not the same in person, 
but different persons, the claim was made that they 
are really one in person. Of course, such unscriptural, 
illogical reasoning cannot support itself, and hence 
those taking this position were driven to various expedients 
and subterfuges of argument. At times some 
of them claimed that there are really three Gods in 
one person, while others claimed that there are really 
three persons in one God, and not being able to explain 
either of the nonsensical statements, they have resorted 
to that word so useful to error and superstition, 
namely, "Mystery," "Mystery." They tell us that the 
matter of the Trinity is so mysterious that neither they 
nor anyone need to understand it. If they do not understand 
it they, indeed, should not discuss it; but this 
should not hinder others who can understand it, and 
who see most clearly that the entire mystery is of their 
own making; that the Bible teaching on the subject is 
most clear, simple, harmonious and satisfactory. 

When the Apostle discusses the question of God 
he says to us, There is one living and true God, not 
three! He proceeds to say that this one living and true 
God is the Father; then he adds that there is one Lord 
Jesus Christ. (I Cor. 8:6.) As we have already seen 
this same Apostle declares that the Father highly exalted 
the Lord Jesus and gave him a name which is 
above every name; that all men should honor the Son 
even as they honor the Father. (Phil. 2:9,10; John 5:23.) 
This means that there are two persons, for 
in no other way could one exalt and honor another; and 
if the Son is to be honored as is the Father it follows, 
as other Scriptures show, that he is now partaker of 
the divine nature and that he was exalted to this high 
honor and dignity— "far above angels, principalities 
and powers"— as a reward for his obedience to the 
Father's will, in having come into the world and redeemed 
mankind at the cost of his own life in pursuance 
of the divine purposes. This we have already 
seen from John 1:1— that our Lord, before he came 
into the world, before the world was made by him as 



the Father's agent, was the Logos, the Word, the Messenger 

of the God, Jehovah, and that he was a God, 

a mighty one, superior to angels, the one "by whom all 

things were made that were made; and without him 

was not anything made that was made." 

It will be noticed that the Apostle, in speaking of 
the Father and the Son, refers to them as separate persons, 
and that he does not refer to the holy Spirit as 
another God, nor as the third part of God. Not that the 
Apostle ignores the holy Spirit however, for throughout 
all of his epistles it is recognized as the Spirit of 
the Father and the Spirit of the Son, representing both 
Father and Son in the Church. Nor are we to understand 
that the holy Spirit is a spirit being— as when 
we read, "God is a spirit"— but that the word used signifies 
the spirit of a being, the power, influence, will, 
purpose, strength or whatever proceeds from the person. 
The holy Spirit is said to proceed from the 
Father and from the Son as an influence or power, and 
this influence or power in the Church of consecrated 
believers operates in turn upon those with whom they 
mingle. It is always a good and holy spirit or influence, 
and is thus clearly distinct from the spirit of the world, 

R4165 : page 137 

the disposition of the world, the influence of the world, 
the spirit of sin, the spirit of anti -Christ, etc. 

"THE HOLY SPIRIT WAS NOT YET GIVEN" 

Our Lord gently broke to his sorrowing, bewildered 
disciples the news of his prospective departure 
to the Father who sent him. They did not 
ask where, for they believed his word, that he had 
come forth from the Father and that he would return 
to the Father who sent him. But sorrow had 
filled their hearts. What would they do without the 
Lord! How could the promise of the Kingdom ever 
be fulfilled if he went away! Had they been following 
a delusion for three years? They would not doubt the 
Lord, but they were perplexed. Our Lord, therefore, 
explained that if they understood matters properly, it 
would relieve them of much of their distress, as it 
really was to their advantage, in their interest, that he 
should go away. Had he not gone away it would have 
been impossible for the Father to beget them of the 
Spirit and recognize them as sons of God; hence it 
would not have been possible for them ever to be 
more than human beings, ever to become spirit 
beings or partakers of the divine nature, together with 
its glories and honors. Indeed, without the departure 
of our Lord it would have been impossible for them 
to attain even to human restitution, for the entire 
work of salvation, both as respects the Church and 
the world, was dependent upon our Lord's fulfilling the 



demands of justice. On the following day, as the Lamb 

of God, he died for the sin of Adam, which rested 

upon the entire race, and on the third day the Father 

raised him up by his own power. In this great transaction 

on our behalf a most important work was accomplished; 

but the benefits of that work, under the 

divine arrangement, could not come either to the 

Church or to the world, until first our Lord would ascend 

on high and appear in the presence of the Father 

and present the merit of his sacrifice as an oblation on 

behalf of his people. Had Jesus remained with his followers 

all through this age, even as a spirit being (as 

he was with them during the forty days), no one could 

have been begotten of the holy Spirit. It was necessary 

for Christ to ascend and present the merit of his 

sacrifice before we could be accepted and adopted, before 

we could receive the holy Spirit. 

When the apostles received the holy Spirit at 
Pentecost, they said, "This is that which was spoken of 
by the Prophet Joel"— not, This is he who was spoken 
of by the Prophet Joel. They called it a baptism with 
the holy Spirit! A baptism with a person is not a 
conceivable or proper thought; nor could it be a proper 
thought that the holy Spirit as a person is personally 
present in each believer's heart! Whenever we attach 
the thought of personality it implies place. Thus we 
see that God is a spirit, not that God is spirit; but we 
do not speak of the holy Spirit as being separate, as 
though it were a person separate and distinct from the 
Father and from the Son; it is referred to in the 
Scriptures as the Spirit of God, belonging to God, 
emanating from God; a Spirit of Christ, emanating 
from Christ; a Spirit or influence or power 
which is all pervasive, which can exercise itself in any 
place or in any number of places at any time and perform 
any kind of work or mission. How much 
more satisfactory is the true thought respecting the 
holy Spirit than the absurd and unscriptural ones! 
We might remark in this connection that the word 
"him" of verse 7 in the Greek could, with equal 
propriety, be translated "it"— "I will send it unto you" 
—nevertheless, we have no objection whatever to urge 
against the use of the word Him, since this holy Spirit 
or influence is of or from him, the Father. Similarly 
the word "he" in verse 8 could, with equal propriety, 
according to the Greek, be translated "it." 

NOT THE SPIRIT OF THE WORLD 

Among the various false ideas of the operations of 
the holy Spirit is one which claims that the holy 
Spirit as a person has been busy going hither and 
thither all through this Gospel Age convincing people 
of sin and converting them to righteousness. Some go 
so far in the erroneous thought as to tell us that no 
one could be converted from sin unless God's holy 



Spirit miraculously operated upon him. If these 
thoughts approximated the truth in any degree they 
would imply that God alone is responsible for the fact 
that the world is not converted today, because the holy 
Spirit has failed to do its part in converting and 
reproving and convicting. But all this is a serious 
mistake. 

The holy Spirit does not operate at all in the 
hearts of the world; but, as our Lord declares, It shall 
be in you, his disciples, the Spirit of the Father, the 
Spirit or disposition of the Son, the spirit of the truth, 
the spirit of a sane mind, the spirit of holiness to the 
Lord. None of these qualities of the holy Spirit is 
found in the sinful world; they belong to and are intended 
only for the "sanctified in Christ Jesus." The 
power of God operates upon the hearts that are fully 
consecrated to him, energizing them, cleansing them, 
separating them from the spirit of the world and using 
them in the divine service. The spirit of the world is 
the spirit of sin and selfishness; the Spirit of the 
Lord is the spirit of holiness and consecration to the 
divine will. 

"HE WILL REPROVE THE WORLD" 

How, then, will the holy Spirit in you reprove 
them? We answer that all of the Church, begotten of 
the holy Spirit and thus enlightened, are to let their 
light so shine before men that it will reprove the 
world. That which reproves the world is the holiness 

R4166 : page 137 

of the Church. The Spirit of the Lord, the disposition 
of the Lord in his people, brings reproof to those who 
are living in sin. It was so in our Lord's case, as he 
declared. The Father's Spirit was imparted to him in 
this special sense at the time of his baptism; as John 
testified, "I beheld the holy Spirit descending and resting 
upon him and abiding." He received the Father's 
Spirit without measure, without limitation, for, as the 
perfect one, in the image and likeness of God, he could 
receive the Spirit of God in full measure. We, on the 
contrary, imperfect, defective through the fall, can receive 
the Spirit only in limited measure because of our 
defects— some more and some less; but, thank God, it 
is the privilege of each to be more and more filled with 
the holy Spirit and sanctified by it as the days go by. 
Our Lord's light, which he let shine before men, was a 
great one. Our lights are feeble in comparison; but 
we are to emulate our Lord's example, and be more 
and more filled with the spirit of the truth, the light of 

R4166 : page 138 

the truth, and let it shine forth with wisdom upon all 



those who are in range of our influence. 

The effect of this will be three-fold, as stated in 
verses 8-11. 

(1) "It will reprove the world of sin"— that is to 

say, it will make the world conscious of its sinful condition; 

it will show to the world more and more the 

exceeding sinfulness of sin. Many of the world have 

so lost the image of God and are so devoid of conscience 

that they cannot with great distinctness discriminate 

between honesty and dishonesty, between truth 

and falsity, between righteousness and sin. The world 

has been in the habit of measuring itself with itself; 

but now in Christ and his Church the Lord has established 

a new standard for the world; and the Church, 

not only by its words, but also by its actions, is to uphold 

the glorious standards of the Lord's words along 

the lines of justice and love. 

(2) It is not enough that the world be convicted 

of sin; it needs to understand something about righteousness, 

the opposite of sin; that a considerable measure 

of righteousness is possible and that the difficulty 

in attaining it is due to the fallen nature. The world is 

to be convinced that righteousness is the proper standard, 

the only one which God could recognize, and that 

in his wonderful plan he has arranged for eternal life 

to be granted only to the righteous. In this connection 

it is unavoidable that those who give the instruction, 

the spirit-enlightened ones, will find it necessary to 

make clear that no one can come into accord with the 

Father through any works of righteousness of his 

own, but that the forgiveness, the covering for sins 

provided through the merit of Christ's sacrifice is 

necessary. 

(3) The Spirit of the Lord in his people will 
convince their neighbors, all who come within the 
range of their light and their message, that the present 
life is not all that there is, that there is a trial purposed 
in God's arrangement for the whole world of mankind, 
a judgment, a test. Whoever hears this message must 
concede its reasonableness, and it becomes a basis for 
joy and hope to all those who desire eternal life. Such 
as are rightly and deeply exercised by these convictions 
will seek the Lord and his various means of grace in 
the present life that they may also have their 
judgment and trial as part of the Church. But 

such as are not thus exercised or influenced 
are to be instructed through the Church; in 
proportion, however, as they have light or knowledge 
they have responsibility. In God's plan he 
has provided a day of judgment in the future for the 
world, in which all shall have full opportunity of being 
judged, of being tested along the lines of their loyalty 
to the Lord. Nevertheless their conduct in the present 
life has to do with that future judgment or trial. In 
proportion as they may disobey their conscience and 
fail to follow the leadings of the truth in the present 



time, they will have stripes, difficulties to overcome in 
the future, and to whatever extent they now seek to 
live in accord with righteousness they will lay up for 
themselves a blessing which shall assist them in that 
day of judgment. 

"BECAUSE THEY BELIEVED NOT" 

The holy Spirit of truth in the Church will make 
known to the world that their continuance in the attitude 
of sinners, "children of wrath," is because they do 
not believe in and accept of Christ and his meritorious 
sacrifice for sin. The holy Spirit in the Church 
will make known to the world that there is such a 
thing as righteousness, an imputed righteousness which 
has been secured by our Lord Jesus through his sacrifice, 
which he presented before the Father. The 
holy Spirit in the Church will instruct the world that 
the present order of things cannot continue, that a new 
order of things will be ushered in at the second advent 
of our Lord, as he has already redeemed the world, 
thus securing the legal right to dispossess Satan, the 
prince of the present order of evil. 

"HE WILL SHOW YOU THINGS TO COME" 

Our Lord prepared his followers for a still larger 
amount of instruction after his ascension than they 
had received from him during his presence. He explains 
that the necessity for this was their unpreparedness 
until they should be endued with power from on 
high. Until this they would be natural men, and, as 
the Apostle points out, "The natural man receiveth not 
the things of the Spirit of God, neither can he know 
them, because they are spiritually discerned." This is 
the explanation, then, of why our Lord Jesus did not 
present as deep teachings along spiritual lines as did 
some of the apostles. It was not inability on his part 
to present them, but those truths would have been 
meat out of season to his disciples, which might have 
choked them, injured them. Hence the deeper things 
of our Lord's teachings were stated considerably in 
parabolic form, which would not hurt them at the time 
and which later they would come to appreciate and 
understand. Thus he said again, "I have told you 
earthly things and ye believed not [are unable to receive 
them], how would you believe if I told you of 
heavenly things?"— John 3:12. 

But the spirit of truth, when it shall come, will 
guide you into all truth, yet it will be only a channel 
and not an authority, for it will make known to you 
various features of the divine plan and these will include 
things not yet made manifest to you, but which 
in due time will be brought to your attention through 
the Word and through the influence of the holy 
Spirit. I shall be glorified by this holy Spirit, for it 



will be my things that will be shown unto you, for all 
things that the Father hath are mine; therefore, said 
I, that he [it] shall take of mine and shall show them 
unto you. Note in this statement the prominence of the 
Father. All things are of the Father, but the Father 
hath made the Son joint-heir with him, his associate, 
and nothing is said to belong to the holy Spirit, because 
it is merely the divine channel or agency through 
which communications, blessings, instructions, etc., will 
be communicated. The holy Spirit is not a person, but 
the spirit or influence or power of the Almighty God 
and his everlasting Son, our Lord. For a full discussion 
of this subject see SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Vol. V., 
Chap. VIII. 

"GIVE YOU ANOTHER COMFORTER" 

Our Golden Text is beautiful, helpful. Indeed, 
our Lord explains that the holy Spirit as a comforting 
influence, as a guide, as an instructor and helper to the 
Lord's people in the narrow way would be a gift from 
the Father. This agrees with the Apostle's statement 
in the record of the Pentecostal blessing. Explaining 

R4166 : page 139 

the matter, the Apostle Peter said that our Lord, having 
been exalted to the right hand of divine power, received 
this holy Spirit, power, from the Father and 
shed it forth or sprayed it forth upon his followers at 
Pentecost. These descriptions fit well to the right view 
of the holy Spirit, but are very much out of line with 
the wrong view, that the holy Spirit is a person. How 
could a person be sprayed or shed forth! How could 
one equal in authority pray to another that a 
third one equal to either of them should be shed 
forth as a gift! The inconsistency of the error is very 
manifest as soon as our eyes open to its falsity. But 
how beautiful is the true thought; that as soon as our 
Lord Jesus had appeared before the Father as our Advocate 
and had presented at the Mercy Seat the merit 
of his sacrifice on our behalf, the Father was well 
pleased to grant his holy Spirit, his holy influence and 
power upon us, and adopt us into his family and treat 
us as sons! 

How precious is the thought that the Pentecostal 
blessing was not merely for those who received it, but 
for the entire Church, as shown in the type! The kings, 
as well as the priests, in the olden times were anointed, 
set apart to special service, and Christ and his Church 
are the true kings and the true priests of the Melchizedec 
order, through whose ministries as kings and 
priests all the families of the earth will be blessed. Our 
Lord is the Head, we are his members in particular. 
The coming of the holy Spirit upon him to fit and 
prepare him to be the King, to fit and prepare him to 



be the Priest of the Melchizedec order, was symbolized 
in the type by the anointing of oil. Thus the 
Prophet speaks of this anointing as being poured upon 
Aaron's head and running down his beard even unto 
the skirts of his garments. This, as we see, represents 
the adoption of the holy Spirit, which 
came upon our Lord Jesus the Head at his baptism, 
and which was shed forth at Pentecost upon all 
those who were ready and waiting to be accepted as 
his members, and we who since have believed on him 
through their word have come into membership in the 
same Body and have received of the same anointing; 
and "this anointing which ye received of him abideth 
in you," and shall be in you. This anointing did not 
represent a person, but an influence and blessing. 
What a satisfaction, what a comfort has come to 
the Lord's people through their privilege of being used 
by him and adopted into his family by the begetting of 
the holy Spirit, the adoption of the holy Spirit, the 
anointing of the holy Spirit, the holy influence, the 

R4167 : page 139 

blessing of the Father and of the Son, guiding our 
judgments, guiding our hearts, opening to us the 
Scriptures, causing our hearts to burn within us as we 
are brought to a still greater appreciation of the 
lengths and breadths and heights and depths of our 
Father's glorious plan of salvation for ourselves and 
all the families of the earth! 

This abiding was not to be a temporary matter, 
for a day, a month, a year, but to the end of the age, 
age-lasting, for the entire period. How glad we are 
that this is so, and how blessed are the instructions 
and guidance which we have enjoyed! Truly, 
as our Lord said, the holy Spirit shows us things 
to come, and explains to us things that are past. How 
many of our blessings are along the line of appreciation 
of coming things— the Millennial Kingdom, the 
times of restitution, the uplifting and strengthening 
of all the families of the earth! 



R4167 : page 139 

OUR LORD BETRAYED AND DENIED 

-JOHN 18:l-27.-MAY 17.- 

Golden Text:— "Jesus said unto them, The Son of man 
shall be betrayed into the hands of men."— Matt. 17:22. 

TODAY'S lesson constitutes one of the saddest 
chapters in history. It reveals to us the depths 
of human ingratitude, selfishness, weakness, 



and fear to a remarkable degree. Nevertheless, it is a 

most helpful lesson to those who are in the right attitude 

of heart to receive it, because it warns against 

weaknesses more or less common to all and against 

dangers to which all are exposed. It emphasizes our 

Lord's words to the twelve apostles, words which are applicable 

also to all of his followers— "Watch and pray, 

lest ye enter into temptation." And in respect to the 

Apostle Peter's experience and our Lord's magnanimity 

in dealing with him, the lesson gives encouragement 

to others who, like Peter, have strayed from the 

right path unwisely. 

To get the proper bearings of this lesson we go 
back to the early hours of the same evening when Jesus 
and his chosen twelve met to eat the Passover Supper. 
For three years our Lord had been training those 
twelve men, preparing them to be his representatives 
in the world, his mouthpieces to the Church. 
They had seen his power, known his teachings and 
themselves had exercised the power of healing and 
casting out devils, his power operating through them. 
He had been on the alert to instruct them as to the need 
of humility; that they must become as little children, 
simple, earnest and obedient in order to be fitted for 
the Kingdom which they were called to share with him. 
On several occasions he had been obliged to call to 
their attention the necessity for meekness and humility, 
as he perceived the spirit of ambition and rivalry 
amongst them. On this last evening which he would 
spend with them in the flesh he had noted with regret 
that when assembling for the Passover Supper they 
had neglected the usual hospitalities of the time not 
only toward each other but also toward him, their 
Leader, their Master whom they professed to believe 
was the special Son of God, the Messiah. They had 
neglected to wash one another's feet and his feet, a 
custom, almost a necessity to comfort in that dusty 
land, where sandals are worn instead of shoes. 

"I, YOUR LORD-SERVANT OF ALL" 

Forgetful of his own weight of care and sorrow, and 
anxious for the welfare of his followers, Jesus improved 
the opportunity to teach them all a great lesson in humility. 
He took water in a basin and a towel and did 
the feet-washing, while the disciples, ashamed, confused, 

R4167 : page 140 

knew not what to say or do under the circumstances, 
except Peter, who protested that he could not 
thus have the Master act as his servant; but when Jesus 
explained that there was a symbolical meaning to the 
matter, Peter also was anxious for the washing. Lest 
they should fail to get the lesson, our Lord, after he had 
finished, explained it, saying, If I, your Lord and Master, 



have washed your feet, have displayed humility and willingness 

to serve any of you in the most menial capacity, 

you surely ought to be willing to follow the same example 

with one another, and to perform the most menial 

service for one another, even to the extent of washing 

one another's feet, as opportunity may offer. 

It was not long before this that Jesus, talking to 
the apostles, told them plainly that he would be delivered 
up to the authorities and that the disciples would all 
forsake him. This seemed a hard statement to the apostles; 
an intimation that Jesus lacked confidence in 
them, and it was the impulsive Peter who spoke up 
and declared that although all should deny the Lord 
and forsake him he would never do so. It was then 
that our Lord prophetically told him that before the 
second cock crowing at night he would deny his Master, 
and assured him that Satan desired to capture 
him, but that he was praying for him that his faith 
would not fail. Surely these statements were of value 
to the Apostle in his hour of temptation; surely they 
helped to put all the apostles on guard against what 
was to be expected. 

"LORD, IS IT I? LORD, IS IT I?" 

Proceeding further in his cautioning our Lord 
declared, "Verily I say unto you, one of you shall betray 
me!" What consternation must have prevailed! 
Could it be that amongst those who were so highly favored 
of the Lord and so long associated with him 
there could be one so base as to deny his Lord? 

Let us not lose the force of this lesson; let us remember 
that the Lord's disciples down through the 
Gospel Age have been as the Apostle here declares of 
the twelve, "Men of like passions with you," men from 
the common walks of life, neither above nor below the 
average standard of human imperfection! Let us remember 
that the same Lord who cautioned those 
twelve respecting the trials coming upon them is still 
mindful of his Church, his flock, and we may suppose 
especially mindful of all who are in any prominent 
place of responsibility amongst the brethren. He still 
guards us, warns us, seeks to keep us from falling under 
the power of the Adversary. He still prays for his 
faithful, those who at heart are loyal to him, but who 
have weaknesses of the flesh which are liable to make 
their temptations more severe. As our Lord's interest 
in and efforts for the apostles increased as they neared 
the special hour of their temptation, so we may be sure 
that it is also with respect to his Church in general 
today, when the last members of his Body, the "feet of 
him," are approaching the crucial hour, "The hour of 
temptation that cometh upon the whole world to try 
them. "--Rev. 3:10. 

The Master does not speak to us in audible tones, 
as he did to those twelve, but has he not spoken to us 



with equal force and earnestness? Do not the words 
and actions of the Lord to those disciples come to us 
today with the same lesson and with as much force as 
they bore to them? Have we not, in addition to these 
examples and warnings, special declarations of the 
Scriptures respecting the end of the age? Did not our 
Lord, in the parable of the suitable and unsuitable fish, 
explain to us that in the end of this Gospel Age there 
would be a separation of those in the Gospel net? 
Does he not again in the parable of the wheat and tares 
tell us of the separation due to take place in the harvest 
time of this Gospel Age, when only the true and the 
ripe wheat will be gathered into the barn? Does he 
not through the Apostle forewarn us that in the 
end of the age perilous times shall come because men 
will be lovers of their own selves— selfish, ambitious- 
lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God? (2 Tim. 3:1,2.) 
Does he not tell us that it would be at the time 
in the divine plan when God would send [permit] strong 
delusions, so that all might believe a lie who shall not 
have received the truth in the love of it and with zeal? 
—2 Thess. 2:11. 

"THE HOUR OF TEMPTATION THAT SHALL TRY" 

Does he not also tell us that the temptations of 
this hour will be such as would, if it were possible, deceive 
the "very Elect," but that in their case it will not 
be possible because of their love, their zeal and the 
consequent blessings and privileges that divine favor 
will provide for them ! And if to Peter special encouragement 
was given— "I have prayed for thee that thy 
faith fail not"— have we not a full equivalent of this in 
the Scriptural assurance, "Lo, I am with you alway," 
"My grace is sufficient for thee; my strength is 
made perfect in your weakness"? (Matt. 28:30; 2 Cor. 12:9.) 
Surely we have much advantage every way over 
the apostles in their trial, and this advantage is emphasized 
in the fact that their trial came upon them 
before their anointing with the holy Spirit, whereas 
our testings come to us at the time we are of the anointed 
Body. When we now look out into the future 
and hear the message, "The morning cometh, but a 
night also" (Isa. 21:12), we may well be forewarned as 
to what to expect in that short night of trouble which 
will affect the consecrated followers before it reaches 
the world in general. We must expect in this hour of 
trial that "a thousand shall fall at thy side and ten 
thousand at thy right hand, but it shall not come nigh 
thee"; yet we must remember that this promise is limited 
to the class specified, to those who have made the 
Lord, even the Most High, their refuge and habitation; 
for no evil can come nigh their dwelling place. (Psa. 91:7,9.) 
Therefore, dearly beloved, putting on the 
whole armor of God that we may be able to stand in 
this evil day, we will need to watch unto prayer for 



ourselves and for those over whom the holy Spirit hath 
made us overseers, that we may feed the flock of God, 
which he hath purchased with the blood of his own 
Son. --Acts 20:28, Diaglott. 
As the eating of a meal together was a pledge of 

R4168 :page 141 

faithfulness, so for the Master to dip a special sop was 
a special mark of favor, and this was given to Judas 
at the supper to indicate the one who would betray the 
Lord. We can better imagine than describe how the 
apostles, in various tones, asked the Lord, "Is it I?" 
and how Judas likewise asked the same question! We 
can imagine the look of our Lord's eye as he gave him 
the sop, saying in action and look, Judas, why do you 
resist the loving kindnesses which I have bestowed 
upon you? You have professed to be my friend and 
disciple; I surely have done the part of a friend toward 
you. That glance and that sop should have overwhelmed 
the selfish Judas, but as the mercy of the Lord, 
in the taking away of the plagues from Pharaoh had 
so much the more hardened Pharaoh's heart, so every 
additional manifestation of our Lord's humility and 
kindness seems to have had the effect of hardening the 
heart of Judas. In answer to our Lord's glance and 
sop Judas, so far from repenting, was more embittered, 
more determined to carry out his program. It shone 
in his eye; our Lord read his thoughts and answered 
in the words, "What thou doest, do quickly." 

Let us not lose the lesson in its application and 
bearing upon the Lord's people of today. If any 
amongst the consecrated are cultivating selfishness 
and personal ambition, they are preparing themselves 
for such a termination as that of Judas. The influence 
of the spirit they are cultivating will lead them further 
and further from sympathy with the Lord's cause and 
the faithful brethren until, like Judas, they shall be 
ready to sell the truth for a little personal advantage. 
And when such a condition of heart has been reached 
by those who were once enlightened and have tasted of 
the good Word of God and the powers of the age to 
come, no power will hinder them from going to the 
limit of their evil course. Their minds become so poisoned 
against the truth that the very sops of favor animate 
them the more toward evil. As in Judas' case we 
read that then Satan entered into him, so with a similar 
class here; we may expect the Adversary to get fuller 
power and control over them. 

THE LESSONS OF GETHSEMANE 

One would think that the impressive lessons 
of that night would have so filled the minds of the 
apostles and made them so alert that sleep would have 
been far from their eyes. But not so; they scarcely 



understood how to take the Master's words; he had 

said so many remarkable things which they did not comprehend; 

it seemed so incomprehensible that he who 

had come to be the Messiah and reign should be betrayed 

and crucified, and that they whom he had promised 

should sit with him in his throne should all forsake 

him and flee. Hence the repeated instruction 

that they should watch and pray made little impression. 

Even the three special friends of Jesus, the ones whom 

he made his special confidants and took with him to 

the Mount of Transfiguration on another special occasion 

without the others— even these three slumbered, 

except as from time to time the Lord visited them and 

awakened them and they noted certain incidents which 

they recorded for us. 

"LEST ANY ROOT OF BITTERNESS SPRING UP" 

How is it now? The night of trouble nearing, the 
hour of trial that shall try all that dwell upon the face of 
the whole earth coming close, and with the many warnings 
of the Master through the Word that we should watch 
and pray lest we enter into temptation!— how is it with 
us? Alas! many of those who, like Peter, James and 
John, have been specially favored of the Lord, especially 
near to him, fail to realize the importance of the time 
in which we are living, fail to realize that the foretold 
temptations are about to come upon them and that, like 
Peter, they will be in great danger of being swept away, 
sifted out from amongst the Lord's faithful. 

We can imagine our Lord's condition to some extent. 
His great hour of trial was upon him; he realized 
it to the full; it meant not only that his own faithfulness, 
past and present and on the day following, 
would decide respecting his loyalty to the Father and 
his right to obtain the high reward of glory, honor and 
immortality, but it meant additionally that the interests 
of the whole world of mankind were in the balance! 
Victory would mean eventually the deliverance of 
all the prisoners in bondage to sin and death; failure 
would mean the loss of everything! Can we 
wonder that his soul was exceeding sorrowful, and 
that in his intensity of feeling bloody perspiration 
oozed from his pores? Ah, dear Master! Well was it 
written of him, "Of the people there was none with me." 
Even his most intimate and most beloved disciples 
failed to appreciate the conditions and to render him 
the sympathetic aid which he craved. What would 
those disciples afterward not have given to have had 
back the opportunity of ministering to their Lord in 
his hour of trial! What a privilege they let slip ! There 
is a lesson here for us also, for although the Master is 
not in the flesh and will suffer no more, some of his 
members are still in the flesh, some who must suffer 
with him if they would reign with him. Our sufferings 
are not all just like those of the Master, nor are they 



just the same with each of us; each has his own experiences 
to prove, to test, to fit, to polish him that he may 
be made meet for the Master's use. Have we, each for 
the other, that sympathy, that yearning love which 
would lead us to help one another and to bear one 
another's burdens and thus to fulfil the Law of Christ, 
the Law of Love? or have we the Judas spirit to injure? 
or have we the spirit of slothful indifference and 
lack of appreciation which would lead us to slumber 
while the interests of others of the Body are at stake, 
while the brethren are suffering and are in trial? Our 
practical answer to these questions the Lord is looking 
for, and his love and his favor will be upon those who 
manifest most of his Spirit. To us much has been 
given, in that the hour of testing along these lines 
comes to us after we have received the anointing of the 
holy Spirit. Of us correspondingly more will be expected 

R4168 : page 142 

—"We ought also to lay down our lives for the 
brethren." 

AN ANGEL MINISTERED UNTO HIM 

When our Lord in his agony prayed the Father, "If 
it be possible let this cup pass from me," we are not to 
suppose that he meant the cup of death, for he had already 
explained to his disciples that this death was 
necessary, and that he had come into the world for this 
very purpose. What, then, was the cup which he asked 
might pass from him? We reply that quite probably 
he referred to the particular ignominy which would be 
associated with his crucifixion; which would attach to 
his execution as a blasphemer against God and between 
two thieves. Another Scripture gives us to understand 
that the severity of our Lord's anguish was 
in respect to his own faithfulness, upon which depended 
his resurrection. If he failed in even one little item, 
one jot or tittle of the Law, his own life would have 
been condemned and forfeited as much as was Adam's 
and as a result he would have had no resurrection and no 
future life, and the whole work, for which he had come 
into the world, would have been a failure. The Scripture 
we refer to says, "Who in the days of his flesh offered 
up strong crying and tears unto him who was 
able to save him from [out of] death. And he was 
heard in respect to the thing which he feared." Although 
none of his disciples gathered around him to assure 
him that he had been without spot and blemish and 
that every act of his life had been in full conformity to 
the divine will, God more than made up to him such 
encouragement by sending specially an angel, who 
ministered unto him, who served him in respect to the 
thing which he feared, who therefore must have given 
him assurance from the Father that he had been faithful, 



that he was approved. 

On the strength of that assurance our Lord arose firm, 
calm, strong for all the coming events of that night and 
the next day up to the moment of his death. And so 
it should be with us: Properly there should be some 
anxiety in respect to the future; the Lord will not be 
pleased if we are careless as respects the matter of 
making our calling and election sure. We are to appreciate 
life, and particularly the life more abundant which 
has been promised to us if we prove faithful. We are 
so to appreciate this that our eyes will be toward the 
Lord for such ministrations of his love and favor as 
will give us assurance that we are still his and that the 
glorious hopes and promises are still ours. And his 
assurances or comfort may not come through earthly 
ministrations; the Lord himself will see to it that 
every member of his Body who is deeply earnest and 
anxious on the subject will have the proper witness of 
the Spirit, the proper testimony to his heart of his continued 
acceptance and faithfulness. 

JESUS BETRAYED WITH A KISS 

Treachery is universally despised and properly 
so, hence Satan, the traitor to God, and Judas, the 
traitor to our Lord Jesus, stand out prominently as representatives 
of that condition of mind and heart which 
should be shunned by all, the condition of heart which 
the Lord declares merits and shall have the Second 
Death, everlasting destruction. From the various 
Gospel records we find that Judas, leaving the company 
of the Lord and the eleven apostles, went again to the 
Chief Priests, with whom he had already been in conference. 
He finished the bargain and became the guide 
of a band of temple guards or temple policemen and 
their followers. These, armed with their clubs or maces, 
took with them lights needed for the searching of the 
foliage, although the moon was at its full. From the 

R4169 : page 142 

standpoint of the rulers the midnight hour was the 
most favorable because a large concourse of people 
then in Jerusalem for the Feast of Passover included 
many who knew Jesus and had been witnesses of his 
miracles and his arrest in day time might have led to a 
tumult. Our Lord probably went to the Garden because 
it belonged to a friend and because in the open his disciples 
would have a better opportunity for escape from 
arrest; though it does not appear that there was any 
special endeavor to make an arrest, except that mentioned 
by Mark of a young man who followed with the 
crowd as they led Jesus away and who had on a long, 
loose garment, and when they laid hold upon it he fled 
from them naked. This is supposed to have been John 
Mark, the writer of the Gospel of Mark, and that he 



lived on the premises of which the Gethsemane Garden 
was a part. 

Our Lord's agony, prayer and comforting at an 
end, he returned to the apostles, saying, "Sleep on now, 
and take your rest." Your opportunity for watching 
with me or speaking a word of comfort has passed; 
your opportunity for waking your own hearts and 
minds to prayer as a safeguard against coming trials 
and testings is past. Behold the band of those who 
will arrest me! A little ahead of the band came Judas, 
who indicated the Master by the traitorous kiss, which 
John, for very shame, did not record. Judas, finding his 
deception recognized as the Master said, "Betrayest thou 
the Son of man with a kiss?" left him and joined the 
band who had come for his arrest, while Jesus, coming 
out of the cover into the open, said, "Whom seek ye?" 
After he had answered their reply, saying, "I am he, 
let these my friends go their way," we read that the 
men went backward and fell on the ground. This was 
doubtless the result of a power our Lord exercised 
upon them, the power by which he might have resisted 
them entirely had he so desired. What he did was sufficient 
to show them and his apostles that his surrender 
was not one of necessity, but that the Father's will 
might be done. 

Awhile before Jesus had said that they should 
have some swords, and, finding that there were two, he 
said they were enough. The Apostle Peter was evidently 
the bearer of one of these and as the armed men 
approached the Lord, Peter used the sword and smote 
off the ear of Malchus, the servant of the High Priest. 
This incident was evidently of the Lord's intention to 
show that his surrender was not because of cowardice 
on the part of the disciples or himself. It also furnished 
the opportunity of healing an enemy by our 
Lord's touch and the opportunity of saying to Peter, 

R4169 :page 143 

"Put up thy sword; they that take to the sword shall 
perish by the sword"; in other words, My followers are 
not to fight with carnal weapons, my Kingdom is not 
to be established in this manner. 

Annas had been the High Priest for a number of 
years and had been followed in the office by several of 
his sons and now his son-in-law, Caiaphas, filled the 
position. Nevertheless, Annas in a certain sense was 
recognized and hence our Lord was first taken before 
him. Annas questioned him but did not attempt a 
judicial investigation. This was had before Caiaphas 
and apparently in another part of the palace of the 
High Priest. 

It was apparently while our Lord was being examined 
by Annas that Peter, who warmed himself at the 
fire, was questioned three times respecting his identity 
with our Lord as one of his followers, and three times 



he denied and directly the cock crowing began. Peter 
heard it, and our Lord, while being led from the presence 
of Annas to the judgment seat of Caiaphas, looked 
upon Peter. What a sermon there was in the glance 
toward Peter! He who had boasted of his courage that 
he never would deny the Lord had failed. How much 
weaker he was than he had supposed! How the Lord's 
prophecy had come true, Before the second cock crowing 
thou shalt deny me thrice! He went out and wept 
bitterly, sick at heart and thoroughly ashamed of himself, 
resolving, no doubt, that he would be less boastful 
in the future and do more of the watching and 
praying which the Master had enjoined. 

We know not how close parallels to some of these 
experiences may lie before some of the Lord's dear 
people now. But let us hope that if any of us should 
come so sadly short of our own hopes and privileges 
that the Master would not only pray for us, as he did for 
Peter, but that he would turn upon us also his glances 
of reproof, of chiding, and also such glances as would 
remind us of his sympathy and love that we might not 
be overwhelmed with our own sense of weakness and 
shame, but that our repentance, unlike that of Judas, 
should be like that of Peter, sincere and acceptable to 
the Lord. 



page 143 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V. (E) 

Questions on Study II.— The Author of the Atonement. 

JUNE 7 

(29) Examine the tenth proof-text— Isa. 6:1— and 
demonstrate what is and what is not its true signification. 
P.47, last two pars., and P. 48. 

(30) How should we view Isa. 8:13,14? P. 49, par. 1. 

(31) Proof-text number 12 is Psalm 110. Examine 
it and demonstrate the truth respecting its teachings. 
P.49, pars. 2,3,4. 

(32) Since our Lord Jesus is styled the "Great 
Teacher" and since it is written, "All thy children shall 
be taught of Jehovah" (Isa. 54:13), is or is not this a 
proof that our Lord Jesus is there referred to as Jehovah 
by name? Pp. 50-54. 

JUNE 14 

(33) Find and read one or more Scripture texts containing 
the word Trinity. 



(34) Is it supposable that the doctrine of Trinity is 
taught in the Bible and yet no such word can be found 
in it? 

(35) Quote the strongest text in the Bible which 
seemingly implies that there are three Gods instead of 
one. Compare I John 5:7 with Deuteronomy 5:6-11. 

(36) What is the teaching of Trinitarianism— that 
there is one God who sometimes assumes three distinct 
manifestations, or three Gods equal in glory and honor? 
Did you ever know anybody able or willing to give a 
positive answer to this question? P. 54, par. 1. 

(37) Explain the force of the Trinity doctrine in 
the passage, "The head of the woman is the man, the 
head of the man is Christ and the head of Christ is 
God." (I Cor. 1 1:3.) P.55, par. 1. 

(38) What objection can be urged against I John 5:7? 
Does it teach three Gods in one person, or three 
distinct Gods? 

JUNE 21 

(39) Were the translators of our Common Version 
Bible to blame for the insertion of the spurious text? 
Why not? P. 56, par. 1. 

(40) Do scholars of all denominations acknowledge 
that the greater part of I John 5:7 is not a part of the 
original Bible, but a spurious addition without right 
or authority? P. 56, par. 1. 

(41) Which words in that text are spurious? 

(42) Would the passage make as good sense or 
better if the interpolation were omitted? Read the 
passage corrected. P. 56, par. 2. 

(43) Mention some of the versions of the New Testament 
that omit these words and cite the comment by 

the "Improved Version," also Lang's comment. P.57. 

(44) Name some prominent Bible scholars who 
have pronounced the passage a spurious interpolation. 
P.57, last par. 

(45) Quote Dean Alford's words. P. 58, par. 1. 

(46) Quote Dr. C. Tischendorf on the subject. P. 58, 
par. 2. 

(47) Quote Prof. T. B. Wolsey. P.58, par. 3. 

(48) Quote Dr. Adam Clarke on this passage. 
P.58, par. 4. 

(49) Quote John Wesley on this subject. P.58, last par. 

(50) Why was there more excuse for misunderstanding 
on this matter a century or two ago than now? 

P.58, last par. 

JUNE 28 

(51) In what sense is there a unity or oneness between 
the Father and the Son? P. 59, par. 1. 

(52) Are the Father and the Son spoken of in the 
Scriptures as equal, in the sense that neither has nor 
ever had a superiority over the other? P. 59, par. 1. 



(53) What is implied in the terms Father and Son? 
P.60, par. 1. 

(54) Are all things of the Son and all things by 

the Father, or vice versa, and what does this statement 
imply? P.60, par. 1. 

(55) The doctrine of the Trinity is called a mystery. 
Why? In what sense is it mysterious? P.60, par. 2. 

(56) Would Satan over-honor Christ? Why, then, 
would he propagate this error? and what has he effected? 
P.61,pars. 1,2. 

(57) How old is the error on this subject, and how 
did it get so firm a footing in Christendom? Pp.62, 63. 



page 145 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXIX MAY 15 No. 10 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

The Editor's British Tour 147 

The Memorial Celebration 148 

Why Our Lord was Crucified 149 

"They Condemned the Just One" 150 

A Look at the Crucified One 151 

Seven Words from the Cross 152 

"It is Finished!" 153 

Broken-Hearted Literally 153 

"He That Liveth and was Dead" 154 

"He Descended into Hell" 155 

Cemeteries— Sleeping-Places 155 

Resurrection Hopes and Joys 156 

"Become the First-Fruits" 156 

"Preached to the Spirits in Prison" 158 

page 146 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 



All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R4164 : page 146 

NEW POSTAL REGULATIONS 



A new postoffice ruling should be known to all our readers. 
Hereafter newspapers and magazines will not be allowed 
to keep on their lists the addresses of expired subscriptions 
—except for a few months: semi-monthlies, such as the 
WATCH TOWER, three months; quarterlies, such as the Old 
Theology, six months. If your papers stop coming you will 
know the reason why. 

Subscription lists hereafter must contain the addresses 
of only those who (1) have paid their money, or (2) have 
definitely asked for credit, or (3) whose subscriptions have 
been paid for them at their request. The majority of our subscriptions 
come under either the first or second of these rules, 
and we here remark that the publishers are at liberty to extend 
a credit for another and another year, if the subscriber so 
requests, but not otherwise. As for the third class; these subscriptions 
of the Lord's poor are paid for them gladly by 
Tract Fund donations of those more favored financially. But 
do not forget that these also under the new regulations must 
write us yearly requesting this. Look at the address label on 
your paper and note thereon the time of expiration of your 
subscription and act accordingly. We prefer to have the "Lord's 
poor" write us in May each year. As paid subscriptions come 
at the close of the year this helps to divide the office labors. 
Remember that we like to have on our List the names of all 
the interested. Those who donate to the Fund which pays your 
subscription are delighted to have the privilege of thus serving 
the fellow-members of the Body of Christ. Therefore let 
no feeling of false modesty hinder you from making request 
under these terms if you need so to do. You can no 
more afford to do without the spiritual food than to starve 
naturally. 



R4169 : page 147 

THE EDITOR'S BRITISH TOUR 

Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse. 

TO THE DEAR BIBLE HOUSE FAMILY, 
ALLEGHENY, PA. 

As my train left the Pittsburgh depot your waving 
handkerchiefs greeted my eyes, assuring me of your 
Christian love— and that it would go with me. And the 
echo of your songs stays with me still— "God be with you 
till we meet again" and "Blest be the tie that binds our 
hearts in Christian love." Your parting greetings and 
songs commingled with my prayers for you and all the 
dear Israel of God, and my thanksgivings to the Great 
Giver of all good beautifully blended into sweet 
dreams and refreshing sleep. 

The next day, Sunday, April 5th, we reached Lynchburg, 
Va., where we were met at the depot by about two 
dozen of the dear brethren and sisters of that vicinity, 
and soon we were at the Opera House, where a great 
throng came to hear "The Bible Defended." About 
1,000 were present, and it is said several hundred were 
turned away. We had close attention, and have reason 
to hope that some received a blessing. 

The evening meeting was not advertised, and the 
audience, therefore, was chiefly of the interested— including 
some who had come from Norfolk, Suffolk, 
Richmond and other cities. The discourse on that occasion 
you already have in the Dispatch and other 
papers publishing the sermons. 

We left at 2.10 Monday morning, and reaching 
Washington City were surprised to find a delegation 
representing the Washington ecclesia in the depot, expecting 
us to change cars there and bent on having us 
take breakfast with them, which we did. The hour 
spent in their company was a delightful one, reminding 
us afresh of what are the usual characteristics 
of the "Church of the First-born"— everywhere, 
viz., love and zeal for the Lord and for all who are his. 

Six hours later we were with the New York friends. 
A delegation of four had been appointed to meet us 
and greet us in the name of the Church, and to provide 
for our entertainment. Assuring them that such kindness 
was neither expected nor deserved, we nevertheless 
were persuaded not to spoil their pleasure by declining 
the arrangement, and accepted it most heartily. 
Their arrangements included an evening discourse at 
Judson Memorial Church. We spoke to an audience of 
about 600 on the significance of the Passover Memorial, 
from the text, "Except ye eat the flesh and drink the 
blood of the Son of man, ye have no life in you." 



After the service we greeted the congregation at 
the door. About one-half of the number were friends 
of the Truth— of New York, Brooklyn and nearby cities 
as far east as Boston and as far south as Philadelphia. 
The next morning about forty of these bade us 
"Good-bye" again on the pier, and sang "God be with 
you till we meet again." These many demonstrations 
of Christian love by the dear friends everywhere have 
an humbling effect, as we feel our unworthiness of so 
much of their kind attention; and it has a stimulating 
effect, too, in that it encourages us to endeavor still 
more earnestly to attain the perfect ideals set before us 
in the Scriptures. 

Our first day on this great vessel has been a delightful 
one, clear, sunshiny, cool, bracing. We have 
rested, read letters brought from home, tried to get 
acquainted, and above all have enjoyed sweet fellowship 
with the Lord— allowing our heart to overflow 
with thankfulness on our own behalf and on behalf of 
all the dear Church of Christ, especially those who had 
asked to be remembered in prayer. With a hot salt water 
bath we will retire, wishing you all "Good night!" and 
visiting you in memory as we pray for you each by 
name and remember what we know of your special 
needs. 

At 3 p.m., April 13th, we reached Plymouth, our 
landing place. Our journey across the ocean was 
rather uneventful— apparently nobody seriously seasick. 
We enjoyed a splendid rest, exercised moderately, 
slept well and ate with good relish— our zest 
being enhanced by a large bouquet of handsome flowers 
beside our plate, the kind gift of our dear Brother 
Pierson as we started. Brother Zink's company has 
also added to our enjoyment of the trip. How gracious 
are the provisions of our Father, "who daily loadeth us 
with mercies." "Praise the Lord, O my soul, and forget 
not all his benefits." 
England. 

Our steamer, "Kaiser der Grosse," was some eight 
hours late at Plymouth, England, where we took the 
Express for London, arriving there safely at 9 p.m. 

R4170 :page 148 

and finding eighteen dear brethren and sisters at the 
depot waiting to welcome us. And a hearty welcome 
we received there and also at the Society's depot, 
where a goodly company gathered. Short speeches 
were made welcoming us, and we were handed as a 
donation for the Tract Fund a draft for L.230 ($1,1 15), 
a thank-offering to the Lord. We were assured that 
our objection to collections and solicitations had been 
duly kept in mind, and that the sum was purely a voluntary 
one, the result of mere suggestions passed 
amongst the brethren of the British Isles, and that the 
amount but feebly expressed the sentiments of the givers, 



and that it would have been much larger had not 
many of the dear friends already undertaken all they 
were financially able in connection with the rent of 
halls and advertising for the meetings we were to address. 
We acknowledged our surprise, as well as our 
deep appreciation of so practical a demonstration of 
the loving zeal thus manifested. We appropriated 
to ourself the Apostle's word, assuring them that we 
had not come seeking a gift, yet we had much pleasure 
in accepting it, well knowing that the voluntary sacrifices 
thus undertaken for the Truth's sake would be to 
the Lord a sacrifice of sweet savor acceptable through 
our Redeemer, and that corresponding blessings 
would flow to the givers. 

The following night we celebrated the Memorial 
Supper with 450 friends from London and vicinity, as 
elsewhere reported. We had a most blessed season of 
communion with our Lord and each other. 

Wednesday, April 15th, we arrived at Bristol, our 
train being met at the depot by about twenty of the 
dear friends, who gave us most cordial greetings. We 
were the guest of Brother Ford and his family and were 
treated most hospitably. In the afternoon we addressed 
the interested to the number of about 100, which included 
probably 50 from neighboring cities. The evening 
service was for the public specially. It was held 
in the Y.M.C.A. chapel. Nearly 1000 were present and 
close attention was given us on "The Overthrow of 
Satan's Empire." 

We left Thursday morning, speeded on our way by 
the voices of the friends on the railway platform singing, 
"God be with you till we meet again." Our train 
stopped at Gloucester, and on the platform we soon 
found dear ones anxious to grasp our hand and content 
that we had passed by their request for a meeting because 
such seemed the providence of God. At Birmingham 
we had a change of cars and found about a dozen of 
the friends waiting to greet us and to show us our other 
train and to tell us that they were preparing for our 
meetings with them later on. 

Yours in the bonds of love divine, C. T. RUSSELL. 



R4170 : page 148 

THE MEMORIAL CELEBRATION 

FOR the first time in thirty-five years the Editor 
celebrated the Memorial Supper apart from the 
Allegheny congregation. But we had a blessed 
season of fellowship and communion of the holy Spirit 
with the dear friends in London (England), which we 
will long remember. We reviewed briefly the time 
from the institution of the Passover more than 3500 
years ago to the change from the type to the antitype 



nearly 1900 years ago, when the Memorial of the unleavened 
bread and fruit of the vine was instituted amongst 
spiritual Israelites as a reminder of the broken body and 
shed blood of our dear Redeemer— "The Lamb of God 
which taketh away the sin of the world." We recognized 
not only our Lord's redemptive work, but also that the 
drinking of his "cup" signified our pledge to suffer with 
him for the cause of truth and righteousness as a condition 
precedent to our sharing with him his Kingdom honors 
and privileges, according to his promise. We also remembered 
the Jewish Law to the effect that all leaven 
must be destroyed, burned, before the Passover could 
properly be observed; and we saw from the Apostle's 
words that the antitype of this to us is the cleansing of 
our hearts from anger, malice, hatred, envy, strife, and 
all works of the flesh and the devil. Then we partook— 
about 450— sang a hymn, and went to our homes full of 
solemn thankfulness, but still feasting on our Lamb and 
resolved to suffer with him that we may also reign with 
him. 

The total number so far reported as having participated 
in the Memorial this year is 8,393. Those that 
reported 15 participants or over are as follows:— 

New Philadelphia, O.; Weatherford, Tex.; Carbondale, 
Pa.; Syracuse, N.Y.; Healdsburg, Calif.— 15. 

Windsor, Ont.; Decatur, 111.; Abilene, Kans.; Annapolis, 
Md.; Dundee, Scotland; Cromwell, Conn.; Pt. 
Huron, Mich.; Tacoma, Wash.; Shawnee, Okla.; Waterbury, 
Conn.— 16. 

Oil City, Pa.; Joplin, Mo.; Waukesha, Wis.; Santa 
Monica, Calif.; Big Sandy, Tex.; Sacramento, Calif.; 
Spokane, Wash.; Whittier, Calif.; San Rafael, Calif.; 
Mahaffey, Pa.; Dormantown, Pa.; Easton, Pa.; Butler, 
Pa.; Ogden, Utah-17. 

Chatham, Ont; Niagara Falls, N.Y. and Ont.; 
Oakland, Md.; Oldham, Eng.-18. 

Rock Island, 111.; Lima, O.; Nashville, Tenn.; So. 
Sharon, Pa.; Greenwich, N.Y.; Camberwell, Jamaica; 
Wermelskirche, Germany— 19. 

Gloucester, Eng.; Valdosta, Ga.; Rochester, N.Y. —20. 

San Jose, Calif.; Medford, Ore.; Omer, Mich.; Auburn, 
Ind.; Chicago, 111. (Polish)-21. 

Grand Rapids, Mich.; Port Limon, Costa Rica— 22. 

Everett, Wash.; So. Knoxville, Tenn.— 23. 

Norfolk, Va.; Omaha, Neb.; Preston, Ont; Ft. 
Wayne, Ind.; Vancouver, B.C.— 24. 

St. Petersburg, Fla.; Lancaster, Pa.; Mansfield, O.; 
Dallas, Tex.; Jackson, Mich.; Port Clinton, O.; Johnstown, 
Pa.-25. 

Hartford, Conn.; New Brighton, Pa.; New Brunswick, 
N.J.-26. 

Bloomington, 111.; Tampa, Fla.; Worcester, Mass.; 
Iola, Kans.— 27. 

Cedar Rapids, la.; Galveston, Tex.; New Albany, 
Ind.; Milwaukee, Wis. -28. 

Harrisburg, Pa.; Muncie, Ind.— 29. 



Liverpool, England; 30; Edinburgh, Scotland, 30; 
Sherman, Tex., 30; Cumberland, Md., 33; Birmingham, 
Ala., 33; Allentown, Pa., 34; Youngstown, O., 35; 
Springfield, Mass., 35; Autryville, N.C., 35; Hamilton, 
Ont., 36; Lynn, Mass., 37; Binghamton, N.Y., 38; 
Wheeling, W.Va., 39; Richmond, Va., 40; San Antonio, 
Tex., 41; Buffalo, N.Y., 42; Pasadena, Calif., 42; 
Houston, Tex., 42; Newark, N.J., 43; Tiffin, O., 44; 
Altoona, Pa., 47; St. Joseph, Mo., 48; Canton, O., 48; 
Stockholm, Sweden, 49; Denver, Colo., 50; Kansas 

R4170 : page 149 

City, Mo., 51; San Francisco, Calif., 60; Copenhagen, Denmark, 

63; Cincinnati, O., 69; Toronto, Ont, 74; Ballard, 

Wash., 75; Scranton, Pa., 76; Providence, R.I., 85; Indianapolis, 

Ind., 90; St. Louis, Mo., 91; New York City, 95; St. 

Paul, Minn., 103; Cleveland, O., 109; Barmen, Germany, 1 10; 

Los Angeles, Calif., 150; Washington, D.C., 155; Philadelphia, 

Pa., 175; Boston, Mass., 216; Chicago, 111., 225; 

Glasgow, Scotland, 263; London, England, 450; Allegheny, 

Pa., 493. 



DEAR BRETHREN:- 

Last night two hundred and forty-six of us met 
together in an upper room in Glasgow and partook of 
bread and wine in commemoration of our dear Lord's 
suffering and death and of our participation in the 
same. In addition, seventeen brothers and sisters, 
who were prevented by sickness from joining us, 
were served in their homes. We felt it a solemn 
occasion, more particularly as we remembered that 
so few Memorial Suppers can now be held by the 
Church in the flesh. We called to mind that since 
the last occasion several of our number have 
passed beyond the vail, and we rejoiced to know that 
the time of our own deliverance from this world of sin 
and sorrow is now so nigh. Pray for us, as we do for 
you, that we may be found faithful. 

The knowledge that our dear Brother Russell, to 
whom we owe so much in the Lord's providence, was 
at the same time partaking of the Lord's Supper so 
near to us, gave us great pleasure. We are praying 
that our dear Brother's visit may be greatly blessed of 
the Lord, not only to himself and to us, but also to 
many who are hungering for the Truth. 

With much love in the Lord, yours in the blessed 
hope, JOHN EDGAR,-Scotland. 



DEAR BRETHREN:- 

I take great pleasure in sending the report of the 
Memorial observance at Cleveland. There were 107 



participants assembled; two, through infirmity of the 
flesh, were unable to meet with the others— making in 
all 109. As each Memorial draws nigh there seems to 
be a greater appreciation of this blessed privilege and 
a greater desire that we all assemble at one place, and 
not be separated into companies for the commemoration 
of the Lord's broken body and shed blood for the 
sake of the Church and the world. Truly, "Blest be 
the tie that binds our hearts in Christian love." And 
may the Lord grant to each and every one of his children 
more of his holy Spirit and love, binding our 
hearts into closer union and fellowship with himself 
and the brethren. 
In our Lord and King, W. K.,— Cleveland, O. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I want to tell you that the little Church or gathering 
in this place, ten in all, partook of the emblems of 
our dear Redeemer's flesh and blood. We considered 
the nearness of the time when, if faithful, we shall be 

R4171 :page 149 

with our dear Lord and see him as he is. We considered 
also our part in the sin-offering; how our dear 
Lord bought us, how we presented ourselves to him, 
and finally how he, as our High Priest, will offer the 
blood of the finished sacrifice before the Mercy Seat. 

There was one dear brother present who was reared 
a Roman Catholic, and this was the first time he had 
commemorated our dear Lord's death. It was good to 
see him. His face shone with love. It was good to be 
there. We also remembered our dear Brother Russell 
and all the dear ones gathered at that time. I think 
we were all made much stronger in the Lord. With 
much Christian love, 

Your brother, G. A. D.,-Conde, S.D. 



R4171 :page 149 

WHY OUR LORD WAS CRUCIFIED 

-JOHN 19:17-42.-MAY 24- 

Golden Text:— "Christ died for our sins 
according to the Scriptures."— 1 Cor. 15:3. 

ONE of the most remarkable facts of history is 
that the most intelligent people of the world, 
the most highly civilized, recognize as their 
Leader, their Prophet, Priest and King, one whom they 
admit was crucified as a malefactor nearly nineteen 



centuries ago ! Still more remarkable is the fact that 
the doctrines promulgated in his name by his followers 
lay stress upon the fact that his crucifixion 
was a part of the divine program; more than 
this, that his crucifixion was necessary; that by 
the blood of the cross, by the death of the crucified 
One, atonement is effected for the sins of the Church 
and of the world— "He is the propitiation for our sins 
[the Church's sins], and not for ours only, but also for 
the sins of the whole world." (I John 2:2.) Indeed, by 
divine providence we see that the cross of Christ (not 
the pieces of wood, but the sacrifice made thereon and 
represented thereby) is the very center of the great 
salvation which God had prepared for our race before 
sin entered the world, foreknowing that it would come. 
The divine sentence was death, and this rested upon 
Adam and all his posterity. None of the condemned 
could redeem himself or his brother, hence the divine 
provision that the Logos should leave the heavenly 
condition and become a man, that he might redeem 
man. 

The death of the man Christ Jesus in any form 
would have been a sufficiency to offset the original sentence; 
but God was pleased to test our dear Redeemer's 
loyalty to him by arranging that the death should 
be a peculiarly trying one, a disgraceful one, so that 
the loyalty of Jesus should thereby be the more particularly 
demonstrated, both to angels and to men; and 
so that the Father could be fully justified in rewarding 
him with the highest exaltation— far above angels, 
principalities, powers and every name that is named— 
that all men should honor the Son, even as they honor 
the Father. It was for this reason, then, that the 

R4171 :page 150 

death of the cross was intimated in the Scriptures as 
being the most ignominious— "Cursed is every one that 
hangeth on a tree." The Apostle implies this added 
ignominy of the cross in his account of how the Lord 
left the glory which he had with the Father, humbled 
himself, took upon himself the form of a servant and 
was found in fashion a man— "And being found in 
fashion a man he humbled himself unto death, even 
the death of the cross. Wherefore God hath highly 
exalted him." (Phil. 2:7-10.) So far, then, as our 
dear Redeemer himself was concerned, this disgrace of 
the cross, which would have been so trying to any noble 
son and particularly to the Perfect One, became to 
him a stepping stone to glory, honor and immortality, 
the divine nature. As for us, it certainly has already 
exalted our dear Redeemer in the estimation of all 
truly his and guided by the Word of the Lord. These 
glory in the Master's faith and obedience thus demonstrated 
to the last degree. We are aware, however, 
that the Higher Critics and Evolutionists have no sympathy 



with any such thought. Considering themselves 

wise they neglect the wisdom from above, which instructs 

us that only by this sacrifice of himself our 

Redeemer presented to the Father the ransom price for 

father Adam's life and for the lives of all his posterity, 

forfeited through his disobedience; and that only by 

this ransom could any of these attain to a resurrection 

and opportunity for eternal life in harmony with 

God. 

"THEY CONDEMNED THE JUST ONE" 

Our lesson does not include the trial of our Lord 
by the High Priest and the Sanhedrin, nor his presentation 
to Pilate's court, then at Herod's and his return 
to Pilate and the endeavors made by that Roman governor 
for his release. It was only when a riot was 
feared that Pilate consented that Jesus should be crucified 
and gave the order therefor, at the same time 
washing his hands before the multitude, saying, "I am 
guiltless of the blood of this just person." It was then 
that the multitude cried out, "His blood be upon us 
and upon our children," and Jesus was led away for 
crucifixion. 

Jerusalem has several times been destroyed and 
rebuilt since then, and the levels of some of the streets 
are quite different from what they then were; yet the Via 
Dolorosa, or the "sorrowful way," is still pointed out, 
and also a portion of the archway known as the Arch 
of Ecce Homo, reputed to have been the place where 
Pilate stood when, pleading for our Lord's release, he 
said to the rabid throng, "Behold the man!"— as 
though he would say, Do you really wish me to crucify 
such a noble sample of humanity and of your race? 
Look at him! decide now and finally on the subject! 
That these traditions are well founded is shown by the 
fact that in quite recent times excavation made for the 
foundation of a house on the supposed site of Pilate's 
palace revealed at a considerable depth an extensive 
portion of a mosaic pavement of fine work such as 
would have probably been connected with a palace; 
and this identifies itself through the statement of John 9:13, 
which refers to the judgment seat as being in a 
place "called the Pavement." Herewith we publish a 
small diagram of the city, from which can be judged 
the route taken by our Lord and the Roman soldiers 
who were to crucify him while they went to the "place 
of a skull" called in the Hebrew language Golgotha, and 
in the Latin, Calvary. The supposed site is on a hill 
near Jerusalem, which in the distance has the general 
contour of a skull, with hollows corresponding to the 
eye-sockets. Modern scholars are well agreed as to 
this site, which answers well to the general requirements 
of the Gospel narrative— outside the city walls, 
nigh to the city, in a conspicuous position, near a frequented 
thoroughfare, and still called by the Jews the 



"place of stoning." Christian tradition from the fifth 
century fixes this as the place of the stoning of Stephen. 

"Must Jesus bear the cross alone, 
And all the world go free?" 

It was a part of the custom of these crucifixions 
that the culprit must bear his own cross; 
and so we read that Jesus bore his until, faint 
from the nervous strain of the preceding twenty-four 
hours, without sleep and probably with but 
little nourishment, and under great strain and exhausted 
from the beating, he sank under the 
weight of the cross. If on the one hand we think of 
the fact that he was perfect, we might suppose that he 
would have had more strength; but on the other hand 
we should remember that man in his perfection was 
not necessarily a giant in size or a Hercules in strength. 
Quite to the contrary; these abnormal conditions are 
the expressions, the results of imperfections. We may 
suppose that a perfect specimen of our race would 
combine the best qualities of mind and body represented 
in both the male and the female, and that delicacy, 
refinement and elegance with moderate strength 
should be nearer to our conception of perfection. 
Thus with fruits and vegetables; the largest fruits 
are frequently the coarsest; the perfect are neither 
over-sized and coarse-grained nor dwarfs. Our race 
seems to have left perfection to such a degree that the 
majority are either too delicate or too coarse. Furthermore, 
in our Lord's case we are to remember that he 
had been sacrificing his life for three and a half years; 

R4171 :page 151 

that vitality had been going out of him for the healing 
of all kinds of disease. This loss would tend to weaken 
him. In other words he had been dying for three 
and a half years and was now on his way to Calvary to 
finish the matter of surrendering his life in harmony 
with the Father's will. 

Some of our Lord's disciples were onlookers 
(John, at least, was one), and truly they would 
have been glad to bear the cross for him. We 
must suppose that they were hindered from proffering 
their services by fear of being considered 
as interfering with the officers of the law. However, 
in the emergency the soldiers found a countryman 
on the route whom they compelled to bear the 
cross after Jesus. This expression might have meant 
to walk after him, to relieve him of part of the load; 
or it might have meant for him to carry all the load 
while the Lord walked on before. But we do know 
that this enforced task upon Simon was a very precious 
privilege. How many of the Lord's followers since 
have almost envied him the opportunity enjoyed! Tradition 



says that Simon ultimately became a Christian, 

R4172:page 151 

that his name was known to the Apostle John and 
also the part of the country whence he came. The 
mention of the names of his sons gives strong corroboration 
to the tradition. --Mark 15:22. 

While sympathizing with our Lord and thinking 
how we should have enjoyed helping to bear his cross, 
we should not forget in this connection two privileges 
which he has provided for us. First, he tells us that 
if we would come after him as his disciples we may 
share with him in the bearing of the cross of this present 
time— "Whosoever will be my disciple let him take 
up his cross and follow me." Then, after believing on 
the Lord, and being justified by faith, and having peace 
with God, and realizing the forgiveness of our sins, we 
are invited to make a full consecration of ourselves, to 
take up our cross— to cross our own wills and to do 
the will of the Lord, which is the will of the Father 
which sent him. Do we appreciate the privilege 
enough thus to take up our cross daily? Are we still 
bearing the cross? Is it our resolution that by the 
Lord's grace we will continue to bear it to the end of 
the journey, until like him we shall be able to say, "It 
is finished"— the work given us to do, the privilege of 
bearing witness to the Word of truth by word and by 
daily conduct? 

The second way of crossbearing is to help others 
who, as members of the Body of Christ, are his representatives 
about us in the world. When we see any of 
these with crosses too heavy for them to bear, 
crosses under which they will likely sink or have already 
sunk, let us think of the Master and of how we 
coveted the privilege of helping him to bear his burdens, 
and let us hear his voice assuring us that what is 
done unto one of the least of his disciples in his name 
is done unto him. Oh, how many helpful words this 
would mean to many of the burdened and the weak of 
the Lord's Little Flock! Oh, how many cups of kindness 
it would imply! How much it would bring of 
cheer and comfort to some of those whom the Lord 
recognizes as members of his Body! As one member 
of our body assists another member in distress, so in 
the Body of Christ. All the members are to bear one 
another up, strengthen one another, comfort one another, 
refresh one another, and generally to make one 
another ready for the glorious consummation of our 
hopes in the Kingdom. 

A LOOK AT THE CRUCIFIED ONE 

Numerous details connected with the crucifixion 
are enumerated. The time was the third hour, nine 
o'clock, according to Mark, but the sixth hour or noon 



according to John. The discrepancy is accounted for 
by the oriental lack of exactness; or Mark may have 
referred to the fact that the sentence was pronounced 
in the third hour, while John's record has to do with 
the time when our Lord was actually on the cross- 
after the slow journey, the fastening to the cross, and 
the making out and attaching the board indicating the 
charge against our Lord, "This is Jesus of Nazareth, 
the King of the Jews," and then the subsequent raising 
of the cross with Jesus on it, all of which would occupy 
quite a considerable period of time, probably nearly or 
quite three hours. 

The Jewish leaders were disappointed with the 
placard which appeared on the cross, indicating the 
crime for which the culprit had been executed. They 
protested about it, denying that Jesus was the King of 
the Jews. But the Governor refused to alter the matter; 
and doubtless he worded it especially as a rebuke 
to them, for he perceived that for envy, malice, they 
had delivered Jesus to him for death. He would now 
shame them. The multitudes could all read the inscription: 
for according to custom it was written in three 
languages, in Hebrew, the language of the people; in 
Latin, the language of the government, and in Greek, 
the language of the educated of that time. Thus in 
spite of his enemies, the crucified Jesus was proclaimed 
the Messiah. Yet how strange! A crucified Messiah! 
How different are God's ways and means of accomplishing 
an object from man's ways! Truly, as the 
heavens are higher than the earth, so are his ways 
higher than our ways. Had Jesus not died, had he 
not redeemed us from sin, the most that he could have 
done as a ransomer would have been to assist man to 
more reasonable and better lives— but not to eternal 
life, which had been forfeited through Adam and which 
could not be recovered except through a redemption. 
Under the divine plan, however, he who humbled 
himself to redeem the world is now highly exalted by 
the Father to his own right hand of power and dignity, 
and shortly, as the King of Israel and the King of 
all the world, he will reveal himself to the overthrow 
of wickedness, to the uplifting of righteousness, and 
to the assistance of the weak and the poor and the ignorant, 
for the blessing of all the families of the earth 
according to the promise.— Gen. 12:3. 

Our Lord was made a companion of robbers. The 
two crucified with him, one at either side, were probably 
members of the band of Barabbas, and were 

R4172:page 152 

probably considered by the people as more or less of 

heroes. At all events we are not informed that any 

jests or jibes were hurled at them by the people. Thus 

it must be with the Lord's followers to this day. We 

must remember that our Master and his cause are unpopular; 



that the learned and influential of the world 
will be opposed to us, as they were to him, and that 
this is according to his Word and to the principle upon 
which the divine plan is being worked out, namely, 
that if we would reign with him, we must also suffer 
with him. Crucifixion particulars are not given, and 
we may be glad of it, for the picture which suggests 
itself to the mind is horrible enough without any incidental 
details, and the fact that four writers recorded 
the main features of the execution, but gave none of 
the details of the crucifixion itself, is in full accord 
with the general treatment of such matters in the Bible 
so different from what would ordinarily be the course 
of a narrator. Ian MacLaren suggests:— 

"There was no death so cruel as that of crucifixion, 
because the prisoner died not from loss of blood nor in 
a short space of time, but through the lingering agony 
of open wounds, the arrested circulation at the extremities, 
the tension of the nervous system, and the oppression 
of heart and brain. For five long hours Jesus 
endured this pain of torn nerves, of intense thirst and 
of racked body and throbbing brain!" 

SEVEN WORDS FROM THE CROSS 

It is not to be expected that anyone under such 
conditions would have much to say. It is quite probable, 
therefore, that the recorded words or messages of 
our Lord were the only ones he uttered. These words 
represent faithfully some of the most important features 
of our Lord's character and teaching. 

What is generally known as the first of these words 
from the cross is recorded in Luke 23:34. Then said 
Jesus, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what 
they do." We have no doubt at all that our Lord's 
heart was full of a forgiving spirit, but for several reasons 
we doubt if he ever uttered these words: (1) They 
are not found in the Greek MSS., Codex Vaticanus, No. 
1209 (fourth century), and Codex Alexandrinus (fifth century). 
(2) These words would not seem to be appropriate, 
for those who were guilty of our Lord's death 
were not repentant, and our understanding is that 
the Scriptures clearly indicate that repentance is 
necessary to forgiveness. (3) Those who were guilty 
of our Lord's death did not believe on him nor trust in 
his merit, and the clear teaching of the Scriptures is 
that forgiveness must be preceded by faith. (4) It is 
not recorded that they were of repentant and contrite 
hearts and that they had turned away from sin; and 
the clear teaching of the Scripture is that no one is 
forgiven unless in this attitude of repentance. (5) Our 
Lord had not yet finished the work of sacrifice, nor had 
he yet ascended to the Father and presented that sacrifice 
even on behalf of believers, and hence the Father 
would not be prepared to forgive the sin. (6) We have 
no evidence that the sin was forgiven, but every evidence 



that the prayer of the Jews themselves, "His 
blood be upon us and upon our children," was answered 
in the time of trouble which came upon that nation, of 
which the Apostle says, "Wrath is come upon them to 
the uttermost."— I Thess. 2:16. 

The reputed second word from the cross, "Verily I 
say unto you today, thou shalt be with me in Paradise,"* 
is apparently authentic. It was the Lord's message to 
one of the robbers who confessed his sin and desired 
the Lord's favor and clemency when he would come 
into his Kingdom. Our Lord has not yet fully come 
into his Kingdom; hence the time has not yet come 
when the thief desired to be remembered. Notwithstanding 
the dark day and the apparent eclipse of our 
Lord's life and hopes, he assured the penitent one that 
he was able to answer his petition and would do so. 
The fulfilment of that request, as the Scriptures show, 
will come at our Lord's second advent, when he shall 
take his great power and reestablish Paradise in the 
earth, the Paradise which was lost on account of sin, 
but which was redeemed by the precious blood. Then 
the penitent thief will come forth; yea, the Scriptures 
tell us that all that are in their graves shall hear the 
voice of the Son of man and shall come forth; and this 
call will include the other thief also. They will come 
forth to the favorable conditions of the Millennial 
Kingdom; but we may be sure that the penitent one 
will have an advantage over the other and a special reward, 
too, for ministering a word of comfort to our 
Redeemer in his dying hour. 

"BEHOLD THY SON!" "BEHOLD THY MOTHER!" 

Mary, our Lord's mother, and John, his beloved 
disciple, evidently were standing not far from the 
cross, doubtless weeping and surely sorrowing. But 



*Note corrected punctuation. See DAWN-STUDIES, Vol. VI., p. 667 

R4173 :page 152 

our Lord, so far from thinking of himself and his own 
anguish, was thinking of others. As during his ministry 
he had gone about doing good, so in his dying hour 
here he thought of the good, the welfare of others, and 
in the above words committed his mother to the care of 
the loving disciple. Beautiful is the lesson! How it 
shows us the largeness of our Lord's heart and sympathy, 
and how it teaches us not to be entirely engrossed 
with our own trials and difficulties, large and 
small, but rather to be burden-bearers of others, allowing 
our sympathies, our thoughts and our plans to 
be active for the blessing of all those who in any measure 
are under our care in matters temporal or spiritual! 



"My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me!" 
These words are known as the fourth word or message 
from the cross. They mark to us the depth of our 
Lord's anguish. He was dying as the sinner's redemption 
price, as the substitute, in order that God might 
be just and the justifier of all who believe in Jesus, 
and that he might grant them in due time a resurrection 
from the dead and a return to the Father's favor 
and to eternal life— to all that was lost in Adam. To 
be our substitute he must in everything suffer all that 
we were doomed to suffer as sinners. This included 
not only his loss of life, but also his cutting off from all 
fellowship with the Father. A moment, as it were, would 

R4173 : page 153 

do; but there must come that moment of darkness, of 
separation, and we may readily understand that this 
was the darkest moment in all of our Lord's experiences, 
still darker than Gethsemane, which was merely 
a foreshadowing of this experience. How glad we are 
that we can see the philosophy, the reason why this 
experience came to our Lord! And as we realize this, 
may it more and more fill our hearts with appreciation 
of the blessings which are ours through Christ; the 
privilege of return to the Father's fellowship and love, 
so that we can apply to ourselves the Master's words, 
"The Father himself loveth you." (John 16:27.) There 
is nothing in this dying word of our Lord that would 
suggest insincerity on his part, and surely nothing in 
it that would suggest the doctrine of the Trinity! It 
is in perfect keeping, however, with all that he said on 
the subject of his relationship to the Father. 

The fifth word: "I thirst." This expression calls 
forcibly to mind several facts: (1) Exposed to the 
heat of the sun, with but slight covering and under 
nervous excitement and pain, thirst must have been 
one of the principal elements of torture to the crucified. 
(2) When we think of the fact that our Lord had been 
the active agent of Jehovah in the great work of creation 
of all things, including water, the Master's voluntary 
humiliation and resignation to thirst— yea, to die 
on behalf of the rebels of the realm— is a remarkable 
illustration of his love for mankind. This cry of thirst, 
we are told, was uttered when he knew that all things 
had been finished, when all of the work which had 
been given him to do had been accomplished— and not 
until then might he refer to his own condition. Even 
this cry was in fulfilment of the prediction of Psalm 69:21. 
Our Lord had refused the stupefying draught, 
but now accepted the refreshment given him from a 
sponge lifted to his lips on a reed, probably two and 
one-third feet long. As we think of this matter let us 
remember that our Lord hungered and thirsted that 
we, with all for whom he died, might have the water of 
life and the bread of life— might attain eternal life! 



"IT IS FINISHED" 

This sixth word was one of triumph. He had finished 
the work which the Father had given him to do; 
he had been loyal from first to last, self-sacrificing. 
He was glad, surely, that his earthly course was at an 
end, glad because it ended in victory and because this 
meant ultimately the blessing of the world of mankind 
and their release from the power of sin and death and 
the Adversary. It might be said in this sense of the 
word that our Lord began his work when he left the 
heavenly courts and humbled himself to take the human 
nature; and that it progressed during the period 
of his attaining manhood's estate, thirty years: however, 
Scripturally considered, the work that was finished 
was the work of sacrifice which began at Jordan 
when he was baptized, when he made a full consecration 
of himself even unto death. Just before his crucifixion 
he had said, "I have a baptism to be accomplished 
and how am I straightened until it be finished." 
Three and a half years was the period of his baptism 
into death, and now the final moment had come— "It is 
finished." 

"Father, into thy hands I commit my spirit." This 
is supposed to have been the last word, the last act of 
our Lord's earthly ministry, its finishing touch. How 
appropriate that he who had sought to do the Father's 
will at any cost should have absolute confidence that in 
his death his spirit of life would be in the Father's care 
and keeping, and that he should thus express himself! 
And this should be true of all who are his followers. 
Having resigned our all to the Lord we should so fully 
appropriate his gracious promises as to be without 
fear as we go down into death. Death in our Lord's 
case, however, must have meant far more than it could 
possibly mean to any of us. We not only have the 
Lord's assurance of a resurrection, but we have in 
our Lord's own case an illustration of the divine power. 
It was he who raised our Lord Jesus from the dead 
whose power will be exercised through him in bringing 
us forth to glory, honor and immortality. Our Lord 
was the forerunner; none before him had ever been 
raised from the dead, either to the perfection of human 
life or to the perfection of the divine nature. 

BROKEN-HEARTED LITERALLY 

St. Luke informs us that he cried with a loud voice, 
a testimony and witness to all that were near of his 
hope in God and in a resurrection. Some modern 
writers regard the cry as the utterance of one dying 
of a ruptured heart, the supposition being that this 
was the immediate cause of our Lord's death. It is 
admitted that there is such a thing as an actually broken 
heart. We might attribute the cause of this rupture 



to the ignominious circumstances surrounding our 
Lord's betrayal, denial, condemnation, scourging and 
crucifixion; and no doubt all of these would tend to 
depress him in spirit. But in our judgment the primary 
cause of his heart rupture was the grief mentioned 
in the fourth cry, the withdrawal of divine fellowship, 
the loneliness which was his during his last hour. 

The technical explanation of the reasons for supposing 
that our Lord died of a heart rupture is thus 
stated:— 

"The bloody water that burst from Christ's side 
when pierced by the soldier's spear evidenced this. 
The blood exuding from the heart into the pericardium 
had separated into red clots and a water serum. Jesus 
died literally from a broken heart." 

It does not surprise us that in the divine order 
nature is made to manifest a sympathy with our Lord 
by the peculiar darkness which came over the land at the 
time Jesus hung on the cross. One ancient MS., treating 
of the subject, says that "many went about with lamps, 
and the darkness lasted until Jesus was taken from 
the cross." A great earthquake is mentioned also as 
having taken place at this time, in connection with 
which the heavy curtain of the Temple, separating the 
Holy from the Most Holy, was torn from the top to the 
bottom, symbolizing thus, as the Apostle suggests, 
that the way into the Most Holy was now made manifest, 
made possible through the suffering and death of 

R4173 : page 154 

Christ. According to Mark, Joseph of Arimathea went 
"boldly" to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus. 
From all accounts he must have been a noble character. 
Matthew says "he was a rich man"; Luke says, 
"a good man and a righteous. ..who was looking for 
the Kingdom of God"; Mark says he was a "counsellor 
of honorable estate," that is, a member of the Sanhedrin. 
"How hardly shall they that have riches enter 
into the Kingdom of heaven," said Jesus. It is 
hard for them, because they have much more to 
overcome proportionately than if they were poor. Had 
this Joseph of Arimathea not been a rich man he probably 
would have been fully a follower of Jesus. We 
are pleased, however, to know that so many good 
things could be said about him, and that his courage 
and boldness increased, instead of diminishing under 
trial. May we not hope that ultimately he became a 
disciple and footstep follower in the fullest sense? 
Geike remarks respecting him:— 

"It was no light matter Joseph had undertaken: 
for to take part in a burial at any time would defile him 
for seven days and make everything unclean which he 
touched (Num. 19:11); and to do so now involved a 
seclusion through the whole Passover week with all its 
holy observances and rejoicings." 



How Joseph's natural, hewn tomb was honored by 
the Master's burial therein! 

With pleasure we find Nicodemus, another wealthy 
and influential ruler of the Jews, associated with Joseph 
in caring for our Lord's body. We may be sure 
that these men received at the hands of the Lord special 
blessing because of the courage and zeal which 
they exhibited on this occasion. We may be sure that 
those who are so fearful as to hold back when opportunities 
are offered for service to the Lord are unlikely to be 
approved of the Master and unlikely, therefore, to gain 
the great reward which he is now offering to victors. 
To us the lesson in all this is to be bold for the right, 
for the truth, for the Lord, for the brethren— at any 
cost. Indeed, the more our courage and faithfulness 
to privilege and opportunity may cost us, the greater 
will be our reward, both in the present life and in that 
which is to come. This is the third mention we have 
of Nicodemus in connection with our Lord's ministry. 
First he visited Jesus by night, as recorded in John 3. 

R4174 : page 154 

Second, he cautiously interposed on Jesus' behalf when 
an attempt was made to seize the Lord, as recorded in 
John 7:44-52. And now, as some one suggests, he 
"improved a last opportunity for service with the bitter 
consolation of having failed where he might have done 
much." He was a rich man and brought an hundred 
Roman pounds (67 lbs. our weight) of myrrh, resin 
and pounded aloewood, aromatic and preservative, 
supposedly used by the Jews in wrapping up the dead. 
A lesson for us is that we should not be content with 
neutrality in connection with the truth and its service. 
We should be positive as far as possible; we should take 
our stand for righteousness and do with our might on 
behalf of the Lord's cause and the Lord's brethren; 
while using wisdom and discretion, we should nevertheless 
be courageous. We should bring our flowers 
to cheer and comfort in life and not wait until death 
has prevented an appreciation of these. 

Newman Hall suggests:— 

"Golgotha! There is a legend that it was the very 
center of the earth's surface, the middle point of the 
habitable globe. We think nothing of the legend, but 
very much of the truth which it suggests, for the cross 
of Christ is the true center of the Church where all believers 
meet, of all tribes and nations." 

Another says:— 

"How shall we dare, with the cross in our view, to 
lay out our lives for self-blessing and self-indulgence? 
How shall we make the possession of this world's honors, 
its wealth, or its favor or its high places, the main 
end and scope of our lives? taking no part in the 
sufferings of Christ, choosing ever the feast and never 
the fast?" 



Phillips Brooks wrote:— 

"You have your cross, my friend. There is pain 
in the duty which you do. But if in all your pain you 
know that God's love is becoming a dearer and a plainer 
truth to you, then you can triumph in every sacrifice. 
Your cross has won something of the glory and beauty 
of your Lord's. Rejoice and be glad, for you are crucified 
with Christ." 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT 

In closing this lesson let us remember the important 
truths of its Golden Text, "Christ died for our sins 
according to the Scriptures." He did not die because 
death was natural, because he was sinful like other 
men, nor to show us how to die; he died for our sins, 
because of our sins; because the penalty of our sins 
was a death penalty, and because we must be redeemed 
in order to have any future life on any plane. Hence:— 
"In the cross of Christ we glory, 

Towering o'er the wrecks of time; 
All the light of sacred story 

Gathers round its head sublime." 



R4174 : page 154 

"HE THAT LIVETH AND WAS DEAD" 

-JOHN 20:1-18.-MAY 31.- 

Golden Text:— "I am he that liveth and was dead; 
and behold I am alive forevermore."— Rev. 1:18. 

THERE is no more important lesson in connection 
with the Gospel than that of the resurrection 
of our Lord Jesus. The death of Jesus indeed 
exhibits to us his love, and the love of the Father on 
our behalf. But in the divine plan, in order for the 
proper benefit to come to man from the death of Jesus, 
he must rise from the dead; he must become the Captain 
of our salvation, as well as our Ransomer. A 
dead Christ could not be our Savior; as it is declared, 
"Because I live ye shall live also." (John 14:19.) A 
proper appreciation of this subject assists materially 
in straightening out various theological kinks which 
have troubled the Lord's people for centuries. 
(1) We must have the proper thought; that our 

R4174 : page 155 

Lord really died, that there was no sham about it, that 
he was not, as some erroneously suppose, more alive 
than ever while apparently dead. Our Golden 
Text expresses this thought in our Lord's own words, 



"I am he that liveth and was dead." He was dead 

in the same sense exactly that Adam was dead, 

for he died as Adam's substitute, to take his place under 

the divine sentence or curse of original sin, thus to 

make possible the release of Adam and all of his posterity 

from that sentence. As Jesus did not in death 

go to a place of eternal torment, neither did Adam go 

to a place of torment, nor was anything of the 

kind implied in the sentence upon him, all the creeds 

of Christendom to the contrary notwithstanding. Let 

God be true though it make every creed a lie! 

"HE DESCENDED INTO HELL" 

This expression is found in the so-called Apostles' 
Creed. It is in full accord with the statement of the 
Prophet David, "Thou wilt not leave my soul in sheol" 
[the tomb, translated thirty-one times hell and thirty-one 
times grave and three times pit]. The Apostle Peter 
confirms the same, quoting the Psalmist's words in the 
Greek; he says, "Thou wilt not leave my soul in hades" 
[the grave, the tomb, the state of death]. And the same 
Apostle, speaking under the inspiration of Pentecost, 
on the subject of our Lord's resurrection tells us that 
the Prophet David spake not these words respecting 
himself, that they were not true of him, that his soul 
was left in sheol, in hades, and that his flesh did see corruption. 
St. Peter says of David, "His sepulchre is 
with us until this day." It would not be his sepulchre 
if he had risen. The Apostle says these words were 
spoken of our Lord; that his soul, being, was not left 
in the tomb; that he was raised from the dead on the 
third day. There is no excuse for the confusion usually 
presented to the minds of inquirers on this subject 
by their teachers. The Scriptures are plain 
enough in their declaration that the Lord was dead, 
not alive. To prevent any misunderstanding they 
make very plain that not merely was our Lord's body 
dead, but his soul was dead; as we read, "He poured 
out his soul unto death," "He made his soul an offering 
for sin"; and again, "He shall see of the travail of 
his soul and shall be satisfied." (Isa. 53:10-12.) And 
again in the text above examined, "Thou wilt not leave 
my soul in hell," in sheol, in hades, the tomb, the state 
of death. To suppose anything else than that our 
Lord was actually dead would be to suppose that Calvary 
was all a mockery, a farce, and that our Lord as a 
spirit being stepped out of the mortal body and deceived 
his executioners, allowing them to suppose that 
they killed him, while he was more alive than ever. 
Scriptural declarations are quite to the contrary of 
this, and we must stand fast by the Word of God to 
avoid confusion. During the "dark ages" the theory was 
foisted upon the Church that a man appearing to die did 
not do so, but became more alive than ever. Upon this 
false premise various delusive errors have been built— 



Spiritism, Theosophy, Purgatory, means for deliverance 
from Purgatory, praying for the dead, etc., etc. 

All scholars are aware of the truth of what we here 
set forth, but few of them are willing to undertake to 
combat the error which has become so firmly lodged in 
the human mind, fearing the loss of influence, honor 
amongst men and salary. As an illustration of what 
we say we call attention to a pocket-card bearing the 
impress of the Presbyterian Board of Publication and 
Sabbath School Work, 1319 Walnut St., Philadelphia. 
This card has on the one side printed the ten commandments 
and on the other side the Apostles' Creed. 
It is in the latter, respecting Jesus, that we read, he 
"suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead 
and buried; he descended into hell; the third day he 
rose again from the dead." Beside the word "hell" 
there is an asterisk referring to a footnote, which is 
herewith given: "*i.e., continued in the state of the 
dead and under the power of death until the third day." 
This shows conclusively that the Presbyterian Board 
of ministers recognize the fact that Jesus was dead and 
not alive during the period of his entombment. He was 
in neither a hell of suffering nor a heaven of bliss. He 
was dead, as he himself declared in our text. His resurrection 
was his coming to life— and again we are told 
that he was raised from the dead by the Father's 
power.— Acts 2:24,32. 

CEMETERIES-SLEEPING PLACES 

Our common word cemetery signifies a sleeping place, 
and the thought thus conveyed is in full accord with the 
teachings of the Scriptures on the subject. They teach 
that the penalty of sin is death, and that death would 
have meant complete, absolute, perpetual destruction 
had it not been for God's mercy in providing for our 
redemption from that sentence and a resurrection from 
the dead through Jesus. And it is because of our faith 
in God's promise of a resurrection of the dead that 
we, in common with the Biblical writers, speak of death 
as a sleep. Thus, "Abraham slept with his fathers," 
all the prophets and kings "slept with their fathers," 
Stephen "fell on sleep" to await the awakening time in 
the resurrection morning, at the second coming of his 
Redeemer for the establishment of his Kingdom. Similarly 
the Apostle speaks of the dead in Christ being 
awakened in that glorious morning, and he even calls 
our attention to the fact that the whole world may be 
properly said to be "asleep in Jesus," because our Lord 
by his death redeemed the whole world of mankind and 
broke their death sentence and will in due time awaken 

R4175 : page 155 

them all in the resurrection morning. Hence the Apostle, 
in writing to the Church respecting their dead and 



dying friends, both in and out of Christ, says, We sorrow 
not as others who have no hope, for if we believe 
that Jesus died [on behalf of original sin on the whole 
race] and rose again [to be the deliverer of the race 
from the bonds of sin and death] let us believe also 
[the logical consequence] that those who sleep in Jesus 
[whose death through his merit has been changed 
to a sleep] will God bring from the dead by him. 

R4175 : page 156 

(I Thess. 4:13,14.) This is in harmony with the Father's 
arrangement that there shall be a resurrection 
both of the just and the unjust, and that this work 
shall be accomplished by the Lord Jesus, his honored 
representative. 

The word cemetery, therefore, rightly understood, 
the sleeping place of the dead, teaches a volume in itself 
to those who have the ears to hear. It is in full accord 
with the facts as we know them, and better still in full 
accord with the divine revelation that the "wages of sin 
is death; but the gift of God is eternal life through 
Jesus Christ our Lord"— by a resurrection from the 
dead. (Rom. 6:23.) In this connection let us remember 
our Lord's words, "Marvel not at this; for the hour 
is coming in the which all that are in their graves 
shall hear his voice and shall come forth," those who 
shall have passed their trial successfully unto life 
eternal, instantly perfected, while those who shall not 
have been approved will be brought forth that they may 
have the opportunity for rising up out of sin and 
death conditions by the judgments, chastenings and 
corrections of the Millennial Age. Our special attention 
for the moment is called to the word "graves" in 
this text. We have already seen that sheol in the Hebrew 
signifies the death state and that hades is its Greek 
equivalent, but the word here rendered "graves" is a 
different one, namely, mnemeion, which signifies "remembrance. 
The proper thought is that although our 
friends and neighbors of the world of mankind are 
passing to the tomb at the rate of 90,000 every day, 
nevertheless they are not blotted out of existence, 
but are still in divine "remembrance" and subjects of 
divine power and will eventually be released from the 
great prison-house of death by him who bought us all 
with his own precious blood. 

RESURRECTION HOPES AND JOYS 

It is in full accord with the Scriptural presentation 
that joy thrills our hearts as we come to the resurrection 
of our Lord Jesus and also as we think of the resurrection 
morning of the Millennial day and the promise 
that therein and thereby the Lord God shall wipe 
away all tears from off all faces, and there shall be no 
more sighing, no more crying, no more dying, because 



all the former things shall have passed away. But 
notwithstanding this natural, proper sentiment the 
resurrection does not hold its proper place in the minds 
of the majority of Christian people for the same reason 
that the second coming of Christ has lost its proper 
relationship to their faith. The fault lies in the fact 
that unconsciously another hope than that of the Bible 
has been instilled, a hope that men do not die but pass 
immediately into glory or immediately into anguish 
eternal. To those who thus misread their Bibles the 
word resurrection can have but little real significance. 
To all such it is not only a needless and useless proposition 
but a very inconvenient one. They ask, "Why 
have a resurrection for those who have gone to heaven 
and who hope that its joys are eternal? Why have 
a resurrection for those who have passed into eternal 
torment? What is to be gained?" Very true, we answer! 
Under such conditions undoubtedly a resurrection 
would be of no value and would have no place, 
but those are not the conditions. The dead are dead; 
they have neither joy nor suffering while they sleep. 
They know nothing of the lapse of time; the awakening 
moment to each will be the next in consciousness 
to the one when they died. From this standpoint the 
resurrection is all important, without it there could be 
no future life or bliss. Hence the Apostle looked forward 
to the resurrection and pointed us forward to the 
same event for the culmination of our hopes— and our 
dear Redeemer indicated that the blessing of the world 
was dependent upon their hearing his voice and coming 
forth from the prison-house of death, the tomb, to hear 
the good tidings, to be judged or tested thereby as to 
their willingness to be obedient to their Creator. All 
who will obey the commands of the great King shall 
by his judgments then abroad in the earth be brought 
to perfection and life eternal, while those who will decline 
to be obedient at heart shall ultimately be destroyed 
in the Second Death.— Acts 3:23. 

"BECOME THE FIRST-FRUITS" 

The Apostle Paul found the spirit of the Greek 
philosophers intruding upon the teachings of the Gospel 
even in his day, so that in the Lord's providence it 
was proper for him to write a wonderful chapter (I Cor. 15) 
fully setting forth the doctrine of the resurrection 
and what would be our fate without the resurrection. 
He says, If there be no resurrection of the dead, our 
hope is vain, our preaching vain, we are yet in our sins; 
and those who have already died are perished, and our 
fate will be the same. If God has provided no resurrection 
for the dead then our future is hopeless and we 
might as well eat, drink and be merry, for tomorrow 
we die. -Vs. 12-18. 

The Apostle was writing to those who believed in 
the resurrection of Jesus, but who disbelieved in the 



necessity for their own resurrection, and so he adds, 
If the dead rise not then Christ did not rise, and 
if Christ did not rise, the basis of all your hopes 
and faith drops out; and if Christ did rise from 
the dead you must logically believe that the resurrection 
of his followers will be like his. Indeed, 
as the Apostle again says, the resurrection of the 
Church is spoken of as being Christ's resurrection, 
having a share in Christ's resurrection; because 
in coming forth the Church will share the same 
kind of resurrection as our Lord, be like him— put to 
death in the flesh they will be quickened in spirit, sown 
in corruption they will be raised in incorruption, sown 
in weakness they will be raised in power, sown animal 
bodies they will be raised spiritual bodies. All who 
now are transferred from Adam to Christ and accepted 
of God as members of the Body of Christ, members of 
the Bride of Christ, have his new nature, are begotten 
of the Spirit and will in the resurrection be spirit beings 
like their Lord and Head. The remainder of mankind 
in the resurrection will be like their head, Adam. 
As is the heavenly one, such will they be who attain 
to his nature; as was the earthly one, such will they 

R4175 : page 157 

be who in this Gospel Age do not experience the 
begetting of the holy Spirit. As to the remainder of 
the natural seed, their resurrection will be to earthly 
conditions, a gradual uplifting to the full perfection of 
human nature, all that Adam had originally, plus 
experience. 

If our Lord became the first-fruits of them that 
slept, did he not sleep? And do not the others sleep? 
And if he was awakened, raised from the dead by the 
Father's power, must not all be awakened and lifted 
up? A first-fruits implies after-fruits. The Scriptures 
point out that the Church is included with the Lord as 
a part of the first-fruits, "a kind of first-fruits unto 
God of his creatures." (Jas. 1:18.) Thus the resurrection 
of the Christ began with the resurrection of our 
Lord and will be consummated with the change of the 
last member of the Church, which is his Body. "Christ, 
the firstfruits," will then be complete. But this will 
not consummate the divine plan, for it is God's intention 
to have the after-fruits, a great harvest, which will 
be gathered during the Millennial Age. To this the 
Apostle refers, saying, Afterwards they that are 
Christ's during his parousia. Our Lord's parousia will 
continue for a thousand years; he will be present in the 
world, present for the very purpose of ascertaining how 
many of the world, under favorable conditions of 
knowledge and opportunity and assistance, will be 
glad to go up on the highway of holiness to perfection, 
to full recovery out of sin and death. That noble company 
will be the after-fruits of the divine plan. Earth 



as well as heaven will be filled with the glory of God 
when all evil doers shall have been cut off; and then 
every voice in heaven and earth shall be heard praising 
him that sitteth upon the throne and the Lamb 
for the grand consummation of the divine plan! 

THE NARRATIVE OF OUR LESSON 

Those who get the proper grasp of the importance 
of the resurrection of Jesus will perceive the necessity 
for the very explicit description thereof given us in the 
Gospels, because without faith in the resurrection of 
Jesus we must be without faith in the merit of his 
death, in the sufficiency of his sin-offering on our behalf 
and consequently uncertain in respect to our own 
resurrection, the salvation which shall be brought 
unto us at the revelation of our Lord and Savior Jesus 
Christ. (I Pet. 1:13.) This accounts for the minuteness 
of detail. Moreover, not only is it to be remembered 
that the apostles and the five hundred brethren, 
converts to our Lord's teaching at the time, were natural 
men and needed such proofs as would appeal to 
the natural mind, but it should be remembered also 
that the message of our Lord's death and resurrection 
would go to natural men all the way down the Gospel 
Age and must be so plain and distinct as to be understood 
by all. After the apostles received the holy 
Spirit they understood matters connected with our 
Lord's death and resurrection which they did not understand 
before. It is similar with us; when we receive 
the holy Spirit we come to a deeper appreciation 
of the features of divine truth. 

"PUT TO DEATH IN THE FLESH-QUICKENED IN SPIRIT" 

Our Lord took our nature not with a view to keeping 
it to all eternity, but merely that he might be able 
to present the ransom-sacrifice on our behalf; that he 
might die as the man Christ Jesus for the man Adam 
and his posterity involved with him in his sin. The 
death of Jesus finished the work which he came to do, 
as his dying words show— "It is finished." There was 

R4176 : page 157 

no reason why he should be raised a human being, but 

every reason to the contrary. As a human being he 

would have been circumscribed in his power, talents, 

dignities, honors and thus have been forever humiliated 

as the result of the great work which he accomplished 

in obedience to the Father's program. This 

would be quite the contrary of what the Apostle points 

out when he declares that God raised Jesus from the 

dead and highly exalted him far above angels, principalities 

and powers and every name that is named. 

(Phil. 2:9; Eph. 2:21.) Most evidently, then, he does 



not now have a human nature, but, as the Scriptures 
declare, a divine nature, for the human nature, instead 
of being far above that of angels, is a "little lower than 
the angels."— Psa. 8:5. 

So, then, our Lord was put to death in the flesh- 
not quickened or made alive or resurrected in the flesh 
—but as the Apostle declared, he was quickened, 
raised in spirit, a spirit being of the highest order, 
"changed" from mortal to immortal, because "flesh and 
blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God." 

TWO LESSONS WERE TAUGHT 

We see, then, that two great lessons were to come 
to our Lord's followers: (1) That their Master was no 
longer dead but alive, risen from the dead; (2) that he 
was no longer the man Christ Jesus, but Jesus 
"changed," glorified. "Now the Lord is that spirit."— 
2 Cor. 3:17. 

How could these two great and important lessons 
be taught to the disciples then and since, seeing, as our 
Lord says, that they were slow of hearing because they 
were natural men with natural minds, naturally disposed 
to think of things only upon the earthly, fleshly 
plane? The method adopted by our Lord was, first, 
to make very distinct to their natural sense the fact of 
his resurrection by the removal of his body from the 
tomb, by the vision of angels speaking of our Lord as 
risen, by the clothes and napkins lying in their places 
as though they had been laid aside by one awaking 
from sleep. To emphasize this lesson our Lord, although 
a spirit being, appeared to the disciples in 
bodies of flesh which on one or two occasions he permitted 
to be touched. But lest they should get the 
idea that he was still man, lest they should lose sight 
of the fact that he was a spirit being appearing as a 
man, as the angels had frequently done in the past, 
our Lord appeared in various forms, once as a gardener, 
once as a stranger traveling to Emmaus, once as a 
stranger on the shore of Galilee calling to the fishermen 
and directing them where to cast their nets, twice 
in the upper room, where he demonstrated that he was 
not a man by coming into their midst while the doors 
were shut and, after a brief conversation, vanishing 

R4176 :page 158 

out of their sight while the door was still shut. In 
these various ways the Lord demonstrated the double 
lesson, and remained with his disciples forty days that 
these lessons might be well learned— first, that he was 
risen; secondly, that he was changed and was no longer 
the man Christ Jesus. 

No wonder that the early Church, appreciating the 
value of our Lord's resurrection and the fact that they 
were no longer Jews under the Jewish Law, gradually 



changed the day specially set apart for divine worship 
from the seventh day to the first day of the week— but 
not with any law or command, simply of good will and of 
choice, since to the Christian every day is a Sabbath, 
a holy day in which he is not to do anything which 
would be wrong or displeasing to the Lord. The custom 
is a beautiful one and all who love the Lord and 
appreciate the value of his resurrection must esteem 
the first day of the week on that account. It was made 
sacred by our Lord's resurrection; it became, therefore, 
to his followers the day of hope. 

Joining the various accounts of the resurrection 
morning we find (Mark 16:1) that Mary Magdalene, 
mentioned in our lesson, was one of the first at the 
sepulchre while it was yet dark; that with her were 
Mary, the mother of James and Salome, and (Luke 24:10) 
Joanna, the wife of Chuza, Herod's steward. 
On their way they had been wondering who would roll 
away the stone from the mouth of the sepulchre that 
they might enter with their spices to complete the embalming 
work which was discontinued two evenings 
before because of the Jewish Sabbath then beginning. 
To their surprise the stone was already rolled away. 
They tarried awhile wondering, and then in the dim 
light they perceived that the Lord's body was not there. 
Perplexed by their further loss Mary hastened to the 
home of John, with whom Peter was lodging, and related 
these facts. The two apostles ran to the sepulchre. 
John, the younger, outrunning Peter, arrived there 
first. But by this time the other women had departed 
to communicate the news to the other disciples. 
Awestricken, John had stooped down and looked in, 
but Peter, on arrival, still more courageous, went in 
followed by John. They found things as Mary had 
described them, the body gone, the linen cloths there. 
Troubled and perplexed they went their way. Although 
the indication is that they both believed, their belief 
was not that the Lord had risen, but that Mary's story 
was true, that his body had been removed, "for as yet 
they knew not the Scripture that he must rise again 
from the dead."— V. 9. 

Mary returned to the tomb filled with sorrow; she 
was weeping and saying in her heart, They might at 
least have left us the body of our Lord. She looked 
again into the sepulchre. Ah, now she saw something 
different. Two angels were present, who said, "Why 
weepest thou?" intimating that there was no cause for 
weeping and thus no doubt helping to prepare Mary 
for the next step of our Lord's revealment. A noise or 
perhaps a shadow called her attention backward and 
she saw a man who she supposed was the gardener 
and she appealed to him, Sir, if you have borne him 
hence tell me where you have laid him and I will see 
that you are not further troubled in the matter, for myself 
and his other friends will care for his remains. Then Jesus, 
who had hidden his identity by appearing in "another 



form," like a gardener, in different clothing from 
that which was parted amongst the soldiers, and different 
also from that in which he had been shrouded, revealed 
himself through the tone of his voice which she so well 
knew, uttering her name only. In a moment the truth 
flashed upon her mind and she cried, Rabboni, my 
Master, my Lord! 

With us as with Mary sorrow sometimes fills our 
hearts and we see not the streams of joy and everlasting 
blessing which the Lord has for us; not until we 
hear his voice, his word, do we appreciate the truth. 
But all who know the Master truly know his voice, 
know his message, know his spirit, his disposition; 
as he himself expressed it, My sheep hear my voice 
and they follow me, they recognize not the voice of 
strangers.— John 3:5. 

"I AM NOT YET ASCENDED" 

In her ecstasy Mary was apparently about to grasp 
the Lord by the feet. Her thought evidently was, 
This is a vision, which will pass away and I will see my 
Lord no more; I will hold him tightly; where he is I 
must be. But Jesus taught her otherwise, and the lesson 
is a good one for us also. He would have her remember 
that he had already said, "It is expedient for 
you that I go away." Why, then, should she detain 
him? Besides, she was not ready to go with him, she 
had lessons to learn, experiences were to still further 
develop her character, to fit and prepare her for 
the Kingdom blessings. He must go, she must stay. 
She must learn submission, confidence in him and have 
a realization that he is able to make all things work together 
for good to those who trust him. Our Lord 
gave Mary a message for the apostles, a service she 
could render him and them— and the intimation is that 
she should rather have been thinking of such a service 
instead of holding him by the feet; she should be exercising 
faith and accepting divine providence and hastening 
to spread the good tidings of his resurrection 
to others. The lesson for us is obvious. We, too, 
have heard of the death and resurrection of Jesus and 
additionally have learned of God's grace through him, 
and it is our privilege to carry the message to all of the 
brethren wherever they may be, to all who have the 
hearing ear. 

Our Lord's declaration, I have not yet ascended 
to my Father and your Father, to my God and your 
God, emphasizes the fact that he went not to heaven 
when he died, but into the tomb, into the state of 
death. It emphasizes also the fact that he is our Elder 
Brother, our forerunner into the Father's presence 
and into the glories which God hath in reservation for 
all those that love him, that love him to the extent of 
willingness to follow in the footsteps of Jesus at any 
cost along the rugged narrow way. 



"PREACHED TO THE SPIRITS IN PRISON" 

We refer to these words of the Apostle Peter because 
they are so generally misunderstood. Some suppose 

R4176 : page 159 

that our Lord went to Purgatory or to some other 
place of torment and delivered some discourses during 
the period of his death. Here we find the error respecting 
the meaning of life and death still further confusing; 
we ought to understand that when our Lord was 
dead he could not preach and that the dead of mankind 
could not hear; as the Scriptures declare, "In 
death there is no remembrance of thee; in the grave 
[sheol] who shall give thee thanks?" (Psa. 6:5.) "There 
is no work nor device nor knowledge in the grave 
[sheol] whither thou goest," whither all mankind go. 
(Eccl. 9:10.) What, then, is the signification of the 
words of St. Peter quoted above? We reply that he is 
referring to those angels who sinned in the days of 
Noah— the fallen angels. They are the spirits in prison, 
under restraints, "chains of darkness," until the judgment 
of the great day. True, mankind in general are 
said to be in prison also; the tomb is the great prison-house 

R4177 : page 159 

to which our Lord referred, quoting Isaiah's 
prophecy and assuring us that ultimately he will open 
the prison-doors and bring forth the prisoners. Again 
he assures us that he has the key to this prison, the 
"key of death and of hades"— the tomb. But men are 
never referred to as spirits; angels are so referred to; 
they are spirit beings; man is not, he is a human or 
earthly being. True, we sometimes speak of the spirit 
of life, the power of life in man, but we do not speak 
of it as a thing that could be preached to; it merely 
refers to his vitality. Every spirit that can be preached 
to must be a spirit being and must be alive and not 
dead, in order to be able to receive the preaching. 
With these points in mind it is very easy to see 
that the Apostle was referring to our Lord's preaching 
in a figurative sense in much the same way that we are 
in the habit of saying, "Actions speak louder than 
words." Our Lord's sermons to the fallen angels, the 
spirits in prison, restrained from liberty in the days of 
Noah, were along this line of action, not of words. 
When cast out by our Lord, some of these spirits who 
had obsessed humanity cried out, "We know thee who 
thou art!" They knew Jesus was the Logos, the Father's 
representative who had created them; they knew 
that he had left the glory of the Father and humbled 
himself to take the earthly nature instead; they knew 
that he had consecrated his human life to death as a 



sin-offering for mankind. In all this they beheld a wonderful 

lesson, yet we cannot suppose that they any more 

than the apostles understood that our Lord would be 

raised from the dead. When, however, he was raised 

up by the Father's power on the third day and they 

beheld him again a spirit being of the highest order, 

it must have been a matter of astonishment and wonderment 

to them. It preached a lesson, namely, that 

obedience to God is profitable. It must have preached 

another lesson also, that God who punishes evil doers 

is sure to bless and reward all those who seek to do 

his will. 

It was a sermon along still another line, namely: it 
taught the love of God, his compassion toward sinners, 
and it gave the fallen angels room to reflect that if God 
had such compassion upon the poor, fallen human race, 
he might ultimately have as much compassion upon 
them and grant them some opportunity for escaping from 
the punishment which had come upon them for their 
sins. Theirs, indeed, was a different penalty from that 
upon man, but why might they not hope that the same 
God who was rich in mercy upon Adam and his race 
would have compassion also upon any of those who 
would have the heart desire to come back into harmony 
with him. It is our thought that this was a powerful 
sermon, and we shall not be surprised to find by and 
by that as a result of this sermon some of those fallen 
angels repented and did thereafter strive to live in harmony 
with the Father, hoping that some time divine 
mercy might be extended to them for their release and 
their restoration to fellowship with the holy angels. 
And this very hope is held out by the Apostle when he 
tells us that the Church shall judge not only the world 
of mankind but shall also judge angels. This means a 
judgment or trial time for the fallen angels, the holy 
angels needing no judging or trial. 

IT IS SOWN--IT IS RAISED 

Before leaving this subject we call attention to the 
words of the Apostle descriptive of the resurrection 
change of the Church. (I Cor. 15:42,43.) He says, 
"It is sown in weakness, it is raised in power; it is 
sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown an 
animal body, it is raised a spiritual body." And since 
the Church's resurrection is really a share or part of 
Christ's resurrection, the First Resurrection, these 
words must also describe our Lord's resurrection. 
The question we raise is, What is it that was sown and 
that was raised? We answer that it was our Lord's 
soul or being. When he was thirty years of age he was 
simply the perfect one, a man separate from sinners. 
But when he consecrated himself at baptism and was 
begotten of the holy Spirit he was then a New Creature 
in embryo. It was our Lord the New Creature who 
was the heir of all things, the High Priest whose privilege 



it was to sacrifice. He sacrificed his flesh, his 

earthly nature, which he covenanted to the Lord at 

his baptism. He finished the work of sacrificing at Calvary; 

for parts of three days he was dead, but when 

the resurrection moment came and the Father raised 

him up by his own power, he raised up not the sacrificed 

flesh but the New Creature, the "it" to which the 

Apostle refers, the "it" which was sown, buried in the 

flesh, in dishonor, with the wicked and the rich. It 

was raised the third day to glory, honor and immortality, 

the divine nature. In other words the New Creature 

was perfected by being given a new body. Thus 

seen all of the Lord's people, as was their Lord, are 

dual beings. They as New Creatures have a reckoned 

existence while their mortal bodies are reckoned 

dead. By and by when the mortal flesh is actually 

dead the New Creature will be perfected by being 

granted a new body, a resurrection body. Let us remember 

the Apostle's words and apply them to ourselves, 

I do count all things but loss and dross that 

I may win Christ. .that I may know him and the 

power of his resurrection [sharing it], being made conformable 

to his death.-Phil. 3:8-10. 



page 161 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXIX. JUNE 1 No. 11 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

The Editor's British Tour 163 

The Glasgow Convention 163 

"My Lord and My God" 168 

"He Opened to Them the Scriptures" 168 

"Did Not Our Hearts Burn?" 169 

Sins Remitted— Sins Retained 170 

A Letter From South Africa 171 

"Lovest Thou Me More Than These?" 172 

"What Shall This Man Do?" 173 

"What Is That to Thee?" 173 

"That He Tarry Till I Come" 174 

"Lo, I am With Thee Alway" 174 

The Mighty King of Kings (Poem) 175 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 175 

page 162 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



NEW U.S. POSTAL RULES RE SUBSCRIPTION 



The new Post Office rulings require that subscriptions 
shall stop, be discontinued shortly after expiration of the 
period paid for. Hence, we may not continue your papers 
indefinitely. If, however, you cannot conveniently send the 
price you may have them sent on credit if you will definitely 
request this. Remember, also, that we have a fund specially set 
apart for the payment of the subscriptions of such as desire 
our journals, but cannot appropriate any of the amount without 
request. This fund we call the "Lord's Poor Fund." 

But remember that whatever you write us on this subject 
must be pointedly stated, so that the Post Office Inspector 
or any stranger reading your letter will know definitely just 
what you desire. It will not do to say I am poor and would 
like to have the WATCH TOWER. Rather say: Please enter my 
WATCH TOWER subscription for another year (charge same 
to me and I will remit later; or, I am one of the Lord's poor 
and thankfully accept God's provision in the "Poor Fund"). 

OLD THEOLOGY QUARTERLY SUBSCRIPTIONS 



We have not yet made clear to all our desires re the 
Quarterly Tracts. Heretofore many of you have sent money 
to the Tract Fund and then ordered tracts irregularly. Such 
can just as well apply a part of their donations to definite 
subscriptions to a certain number of each quarterly issue of 
tracts— with the privilege of ordering extra copies of the January 
issue or Volunteer number. These regular quarterly 
issues could go to the class or ecclesia with which you associate 
—to some one address— or could be divided up, sent to 
the addresses of several of the brethren— as may be most 
convenient to you and them— say 10 each or 50 each, as may 
be your pleasure. The price per year is 6c for single copy, 
quarterly, or 10 for 20c, or more at same rate. 



R4177 : page 163 

THE EDITOR'S BRITISH TOUR 

(Continued) 

TO THE DEAR BIBLE HOUSE FAMILY, 
ALLEGHENY, PA. 

About noon (April 16th) we reached Leicester and 
were warmly welcomed by about eighteen dear brothers 
and sisters, whose greetings were most hearty 



and were expressed by the radiant faces and 
grasp of the hand. Brother and Sister Allsop 
most cordially entertained us. The afternoon discourse 
to the interested was held in their usual hall, 
about 100 being present, including about 50 visiting 
brethren. Three years ago there were no meetings 
here and only about three interested in Present Truth. 
The evening meeting was held in Temperance Hall 
and, considering it was the night before a holiday, was 
well attended, about 600 being present. The audience 
was a remarkably intelligent one and gave close attention 
to the "Overthrow of Satan's Empire." Despite 
our protests and the fact that our train for Glasgow 
left at 2 a.m., about a dozen of the friends stayed with 
us and accompanied us to the station. We thanked God 
for them as we beheld their love and zeal, and prayed 
for them heavenly compensations of spiritual rest and 
refreshment. 

Glasgow, Scotland, was reached by 10 the next 
morning. As we alighted we were surrounded by about 
forty dear Brothers and Sisters— some of whom had 
been waiting there for us for three hours— and, as they 
said, for three years; for when leaving them in 
1903, we had purposed returning in 1905. Some in 
greeting us remarked that the day was the anniversary 
of the day of our Lord's return from the dead. We returned 
their hearty greetings and smiles and handshakes 
to the best of our ability— inwardly commenting 
on the effect of the Truth and its spirit— so unlike 
anything else in the world. Brother Edgar, M.D., 
claimed us as his guest, and arriving at his home we 
were warmly welcomed by Sister Edgar and others 
awaiting our arrival. 

At 3 p.m. of April 17th 

THE GLASGOW CONVENTION OPENED IN VICTORIA 
CHAMBERS 

We cannot undertake a report of it in the proper 
sense of that word, but can tell you briefly little 
more than your own experiences at other conventions 
would tell you, viz., that it was a season of refreshing 
long to be remembered. We had nothing to do with 
the program and hence had nothing to do with the apparent 
monopolizing of the Convention's time. We 
merely submitted to the wishes of the dear friends and 
served their desires to the extent of our ability. 

The Convention was opened by a brief address of 
welcome by Brothers Edgar, Hemery and ourself, expressing 
the greetings of the Glasgow Church and of 
the Society to all in attendance, with hopes for the 
Lord's blessing upon the Convention. This was followed 
by an address by Brother Johnson on "The Joy 
of the Lord." Next came a precious testimony meeting, 
after which we had tea, and following this at 7.30 
we spoke on "The Resurrection," noting the fact that 



the day was the true anniversary of that great event. 
The discourse was published as our Sunday topic, with 
some variations. We were most hospitably entertained 
by Brother John Edgar, M.D., and wife, and after a 

R4178 : page 163 

most refreshing sleep we were ready for the second day 
of the Convention. 

Saturday, April 18th, opened with a "Colporteur 
Meeting" in the forenoon. We spoke for two hours to 
the colporteurs, sharpshooters and volunteers on the 
character, importance and methods of the Harvest 
work. Incidentally we assured them of our agreeable 
surprise that the British work had so remarkably progressed 
during the five years since our last visit; and 
that we foresaw still greater things in their midst for 
some years to come. And here we assure you all that 
undoubtedly God has many loyal children in Britain for 
whom the Harvest message will surely be "meat in due 
season." Their awakening time has come! The "New 
Theology," Theosophy, Christian Science and Socialism 
are awakening public thought along religious lines; 
and all this must inure to their preparation for "The 
Old Theology" of the Bible, which we have for them. 

In the afternoon we answered questions for an hour 
—nearly all of which were quite to the point, the audience 
showing keen appreciation of the Truth. Dr. J. Edgar 
followed us in a very helpful address on "Humility." 
Then came tea, and after it our discourse on "Baptism," 
closing another interesting and, we trust, profitable day. 

R4178 : page 164 

On Sunday forenoon, April 19th, the immersion 
service busied the Convention, while we visited some 
of the sick who were unable to attend the meetings. 
Seventy -eight symbolized their full consecration into 
Christ's death. At 2 p.m. Brother Hemery gave an 
address, said to be excellent, on the subject, "I am 
the Vine, ye are the Branches." We regretted inability 
to attend because of necessary private appointments. 

The evening service was at "St. Andrew's Hall," of 
a reputed capacity of 4500. It was full to overflowing 
and Brother Hemery addressed about 500 at the overflow 
meeting on the same subject that we used at the larger 
service, namely, "The Return from Hell." The occasion 
was an inspiring one. The audience was an extremely 
intelligent one, and gave profound attention for about 
two hours. At the door free literature was taken with 
avidity. 

An hour later we were on the railway train bound 
for our next appointment— Liverpool. Many of the 
dear friends had posted themselves relative to our train 
and its time for departure, for they gathered to the 
number of about 200 to bid us farewell again, singing, 



"God be with you till we meet again" and "In the sweet 
by and by." As the train pulled out we waved our 
handkerchiefs to each other, while some ran alongside 
to the full end of the platform. Our heart was deeply 
touched and we thanked God for the tie that binds his 
people to him and to each other. 

The Convention continued a day after our departure, 
and, we learn, was profitable to the close. The 
attendance was estimated at 800. Undoubtedly many 
others would have been there had they not been preparing 
for our coming to their cities or vicinity— attending 
to advertising, etc. 

THE LIVERPOOL MEETINGS 

Although our train reached Liverpool at the very 
inconvenient hour of 4.40 a.m., before the electric cars 
were running, about 15 came to the depot on foot to 
meet us, rising even at 3 o'clock. Their hearty greetings 
we returned with good appreciation, and with glowing 
hearts remembered the Lord's words, that all who 
become his disciples in truth shall have even in this 
life "an hundred fold"— houses, lands, brethren, etc. 
Soon Brother Hay had us in a cab, en route for 
his home and its comforts; and presently Sister Hay 
received us and cared for our temporal interests most 
hospitably. 

After some personal visiting in the afternoon 
(April 20) we addressed an appreciative audience of 
about 500 in a Baptist chapel rented by our friends for the 
occasion, and we were informed that nearly all of the 
congregation were "brethren" and "friends" of Liverpool 
and surrounding cities. We were gratified indeed, 
and praised God for the increased numbers since our 
last visit, but also and specially for the evidences we 
subsequently had of the growth in grace and knowledge 
amongst the dear friends. The beginning of the 
interest in Present Truth in Liverpool was with dear 
friends connected with a "Mission," and quite naturally 
the mission methods for a time influenced them and 
led to "frothy" rather than "solid" methods of Christian 
fellowship and endeavor. We rejoiced with them in 
their zeal manifested on the occasion of our visit five 
years ago, and hoped and prayed for their growth also 
in knowledge. Now we rejoice that they have grown 
in knowledge without having lost their zeal. 

The evening session had been advertised and the 
attendance was estimated at 650, who gave closest attention 
to our topic, "The Overthrow of Satan's Empire." 
An hour after the evening service we boarded 
the steamer en route for Belfast, Ireland, and to our 
surprise about 150 of the dear friends gathered on the 
pier to give us a farewell. They sang for us several 
hymns as the boat delayed for a rail connection,— 
"Blest be the tie that binds," "God has promised a glorious 
day," "All hail the power of Jesus' name," and 



"God be with you." 

THE BELFAST, IRELAND, MEETINGS 

As the steamer reached Belfast next morning we 
caught sight of five brethren on the dock. We recognized 
each other, though we had never met before. Indeed 
not one of the present Belfast Church was in the 
Truth at the time of our previous visit, five years ago. 
The greetings were warm, as usual, and soon Brother 
McComb had us in a cab hurrying us to his home, 
where we were warmly received by his wife, Sister 
McComb, and her mother— both beaming with joy, 
and thinking, of course, not of us, whom they had never 
before seen, but of the Truth which bound all of our 
hearts to each other and to the Lord. 

Soon after breakfast a number of other friends 
joined us in the McComb parlor and we had pleasant 
fellowship in the Truth— cheering and comforting and 
building up one another in the most holy faith. After 
dinner we had a meeting in the little hall generally 
used by the friends. Our subject was along lines of 
general helpfulness, suited as best we were able to 
their needs. After about two hours we adjourned for 
tea, and the entire twenty-four who were present thus 
spent the interim of time until the evening meeting, 
which was advertised for the public. 

A very intelligent audience of about 300 attended 
the evening service and manifested a deep interest in 
our subject, "The Overthrow of Satan's Empire." At 
the conclusion of the service a man wished to oppose 
our presentation, and, mounting a chair, began a 
harangue on the text, "The wicked shall be turned into 
hell, together with all that forget God." We asked him 
to sit down and we would answer his objection; and the 
audience insisted that he do so. We then briefly showed 
that the wicked are such as sin wilfully after they have 
knowledge to the contrary, and that those who "forget 
God" could not include the heathen who had never 
known God; that the word hell in this text is sheol 
in the Hebrew and means the tomb; and that the 
Hebrew really says that the classes described will 
be "returned to sheol"— returned to death;— implying 
their previous recovery and release from it for the trial 
secured for them and for all through Jesus' death. 
Then another mounted a chair and objected that the 
Church do not die because Jesus said, "He that believeth 
on me hath everlasting life." We reminded him that 
he should quote the entire passage, namely, "And I 
will raise him up at the last day." Briefly we pointed 
out that the life given us now is ours by faith and 
promise and that the Word says, "This life is in his 
Son," and "When he who is our life shall appear we 
also shall appear with him in glory." 

After a good night's rest we on the 22nd started 
for Dublin, joined by Brother Hemery and five others. 



We arrived after noon and ere long were with the brethren 

R4178 : page 165 

and friends (about 40) in their usual meeting room. 

At their request two hours were spent in answering 

their written questions on Bible topics. At the conclusion 

they expressed themselves as well pleased, 

and we proceeded to enjoy a social tea which had already 

been prepared. 

The evening meeting was for the public, and drew 
a remarkably fine audience estimated at 1000 or more. 
Before the opening we received from Mr. O'Connor, 
secretary of the Y.M.C.A., his card with a request 
thereon for an opportunity for questions. We announced 
the fact and promised to entertain the questions 
after concluding the lecture on "The Overthrow 
of Satan's Empire." Our address of an hour and a 
half long was well received, and at its conclusion nearly 
all of the audience remained to hear Mr. O'Connor's 
questions and our replies. 

Then came stirring times, for Mr. O'Connor had 
many friends at the rear of the hall who loudly applauded 
when he commented that the speaker had not 
used a Bible and had not asked the audience to turn to 
his quotations. We replied that surely we had quoted 
much more Scripture than we could have read from the 
Bible in the same time, and that we had given the intelligent 
audience credit for being familiar with the 
Scriptures quoted, and that as for ourself we had our 
Bible here— pointing to our forehead. The audience 
recognized the fact that the criticism of Mr. O'Connor 
was a captious one, that the Scriptures had been quoted 
rapidly and voluminously by us in the lecture, and 
the applause on our behalf and in support of our reply 
was tumultuous, and showed that we had the sympathy 
of about nine-tenths of the audience. 

R4179 :page 165 

When the applause could be stilled we asked the 
Y.M.C.A. secretary to please proceed with his questions. 
He did so by asking whether the speaker believed 
in the deity of Christ. We replied that we believed 
all that the Scriptures declare on the subject 
and requested that since he had brought his Bible 
he kindly put his query in Scriptural language. 
He objected that we should answer his question as put. 
We replied that the words might be used with various values 
and hence that we must insist that a Scriptural 
question should be put in Scriptural language. The 
audience agreed with us in deafening applause, and 
the secretary responded by asking, "Do you believe 
that 'God was in Christ reconciling the world unto 
himself?" (2 Cor. 5:19.) We replied that we do most 
heartily so believe. We then took the opportunity to 



quote John 1:1, calling attention to the emphasis of the 

Greek which distinguishes between the Father as "the 

God" and the Son as "a God" in this passage. We proceeded 

to show that the Father had no beginning; that 

the Son was "the beginning of the creation of God"— 

"by whom all things were made"— angels and men. 

The secretary objected that our publications do not so 

teach; but we assured him that he must have misunderstood, 

for we had done our best to express in them 

this very thought. 

But when the secretary sat down a Mr. Allston arose 
and attempted to quarrel with our translation, "a God" 
and "the God." He floundered considerably, and the 
audience, getting tired of him, called on him to sit 
down and made such disturbance that his voice was 
drowned for a time. When next heard he claimed that 
we had misrepresented the creeds in stating that they 
consigned nearly all mankind to eternal torment. This 
gave us opportunity to rehearse briefly the Catholic 
and Protestant views of mankind in death— that while all 
agree that the saints who walk the "narrow way" go to 
glory, the Catholics send nearly all others to Purgatory 
and the Protestants more unreasonably consign nearly 
all to eternal torment. This brought down the house 
with applause, as they perceived the dishonesty of any 
denial of our claim on the subject according to all the 
teachings they had ever received. 

We announced here that doubtless the profit of the 
question meeting had been attained and invoked the 
Lord's blessing. But at this juncture the ex-Governor 
of the Dublin prison arose and called for a vote of 
thanks to the speaker of the evening for his able handling 
of his subject. The audience responded by an 
outburst of stamping, cheering and hand-clapping which 
told that the Truth had satisfied some heads better 
than had the error. Our hope is that some hearts also 
were touched and that some wheat in the garner may 
finally result. 

Another good night's rest at Brother Stewart's 
home, some further fellowship with the friends and visiting 
of the sick, and we took tram to the boat, accompanied 
by about a dozen of the dear friends, who took 
leave of us on the boat with warmest assurances of love 
and the presentation of a silk umbrella, a souvenir of 
our visit to Ireland. We left the Emerald Isle with prayers 
for the dear Church of Dublin, waving to them and 
they to us until lost to view. 

Bradford was our next stop. We reached there at 
noon (April 24) and were warmly received by quite a 
little crowd of brethren, and soon were at the hospitable 
home of Brother and Sister Hudson. In the afternoon 
we met about 100 dear friends in a Methodist 
chapel hired for the day. About two-thirds of the number 
came from nearby places, all wearing what is known 
as the "MILLENNIAL DAWN smile" and otherwise manifesting 
their joy in the Lord and his precious promises. 



We spoke to them for an hour and a half along the line 
of practical living and our precious hopes, and then a 
free tea was served in one of the ante-rooms. 

By request the evening meeting was on the subject, 
"Where are the Dead?" An audience of about 500 
gave closest attention and at the conclusion took with 
avidity the "Hell TOWERS." We are hoping that some 
of them had hearing ears. A good night's rest prepared 
us for our next appointment— at Birmingham. 
As we left Bradford a little company on the railway 
platform bade us "God speed." 

Birmingham was reached Saturday noon. We 
were greatly surprised that the afternoon meeting, 
for the interested only, was attended by about 
1 15— fully one-half of whom came from nearby cities 
and villages. We had a most delightful season of fellowship 
and specially rejoiced with the Birmingham 
friends on their growth not only in numbers but also 
in the spirit of the Truth. A very dear brother whom 
the Lord used to start the interest here became imbued 
with some wrong notions to the effect that nothing 
could be done except by himself, and that no more 
"wheat" could be found there. He dominated the 
class and hindered its sphere of usefulness until 
the Lord called him out of their way— we trust to a 
share in the Kingdom. Although the dear friends still 
reverence his memory they perceive that the speedy 
increase in their numbers and zeal and warmth since 
his death are blessings in which they might have participated 

R4179 : page 166 

sooner had they been less subservient. We 
rejoice in their present condition of spiritual life— so 
in contrast with their condition when last we visited 
them, respecting which we made no comments, knowing 
that in DAWN STUDIES, Vol. VI., they had our advice 
and the Scriptures noted. 

The evening meeting was a great success, especially 
considering that it was Saturday. About 300 gave us 
closest attention on the topic, "Where are the Dead?" 
Immediately on the conclusion we hastened to our train. 
On the platform we bade goodbye and waved our handkerchief 
to dear friends who saw us off. 

It was past midnight when we reached Manchester 
and were met by Brothers Glass and MacKenzie and 
taken in a cab to Brother Glass' home and supper. A 
good sleep refreshed us and prepared us to meet the 
Sunday morning gathering of the interested, estimated 
at more than 300, but including one-third from nearby 
points. They had an interesting Testimony Meeting 
before our arrival, and all faces were radiant when we 
were introduced and while we spoke to them for half an 
hour. Next came dinner, then a visit to a dear dying 
sister, at her special request, and then our afternoon 
sermon on "Love the Principal Thing." About 800 were 



present at this semi-public service. In the evening the 

immense Hippodrome was crowded, extra chairs being 

used. It is estimated that 3,300 were present and that 

about 500 were turned away— each with one of the HELL-TOWERS. 

Best of all, the audience gave excellent attention 

—we cannot think that better attention was ever 

given to our message— not even in Allegheny. 

Later, when we took our train for Edinburgh at 
12:50 o'clock, we were surprised to find as many as thirty-eight 
on the platform to bid us good-bye. They had 
for us a remembrance of Manchester— an Autograph 
Album, which contains an inscribed address of welcome 
and thanks for the visit and a wish for our return, and 
the addresses of the Manchester Class of Berean 
Students of the Word. We accepted it with deep appreciation 
of the love it represented. Our train departed 
amid the singing of praise to God and the waving of 
handkerchiefs, after all had filed past us and exchanged 
personal greetings. We departed weary, and full of 
sympathy for the dear friends, who because of the lateness 
of the hour would get no tram-car service. We 
could secure no sleeping-car accommodations, but under 
the Lord's blessing had some sleep, and arrived 
at our destination at seven the next morning. 

At Edinburgh, the beautiful, we were met at the 
depot by Brother Robertson (and others), who took us 
in a cab to his hospitable home for breakfast. Then 
came a two-hour talk to the friends, numbering about 
140— our topic being "A new commandment I give unto 
you, that ye love one another as I have loved you." 
Next came dinner, and then another two-hour session 
attended by about 300, in which we replied to questions 
touching order in the Church and how the brethren 
should deal one with another. Then came tea; and following 
it the public session on the topic, "The Return 
from Hell." About 600 were present. Excellent attention 
was given and we trust a good impression left. 
Two attempts were made to interrupt, but we went 
along and the Lord delivered us from any real disturbance. 
Then Bros. Watson and MacDonald took us in a 
cab to a hot supper and to the railway depot, where we 
bade good-bye to a very zealous band of about thirty-five 
and got into a sleeping-car— shaking hands and 
waving handkerchief to the singing crowd. God bless 
them! 

Notwithstanding an all-day rain we had a splendid 
time at Luton. About a dozen met us at the station 
with hearty greetings, and Brother Moody had a cab in 
waiting, which took us speedily to his home, where we 
met his dear family, all of whom are in the Truth, and 
were most hospitably entertained. Numerous friends 
called during the forenoon to greet us; and at the afternoon 
meeting in a hall we met all of the Luton Church 
and more than as many more from nearby points, in all 
about 100, who gave close attention to our discourse on 
"Elect according to the foreknowledge of God, through 



sanctification of the spirit and the belief of the Truth." 
A free "Tea" was provided and greatly enjoyed by all. 

Next in order came the Public Meeting, at eight p.m., 
the attendance at which was estimated at 700— excellent, 
surely, for a week night and rainy weather. The 
audience was an intelligent one, and gave close attention; 
we trust the future will show that some were deeply 
interested and profited and assisted in preparation 
for a share either in or under the Kingdom of God's 
dear Son. A large crowd gathered at the railway 
station and bade us good-bye! We reached London 
not long after midnight and were most comfortably entertained 

R4180 : page 166 

by Brother Hemery and family. 

MEETINGS IN LONDON 

A good portion of Friday was spent in searching 
for a meeting room convenient to our office and much 
larger than the one now in use (overcrowded) in the 
Society's depot, 24 Eversholt street. We are hopeful 
of good results. 

In the evening at Horticultural Hall about 900 were 
present (about 700 of them strangers) to hear about 
"The Overthrow of Satan's Empire." We had excellent 
attention, and had assurance from several that they 
were interested, had seen matters in a new light and 
would investigate further. 

Thursday afternoon we met with the specially interested 
to the number of about 350, and again in the 
evening addressed about 450, in the same room used on 
the occasion of the Memorial— formerly a Wesleyan 
Chapel. The interest evinced was excellent, as may 
be judged by the numbers and by the fact that it was 
neither a Sunday nor a holiday, nor were the meetings 
advertised to the public. Brethren were present from 
surrounding places, however, some coming nearly 200 
miles. At the close of the evening service we sang together, 
"God be with you 'till we meet again"; and then 
the congregation filed past, shaking our hand and wishing 
us and we them God's blessing. 

ILFORD'S CLOSING MEETING 

The last discourse of the tour was at Ilford Town 
Hall— to the public. About 1000 were present— fifty 
standing; and some, we learned, were turned away. 
We had a splendid hearing on "The Overthrow of 
Satan's Empire." One-third of the audience were 
friends of the Truth, Ilford being a suburb of London 
adjacent to Forest Gate, where the majority of the 
London congregation reside. We hope for good results. 
Before the evening meeting we had a pleasant social 
season and tea with Brother Guard and family and with 



about forty others. We parted from these dear friends 
with warm greetings, and sang together, "God be with 
you." 

R4180 : page 167 

Saturday noon we took the "boat train" for Liverpool, 
parting with about forty on the platform singing 
their good-bye. Four accompanied us the 240 miles to 
see us off— two from Liverpool who had attended the 
London meetings, one from London who had been in 
the Truth but two months and who brought us some 
flowers, chiefly "forget-me-nots," and Brother Moody, 
of Luton, who accompanied us on much of the tour. 
They saw us on to the steamer and, with others from 
Liverpool and Manchester, about 85 in all, waited for 
two hours until our boat started; then sang, "In the 
Sweet Bye and Bye," "Crown Him Lord of All," "Blest 
be the Tie that Binds," "God be with you," etc. 

Our heart goes out very warmly to the dear British 
friends, and we feel sure that the 5,000 now interested 
there are but the beginning of a great gathering. We 
expect the numbers to double within the next few years. 
We told them of our hopes and assured them that in 
America, Australia, Germany, Switzerland, Norway and 
Sweden, Denmark, etc., the brethren of the King 
were of the same spirit, that the loving zeal of our 
British brethren is the most manifest of all. But the 
Spirit of Christ is surely growing wonderfully in all 
who are studying "Present Truth." May it abound 
more and more in all of our hearts. Thus we shall be 
more and more "copies of God's dear Son," our dear 
Redeemer. 

ON THE SEA-HOMEWARD BOUND 

We enjoyed a very restful season on the sea, which 
was very quiet. We ate, slept, exercised, read, and, of 
course, talked. In answer to prayer, the Lord granted 
us some very favorable opportunities for presenting 
the Truth to several who seemed to have "hearing ears." 
We trust that their interest may continue and abound 
to their present and eternal joy. We have considerable 
hope for four in particular, and some hope for four 
others. 

The breaking of a blade of the ship's propeller delayed 
us a day, and thus we avoided a most severe storm, 
which wrecked a vessel near our pathway on the night 
we were due to arrive. We would even then have 
reached port on the next night (Friday) but for a heavy 
fog, which detained us all night just outside our port. 
But this also proved advantageous, for it gave us 
opportunity for three two-hour talks on the great 
"Divine Plan of the Ages." (1) To a returning 
missionary, whose acquaintance we had not previously 
made, and who seemed to have "an ear to hear" the 



"good tidings of great joy for all people," which we 
presented as forcefully and wisely as we knew how. 
(2) To a doctor and two of the ship's stewards, and (3) 
to two travelers who had been waiting for an opportunity 
to inquire concerning the better Gospel, of which 
they had casually learned something through others. 
We talked with them from before nine o'clock until 
eleven o'clock, the hour for closing the ship's parlor. 
Both had hearing ears and seemingly appreciative 
hearts and will read and, we trust, come fully into the 
Truth. One of these, we understand, rehearsed much 
of what he had heard to a fellow-passenger on the 
promenade deck until midnight. We were in consequence 
of these experiences very appreciative of the fog 
and the delay which it occasioned, and more than ever 
resolved to appreciate delays and fogs, etc., knowing 
that "All things are working together for good to those 
who love God, to the called ones according to his purpose." 
Thus gradually we learn to spell Dis-appointment 
His-appointment, and to look for his leadings. 

When we landed at nine o'clock Saturday morning, 
we found twelve dear brethren and sisters of the New 
York City Church waiting for us with smiling faces and 
outstretched hands. (Poor dears, they had been standing 
there for over two hours, having been misinformed 
that the landing would be at seven o'clock.) Some, we 
learned, got up at three o'clock to be there to welcome 
us. We greeted them with equal warmth, commenting 
in our heart that naught but the Truth and the spirit 
of pure love which it develops could form such a heart-binding 
tie. We assured the dear friends of our deep 
appreciation of their fragrant alabaster boxes so liberally 
poured forth; but that we accepted these, not as a 
personal tribute, but as marking their love for the Lord 
and his Truth, and, because we, by his grace, occupy 
a prominent place as their representative. 

Escorted to the railway station we fellowshipped 
until train time. Handing each one a new farthing, we 
explained that we had brought from the Bank of England 
enough of these to supply one each to the Allegheny 
Congregation; that these would be not only 
souvenirs of our trip, but much more, reminders of 
God's loving care for all who are his— yes, and for the 
world of mankind. We explained that each farthing 
would represent two sparrows and remind us of the Lord's 
words: "Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? yet 
not one of these (sparrows) can fall to the ground without 
your Father's notice. Are not ye of much more 
value than many sparrows?" 

We remarked that God's drawing power is exercised 
chiefly toward the meek, the humble-minded, the lowly 
in heart, and that their proper humility at times led 
these to feel their own unworthiness so keenly that they 
needed the comforting assurance that God's infinite 
powers permit a supervision of all creation, including 
the poor little sparrow and much more the interests of 



humanity, and particularly the welfare of the saints, 

the consecrated, the members of the Church, which is 

the Body of Christ. The Father's providential care is 

over all his works, even over the sparrows— but "The 

Father himself loveth you" ! How wonderful is all this! 

No wonder that those who realize the truth of these 

divine messages love in return! "We love him because 

he first loved us." And no wonder if this love becomes 

contagious amongst the spirit-begotten and Truth-enlightened, 

so that he that loveth him that begat will love 

also all who are begotten of him. (I John 5:1.) Here, 

then, we have the secret of the tie that binds our hearts 

in Christian love. If these farthings shall remind us 

of the sparrows, and the sparrows remind us of our 

Lord's words respecting the Father's love for us and 

care for us and of his new commandment, that we love 

one another as he loved us, then they will, indeed, be 

mighty sermons to us, repeated each time we see them. 



After we had bidden farewell to the representatives 
of the New York City Church, a speedy train enabled 
us to be with the Bible House family at 8:15 Saturday 
evening, where we were warmly welcomed by about 

R4180 : page 168 

fifty— with prayer and refreshments, preceded by the 
singing of the following hymn, the first verse of which 
represented our sentiments, and the other two the sentiments 
of the family: 

"Home again! Home again! 

From a foreign shore. 
And oh! it fills my soul with joy 

To meet you all once more. 
Here I left the friends so dear, 

To cross the ocean's foam; 
But now I'm once again with those 

Who fondly greet me home." 

"Welcome home! Welcome home! 

This our happy strain; 
For God in love has overruled, 

And brought thee home again. 
Day by day our earnest prayers 

Were with thee o'er the sea, 
That God would bless his work abroad, 

And gently care for thee. 

"Happy hearts, happy hearts, 

Join in grateful praise 
To him who guides and guards his own 

Throughout their earthly days. 
Cords of love our hearts entwine, 



Sweet love that shall not fail; 
'Twill firmly bind us while on earth, 
And reach beyond the vail." 



R4181 :page 168 

"MY LORD AND MY GOD" 

--JOHN 20:19-31. -JUNE 1 .- 

Golden Text:— "Thomas answered and said 
unto him, my Lord and my God."— v. 28. 

THE story of our Lord's resurrection never loses its 

interest to the Christian. With the cross and 

Pentecost and our Lord's second coming and the 

resurrection of the Church, it is one of the most important 

events recorded in the Word of God. Whatever 

helps to impress it upon our minds assists in establishing 

in us the faith once delivered unto the saints. Indeed 

we may say that if Christian people in general 

studied, understood and appreciated the resurrection 

of Jesus it would correct very many of the errors of 

theology received from the "dark ages" and it would 

protect them from other doctrinal errors of our day. 

Let the words of the apostles then sink deep into our 

hearts. If Christ be not risen your faith is vain and 

our preaching is vain, ye are yet in your sins (I Cor. 15:17), 

and we who have espoused the cause of Christ 

are most wretchedly deceived. Whoever realizes the 

force of the Apostle's words and trusts to him as an 

inspired teacher, will assuredly not believe that the 

dead are alive, but that, as the Scriptures declare, their 

hope is that eventually they will be made alive by their 

resurrection from the dead. Connecting this lesson 

with the preceding one brings to our attention our 

Lord's manifestation to two of his disciples on the day 

of his resurrection as they were walking into the country 

to the home of one of them at Emmaus. The name of but 

one is given, Cleopas; the other has been variously suggested 

to have been Nathaniel or Peter, but nothing is 

known on the subject. The two travelers were talking 

as they walked, and of course the topic of their conversation 

was the great tragedy of three days before and 

the consequent disappointment of all the grand hopes 

they had built of sharing with Messiah in his Kingdom. 

What wonder that they were sad! It was at this juncture 

that Jesus, in another form, overtook them and in 

passing looked upon them saying, sympathetically, 

Countrymen, wherefore so sad; is there any special 

trouble? Their reply was, Perhaps you are a stranger 

hereabouts and have not heard of the recent tragedy? 

Jesus, a just and true and noble character, was taken 

by our rulers and delivered over to the Roman authorities 



for crucifixion, because they were envious of him 
and of his growing influence with the people. It is a 
sad thing that such an occurrence should ever take 
place in this city of Jerusalem. Besides we and many 
others were witnesses of his good works and wonderful 
teachings and know that never man spake like this man. 
What wonder, then, that we are sad! Just as you came 
we were discussing a new feature of the matter; we 
have just heard that the tomb in which he was buried 
was robbed, but some of our friends declare that they 
saw at the sepulchre a vision of angels and received the 
message that he had risen from the dead! Ah, Sir, we 
are living in strange times; we know not what to think 
of these things; we are perplexed! 

"HE OPENED TO THEM THE SCRIPTURES" 

To the surprise of these sorrowful men their fellow-traveler 
was mighty in the Scriptures; he seemed to be 
sympathetic, to be a believer in Jesus and his Messiahship, 
but he had a remarkable way of presenting matters, 
explaining to them that they should not be sad, 
but on the contrary glad; that the very matters that 
were casting such a gloom over their lives were important 
features in the fulfilment of the divine program 
and in full accord with the teachings of Jesus and with 
the Scriptures. We may well suppose that he carried 
their minds backward and reminded them of the original 
promise made at the time of sin's first victory, that the 
Seed of the woman should bruise the serpent's head, 
but that it should mean the bruising of his heel. Thus 
the crushing of evil was pictured, and the fact that it 
would cost Messiah something of suffering was also implied, 
but that the suffering would be insignificant and 
the destruction of the Adversary would be ultimately 
complete. 

We can also imagine his telling them about Abraham 
typifying the Father and Isaac typifying the Son, 
Messiah, and that Isaac's consecration to death, from 
which Abraham received him in a figure, was a typical 
fulfilment of the fact that Messiah must actually die 
and rise from the dead, and that this was illustrated in 
the various types of the Law, in the Passover lamb and 

R4181 :page 169 

also in the sin-offering of the Atonement Day. Coming 
down he doubtless mentioned Joseph as a type of Messiah 
and that his imprisonment, before he was exalted 
to association with Pharaoh in the government, was a 
type of Christ's imprisonment in death before his exaltation 
to be the Life Giver to the world and next to the 
Father in the Kingdom. Doubtless he reminded them 
also of the words of the Prophet Isaiah, "He shall be 
led as a lamb to the slaughter, as a sheep before his 
shearer is dumb, so he opened not his mouth." We can 



think of many Scriptures which he doubtless quoted 
and thus brought to their attention, telling them that 
they had been slow of heart to believe all that God's 
Word contained on this subject, that they had believed 
the glorious features but had failed to give proper 
weight to the ignominious, sacrificial features of the 
divine plan which were not less necessary, indeed were 
fundamental, the basis upon which the blessings should 
ultimately rest. He also assured them that it behooved 
the Son of man to suffer, that it was necessary for him 
to suffer as the redemption price of Adam and his race 
and that then he should rise from the dead to be their 
Deliverer. 

The narrative does not tell with what amazement 
the two sorrowing disciples looked at their companion 
and wondered at his erudition and knowledge of the 
Scriptures, which was so much greater than their own, 
so much greater than that of the other apostles! No 
wonder that reaching their home they invited him to 
stay with them! He made as though he would go 
farther and undoubtedly would have done so had they 
not been anxious to have him stay; but they urged him, 
pleading that the day was far gone, that he could not 
accomplish much in the remaining hours and that they 
would like to have his fellowship. 

KNOWN IN THE BREAKING OF BREAD 

Soon they were seated at their simple evening meal, 
and without hesitation the wonderful stranger, who 
seemed to have such a grasp of the divine plan, was requested 
to ask a blessing upon the food. It was as he 
asked the blessing that they recognized his familiar 
tones and that it was none other than Jesus who could 
teach them as he had done— and simultaneously with 
this thought the stranger vanished. He had accomplished 
his purpose; why should he remain? His purpose 
was threefold: He would prepare their minds by 
pointing out to them the prophecies and the necessity 
for their fulfilment and their order for fulfilment; 
secondly, he would demonstrate to them not only his 
resurrection but also his change, that he was no longer 
the man Christ Jesus, but the same Jesus under new 
conditions, a spirit being, no longer limited in any respect; 
now he could appear and disappear at his convenience 
and in one form or in another form, as suited 
best his purposes, and in one garb or in another garb 
as would serve the occasion best. Thus to Mary he appeared 
as a gardener, to these two disciples as a traveler 
—but neither Mary nor these noted any print of nails in 
his feet or in his hands; although they were close to 
him, neither recognized his features nor his clothing— 
in fact, his raiment, as we remember, was divided 
amongst the Roman soldiers, and what he wore, therefore, 
must have been specially provided for the occasion, 
just as the wine was provided at the Cana marriage by 



divine power, which is so incomprehensible to us. 
"DID NOT OUR HEARTS BURN?" 

When our Lord vanished the two disciples were 
thoroughly aroused. We can imagine the looks upon 
their faces, the earnestness of their motions and the 
beam of their eyes as they said to one another, "Did 
not our hearts burn within us by the way as he talked to 
us and opened to us the Scriptures?" Ah, yes! Joy 
had now taken the place of sorrow with them; his explanation 
of the prophecies which made their hearts 
burn at the time caused them to glow still more now 
that they knew the speaker, recognized him as their 
crucified and risen Lord. They hastened back to the city 
seven miles away. They were so full of enthusiasm that 
they could not be content to rest at home with their 
glorious message while they knew that other dear hearts 
were in perplexity. They had the true spirit of discipleship, 
the desire to tell the good tidings of great 
joy, whatever the cost, to those who had the ear to hear. 

And are not our experiences similar to theirs notwithstanding 
the fact that centuries have since elapsed? 
Indeed, our condition is very similar to theirs in this 
respect. The false doctrines of the "dark ages" have 
cast a gloom and a sorrow and fear and disquiet over 
all Christian hearts. The story of the resurrection is 
still with us, but it has been made rather meaningless 
by the various false doctrines, as, for instance, that our 
Lord was the heavenly Father himself, that he did not 
die, could not die, else the Universe would have been 
without a Ruler, hence, that there is no real death, no 
real atonement for sin, but more or less of a deception 
practiced, a make-believe dying upon the cross while 
Christ as the Father permitted the deception to be 
worked. Surely thus our Lord has been taken away and 
we know not where they have laid him; and what is true 
of us is true of all the Lord's truly consecrated 
people. But now in this harvest time the Master is 

R4182 : page 169 

again present with his people. We are in his parousia, 
in the time of his presence in the end of the age, 
and those who have been watching and hearkening 
have heard the prophetic knock indicating the time of 
his presence, and have opened their hearts. Our hearts 
burn within us now as we come to understand better 
than in the past the great messages of God's Word, 
telling us of his love not only for the Church but also 
for the world, and of the redemption accomplished 
through the precious blood and of the salvation that 
shall be brought unto us at the revelation of our Lord 
and Saviour Jesus Christ in Kingdom glory; yea, and 
of a blessing also upon all the families of the earth which 
will be willing to receive the same into good and honest 



hearts. Do not our hearts burn within us as these 
prophecies of old open before us and we see their 
true significance? And shall not we like these disciples 
at Emmaus arise hastily and go to the brethren 
wherever they may be and tell them the blessed tidings 

R4182 : page 170 

of the Redeemer's presence, to help them to understand 
the riches of God's grace as outlined in his 
precious Word? Surely all who have the proper feeling 
have this missionary spirit and desire to do good to all 
men, especially those of the household of faith.— Gal. 6:10. 

"HE BREATHED ON THEM" 

Meantime Jesus, the spirit being, immediately 
transferred himself from Emmaus to the upper room 
where the disciples were assembled and the doors 
were fastened because they were fearing the Jews 
and also that the persecution which had come to the 
Lord might also extend to them. They were having 
their evening meal when our Lord, discarding the body 
and the clothing in which he had appeared to the two 
at Emmaus as a spirit being, came into their midst while 
the doors were shut, just as an angel could do. There 
he materialized, created for himself a body of flesh with 
clothing and in an instant stood before the disciples, 
who were terrified and were scarcely calmed by his 
familiar salutation, "Peace be unto you." It was still 
the first day of the week, the day of his resurrection; 
we may be sure the disciples were discussing the great 
and momentous event and the news they had indirectly 
received of our Lord's resurrection. They were endeavoring 
to harmonize the various stories told by the 
women, wondering to what extent they had been deceived, 
etc. And now to hear the Master's own words 
saying, "Peace be unto you,"— what could it mean? It 
meant a confirmation of the story of the women that 
they had actually seen the Lord, that he really was no 
longer dead. Then the Master showed them the 
wounded side and lacerated feet and hands, and their 
fright was turned into joy. The perplexities were not 
all gone; but they were getting the lesson that their 
Master was triumphant over death. Undoubtedly they 
were still perplexed at his appearing to them while the 
doors were shut; it would require a little time for them 
to learn that he was no longer the man Christ Jesus but 
the glorified Jesus, the spirit Jesus. They got a further 
lesson on this subject when a few moments later he 
vanished out of their sight, or, as some would say, dematerialized. 
The material body and clothing could 
not have gone through the walls while the doors were 
shut; a spirit being, however, is not limited by doors 
or locks or walls and our Lord, a spirit being, had used 
spirit powers and then additionally had created the 



body in which he then appeared, which was in still 
another form than that of a gardener, a stranger, a 
traveler to Emmaus. 

Here our Lord took occasion to give his commission 
to the apostles, saying, "As the Father sent me, even 
so send I you." I have done the work the Father gave 
me to do; I now appoint to you a great work, which 
you are to do in my name, even as I worked in my 
Father's name. Symbolically then, as conveying to 
them a lesson, Jesus breathed upon them and said, 
"Receive ye the holy Spirit." He thus represented that 
he would put his Spirit, his disposition upon them which 
would enable them to carry out their commission, even 
as his own reception of the holy Spirit at the time of his 
baptism enabled him to carry out his consecration. 
What he did was rather a pantomime teaching; they 
must tarry at Jerusalem before they would really be 
endued with power from on high, before they would be 
endued with the holy Spirit. And why must they wait 
for Pentecost? Because the holy Spirit could come only 
upon those who were fully reconciled to the Father, 
and before they could be acceptable to the Father the 
great Redeemer must first ascend on high and appear 
in God's presence on their behalf and on behalf of all 
the household of faith to apply for them the merit of 
his sacrifice as a covering for all of their blemishes, 
that through him they might be acceptable to the Father 
and be permitted to receive the full adoption of the 
holy Spirit as the sons of God. 

SINS REMITTED-SINS RETAINED 

Addressing the apostles our Lord indicated the 
dignity of their complete representation of himself, 
saying, "Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted 
unto them; and whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained. 
This dignity, this honor, this privilege was 
not granted to all believers, but merely to the apostles. 
And it is not true that this authority descended from 
them to others, the clergy, nor that the power to forgive 
sins nor to fix the responsibility for sins is thus come to 
reside in those who are alleged to have been called by 
apostolic succession in the laying on of hands. The 
apostles had no such successors; there were only 
twelve and when one (Judas) lost his bishopric it was 
given to another, St. Paul. These twelve are represented 
in the symbols of Revelation as the twelve 
foundation stones of the New Jerusalem, and these alone 
were the apostles of the Lamb, specially privileged as 
such, and specially addressed in the above words. 

It is right, therefore, that we should heed carefully 
the words of the twelve apostles as being a divine revelation 
in the most special sense, that we should note 
well what they tell us of such sins as are cancelled by 
the merit of Christ's sacrifice and which sins are not 
cancellable, but are sins unto death or sins for which 



a measure of stripes must be inflicted. In view of this 
how carefully we should study not only the words of 
the Master himself but also those of the apostles, to 
note the conditions upon which God is willing to accept 
all who come unto him through Christ and the conditions 
upon which sins may be forgiven. 

But while it is not granted to any but the apostles 
thus to fix the limitations upon which sins are forgivable 
and which sins must be punished, it is the province 
of all those whom the Lord uses as his mouthpieces to 
make known these limitations to the Church and to point 
out to them the teachings of the apostles on these subjects. 
Thus it is our privilege today to explain to those 
who have hearing ears what are the conditions of justification 
by faith and reconciliation to the Father and 
what are the conditions leading to the Second Death— 
not on our own authority, not on our own account, but 
in the name of the Lord through his apostles, whose 
words we properly quote in substantiation. 

R4182:page 171 

"MY LORD AND MY GOD" 

The Apostle Thomas was not with the others on 
that first Sunday evening that our Lord appeared in the 
upper room. It was probably fortunate for many since 
that he was absent and that he was of that doubting 
disposition which lead him to rebuke the others for 
having believed in the Lord's resurrection upon too 
slight evidence. When they related to him the circumstances 
he declared, "Unless I put my finger in the 
prints of the nails and thrust my hand into his side I 
will not believe." An entire week passed and there was 
no further manifestation of our Lord so far as the records 
show until the next first day of the week, probably 
again in the evening, the beginning of the eighth 
day from the time of our Lord's resurrection. On this 
occasion all of the eleven apostles were present. The 
conditions were very similar to those of the week previous. 
Possibly they had been expecting all through the 
week to see our Lord and had been disappointed and 
when they were together a week later they hoped that 
this would be a favorable time for him to reveal himself. 
Thereafter the first day of the week was made 
an occasion for special meetings of the Lord's followers 
in remembrance of his revelations of himself on the first 
and on the eighth days. Thus as the Jewish Law, providing 
for the seventh-day Sabbath, was recognized as 
ending with the Jewish dispensation, the Gospel 
Church, under the guidance of the holy Spirit and freed 
from the Law, nevertheless desired a special day in the 
week for rest and spiritual refreshment, and the choice 
for the first day became very pronounced. We must 
remember, however, that there is no stipulation of the 
first day of the week nor any other day as a Sabbath. 



As Christians we delight to have the Sabbath spirit, the 
spirit of consecration to the Lord every day, and we are 
glad that the first day of the week is so generally observed 
by the nominal Church and that thus the Lord's 
Spiritual Israel can have the more favorable opportunity 
for fellowship with him and with each other on the 
day which most beautifully represents their hopes, the 
resurrection day, the day which marked the beginning 
of the new hope, new joy and a new dispensation of 
divine providence. 

When our Lord appeared on this occasion he addressed 
Thomas particularly, showing that he had 
knowledge of what his disciples had discussed when 

R4183 :page 171 

they saw him not. Using Thomas' own language he 
exhorted him to stretch hither his finger and put it into 
the print of the nails and to thrust his hand into his 
side, and not be faithless but believing. The fact that 
Thomas was not too easily convinced gives us all the 
more assurance that the manifestations were unquestionably 
genuine and conclusive to those honorable 
men who bore witness thereto at the cost of their reputation, 
their influence, their lives— their all. We are not 
informed whether or not Thomas did put his finger into 
the nail prints and his hand into our Lord's side; it 
matters not, for at all events his mind was convinced. 

Thomas' response is the Golden Text of this lesson, 
"My Lord and my God!" He recognized a divine power 
as indubitably attested by this manifestation; he knew 
therefore that the one in whose presence he stood was 
not only his Lord and Master Jesus, whose disciple he 
had become, but he recognized him as his God, as a 
mighty one, superior to all mankind, worthy to be 
called by the name God, which signifies "mighty one." 
This would not, however, mean that Thomas supposed 
our Lord Jesus to be the heavenly Father. We are to 
remember that the word God is applied not only to the 
Father and to the Son but also to the holy angels and 
on one occasion to men, to the seventy elders of Israel, 
whom Moses appointed in the wilderness. 

Nevertheless we delight to remember the testimony 
of the Word that all men should honor the Son as they 
honor the Father also. The word also signifies that 
there are two so far as personality is concerned, though 
they are one so far as purpose and plan are concerned, 
as our Lord declared. Thus our Lord testified that all 
of his followers are to become one, even as he and the 
Father are one— one in purpose, in intent, in will, in 
spirit. Thus we also properly recognize the Lord Jesus 
as our God, a mighty one, in harmony with and one 
with the Father. 



R4183 :page 171 

A LETTER FROM SOUTH AFRICA 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

I am today in receipt of your welcome letter of 24th 
ult. I esteem it highly, and was exceedingly glad to 
hear from you. 

I shall have much pleasure in giving you my honest 
opinion about the translation you mention, when it 
reaches me. I regret to find that you have met with so 
many disappointments in the translation. 

Brother Booth is very active in connection with the 
Millennial message. I am deeply interested in your six 
books, and have two brothers similarly interested; 
one is a clergyman of the Dutch Church; not only a 
reader, but a thinker. He is emeritus; resides at Pretoria, 
Transvaal, and edits a Dutch Church paper, besides 
preaching when requested. I do not know how 
far the Lord means to use him in spreading the DAWN 
message. 

Then there is a mutual friend of Brother Booth and 
myself, Rev. J. H. Orr, minister of the Independent 
Congregational Church, Wymberg (one of our suburbs), 
who is already preaching some of the new truths contained 
in your books. 

As you will have heard, quite a nice little company, 
of which I was one, all interested in the Millennial 
message, assembled in Brother Orr's Church to 
celebrate the Passover— five Europeans, 29 natives (conducted 
in three languages— English, Dutch, Sixloga.) 
It was an important and impressive hour, and a new era 
in our lives. 

Brother Orr is preaching the message, with great 
acceptance by his hearers. 

Your books have left a deep impression upon me, 
and I am watching to see how far the Lord will see fit 
to use me in spreading the truths they contain. 

No doubt Brother Booth has written to you about 
the native brethren, Oliphant and the student. Herein 
we observe the hand of God also. 

I have been doing what I can to assist Brother 
Booth in getting your publications out among the 
people. No license is needed for the sale of books, only 
for stationery, etc. 

With sincere regards, believe me, 

Truly yours in Jesus, 

L. DE BEER, -Africa. 



R4183 : page 172 

"LOVEST THOU ME MORE THAN THESE?" 
-JOHN 21: 1-25. -JUNE 14.- 



Golden Text:— "Lo, I am with you alway, even 
unto the end of the world. "-Matt. 28:20. 

QUITE a long interval elapsed between our Lord's 

appearance to the disciples on the eighth 

day (which was the sixth manifestation after 

his resurrection) and the one recorded in this lesson; it 

was about three weeks. During that interval we may 

be sure that our Lord was frequently with the apostles 

in spirit, watching over their interests. During that 

time the excitement incidental to his resurrection and 

six appearances within eight days wore off. Week after 

week they waited for further manifestations, and then 

concluded that something more practical should occupy 

their attention. Peter, because of his years and 

natural leadership, was the first to suggest a practical 

turn of affairs, saying, "I go a fishing"— I will return to 

the fishing business; what will you do? James and 

John, former partners with Peter, replied that they were 

of the same mind, and speedily the partnership was revived. 

They returned to Palestine and took possession 

of the ships and fishing tackle which they had abandoned 

three years before in obedience to the Master's call— 

"I will make you fishers of men." We can imagine the 

disappointment of those men; and yet as they looked 

back and thought of the blessings experienced during 

the three years of following Jesus they must have felt 

glad as well as regretful; glad that they had been with 

the Master, and that they had had such a blessed 

season of cooperation, but regretful that the whole 

matter had evidently come to naught; that in the eyes 

of their neighbors and friends they had made fools of 

themselves, been deceived; they must have been grieved 

also because a return to the former occupation would 

be comparatively distasteful to them. Their first 

night's experience in the fishing business was calculated 

to disappoint them greatly; they toiled all night 

and caught nothing. 

"JESUS STOOD ON THE SHORE" 

With the morning dawn they were approaching the 
shore faint-hearted and discouraged, when a voice from 
the shore attracted their attention; some one calling 
for fish, they were obliged to reply that they had none. 
Then the stranger on the shore directed that the net be 
cast on the right side of the boat. They followed the 
suggestion of letting down the net again, when immediately 
it was full of large fish. 

It was the loving John who first realized that the 
miracle implied that the stranger on the shore was the 
Lord, and he proclaimed his conviction to Peter. The 
latter, a man of action, and doubtless still suffering 
at heart from his denial of the Lord, plunged into the 
sea and swam ashore, but evidently was timid when he 



reached the land and waited and helped to pull the net 
full of fish to the shore. When the three fishermen 
were landed and things made fast and safe, it was 
noticed that the stranger had a fire of coals and fish 
thereon, and he invited the weary ones to come and have 
breakfast with him. This they did. It is not probable 
that they ate in silence, yet their conversation is not 
recorded, except that none of the disciples felt at liberty 
to inquire if it were the Lord, knowing, confident that 
it was he. There is no indication that on this occasion 
our Lord appeared with marks in his hands or his feet 
or his side; everything implies that he appeared in still 
another form, and was thus giving them another lesson 
in the fact that he not only had risen from the dead but 
was wholly changed, and was now a spirit being, who 
could go and come like the wind and they could not 
tell whence he came or whither he went; he could appear 
in a form best suited to the occasion. 

"SIMON, LOVEST THOU ME?" 

Poor Peter was doubtless wishing for some favorable 
opportunity to make some amends for his denial of 
the Lord, when our Lord looked at him and addressed 
him not as Peter, a rock, but as Simon, saying, "Lovest 
thou me more than these?" He may have meant, Do 
you love me more than these nets and boats and this 
fishing business? or he may have meant, Do you love 
me more than these other disciples? At least there was 
an opportunity for Peter to call to mind his own rather 
boastful expression of love for the Lord on the same 
night in which he denied him. He had said, "Lord, 
though all should forsake thee yet will not I." Peter replied 
without making any comparison between himself 
and the others or the fishing implements, saying, 
"Lord, thou knowest that I love thee." Our Lord used 
the word agapao for love, while Peter used a different 
word, phileo, supposed to signify a warm, personal 
affection. Upon this declaration our Lord replied, 
"Feed my lambs," my little sheep. There was in this 
the suggestion of a partial restoration of Peter to the 
work of the ministry. Three years before, our Lord had 
taught the multitudes on the shore from Peter's boat, 
and subsequently had performed the miracle of granting 
them a great draught of fishes, so great that the 
net broke. Following that incident, our Lord had said 
to Peter and James and John, "Follow me, and I will 
make you fishers of men." Now he gave them a similar 
miracle, and the net did not break, although 153 large 
fish were caught; and it was now, after this catch, that 

R4184 : page 172 

our Lord wished again to start the apostles as fishers of 
men under the auspices of the Gospel dispensation 
beginning with Pentecost, when they would be endued 



with power from on high. Although our Lord did not 
directly reprove Peter, he nevertheless impressed upon 
him the seriousness of his mistake and his denial, and 
intimated that thereby he had forfeited his place as one 
of the apostles. This new commission that he might 
feed the lambs of the flock indirectly implied that he 
might not be a full shepherd amongst the sheep. But 
our Lord again put the same question in the same form, 
and Peter replied in the same words. Jesus then extended 
the commission to him, saying, "Tend my sheep," 
care for the sheep, serve the sheep. By these two parts 
of the commission Peter was authorized to feed the 
lambs, but merely to tend the sheep; he had not yet received 
the full liberties of shepherding. As Peter had 
denied the Lord three times, so our Lord questioned 
him the third time, this time, however, changing the 
word for love to phileo. Perhaps Peter recognized the 
analogy; in any event he was deeply grieved at this third 
questioning of his love and that our Lord used this 
time the word phileo. Peter's reply was pathetic, "Lord, 
thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I love thee." 
With this third confession our Lord restored him fully 
as a bishop or shepherd, saying, "Feed my sheep." He 
was authorized not only to feed the lambs and tend the 
sheep but finally to feed the sheep also. We are glad 

R4184 : page 173 

for Peter; and we admire our Lord's course in adopting 
such a skilful method of reproof and his generosity in 
not reproving more severely. Let us learn lessons from 
this grand exampler! Are there any other lessons we 
may learn from our Lord's words? Is it not well that 
we inquire each of his own heart whether or not we 
have a warm, deep, earnest love for the Lord, or if it is 
only a general love and admiration? We are to seek to 
cultivate that personal fellowship with the Master which 
will enable us to answer these questions affirmatively, 
and to assure him that we love him more than lands or 
houses, boats or nets, parents or children, husband or 
wife or self. As our heavenly Bridegroom he is worthy 
of our love, and if we do not feel this love toward him 
we are not of the kind fit for the Kingdom, not fit to be 
members of the Bride, the Lamb's Wife. And how 
shall we know, how shall we test our own hearts as to 
the degree of our love for the Lord? How will the 
Lord test us if not by permitting trials and difficulties, 
oppositions, etc., to overtake us? As our Lord hid 
himself from the apostles for three weeks or more, yet 
was near them watching over them and ready to take 
advantage of the most favorable moment to impart the 
necessary lessons, so we may be sure that he watches 
over our interests to give us needed instruction and 
guidance— and if sometimes he hides his face behind a 
frowning providence it is with a view to our blessing or 
strengthening, to prepare us to appropriate some valuable 



lessons which will be helpful to us in our 
preparation for a place in the throne. Let us, then, 
rejoice even in tribulation, knowing what it is working 
out, and in such tribulation let us ask ourselves the 
question, How am I showing my Lord that I love him 
supremely? 

As our Lord said to Peter upon the profession of 
his love that he might feed the lambs and tend and 
feed the sheep, so he says to all who are his followers. 
Not that we can have the honorable place of apostles 
in connection with the Lord's dear flock, but that each 
of us may find opportunities for tending and assisting, 
feeding, nourishing the flock of God, especially all 
whom the Lord's providences place in the Church as 
elders so that, as the Apostle Paul said of the elders at 
Ephesus, they may feed the flock of God over whom the 
Spirit has made them overseers, bishops, shepherds. 
(Acts 20:28.) It is proper, nevertheless, that each one 
for himself provide things decent and honest in the 
sight of all in a temporal way; it is also necessary and 
proper that each under-shepherd give attention to his 
own spiritual feeding and refreshment; but it is very 
important that the Master's commission in respect to 
the flock shall have a prominent place in our hearts, 
that we shall rightly esteem it a great privilege to feed 
and to tend the Lord's followers in his name and as far 
as possible in his spirit of self-denial, self-sacrifice, in 
loving service, laying down our lives for the sheep, as 
he did. Whoever is heedless of the sheep should not 
in any sense of the word be recognized as an Elder, a 
leader, and each dear Elder should be esteemed and 
chosen to the position by his brethren because of evidence 
of loving zeal and devotion to the cause of the 
great Shepherd and the flock, and not from any selfish 
or worldly reasons. The primary qualification of an 
Elder in the Church, an under-shepherd, must necessarily 
be love for the Lord. All of the eloquence, all of 
the zeal might be hindrances and injurious to the flock's 
best interest, except as love for the great Shepherd 
would be the mainspring of action. And how may we 
know who has love for the Lord, and know of its 
measure? Our Lord tells us through the Apostle that 
if we love not our brethren whom we have seen we would 
be deceiving ourselves if we claim to love God, whom 
we have not seen. Hence love for our Lord must be 
expected to manifest itself in love for the brethren, and 
only those who manifest great love and sympathy, 
benevolence, patience, gentleness, brotherly kindness 
for the dear flock, are to be considered faithful shepherds 
or worthy of eldership. The self-seeking, the 
ambitious are to be feared and not to be encouraged. 

"WHAT SHALL THIS MAN DO?" 

Following the questioning our Lord, still addressing 
the Apostle Peter, made a prophecy respecting him that 



he would live to be an old man, and that then he would 
be deprived of his liberties. This was not a very bright 
prospect to hold out before Peter; it meant a further 
testing of his loyalty. We are glad to know that the 
Apostle was not discouraged, and that he was faithful 
even unto death. The prophecy proved to Peter and to 
the other apostles present, that in the work in which 
they were to engage afresh they were not to expect 
Kingdom honors and blessings, but rather to remember 
the Lord's previous declaration that the servant is not 
above his Master, and that as men despitefully used 
the Master the servants must expect nothing better. 
How nobly those chosen ones came up to the various 
tests and requirements placed upon them! There is a 
lesson for us, too, along the same lines, namely, that 
faithfulness to our Master will probably bring us tribulation 
of one kind or another. Hence we are not to seek 
our own wills or our own ways, but rather to look for 
and accept the Lord's providential guidance of our interests 
and to prefer this, knowing that he is able always 
to make all things work together for our good as New 
Creatures. John tells us that our Lord's words were 
understood to signify that Peter would die a violent 
death, and that in conclusion Jesus said, "Follow me," 
note my example and copy it. 

Peter evidently felt that the conversation was 
pivoted largely upon himself and sought to turn it a 
little, saying respecting John, whom he recognized as 
the Lord's favorite disciple, "Lord, what shall this man 
do?" What is your prediction and what will be your 
providence in respect to John? Our Lord's reply was 
almost curt; it amounted to, Mind your own business 
and you will have plenty to do, though it was stated 
in a more polite form. Jesus said, "If I will that he 
tarry until I come, 

WHAT IS THAT TO THEE? FOLLOW THOU ME" 

This is a difficult lesson for all of the Lord's 
followers to learn, but a very important one. If we 
allow ourselves to look about us and to wonder why 
some fellow-disciple is not receiving apparently the 
same amount of chastisement or trials or difficulties or 
burdens that the Lord permits to come to us, and if 
then we permit ourselves to become judges of the Lord 
and his wisdom and his providences, the result will be 
disastrous to ourselves. It will destroy our peace and 
undermine our faith and hinder us from learning the 
lessons necessary to prepare us for the Kingdom. If 
such criticisms of divine providence at any time come to 
our minds, we should answer ourselves, promptly, in the 

R4184 : page 174 

language of our Lord to Peter, "What is that to thee? 
Follow thou me." You are not competent to regulate 



these matters, nor is it proper nor necessary for the 
Master to explain to you all of his plans and purposes. 
It is far better for you that you learn faith, submission 
and trust. No two of us have the same natural disposition, 
no two of us, therefore, need the same disciplinary 
training at the hand of the Lord. We have 
confidence in his wisdom and love; let us manifest 
it, realizing that if our trials are greater our blessings 
will be proportionate, and as the Lord said to Paul, so 
he would say to each of us, "My grace is sufficient for 
thee, my strength is made perfect in weakness." 
(2 Cor. 12:9.) With the Apostle let us say, If, therefore, 
the Lord's grace is proportionate to our trials let us 
receive with rejoicing all the trials he may send that 
we may have the more of his grace ! It is for each 
sheep to know the Shepherd and to follow him, taking 
as straight paths for his feet as possible, and leaving 
with the Shepherd the general oversight of the flock 
and its interests, giving attention in proportion as the 
Lord through the brethren gives opportunity to assist 
in the shepherding work and in the name of the Lord 
to counsel or assist his dear flock. 

"THAT HE TARRY TILL I COME" 

Our Lord had clearly indicated that Peter would not 
tarry until his second coming, that he would die, and 
now, without saying that John would tarry until he 
should come, he merely said, If it should be my arrangement 
that he tarry till I come, would that interfere, 
Peter, with your arrangements and my dealings with 
you as my follower? But the matter became a proverb 
amongst the Lord's followers that John would not 

R4185 : page 174 

die, and the fact is that he outlived all the other 
apostles. Yet he himself did not understand the 
Master's words to mean that he would not die, for he 
so calls our attention to the matter in this very lesson. 

There is a sense in which John has tarried until the 
second coming of Christ, namely, in that he was made 
a representative of the whole Church in the book of 
Revelation. The things which happened to John are 
the things which have happened or will happen to the 
Church. The angel showed John— but in reality it was 
for the John class. John fell down to worship the 
angel, and was told not to do it, and this is in reality a 
lesson to the whole Church, that they are not to be worshipers 
of God's messengers who bear to them the 
divine Word of truth and grace. The John class is, 
therefore, still in the world representatively, and we 
trust that we are members of it; it has tarried until the 
second presence of the Lord. 

Applying this lesson to ourselves further, we suggest 
that some of the dear friends seem disposed to 



query as to how long they must wait before the First 
Resurrection change shall come and which of them 
shall remain the longer, etc. Let us leave the entire 
matter to the Lord; we should be glad if our change 
should come soon, yet fully content if the Lord has 
further service for us and the change should be delayed. 
Those who experience the change the earlier will, of 
course, have in many respects the greater blessing for 
the time; but if the Lord has service for us on this side 
the vail let us be glad to do his will; let us be assured 
that he will grant sufficient grace for every experience 
of life. 

"LO, I AM WITH THEE ALWAY" 

Our Lord's assurance that he would be with his 
followers until the end of the age was a consoling message. 
He did not tell us how long the age would last, 
nor all the trials and difficulties which would intervene 
between the time of his ascension and his return for 
the harvest work and the exaltation of his Church and 
the beginning of his Kingdom reign. It has been to 
our advantage that he left us in ignorance on this point; 
but we are assured, however, that in due time the wise 
shall understand; and again through the Apostle we 
are assured, "Ye, brethren, are not in darkness that 
that day should overtake you as a thief." (I Thess. 5:4), 
but "as a snare shall it come upon all them that dwell 
on the face of the whole earth." (Luke 21:35.) Our 
Lord indicated that at his second coming he would give 
such a knock as would arouse his faithful ones and 
lead to the trimming of their lamps, that they might 
know of the presence of the Bridegroom and be prepared 
to enter with him to the wedding festival. It is 
not intended that this prophetic knock should be heard 
by the world; it is intended only for the virgin class, 
wise and foolish. 

Evidently our Lord did not intend that we should 
understand these words of the Golden Text to mean 
that he would be personally present in the world 
throughout the age. Rather we must understand him, 
in harmony with other statements, to the effect that 
the holy Spirit, the holy power of God, which came at 
Pentecost, was the representative of the Father and of 
the Son, the Spirit of both with the enlightening and 
instructing power, supervising all of our affairs and interests, 
expedient for us, beneficial to us. How glad 
we are that it is our great privilege to be living now in 
the time of the parousia, the presence of the Lord, and 
to have his special supervision in the same manner as 
when he was present with his disciples during those 
forty days before he ascended. But we are not to expect 
any materialization or manifestation of our Lord's 
presence, such as was appropriate and indeed necessary 
at that time. We have seen that the necessity then 
was that the disciples should have convincing proof 



that our Lord was risen and that he was not any longer 
human but capable of appearing in various forms. No 
longer are these lessons needed, for we know he is a 
spirit being and is present with us in this harvest time 
supervising all the work of the harvest. Indeed, we 
have every reason to be on guard now against the 
manifestations of the Adversary, knowing from the 
Scriptures that the evil spirits, the fallen angels, will 
have considerable power in the way of materializing, 
and that it will be part of their deception to endeavor 
to ensnare and deceive us by impersonating the Lord 
and the holy ones as well as earthly friends. Let us not 
seek to walk by sight, but to be quite content to walk 
by faith, as our Lord desires us to do. The promise to 
us now is that we shall see him as he is— not as he was 
—because we shall be changed that we may be made like 
him. He will no longer change himself to appear as a 
man to us. 



R4187 :page 175 

THE MIGHTY KING OF KINGS 

From far in the great aions of eternity, 
From space unlimited, unmeasured by the steps 
Of worlds, from silence broken only by the voice 
Of him, the self-existent One, whose skilful word 
Created him,* came forth the glorious Son of God! 

O sacred moment! which with shaded eyes we dare 
With holy boldness to approach; not with a vain 
Desire to see and know what God has hid, but drawn 
Thereto by that blest Spirit which in reverence 
Delights to search the deep and precious things revealed. + 

O glad Beginning of Creation's early morn! 
O glorious Finish of Creation's noon and night! 
O blessed Son, begotten of the Father's speech, 
Thou only Well-Beloved, in whom all fulness dwells! 
Silence and space alone were found to worship thee! 

But deep within the counsels of th' Eternal One 

Lay countless hosts whose praise should celebrate the Son; 

And to the Son was giv'n prerogative-H- to call 

Them to existence, in abodes of him prepared, 

And crown with happiness each creature in its sphere. 

Rich in insignia of his high rank, he still 

Delighted in the emblems of humility; 

And wore upon his heart the gem obedience, 

And clothed his arm with zeal, his feet with haste, to do 

The holy will of him who loved and cherished him. 



*Rev. 3:14. +1 Cor. 2:10. ++John 1:3. 

And now reign silence, solemn, still, as that which on 
His natal day received him; for the angels watch, 
With awe constrained, while he divests himself of all 
His wealth and glory, and becomes a babe; then loud 
Hosannas sing, "On earth be peace, good will to men." 

And lovingly they watch him as the perfect man's 
Estate he magnifies with like obedience, 
Unflinching loyalty and firm humility; 
Till, daunted not by Calv'ry's cross and shame, he gives 
His life a ransom for a helpless, dying race. 

That awful day the darkened sun and quaking earth 
Creation's anguish voiced; but One yet reigned supreme, 
Who loved him with the power of infinite strength, 
And in his master hand the mighty issues held— 
The matchless Son had won the title to a throne! 

What throne? Could all the boundless universe produce 
A worthy coronet for his escutcheon which 
Nor honor, glory, shame nor death could mar? Behold, 
The heav'nly myriads worship, while the Father crowns 
The risen Son— divine,* immortal,+ Lord of all.++ 

O hail, Immanuel! Prince of life and glory, hail! 
Let earth with heaven unite in adoration, praise, 
Thanksgiving to thy God, whose attributes thou hast 
Exalted, and to thee, whose love and sacrifice 
Constrain to endless gratitude a race redeemed! 
— R. B. Henninges. 



*Heb. 1:3, Diaglott. +John5:26. ++Rom. 14:9. 



page 175 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE IS 
SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V. (E)* 

Questions on Study IV.— 
The Author of the Atonement. 

JULY 5 

(58) Was faith in the unreasonable and unscriptural 
made a test of orthodoxy and its disbelief threatened 
with eternal torment and was the error thus fastened? 
P.64. 



(59) Is the Hebrew name Jehovah properly shown 

in our common Bibles? How many times does it occur? 
How many times is it correctly rendered and how many 
times incorrectly? P. 65, par. last. 

(60) What motive seems to have led to this kind of 
hiding of the Truth? P. 65, foot-note. 

(61) What about the word elohim— how frequently 
does it occur? What does it signify, and to whom is it 
applied? P. 66, par. 3. 

(62) What Hebrew words are used as titles for our 
Lord Jesus? P. 66, par. 4. 

(63) When elohim, the Hebrew word usually translated 
God, is used in (Psa. 8:5) and translated angels, 

is it a mistaken translation or not? Prove it. P. 67, par. 2. 

JULY 12 

(64) Is the Hebrew word elohim, usually translated 
God, ever applied in the Scriptures to the heathen or 

false gods? If so, how many times? Give some illustrations. 
P. 67, par. 3 and on. 

(65) Is this same word elohim ever applied in the 
Scriptures to men in olden times? If so, give illustrations. 
P.68, par. 3-8. 

(66) Is this word elohim ever used prophetically in 
reference to the saints of this Gospel Age? If so, give 
quotation and explain. P.68, par. 9,10, and foot-note P. 69. 

(67) Is elohim otherwise rendered in the Old Testament? 
P.69, par. 1. 

(68) What are the facts respecting the terms God 
and Lord in the New Testament? Give illustrations. 
P.69, par. 2, andP.70. 

JULY 19 

(69) What about the word Godhead of the New 
Testament— how many times does it occur, and is it 
always from the same Greek word? P. 71, par. 4. 

(70) What is the ordinarily understood meaning of 
this word Godhead, and is it the proper thought of any 
of the three Greek words used? 

(71) Give the Greek words mistranslated Godhead 
and show the meaning of each. P. 71, par. 5 and on. 

(72) Did the fact that Jesus was "worshiped" by 
his disciples and others, and the fact that he received 
such worship without protest, prove that he was Jehovah, 
his own Father? 

(73) Prove the answer by Scriptural citations. P. 72, 
73. 

JULY 26 

(74) Our Lord Jesus said explicitly, "I and my 
Father are one" (John 10:30.) Does this prove that 
he was both Father and Son, or that the one person 
filled these two offices? P. 75, par. 1,2. 



(75) When our Lord prayed for his followers, "that 
they all may be one" (John 17:21), does it signify that 
he expected or desired that all of his followers should 
ultimately become one person or one in heart-harmony 
and purpose? 

(76) How, then, must his statement of the next 

verse be understood, viz.: "that they may be one even as 
we are one"? P. 75, par. 3,4. 

(77) If "no man can see God and live" (Exod. 23:20), 
what could our Lord Jesus have meant when he said, 

"He that hath seen me hath seen the Father" (John 14:7-10)? 
P.76,77. 



*Five years ago DAWN-STUDIES, VOL. V., was reset, and 
unfortunately the type was not exactly same size as before; and 
hence page for page they differ. The references given in these 
Berean Studies apply to the present edition, a copy of which 
postpaid will cost you but 30c. But keep your old edition, for 
unfortunately the New Bible helps refer to its pages. 



page 177 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXIX. JUNE 15 No. 12 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

Views from the "Watch Tower" 179 

The Power of the Pulpit 179 

Clerical Weaknesses Dramatized 179 

Episcopalian Papers on Anglo-Roman Union 180 

"The Gospel Which I Preached" 181 

St. Paul's Gospel Summary 181 

"Walk as Children of Light" 182 

"Things Which are Done in Secret" 183 

The Seven Walks 184 

"To the Feet of Him" (Poem) 185 

"Pay Thy Vows Unto the Lord" 186 

Israel's Wrong Course 188 

They Desired a King 188 

Immanuel's Kingdom Autocratic 190 

Some Interesting Letters 190 

page 178 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 



"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTIONS 



The time has come when by Post Office ruling quite a 
good many names must be dropped from our lists. We have 
assured you of our willingness to supply you on credit, or, 
if you are poor, pay your subscription from a special fund 
for the purpose, but that you must send us a definite, formal 
request so to do to come within the laws. If you neglect do 
not be surprised that your paper stops and do not blame us. 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S SERMONS WEEKLY 



The Dispatch, daily, as heretofore, gives us a club-rate 
which will cost you $3 per year. 

The Cincinnati Enquirer, weekly, gives a 50c. club-rate 
per year. 

The Ft. Wayne News now gives us a yearly club-rate of 
$2.25, or a weekly rate of 75c per year. Remit to us. 

The Toronto (Canada) World gives us a club-rate of $1.50 
on its daily, except in Hamilton and Toronto, where the 
postage rate increases it to $2.75. We are surprised that we 
have so small a list for the World; we guaranteed twice as 
many and paid for them in advance. 



Colporteurs will please use our Order blanks and direct 
all business letters to "Colporteur Department." 



R4185 : page 179 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
THE POWER OF THE PULPIT 



THE Rev. Jonston Meyer, of Chicago, is reported to 
have recently told the theological students of the 
Chicago University that the people are tiring of 
preaching, that the power of the pulpit is on the decline, 
and that the people continue going to church only from 
force of habit, to hear the preacher. A Detroit newspaper, 
in an editorial, asks Dr. Meyer where oratory 
could find a weightier matter for discussion than in the 
redemption of mankind, and then speaks as follows 
about the great preachers of the past: 

"These people knew what they believed, and preached 
what they believed, without apologies, without reservations, 
and without dodging inconvenient facts. Perhaps 
they were sensationalists, but only because their message 
was intensively dramatic. Their confidence in their mission 
was the secret of their strength. Dr. Meyer would 
have been more correct had he said that modern 
preaching is losing its power because those engaged in 
it are half-hearted evolutionists and not expositors of the 
Scripture. They are as highly educated as their predecessors, 
perhaps just as polished and eloquent, but they 
are not so sure of the ground on which they stand, not 
so certain, or if they are they lack the courage openly to 
state what they secretly believe. The ministers are, 
therefore, degenerated and give, in place of a sermon, a 
literary treatise, which convinces nobody. It is the sensationalism 
of the melodrama, and not the sensationalism 
which lends to the tragedy of the Master's undying 
power. The sooner the pulpit is no longer the place of 
entertainment in competition with the theater and the 
lecture stage, that much sooner will it regain its old 
power and those ministers who will preach without fear the 
gospel which they have believed, and do so without bending 
their necks under the public opinion will have comparatively 
little reason for complaint." 

SPIRIT MANIFESTATIONS IN ITALY 



Rome.— Ancona has a peculiar kind of haunted house, the 



residence of Sig Maracini, the public prosecutor. Unique in 

the annals of psychical research is the particular kind of manifestation 

with which this residence has been visited. The 

extraordinary happenings are thus described by the sons of 

Sig. Maracini, who are both lawyers: 

For several days the strangest things have been happening 
in unoccupied rooms. Meanwhile there was an electrical 
disturbance, and all the bells in the house began to ring. 
Nothing, however, was wrong with the electric installation. 

But the most remarkable thing was the discovery of jets 
of water springing from the walls and almost flooding the 
floors. In the dining room milk welled up from the floor. 
We had the walls examined, the flooring broken up and the 
blocks raised, but not the least traces of milk, water or any 
other liquid was found. 

A cup filled with milk suddenly appeared in the dining 
room, followed by a cup of coffee and milk. Our father cried 
jokingly: 

"Coffee and milk? Bah! I should prefer wine." Shortly 
afterward we saw a liquid running from the walls; it was 
wine. Once a pear appeared, and then we recalled that our 
little sister had asked at table for a pear, but was refused, as 
she had already eaten enough fruit. The pear was on a dish 
which was locked away in the sideboard. When the latter 
was opened the pear was no longer there. We then thought 
that some mysterious medium-like force might be exercised by 
our sister, so we watched her carefully and followed the child, 
when she rose from the table. When she passed close to a 
book shelf where there were two volumes on Spiritualism one 
of the books was raised in the air. It touched the girl several 
times on the shoulders, then danced for a few moments in the 
air, and then was clapped against the wall at the very spot 
whence the milk had issued.— Cincinnati Enquirer. 



We keep track of such manifestations, as they are 
in line with and leading up to greater developments 
and manifestations by the demons who personate the 
dead. It will be noted that all who to any degree meddle 
with spirits, mediums, seances, etc., seem to make 
themselves the more liable to annoyances of this kind. 
Note the reference to two books on Spiritism and the 
kindnesses expressed. We know of at least two cases 
where Millennial Dawn volumes aroused an opposite 
sentiment in the spirits— the demons. "The darkness 
hateth the light!" 



CLERICAL WEAKNESSES DRAMATIZED 



"The stage has been so often assailed by the Church that 
the time appears to have come for a turning of the tables. 
A play just produced in Baltimore, called 'The Servant in the 
House,' sets out to show that 'the Church, as at present constituted, 



is a hollow mockery from foundation to dome, and 

R4186 : page 180 

that if Christ were to be born today instead of two thousand 
years ago, the first people, or rather the only class, he would 
revile would be the clergy.' The Church is measured by its 
own yard-stick and found wanting. 

"The scene is the home of a young English vicar and his 
wife. Into the home comes 'the servant in the house.' He is 
introduced as an Indian butler and he performs good service. 

"In the home of the vicar is his niece, the daughter of 
a long-absent brother, a miserable, drunken specimen of 
humanity. This representative of Socialism and the dregs of 
London unexpectedly shows up and incidentally becomes the 
real 'hero' of the play. He is the 'drain-pipe,' as he says— for 
there must be drain-pipes— that carries off all doubt and sorrow. 
He finds the trouble, all the trouble, right under the 
foundation of the crumbling church. His dramatic description 
of the cesspool of sham and show and form and creed, 
and miserable hypocrisy, that he discovers right under the 
pulpit, makes his parson brother throw off his coat and jerk 
off his clerical habiliments with disgust. 

"I am no longer a preacher, a pretender,' he declares. I 
am a man. I disown my creeds and my shams. I go to do 
the work of a man; the work that God has shown me.' 

"But into the house comes what the 'servant' calls 'the 
abomination.' He is James Ponsonby Makeshrift, D.D., the 
Most Reverend, the Lord Bishop of Lancaster— a mighty man 
in the Church. His main object in life, he confesses confidentially, 
is to swell the ranks of 'The Society for the Promotion 
and the Preservation of Emoluments of the Clergy.' He is 
the friend of the wealthy men and he gets them to dig deep 
into their pocketbooks. He is scornful of all that is not 
sanctimonious. 

"The Bishop is finally forced to confess that his doctrine, 
and the secret doctrine of all his profession, is 'to give as little 
as possible and grab as much as we can.'"— Literary Digest. 

EPISCOPALIAN PAPERS ON ANGLO-ROMAN UNION 



The Protestant Episcopal Church bids fair to have a vigorous 
question on its hands regarding the movement for Anglo-Roman 
union. The tendency of which this is a crystallized 
form has been frequently treated in her Church organs, 
but the steps taken under the leadership of the Rev. Father 
Paul James Francis, General of the Society of the Atonement, 
have precipitated something like a crisis. His new organization 
(treated in our issue of February 22) aims "to promote 
the corporate union with the Apostolic See." It seems to have 
been mainly inspired as a protest against the action taken by 
the Episcopal Church at its general convention at Richmond 
last fall in adopting the canon of the open pulpit, allowing 
any one, whatever his denominational affiliations, to preach 



in the pulpits of the Episcopal Church if he first obtains the 
consent of the bishop of the diocese. The new union, then, 
is in its nature reactionary. 

The Churchman (New York), in commenting upon Father 
Francis' movement, assumes a favorable attitude, but criticises 
the members of the Anglo-Roman union as bad "students of 
facts when they interpret to the public what can be done or 
what has been done by the Apostolic See of Rome under curial 
control inspired by traditions of absolutism, handed down and 
enforced through long years of incapacity and wilful aspirations 
for temporal control." But the importance of what the 
new movement aims at, The Churchman points out, "lies in 
the fact that churchmen on all sides, of all kinds and conditions, 
are beginning to recognize that reunion is a thing not 
to be talked about only, but to be worked for." This paper 
favors the project of the Anglican communion in trying to do 
away with its "isolation." Thus: 

"While hosts of people are pressing for closer relations 
with historic Protestant bodies, there should be the same liberty 
in the Anglican Church for a movement toward closer 
relation with Roman Catholics. Disloyalty should not be 
charged in either direction. There is not only the same liberty 
in the one that there is in the other, but there is the same 
necessity. The wrong attitude or the wrong-doing of Romanism 
and Protestantism does not lessen our duty toward unity. 
No kind of separation can be looked upon as a finality. Such 
men as Archbishops Temple and Maclagan, when they addressed 
a letter to Pope Leo XIII. on Anglican Orders, spoke 
of him as their venerable brother. Does this term of address 
mean nothing? Is not Christian courtesy based, after all, on 
the reality found in Christ's teaching as to what brother 
means, as to what brotherhood implies? 

"The Anglo-Roman union is not the sign of a revolution, 
but in a double sense it is a sign of the times, however insignificant 
its numbers. The desire for union of some sort is 
becoming universal among Christians, and publicity is a distinctive 
sign of the times. The members of the Anglo-Roman 
union in proclaiming their desires and their methods to the 
world, protect themselves from any charge of treachery or 
treason. In this respect, at least, they are to be congratulated 
in contrast with those who would Latinize and yet localize the 
American Church as a petty sect in opposition to the worldwide 
sectarianism of the Roman Communion. If it is right 
and praiseworthy that men should desire and work for union 
in Protestant directions, it must in all fairness be admitted 
that men should be allowed the same privilege to work for 
unity in the other direction." 

The idea that "Uniat churches" would result from the 
going over to Rome The Standard calls "a mere pipe-dream." 
It adds: 

"We wonder that these men do not reflect upon the peril 
in which they leave their immortal souls. They cannot plead 
invincible ignorance, for they admit that Rome is right and 
Anglicanism is wrong. They cannot plead their good intentions, 
for the Holy Father is perfectly well aware of the quixotic 
nature of their enterprise, and he would prefer to have them 



execute the much better intention of following out their logic. 
It is nothing to him that they admit his primacy and supremacy, 
for that is merely academic so long as they fail to do the 
logical and practical thing. Until they shall do that and make 
their submission, from his point of view they are contumacious 
rebels against his authority, all the more because they admit 
that authority with all its implications. We have no wish to 
see any of our clergy or communicants go to Rome; but, as 
a matter of elemental honesty and for the peace of the Church, 
we should be really glad if those who thus proclaim themselves 
to be alien to our faith and polity were consistent and 
scrupulous. They should go out from us because they are not 
of us. It is painful to have a carbuncle lanced, but it is better 
for the body to let out the poisonous humor. These men are 
living in a realm of utter illusion. They grant all the premises 
of the Roman argument and flinch at the conclusion. The 
inference from their admissions is not the propriety of their 
staying where they are until they can convert the whole 
Church; it is that they should make haste to save their own 
souls by acknowledging the vicar of Christ and shaking from 
their feet the dust of the doomed city. To refuse this act of 
obedience is an exercise of private judgment more groundless 
than any Protestant's, and none would be more forward to 
tell them so than Archbishop Ryan or Cardinal Gibbons, or his 
Holiness, Pope Pius X." 

The Living Church (Milwaukee) is the organ of the extreme 
high-church party of Episcopalianism, and has long 
striven toward achieving a "Catholic unity," but one which 
does not recognize the primacy of the Papal See. Concerning 
this movement it says: 

"Gentlemen who are taking up with this latest novelty in 
religion must realize that they are seriously embarrassing us 
who would maintain the Catholic position among Anglicans. 
If they were strong enough to prove a serious factor in our 
Church life, they would prove a most useful ally to ultra-Protestants, 
in assuring churchmen that the terminus ad quern 
of the Catholic Movement is Rome. All of us, we trust, desire 
unity, and unity that left Roman Christendom out would 
be far from complete; yet it would be cowardly for us to surrender, 
for the sake of unity, the impregnable position with 

R4186 :page 181 

respect to Catholicity which we hold. This position is that 
the Catholic Church is complete wherever the valid ministry 
of the Church, in its threefold orders, is teaching the Catholic 
faith and administering the Catholic sacraments with the living 
Presence of the Holy Spirit in her; that any primacy, whether 
of Rome or of any other see, depends upon the Church, and not 
the Church upon the primacy; that the faith can be finally defined 
only by the consensus of the whole Church, expressed 
generally and corporately as such consensus, and not by any 
single bishop; and that unity will eventually come, in the good 
providence of God, if at all, by the recognition throughout the 
Church of the equal authority of all bishops severally, and the 
appellate authority of all of them collectively. 



"We cannot do otherwise, then, than to condemn this 
movement which some have sought to exploit, through this 
most recent of ecclesiastical novelties. Whatever else may be 
said for or against it, we repudiate it as an expression of Catholic 
churchmanship . " —Literary Digest. 



R4187 :page 181 

"THE GOSPEL WHICH I PREACHED" 

-I COR. 15:1-20.~JUNE21.~ 

Golden Text:— "But these things are written that ye 
might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; 
and that believing ye might have life 
through his name."— John 20:31. 

THIS lesson is appointed as a review for the Quarter, 
and no doubt will be profitable to many so to use 
it. We, however, call attention to the reading 
lesson as a summary of the entire Gospel of Christ. 
The Apostle declares, "I declare unto you the Gospel 
which I preached unto you, which also ye have received, 
and wherein ye stand; by which also ye are 
saved, if ye keep in memory what I preached unto you, 
unless ye have believed in vain."— vs. 1,2. 

From these words we perceive how important faith 
is to present salvation. Whoever cannot believe, whatever 
the lesson, cannot be saved in this present time. 
Whoever has not heard the Gospel, as in the case of the 
heathen, is not saved in ignorance, and whoever has 
heard the Gospel and does not keep it in memory and 
thus loses its power will miss the present salvation; or, 
if it should be kept in memory, still it might be useless 
because of failure to allow the Gospel message to act 
properly upon the heart and life. These things being 
true we perceive how important it is for us to have a 
pure Gospel, to know the truth, for nothing but the 
truth can make us free. We do not mean by this that 
full knowledge of the truth is necessary either to our 
justification or to our consecration; we do not mean 
that if we have a measure of error mixed with our 
knowledge of the truth this would keep us from the 
privileges of justification and sanctification; on the 
contrary, nearly all of us were justified and brought 
into relationship with God while we had as yet much 
error in our minds. It was not, however, the error 
which justified nor the error which led us to sanctification 
or consecration; only the truth could so profit us. 
The more truth we have at the beginning the more 
favored we are, and we are blessed then in proportion 
as we get rid of the errors and superstitions which becloud 
our mental vision. The truth alone can make us 
entirely free, and hence we cannot enter fully into the 



enjoyment of all the blessings and privileges while as 
yet we are hampered by error. But may we not say 
that it is entirely probable that we shall be hampered by 
some errors, some confusion to the very end of our 
journey, and that not until our change shall come shall 
we know as we are known? 

ST. PAUL'S GOSPEL SUMMARY 

The Apostle summarizes our Christian faith saying, 
"I delivered unto you first of all [as of primary importance] 
that which I also received, how that Christ died 
for our sins according to the Scriptures; and rose again 
on the third day according to the Scriptures." This 
much of knowledge is necessary to anyone who would 
be properly termed a believer, a Christian. Hence the 
heathen, whatever their condition in their ignorance 
of these facts, could not be believers, could not be 
Christians. This is the faith which justifies, and those 
who have it not are not justified. It recognizes "our 
sins" and "Christ's death" as our ransom-price, and 
Christ's resurrection, as evincing the satisfying of 
divine justice, and that the Redeemer lives to carry out 
the glorious features of our salvation. There was a 
time when to us, as still to the majority of Christians, 
all this matter was hazy because of the false doctrines, 
false theories which filled our minds, leading us to believe 
that eternal torment was the penalty for sin and 
hindering us from understanding how Christ's death 
could meet our penalty therefor. Then again the error 
that the minute of dying means getting more alive 
hinders one from understanding how the Lord died for 
our sins and also hinders appreciation of the meaning 
of his resurrection from the dead. Nevertheless, we 
were justified even in our ignorance of the philosophy 
of these matters, justified because our faith accepted 
the general facts, namely, that we were sinners and 
that Christ did something acceptable in God's sight as 
the ransom price for our sins, and that now by the 
grace of God we are thereby relieved from the condemnation 
and brought back into fellowship of heart with 
him. 

The Apostle then proceeds to recount the evidence 
respecting our Lord's resurrection, apparently confining 
himself to those manifestations which our Lord made 
to the apostles. Thus he mentions Cephas, or Peter, 
but does not mention Cleophas, who was one of the 
two with whom the Lord talked on the way to Emmaus. 
Neither does he mention the appearance to Mary and 
the other women on the day of the resurrection. Although 
he mentions the five hundred brethren the 
apostles were amongst them. He is summing up the 
strongest kind of evidence respecting our Lord's resurrection, 
and finally says, "Last of all he was seen of me 
also as of one born before the time"— as of premature 
birth. That is to say, St. Paul saw our Lord not in 



fleshly form, but shining above the brightness of the 

noonday sun; he saw him as a spirit being, as all the 

Church hope to see him after they shall have experienced 

the resurrection change, when they shall be like 

him and see him as he is (not as he was) and share his 

glory. 

"SO WE PREACHED--SO YE BELIEVED" 

The Apostle was combating the heathen theory that 
a resurrection of the dead was unnecessary. Some 
claimed that the dead would never rise, others that in 

R4188 :page 182 

the moment of dying they become more alive than ever. 
The Apostle lays down the Christian teaching on the 
subject, namely, that the dead are dead and that without 
a resurrection there would be no hope. Those to 
whom he wrote were shortsighted; they claimed still to 
believe the resurrection of Jesus, but had dropped the 
thought of the necessity of a resurrection for others. 
The Apostle seeks to re-establish them by pointing out 
that all the hope they had received as Christians was 
built upon the resurrection of Jesus, that a dead Savior 
would be of no assistance to them; that his teaching 
and the teaching of the other apostles had been, that 
while the merit of the redemption resided in the sacrifice 
of Christ yet the redemption itself was equally dependent 
upon the resurrection of him who died for us, 
because a dead Savior could not help us. He says, 
"So we preached, and so ye believed; how, then, say 
some amongst you that there is no resurrection of the 
dead;" that you do not now see the importance of the 
doctrine of the resurrection respecting the Church? If 
it was important in respect to our Lord, is it not equally 
so in respect to the Church and the world? If, as some 
claim, the doctrine of the resurrection is foolish and 
false, then Christ is not risen. Do you say, What if he 
is not risen? I answer, "Then is our preaching vain, 
your faith is also vain, and we are found false witnesses 
to God, because we have testified of God that he 
raised up Christ; whom he raised not up, if so be that 
the dead rise not. For if the dead rise not, then is 
Christ not raised."— Vs. 13-15. 

Thus does the Apostle link together the doctrine of 
the resurrection of Jesus with the doctrine of the resurrection 
of the Church and of the world. If the latter is 
not true the former is not true; if the resurrection of 
Christ was necessary, the resurrection of the Church 
and of the world is also necessary. With what clinching 
argument the Apostle sets this forth, saying, "If 
Christ be not risen your faith is vain; ye are yet in your 
sins; yea, also, they that are fallen asleep in Christ are 
perished." If Christian people in general would study 
this lesson and allow it to have its proper weight in 



their minds, it would settle certain questions thoroughly. 
They would decide to throw away, either the teachings 
of the Apostle and the whole Bible respecting the 
condition of man in death (that he was really dead or 
figuratively said to be "asleep," waiting for the resurrection 
change in the Millennial morning), or else they 
would throw away the human theories that are blinding 
and confusing them on this subject and which teach 
that the dead are not dead but more alive than ever, 
neither dead nor asleep, but in heavenly glory or eternal 
torment. Let us take the Apostle's standpoint and 
rest our hearts and our faith thereupon. Christ died, 
and on the third day arose from the dead. His followers 
and the whole world died, and in the Millennial 
morning they are to come forth, the Little Flock in the 
First Resurrection of the blessed and holy, the world 
in general in the general resurrection unto judgment or 
trial or testing in respect to their willingness to become 
God's people or not. 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT 

The following references by another Apostle are 
fully in harmony with those of St. Paul: The Gospel was 
written that those who have the hearing ear and the 
proper heart might be enabled to believe that Jesus is 
the Anointed One, the Messiah, the Son of God, and that 
believing they might have life through his name. (John 20:31.) 
Not that merely believing will bring the life, 
for "devils also believe and tremble," but that believing 
brings them into that relationship with God where it is 
possible for them to become followers of Jesus, pupils 
in the school of Christ to learn of him; to be assisted 
in walking in his footsteps, to learn of their high 
calling of God in Christ Jesus, and by assistance 
granted, to make their calling and election sure to life 
eternal as members of his Little Flock, his Bride class. 
All this is possible in his name, in his merit, but none 
of it is possible on any other terms or conditions, for 
"there is none other name given under heaven and 
amongst men whereby we must be saved." We thank 
God, however, that while only the few have the hearing 
ear now, and hence only the few hear the divine call 
now, yet by and by all the deaf ears shall be unstopped; 
the message will be delivered in no uncertain tones and 
all shall know, from the least to the greatest, of divine 
love and mercy in Christ, and shall have the opportunity 
of accepting the same in his name or of rejecting 
and coming under the divine condemnation of the 
Second Death. 

Let us see to it with diligence, that having been 
favored so highly as we are, it shall not be said of us 
that we received the grace of God in vain! Receiving 
it let us use it, let us improve the opportunity, let 
us make our calling and election sure! 



R4188 :page 182 

"WALK AS CHILDREN OF LIGHT" 

--EPHESIANS 5:6-21.-JUNE 28.- 

Golden Text:— "Be not drunk with wine, wherein is 
excess; but be ye filled with the Spirit."— v. 18. 

AS implied by the selection of the Golden Text, the 
International Sunday-School Study styles this 
a Temperance Lesson. We shall not, however, 
treat it particularly from that standpoint, as we do not 
consider that such was the apostolic thought, except 
in the sense that temperance and abstinence from evil 
in any form are the inculcations of holy Scripture for 
all who have named the name of Christ. Thus the 
Golden Text properly sets before us that there is one 
spirit of the world and another spirit of the Lord; one 
a spirit of error, the other the spirit of truth. We are 
no longer to walk in darkness as others— in sin, in 
rioting, in drunkenness, in debauchery of various kinds; 
the Christian course is the very reverse of this, for he 
has turned his back on all these experiences and is 
walking in the light of the lamp, toward the things that 
are perfect, toward the things set before him in the 
divine Word and plan. Instead of needing alcoholic 
spirits for his refreshment he has the Spirit of the Lord, 
the holy Spirit, which exhilarates; it overcomes the 
spirit of gloom and fear, it does for him much more 
than alcoholic spirits could do for the natural man in 
the way of blotting out unpleasant memories and bringing 
in happiness. 

R4188 : page 183 

THE SEVEN WAYS OF THIS EPISTLE 

The Epistle to the Ephesians is one of the grandest 
books of the Bible. Deeply spiritual it appeals thoroughly 
only to the consecrated. Its central thought is the 
New Creation; that the justified by a consecration of 
their justified humanity, when accepted of the Lord, 
are begotten of the holy Spirit to be New Creatures in 
Christ. For such, old things have passed away— earthly 
hopes, earthly aims and ambitions; their earthly rights 
have been surrendered, and instead of them, heavenly 
prospects have been received by faith and are waited 
for, with the expectation that they will be received in 
the First Resurrection. The first part of the book of 
Ephesians relates to the theory, the philosophy of the 
change from human to spiritual, from humanity to 
membership in the New Creation; the last chapters of 
the book point out to us the effect of this change, not 



only upon the sentiments of the New Creature, the new 

will, but also the effect of the change upon the mortal 

body, which the new mind is supposed thereafter to 

hold in check, to govern, to control with more and more 

decision and ability as it grows stronger in the Lord 

and in the power of his might. The New Creature is to 

keep the old creature, the body, under; to keep it dead, 

buried. Our lesson relates particularly to this phase 

of the subject— the New Creature's battle and victory 

and its preservation, which is dependent upon the maintenance 

of its rule over the flesh. 

The opening words of our lesson (v. 6), "Let no 
man deceive you with vain words, for because of these 
things cometh the wrath of God upon the children of 
disobedience," should not be understood to signify that 
God's wrath comes because of vain words. The things 
which bring the wrath are mentioned in the preceding 
verses (3-5), fornication, uncleanness, covetousness, 
filthiness, foolish talking, ribaldry; for, as the Apostle 
explains, those in whom these characteristics are dominant, 
or those in whom the characteristics are sympathized 
with, can have no inheritance in the Kingdom of 
Christ and of God. Let no man deceive you with vain 
words on this subject, telling you that such things are 
natural, proper, excusable. They have indeed become 
second nature to many of the fallen race, but if any who 
have become New Creatures in Christ love the unclean 
things, sympathize with them, desire them, or jest 
about them, they are far from the condition which 
is becoming to saints. Such a mental attitude on 
their part would imply that they had either never 
been begotten of the Spirit of holiness or else they 
were returning again like a sow that was washed 
to wallow in the mire. These things are characteristic 
of the children of disobedience, but not characteristic 
of the children of obedience. The Apostle says elsewhere, 
Such were ye; but now ye are washed, but ye 
are justified, but ye are sanctified through the Lord 
Jesus Christ. (I Cor. 6:11.) In our lesson he exhorts, 
"Be ye not, therefore, partakers with them," with the 
children of disobedience; for ye were once in darkness, 
but now are ye light in the Lord. 

"WALK AS CHILDREN OF LIGHT" 

He proceeds to show how the children of light 
should walk, saying, The fruit of the Spirit, wherever 
it is found, is goodness and righteousness and truth— 
therefore, the holy Spirit never prompts to badness, 
unrighteousness, untruthfulness. And whoever has 

R4189 :page 183 

received the holy Spirit, whoever has been begotten of 
the Lord as his child, will want to prove, to demonstrate, 
to ascertain thoroughly what is acceptable unto the 



Lord; what the Lord will be pleased with, not merely 
what would not merit severe punishment from the Lord, 
not merely what the Lord would wink at and not take 
serious offence from, but far beyond all this! Whoever 
properly has the spirit of a son must desire to know the 
Father's will and delight to do it, and that will is in all 
purity, goodness, righteousness, truth, honesty. The 
influence of this determination of the New Creature to 
please God, to do his will, will signify that his life, that 
his heart and so far as possible every act and word of 
his will be in accord with goodness, in accord with the 
principles of righteousness which God represents— in 
accord with truth. 

"HAVE NO FELLOWSHIP WITH THE UNFRUITFUL WORKS OF 
DARKNESS, BUT RATHER REPROVE THEM" 

We are responsible not only for what we ourselves 
may do and think as New Creatures, but our responsibility 
goes out beyond ourselves to the brethren, to all 
who in any sense of the word come under our influence. 
Obscene jesting certainly is to receive no encouragement, 
to provoke no laughter, but rather to call forth a 
gentle, loving rebuke. Brother, Sister, let us set our 
affections on things above— let us walk in the light, let 
us think of and discuss whatsoever things are pure, 
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of 
good repute. Let us put away from our conversation and 
from our thoughts everything that would be defiling 
and ensnaring to ourselves or to others. Failure to reprove 
is a measurable endorsement of the wrong. A 
word in season— how good it is, how helpful! But it is 
equally important that the word of reproof be wisely 
and lovingly given, otherwise it may do harm where 
we intended good; as the Scriptures say, "Speak the 
truth in love." 

"THINGS WHICH ARE DONE IN SECRET" 

"It is a shame even to speak of those things which 
are done of them in secret"— that are done in the dark. 
The Apostle's intimation is that the whole world lieth 
in darkness, and in the wicked one and in sin, and that 
the Lord's people of the New Creation have accepted 
his leadership in the opposite direction; that they are 
children of the light and should walk accordingly in 
the light, and that they should lift up the light of truth; 
that they should allow the holy Spirit to shine forth for 
the reproving of the world, for the reproving of darkness, 
and for the setting up of a standard of righteousness 
in harmony with the Lord's example. 

The Apostle here reminds us of the prophetic statement, 
"Awake thou that sleepest and arise from the 
dead, and Christ shall give thee light." This should 
be our attitude toward all who are still unregenerated. 
The world lieth in the wicked one, in sin, in darkness. 



Instead of having fellowship with them in the works of 
darkness, instead of sharing in their foul jesting, we 
are rather to reprove them and to direct them according 
to the above Scripture, to awake from their stupor, 
from their sleep, to recognize conditions from their 
true standpoint, and that, getting awake, they should 
realize that they are sinners; that the wage of sin is 
death, and that the tendency of sin is downward— and 
that they should rise from the dead, should separate 
themselves from the world, not only so far as their conduct 

R4189 :page 184 

is concerned, but so far as their conversation and 
their sympathies are concerned, that all these should be 
turned toward the Lord, toward the truth, toward the 
light. It is to those who thus separate themselves from 
the world and its spirit that the Lord has promised to 
give light, a little and a little more and a little more, 
for the path of the justified, the path of those following 
in the footsteps of Jesus, will shine more and more 
until the perfect day. 

THE SEVEN WALKS 

The Christian's walk of course means his course 
of conduct, including thoughts and words and acts. 
The Apostle indicates very clearly what this work or 
course of the Christian should be, outlining it in seven 
different ways. 

(1) The New Creature should walk not according to 
the course of this world, not according to the prince of 
the power of the air, the spirit which now worketh in 
the children of disobedience. (Eph. 2:3.) This is the 
walk of the world, the walk of evil-doers, the walk of 
the children of wrath; it is the very opposite of the walk 
of the children of the light. 

(2) The New Creation should walk in good works— 
"For we are God's workmanship, created in Christ unto 
good works, which God has before ordained that we 
should walk in them."— Eph. 2:10. 

(3) The New Creation should "walk worthy of the 
vocation wherewith they are called." (Eph. 4:1.) Their 
vocation is the very highest of all; they are the representatives 
of the Lord and Master; they bear his name, 

and should seek in everything to glorify it and never to 
dishonor it. What we do, what we say, what we think 
—in fact, even general appearance and deportment, and 
where we are seen, all reflect more or less upon the 
great King, whose ambassadors we are. Our vocation 
is that of servants of God, and no earthly avocation 
should be permitted in any degree to hinder or abridge 
the influence or the service which we have undertaken 
as children of God, as joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our 
Lord, prospective members of his Bride class, his Kingdom 
class. 



(4) The New Creation are to "walk not as other 
Gentiles walk." (Eph. 4:17.) We are not merely to refrain 
from the sins and gross immoralities of the 

natural man, but we are to allow this principle or spirit 
to pervade all of life's interests. We are to refrain 
from following foolish, worldly fashions, from being 
influenced by a worldly spirit; we are to have the Spirit 
of the Lord, the spirit of a sound mind to direct us in 
our joys, in our sorrows, in our wedding celebrations, 
in our funeral services— in fact, whatsoever we do we 
are to do to the glory of God and are not to be influenced 
by the spirit of the world, but contrariwise 
are to set a proper example for the world in all matters 
—in gentleness, kindness, patience, faithfulness to the 
Lord and to duty. The walk of the world is on the 
broad road; the walk of the Church is on the narrow 
path. As we progress in Christian experience, we find 
this path getting farther and farther away from the 
broad road which the world is traveling, and whoever 
tries to keep pace with the world will in many respects 
be apt to find himself leaving the narrow path or otherwise 
disadvantaging himself as a New Creature. 

(5) The New Creation is to "walk in love." (Eph. 5:2.) 
Their words, their deeds, everything with which 

they are connected, is to be governed by this law of the 
New Creation— love. "Love is the fulfilling of the Law." 
"A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love 
one another, as I have loved you." In compliance with 
this law of love and our Lord's glorious example, the 
Apostle says we ought to so love one another as to be 
willing to lay down our lives for the brethren. We 
should be ready to lay down a few months, a few years; 
we should be ready at any time we can find an opportunity 
of service for a brother, especially along the 
lines of his spiritual or higher interests as a New 
Creature. This spirit of love is to control our conduct 
with all; we are to love our neighbors and seek to do 
them good, to serve their interests. "Love worketh no 
ill to his neighbor," would not take advantage of his 
neighbor to cheat him, to injure him in any manner. 
Love would not prompt its possessor to speak evil of 
his neighbor, but would lead to a remembrance of the 
Scriptural injunction, "Speak evil of no man." Love 
would do this from principle, because it is right; but 
more than this, Love ultimately takes such an interest 
that the brother exercising it does not wish to do anything 
that would be harmful to another's interests, to 
his welfare, but rather to do something to his honor and 
blessing. Love, progressing as we walk in it, ultimately 
brings us to that blessed condition where we 
can love our enemies and be glad of the privilege of 
doing good to those who despitefully use us and persecute 
us. 

(6) The New Creation are also instructed to walk 

as children of light; their course in life is always to be 
with respect to the things that are just, pure, loving, 



noble, kind, the things that are in harmony with the 
divine character and Word, the things that prove to be 
of greatest blessing to neighbors and to friends. As 
children of the light every day and year will see progress; 
their light will be shining more and more clearly and 
accomplishing the greatest good; they will not be 
ashamed of it, but will set it on a candlestick, where it 
may give light to all in the house, to every member of 
the household of faith. "Let your light so shine before 
men that they may see your good works and glorify 
your Father which is in heaven."— Matt. 5:16. 

(7) The New Creation should "walk circumspectly." 
(Eph. 5:15.) This word circumspectly signifies to 
look carefully all around at every step. The Christian 
cannot be a careless liver, and as he looks around him 
and realizes the various pitfalls and snares, not only 
will he seek to make straight paths for his feet, lest 
that which is lame be turned out of the way, but additionally 
he will seek divine aid and counsel and guidance 
that he make no mistakes, that every step in life's pathway 
will be such as will have divine approval and glorify 
God in his body and spirit which are God's. This circumspection 
of our walk as New Creatures is the more 
necessary because our Adversary, the devil, is specially 
on the alert to ensnare us; and our tests are permitted 
to be the severer as we come nearer the goal of character. 
We should walk circumspectly also because we 
profess to be of the New Creation, begotten of the holy 
Spirit and not of the world, but separate from it; and 
because our lights so shining more or less reprove the 
world. Therefore the world, instead of sympathizing 
with us, hate us, and watch either to see what fault can 
be found with our walk, or to stumble and trip us, 

R4190 : page 185 

sometimes from malicious impulse and sometimes from 
sympathetic reasons; as the Apostle Peter, when speaking 
to our Lord, said, Far be it from thee, Lord, to 
thus sacrifice thyself and die. To walk circumspectly 
is to take note of these various hindrances and stumbling 
stones and pitfalls; to hearken to the instructions 
of the Lord's Word and to the leadings of the holy 
Spirit; and thus to walk carefully; and in so doing to 
develop the characters which are most pleasing to our 
Lord and Head. The Apostle says this circumspection 
is necessary in order to our walking "not as unwise but 
as wise." There is a wisdom of the world which is 
foolishness with God, and there is a wisdom with God 
which is foolishness to the world. The wisdom of God 
is to be ours, and we are to exemplify it in all the affairs 
of life. Hence the faithful, the New Creatures in Christ, 
should be the most exemplary, the most wonderful 
people in the whole world, the wisest in the management 
of their affairs, the wisest in the government of 
their children, the wisest in their eating, drinking and 



dressing. Not that the world will always approve, but 
that the end will justify the course which the Lord's 
Word directs, and which the wise of the New Creation, 
walking circumspectly, will take. 

"REDEEMING THE TIME" 

This signifies buying back the time, as though the 
time were already mortgaged. And this is so; the cares 
of this life, its necessities, the customs of the world, 
our fallen tendencies, all would absorb every hour of 
life in the things pertaining to this life, whereas as New 
Creatures our new hopes and aims and efforts are 
properly centered upon things above, the heavenly, the 
King's matters. Where may we obtain the necessary 
time wherewith to study and to refresh ourselves in rehearsing 
the blessings, the promises and favors which 
are ours as New Creatures? And where may we obtain 
the time for telling these good tidings to others? If 
we allow the spirit of the world to direct us we shall 
have no time for any of these things and shall fail, but 
as wise and not as foolish children of the Lord, we will 
see and appreciate the greater importance of the 
heavenly things, and be ready to sacrifice our earthly 
interests and customs and ambitions in favor of the 
heavenly. Thus we may redeem or buy back the time 
that we had previously spent for worldly things, that 
we may henceforth spend such time in the interest of 
ourselves and others of the New Creation and in the 
service of our Lord and Master, to whom we have consecrated 
our all, which we find to be so little over and 
above the things necessary to provide honestly for the 
life that now is. 

"WHEREFORE BE YE NOT FOOLS, BUT UNDERSTAND 
WHAT THE WILL OF THE LORD IS" 

How many of the Lord's people are fools! How 
many allow the spirit of the world so to enter in as to 
hinder them from appreciating the real wisdom and the 
proper course, the proper walk in life! It is time for us 
to cease this foolishness of trying to do everything just 
as the world does it and to be everything that the world 
will approve! It is time for us to determine that by the 
grace of God we will be popular with our Father in 
heaven, whether or not it makes us unpopular with 
everybody else in the world! It will be sweeter far 
eventually to hear his voice saying, "Well done, good 
and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy 
Lord," than to have the well done of the world and its 
applause, and to come short of the glorious blessing to 
which we have been called! 

"INSTEAD PRAISE AND THANKSGIVING" 

Instead of intoxication with the spirit of the world 



and its ambitions, its craze for money and for show and 

outward adornment, we are to be so filled with the 

Spirit of the Lord, that our chiefest joy, our chiefest 

blessing, will be in giving thanks to the Lord for his 

goodness, in maintaining a fellowship of heart with him 

and then additionally having fellowship one with 

another, with those who are in the truth, in the Lord. 

We are to speak one to another in psalms, hymns, and 

spiritual songs, thus making melody in our hearts to 

the Lord. The Lord's people are not to be morose, 

sullen, unhappy, always in tears. This is not the will 

of God concerning them; they are on the contrary to be 

continually rejoicing, full of gladness, the basis for this 

to be their faith in the Word of God, which they all continually 

eat and are nourished by, together with their 

fellowship with the Lord, which will continually be a 

ground for praise and thanksgiving; and additionally, 

their fellowship with one another, which will be more 

sweet than any earthly or selfish fellowship; more 

precious than any sensual relationship, the exhilaration 

of the new mind continually growing stronger and more 

God-like, and seeking to build up one another in the 

most holy faith and character-likeness of our Redeemer. 

The Apostle says that we are to give to God, even the 

Father, thanks always for all things in the name of our 

Lord Jesus Christ; thanks for the trials, thanks for the 

clouds as well as for the blessings and the sunshine; 

thanks for matters that seem to be adversities, knowing 

that God is able to make all things work together for good 

to them and has promised to do so, and that the entire 

matter of needs and welfare are in the hands of our Redeemer, 

who is too wise to err and too loving to be unkind, 

and who will not suffer us to be tempted above 

that we are able. Well then may we rejoice! 

We are exhorted also to submit ourselves one to 
another in the reverence of the Lord, not to be dictatorial, 
not to be too self-assertive, not to be anxious that our will 
should be done on earth or in heaven, but rather desirous 
that the will of the Lord should thus be done, and 
that we may be looking to note his leadings and providences 
in and through others as well as through ourselves, 
and especially to note the instructions in his 
Word. 



R4192:page 185 

"TO THE FEET OF HIM" 
"How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him."— Isa. 52:7. 

Oh precious "Feet," so weary and so worn, 

Make haste to "enter in;" for when 'tis done, 
How sweet will be the rest so much desired— 

When that last step upon the race is run! 



Dear "Feet," so tired, do not, do not forget, 
How once those other feet were blest indeed, 

When he, our Elder Brother, blessed Lord, 
So gently ministered unto their need. 

And doth he not today, so stoop and soothe 
The "Feet," who yet must "strive to enter in?" 

"How beautiful!" Ah, yes, how glorious, 

To bring good tidings that "our God doth reign"! 

And so, dear "Feet," by him so well beloved, 
Come joyfully, attuned with music sweet; 

Come hasten on with patient, loving zeal— 
"A little while"— we all with him shall meet! 
—Mary H. Robinson 



R4190 :page 186 

"PAY THY VOWS UNTO THE LORD" 

DEAR BROTHER AND PASTOR:- 

I have been wanting to write you for some time concerning 
the matter of proper conduct between the sexes 
in the Ecclesia. Some items have come to my attention 
within the last few months, that I feel it incumbent upon 
me again to call your attention to the subject. I 
am not at liberty to write you as plainly and fully as I 
might, concerning the specific instances of which I 
know; but I have both heard and seen enough to become 
convinced that the Adversary is making a strong attack 
along these lines all over the country, deceiving some of 
the dear brethren (who are old enough, both in the flesh 
and spirit, to know better) into thinking that hugs and 
kisses and letters, laden with terms of excessive 
endearment, etc., are proper expressions of spiritual 
affection between brothers and sisters in no way related 
in the flesh. 

The consequences of such an attitude of mind 
would surely be a decline of spirituality; sometimes 
with unkindness toward and neglect of those who 
have a right to the affections lavished on others. If 
the Adversary accomplishes his ultimate design, gross 
immorality and public disgrace of the cause we love 
will surely follow. Shall it come to this? God forbid! 
He can, and I believe will, deliver us. If the heart-intentions 
of the dear brethren are pure (as I believe 
them to be), then certainly this matter is the deception 
of Satan himself. 

What I desire earnestly to entreat of you now, dear 
Brother Russell, is that you publish in the WATCH TOWER 
an article giving in plain and unmistakable terms 
your views of this matter, as outlined in the extract 
from DAWN-STUDIES, VOL. VI., pp. 489, 490, enclosed 



herewith. This seems to me particularly desirable, as 
I understand your writings as well as Scripture are 
being twisted into a rebuke to any who dare criticise 
this kind of conduct, as "surmising evil," etc. 

Forgive me, dear brother, if I have been over-bold 
in presenting this matter; I feel very deeply on the subject. 
With kindest Christian love, I remain, yours in 
the King's service, HORACE E. HOLLISTER,--IU. 

PROMISCUOUS ASSOCIATION NOT IMPLIED 

(EXTRACT FROM VOL. VI., DAWN-STUDIES, PP.489, 490) 



"The Lord clearly teaches us, through the Apostle, 
that his preferences and favors are alike to all the New 
Creatures— according to their zeal, according to their 
love for him and the principles represented in him; and 
that conditions of sex, race, color, etc., of the mortal 
body have no bearing with him in his judgment of his 
people, in his estimation of them, and in the distribution 
of the final rewards. Knowing the Father's view 
of this matter, all of the New Creation must take a similar 
view of it, must esteem all New Creatures in Christ 
Jesus as "brethren," must be kindly affectioned toward 
all, must seek to serve all, must know no partiality 
amongst the brethren, except such as the Lord himself 
showed— in that he favored and honored those who 
showed the largest measure of zeal for his cause. 

"But all this impartiality, this ignoring of sex, color, 
race, etc., belongs to us as the New Creation, and only 
partially affects our mortal bodies, and their relationship 
with each other and with the world. Hence, the 

R4191 :page 186 

proprieties of conduct and relationship between the sexes 
must be maintained by the New Creation. 

"These, indeed, should have a larger degree of wisdom 
and prudence than the world, by reason of their 
being begotten to the spirit of a sound mind. They 
accordingly should realize that as a New Creation, seeking 
to walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit, it would be 
appropriate for them to be even more careful than the 
worldly, the natural man, respecting the weakness of their 
flesh and respecting the propriety of certain metes and 
bounds of proper conduct, modesty, reserve, etc., as between 
the sexes. In proportion as the New Creature is seeking 
the spiritual life, and in proportion as it realizes 
that sexual appetites war against the interests of the 
New Creation, in that same proportion should they endeavor, 
even more than the world in general, to make 
straight paths for their feet, and to erect as many barriers 
and as formidable ones as possible between themselves 
and temptations." 



BROTHER RUSSELL'S REPLY 



We believe it is our Lord's will that we publish the 
above letter with our unqualified endorsement of its 
sentiment and expression. Without surmising evil 
intent it calls attention to a world-wide tendency which 
we as specially covenanted people should oppose. We 
have already called attention to the fact that the Adversary 
may be expected to try various tactics of opposition 
during the last seven years of the harvest; and that the 
Lord may give him a comparatively free hand. While 
the hour of temptation, we are told, will try all that 
dwell upon the whole earth (Rev. 3:10), it must not 
surprise us if it comes with special force against the 
consecrated, the Temple class or "House of God."— 
I Pet. 4:17. 

TEMPTATIONS FROM OPPOSITE QUARTERS 

So far as the consecrated are concerned the testings 
seem to be opposites. Perfect love being recognized as 
the mark to be reached and to be maintained, the Adversary, 
finding that he cannot keep us from it, begins to 
push us— past the mark into such earthly loves as the 
foregoing letter mentions. The danger must be evident 
to all who will think for a moment. The spiritual love 
amongst the Lord's members is as proper as it is unavoidable. 
The tie that binds our hearts in Christian 
love is the dearest and the strongest of which we have 
any knowledge; because like to that above. With the 
love goes a confidence in each other's integrity of motive, 
which, unless guarded against, might let down some of 
the barriers of reserve which society has found by experience 
are absolutely necessary for the world. We do 
not mean that the Lord's people have lower standards 
of morality than has the world; but with higher ideals 
they have found a new confidence in each other— not in 
the flesh, but in the spirit. For the time they forget all 
about the flesh and are all the more in danger of being 
ambushed by the Adversary along that very line. 

On the other hand the Adversary attempts to push 
others of the faithful aside from the "mark" by arousing 
bitterness, jealousy, envy, strife. He is too crafty to 
suppose that such seeds would spring spontaneously 
in the hearts of the consecrated. Hence, so far as we 
can discern, his course is to plant these seeds of evil 
while apparently cultivating justice and purity and 
truth. Ah! he is an artful enemy, and "we are not entirely 
ignorant of his devices," though we may little 
guess which will be his next move for ensnarement. 

Brother Hollister, for instance, as the above letter 
implies, was tempted to surmise evil respecting those 
whose conduct he disapproves; but he gained a victory 



over the snare, and hence, without judging others as of 
bad intention and impure motive, he sees the matter as 
we do and as we believe the Lord does— as a snare of 
the Adversary against which it is our privilege to warn 
the brethren in love. 

How long will it require for the Lord's dear followers 
to learn the meaning and proper application of 

R4191 :page 187 

Matthew 18:15-17? Failure to note and to use properly 
this rule seems to us the tap-root of nearly every difficulty 
amongst the brethren, in every quarter. We 
have made the matter as plain as we know how in 
DAWN-STUDIES, VOL. VI., yet are surprised and grieved 
to note blunders along this line made by some of the 
most advanced of the dear members of Christ. The 
usual sophistry by which the "old man" sets aside this 
divine rule is to conclude that "it is not applicable in 
this instance;" or to be persuaded that he does not 
know how to apply it in his case and must ask counsel 
of others— the very thing he should understand is forbidden 
by our Lord's words, "Go to him, and between 
thee and him alone tell him of his fault." 

Again, few seem to understand that the conference 
is not to reprove or rebuke or humiliate or punish the 
one that be in error. All that is for the Lord to attend 
to— "The Lord will judge his people." Our object 
should be merely to get the wrong thing stopped and 
thus to "gain thy brother." It is safe to suppose therefore 
that our Lord's counsel is generally needed— "First 
cast out the beam from thine own eye and then shalt 
thou see clearly to pluck out the mote from thy brother's 
eye." So then before attempting to apply Matthew 18:15-17, 
it would be wise to kneel down before God and 
get our hearts very humble and loving and very free 
from bitterness, etc., before making the first move. 
Then read afresh the Scripture and the comments in 
DAWN-STUDIES, VOL. VI., and then proceed very carefully 
—fearing to touch amiss matters which involve so 
much to "one of the least of these." 

We quite agree with Brother Hollister, that none of 
the "members" of Christ could willingly and intentionally 
lay snares for their own spiritual feet or those of 
others. We quite agree that their danger lurks in their 
good intentions and over-confidence in their control of 
the flesh, and in their forgetting the Adversary's cunning, 
even while not ignorant of his devices. But while 
urging that there be no evil surmisings we also urge 
the Apostle's words, "Be blameless and harmless, the 
sons of God without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked 
and perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in 
the world." (Phil. 2:15.) But suppose we could be 
confident of our own self-mastery and immunity from 
temptation, how could we judge for others or be sure 
that it would be so with them? Or, suppose that all 



Truth people had so progressed that they had brought 
every thought into captivity to obedience to Christ, 
should they not still let their light so shine before men 
as to assist them and to glorify their Father in heaven? 
Note the Apostle's argument— If my eating of meat 
cause stumbling to others, I will eat no meat. (I Cor. 8:13.) 
But let us not suppose our flesh to be dead. It 
is safer to suppose the reverse and to keep guard 
against every snare of the Adversary to entrap us or 
others. 

PERFORM THY VOWS TO GOD 

Realizing that because they are prominent representatives 
of the Truth the Adversary would lay special 
snares for the feet of the Pilgrims, the Editor last 
March sent to all engaged in continuous or occasional 
"Pilgrim" service under the Society's auspices, 
including all the brethren of the Bible House family, 
the following letter, which explains itself: 

"Without casting the slightest reflection upon any of you, 
and merely having in view the fact that we are in 'the evil 
day' mentioned by the Apostle, and that we may be certain 
that the Adversary will be more than ever alert to injure the 
cause of truth and its servants, we are proposing to each and 
all of the brethren hereby addressed that each shall bind himself 
by a vow to the Lord, which we believe will prove helpful, 
strengthening, and be in some measure a fortification or safeguarding 
of the interests we have pledged our lives to serve. 
We are not requesting that this vow be made to each other, 
but to the Lord; nevertheless, we shall be pleased to hear from 
each one who receives this letter if he should take the vow in the 
name and in the strength of the Lord. Furthermore, the fact 
that we have taken such a vow may prove helpful to others 
not only in the Pilgrim service, but out of it— yea, amongst 
all of the Lord's people with whom we are in contact— not by 
public profession, but wherever it would seem wise and proper 
by a private one. 

"By way of starting the matter, by way of encouraging 
others to see that the vow proposed is in full harmony with 
our original surrender of ourselves, and all of our earthly 
rights to the Lord, and the service of his cause, and by way 
of suggesting that this is another means by which we may 
'bind the sacrifice to the horns of the altar,' the writer hereby 
informs you all that he himself has made this vow to the 
Lord. 

"The vow is: 'Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed 
be thy name. May thy rule come into my heart more and 
more, and thy will be done in my mortal body. Relying on 
the assistance of thy promised grace to help in every time of 
need, through Jesus Christ our Lord, I register this vow. 
Daily will I remember at the throne of heavenly grace the 
general interests of the harvest work, and particularly the 
share which I myself am privileged to enjoy in that work, 
and the dear co-laborers at the Bible House, Allegheny. I 
vow to still more carefully, if possible, scrutinize my thoughts 



and words and doings, to the intent that I may be the better 

enabled to serve these, and thy dear flock. I vow to thee 

that I will be on the alert to resist everything akin to Spiritism 

and Occultism, and that remembering that there are but 

the two masters I shall resist these snares in all reasonable ways, 

as being of the Adversary. I further vow that, with the exceptions 

below, I will at all times and at all places, conduct 

myself toward those of the opposite sex in private exactly as 

I would do with them in public— in the presence of a congregation 

R4192 : page 187 

of the Lord's people, and so far as reasonably possible 
I will avoid being in the same room with any female alone, 
unless the door to the room stand wide open— wife, children, 
mother and sisters excepted.'" 

We have received favorable responses from the following:— 
H. C. Rockwell, F. H. Robison, R. H. Hirsh, W. 
H. Bundy, F. Draper, G. Draper, M. L. McPhail, E. W. 
Brenneisen, J. F. Rutherford, Hayden Samson, J. A. 
Parker, F. A. Hall, M. L. Herr, J. D. Wright, C. H. 
Swingle, C. E. Fowler, O. L. Sullivan, John Harrison, 
Smith Walker, Isaac Hoskins, W. E. Van Amburgh, H. 
K. Blinn, J. A. Bohnet, A. E. Burgress, J. A. Bauerlein, 
F. L. Scheerer, A. G. Wakefield, C. W. Hek, A. E. Williamson, 
B. H. Barton. 

We wish you all could see the precious letters received. 
They would do good, and abundantly prove 
the heart-loyalty of these noble brethren. One writes, 
"I am glad that you got out that mimeograph letter; I 
am sure that it will be a wonderful help to me and perhaps 
to others." Another writes, "When I read it I felt 
that such a vow was particularly hard for me, and also 
realized it would be especially helpful to me; so after 
deliberation, I write to assure you I shall humbly strive 
to fulfil this vow and am glad to take it, and want your 
prayers, dear brother." 

ENLARGING THE SCOPE OF PROTECTION 

Yesterday we received a letter from an Elder in one 
of the Ecclesias, saying, that one of the Pilgrims had 
shown him one of the vow letters, and that he was so 
much pleased therewith and felt the matter so helpful, 
that he had in prayer registered it as his vow to the 
Lord. This, with Brother Hollister's letter, prompted 
both this article and the suggestion that Colporteur 
Brethren and all Church Elders and Deacons would no 
doubt be strengthened by the making of this vow. We 
believe that it will assist greatly in binding the sacrifice 
to the horns of the Lord's altar. 

Do it now! and drop us a postal-card so stating, 
that we may rejoice with you. But remember, that the 
vow must be not to us but to the Lord, as a part of 
your Covenant with him and for the protection of the 
interests of his cause. 



R4192 : page 188 

A FURTHER SUGGESTION 



The foregoing is in type, but we squeeze room to 
insert something of quite a contrary spirit just clipped 
from the Woman's Daily as follows:— 

"There is one Church in Chicago that has a wise 
man in charge of its affairs. He insists on having a 
regularly fitted-up courting room for the young people, 
with cozy-corners, screens, chaperones and lamps that 
can be turned away down. He says courtship is essential 
to happiness and that it is the province of the 
Church to do everything possible for the happiness of 
its members." 



Now the suggestion comes to us, why not propose 
the vow above outlined to all the dear brethren, and a 
corresponding one to all the dear sisters? Would it not 
safeguard many during the days of special trial we may 
expect? If good for Pilgrims, Colporteurs and Elders 
why not apply it to your life? 

One dear "Pilgrim," against whose conduct there 
is not a breath of censure, writes us as follows:— 

"It has been withal a glorious year to me, and I am indeed 
thankful to our dear Lord that he has permitted 
me to have a part in the harvest-field work. Really, 
dear Brother Russell, I find that the Lord is blessing 
me more since the vow we took recently, and I am indeed 
thankful that the Lord put this into your mind to 
suggest our taking this vow. Some new blessing has 
been given me almost every day. Now I am more 
anxious than ever to please him, and I beseech your 
continued prayers to this end, and that I may be given 
strength and wisdom from on high, and be kept in 
humility and love." 



In a back issue (Oct. 15, '04) we published a poem 
entitled, "Stepping Stones or Stumbling Stones," which 
we wish all would read afresh. There is in the foregoing 
suggestion of a vow a stepping stone or a stumbling 
stone possibly for you. 



R4192:page 188 

ISRAEL'S WRONG COURSE 



-I SAM. 8:10-22.-JULY 5.- 

Golden Text:— "By me kings reign, and 
princes decree justice."— Prov. 8:51. 

THE International Lesson Studies now return to 
Israel's history at the point discontinued last 
December— Samuel's judgeship. It will be remembered 
that Israel's progress under the judges for 
450 years had not been very brilliant. Their government 
was that of a Republic under divine autocracy 
and law supervision. They were not a warlike people, 
and under the divine Covenant were merely assisted in 
conquering the promised land, in proportion as they 
were faithful and obedient to the Lord. In consequence 
many of the Canaanites still possessed strong-walled 
cities in their very midst, including Jerusalem, 
which was not conquered until the seventh year of King 
David's reign. Indeed, so far from becoming nationally 
great the Israelites had experienced some severe 
defeats in battle with neighboring nations, particularly 
the Philistines, Moabites, Ammonites, etc. In all they 
had experienced some eighteen periods of reverse and 
subjection, during which they were obliged to pay 
tribute. 

Israel's national organization in the times of the 
judges was merely a voluntary and sentimental one. 
In reality each tribe managed its own affairs within its 
own border, and the heads of the tribes constituted its 
judges in ordinary affairs. The only thing which 
cemented the union between these tribes was the oneness 
of their speech and blood; but above all, the oneness 
of their hope toward God, based first upon the 
Covenant made with Abraham, "In thy Seed shall all 
the families of the earth be blessed." This promise 
was understood to include the nation of Israel— cemented 
as a nation by the Law Covenant, which was 
instituted through Moses its Mediator and which bound 
the nation to Jehovah as his people and servants, and 
Jehovah to that nation as its Law-Giver and King. 
The divine promise to Israel was that so long as they 
should walk in the statutes of the divine Law they 
would be God's peculiar people and receive his peculiar 
blessings in all their temporal affairs as well as in their 
higher interests of character development. But if they 
should neglect him and his statutes and ordinances he 
would chasten them with pestilences, with captivities, 
etc. Nevertheless, if they should repent and cry unto 
the Lord and seek again to do his will and to obey his 
laws, he would hearken unto them and raise up for them 
deliverers, who as his representatives, would judge 
them, i.e., would see that they obtained deliverance, 
help, instruction, guidance.— Judges 2:16,18. 

THEY DESIRED A KING 



In harmony with this arrangement Eli had been a 
judge in Israel of recognized divine appointment, but 
because of Israel's unfaithfulness captivity to the Philistines 
ensued at the time of Eli's death. For quite a 
number of years Israel was subject to the Philistines. 
Meantime Samuel taught the people and urged them to 
put away their strange gods and to serve Jehovah only. 
He assured them that through this turning to the Lord 
would come divine blessing and favor. The people did so 
and gathered at Mizpah, where Samuel offered sacrifices 
on their behalf. Meantime the Philistines, learning of 
this gathering of the people, anticipated that it meant 
rebellion from their overlordship and came against 
them with an army. Then it was that the "Lord 
thundered with a great thunder on that day against the 
Philistines and discomfited them; and they were smitten 
before Israel." (I Sam. 7:10.) As a result, the Israelites 
were delivered, and Samuel was recognized by all 
the tribes as the divine representative and judge of 
Israel. Throughout his judgeship he traveled hither 
and thither, apparently hearing and deciding such 
cases as were too difficult for the local judges. Under 
his wise judgeship the Israelites were greatly blessed; 
but with their returning prosperity came the ambition 
to be like the nations round about them— to be a united 
kingdom under the dominion of a king who would lead 
them in war and rule over them as an entire nation and 
centralize their power and energy. It is at this point 
that our lesson really begins. 

From every worldly standpoint the people decided 

R4193 : page 189 

wisely, but from the divine standpoint unwisely. They 
appealed to Samuel as God's representative, to anoint 
over them a king, and thus establish in their midst a 
central authority. "Distance lends enchantment to the 
view," is a common adage, which was true in Israel's 
case. As they looked at the nations round about them 
they beheld the glories of the king, his armies, his 
officers, his chariots. Such kings were war-lords to 
their people, and more or less the dignity, authority 
and power of these kings represented these qualities in 
the nations under them. The Israelites saw not the 
grievous burdens under which many of the people labored 
as a result of such kingly dignity and glory. 
They saw merely the outward glitter, and not the anguish 
and labor of the people who supported these 
kings. As we look into the matter from the divine 
standpoint, we may reach the divine conclusion that 
they were making a poor choice when they preferred to 
have a kingdom rather than a republic under a divine 
King. The Lord had forewarned them through Moses 
of what would be the results if they should at any time 
choose a monarchial government rather than the one 
he had arranged for them. (Deut. 17:14-20.) From 



this standpoint we can see that the republic under 

divinely appointed judges tended to develop the Israelites 

individually, while the kingdom, no doubt, would 

tend to develop them along national lines. However, 

the individual development, through exercising liberty 

and individuality, would no doubt have prepared the 

people the better for the coming of Messiah and a 

proper acceptance of him. There are chastisements and 

there are rewards under the divine kingship, and these, 

represented by the divinely raised up judges, would 

have developed them along the lines of individual responsibility 

and faith in God. Be it noticed also that 

in the Lord's promise of future blessings he declares, 

"I will restore your judges as at the first, and your lawgivers 

as at the beginning," thus clearly intimating that 

the republican form of government under divine supervision 

was superior to the subsequent kingly regime. 

SAMUEL, THE FAITHFUL 

Few characters shine out on the pages of history 
with such a pure light as does Samuel. When the 
Israelites made the request for a king Samuel was 
grieved. He knew he had served the people faithfully, 
that he had been self-sacrificing and generous to the 
last degree, spending his life in their interest. It 
seemed strange to him that a people should be so unthankful. 
But the Lord pointed out that their ingratitude 
was not to Samuel, but to their great King, Jehovah, 
saying, "They have not rejected thee but me." 
Nevertheless, the Lord bade Samuel hearken to the request 
of the people and anoint them a king, meantime 
assuring them that the truth of the divine prediction 
would be fully verified and that they were really 
choosing second best rather than the best. It was then 
that Samuel dismissed the people, assuring them that 
their request would be granted and a king anointed— 
such a one as the Lord would direct. Meantime Samuel 
wrote out for the people a statement or report of his 
judgeship, recorded in chapter 12. In this he shows 
most distinctly how he had avoided bribery and in everything 
had sought to do the will of the Lord, and he 
called upon the people to witness to the truthfulness of 
this, and they did, and attested it. What a noble 
character! 

It was the custom for the candidates for office in 
the old Roman republic to go before the people clothed 
in a white garment, thus representing their purity and 
spotlessness. But surely remarkably few men have 
ever left office spotless! In the majority of cases, no 
doubt, human weaknesses prevail to such a degree that 
the temptations of high position are overpowering. 
But notice that in Samuel's case this twelfth chapter 
and its witness to his purity, imply, figuratively, he had 
put on his white garment when he resigned his office, 
and all the people bore witness of his spotlessness, his 



integrity as a judge. 

SAMUEL WAS WELL BORN 

We must not forget that Samuel's training was with 
Eli, and that the sons of the latter turned out to be 
bribe-takers and generally scandalous in their misinterpretation 
of the divine law and justice. It was not, 
therefore, that Samuel was under the best environment 
and best teachers that would account for his grandeur 
of character and fidelity to principle. We must look 
further back, and find it in the fact that his parents 
consecrated him to the Lord, not only when a child but 
before his birth, and that this favorable influence contributed 
to his being well born in the reverence of the 
Lord. Undoubtedly the thoughts of parents, especially 
of the mother, during the period of a child's gestation, 
have great influence upon its mental character. Every 
child should be born with a large reverence for God, 
for justice, for truth, for goodness. To be thus born 
surely signifies a favorable start in the way of righteousness 
under present conditions. And we may be sure 
that the child thus begotten and born was well trained 
up to the time of his presentation to the Lord's service 
under Eli. Here we have a fresh testimony to the fact 
that if a child be trained up in the way he should go he 
is not likely to depart therefrom. Oh, that Christian 
parents could realize what a responsibility is in their 
hands in respect to the training of their children, and 
especially during their most impressionable years! 

Respecting Samuel's moral heroism in promptly 
assisting to incorporate the kingdom, which would displace 
himself as the Lord's representative and judge in 
their midst, Professor Elmslie well says, "I think that 
one of the most magnanimous and majestic and heroic 
deeds ever done in our world's history was done by 
Samuel, when, convinced that it was the will of God, 
he set himself to do what no other man could do— to 
forsake all his past, to abandon all the lines of action 
on which he had worked through the best years of his 
life, and to put into other men's hands fresh possibilities. 
I call that conduct magnificent." 

THE MANNER OF THE KING 

In recounting to Israel the manner of a king we 
are not to understand that the Lord or Samuel his 
mouthpiece meant that the description given would be 
the proper one for a proper king; but rather that it 
would be the general course of a king, of any man 
raised to such a place of imperial power as the kings 
of olden time enjoyed. The wrong course of kings is 
traceable to three conditions: (1) All men are imperfect 
and fallen, hence any king chosen would be so, 
and it would be merely a question of the measure of 
imperfection and tendency to pride and selfishness and 



the abuse of power. (2) The imperfection of those 
over whom they reign is a factor, for the recognized 

R4193 : page 190 

imperfection makes possible and to some extent makes 
reasonable the usurpation of great power. (3) The 
Adversary's derangement of all earthly affairs, putting 
light for darkness and darkness for light, often makes 
it seem to rulers and to the ruled that an abuse of power 
is necessary and really to the advantage of the ruled. 

IMMANUEL'S KINGDOM AUTOCRATIC 

In view of the danger of placing great power in 
the hands of a ruler and the advisability of the republican 
form of government of the people, by the people 
and for the people, the question arises, How will it 
be with Immanuel's Kingdom? We reply that the 
Scriptures teach that his Empire will be autocratic in 
the extreme. Nevertheless, no one who understands 
the matter need have any fear, as he who is to take the 
throne to be the Emperor of the World is the one who 
so loved the world as to give himself a ransom for all. 
Instead of his Empire being one of selfishness; which 
would ruin its subjects for its own aggrandizement, he 
has shown his Spirit to be the very reverse of this, in 
that he left the glory of the higher courts and humbled 
himself to a lower nature and became man's substitute, 
a ransom for man's penalty, "tasted death for 
every man." It is this One who is now highly exalted 
and appointed heir of all things. 

Let us remember also that the Church now being 
selected from the world is composed only of such as 
have their Master's Spirit and delight to lay down their 
lives for the brethren and for the truth in cooperation 
with their Lord and Head and Bridegroom! Let us remember 
that according to the divine predestination 
none shall be of that elect class save those who are 
copies of God's dear Son, and that the tests of discipleship 
are such as to prove them— their love and loyalty 
to God, to the brethren, to their neighbors, yea, 
also to their enemies! Who need fear an autocratic 
government in the hands of such a glorious King? 
Indeed, we may say that such a government will 
be the most helpful, the most profitable, that the 
world could possibly have— wise, just, loving, helpful! 
While others are seeking for earthly honors, earthly 
name and fame and substance, let us who have been 
called to this high calling lay aside every weight and 
every besetting sin and, by the Lord's assistance, gain 
this great prize of joint-heirship with our Master in his 
Kingdom and have a share with him in the blessing 
and uplifting of mankind in general! 



R4194 : page 190 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I suppose you know that there are a number of publications 
being circulated by persons who have, at some 
time, been enlightened by Present Truth. These publications 
teach the Truth to some extent, but are considerably 
mixed with error in regard to important 
doctrines. The channel which the Lord has used for 
the blessing of his people during this time of the 
"Harvest" has been the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND 
TRACT SOCIETY, and it continues to be so used, and we 
render praise to our heavenly Father for the benefits 
so conferred. 

Now what shall be our attitude toward those other 
publications which claim to be channels of instruction? 
A good many of us have listened to their claims and 
have bought the publications, only to find that our 
money (the Lord's money) has been wasted and the 
publication of pernicious literature has been encouraged. 
Of the 30,000 TOWER subscribers (more or less) perhaps 
one-third might be reached by the plea that these other 
channels contain more "light," and it is no more than 
a business proposition to put these things on the market, 
relying on the claim of the Truth friends to be "students" 
in order to sell the goods. No matter how unauthoritative 
may be the "teaching" how could its claim be investigated 
without encouraging its circulation? 

I realize that all that might be said against buying 
anything not published by the WATCH TOWER, has been 
urged upon Nominal Christians to prevent them from 
being "poisoned" by the Truth, and anything we may 
now say will be used to support the claim that the 
DAWN readers have become a part of "Babylon," and 
that these other publications now represent Present 
Truth, and are being persecuted because of their unpopularity. 
In fact, every argument and Scripture may 
be used in their behalf which we have used in opposing 
the DAWN teachings against Nominal Churchianity. 
Which horn of the dilemma shall we take; that of refusing 
to investigate and open ourselves to the charge 
that we are not truth-seekers or, on the other hand, risk 
the encouragement of that which is opposed to the 
Truth? 

It seems to me safe to assume that the Lord will 
supervise the publication of ZION'S WATCH TOWER 
so long as that help is necessary, inasmuch as it has 
been used thus far to bring out dispensational truth, 
and that we may show our faith in the Lord's promises 
by accepting his provision for our enlightenment by refusing 
to help the circulation of that which we have 
good reason to believe to be error. Satan would be 
highly pleased if he could induce us to investigate the 



claims of everything purporting to be Truth. As we 
note the spirit and character of those who have been 
led to investigate these things we feel more sure that 
insidious error is most safely left entirely alone. "If 
any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of 
his." We would be glad to have your thought on the 
subject. 

With much Christian love to you and all the Bible 
House family, in which all here join, 

I am, yours in the service of the King of kings, 
F. P. S.,-Cal. 



[In reply: We appreciate the force of your very 
well-stated proposition, and endorse its sentiments in 
every way. It seems to us that this question is one 
which each WATCH TOWER reader must decide for himself. 
Accordingly we have refrained, so far as possible, 
from criticism of the views of others, either publicly or 
privately. Those who are not our fellow-servants in 
any sense of the word would doubtless rejoice to have 
us berate them, and to claim that we were thus fulfilling 
Matt. 24:48,49— smiting our fellow-servants. We love 
fellow-servants too much to wish to smite them, and we 
trust we are too wise to allow the Adversary to draw us 
aside to squabble with the enemies of the Truth, thus to 
hinder the more important work of scattering the Truth. 

The Lord said, "It must needs be that offences 
[stumblings] come, but woe unto that man by whom 
they come!" Some of the dear friends who have been 
long acquainted with the Truth, and fail to become 
zealous and active in its service, are, we fear, in danger 
of being entrapped by the "snares of the fowler" which 
you mention. Some of them have been so long in the 

R4194:page 191 

Truth that they think they understand it perfectly, while 
in reality they have forgotten nearly as much as they 
know. These are just in the attitude where a mixture 
of Truth and sophistry would be likely to catch them. 
And for aught we know it is a part of the Lord's will 
that they should be trapped and ensnared, because they 
have not received the Truth in the love of it— with a 
proper zeal.— 2 Thess. 2:10. 

So far as our observation carries, the earnest, the 
zealous, the warm-hearted, are in no danger from these 
snares. They are protected in various ways: (1) Their 
love for the Truth is so great that they would be continually 
feeding at the table of the Lord. Their perceptions 
of the Truth are correspondingly clear. Instead 
of forgetting half of what they knew, these are continually 
growing in grace and knowledge. (2) They are 
so satisfied with the Lord's provision of which they 
have been already partaking that they have no appetite 



for other food, and are not seeking for it. In this respect 

they are different from the great mass of mankind, 

nearly all of whom are in doubt, in perplexity, in bewilderment, 

hungry for something to satisfy in respect 

to the life that now is and that which is to come. The 

class we refer to as being safe under the shadow of the 

Almighty is able to sing, with the Spirit and with the 

understanding also, that beautiful hymn: 

"I love to tell the story 

Because I know it's true; 
It satisfies my longings 

As nothing else would do. 

"I love to tell the story! 

It did so much for me; 
And that is just the reason 

I tell it now to thee. 

"I love to tell the story, 

For those who know it best 
Seem hungering and thirsting 

To hear it like the rest." 

In conclusion, then, dear brother, it seems to us 
that all those who have received the Truth half-heartedly, 
and who do not give heed thereto, do not study it, 
cannot be expected to have the strength, the knowledge, 
or the character which would enable them to endure the 
tests of this "harvest" time, which we expect will become 
more severe throughout the remaining years. It 
seems that we would do best to set an example of studiousness, 
and to a reasonable degree urge the use of the 
wonderful helps which the Lord has provided us, and 
not to specially chide or interfere with those who are 
unsatisfied, if they look further and become confused 
and entangled. The result with such seems usually to 
be a complete turning aside into the state of uncertainty 
in which the world and the nominal church are called, 
by the Lord in the parable, "outer darkness." Those 
who receive the Truth in good and honest hearts, full 
of zeal and love, get such a filling, such a satisfaction, 
become so strong in the truth and its spirit, are so well 
equipped with the armor, that the "Adversary toucheth 
them not." I think we would make a mistake if we 
should fail to recognize the Lord's own supervision of 
this "harvest" work, and the necessity, according to his 
wisdom, that errors be permitted for the very purpose 
of sifting the wheat.-EDITOR.] 



THE FIRST DAWN-MOBILE 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The Lord has seen fit to let us sell our old home 
and relieve us all of any ties, that we may each be free 
to go where the work is. And the increased opportunities 
for service make us all rejoice— that we are pilgrims 
and wanderers in the land, journeying always 
toward our heavenly home. Our stay here will be but 
three weeks, by which time (June 6) we hope to have 
all weights (furniture included) disposed of and enter 
our new field of labor with renewed energy and zeal. 

I have desired very much to express my deep appreciation 
of the encouragement and help received 
through yourself and the dear Bible House helpers, 
especially in regard to the recent experiences in Louisville, 
Ky. It seems to me such a special leading of the 
Lord that the territory should be divided among many 
of us, thus sparing any few from having the entire 
burden of such trying territory for any great length of 
time. At first we were inclined to think we would not 
be permitted to stay there as long as we should wish, 
but the Lord soon showed us the wisdom of his ways. 

I wish also to say that I am more firmly convinced 
that the Lord knoweth how to take care of his own. 
First, he provided for us fitting language to present 
to the public in the house-to-house canvass. As for myself 
I have always rejoiced in this fact that the Lord 
saw fit to provide even the words, that I need not depend 
upon my own poor judgment. I have taken great 
pleasure in speaking to others about the "successful 
method" and in watching the results of their change of 
method, which have always been markedly for the better. 
Secondly, we find that as our needs are made 
manifest these are all supplied, for we find we have 
very little strength left with which to "tote" the books, 
so now we have the Dawn-Mobiles, which beautifully 
does that part for us. 

It was my good fortune to use the sample wagon 
in Louisville when delivering several days last week, 
and I cannot express my appreciation in words. While 

R4195 :page 191 

it caused some comment and made me a little conspicuous, 
it was on account of interest in the new invention, 
which met the approval of all who saw it. I am 
so thankful, not only for myself but for many other 
sisters who find their strength insufficient to do the 
heavy part of the work, which now may be rolled along 
with any steady hand to guide it. We are anxiously 
awaiting the announcement that the Dawn-Mobiles are 
ready for our use. We hope that all needing such a 
convenience will avail themselves of it. 

We are all rejoicing that the Lord has seen fit to 
bring you back from the old country to Allegheny 
again. Our prayers are with you and "the family" 
daily that you all may have strength to keep the sacrifice 



so pleasing to him on the altar until soon entirely 
consumed. God bless you! 
I am your sister by his grace, 

CHARLOTTE WHITE,--Iowa. 

THE DAWN-MOBILES READY 



For a long time we have been on the lookout for some 
device which would aid our Colporteur sisters in making delivery 
of their books. Fifty books weigh forty pounds and 
are too great a strain on the delicate of either sex. 

Colporteur Brother Cole has solved the problem splendidly. 
He has contrived a device having two wheels which 
may be attached to any ordinary "suit-case" in five minutes, 
and without injury to the latter except two holes. In use the 
wheels support the weight of the books and are easily guided 
by the hand on the suit-case handle. On a car the wheels 
fold up against the side of the suit-case. The mechanism is 
of light weight. The device will be supplied at cost to any 
colporteur— $2.50 plus express charges. 

A GENEROUS PROPOSITION 

Knowing that few of the sisters can do better than meet 
their expenses at Colporteuring, Brother Cole makes the following 
generous proposal: Through our Society's Colporteur 
Department Brother Cole offers one of these attachments 
free to each Colporteur sister now working and who 
has worked on a regular assignment of territory during the six 
months ending June 1, 1908, to the extent of sending in regular 
reports, and paying for not less than sixty dollars worth 
of books in that time. Orders may be sent in at once, naming 
your express company. 

Should these limitations barely bar out some struggling 
sisters, such may write us particulars and we will see what, 
if anything, can be done for them. 



page 193 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXIX JULY 1 No. 13 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

Views from the "Watch Tower" 195 

See Things Coming 195 

Methodists Want Creed Restated 195 

Giving Life to the Image 196 

The Choice of a King 197 

"Little in Thine Own Eyes" 198 

God's Choice of Saul Indicated 198 

The Sin of Ingratitude 200 

God's Love for Them Not Quenched 201 

"Forbid That I Should Sin Against The Lord". ..202 

The Lord Hath Done Great Things for Us 203 

The London (Eng.), Convention 204 

"She Hath Done What She Could"-(Poem) 205 

Some Interesting Letters 205 

Letters Commending the "Vow" 206 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 207 

page 194 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 



FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



GENERAL CONVENTION-- AUG. 29-SEPT. 6 

Arrangements have been made for the Convention to be 
held in Put-in-Bay Island (Lake Erie), Ohio; headquarters 
at Hotel Victory, where exceptionally low rates for rooms and 
meals have been arranged. The prospects are that this will 
be the largest and best convention we have ever held. 



ONE-DAY CONVENTIONS 

PITTSBURGH, PA., JULY 5 

Immersion service 10 a.m., at Bible House Chapel, N.S., 
610 Arch St. Friends desiring to be immersed would confer 
a favor by signifying their intention. Afternoon session in 
Alvin Theatre, Sixth St., Pittsburgh: Subject, "Where are 
the Dead?" Evening session, Question Meeting, 7:30 o'clock, 
Bible House Chapel, N.S. 

OLEAN, N.Y., JULY 26 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S SERMONS WEEKLY 



Clubbing arrangements permit us to supply friends as 
follows: 

In Canada with the Toronto World, daily, for $1.50 per year; 
except in Toronto and Hamilton. Send subscriptions to us. 

In Great Britain and foreign countries we can supply the 
weekly sermons hereafter for $1.00 (4 shillings) per year. 

In the United States the Cincinnati Enquirer, weekly, 50c; 
The Ft. Wayne News weekly, 75c; The Pittsburg Dispatch, daily, 
$3.00 is still advised— it is a $6.00 paper. 



R4195 :page 195 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
SEES THINGS COMING 
"GIGANTIC STRUGGLE BETWEEN LABOR AND CAPITAL" 



SECRETARY Taft made an address before the 
Order of Railway Conductors in which he 



said:— 

"Men who control capital, as well as men who work for 
wages, must combine," said Secretary Taft to the conductors. 
"Combinations of capital within the bounds of the law are 
necessary for business expediency and for cost reduction. And 
because of these combinations among employers, the laboring 
men must combine also in order to obtain that independence 
to which they are entitled. 

LOOKS FOR GIANTS' STRUGGLE 

"Every man who understands welcomes the lawful combination 
of capital and the combinations of the laboring men. 
Yet there is no denying the fact that we must look forward 
to a gigantic controversy between labor and capital, hoping 
and trusting that it will be settled peaceably. That controversy, 
when it comes, will decide once for all how capital and 
labor shall share the joint-profits which they create. 

"For the past three years we have been doing some house-cleaning 
We needed it. President Roosevelt was the chief 
of those who called a halt and convinced the people that no one 
in this country is above the law. I do not say that all rich men 
are wicked. We take pride in those who by energy, intelligence, 
and honesty have accumulated wealth. But there are men in 
this country who by means devious and contrary to law have 
become multi-millionaires. These must be made to know that 
their lawless methods cannot be successful in the future." 



How evidently our Lord's teachings and those of 
his apostles were not to the world, but to "the called 
according to his purpose." To those he said, "Ye are 
not of the world, for I have chosen you out of the 
world." 

The purpose of their call is also made clear: That 
they should be holy, and, as his consecrated "little 
flock," learn important lessons and be developed to the 
full in love and loyalty to God and to each other and 
to all the principles of righteousness to the intent 
that being thus qualified for the service they may be 
made members of the Royal Family, the Kingdom 
class, which shall rule the nations with a rod of iron, 
wielded by a hand of love, during the Millennium. 

Surely no other explanation fits the facts of history 
and the records of the Bible. Blessed are the eyes 
of all who see these things and still more blessed are 
those whose hearts respond fully and who thus by the 
Lord's assisting grace make their calling and election 
sure to a place in that Kingdom. 

LONDON GONE MAD OVER OCCULTISM 



The London correspondent of the Toronto Globe says: 



"Mayfair's great army of clairvoyants, soothsayers, table-rappers 
and seventh-day sisters have been greatly encouraged by Sir 
Oliver Lodge's declarations concerning communications received 
from beyond the grave by the Psychical Research Society. 
The police prosecutions of a few years ago caused a 
genuine stampede from the luxuriously-appointed temples of 
mystery in the fashionable streets of the West End, but most 
of those who ran away have returned or are returning— bolder 
and more mysterious than ever. 

"It is declared on good authority that dabblers in the occult 
among fashionable society are numerically greater than 
ever before, and this statement is borne out by the rushing 
business being done by the men and women of mystery. In 
Oxford Circus and Piccadilly are daily to be seen sandwich 
men in large numbers bearing advertisement boards telling of 
the wonderfully accurate predictions made by Mme. X., and 
how Mme. Z., by timely warning to a lady of high title, prevented 
a dreadful domestic catastrophe. 

"Quite a separate division of the futurity-reading industry 
is that of the sporting 'prophets,' who are doing so well 
financially that they are able to spend large sums for advertisements 
in the newspapers. A special crusade against this 
form of clairvoyance has been started by the Bishop of Hereford. 
He has used his influence to have a committee of the 
Upper House of the Convocation of Canterbury appointed to 
deal with the subject, and wholesale prosecutions, both of 
newspapers printing the advertisements and of those placing 
them, are threatened." 

METHODISTS WANT CREED RESTATED 



Presbyterians are having great comfort from their 
restatement of their Faith for the public. They 
claim that it is just the same in meaning as their 
Westminster Confession. The new creed states so 
little and so vaguely that it mates well with the "new 
theology," which denies the Atonement, the pre-existence 

R4195 :page 196 

of Jesus, etc. But now Methodists are feeling 

their need of a similarly colorless creed, as is shown by 

the following from the Portland Evening Telegram: 

At the meeting of the Methodist Episcopal ministers 
today at Taylor Street Church, Rev. C. E. Cline read a paper 
on "Restating the Articles of Our Religion," which was in 
line with the general movement of that Church to restate the 
present articles, which were originally taken from the Episcopal 
creed. 

Rev. Clarence True Wilson, D.D., said he found the 
articles needed restating, as he had often been embarrassed 
by the inadequacy of the present Discipline. 

"Why, the other day," he said, "a Unitarian wrote me 
for information about our belief, and do you think I could 



send our Discipline? No, indeed not. Had I done so every 
minister present today would have criticised me. I happened 
to meet a Presbyterian minister who was in receipt of a letter 
from this same Unitarian and I asked him what he was going 
to do about it. 'Why, send him our Articles,' said he. I 
then said, 'Sign my name to it, too.' 

"We don't believe in the idea of Christ's atonement, yet 
we have it in our Discipline, and several other things, such as 
Original Sin being inherited. There can be no such thing, and 
no minister of our Church believes there is." 

A CANDID CONFESSION TRULY, FROM A PROMINENT MAN 



The Rev. Dr. Day, Chancellor of the Syracuse 
University, recently, in an address to the Y.M.C.A., 
is reported by the public press to have voiced sentiments 

R4196 : page 196 

which we have reason to believe are shared by 

vast numbers of humanity, though seldom expressed. 

We quote from the New York Press: 

"Wouldn't you rather live in America than in heaven? 
I would. I'd like to go to heaven when I can't be here. In 
fact, I think I'd be rather discontented in heaven till I got 
adjusted. You can get anything you want here. You can 
live under forty odd governments, meet all the nations of the 
world, eat all the fruits of the world and get any kind of 
climate that you choose. So America is the best place to live; 
but I think when a man can't stay here any longer he ought 
to steer for heaven. 

"For my part, I've never been much fascinated with the 
idea of corner-lots and mansions in the skies, and songs and 
harps and such things. I like a place because it's busy, and the 
more business there is the better I like it. Give me lots of 
work and lots of people to oppose me and then I'm happy. 

"The business of the country isn't going to stagnate, or 
wither. It is going on. There's too much wealth in the interior, 
too much property on the surface, too much harvest 
on its broad acres, too many factories, too much money that's 
got to be invested to be safe for us to halt long. We've had a 
little scare, it's true, but nothing more." 



Such a truthful expression will doubtless do good. 
Hypocrisy is never advantageous nor commendable. 
If all spoke out their true sentiments, Christianity 
would be rudely shaken and surprised, but the result 
would be good; the few really energized by the 
heavenly promises would be manifested and separated 
from the nominal mass to their great advantage. 

The Apostle Paul spoke of such as "loved the 
present world" (2 Tim. 4:10), as thus giving evidence 



that they had departed from the faith and departed 
from all relationship to Christ as his disciples. We 
remember also the inspired Word, "Love not the world, 
neither the things of the world. If any man love the 
world, the love of the Father is not in him."— 
I John 2:15. 

Those who have really "tasted of the heavenly 
gift and the powers of the world (age) to come, and 
been made partakers of the holy Spirit," possessing 
this illumination of the eyes of their understanding, 
can never be satisfied with present conditions under 
the rule of the Prince of Darkness, can never 
be satisfied by the present "reign of sin and 
death," under which "the whole creation groaneth and 
travaileth in pain." 

Dissatisfied with all that the present evil world 
can offer, they are content, nevertheless, because of 
their faith in God's promises of future blessings to the 
Church and the world; content because of God's assurance 
that the present evils will ultimately work out 
blessings under divine guidance— helpful both to the 
Church and the world. We will be satisfied when our 
polishing as the Lord's jewels is completed— when we 
awake in his likeness in the resurrection. And the 
groaning creation— the poor as well as the rich— will 
be satisfied when the Millennium shall have blessed 
and uplifted all from sin and degradation and selfishness 
and shall have established amongst men equity and 
love, the fulfilling of the divine law. And all not then 
satisfied will be utterly destroyed.— Acts 3:23. 

GIVING LIFE TO THE IMAGE 



Many of our readers know that for years we have 
been waiting for a fulfilment of the symbolic statement 
about the two-horned beast of Revelation 13:15. 
Our expectation has been that the Church of England, 
represented in the two-horned beast, would give life to 
the Protestant Image of Papacy, viz., the Protestant 
Evangelical Alliance. Just what we have been waiting 
for may yet occur— Episcopal ordination may be 
granted to the "clergy" of other denominations; but 
possibly the action of the Episcopal House of Bishops 
some months ago is all that we should expect. By 
opening Episcopal pulpits to other Orthodox Protestant 
ministers it tacitly acknowledged their ordination 
and thus gave them sanction, acknowledgment, 
validity— life. This, at least, is the view taken by 
some of their own "clergy," as the following will 
show:— 

FOUR EPISCOPAL MINISTERS QUIT AND DENOUNCE 
THE OPEN PULPIT 



Dramatic scenes marked the departure of the Rev. William 
McGarvey and his three assistants from St. Elizabeth's 
Episcopal Church, Philadelphia. 

The four clergymen of the Church decided they could no 
longer remain in the Episcopal Church when the "open pulpit" 
canon was adopted. 

THEY EXPLAIN ACTION 

They distributed a circular letter in part as follows:— 
"It is due to you that we should tell you plainly why we 
are leaving you and going forth to begin our lives anew. 
When we were ordained we were persuaded that the Catholic 
religion in its fulness was the faith of the Episcopal Church. 
Animated by this persuasion, we gave ourselves freely to her 
ministry and would gladly have laid down our lives in her 
service. Misgivings with regard to the legitimacy of our position 
were first aroused when certain of the bishops a year 
or two ago began to invite non-Episcopal ministers into the 
pulpits. 

"Such action was not, of course, the action of the Episcopal 
Church, although its proceeding from bishops gives it a 
serious import. But when the whole house of bishops, without 
a dissenting vote, indorsed this practice by incorporating 

R4196 : page 197 

into the discipline of the Episcopal Church explicit provision 
for an open pulpit, it was manifest that either the non-Episcopal 
ministers had already the same ministerial status as ministers 
of the word with those ordained by bishops of the 
Episcopal Church, or that the Episcopal Church had by her 
enactment of the open pulpit canon seriously compromised the 
doctrine of holy order which we had supposed that she held in 
its integrity. 

"Had such a canon been enacted prior to our ordination 
our consciences would never for a moment have allowed us to 
receive ordination in the Episcopal Church. And now that 
the canon was enacted it was plain that we must, as honest 
men, reconsider our whole position. We set a time for prayer 
and thought that we might know God's will and might do 
nothing hastily. 

"That time has now expired, and it has been made abundantly 
clear to us that the Episcopal Church, in making possible 
the admission of all sorts of Protestant ministers as teachers 
of her people, has rightly interpreted her own essential 
spirit. She now stands forth before the world in the character 
which belongs to her, and by which she desires to be 
known. She is as she calls herself, as in the last general convention 
she has demonstrated herself to be, and as most of her 
members regard her— a Protestant Church." 

"SUNDAY SCHOOL TIMES" TELLS THE TRUTH 



"Sheol and Hades are respectively the Old and the New 
Testament words for the place of the dead— all dead, whether 
saved or lost. Gehenna is the name of the place of the dead 
who are lost."— Issue May 2, 1908, p. 214. 

THE DESTRUCTION OF SODOM 



"A streak of fire passing rapidly through the air would 
precipitate nitric acid. So would a bolt of lightning. A bolt 
of lightning moving for a distance of 200 feet without the zigzag 
breaks in its course would throw down nitric acid out of 
the air, for a territory a mile in diameter. 

"Now, suppose a bolt of lightning did dart through the air 
in the immediate vicinity of what is now the Dead Sea. Suppose 
that bolt to have traversed a long distance, with its course 
unbroken by a common zigzag movement of lightning. Enough 
nitric acid would be thrown down to change all the surface 
of the earth for miles around to nitrates. And, in my opinion, 
that is exactly what did happen, causing not only the 
transformation of Lot's wife into a pillar of salt, but also 
causing the Dead Sea to become 'dead.'"— Lyell M. Rider, 
professor of chemistry. 

SOCIALISM VS. ANARCHISM 



BERLIN— The police today discovered guns, ammunition 
and other material supposed to belong to Russian Terrorists 
in the house of the Socialist Municipal Councilor (member of 
the city council), Kerfien. 

There were many pistols with so called dumdum bullets, 
and an electric apparatus for the igniting of explosives at a 
distance, double shirt bosoms for the smuggling of forbidden 
literature into Russia, etc. A whole dray load of such articles 
was being removed.— Translated from the German. 

GATHERING NATURAL ISRAEL 



The correspondent of the Jewish Daily News reports that 
the Hungarian Minister of the Interior ordered a thorough 
investigation of the status of Russian Jews who live in Budapest. 
Those who are unable to show that they have certain 
means of livelihood should be expelled from the capital. This 
order affects the fate of nearly 10,000 Jews, for the Galician 
Jews living in Budapest will be included in that edict, and 
most of these belong to the poorest classes. A cable dispatch 
received by the above journal announces that 1500 Jews have 
already been expelled from Budapest. 



R4197 :page 197 

THE CHOICE OF A KING 

--ISAM. 10:1-27.~JULY 12.- 

Golden Text:— "He that ruleth over men must be 
just, ruling in the fear of God."— 2 Sam. 23:3. 

SAMUEL informed Israel that God acceded to their request 
for a change in the form of their government; 
that they might have a king like the nations round 
about them. This lesson details the process by which God's 
choosing of a king was indicated. Viewed from the standpoint 
of faith it contains lessons for us daily, indicating how 
divine supervision takes cognizance of human reason and 
operates in harmony therewith. 

A well-to-do farmer named Kish, residing not far from 
the present site of Jerusalem, had a son named Saul; tall, 
manly, well-balanced mentally, but not specially religious. 
This son was God's choice for Israel's king. In the carrying 
out of the divine programme, a herd of asses, under Saul's 
care, was lost, and, after vainly searching for them, he finally 
bethought him to consult God's prophet, Samuel, who 
lived not a great distance away. We can see how this lesson 
itself would be helpful to the young man— drawing out 
his thought to the fact that all things are known to God, and 
that the prophet was God's special representative. Samuel's 
ability to locate the asses gave Saul an increased faith in 
him as a man of God, and in the message which he gave him, 
when later the prophet told Saul that he was God's choice 
for king over Israel, and poured upon him the oil anointing 
him to that office. It was, doubtless, in harmony with the 
prophet's advice, that Saul kept the matter of his anointing 
secret, and went about his business until such time as the 
Lord's providence should make him known to Israel as the 
divinely chosen king. 

Saul was well suited to the office in various respects. 
First, he belonged to the small tribe of Benjamin, whose territory 
lay between that of the two principal tribes, Judah and 
Ephraim; he would, consequently, be more likely to have the 
sympathy and cooperation of the people of the most influential 
tribes, who would have been more likely to have feelings 
of opposition and jealousy toward any man from an important 
tribe. We read that he stood head and shoulders 
above his fellows, and the intimation is that he was quite 
muscular. In olden times, when physical force had so much 
to do with military fighting, we can readily see that such a 
type of man appealed strongly to the sentiments of the 
people. 

Various Scripture lessons convey to us the thought that 
God's foreknowledge has much to do with many things that 
to men may appear accidental. Thus, for instance, with 
Saul of Tarsus, who became the Apostle Paul. The Scriptures 
inform us that he was chosen of God to be a special vessel, 
or servant, from his mother's womb, implying a divine supervision 



of the prenatal conditions, which affected the general 
caliber and balance both of his mind and of his body. We 
think it not unreasonable to assume similarly in respect to 
King Saul; that his noble stature and physique may have 
been the result of divine foreordination. However, this divine 
foreordination and interposition did not affect the free agency 
of either of these men, of the same name and the same tribe 
and born more than a thousand years apart. With the conditions 
favorable in both cases, the free will, free agency 

R4197 : page 198 

was untrammeled; as, for instance, King Saul, later in life, 
chose an evil way and was not hindered by the Lord from 
taking it; while Saul of Tarsus, when shown the right way, 
manifested his loyalty of heart most remarkably. The latter 
states, however, that notwithstanding the blessing conferred 
upon him from his mother's womb and the honor that later 
came to him as an Apostle, he might still, by rejecting the 
Lord, become a castaway as respects a share in the coming 
Kingdom. 

Another suggestion that may appeal to all the Lord's 
people is that, while known unto the Lord are all his works 
from the foundation of the world, these are not known to us, 
and hence all of us should reverence the Lord and recognize 
his supervision in the affairs of his consecrated people; 
specially should they be on the lookout for divine providences 
and be prompt to follow them. A constant temptation 
is to view matters from the worldly standpoint and to 
conclude that our destiny is entirely in our own hands and 
to forget divine providence in our affairs. Every day this 
lesson should become more deeply impressed upon us. With 
each year of Christian experience we should learn to look 
into the facts and circumstances of life from the standpoint 
of faith, seeking to note the will of the Lord concerning us 
in things small as well as great. True, the Lord is not now 
selecting from amongst his saints a king for Israel, but he is 
making selections for the Body of the Great King, the Messiah, 
whose Head is the Lord Jesus Christ and whose members 
are the "more than conquerors" of this Gospel Age. 

"LITTLE IN THINE OWN EYES" 

Although Saul was tall and athletic, a wonderful man in 
his way, he was humble withal, as the Lord testified: "Thou 
wast little in thine own sight." (1 Sam. 15:17.) This is 
another characteristic which belongs to those whom the Lord 
is now choosing to be kings and priests unto God under their 
Lord in the Millennium. They must really be taller than 
their fellows in respect to character as New Creatures, even 
if not according to the flesh; but they must be humble, "little 
in their own sight." They must realize that they are not 
worthy of such honor, that it is only of God's grace, and 
that the honor thus conferred upon them is not merely for 
themselves, but that they may be used of the Lord in connection 
with the blessing which he intends to confer upon 



humanity in and through the Kingdom of his dear Son. 

Respecting Saul's homeward journey we read: "And it 
was so that when he had turned his back to go from Samuel, 
God gave him another heart, and the Spirit of the Lord came 
upon him." (1 Sam. 10:9,10.) Verse 6 declares that he 
"was turned into another man." Forthwith he joined 
himself to one of the schools of the prophets, which Samuel 
had established, through which the better education of Israel 
might be accomplished, especially with respect to religious 
truths and influences. We may be in doubt as to just what 
is meant by this statement of Saul's change, but we can have 
no doubt that it would not signify that God's holy Spirit 
came upon him as it came upon the Church at Pentecost and 
as it is with all of the consecrated from that time to the 
present; because this Pentecostal blessing is a seal of sonship 
and grants an enlightenment of the mind respecting the deep 
things of God's Word and plan, such as was not granted to 
any previous to our Lord's anointing with the Spirit. Respecting 
this Pentecostal sealing we are informed that the 
holy Spirit was not yet given, even to the disciples, because 
Jesus was not yet glorified. Not until Jesus' glorification 
was the holy Spirit sent forth, because the penalty for sin 
being upon the race none could be fully accepted of God to 
the begetting of the holy Spirit to the heavenly nature until 
after the ransom price for sinners had been paid by our 
Lord's sacrifice. 

The Spirit of God upon Saul was more physical in its 
manifestation, controlling his words and actions rather than 
enlightening his mind in respect to the deep things of God. 
This was true of all the prophets who spake and wrote as 
they were moved by the holy Spirit, but who did not understand 
in full degree the things which they uttered.— 1 Pet. 1:10; 
2 Pet. 1:21. 

Saul's experience gave him practical demonstration of 
a divine power outside of himself, and thus tended to fix his 
mind upon the more sober things of life and God's relationship 
to these. The result was that, returning to his duties 
as a farmer, he was thereafter a changed man, or had a new 
heart, a new purpose. The experiences through which he 
had passed led his mind out into new channels, new ambitions. 
The sports of life in which he had previously spent 
considerable time were unworthy of his attention now, because 
he had been lifted to a higher plane and had his mind 
full of conjectures and resolutions respecting the Kingdom; 
wondering, perhaps, how the Lord would bring it to pass 
that one so obscure as himself should come to a place of such 
political prominence in the nation. 

Similarly we may suggest that those who believe God's 
message and accept the anointing of the holy Spirit, typified 
by the oil poured upon Saul, also find new aims, new impulses, 
new hopes, new desires, and are also disposed to join 
themselves to a school of the prophets, to associate with those 
who are studying the divine Word and will. And similarly 
these in all of life's affairs are changed men. Yet not similarly 
either, because the change to these is much greater and 
of a different kind, as we have already suggested. The 



Scriptures explain to us that the Lord's people, now being 
selected for joint-heirship in his Millennial Kingdom, are 
changed in a most remarkable manner. All things become 
new to them, and things which they once loved now they hate, 
and things which once they hated now they love. The ambitions 
of these are too high to permit of waste of time and 
energy in the follies of life, which engage the attention of 
the worldly. The thoughts of the Kingdom fill their hearts 
and they study to make their calling and their election sure, 
requiring their time and attention to such a degree that previous 
pleasures are dead and unsatisfactory in comparison. 

R4198 : page 198 

GOD'S CHOICE OF SAUL INDICATED 

When we read that Samuel called all the people together 
at Mizpeh, we should understand that it signifies that 
according to their national organization all the people were 
represented, not only as twelve tribes, but by persons representing 
the different tribes proportionate to the number of 
persons in the tribe. The proper persons to represent the 
tribes, we are informed, were chosen by lot; but no matter 
how, all the tribes were represented, and not all the people 
were expected to go to Mizpeh. 

At the proper time the prophet Samuel stood forth and 
explained to the people afresh, that they had not done wisely 
in appealing for a king instead of continuing the Lord's 
arrangement, but that the Lord was willing to give them an 
experience along the line which they had preferred, and that 
they were now come together to ascertain from the Lord who 
of the hosts of Israel should occupy the important position of 
king. Accordingly they first inquired of the Lord respecting 
the tribe in which was the person of his choice. The testing 
of the twelve rods, representing the twelve tribes, gave 
the answer that the expected one should be from the tribe of 

R4198 : page 199 

Benjamin. Next the testing as to the different families of 
the chosen tribe, and next as to which member of the 
chosen family, the choice falling upon Saul, the son of 
Kish, as Samuel already knew it would, and as Saul also 
knew because of Samuel's words and the anointing oil. Thus 
the Lord dealt with the minds of the people to show them 
his choice and to teach them to look for divine direction in 
their various interests. 

There is a lesson here for the Lord's people in respect 
to the choosing of elders and deacons in the various ecclesias. 
Each of the consecrated should recognize that in doing his 
part in the election he should merely act as the Lord's agent 
and that the Lord's will should be done fully, completely. 
Personal preference should be ignored, wire-pulling and attempting 
to influence the minds of those who would vote 
should be merely along Scriptural lines in respect to character, 
and nothing should be done for strife or vain-glory, but 



all to the glory of God. Earthly relationships should have 
no influence in this question, as his people should speak as 
the oracles of God, recognizing that the matter is in their 
hands to be decided according to the directions of the holy 
Word and Spirit. 

The record shows that when the announcement was 
made that Saul, the son of Kish, was to be the king, there 
was a general search and none knew his whereabouts. Inquiry 
of the Lord revealed the fact that he was hidden 
amongst the stuff, the baggage of these tribes. The modesty 
of Saul is commendable. He knew that he would be the 
choice on this occasion, for the Lord had indicated this by 
his anointing, but he modestly withdrew. As much modesty 
of heart, even though differently expressed, should be found 
amongst all the Lord's dear people, specially amongst those 
who are chosen to serve the Lord's flock in any capacity. 
The man should be hiding himself rather than aspiring to 
the position of service, however much he may appreciate the 
honor of being a servant of the Lord and of his flock. 

Saul's modesty is further evidenced by the fact that 
after being chosen he did not assume a dictatorial spirit and 
authority, but reasonably, properly went to his own farm to 
attend to its interest until such time as the Lord would indicate 
some forward movement on his part— until the Lord 
would bless him with the kingdom. And it is so with us; 
we are to do as the Apostle tells us: "Let every man abide 
in the same calling wherein he was called," not necessarily 
forever, but until such time as the Lord's providence should 
open the door and call him forth to service for the Lord and 
his people. If the matter is of the Lord at all, he will give 
the opportunity and the wisdom to use it properly. If it is 
not of the Lord, the service would better never be entered 
upon in any degree. 

"WHOSE HEARTS GOD HAD TOUCHED" 

Verse 26 tells us that a band of men accompanied Saul 
to his home— men whose hearts God had touched. And on 
the other hand the following verse tells us that there were 
other "sons of Belial," who despised him, brought him no 
present, but said: "How shall this man save us?" Apparently 
the latter class were more numerous than the band who 
accompanied Saul. The whole account reminds us of our 
Lord after his anointing, when a band of the people were 
drawn to him, "Those whose hearts God had touched." 
These became his disciples and followers, and the Apostle 
tells us that the number of them was about five hundred. 
There were certain sons of Belial who withstood Jesus, of 
whom the prophet tells us saying, "We hid, as it were, our 
faces from him; there was no beauty that we should desire 
him." They said in effect, "How can this man save us?" 
There was nothing desirable in him in their estimation. 

The same thing is true of the Lord's people and cause 
ever since, and particularly true of those who occupy any 
place of prominence in his service. Some approve God's 
dealings, recognizing his providences, and act in harmony 



with their faith. These are the ones whose hearts God has 

touched. God's directings and touchings in the present time 

are mainly through the truth, "Thy Word is truth;" "Sanctify 

them through thy truth." The sanctified are looking for 

the Lord's leadings, and they are assisted in discerning them. 

On the other hand, as there were in Saul's day and in our 

Lord's time, so there have been since, sons of Belial, contentious, 

unwilling to be guided by the Lord's providences and 

the words of his prophet. These sons of strife are not always 

dissolute either; as, for instance, in our Lord's time 

they included scribes, Pharisees and doctors of the Law, who 

were moved, we are told, with envy and jealousy; those 

Satanic qualities which trouble the entire human family so 

much. The lesson to us is that we should never forget the 

Lord in our personal affairs, and specially in the affairs of 

his Kingdom. And the recognition of this should make us 

very careful respecting every step we take "Lest haply we be 

found even to fight against God."— Acts 5:39. 

PROMPT TO USE OPPORTUNITIES 

In the Lord's providence an opportunity came to Saul, 
and his promptness in seizing it endeared him to the hearts 
of the majority of the people. An enemy, the Moabites, made 
an attack upon the city of Jabesh, overpowering it. They 
then sent a message to the people offering to spare their lives, 
but on condition that their eyes should be put out. Saul 
promptly sent a message to all of the tribes to come to the 
help of their brethren, and with the recruits thus gathered 
drove off the enemy and delivered the people. May we not 
draw an illustration from this also as respects those whom 
the Lord anointed with the holy Spirit, with a view to their 
becoming ultimately joint-heirs with Jesus in the Kingdom. 
After being anointed of the Spirit we should expect some 
opportunity for divine service, and should be on the lookout 
for the same, even while, as the Apostle urges, we abide in 
the same calling wherein we were called. We also know of 
an enemy who has blinded some of the Lord's people and 
who is threatening others with blindness. The circumstance 
should become to us a call, and we should go forth in the 
name and the strength of the Lord, and with all the assistance 
we can command in harmony with his arrangement for 
the delivering of our brethren from the power of the blinding 
forces. Whoever sees such an opportunity and fails to 
avail himself of it, gives evidence that he is not in a proper 
condition of heart for one of the royal priesthood; he needs 
more love for God and for his people. 

APPLYING OUR GOLDEN TEXT 

After Saul had been indicated as the king the prophet 
"Samuel told the people the manner of the kingdom, and 
wrote it in a book, and laid it up before the Lord"— probably 
in the ark. The book probably set forth the rights and 
prerogatives of the king and the rights and duties of the 
people with a view to having each recognize the responsibility. 



Nevertheless, this was merely a statement of how 
matters should be; and, as a matter of fact, we find that 
neither Saul's kingdom nor any other kingdom was free from 
imperfection. God, however, in his book, the Bible, has set 
before us the laws of his kingdom, the laws which will be in 
force when the Millennial Kingdom shall be established and 

R4198 : page 200 

which, when rightly enforced, will bless all the families of 
the earth, instructing and uplifting them. 

Our Golden Text is in harmony with this thought, declaring 
that "he that ruleth over men must be just, ruling in 
the fear of God." This is the meaning of the Lord's careful 
selection and instruction, and disciplining and judging and 
proving his people whom he is now calling to a position 
in the Millennial Kingdom. They must judge justly and 
they must rule in the fear of the Lord, and none will be 
selected or elected who are of a different disposition. The 
Lord makes this clear when he tells us through the Apostle 
that all of these who will have a share in the Kingdom must 
be copies of God's dear Son.— Rom. 8:29; Col. 1:13. 

However, while justice will be the rule of the Kingdom 
it is not the rule of those who are under instruction and preparation 
for the Kingdom. Justice is not the Lord's rule for 
his people in the present time when they themselves are 
weak and imperfect and when their judgment of others 
would necessarily be imperfect also. He therefore tells us 
to "Judge no man before the time." The time will come 
when we shall judge the world (1 Cor. 6:2), but by that time 
we shall be qualified by our glorious First Resurrection change, 
which will make us like our dear Redeemer and Lord. On 

R4199 : page 200 

the other hand, we must remember that the force of this 

Scripture is that we must do no judging in the present time; 

instead of seeking to execute judgment upon others we may 

strive to exercise it upon ourselves; but toward others we 

must exercise love, sympathy, compassion. This is one of 

the great lessons to be learned and whoever fails to learn it 

will fail to get into the Kingdom. Whoever does learn this 

lesson may understand that in proportion as he himself is 

forgiving in that measure shall he be forgiven, for, "If ye 

from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses," 

"Neither will your Father forgive your trespasses." 

As we prove every matter of doctrine by the touchstone of 

the ransom, so let us learn to prove every word and act and 

thought by the touchstone of love. Whatsoever is not of 

love is sin; will prove injurious to ourselves and possibly to 

others. 



R4199 : page 200 



THE SIN OF INGRATITUDE 

--ISAM. 12:1-25. -JULY 19.- 

Golden Text:— "Only fear the Lord, and serve 
him in truth with all your heart; for consider 
how great things he hath done for you." 

AFTER Saul had been duly anointed, accepted and installed 

in office came the time for his coronation. 

This is in full line with the custom of the present 

time. The present king of England was not crowned for 

nearly a year after he had assumed his office. The interim had 

given time for the development of an appreciation for their 

king on the part of the people by reason of his prompt action 

and good success in dealing with the situation at Jabesh, referred 

to in our last lesson. The people rejoiced much more 

in the coronation of their king than they would have done 

immediately after his choice under divine direction. If we 

carry out this thought and its application to the Christ, the 

lesson would be that the influence of the Church in the 

present time under the divine anointing and before the coronation, 

after the first recognition, will have a helpful influence 

upon the world. Mankind will then discover that the Adversary's 

blinding influences upon them would have been still 

greater, still more pernicious, had it not been for the intervention 

of the Royal Priesthood, who laid down their lives 

in the service of the truth under the guidance of their Head. 

Concerning the attitude of the world toward the new 
Kingdom of Messiah when established, we remember the declaration 
of the Scriptures, "Many people shall go and say, 
Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to 
the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his 
ways, and we will walk in his paths." "The desire of all 
nations shall come." (Micah 4:2; Hag. 2:7.) All nations 
have been desiring the very blessing that God has in store 
for them during the Millennium; but the enemies of truth 
and righteousness have deceived them, putting light for darkness 
and darkness for light. When once they see clearly out 
of obscurity, the effects will be magical. Eventually every 
knee shall bow and every tongue confess Immanuel. 

Samuel chose the occasion of Saul's coronation for a 
public rendering up of his own accounts. As God's servant, 
he had occupied the place of a Chief Justice to the nation, 
but the choice of a king relieved the prophet of political influence 
and responsibility. He called upon them as a whole 
people to declare whether or not he had ever taken from 
them aught that could be construed as a bribe, aught that 
in any sense of the word could be said to influence 
his judgment or decision of their matters. With one voice, 
the people declared that he had been faithful; and he in 
turn called upon the king and upon the Almighty Sovereign 
to witness this declaration of the people as a safeguard 
against anything that could ever be said against him in the 
future. 

The statesmanship of Moses and Samuel stand out upon 



the pages of history as noble examples of courage and 
faithfulness to God and to the people. While it is true that 
few if any of the saints of God of this Gospel Age have occupied 
or are occupying positions of special political influence, 
nevertheless, the principle here set forth should be appreciated 
by all of God's saints under all conditions. Similar 
principles apply in the home, in the family. Every father 
ought to be able to make a similar appeal to his family as 
respects his nobility of purpose and honorableness in dealing 
with them. They should be able to witness that he had not 
been self-seeking in any sense of the word; that he had been 
faithful to his responsibility as a husband and as a father, 
seeking to use wisely the opportunities and responsibilities 
which were his by divine arrangement, caring for those under 
his charge, spending his life in considerable degree in their 
interest and certainly never against their interests. Every 
mother, every son, every daughter, in the family ought similarly 
to be able to call the fellow-members of the family to 
witness their faithfulness, their loyalty. The person who 
would be loyal in the family would be loyal to his nation, 
which is merely a larger family. Although Samuel had sons, 
he had not sought to put them forward for political preferment. 
His faithfulness to the interests of Israel meant primarily 
his faithfulness to God. So it is always with God's 
people. They are not to trust in their own judgment merely 
in serving their family. They are to seek the wisdom from 
above; and this implies prayer and the study of the teachings 
of the Scriptures. 

A SEVERE ARRAIGNMENT 

In verses 6-12, the prophet recounted God's faithfulness 
to the people of Israel, and their ingratitude in return. He 
reminded them that Moses and Aaron, those noble characters 

R4199 : page 201 

who had served them so faithfully, were of divine appointment; 
and that their success was because of their faithfulness 
to the Lord. He said, "Now, therefore, stand still, that 
I may reason with you before the Lord of all the righteous 
acts of the Lord, which he did to you and to your fathers." 
He rehearsed to them their sins of idolatry, forgetfulness of 
the Lord's favor, and reminded them that chastisements were 
sent upon them not in anger, but in love, because the Lord 
desired to have them as his people, and because the chastisements 
were necessary for their good. He mentioned the 
names of a number of the prominent judges under whom the 
Lord had blessed them in recovering them from the power of 
their enemies. This is in full accord with the subsequent 
statements of the Lord on this subject. Through Isaiah the 
prophet, the Lord reminds the people that he used these 
enemies as "The rod of his anger" (Isa. 10:5); and through 
the Psalmist he reminds them of how he had cleansed them 
from their defilements and brought them back to himself, 
saying, "Moab is my washpot." (Psa. 108:9.) Thus for 



several centuries Israel had been under divine supervision, 
blessed according to the Covenant which God had made with 
them through Moses, when between the mountains of Ebal 
and Gerizim he caused to be pronounced upon them the 
blessing that would be theirs if they would be faithful to 
him, and the evil that would befall them if they forsook the 
Lord— evil that would be not only retributive but also purgative, 
intended to retrieve them from their evil tendencies. 

The Israelites had not been rightly appreciative of the 
favor they enjoyed, rather they forgot, ignored the Lord in 
their affairs; and taking worldly wisdom on the subject, 
they concluded that their disasters had not been punishments 
from the Lord and blessings in disguise, but merely 
the result of their failure to be organized as a kingdom under 
an earthly head. This, Samuel related to them, saying, 
"When ye saw that Nahash, the king of the children of Ammon, 
came against you, ye said unto me, Nay; but a king 
shall reign over us; when the Lord your God was your King." 

Fallen human nature is considerably the same at all 
times and in all places; and so we find that amongst those 
who have named the name of the Lord during this Gospel 
Age, there have been similar tendencies to overlook the Lord 
as the great Head of the Church, the great protector of its 
interests, the great Governor of its affairs. Two centuries of 
the Gospel Age had not passed when the worldly spirit called 
out for more organization than the Lord had established 
through Jesus and the apostles. First it was the partizan 
spirit, whereby the people in various parts sought headship 
for their bishops, contrary to the arrangement which the 
Lord had made for them. This was the very spirit which 
the Apostle had reproved, saying, While ye say, I am of Paul, 
I am of Apollos, and I of Peter, are ye not carnal? Is not 
this sectarian spirit an evidence that you are not in the 
proper relationship to the Lord? Paul did not die for you; 
neither did Peter; neither did Apollos. (1 Cor. 1:11-13.) 
Your Redeemer is the only Head which should be recognized 
in this particular way. Though Paul and Apollos and Peter, 
and all of the Lord's faithful ones may be recognized and 
appreciated for their work's sake, it must be remembered 
that they are nothing more than the Lord's mouth-pieces and 
representatives, and that he alone is to be considered the 
Head of the Church. Such are to be appreciated only as 
they are faithful and loyal to him. Repeatedly during the 
last thirty years we have reminded the Lord's faithful of the 

R4200 : page 201 

experience of John on the Isle of Patmos. When receiving 

revelation of divine things, he fell down before the angel 

that showed him these things, to worship him. The Apostle 

John in a measure represented the faithful of the Lord's 

people in the end of this age. The more wonderful things 

of the divine plan are being revealed; and some might be 

in danger of worshiping the angel through whom the enlightenment 

was sent. It is well that all should remember 

the lesson given in that connection, in which the angel of the 



Lord rebuked anything that would be in the nature of personal 
idolatry, saying, "See thou do it not: I am thy fellow-servant, 
...worship God."— Rev. 19:10. 

This same spirit of forsaking God as the real ruler and 
protector of all the interests of his people was further emphasized 
in the third century, when the rivalry of the bishops 
became pronounced, ultimately leading to the recognition of 
one of these as Primate or Pope. The Lord did not interfere 
to hinder the establishment of the papal views in the 
Church, even as he did not interfere to hinder natural Israel 
from choosing a king. Although they had chosen unwisely 
and contrary to divine instruction, the Lord would still be 
gracious to such as would seek to keep his way even under 
the new arrangement. He would be faithful, even though 
his people were not faithful. He would still do them all 
the good possible, but they would find that those conditions 
which they had made for themselves were injurious to their 
better interests, and thus might ultimately learn a lesson as 
respects the wisdom of God and its superiority to the wisdom 
and desires of their own fallen judgment. 

In other words, as the Israelites were far better under 
such leaders as the Lord raised up from time to time— Moses, 
Aaron, Joshua, Jerubbaal, Bedan, Jephthah and Samuel— he 
would, nevertheless, bless them as much as would be possible 
according to their course under the new arrangement 
which they desired. He would overrule the further experiences 
they would have under their kings, so that they might 
from these learn a great lesson in respect to the wisdom of 
God. So, too, in Spiritual Israel, the Lord has not forsaken 
Israelites indeed, even in the midst of spiritual Babylon; but 
as related in the parable which foretold present conditions, 
the Lord said, Let both wheat and tares grow together until 
the harvest; in the time of harvest shall be the separating; 
so now the Lord, still mindful of his true saints in Babylon, 
sends forth the call, "Come out of her, my people, that ye 
be not partakers of her sins and that ye receive not of her 
plagues." (Rev. 18:4.) Those desirous of being under the 
Lord's direction have constituted a little flock, for whose 
shepherding and care the Lord himself has always been responsible, 
sending assistance and messages from time to time 
through undershepherds who were never recognized by the 
great systems, but merely by those who had an ear to hear 
and the right condition of heart to appreciate the message 
of truth and grace. 

GOD'S LOVE FOR THEM NOT QUENCHED 

From verses 13-18, the Prophet reviews the present situation 
of the people. They had rejected the Lord from being 
their King, but he had not rejected them and would not do 
so. They had not chosen the best, but the Lord did not 
cross them in this matter. He, therefore, had anointed their 
king as his representative, and their future blessings would 
depend now upon how truly they and their king would remain 
in accord with the Lord. Under the new arrangement, 
the king of their choice represented them, and a sin on his 



part, a deflection from obedience to the Lord would mean a 
national sin, for which the people as well as the king would 
be punishable; whereas, before, under the judges whom the 
Lord had raised up, if the judge was faulty, he was the 
Lord's agent and was punished as such; and, if the people 

R4200 : page 202 

were faulty, the punishment was theirs. Thus they had run 
a great risk in choosing a representative, in placing power 
in his hands, because the weakness and selfishness of humanity 
is such that the one thus exalted would be the more liable 
to transgress the divine statutes. In harmony with this, note 
how the sin of David was esteemed a national sin and brought 
a national penalty.— 1 Chron. 21:12-27. 

In summing up by the Lord's direction, Samuel gave a 
sign to corroborate his declaration that their calling for a 
king was a rejection of the Lord as their king, and a sin on 
the part of the people. There should be a thunderstorm in 
the midst of their harvest-time, an occurrence said to be very 
rare in southern Palestine. Coming promptly as a fulfilment 
of Samuel's prediction, it appealed to the people, convincing 
them for the first time that their course was a reprehensible 
one and a sin of gross ingratitude. They said to 
Samuel, "Pray for thy servants unto the Lord thy God, that 
we die not; for we have added unto all our sins this evil, to 
ask us a king." 

THE SIN OF INGRATITUDE 

Of all crimes, ingratitude appears to be one of the most 
inexcusable, and has so been esteemed amongst all people 
and at all times. Lycurgus, the great law-giver and statesman 
of Greece, wrote, "I make no law, perhaps, punishing 
ingratitude; I leave that for the gods to punish." Amongst 
the Athenians, if a slave, being freed, was afterward convicted 
of ingratitude toward his liberator, he was sent back 
again into slavery. Someone has written, "Gratitude is the 
fairest blossom which springs from the soul; and the heart 
of man knoweth none more fragrant." Shakespeare wrote: 

"This was the most unkindest cut of all; 
For when the noble Caesar saw him stabbed, 
Ingratitude, more strong than traitor's arms, 
Quite vanquished him; then burst his mighty heart." 

Gratitude not only is a fragrant flower, but is indigenous 
to the soul of every true and noble heart. Accepting this 
standard, we are bound to conclude that comparatively few 
of the human family are noble in this respect. Even 
amongst the Lord's people the grateful seem to be comparatively 
few in number. This agrees well with the Apostle's 
statement that amongst the called are "not many noble"— 
chiefly the mean things of this world." (1 Cor. 1:26-29.) 
But this describes what we were when we were called. Who 
shall say that amongst those who have accepted the divine 



call and been made partakers of the divine favors granted to 
all the sons of God, begotten of the Spirit— who shall say 
that these will remain ungrateful? Who shall say that the 
grace of God would not have a transforming influence on 
their hearts, so that however ungrateful they might be by 
nature, they would be so changed by grace that gratitude 
would be one of the chief elements of their disposition? 

We believe that this is true; and that the Lord's people 
may in considerable degree measure their spiritual growth 
and development in this manner. If they find in themselves 
a spirit of murmuring and complaining against the Lord, it 
is a sure sign that they are ungrateful; for we know that he 
is faithful, and faith tells us that it is surely true that all 
the experiences of life permitted to come to us are working 
for our good. (Rom. 8:28.) Whoever has this faith can 
give thanks to the Lord and can rejoice even through his 
trial and sorrow. And if we have gratitude to God for his 
blessings and favors, if we cultivate the true nobility of heart 
which is impulsed by love and appreciation of divine care, 
it will make us appreciative of all the affairs of life and of 
all those with whom we have contact. We shall appreciate 
their good qualities, even if we cannot endorse all of their 
course; and whoever may do us kindness in the least degree 
must have our gratitude, our appreciation. Yea, with the 
Christian the standard must be still higher than this; for 
this should be the world's standard; as our Lord expressed it, 
"For if ye love them which love you, what thank have ye? 
for sinners also love those that love them. And if ye do 
good to them which do good to you, what thank have ye? 
for sinners also do even the same." (Luke 6:32.) The 
standard for the Lord's people is still higher than that of 
gratitude, though it must include this. Our standard is 
benevolence, a forgiveness of those who transgress against us, 
and who say all manner of evil against us falsely. Such as 
attain this degree of character-likeness to their Lord receive 
an extra blessing from him in proportion, and are bidden to 
rejoice and be exceeding glad, and to know that they will 
have a reward in heaven. 

Gratitude is therefore a keeping power in our hearts, 
there to repel the suggestions of the evil one, and to stop 
our imperfect fleshly mind if it attempts to assert itself. 
Gratitude is closely akin to love; and where they dwell together 
in the heart, there is little room for the Adversary to 
get in his work. On the contrary, ingratitude signifies a 
blindness of the mind in respect to justice. It speaks a low 
standard of character, in which the fruits of the Spirit of the 
Lord have not been well developed. Surely in any heart 
in which the love of God has been "shed abroad," ingratitude 
to him or anybody would be an impossibility. But 
where ingratitude gains a foothold, it admits its relatives- 
selfishness, pride, anger, malice, hatred, strife, evil surmisings, 
slander, backbitings and other qualities which the 
Apostle enumerates as "works of the flesh and the devil." 
The Lord's consecrated people should daily search their 
hearts for any manifestations of selfishness or ingratitude, 
and should look well to the growing development therein 



of love and thankfulness and appreciation toward the Giver 
of all good, toward the brethren of the Household of Faith, 
yea, toward all with whom we have to do. 

"FORBID, THAT I SHOULD SIN AGAINST THE LORD" 

After assuring the Israelites that they need not fear the 
Lord, that he is gracious, and that if they should follow him 

R4201 : page 202 

faithfully under a king or otherwise, he would surely never 
forsake them, the prophet proceeds to answer their query 
respecting his praying for them. He said, "As for me, God 
forbid that I should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray 
for you." What a sublime character is thus brought to our 
view! It is the more remarkable when we note that 
Samuel did not belong to the Spirit dispensation; that he 
therefore had not all the advantages which we, the Lord's 
people of this Gospel Age since Pentecost, enjoy, and yet, alas! 
how few of the Spirit-begotten ones manifest this spirit, this 
same degree of likeness to the Lord's character and Spirit! 
In how many would the natural mind rise up and say, You 
have a king now, I have foretold you that it was a sin of ingratitude 
against the Almighty and against me, now go your 
way and see if what I have told you does not come true, and 
that you will be worse off. 

On the contrary, notice the prophet's words. They 
show that he felt that he had a duty toward the people of 
Israel as his brethren, whether they felt similarly toward him 
or not. Although they had rejected him after his faithful 
service of many years, he assured them that he would pray for 
them and consider their very highest welfare, and that he 
would consider the matter from the very best standpoint, 
viz.: that it was a part of his duty, if he would be in harmony 
with the Lord, and that he could do nothing less than 
pray for them and seek their every good. How is it with 
those who slight us? Has the new spirit, the new mind of 

R4201 : page 203 

Christ, gained sufficiency of foothold for us to say as Samuel 
did, "God forbid that I should sin against the Lord and 
cease to pray for you." Our Master's words instruct us even 
upon this, and say, "Love your enemies,... pray for 
them which despitefully use you; that ye may be the children 
of your Father which is in heaven." (Matt. 5:44,45.) Oh, 
yes! Those whose hearts are loving to their enemies, and 
loving to the Household of Faith, and above all, loving to 
the Lord, these would indeed be exceedingly sensitive if their 
hearts got into any attitude in which they would not be 
seeking the welfare of others, and praying for them. In 
such hearts there would be no room for anger, bitterness, 
strife, envying. In such hearts the love of God is shed 
abroad as represented by the holy anointing oil, the unction 
from the Holy One, which lubricates all of the sensibilities, 



smoothing not only the countenance, but also the tongue and 
the heart; for "out of the abundance of the heart the mouth 
speaketh," and bitter water cannot come from a pure fountain. 
—Luke 6:45; James 3:11. 

"THE LORD HATH DONE GREAT THINGS FOR US" 

After assuring them of his prayers on their behalf, 
Samuel told that he would continue to instruct them in the 
good and right way, and that he would do all of his duty 
toward them so far as their attitude of heart would permit. 
Then he urges the words of our Golden Text, "Only fear the 
Lord, and serve him in truth with all your heart; for consider 
how great things he hath done for you." It is well 
that we note the distinction between the outward service and 
that of the heart, the mind, the affections. Outward service 
that does not spring from the heart will soon wither away, 
whether under adversity or prosperity. Hence the Lord always 
appeals to our hearts, "Give me thine heart." (Prov. 23:26.) 
So long as our heart is loyal to the Lord, it will 
control all of the products of life, because it will lead us to 
seek to know the Lord's will in everything. This will take 
us to the Lord in prayer. It will take us to the Word for 
instruction, and it will assist us in understanding the Word, 
giving us more and more the spirit of a sound mind. 

The prophet gives us a lesson in the statement, "Consider 
how great things he hath done for you." Oh, yes! 
The difficulty generally is that consideration of these favors 
of God are crowded out of our hearts by other considerations, 
often selfish ones. The Israelites had passed through several 
centuries of divine guidance under the judges, and we have 
comparatively little knowledge of their progress during that 
time, the history of that period being much less ample than 
that which followed their organization as a kingdom; but we 
may be sure, nevertheless, that their spiritual interests were 
really forwarded more under the judges than under the kings. 
Centralization of government does not always mean greater 
blessing and progress. It usually means less in individuality 
and personal progress. A similar condition of things is 
noticed in the history of the Church. We have no history 
whatever of that period which followed the days of the 
apostles for more than a century, for the same reason that 
we have no history regarding the real Church, which 
is unrecognized of men. "The world knoweth us not." 
That the rule of the judges was superior to that of the kings 
is evident from the Lord's promise to Israel, "I will restore 
thy judges as at the first, and thy counsellors as at the beginning 
(Isa. 1:26.) The lawgivers as at the first will be the 
greater than Moses— the Christ, Head and Body. The 
judges as at the beginning will be the Ancient Worthies, in 
full authority as the prophets or teachers and judges amongst 
men, under the supervision of Immanuel's heavenly Kingdom. 

Samuel appealed to fleshly Israel to remember the 
great things that God had done for them, as a ground for 
thankfulness and faithfulness— their delivery from Egypt, 
their guidance through the wilderness and their entrance into 



the land of Israel; but if we apply these words to Spiritual 
Israel, with what greater force do they come to us! The 
Lord has delivered us from Egyptian bondage, the bondage 
of sin and death. He has led us out of darkness into his 
marvelous light. He not only lifted our feet from the horrible 
pit and the miry clay, but he placed them upon the Rock, 
Christ Jesus; yea, more! he has put a new song into our 
mouths, even the loving kindness of our God. He not only 
forgave our sins, but accepted us in Jesus, and invited us to 
joint-heirship with Christ. He not only gave us exceeding 
great and precious promises to cheer our hearts in the wilderness 
journey, but has in reservation for us things exceeding 
great and precious, of which he has given us a glimpse or 
foretaste through the holy Spirit, an earnest of our 
inheritance. 

Who that has gratitude of heart to the Lord for these 
blessings, who that is appreciative and thankful, would not 
be indeed seeking to serve the Lord in truth with all his 
heart! Who that is of this attitude of mind would fail to 
remember the Lord's Word and to seek divine assistance in 
complying with its requirements, remembering the statement, 
"If ye love me, keep my commandments." To such daily 
the commandments of the Lord amplify, enlarge. Daily he 
sees new forces, new meanings in these commandments. If 
he be thankful, if he be appreciative of the Lord's providence 
toward him in the past, the depths of meaning to God's commands 
would not be grievous to him; but he will still rejoice 
to go on day by day in sympathy with our Lord's words, "I 
delight to do thy will, O my God; Thy law is written in my 
heart." So it will be with us. As the Apostle says, We 
shall do his commandments, and they will not be grievous 
unto us, and this will be the evidence to us that we love God 
and that we are loved of him, and being sealed, impressed 
more and more by his Spirit, the spirit of truth.— 1 John 5:2,3. 

"YE SHALL BE CONSUMED" 

Of course there is an alternative. Those who do not 
enter into the Lord's service of a truth, with all their heart, 
those who do not continually and repeatedly consider how 
great things God has done for them, those who lack appreciation 
of his kindness and are resentful of his arrangement and 
leading, will be esteemed of him as wicked and as unfit for 
the glorious things which he has in reservation for the faithful. 
The Lord has made provision for the forgiveness of all 
of our inherited imperfections and weaknesses, and he has 
also made provision for our growth in grace and knowledge 
and love. While he is willing to cover our blemishes from 
his sight through the merit of the precious blood, he insists 
that we under that covenant shall develop the character 
which he has delineated and exemplified, the character of 
which love is the essence, and he rejects those who refuse to 
come to this standard of perfect love, or refuse all the provisions 
of divine grace; for it is not the Father's proposition 
to associate with his Son in glory any except those who shall 
be copies of his character. This he has predestinated.— 



Rom. 8:29. 



R4201 : page 204 

THE LONDON, ENG., CONVENTION 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The Convention just closed has been one of the 
most helpful seasons of refreshing we have been permitted 
to enjoy. From the first meeting to the last there 
was a deep and calm feeling of sweet communion, and 
the consciousness that we were to meet with the Lord 
as we met with each other; and already there are many 
evidences that the windows of heaven have been opened 
and the abundant blessings received. Besides the 
quickening of those who have long been consecrated to 
the Lord, there has been in the hearts of several who 
attended a decision to consecration, and we rejoice in 
having new brothers and sisters walking with us in the 
Narrow Way. The Psalmist said, "O taste and see that 
the Lord is good," but here we have had such abundance 
out of the storehouse of heavenly grace, that we have 
been feasting at the Divinely provided table, and surely 
our Lord has been fulfilling Luke 12:37. We thought 
that your recent visit to the various centers might cause 
a diminution as to the attendance, but though we know 

R4202 : page 204 

some were prevented through local activities the Convention 

came up to the general average. Indeed, owing 

to growth of interest in London there was a rather better 

average attendance than last year— so, at least, it 

seemed to us. About 650 were in attendance, though 

some meetings had many more than that number. 

The Convention was opened by a word of welcome 
from Brother Hemery, representing the Watch Tower 
Bible and Tract Society. He expressed the hope that 
all would look out for one of the best times we could 
expect to have; that each should prepare his heart and 
mind to receive much from the Lord, and to be as ready 
to seek the good of each as he was to get good for himself. 
Brother F. W. Williamson also spoke briefly, 
carrying a message of love from yourself, and making 
us long for a renewal of the sweet fellowship we had 
with you so recently. Brothers Bull and Bilsbrough 
led us away into thoughts of the fulness of the Divine 
Plan— Brother Bull by a talk on the "Oneness" which 
is desired now and to which God is working, when all 
things shall be brought into subjection to Christ; 
Brother Bilsbrough by reminding us of the "Glory-Filled 
Earth" soon to be. In the evening Brother Hemery 
spoke on "Perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord," 
and surely the Lord helped us to see the need of the 



work yet to be done in each heart. Sunday was a happy 

day, spent in Testimony and Praise and meditation upon 

the Word. Brother Edgar gave a helpful address 

on "Humility," and in the evening Brother Williamson 

spoke to a crowded house on "Which is the True Gospel." 

On Monday there was an immersion service in a fine 

chapel kindly lent to us for the occasion. We rejoiced 

with 72 brothers and sisters who symbolized their consecration 

to the Lord, in this manner testifying to their 

death and resurrection as New Creatures in Christ 

Jesus. There were many wet eyes in the meeting, 

though the tears were mostly those which came from 

joy rather than sorrow; though we know tears were 

shed by some because they had not then given themselves 

to the Lord and could not share in the immersion. 

How gladly we would wipe these tears away by helping 

the weepers into the Kingdom, and into the joy of the 

Lord! 

After the baptismal service we had a long afternoon 
and evening; more testimonies were given. That was 
a short but particularly blessed part of the day, for we 
were just a large family talking of the common love for 
our Head. Profitable and helpful talks by Brother 
Guard and again by Brother Williamson brought the 
afternoon to a close. In the evening Brother Hemery 
talked on our present privilege of "Fellowship with 
God"— our fellowship is (now) with the Father and with 
the Son. We parted with a love-feast of hand-shaking, 
bidding one another "good-bye" and wishing each other 
a real "fare-well," of which, indeed, we are confident, 
since our Father's hand provides for us! and since we 
are under his special care. Some present had never 
before attended such meetings, and the loving interest 
which the brethren showed in each other's welfare, and 
the fulness of experience in the Lord which so many 
had, were sources of surprise; but these soon proved to 
be of the best helps of the Convention. 

We were very glad to have dear Brother F. W. Williamson 
and Sister Williamson with us, and they go on 
their visit to other friends with many prayers that they 
may be used of the Lord and that they may be fitted 
in all ways for the Master's use. 

This year we had only three days of Convention, 
but many of the visiting friends have spent some days 
in getting a closer acquaintance with the London 
brethren, and such times have been spent in helping 
each other to a closer walk with God. All the evidences 
seem to show that there is a great work for the Lord 
waiting to be done; many are asking after the Truth, 
and of this "Way." A Christian brother unknown by 
sight to us, writes asking how he and others with him 
can cooperate in the work of Harvest, for they are interested 
in this clearer knowledge of the Christian's 
hope. Since the beginning of May we have sent out 
from here over 700,000 of the 1908 Volunteer matter and 
already many inquiries are coming in. Surely there 



are thousands of hearts waiting for the cheer of the 
only "hopeful" message. Continue to pray for us, dear 
brother, as we pray for you, that we may be faithful to 
our calling and to our opportunities of service. 

With loving remembrances and good wishes, I am, 
dear brother, yours affectionately, in the Lord, 
J. HEMERY. 



As already expressed, we have great expectations 
respecting the harvest-work in Great Britain. The fact 
that the Colporteur work there is less successful than 
we had hoped must not deter us. We must look for 
other doors also. We rejoice to learn that the Volunteer 
Tract distribution progresses so well and is yielding 
results. This should lead to increasing zeal in that 
department of service. The Society is prepared to supply 
all the tracts you can use— FREE and freight paid. 
Let us by word and example double the output. 

We fancy that Sharp-shooting would do much good 
to all of the dear friends, as well as do much to spread 
the Truth. "Sharp-shooting" is the circulating of DAWNS 
and booklets amongst your friends and neighbors, accompanying 
the introduction with a word of testimony 
respecting their effect upon your own head, heart and 
daily living. The effect will be beneficial to yourself as 
well as to your friends.— EDITOR. 



R4203 : page 205 

"SHE HATH DONE WHAT SHE COULD" 

The Feast was spread at Simon's house, and as they sat at 

meat, 
A woman came and silent stood within the open door- 
Close pressed against her throbbing heart an alabaster box 
Of purest spikenard, costly, rare, she held. With modest fear, 
She dreaded to attract the curious gaze of those within, 
And yet her well-beloved Friend was there, her Master, Lord. 
With wondrous intuition she divined that this might be 
Her last, her only opportunity to show her love; 
She thought of all that he had done for her, the holy hours 
She spent enraptured at his feet, unmindful of all else, 
If only she might hear those words of Truth, those words of 

Life. 
She thought of that dark hour when Lazarus lay within the 

tomb 
And how he turned her night to day, her weeping into joy. 
Her fair face flushed, with deepening gratitude her pure eyes 

shone. 
With swift, light step she crossed the crowded room. She 

bravely met 
Those questioning eyes (for Love will find its way through 



paths where lions 
Fear to tread); with trembling hands she broke the seal and 

poured 
The precious contents of the box upon her Saviour's feet, 
And all the house was filled with fragrance wonderful and 

sweet. 
She could not speak, her heart's devotion was too deep, her 

tears 
Fell softly, while she took her chiefest ornament, her long 
And silken hair and wiped his sacred feet,— when suddenly 
A rude voice broke the golden silence with, "What waste! this 

might 
Have sold for much, to feed the poor!" She lower bent her head- 
To her it seemed so mean a gift for love so great to make! 
Again a voice re-echoed through the room, her blessed Lord's. 
(He half arose and gently laid his hand upon her hair)— 
And how it thrilled her fainting heart to hear him sweetly say, 
"Rebuke her not, for she hath wrought a good work, what 

she could; 
Aforehand, to anoint me for my burying she hath come, 
And this her deed of love throughout the ages shall be told!" 



How oft since first I read the story of this saint of old, 
My own poor heart has burned with fervent, longing, deep 

desire, 
That I might thus have ministered unto my Lord and King— 
"The chiefest of ten thousand, altogether lovely One." 
And now, to learn— Oh! precious thought, 'tis not too late, I still 
May pour Love's priceless ointment on "the members" of his 

Feet! 
Dear Lord, I pray, Oh! help me break with sacrificial hand 
The seal of Self, and pour the pent-up odors of my heart 
Upon thy "Feet!" Oh! let me spend my days and nights in 

toil, 
That I, perchance, may save from needless wandering, and 

help 
To keep them in the narrow way that leads to light and life. 
Oh! let me lay within their trembling hands a rose of love, 
A lily's pure and holy inspiration on their breast! 
Dear Master, let me kneel with them in dark Gethsemane; 
Oh! help me boldly stand and meekly bear the scoffs and jeers 
Of cruel, mocking tongues! Oh! may I count no cost, e'en 

life 
Itself, too great to serve, to bless, to comfort thy dear "Feet," 
And when the last drop of my heart's devotion has been shed, 
Oh! may I hear thy sweet voice say, 'She hath done what she 

could!" -G. W. Seibert. -April, 1908. 



page 205 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 



DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

I had in mind for some time to unburden to you 
some of my experience with some of our friends in the 
Nominal Churches in dispensing Tracts, TOWERS and 
DAWNS to them; that we often meet with the remarks 
that they cannot observe any changes in the 
general conditions, everything going on as usual. We 
say to them, we agree with you in this; but how about 
the worship to God, and walking in his precepts; the 
faith in general of Jesus Christ, who said, "When the 
Son of Man cometh will he find faith on the earth?" and 
we call their attention back to about twenty years or 
more, when in the Christian home we would hear the 
singing of hymns or reading a Psalm, or expounding 
the Gospel or the apostles' letters; how the evening 
and the morning worship was regularly conducted, and 
how Saturday evening was the beginning of the rest 
day, to give thanks unto God for blessings received 
during the past week, and that this was a custom since 
Reformation times, to which books and periodicals attest. 
And further, a visit to the same homes now, and what do 
we observe in the majority of them? Is it not card playing, 
dancing, and beer drinking and other worldly affairs, 
of which the Christians in former years kept aloof? 

To these existing conditions all older people agree 
with me, that a very great change has taken place, that 
the sowing time is past, and the harvest far advanced. 
The churches receive almost anyone for membership, 
with almost any kind of baggage. Recently a Baptist 
minister returned from a heathen land, where he had 
been doing missionary work for over twenty years, and, 
preaching one of his old-fashioned sermons to a flock 
of his believers, he was requested to remain with 
them and start a new church, to which he assented, 
with the remark, that he had observed since coming 
back that they were more in need of the Gospel than 
were the heathen. 

Let us pray to the Lord to send more servants into 
the field, and give thanks for the Light we have received. 

I will close my few remarks, as my letter may become 
too lengthy, although much more could be said in 
regard to these changes. Yours, W. H. GRUHL,— Wis. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 
I am sending herewith an order for WATCH TOWER 

and Diaglott for Mrs. , to whom I delivered a set of 

Studies in the Scriptures three weeks ago today. She 
has fairly devoured the first three volumes, and said to 
me last night on our way home from the meeting, "You 
cannot comprehend what those books have been to me, 
for I was utterly without faith of any kind, but now I 
have committed all to the Lord and am trusting him 
entirely and worry about nothing, for I possess nothing 
to worry about any more. All belongs to him." She 



had never professed Christianity but attended Christian 
Science meetings, and thought that belief more reasonable 
than anything she had ever heard, as her husband 
had been healed by it. She says she wonders now how 
she could ever have thought there was anything in 
Christian Science. 

My heart overflows with gratitude to our heavenly 
Father for having used me as his humble messenger to 
bring such joy into the life of this dear sister and I 
pray that I may prove faithful even unto death, that he 
may use me in like manner in the coming age to assist 
in bringing joy to the whole "groaning creation." 

Praying the Great Chief Reaper's richest blessing 
to continue to rest upon you, and asking your prayers 
that I may prove faithful, I am, your humble sister in 
our Redeemer, S. L. G. CHAPMAN,-Maine. 



R4202 : page 205 

A CORRECTION: --Several earnest friends of the Truth, 
residing in or near Birmingham, Eng., have written us 
that they think we were misinformed respecting Bro. B. 
C. Hughes; that in their opinion he was a most exemplary 
Elder. We are glad to make note of their testimony 
in his favor. However, nothing in our report was 
intended unkindly; we have always thought of him as 
conscientious.— EDITOR. 



R4202 : page 206 

LETTERS COMMENDING THE "VOW" 

BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am just in receipt of June 15th TOWER, and so 
far as read have been much edified by it. It is my 
pleasure to inform you promptly that the "Vow to the 
Lord" which you suggest, is very earnestly and readily 
made to him; in fact, it is but a renewal under different 
language of a vow very understandingly (on my part) 
made some years ago, and in which I have been very 
abundantly blessed. No doubt a fervent recalling and 
renewal will bring further blessing, and I am rejoiced 
at the opportunity of so doing and in a more open and 
public manner. I shall make a similar statement to our 
Waukesha and Milwaukee classes, to both of which I 
expect to minister the coming Sunday. 

Surely the article was very timely, and may it, and 
the blessed vow, be but "stepping-stones" to all. We 
know they will prove only so to the "very elect." The 
truth, and complete information as to how to serve it 
in detail, are always a "savor of life unto life, or death 
unto death." Those who "stumble at the Word, being 



disobedient," are "appointed thereunto," and while we 
for a time may be in sorrow through such and other 
"manifold" trials, we remember that they are for the 
testing of our faith, which is of much more value than 
gold that perisheth, even though it be tried by fire, and 
which will "be found unto praise, and honor and glory, 
at the appearing of Jesus Christ." So let us "endure 
hardness as good soldiers of Jesus Christ." 

Since the topic is up, the occasion seems to be appropriate 
for a suggestion that I want to make, knowing 
you will accept it in the spirit of love in which it is 
made, and use it so far as wisdom indicates to be 
proper. The dear Colporteurs are going out in groups 
of mixed sexes and unmarried. Owing to inexperience, 
ardentness of spirit, inherent fleshly defects, and unfeigned 
brotherly love, it is easy for these— in fact, almost 
impossible for them not to overstep the bounds of 
prudence in apparent or surface fleshly relations— which 
the sound judgment of the world on this subject has 
established— while every thought and word and deed is 
pure. To the pure all this will be pure; but the world 
is not pure, and readily speaks and imputes evil. Therefore, 
the Church of God must avoid all appearance of 
evil, and do nothing, make no arrangements that seem 
to abet evil. The point is, cannot these groups or 
camps when arranged, be wholly male and wholly 
female; no groups of both sexes being sent to the same 
places? 

A little incident occurred at Madison, Wis., at the 
time of your recent visit there which I believe will interest 
you. 

Sister Hanson, of Kansas City, writing Sister 
Rutherford, who is summering here, makes statement 
as follows: 

"I wrote my nephew, who was a student in Madison, 
about Brother Russell's being there; he attended both 
services and thought them fine. He believes the Truth. 
He tells me that some of the students that were there, 
and had intended to jeer and make fun, said that if the 
Bible is true, that is the truth." 

Knowing the quality of the students at the large 
Universities, and recognizing that they would be more 
or less stirred up to mischief by the title of your discourse, 
I had rather anticipated that a united attempt 
would be made to interrupt your address. It seems 
that the Great One who is overruling our affairs, is 
able also on occasions like this to overrule for benefits, 
and I know that you as well as we, who already 
know of this instance, will be cheered and edified by 
the outcome. 

I rejoice, dear brother, to attest again to you my 
full appreciation of your labor in the Lord, my fullest 
confidence and my earnest, warm and unfeigned brotherly 
love. I hope ere long to see you again face to face. 
Give all the Bible House household our warm love and 
greeting. Yours in him, W. E. PAGE,— Wis. 



[IN REPLY:— The Society has similarly advised the 
dear Colporteurs, and at the risk of being misunderstood, 
has adhered to its rule of not making mixed 
assignments. However, we consider that our duty on 
this subject ceases there. Where the dear friends, for 
reasons of their own, work on each other's assignment 
we do not feel it incumbent to object further, knowing 
well that their heart-desires are of the very best.] 



page 206 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am thankful for the privilege of informing you 
that the vow published in the last TOWER has been 
registered with our Father as my vow. It already has 
impressed me as being necessary to this evil hour, 
especially as we are convinced of the increasing necessity 
for "circumcision of the heart." 

The Lord has dealt graciously with me, and I do 
love him and want to please him in carrying out my 
consecration, of which I consider this vow now a part. 
I ask your prayers on my behalf. 

May our Father continue his blessing upon you, 
dear brother, and upon us through your willing service. 
Praise to him. With much love, A. M. SAPHORE,-NJ. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

In accordance with your request, I drop you a line 
in reference to vow of June 15 TOWER. 

I made the vow to the Lord, dear brother, then, and 
rejoice in the privilege, for it has been along these lines 
that I have had to keep a constant guard since I have 
come to a knowledge of the Truth— nearly seven years 
ago. In my petitions to the Lord, I appealed for strength 
constantly, and in due time I received the strength 
needed, which I consider a miracle. 

Dear brother, you probably do not know how much 
good and how needful those articles in the TOWER are! 
But surely the Lord saw the need. May the dear Lord 
continue his favored blessings with you, and all associated 
with you in the harvest work. 

Your brother in the dear Redeemer, 

E. LAVEALLE-N.Y. 



THE FOLLOWING ADVISE THAT THEY HAVE TAKEN THE VOW 
R. H. Bricker, J. H. Blackmore, C. E. Reed, John 



G. Kuehn, S. J. Arnold, W. E. Page, Henry Hoskins, 
Sr., R. E. Streeter, Paul S. L. Johnson and wife, Sister 
H. O. Henderson, Dr. S. N. Wiley, Dr. W. D. Pelle, 
Ray Domer and wife, C. D. Welborne, Mrs. J. M. White, 
Emil H. Herrscher, F. Brown, Bernice McNaught, W. 
H. Spring, W. W. Black and wife, J. F. Emmerson and 
wife, C. E. Myers, Mrs. E. M. Detwiler, Mrs. F. P. Van 
Amburgh, Mrs. A. M. Weber, Ed. H. Wilhelm, Samuel 
S. Jacobs, M. H. Myers, C. M. Utzler, Virgil C. Haviland, 
C. H. Dickinson, J. W. Watts, H. E. Whitenut, 
J. A. Seip, Ethel Halstead, J. O. Faulk, Wm. Lowry, 
Mrs. M. McGinnis, B. F. Boyer, Springtown, Pa.; Mrs. 
C. C. Stone, Worcester, Mass.; L. M. DeLaMater, Catskill, 
N.Y.; G. M. Hunt, Colorado Springs, Col; Geo. 
W. Harner, Veedersburg, Ind.; J. F. White, Chelsea, 
Mass.; Brother and Sister Merrow, Kittery, Me.; Granville 
Houchins, Huntington, W.Va.; W. E. Richards, 
Toledo, Ohio; Mrs. Carrie Beatty, Kansas City, Mo.; 
A. O. Ogston, Everett, Mass.; E. S. Mason, Bloomington, 
111.; H. P. Gleason, Hyde Park, Mass.; Viola E. 
Imhoff, Mrs. A. Hamilton, Brother Moran, Beth Wikof, 
Ella V. Dyer, J. A. Hodges, Brother and Sister Woodley, 

C. E. Fellow, Lydia A. McMier, John M. Lathwell, B. F. 
Payen, H. S. Blankenship, Roy G. Ratcliff, J. Marriot, 
Alex. M. Graham, Mrs. Alex. M. Graham, Carl F. Hammerle, 

D. V. Haymes, C. E. Frost, J. E. Starks. 

page 207 

ANOTHER INTERESTING LETTER 

R4203 : page 207 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

It is now about five years since I came into the 
light of Present Truth, and the Lord has blessed me 
with the privilege of having the six volumes of DAWN, 
and the TOWERS from 1890, all of which I have carefully 
gone through, and from which I have received a course 
of Bible Study, a knowledge of our heavenly Father, 
and our dear Lord, and the plans and purposes and my 
relation thereto, sufficient thanks for which would indeed 
be hard for me to put in words. But I have the 
privilege of thanking you for the service rendered unto 
me, for I knew nothing of the Bible, although a reader 
of it from boyhood, until the Lord in his own due time 
placed in my hands the "meat in due season" from your 
hands. 

I have in these past years learned to go to these 
helps (TOWERS and DAWNS) for all points that have 
perplexed me, and with very few exceptions have always 
received a reasonable Scriptural explanation that made 
things plain to my mind. Until now if a point comes 
up that I do not grasp I go for help, using the 
assistance the Lord has provided in them for me and 
for all the watching ones. The exceptions I have 



written to you about, and you know they have been few, 
and in thanking you I am thanking our dear Lord and 
Head, who "has girded himself" and is "now serving 
the table." Our heavenly Father I also thank. 

I have practised medicine here since 1889 and had 
quite an extensive practice up to the present time, and 
since coming into the Truth Sister Senor and I have 
used up in the Truth, one way or another, as we thought 
the Lord would have us use it, all above our living expenses 
(and a provision for those dependent upon us, a 
reasonable one we hope, until 1914), by sending TOWERS, 
DAWNS, etc., over the counties near by. 

Your brother in Christ, S. D. SENOR,-Missouri. 



page 207 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V. (E)* 

Questions on Study V.— The Author of the Atonement. 

AUGUST 2 

(78) Is it the Father or the Son that is styled the 
King of kings and Lord of lords? P. 78. 

(79) Does this refer to the Father or how otherwise 
shall we understand it? P. 78, last par. 

(80) Cite and explain other similar passages. 
I Cor. 15:27; Col. 2:10. P.79, par. 1. 

(81) Would the passage "thought it not robbery 

to be equal with God" prove the trinity doctrine? If 
both were one how could one think of robbing himself? 
P.79, par. 2. 

(82) What did our Lord Jesus testify respecting 
his equality with the Father? And did he not tell the 
truth? P.79, par. 2. 

AUGUST 9 

(83) What appears to be the Apostle's argument— 
what point is he proving in Phil. 2:6? P.79, last par. 

(84) Is there any evidence that this verse is improperly 
translated? If so, what? P. 80, par. 1. 

(85) Give, in order, different translations of the 

verse: By Clarke, Wakefield, Stewart, Rotherham, Revised 
Version, American Revision Committee, Sharpe, 
Neeland, Dickenson, Turnbull, and the Emphatic Diaglott. 
Pp.80, 81. 

(86) In view of all this array of scholarship, what 
must we conclude that the passage teaches? P.81, 
last par. 

(87) What great spirit being took a very different 



course? Give proof-text. P. 81, last par. 

(88) What quality in Jesus shines out preeminently 
in contrast with what quality in Satan? P. 81, last par. 

AUGUST 16 

(89) What reward was bestowed on the Son by the 
Father? and on what account? Cite the Scriptures. 
P.82, top. 

(90) Can such rewarding be harmonized with the 

idea of oneness of person or with original equality between 
the Father and the Son? Page 82, par. 1. 

(91) Are we enjoined nevertheless to honor the 
Son whom the Father exalted, even as we honor the 
Father who exalted him? P.82, par. 2. 

(92) Quote a Scripture passage showing the distinct 
separateness of the Father and the Son as persons, 
and also the relationship of their work. P.82, par. 2. 

(93) Does the Scripture, "Blessed be the God and 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ," favor the thought that 
Father and Son are one in person? Note the entire 
passage. Ephesians 1:2-18. P.82, par. 3. 

THE MEDIATOR OF THE ATONEMENT 

THE ONLY BEGOTTEN ONE 



AUGUST 23 

(1) Who is the Great One whom Jehovah has exalted 
to so high honor? What has he done to merit it? 
What is he yet to do in his high exaltation? P. 83. 

(2) Did our Lord Jesus have a preexistence? What 
was he before he was "made flesh"? P. 84, par. 1. 

(3) Was he then "a good" or mighty one? And if so, 
what was his name? P. 84, par. 2. 

(4) In that pre-human existence, was the Son in 
some sense "before" all creatures in time as well as in 
rank? P. 84, par. 3. 

(5) Why did the Son stoop to human conditions? 
Was it of compulsion? P. 84, par. 4. 

(6) Was his humiliation to human conditions intended 
to be eternal? Explain fully. P. 84, par. 5. 

(7) Did Jesus' resurrection restore him to the spirit 
plane? P. 84, par. 6. 

(8) Of what station is our Lord Jesus now? P. 85, 
par. 1. 

AUGUST 30 

(9) Why was our Lord in his prehuman existence 
known as The Word or The Logos? P. 85, par. 2. 

(10) What does Dr. Alex Clarke say of this word 
Logos? P. 85, par. 2. 



(11) Show the fitness of the name to the Son, and 
give an illustration of a King's Logos? P. 85, par. 3. 

(12) Does the Greek text of John 1:1 show two persons 
and refer to both as God? P. 86, par. 1. 

(13) Is there anything in the Greek text to differentiate 
these two persons who are both styled God? 

What and how should the verse be translated to show 
its Greek value? P. 86, par. 1,2. 

(14) What beginning is here referred to? P. 86, par. 3. 



*Five years ago DAWN-STUDIES, VOL. V., was reset, and 
unfortunately the type was not exactly the same size as before; and 
hence page for page they differ. The references given in these 
Berean Studies apply to the present edition, a copy of which 
postpaid will cost you but 30c. But keep your old edition, for 
unfortunately the New Bible helps refer to its pages. 



page 209 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXIX. JULY 15 No. 14 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

Views from the "Watch Tower" 21 1 

Nominal Church Dying 21 1 

The Religion of Socialism 212 

Was Jesus a Socialist? 213 

"Obedience Better Than Sacrifice" 214 

The Slaughter of the Amalekites 215 

Not to an Eternal Doom 216 

The Test of Perfect Love 217 

Brethren, What Shall We Do? 218 

What a Vow Signifies 218 

God's Choice 220 

"The Lord Looketh Upon the Heart" 221 

"Anoint Him, for This Is He" 221 

"From That Day Forward" 222 

An Interesting Letter 223 

Our Lord's Last Days 223 

page 210 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
-OR TO- 



BRITISH BRANCH--24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 

GERMAN BRANCH--MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 

AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



THE NEW BIBLES DELAYED 



Please do not send money for the new edition of WATCH 
TOWER BIBLES until you see announcement that they are 
ready and the price stated. We have been disappointed considerably 
in getting the extra matter prepared, and cannot 
hope to announce the Bibles ready before October. 

INDIA PAPER DAWN-STUDIES 



We supply these now in all six volumes, but volume five 
has run ahead of the others in sales and is exhausted. It will 
take several months to get the India paper for a new lot. 
Prices of Vols. I., II., III., 75 cents each; Vols. IV., V., VI., 85 
cents each, postpaid. 

INDIA VOL. I., KARATOL 



It will be remembered that we had a special edition of 
Vol. I. DAWN-STUDIES, in India Paper, not quite up to the 
best standard, bound in imitation leather at low price. These 
were taken quickly. Now we have a new lot, Vol. I. only, with 
Tabernacle Shadows bound in, at 35 cents each, postpaid. 



1908--VOLUNTEER MATTER-- 1908 



We have printed nearly five millions of this year's Volunteer 
Matter— four tracts in each one. Evidently some of the 
dear friends are awake to the privilege of harvest work along 
this line. Order all you can and will use faithfully; they are 
furnished without money or price. Freight prepaid. 



R4203 : page 211 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
NOMINAL CHURCH DYING, SAYS DR. EATON 



BRETHREN, I say to you this morning that the 

American Church is dying. It is dying! It is 

dying! Don't forget it! Ten years from now 

if I lie in my grave I would be willing to have you confront 

me at the judgment seat of God with that statement. 

By that statement I mean that Protestant 

Christianity is dying with marvelous rapidity." 

So spoke Rev. Charles A. Eaton at the Euclid Avenue 
Baptist Church, Cleveland. This was his seventh 
anniversary sermon before this congregation and with 
passionate earnestness he strove to bring vividly before 
his hearers the effects of commercialism which he 
contends is sapping the religious life in the United 
States. He showed that churches, instead of gaining, 
were losing throughout the world. 

Dr. Eaton's sermon on "The Impending Crisis in 
American Christianity" is, in part, as follows: 

"Throughout the entire Christian world we are swiftly 
passing into a period of profound religious depression, 
amounting to almost complete failure on the part of the 
Church. 

"In Italy the headquarters of the great Roman Catholic 
Church, one-third of the people at the very outside, are more 
or less nominal followers of the Church of Rome; another 
third, possibly, are more or less sympathetic toward the 
Church, because it is politically useful; while another third 
are out and out continually and completely antagonistic, apparently 
not only to the Church of Rome, but to all forms 
of Christianity. This is the land where the Church of St. 
Peter has had an unbroken existence for nineteen centuries. 

BRITAIN'S GREAT LOSSES 

"You enter France— the same story is true, only aggravated 
and multiplied a thousand fold. 



R4204: page 211 

"You enter Great Britain, which I consider to be the last 
citadel of Christianity in the world, with a people more robust 
and sane in their religious interests and sympathies than 
any other people. And what is the condition there? The 
other day Mr. Shakespeare, the great leader of our Baptist 
Church in England, appeared before the Baptist convention 
and delivered an address upon the arrested progress of British 
Christianity. That, he said, covered the whole field of all 
the churches, but especially, of course, with reference to the 
Baptists. 

"He pointed out that the nonconformist churches of Great 
Britain last year not only made no progress, but met, according 
to their statistics, with an absolute loss of 18,000; that 
the Baptist Church of Great Britain last year not only made 
no progress but according to their published statistics lost 
5,000 people. 

AMERICAN CHURCH DWINDLING 

"You cross to America. We have one man in this country 
who I believe is doing more to educate the American 
Church, to arouse us to a realization of our condition, than any 
other— I refer to Josiah Strong. Dr. Strong tells that if 
eighty represents the gain of our churches on the population 
during the first half of the nineteenth century, twenty represents 
that gain during the last half. Four represents that gain 
during the last twenty years, and one represents that gain 
during the last ten years. 

"In the year 1905 there were nearly 7,000 Presbyterian, 
Congregationalist and Methodist churches that had not one 
single member unite with them in twelve months. In a recent 
year in New York city, according to the statement of Dr. 
Aked, of the Fifth Avenue Baptist Church, 335 Protestant 
churches reported a net gain that year of 386 members. That 
is to say 335 churches gained one member apiece and fifty of 
them gained two in twelve months. In a city of 4,000,000 people, 
those churches comprise in their membership the mightiest 
men in finance, in commerce, in politics, that this nation has 
—which means that there is heaped up a fund of potential 
power, the like of which can be found in no other organization 
of that great city. 

CAMPAIGN OF FAILURE 

"And they stood there in the midst of 4,000,000 people 
pouring out their money like water, following the leadership 
of the great preachers of the American continent, following 
them week in and week out, for twelve long months, and all 
that they could do was to get one person out of four million 
in each church to accept the Lord Jesus Christ. These are 
facts. 

"The American people for the last generation have seized 
that marvelous instrument furnished them by science, and 
have gone out to give themselves unreservedly to the material 



development of their nation. We are proud of the fact that 

we are a commercial and business people. Our art is now 

made the servant of our commerce. No longer do we build 

the glorious churches and cathedrals, except in certain instances, 

in our great cities, to express the artistic sense of 

our people. We build banks in this present age, decorate them 

with a lavish splendor worthy of God Almighty himself. We 

have turned the intelligence of our people, as keen and resourceful 

as any in the world, to this one question, 'How shall 

we produce material gain?' 

R4204: page 212 

RICHES HIGHEST GOOD 

"To-day we are not in the midst of a religious epidemic. 
We have not enough thought on the subject to create even 
a revival, let alone an epidemic. But we have to-day a financial 
epidemic. That is to-day the thing we think most of— 
the thing that we place at the bottom of our life, the thing 
that we hail as our highest good. 

"That is the thing that men have gone made over to-day, 
and so, sweeping over our land like a gigantic shadow, is this 
awful fear of financial ruin, which constitutes a commercial 
epidemic in our midst. 

"The hope of the Church today lies in a rediscovery of 
Jesus. It does not lie in more organization. We have too 
much now. It does not lie in more wealth. We have all the 
wealth we need, if we had the head to use it. It does not lie 
in more culture. We have all the gifts that any group of people 
could possibly ask for. It does not lie in any lack of consciousness 
of need. We know the needs of the people as 
perhaps we never knew them before. It lies in a new acquaintance 
with Jesus. 

THE CHURCH DYING 

"Brethren, I say to you this morning, that the American 
Church is dying— it is dying! It is dying! Don't forget it. 

"Now, in closing, I sound the note of experience. I want 
to say to my members here, that the next seven years upon 
which this church is entering are going to be twice as hard 
as the seven years just gone by. I want to say to you men, 
that it will be harder for you to be a Christian to-morrow 
than it is today. I want to say to you, young men and middle-aged, 
whose hearts are stirring in response to the appeal 
of Christ, ponder well your step because you cannot follow 
Jesus unless you break in your hands the box of precious 
ointment. 

"I want to say to you who have meditated about surrendering 
your lives to the age, that that is the common tendency 
of all, and if you do it, no matter what your name may be, 
you have ceased to be Christians. I want to say to you Christians 
who are looking for the place that is easier than what 
you have now, that there is no longer any easier place. The 
next thirty years will be harder. They will stir the evil tendencies 



of this nation completely from center to 
circumference." 

THE RELIGION OF SOCIALISM 



Socialism, according to Mr. Richard Whiteing, does not, 
at present, seem to "want a religion of its own," but it is his 
belief that it will sooner or later come to want one. The Socialist 
movement everywhere, and especially that in England, 
he avers, will find that its foundation-principle "as a mere 
economic theory is absolutely inadequate. To get its full 
driving force it must have a faith of its own." At the present 
moment, as he sees the matter, "Socialists are content 
with the discovery that all existing creeds may, and even must, 
lead to their platform." This is the deduction derived from 
the fact that at a Socialist gathering almost every profession 
of faith is represented— "ardent Anglicans and Roman Catholics, 
Freethinkers, Moral Persuasionists, Ethical Theorists, 
and the rest of them." Mr. Whiteing, who is the author of 
"No. 5 John Street" and "Ring Out the New," is an ardent 
Socialist, and gives his views here quoted in the London Daily 
Mail. He looks upon the Rev. R. J. Campbell as typifying the 
tendency he here sketches. Mr. Campbell, he says, "has long 
been engaged in a process which might be not irreverently described 
as the cleaning of a picture— the picture being that of 
the Founder of the Christian faith. It is an attempt to remove 
all the incrustations of dogma and traditional belief, and 
to reach the great original beneath." This pure image, he asserts, 
"will prove to be that of the first Socialist." The faith 
which Socialism will ultimately accept as its own is visioned 
by Mr. Whiteing as the following: 

"As I have tried to express it elsewhere, There must 
come to men the Appointed One, who will show them by his 
shining example what the religion is to be. We may only 
guess at his message, but surely it will be the purified conscience 
as the Word of God, no more no less, and never a 
line of text. Then saints, hierarchies, and choirs celestial will 
seem but poets' playthings. Taken seriously, they have given 
us the whole of that unhappy fakir tribe who are capable of 
thinking of their Maker to the total exclusion of the thing 
he has made. Will not the Appointed One bid us leave that 
Maker— Jehovah, God or Lord, First Cause or Universal Soul 
—to contemplations of his own nature more within the measure 
of his own powers, and listen merely for the voice of him 
in the purified breast, especially for the undertones in which 
the sweetness of its message lies? Then, when, haply, the 
voice says charity, in its larger rendering of love, brotherhood, 
self-sacrifice, obey it, and leave the metaphysics of the question 
to take care of itself. Above all, without waiting for any 
behest, burn the later doctors of the church (not by any means 
the earlier), as the madman's housekeeper burned his books. 
So will come the great change, and the democracy will step 
forth armed and equipped for its conquest of the world. The 
old mystery of regeneration is true as ever as a principle, in 



spite of its fantastic setting in the creeds of the hour. 

'"Democracy must get rid of the natural man of each for 
himself, and have a new birth into the spiritual man, the ideal 
self of each for all. This is its great lesson. The monstrous 
heresy of self- worship, self-absorption, whether as capitalist, 
artist, bonze, or merely greedy fellow with storage for one 
and an appetite for two, is the essentially irreligious idea. 

'"Democracy is a religion, or nothing, with its doctrine, its 
form, its ritual, its ceremonies, its cenobites, its government 
as a church— above all, its organized sacrifice of the altar, the 
sacrifice of self. This is the deepest craving of human nature. 
All attempts to reconcile man's heroism to his interests have 
ever failed. His goodness must make him smart' 

"This is what is coming because this must come. Meantime 
I think many of us are trying to reduce all religions to 
their common denominator of liberty, equality, and fraternity, 
otherwise brotherly love. It is perfectly certain that the 
masses are growing more and more indifferent to the image 
of the Founder of Christianity in his present setting. If he 
is to appeal to them he must lay aside his crown of jewels of 
modern symbolism and resume his crown of thorns." 

The mass of humble believers interpret the conception 
of the "Son of God— the Man of Sorrows"— says Mr. Whiteing, 

R4205 : page 212 

as "the great comrade who tried to get lowly and foolish 
and baffled people righted, and died for it— worse luck." But 
such a one, he maintains, "they don't find in the existing systems. 
The composite personality of the Son of God— the Second 
Person of the Trinity— "all that 'the church' holds most 
dear, leaves them quite mystified and, I must say it, quite 
cold." Mr. Whiteing goes on: 

"One day I ventured to call a Hyde Park orator a Christian 
Socialist by way of compliment, but he flew into a great 
rage. 'Nothing of the sort, if you please— a Socialist Christian, 
at best. Don't put the cart before the horse.' He meant 
that the Socialism was the touchstone, not the Christianity, as 
they understand it in the churches now. You could not be a 
Socialist without being a Christian, whether you knew it or 
not. You might easily think yourself a Christian without being 
the other thing, and the Socialism was the root of the 
matter. Just that and nothing more. 

"The image of the Christ in the popular mind is that of 
one who came to bring more happiness in this world to poor 
men and women beaten in the struggle— material happiness. 
Do not be in any doubt about that— a more equal distribution 
of right-down pounds, shillings, and pence, the second loaf in 
the cupboard, good shoes and stockings for all the children, 
and the Sunday suit for all. 

"What they think, what they say, when they are able to 
say it, is that the rich people and the theologians between them, 

R4205 : page 213 

often working hand in hand, have 'nobbled' the churches, and 



made their symbolic cup a mere opiate for hard luck, instead 
of the healing draft. The parsons are paid to keep people 
quiet, that is the ruling idea. They cannot get their money 
for current expenses without the rich, and so getting it, of 
course, they preach the rich man's creed. 

"The attempt to substitute feasts, fasts, and festivals of 
the church for all this, with elaborate processions, will, historically, 
I feel convinced, mark the end of the present religious 
system. Let our Anglican revivalists just try to recognize 
how a poor, dim creature, born into everlasting short-commons, 
without volition or vocation, stands apart from all 
that, and sees nothing in it but embroidered garments and futile 
excitements about Quinquagesima Sunday and other functions 
with long names that touch him no more than a birthday 
at court! 

"Believe me, as I once ventured to say, people in West 
Ham look on your ecclesiastical anchorites as mere 'ammytures' 
in the artistry of privation, with the sacred institution 
ever behind them as an ark of refuge to save them from the 
worst. Be out of work for six weeks, and out of earnings that 
never rise to more than the docker's tanner, and see what 
you'll think of St. Francis and his flirtation with the lady of 
poverty then. 

"No, no, 'Here and now.' That is how the church began. 
The clever fellows got hold of it as a going concern, 'imperialized' 
it, and so started to make it pretty much what it is 
to-day. Charity is still its abortive message; justice is what 
the others want."— Literary Digest. 

WAS JESUS A SOCIALIST 



Among Socialists Jesus has frequently been claimed as 
one of themselves. "One would like to say that he was," observes 
a writer in The Interior (Chicago), for he was "social 
in the largest sense because he sacrificed himself for the welfare 
of other men." But since "socialist" in the modern world 
has come to mean (the writer interprets) "the adherent of an 
economic cult that would reorganize society on the public ownership 
of property," he does not allow the ranking of Jesus 
among them. Against what he calls the "rash assertions of 
agitators," he places this "proposition" as capable of being established 
from the gospels: 

"Neither socialism nor any other economic doctrine ever 
entered into the teachings of Jesus of Nazareth. 

"He simply paid no attention to the economic phases of 
life. He treated industrial questions exactly as he treated political 
questions; he let them alone. 

"There were doubtless two reasons for this. Jesus didn't 
come into the world to meddle with the clock of human 
progress. Some day the world would learn that democracy is 
better government than despotism, free labor a better industrial 
system than slavery, and would get hold of the facts 
all the stronger for having had to dig them out. Jesus had 
no time to stop to teach the world what it would eventually 



come at on its own account. 

"The second and positive reason why he did not concern 
himself with social questions was because it was part of his 
mission to throw temporal considerations into the background. 

"His principal teaching business was to spread a doctrine 
of life that made a man's economic condition a secondary 
matter. 

"Here Jesus differs from Socialism the whole length of the 
diameter. The thorough-going Socialist thinks poverty the 
worst thing that can happen to a man. His great plea is to 
abolish poverty. Jesus didn't think being poor mattered much 
—not at all if the man was the right sort. He was poor himself, 
and didn't care in the least. 

"The overmastering principle that decides how Jesus looks 
at any or all human circumstances on this earth is this: 
"If a man does the will of the Father in heaven, nothing 
in his earthly circumstances can be wrong. 

"This confidence is half a faith that the Father will compel 
circumstances to turn out favorably; half a faith that a 
man who lives for the Father can be happy in any 
circumstances." 

The nearest Jesus ever came to an economic question, the 
writer points out, was "when he saw that some certain man's 
economic condition was hindering his development in unselfish, 
God-loving and man-loving character." He goes on: 

"Modern social philosophers say it is the poor who don't 
have a fair chance at fine character, but Jesus thought different 
—he considered the rich the most handicapped. 

"When with his marvelous inlook into the heart the Master 
understood that the rich young ruler thought so much 
about his wealth that he couldn't think much about his neighbors, 
the prescription for cure was instantaneous and unsparing: 
'Sell that which thou hast and give to the poor.' Jesus 
didn't speak so out of hate for the property but out of yearning 
for the man. If he could in this way give the youth a big 
heart full of spontaneous impulse to help people, he knew it 
would be worth the price. 

"But where he didn't find worldly possessions hindering 
the growth of a man's nobler character, he simply ignored 
them. Giving half delivered Zaccheus from the bondage of 
avarice, and Jesus asked no more. He was equally at home 
with the poor and with the rich. He loved both for common 
qualities which are counted in no coin of earth. 

"Jesus taught neighbor-love absolutely, not as an incident 
but as an essential of religion, but he never so much as hinted 
at a social programme for demonstrating that aspect of 
religion. 

"Jesus was no programme-builder. This is one of the very 
hardest things for the modern age to comprehend in the Master. 
The latter day must have an organization at work or it 
thinks it has nothing. But Jesus had an unbounded faith in 
the power of a spirit at work in and through the lives of individual 
men. He did not organize even his church; he simply 
put the motive of it in a few lives, and trusted that motive to 
make an organism. 

"Likewise, when he said, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as 



thyself,' he did not deposit the dynamic of that love in some 
artificial social body, either then existent or afterward to be 
created, but he imparted it by contact to the affections and 
wills of his friends, and left them to extend it in the same 
manner. 

"Their first expression of it— the communism of the Jerusalem 
church— was economically faulty; it wouldn't work. 
Taught by their experience, the early church leaders did not 
attempt the same system elsewhere. But the spirit which their 
initial communism crudely manifested did not disappear with 
that experiment. In that generation and in all generations 
after, adjusting itself more and more to the laws of society as 
they are continually better known, the manward love of Jesus 
Christ has found, and is yet to find, an ever larger and more 
adequate demonstration."— Literary Digest. 

A NEW JERUSALEM IS BUILDING 



Adolph Sterner writing from Jerusalem to a friend in 
this country says: 

"People here are not goaded on by competition and their 
surroundings make for indolence and stagnation. Nevertheless 
a spirit of progress has developed which commands respect. 
If you lived here you would know what a new house 
in Jerusalem means and you would stand aghast. I did when 
I was told that two hundred had been completed in the last 
three months. At Jaffa the improvements have been more 
extensive. An art school under the direction of Boris Schatz, 
who was at the head of the Bulgarian Academy of Fine Arts 
at Sofia, is flourishing, and carpet and rug-weaving, carving, 
modeling and metal working are taught to boys and girls who 
are of the same class as children who years ago were taught 
to beg from the tourists. Jerusalem is shaking off its garb 
of antiquity— a new Jerusalem is building."— The American 
Hebrew. 

R4206 : page 214 

MIRACLE WHEAT 

NEW VARIETY PRODUCED YIELDING 277 BUSHELS OF GRAIN TO ACRE 



Wheat with stalks like sugar cane and yielding 277 bushels 
of highly nutritious kernels to the acre has been produced 
as a result of experiments made in Idaho by Allen Adams of 
Minneapolis. 

The new wheat has been named "Alaska" because of its 
hardiness. It is either spring or winter wheat, just as the 
farmer desires to sow. It is so sturdy that storms that ruin 
other stock affect its giant stems but little, and the heads remain 
upright through ordinary hailstorms. 

The yield shows that Adams has been able to obtain an increase 



of 222 fold. One head of the giant wheat was planted in 
the fall of 1904. The seeds from that head were planted the 
next year and seven pounds of seed obtained. This was sown 
in the spring of 1906, and from the seven pounds were harvested 
1,554 pounds that fall. In the fall of the same year he 
sowed it as winter wheat, but conditions were adverse. Almost 
all the "blue stem" and "club" were destroyed, and only 
a third of the crop of experimental wheat came to maturity, 
yet there was a yield of 50,000 pounds. A heavy hailstorm 
in July was the cause of the ruined wheat crop, which left 
scarcely any of the ordinary wheat standing. 

Further experiments brought forth a yield of 277 bushels 
to an acre. The Idaho College of Agriculture has made a 
laboratory test of the wheat and reports the grain plump and 
sound and that it should make better bread than the ordinary 
wheat.— Beloit Free Press. 

THE CZAR IN THE NET OF SPIRITISTS 



What we have been hearing rumored, now seems to be 
certain, namely, that the Czar is being counciled into the snare 
of spiritists. This hard-pressed and unfortunate man gets his 
future foretold by spiritualistic mediums. His judicious premier, 
Herr Stolypin, has called his attention to the danger and 
it appears that he was warned repeatedly, but without success. 
The spirit mediums have earnestly warned the Czar against 
Stolypin, wherefore the latter has to guard himself from saying 
anything further. The physician advised the Czarina to 
leave the country for her health, but a spirit medium communicated 
to her that her youngest son will die if she leaves 
Russia. Thereupon she decided to remain at home. The 
mother of the Czar sought to drive away the mediums, but in 
doing this she only succeeded in falling into the Czar's disfavor. 
It is a repetition, in the case of Nicholas II., of the 
story of Saul, who, in the time of need, betook himself to the 
Witch of Endor.— Translated from the Apologete, Cincinnati, 
Ohio. 



R4206 : page 214 

"OBEDIENCE BETTER THAN SACRIFICE" 

-ISAM. 15:1-35. -JULY 26.- 

Golden Text:— "The Lord our God will we serve, 
and his voice will we obey."— Josh. 24:24. 

OUR lesson tells of the testing of King Saul, of his 
failure to stand the tests, and of the consequent 
rejection of his family and himself from the 
kingdom. His history may be divided into four parts: 
(1) The favorable opportunities of his youth— energetic, 



fine looking, modest, his choice as the king of 
Israel was generally conceded to be an excellent one. 
(2) In the earlier years of his reign he was a successful 
general and an able organizer of his kingdom. (3) In his 
testing time he failed and was rejected, partially at first, 
more thoroughly subsequently. (4) The decline of his 
manhood, his almost loss of reason, and finally the 
tragic death of himself and his sons. Today's lesson 
deals specially with the third of these epochs— his 
testing. 

The Philistines exercised a kind of overlordship in 
Palestine, presumably collecting taxes as the consideration 
for permitting the people to have a measure of 
peace and possession of the country. Apparently they 
had fortified cities in various parts of Israel's territory, 
and from their representatives in these the word came 
that the Israelites had anointed Saul to be their king, a 
circumstance which was understood to imply the throwing 
off of the Philistine yoke, a declaration of independence. 
At once the Philistines assembled an army 
wherewith to overthrow the new kingdom. The record 
that they had thirty thousand chariots is supposed to 
have been a copyist's error for three thousand; for the 
number of horsemen, two to each chariot, is given as 
six thousand. This considerable army marched into 
Palestine; and a battle ensued between them and the 
Israelites. King Saul evidently desired to be in harmony 
with the Lord, and realized still that without 
divine interposition he would be powerless to repel an 
invader of such strength. The prophet Samuel was 
communicated with, and he promised to come within 
seven days to offer sacrifice to God on Israel's behalf, 
that the Lord's blessing might attend his people and 
bring them the victory, in harmony with the divine 
covenant. 

King Saul waited for six days, and meantime saw 
his army melting from desertion, for the Israelites were 
poorly armed and greatly in fear. They had practically 
no weapons, merely their agricultural implements 
for weapons of war. Apparently the Philistines had 
previously deprived them of fighting weapons, and in 
some manner had hindered the Kenites, who were the 
smiths of the time, from serving them in the manufacture 
of swords and spears. When the seventh day 
had come, King Saul, wearied of waiting for Samuel, 
offered the sacrifice himself, contrary to the divine order. 
Immediately Samuel appeared, and, pointing out to 
Saul his failure, stated that obedience to God would 
have been more appreciated by the Almighty than were 
the sacrifices. Samuel also pointed out that the sacrifice 
under the circumstances was a sin, and that the 
result of this disobedience was that God would not 
permit Saul and his kingdom to be perpetuated, though 
he promised that the battle immediately before them 
would be successful for Israel's sake and for the furtherance 
of God's own cause. 



The difficulty was Saul's failure to respect the 
divine arrangement, his presumption in undertaking 
to do what had not been committed to his care, but was 
under the charge of another. The Lord's cause was 
not hindered; but King Saul's own prosperity was interfered 
with by his neglect of the divine arrangement. 

THE LESSON FOR SPIRITUAL ISRAELITES 

What lesson may we draw from this incident? If 
for the moment we think of Saul as representing those 

R4206 : page 215 

who have been favored of God, and called to joint-heirship 
with Jesus in his Kingdom and anointed with the 
holy Spirit, we may see in his early victories a picture 
of our good beginning, when we trusted God implicitly, 
and sought to do merely as he directed, and to wait 
patiently and trustfully for him to guide in all of our 
affairs. As Saul should have made progress and become 
stronger in his faith and patience and obedience, 
so should our earliest experiences as the Lord's servants 
bring to us increasing patience, perseverance, faith, 
confidence, implicit obedience. But as this was not the 
case with King Saul, so it is not the case with many of 
those who have been anointed for joint-heirship with 
the Lord in his Kingdom. Many of these have similar 
experiences to that of Saul. Instead of their growing 
more dependent upon the Lord, the favors received at 
his hand make them less particular to know and 
to do his will. They still reverence the Lord; they 
still recognize that without him they could do nothing; 
but they are not sufficiently careful to note just what he 
would have them to do. Sometimes they undertake to 
do the work of others, and to that extent are "busybodies 
in other men's matters," as King Saul busybodied 
and sinned in attempting to do the work that 
belonged to the prophet. 

We should see that in the divine mind obedience is 
one of the most important elements of character. The 
Lord has us in training in the school of Christ for a 
great work in the future; and the first prerequisite for 
future honors and opportunities very properly must be 
our obedience to the opportunities and directions of the 
Lord in the present time. This our Lord explained 
clearly in his parables, saying that to some of his 
servants he had entrusted more talents than to others; 
that each would be called upon to give an account for 
the proper exercise of the talents, responsibilities and 
commands that had been put upon him, and that each 
would be rewarded in proportion as he used the talents 
given to him. Our Lord's expression on the subject is, 
"He that is faithful in that which is least is faithful 
also in much."— Luke 16:10. 

Here, then, is our lesson, "Obedience is better than 



sacrifice" in God's sight. He will not either approve or 
reward carelessness on our part in this matter. On the 
contrary, inattention to his direct will would mark us 
as proportionately unfit for his direct service, either 
here or hereafter. This implies on our part such a 
loyalty to the Lord, such a carefulness in respect to his 
service, such a recognition of each other in respect to 
the Lord and his service, that we would go about very 
carefully in our endeavors to serve his cause. So the 
Apostle exhorts, "Let us walk circumspectly," carefully, 
scrutinizingly.— Eph. 5:15. 

As the mariner guides the course of his ship by 
certain charts which show hidden rocks and shoals, and 
by the stars in their courses, so the Christian is furnished 
with a chart which shows him the course which 
he should pursue, and the things which would be displeasing 
to God and injurious to himself. That chart 

R4207 : page 215 

is the Bible, and whoever would be in harmony with 

God must not only hearken for his message but keep 

track also of the hidden dangers which beset his course. 

Each one of us is on trial. This Gospel Age is our 

Day of Judgment, of testing. The Lord himself is 

scrutinizing the course we are taking. It is not sufficient 

to him that we shall have zeal. The zeal which 

he will approve is that which operates from love and 

along the lines of his instruction. The zeal which disregards 

the divine instruction is not approved; it leads 

to shipwreck. 

The Apostle gives some suggestions along this line, 
saying that every member of the Body of Christ is necessary 
(I Cor. 12:12-26); none is to be despised or 
hindered from having his part in the general work of 
building up the Body in the most holy faith. The 
Apostle illustrates that the eye cannot say to the hand 
or the foot, "I have no need of you;" and contrariwise 
the hand or the foot cannot say that it has no need of 
the eye nor of the ear. Every member is necessary; 
and above all every member of the Body is to move only 
in accord with the will of the Head. And that will is 
to be sought for in every incident of life, great or small. 
We are not to think of the Lord's cause as being wholly 
dependent upon us. We are to remember the mistake 
which Uzzah made— When he saw the ark of the Lord 
jostled in the road, he put forth his hand to steady it, 
and died because of his disobedience. It was not in 
his province to steady the ark. The Lord had that matter 
under his own supervision, and only the priest 
might even touch it. Let us all then be zealous, not 
only to serve the Lord, but also to know the way in 
which he would have us render that service. Let us be 
sure that service rendered in any other way than as 
divinely directed will not be acceptable and will not 
bring blessing upon us, but on the contrary bring us 



the Lord's proportionate disfavor. Obedience is better 
than sacrifice. 

THE SLAUGHTER OF THE AMALEKITES 

Evidently quite a number of years intervened between 
the incidents to which we have just referred and 
those which constitute the main part of today's lesson 
—King Saul's second test. In the interim Israel had 
grown strong as a nation; and the time had come for 
the carrying out of a divine declaration made long before; 
namely, that the Amalekites should be utterly 
destroyed. As one branch of Esau's family, they were 
related to the Israelites and to the Arabs of today. 
Like the latter they were horsemen, and a kind of 
brigand, who flourished by pillaging their neighbors. 
Not strong enough themselves to injure the Israelites 
they associated themselves with others of the enemies 
of Israel, either directly participating in war or indirectly, 
following after battles to gather up the spoils. 
It will be remembered that they fought against the Israelites 
in the wilderness when on their way toward 
Canaan. (Exod. 17:8-16.) It will be remembered also 
that they again opposed the Israelites in conquering the 
land of promise; and that the Lord had declared through 
Moses that these should be utterly destroyed, and had 
given Israel this command.— Deut. 25:17-19. 

R4207 : page 216 

The fulfilling of these commands was deferred, 
probably for two reasons. First, the Israelites had no 
cavalry and would have found it difficult to cope with 
these marauders, who would swoop down upon them 
and be off. Secondly, it is probable that the Lord permitted 
the Amalekites to continue as a thorn in the side 
of the Israelites for their chastening. But now in 
Samuel's day the message came to King Saul to destroy 
utterly the Amalekites, not only all the people, great 
and small, but all of their belongings— sheep, cattle, 
horses— everything. The Israelites were to do this as 
the sword of the Lord, as inflicting the judgment which 
God had decreed. It must not be said of them that 
they had turned brigands and thieves, to war against 
their neighbors and to profit by their pelf. This must 
be a witness not only to the nations round about, but 
to the Israelites themselves; it must be a lesson. They 
must not get the impression that warfare against their 
neighbors would be undertaken for any selfish, mercenary 
motives. They were God's scourge in this instance. 
We are not to draw the inference that today God gives 
any command to any nation to blot out another people. 
We are to remember, on the contrary, that Israel was a 
picture-nation, a type nation; and that through their 
experience and history the Lord dealt peculiarly to 
illustrate principles; that he used Israel as his sword, 



as his pen, as his mouthpiece. 

NOT TO AN ETERNAL DOOM 

Infidels hold this experience of the Israelites with 
the Amalekites as an awful picture of cruelty, entirely 
opposed to justice; and earnest, honest minds have 
stumbled through a misapprehension of the principles 
involved. Many would be inclined to say, "Why did 
not God send Saul and the Israelites with the Gospel to 
preach to the Amalekites? Why did he send Israel to 
destroy their lives, and thus to end their probation and 
thrust them into eternal torment?" 

We answer that eternal torment had nothing whatever 
to do with their case; for God has made no such 
threat and inflicts no such penalty for their sin, nor for 
any sin. According to the Scriptures, "The wages of 
sin is death." (Rom. 6:23.) And death was the wage 
which God authorized Israel to inflict upon the Amalekites, 
a death penalty. Their execution was along exactly 
the same lines as courts of justice today command 
the execution of murderers, except that in this case the 
Lord himself acted as judge of the court, read the decision 
and imposed the penalty. 

The Israelites preached the Gospel to nobody, because 
no Gospel could be preached until first of all 
Christ had come and had paid the penalty for Adam's 
sin. On the basis of that work of Christ, God commands 
all men everywhere to repent, because he has 
appointed a day of trial, a day of judgment. (Acts 17:31.) 
God did not end their day of trial; for it had 
not yet come to them. Like all the remainder of the 
race they were under death sentence for Adam's sin, 
and it matters not to justice how they die, whether of 
pestilence or of general decay or by the sword. The 
fact that their death was a divine punishment, was better 
shown by their execution in harmony with the divine 
command, than had it come upon them in some other 
manner. The incident furnished a lesson to typical 
Israel, as it still furnishes a lesson to Spiritual Israel. 
Those Amalekites, let us remember, were all redeemed 
by the provision of God's love, by the death of Jesus. 
In due time they are all to have the testimony that 
Christ died for their sins, and to have the opportunity 
during the Millennial Age day, the world's judgment 
day, to return to full harmony with God and to live. 

KING SAUL'S SECOND TEST 

That a good many years had passed, and that King 
Saul had made good use of his opportunities as an 
organizer of the kingdom, is evidenced by the fact that 
a large army was assembled in harmony with the Lord's 
command to the prophet: "Two hundred thousand footmen 
and ten thousand men of Judah." This army was 
evidently so disposed of as to intercept any of the 



Amalekites who might flee. Meantime word was sent 
to the Kenites, who dwelt amongst the Amalekites, advising 
them to leave that they might not suffer in the 
punishment of the Amalekites; and the explanation made 
was that as the Kenites had favored the Lord's people, 
they were spared in recognition of this fact; for the 
destruction of the Amalekites was in harmony with the 
divine decree, because of their opposition to Israel. 

The people were all slaughtered except the king, 
whom King Saul spared, keeping him as a kind of 
trophy. The animals also were all destroyed, except the 
choicest of the flocks and herds, which additionally 
was contrary to the divine command. 

When the prophet Samuel came to the king, the 
latter saluted him as God's representative and reported 
that he had done according to the divine command. 
Then came the inquiry, "If so, what means the bleating 
of the sheep and the lowing of the cattle?" Saul's 
answer was probably a prevarication; that these were 
kept in order to be offered to the Lord in sacrifice. 
Then Samuel reproved him, pointing out that he had 
violated the command of the Lord in preserving any of 
them. The king, however, protested that the people 
had kept them; that Israel had desired them; and we 
can readily suppose that there would have been amongst 
the Israelites quite an opposition to the waste of the 
good things of the Amalekites, so accustomed were 
people of that time, as well as of today, to desire valuables. 
Saul might have indeed complied with the divine 
decree by rendering obedience to the Lord and thus 
put himself in disfavor with the people; but he would 
have maintained the divine approval thereby. As it 
was, the prophet expressed the divine disapproval, saying, 
"Hath the Lord as great delight in burnt-offerings 
and sacrifices as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, 
to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken 
(better) than the fat of rams." 

TESTS OF THE ROYAL PRIESTHOOD 

Let us see if there are not corresponding tests upon 
the royal priesthood. Frequently tests come to this 
class after they have been a long while in the school of 
Christ. Speaking to some such, the Apostle says, 

R4208 : page 217 

"For when for the time ye ought to be teachers ye have 
need that one teach you again what be the first principles 
of the oracles of God," the doctrines (teachings) 
of Christ. (Heb. 5:12.) We are sometimes surprised 
at others, sometimes at ourselves, that we have been 
so slow in making progress; that we have apparently 
gained so little victory in character building and appreciation 
of the principles which should govern amongst 
those who are the Lord's anointed and in preparation 



for the throne. Saul's difficulty and tests may represent 
some of ours. 

(1) A selfish spirit, a desire for some of the best 

of the things which the Lord has condemned; a willingness 
to spare these because they appeal to us from a 
selfish viewpoint, the fleshly viewpoint. 

(2) A man-fearing spirit. As Saul feared to bring 
upon himself the reproaches of the people, fearing to be 
thought too narrow on the one hand and too wasteful 
on the other, so a temptation comes to the Lord's 
people to guide their course not entirely by the Word 
of the Lord, but with a deference to the sentiments of 
others. This is the fear of man that brings a snare. 
(Prov. 29:25.) We are ensnared by the spirit of the 
world. Of such the Lord says, "How can ye believe 
[continue in proper discipleship] which receive honor 
one of another, and seek not the honor that cometh 
from God only?"— John 5:44. 

(3) Saul's third difficulty was that he had too slack 
an appreciation of the Lord's Word; and this is the 
difficulty which specially besets nearly every one of the 
Lord's followers who stray away into error of doctrine 

or of conduct. With what care ought we to guard ourselves, 
lest having become partakers of so great a blessing 
as our anointing implies, any of us should seem to 
come short of its glorious realization in the Kingdom. 
Let us see to it that we put away all love of sin in its 
every form, and that we esteem the Lord's favor so 
highly that the consideration of human friendships 
would not have a particle of weight or influence with us, 
except as the same should be in full accord with the 
divine programme; and in order to the maintenance of 
these proper relationships, let us take heed to his Word. 

Let us remember the Apostle's words that we 
wrestle not with flesh and blood, but with wicked spirits 
in high positions. (Eph. 6:12.) Let us remember that 
these wicked spirits have the power in some degree to 
favor in us wrong sentiments; that in proportion as we 
would give our minds into any selfish, sinful or ignoble 
channel, in that same proportion these unseen adversaries 
of the saints would have power over them. Let us 
remember, on the contrary, that in proportion as our 
hearts are loyal to the Lord and his Word and to the 
spirit of the truth, the spirit of love, in that same proportion 
we are surrounded by a halo of influence which 
would protect us, so that of such it may be written, 
"The wicked one toucheth him not."— John 5:18. 

THE TEST OF PERFECT LOVE 

The Scriptures clearly indicate a great trial and 
testing for the Church in the next few years. It will 
determine with very many what Saul's testing determined 
for him, whether or not God's favor will continue, 
with its Kingdom privileges and opportunities. 
To the faithful the Lord says, "Fear not, little flock; 



it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the Kingdom." 

The others will be answered as was Saul, 

"Obedience is better than sacrifice;" thou art rejected. 

Through the Revelator the Lord tells us how the Philadelphian 

stage of the Church would be saved from the 

great "hour of trial that is come upon all the world, to 

try them that dwell upon the earth." (Rev. 3:10.) 

There are trials coming upon the Laodicean Church, 

living at the time of the presence of the Son of Man, 

when he stands at the door and knocks. (Rev. 3:20.) 

In that trial, we are told, that a thousand shall fall at 

the side and ten thousand at the right hand of the one 

Body, the true Church, of which Jesus is the Head. 

The Apostle Peter, in figurative language, describes 

the heavens as being on fire (2 Pet. 3:12), symbolically 

picturing the ecclesiastical influence of our day; and 

St. Paul tells of the "fire that shall try every man's 

work of what sort it is." (I Cor. 3:13.) We are assured 

that only the gold, silver and precious stones of the 

divine character and doctrine will abide the fiery ordeal. 

Surely none of the Lord's people can afford to ignore 

such testings as these; particularly none of those who 

with us believe that we are now in that trial period; and 

that the next seven years will be preeminently a testing 

time. 

If the test of character approved of God, is love- 
perfect love for God, for the brethren, yea, also for our 
enemies— then let that thought be continually before 
all of our minds to the intent that we be not overtaken, 
that we be not deceived by the great Adversary, who 
still would fain put darkness for light and light for 
darkness, on this as upon every other subject. Our 
anticipation is that the great conflict which will ultimately 
reach the world, and eventuate in the anarchy 
which will overthrow all law and order, will begin with 
the Church; begin with the consecrated, the sanctified, 
the enlightened. Does not the Lord forewarn us, that 
in all things judgment must begin at the house of God. 
(I Pet. 4:17.) Necessarily it must begin with those 
who are highest up in that house as respects light, 
knowledge and privileges. 

Are we prepared for these tests, of which we read 
that they would deceive, if it were possible, the very 
elect? We still believe that these tests will be along 
the lines of perfect love. Love and selfishness are the 
two great powers that are moving the world and each 
individual therein. We have already seen that the 
selfishness, which will overwhelm the world shortly, will 
mean lovelessness to the extent that the Scriptures declare, 
"Every man's hand shall be against his neighbor, 
and no peace to him that goeth out nor to him that 
cometh in." (Zech. 8:10; 11:6.) Is that same condition 
of things to be expected in the Church— every man's 
hand against his neighbor, the tongue of every brother 
against every other brother in the Lord? Are anger, 
malice, hatred, envy and strife to be permitted to overwhelm 



the Church of Christ? Could such things have 

R4208 : page 218 

any place or power of influence against those who have 
knowledge of the truth? We are of the opinion that 
this is just what we are to expect. 

We are in the habit of supposing that our Lord's 
words, "Brother shall deliver up brother to death," applied 
merely to our Lord's time and during the dark 
ages. Do we forget that similar conditions may be expected 
in the end of this age? The delivering up may 
not be physical, however; the crucifying, the scourging 
and the roasting may not be literal; but we believe that 
very much the same things may be expected with only 
such limits as our civilization will compel. Apparently 
it is not enough of a test to us to be "hated of all 
men for my name's sake." We must be tested by the 
hatred, the malice, the evil speaking and evil surmising 
of those who dipped with us in the dish, of those who 
partook with us of the present things of divine bounty 
at the table of the Lord, the spiritual food. Ah! If this 
be so then we may indeed expect for the closing days of 
the Church, the Body of Christ, experiences not dissimilar 
to those which came to the Master in Gethsemane, 
one of the most trying of which must have been the 
Judas kiss. 

BRETHREN, WHAT SHALL WE DO? 

When some of those who heard the Apostles on 
Pentecost day came to an understanding of what was 
the real situation of affairs, and that they and their 
rulers had crucified the Prince of Life— some of them 
actually and some of them by failing to protest— those 
who were right-minded were cut to the heart and cried 
out, "What must we do?" The Apostle assured them of 
forgiveness because they did it ignorantly. And so with 
us. If any of us find that under any snare, or delusion 
of the Adversary, we have been entrapped into wrong-doing 
toward a brother, we should immediately feel cut 
to the heart, and should go to the Lord for divine 
forgiveness and to those whom we have wronged, for 
their part of it, that thus we might turn defeat in the 
hands of the Adversary to victory. 

Undoubtedly just such a storm is coming; and as 
the prophet expresses it, the question is not, Who shall 
fall, but "Who shall be able to stand?" (Mai. 3:2.) A 
thousand shall fall to one who will stand. The very 
Elect will not be deceived, but the question is, Are we 
of the very Elect? and our answer must be that the 
Lord will decide this matter according to the manner 
in which we decide when under the test. It is impossible 
for us to surmise what may be the various apparent 
grounds for unbrotherliness, for the loss of a brother's 
love. If we give heed to the Adversary, he will make 



us think it proper to break away from the regular rule 
of procedure, and, if we are willing, make us to feel 
that we are fully justified in violating all the various 
directions which the Lord our God has given us. It 
will require of all of us loving faithfulness to the Lord 
and to the brethren to enable us to withstand the trials 
of this day; and we cannot at this point refrain from 
reminding the dear followers of the Lord afresh of what 
we have already amplified in DAWN-STUDIES, Vol. VI, 
Chap. 9, the course which the new creature should take 
in every matter in which he feels that a brother has 
offended him, outlined by our Lord in Matt. 18:15-17. 

Let us be sure that the Adversary will use every 
means to turn us aside from this plainly stated rule of 
love; that he will endeavor to make us think that it cannot 
be applicable to the difficulty which troubles us. 
Let our answer to all such suggestions of Satan be, 
"Get thee behind me." We write thus pointedly, because 
in various parts we have intimations from the 
brethren of misunderstandings and in some instances 
the manifestation of a loveless spirit, a hypercritical 
spirit, an unbrotherly spirit, a spirit in direct opposition 
to the Golden Rule and to the Lord's instructions, 

R4209 : page 218 

to go to him alone, to seek to win thy brother, and not 
to cast him off nor excommunicate him. On the contrary, 
be ready to die for him. "We ought also to lay 
down our lives for the brethren."— I John 3:16. 

Let us remember, also, that this loveless condition 
of the heart, this hypercritical spirit, does not come in 
suddenly; it develops gradually. Hence every day 
each of the Lord's people should have a searching of 
his heart to see whether or not he can find there toward 
anybody, saint or sinner, any of the spirit of malice 
which the Lord figuratively represented as leaven, contaminating 
in its influence. "A little leaven leaveneth 
the whole lump." (I Cor. 5:6.) A little envy, a little 
malice, a little anger, a little hatred, and a little strife, 
may leaven our hearts completely, and in a comparatively 
short time turn the sweets of our new nature, the 
spirit of love, into acid bitterness. Moreover, the leaven 
is not likely to be confined to one, but spreads to others; 
and thus many may be defiled. The poet has said:— 

"We are not worst at once; 

The course of evil begins so slowly, and from such slight 

sources, 
An infant's hand might stem its breach with clay; 
But let the stream get deeper, and philosophy, 
Ah! and religion, too, shall strive in vain 
To turn the headlong current." 



R4211 : page 218 

WHAT A VOW SIGNIFIES 

It is not remarkable that the Adversary and the deceitfulness 
of our own flesh should conspire to hinder 
every work of grace, and of course present arguments, 
and if possible Scripture proofs. Let us not be deceived 
thereby, but take our stand firmly for truth and 
righteousness, and for everything which would protect 
the brethren and honor the Lord's cause. We state and 
answer the objections to the Vow as follows:— 

(1) To take a vow is to swear, and we are cautioned, 
"Swear not at all." 

This is a mistake; a vow is not an oath, but a solemn 
affirmation. It is suggested to be made not to man but 
to God. It is in full accord with the Scripture, which 
says, "Pay thy vows unto the Lord." How could one 
pay his vows if he never made any, or if it were wrong 
to make such vows? 

(2) To make such a vow is to put one's self under 
the Law; and the Apostle says, "If ye be under the Law 
Christ shall profit you nothing." 

This is also an error. Christians are under God's 

R4211 : page 219 

law in the sense that they have agreed to do his will in 
all things to the extent of their ability. "The righteousness 
of the Law is fulfilled in us who are walking not 
after the flesh but after the Spirit." The vow proposed 
is merely to assist in this walk, and is in full accord 
with St. Paul's exhortation, "Make straight paths for 
your feet lest that which is lame be turned out of the 
way." We have pointed out that the world's path will 
be very crooked indeed during the next few years, and 
hence the greater need of such a vow to help those in 
the narrow way. The Apostle reproved those who 
sought to justify themselves by keeping the Law, ignoring 
Christ. This vow acknowledging Christ and our justification 
through faith in the blood of Christ, is to assist 
us in following in his steps. 

(3) The vow I took in consecration includes all 
that this proposed vow sets forth. 

This is true in a certain sense; and to that extent 
it surely is not objectionable. Our vow of consecration 
really meant the doing of anything that would honor 
our Lord or assist the brethren— even to the extent of 
laying down life itself. It equally meant the avoidance 
of anything which would injure the Lord's cause or 
possibly stumble the brethren. Hence our consecration 
vow indirectly covers all that the proposed vow includes 
and excludes, and those who see it thus need not hesitate 
to take the proposed vow. 

The Word of God forbids adultery, fornication, lasciviousness 
or uncleanness in thought, word and act, 



and all this we clearly understood when we made our 
consecration vow. But the Scriptures nowhere forbid 
a pure, "holy kiss," nor stipulate other items of the proposed 
vow; hence we had not these in mind when we 
made the consecration. But as that vow included our 
all, even unto death, it really included the new vow, 
which is really another item of our self-sacrifice, made 
in the interest of the general cause, and likely to prove 
beneficial to ourselves also. 

Our space permits the publication of only a few of 
the many encouraging letters received on this subject 
from both brothers and sisters. We continue our list 
of those who have notified us that they have made the 
vow published in our issue of June 15th— the sisters, of 
course, altering the vow to apply it to the opposite sex. 



page 219 

MANY MORE ADVISE THAT THEY HAVE TAKEN THE VOW 

L. S. Ward, Vincent C. Rice, A. N. Marchant, B. F. 
Coley, G. W. LaFerry, Brother and Sister Spietz, John 
Kumpf, J. E. Miller, Mrs. Emilie Bruce Abbe, Brother 
and Sister Wiltison, E. Z. Johnson, Benj. Fisk, Alice 
L. Darlington, E. J. Coward, Paul E. Thomson, Edmund 
Bodeutsch, Geo. W. Faulk, J. W. Hosfield, Chas. 
Strand, G. M. Brown, T. E. Fogan, W. H. Moore, Geo. 
W. Whiteus, C. P. Powley, A. Johnson, Anson G. Wilbor, 
Walter J. Thorn, F. L. Hall, O. R. Amick, G. G. 
DeFrese, Jas. O. Conner, Jas. Shermer, C. C. Coleman, 
H. S. Cox, Albert Berry, Brother and Sister F. A. Kaufman, 
J. D. Gould, Thomas Cox, Mrs. H. B. Ackley, M. 
M. Sanders, Rena Fulton, D. Gossadge, Chas. Murdock, 
Thos. Heald, Sis. H. B. Simmons, R. H. Schmardebeck, 
R. H. Goss, Leonie E. Walker, Robt. Ingle, Frank Bradt, 

C. Greaves, J. B. McGee, John Kurzen, Ida Kurzen, 
Evelyn Sutherland, Eben A. Keller, J. H. Coyle, A. 
Johnson, T. R. Leedy, R. L. Jones, Eastman Douglass, 
M. L. Wolf, Alfred W. Gleason, J. M. Easley, M. L. 
Staples, Mrs. Rosa Townsend, Mrs. Isanre A. Watson, 

D. A. Mackey, Wesley Hawley, M. L. Cobb, D. V. Berlage, 
Benj. J. Haytree, T. McNaught, Brother and Sister 

L. F. Hall, Sydney Stokes, F. A. Acheson, Fred 

Bright, R. L. Smith, F. L. Hickson, Mrs. G. W. DePriest, 

E. Whelpton, Mrs. C. W. Stiver, P. Crippen, H. L. 
Hauerwas, Mrs. F. H. Parmelee, Carrie Otteson, 

F. G. Giddings, A. H. Dooley and wife, J. McCarthy, R. 
H. Goza, Ed. O. Loe, S. W. Williams, H. J. Black, Nellie 
Hall, A. Z. Becker, Charles Toepfer, Lela E. McGee, 

J. A. Browne, T. C. Weaver, Eliza Breary, R. H. Barber, 
W. H. Jackson, A. J. Gibson, M. O. Field, Joe Ganson, 
Emma Shull, A. I. Ritchie, S. J. Fleming, C. R. Pitner, 
Mrs. W. H. Warren, J. W. Bell, Alma Swenson, 
Mrs. S. J. Fleming, Charlotte White, A. Cleveland, D. 



W. Loree, Elmer G. Berry, Chas. Ockerman, Benj. 
Hershey, Mrs. M. Gardner, Mrs. M. R. Land, Alice G. 
James, Alice E. Bourquin, E. Louise Hamilton, M. Almeta 
Nation, Edith Hoskins, Mrs. Isaac Hoskins, Laura 
M. Whitehouse, Charlotte Gillberg, Ora Lee Sullivan, 
J. Violet Meyer, Mrs. M. Hartzell, Mrs. M. L. Roberts, 
Mrs. B. C. Stark. 



R4211 : page 219 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It seems to me the most timely article that has ever 
appeared in the WATCH TOWER is the one in the June 
15th number, under the caption, "Pay thy vows unto the 
Lord." I have wondered at times where this fleshly 
manifestation of love between opposite sexes would end, 
but I thank the Lord now that I believe nearly all, if not 
all, will end in all who are truly his taking the proposed 
vow. I am positive the dear friends have had not the 
least evil motive, and rejoice that the Lord has moved 
you to present the matter in so loving a manner, together 
with the suggestion of the vow, which should prove an 
impregnable barrier against further besetments along 
this line. 

This is to advise you that I have with much appreciation 
made this vow to the Lord. I have taken it in 
the name of Christ our Lord, whose strength is sufficient 
in every time of need. The Lord bless thee and 
keep thee and all thy house. With fervent love, yours 
faithfully in Christ, JOHN HOSKINS,-Minn. 



DEARLY BELOVED PASTOR:- 

The contents of June 15th TOWER have brought 
great joy to my heart, and I believe it pleasing to the 
Lord to express my appreciation of the same to you 
personally. 

In Louisville, last April, Brother Rutherford so 
kindly told me of the "Pilgrim vow," which by the Lord's 
favor came to me at the "due time," when he had prepared 
my heart to receive it as the blessed privilege 
which it is. 

How can I express to you the joy and happiness I 
have experienced in the Lord's love and favor since 
taking this sacred vow before him on April 24th! I do 
thank the Lord, especially for his surpassing favor in 
revealing this privilege to me when he did. The intervening 
nine weeks up to the present time have been 
filled with many lessons in love and humility, revealing 
an unusual gentleness in his leadings and care for me. 
May I ever grow in love for him and all of his, never 

R4211 : page 220 



lacking in appreciation of his manifold blessings— always 
striving to please him. 

Our prayers have been with you many times daily, 
that you may have comfort and strength to perform 
your vows unto him; thanking him on every remembrance 
of you for the rich blessings which he has used 
you to bring to us. 

I am confident, dear Brother Russell, that we Colporteurs 
have had your prayers that we, too, may be faithful 
to our vows in letter and in spirit, even unto the end— 
which prayers will avail much for us and are a great 
comfort to our hearts. We grow more thankful each 
day for our share in the harvest work. 

With much love and prayers, I remain, yours in the 
blessed harvest work, 

SISTER 



R4209 : page 220 

GOD'S CHOICE 

-I SAMUEL 16: 1-13. -AUGUST 2.- 

Golden Text:— "Man looketh on the outward appearance, 
but the Lord looketh on the heart."— Verse 7. 

THE record is, "Samuel came no more to see Saul 
until the day of his death." That is to say, God 
having cut off Saul from special guidance and 
relationship, it was no longer Samuel's province as 
God's representative to go frequently to him to give 
direction respecting the interests of the kingdom. The 
record, however, implies that Samuel had great sympathy 
for Saul and mourned for him. So it is sometimes 
with the Lord's children of this Gospel dispensation. 
We feel a deep interest in matters and persons of our 
intimate association, and at times might almost be 
tempted to think that the Lord had made some mistake 
in his dealings with them— especially if they be near 
and dear to us by the ties of blood or fellowship. It is 
for us to learn, as did Saul, not to question the ways 
of the Lord, but to rely upon his unerring wisdom in 
the management of his own cause. With a slight reproof 
the Lord sent Samuel to anoint Saul's successor, 
saying, "Fill thine horn with oil and go; I will send 
thee to Jesse, the Bethlehemite, for I have provided me 
a king amongst his sons." So sometimes, when our 
hopes and aims have failed us, the Lord bids us look 
in another direction and to behold that he is not dependent 
upon any, but is supervising his own cause, 
working his sovereign will. He has sent us a message 
which, rightly appreciated, should give us comfort 
amongst all the discouragements that might come to us. 



That message reads, "My word that goeth out of my 
mouth shall not return unto me void, but shall accomplish 
that which I please, and shall prosper in the 
thing whereto I sent it." The poet has expressed the 
same thought saying, 

"God moves in a mysterious way 
His wonders to perform." 

THE TRUTH-NOT THE WHOLE TRUTH 

Samuel was a wise man, and knew instinctively 
that while Saul had been ready enough to receive the 
anointing himself he would never consent to have 
another anointed as his successor in the kingdom, but 
would desire to retain the authority, the position, for 
the members of his own family. He therefore replied 
to the Lord, "How can I go?" Will not my mission be 
interrupted if Saul learns of my intention, and I shall 
not even have the opportunity to carry it out, for he 
will kill me, and justify his action under the plea that I 
was a traitor to the king. The Lord replied, "Take an 
heifer with thee, and say, I am come to sacrifice unto 
the Lord." 

Many of the Lord's dear people, evidently lacking 
a proper balance of mind on this subject, would be inclined 
to repudiate such an avowal as being a lie— an 
untruth. Their argument would be, No, Samuel's real 
purpose and the Lord's was that he should anoint a 
king, and the offering by sacrifice was merely a subterfuge 
and misrepresentation— a falsehood out of the 
whole cloth. Among such, hesitancy to brand such a 
course as both speaking and acting a lie, would merely 
be because it was the Lord who gave this direction and 
his inspired prophet who carried it out; but the principle 
involved is the same whoever may be the ones carrying 
it out. If such a course had been wrong for Samuel 
or for any other man, it would have been still more 
wrong for the Almighty God. But if, as we claim, it 
was right and proper for the Almighty, it would be an 
equally proper course for any one to take. 

It would not have been proper to say that he was 
going to sacrifice if there had been no intention to sacrifice, 
but merely to anoint! As a matter of fact, the 
sacrifice was the whole purpose of the visit, so far as 
the people of Bethlehem were concerned, the matter of 
anointing being purely the Lord's business and that of 
Jesse and his family. As the anointing was none of 
the business of the people of Bethlehem, it was entirely 
proper that it should not be mentioned to them. Our 
Lord followed the same course during his ministry, 
telling facts only in part. Sometimes he spake in parables, 
that the multitude might hear and not understand 
the true import of his message, and this he explained 
to the apostles saying, "To you it is given to know the 
mystery of the Kingdom of God; but unto outsiders 



these things are done in parables, that seeing they may 

see and not perceive, and hearing they may hear and 

not understand." (Mark 4:11,12.) Again he said to 

the disciples, "I have many things to tell you, but ye 

cannot bear them now." (John 16:12.) It is a great 

mistake, therefore, to suppose that it is wrong to withhold 

a part of the truth, if it is withheld for the benefit 

of the hearer; if the whole truth would do injury, then 

it is the course of wisdom and love to withhold the injurious 

element. But if, on the contrary, we should 

withhold truth from selfish motives, and to the injury of 

other men, the course would be reprehensible, contrary 

to the law of love. To see this principle will be very 

helpful to many of the Lord's people, and will assist 

them in appreciating and acting upon the Master's 

words, "Be ye wise as serpents and harmless as doves." 

R4209 : page 221 

"COMEST THOU PEACEABLY?" 

In fulfilment of the Lord's will Samuel went to 
Bethlehem. So great was the reverence for him as the 
Lord's prophet and ex -judge that the elders of the city 
came to meet him, trembling and fearing that he had come 
with some message of denunciation from the Lord, to 
reprove some wickedness, to show up some graft, to 
pronounce some penalty. All this implies that the 
people had great confidence in the prophet as God's 
mouthpiece and great respect and reverence for the 
Lord, etc., and that the rule of God through the judges 
had deeply impressed certain lessons. 

In reply to the query, "Comest thou peaceably?"— 
does your coming mean judgments of the Lord upon us 
or blessings— Samuel replied: I am come peaceably to 
sacrifice unto the Lord; sanctify yourselves and come 
with me to the sacrifice. Amongst others he sanctified 
Jesse and his sons, and called them to the sacrifice. 
The sacrificing represented an acknowledgment of sin 
and thankfulness to the Lord for his mercy in respect 
to it, and in general a consecration of obedience to the 
Lord. A certain portion of the sacrifice was usually 
burned unto the Lord and another portion of it was 
eaten by the participants, as representing the reception 
of the blessings. The account is evidently not a complete 
one. We may suppose that after all who wished 
to draw near unto the Lord through the sacrifice had 
attended, and that matter and the feast were entirely 
at an end, Samuel went with Jesse to his home and 
there looked over his sons, waiting for guidance from 
the Lord as to which of them should be anointed. 

"THE LORD LOOKETH UPON THE HEART" 

Apparently Jesse had been asked to send his sons 
one by one to the prophet and they came, the elder first. 



When Samuel looked upon Eliab he said within himself, 
Surely the Lord's anointed is before me; but the Lord 
answered, "Look not on his countenance, neither on 
the height of his stature, because I have rejected him; 
for the Lord seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh 
on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the 
heart." What a wonderful lesson is here applicable to 
every member of the human family! The Lord Jesus 
used nearly similar language, saying, "That which is 
highly esteemed amongst men is an abomination in the 
sight of the Lord." (Luke 16:15.) Judge not by outward 
appearance. Saul in outward appearance was 
handsome, and head and shoulders above the majority 
of the people of Israel. The Lord permitted him to be 
chosen king, and gave an exhibition of the fact that outward 

R4210 : page 221 

appearance is not always a sure token of the attitude 
of heart pleasing to him. So seven of Jesse's sons 
passed before Samuel, and the Lord rejected all of them; 
there was some unfitness at the core, at the heart, which 
was not apparent to the outward observer, who like 
Samuel, would have concluded otherwise. Then Samuel, 
evidently surprised, said to Jesse, "Are here all thy 
children?" and he replied, "There remainest yet the 
youngest, and, behold, he keepeth the sheep." And 
Samuel said, "Send and fetch him, for we will not sit 
down until he come hither, and he sent and brought 
him." The youngest son was David, and we read, "He 
was ruddy, and withal of beautiful countenance and 
goodly to look upon." The description is thought to 
indicate that David was fair-complexioned and of 
auburn hair. It is supposed that he was in his eighteenth 
year. 

"ANOINT HIM, FOR THIS IS HE" 

The Lord said to Samuel, "Arise, and anoint him, 
for this is he. Then Samuel took the horn of oil and 
anointed him in the midst of his brethren." The 
question properly arises here, Why did the Lord choose 
David instead of one of his brethren or some other man 
of the nation? That there was a definite, positive 
choice cannot be questioned; and a similar choice on 
the Lord's part in other cases is scripturally noted. 
For instance, the Apostle Paul calls attention to the 
fact that Isaac and not Ishmael was the promised seed 
of Abraham, and that Jacob and not Esau was chosen 
amongst his seed, and that this choice was indicated 
before their birth, saying, "The elder shall serve the 
younger." We are bound to suppose from all the information 
granted us, that the Lord in times past, while 
recognizing the free will, the free agency of every human 
being, has nevertheless, to some extent, interposed in 
some instances to grant prenatal influences helpful to 



the development of such characters as he desired for 
his service. This same thought is brought to our attention 
in connection with the birth of John the Baptist, 
and the declaration of a prenatal influence in that case. 
Similarly the Apostle Paul calls attention to the fact 
that the Lord chose him from his mother's womb. To 
our understanding this signifies that divine wisdom and 
power supervised the influences, which more or less 
controlled his mother's mind during the period of gestation, 
and which impressed a certain amount of character 
upon the babe. This, as we have already pointed 
out in (DAWN-STUDIES, Vol. VI.), should stimulate 
parents to give to their offspring the very best possible 
mental endowment— as respects justice, wisdom, love, 
and all the finer qualities of disposition. Were all 
children so born, while it would never entirely take 
away the taint of sin and imperfection, never produce 
perfect children, because none can bring a clean thing 
out of an unclean, it would, however, mean a great 
blessing for the human family, a great uplift. 

Nothing in connection with what we have suggested 
implies an interference with the human will, but merely 
the preparation of a better-balanced and constituted 
mind. It was still possible for St. Paul to repel all the 
grace of God— not only that received through prenatal 
influences, but also that received through the varying 
experiences by which the Lord subsequently led him 
and under which the Apostle, by faith and consecration, 
was accepted as a prospective joint-heir with Christ in 
the Kingdom. As the Apostle himself declared, it 
would still have been possible, after preaching the 
Gospel to others, for himself to become a castaway. 
(I Cor. 9:27.) And so it is with us. The preparation, 
the information and the call and the subsequent supervision 
of our best interests, all leave our wills inviolate 
and permit us, if we choose, to reject the Lord's favor. 

R4210 : page 222 

In no other manner than the one we have suggested 
could we account for some of the wonderful characters 
of Scriptural history— Abraham, Moses, David, Elijah, 
John the Baptist, the Apostle Paul and others. We 
may not even surely know that the Lord's providence 
did not affect Pharaoh by some prenatal influence, which 
tended to make him stubborn to the last degree, in 
harmony with the Scriptures which say, "For this very 
purpose have I raised thee up [to the throne] that I 
might show forth my power in thee"— in a manner that 
could not be shown forth had a man of different natural 
disposition been in the throne. 

Subsequent history shows that David's brethren 
did not understand that he had been anointed to be 
king. Samuel may have let Jesse into the secret, and 
may subsequently have whispered something to David 
on the subject; but most evidently the matter was kept 



a profound secret, with the understanding that David's 
anointing would give him no authority of kingship until 
in the providence of God the authority should be fully 
taken from the hands of Saul and put into David's 
hands; and with the full understanding also that David 
himself was to have nothing whatever to do with grasping 
the power. His anointing was a prophecy respecting 
his future, and also a type of the anointing of the 
Christ. David's brethren may have thought of the 
anointing as signifying that their brother was designed 
eventually to become a prophet of the Lord instead of 
Samuel at the death of the latter; or they may have understood 
it as meaning some special blessing in connection 
with the sanctifying and sacrificing in which 
they themselves had participated. Certain it is that 
the youthful David conducted himself most modestly, 
most becomingly, and that the experiences through 
which he subsequently passed in the Lord's providence 
in following his vocation were very helpful to him, 
fitting and preparing him for the office of king, which 
came to him in due time. 

THE CHURCH, THE ANTITYPICAL DAVID 

The name David signifies beloved, and as such 
well represents the Christ, Head and Body. Of him it 
is written, "God, even thy God, hath anointed thee with 
the oil of gladness above thy fellows." (Psa. 45:7.) 
When in due time God sent forth his Son to be the 
world's Redeemer and anointed King and Restorer, 
divine Providence ordered that he should be born in 
the same city of David— Bethlehem. He also had a 
humble position amongst all those of his time; his 
brethren of the Jewish nation considered him one of 
the least fitted to be the Deliverer— "They hid, as it 
were, their faces from him"— in shame. He was anointed 
of the Lord, however, to be the Deliverer; not only 
were the angels of heaven passed by, but also the great 
ones of earth. Neither did he begin his reign immediately 
after being anointed with the Spirit; rather he 
needed first various testings, trials, provings such as 
came to the typical David. And the same principle 
obtains in respect to all of the Church, his Body. Little 
known, not highly esteemed amongst men, not many 
of them great, wise or noble, the Lord is anointing all 
of the David class, the beloved class in the present 
time. They do not at once begin to reign, but do at 
once enter a school of experience designed by their 
Father to be helpful in preparing them for the duties 
and privileges of the Kingdom when the due time shall 
come for the Kingdom to be given to them. The world 
knoweth us not, saith the Apostle. Very true. They 
know not that we are anointed. Indeed, even many of 
our brethren who perceived the anointing know not 
what it signifies; they perceive not that we are anointed 
to be kings and joint-heirs with our Redeemer. However, 



the matter is communicated to us; as the Apostle 
declares, "Ye have an unction from the Holy One, and 
ye all know it." (I John 2:20.) Under this unction, 
this blessing of the Lord, we are to develop more and 
more in preparation for our position of royalty, to 
which we shall attain in our change in the First 
Resurrection. 

"FROM THAT DAY FORWARD" 

"And the Spirit of the Lord came mightily upon 
David from that day forward." We are not to understand 
from this that David was begotten of the holy 
Spirit, as are the members of the Body of Christ, the 
Church, during this Gospel Age. No; ours is a special 
and peculiar blessing from the Lord, the like of which 
never came before Pentecost, except in the one case of 
our Lord's baptism of the Spirit at Jordan, when he 
received the holy Spirit without measure. The Spirit, 
influence, power of God upon David was similar in its 
operation and effect to what it had been upon Samuel 
and the prophets. Undoubtedly it gave him wisdom, 
strength and courage and enabled him wisely to appropriate 
to himself the various opportunities for the 
learning of the imperfect lessons in connection with 
his daily experiences, all of which were a schooling or 
preparation for his future work as king. 

Similarly, only in a higher and fuller sense and 
degree, the Lord's people of this Gospel Age, from the 
time they come under the influence of the holy Spirit 
of begetting, which was poured upon the Church at 
Pentecost— from that time onward they should be exercised 
by this Spirit of the Lord, and, as the Apostle 
expresses it, should be filled with the Spirit, "filled 
with all the fulness of God," filled more and more with 
a knowledge of God's will and with the spirit of obedience 
thereto. This feeling increases as we receive of 
the holy Spirit, and as it abounds and is shed forth in 
our hearts we are enlightened; our appreciation of God, 
our appreciation of our own privileges, our appreciation 
of his calling us to the high position of joint-heirship 
with Jesus and our appreciation of the necessity 
for learning the lessons which would fit us for that 
glorious position, is increased. 

Apropos of God's choice of David rather than any 
of his brethren the Sunday School Times remarks:— 

"Never forget for a moment that no face can be so 
beautiful, or any form so divine, but that a bad heart 
or a wicked heart may make it hateful or worthless. 
In such beauty there is always a cloud, a film, a veil. 

R4211 : page 222 

Through all its masks and shams the gaze of God goes 
like an X-ray, straight to the heart and soul. 
"It often happens that men neglect the very person, 



young or poor or obscure, whom God has chosen for 
highest honor; but whoever men may choose to crown, 
the real feast cannot proceed till God's candidate has 
been discovered. Sometimes our stupid wits never 
make the discovery, and the coronation of God's saints 
and heroes is reserved for the day of surprises in 
heaven. Let us try to honor men as God honors them!" 
—Dr. Bushnell. 



R4211 : page 223 

AN INTERESTING LETTER 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

You have clearly shown that Elijah was a type of 
the Church in the flesh, and that his 3-1/2 years correspond 
to the 1260 years of Papacy's power (a day for a 
year), during which the Church was in the wilderness 
condition, fed as it were by ravens. (Vol. II., p. 256.) 
Now I want to ask whether the subsequent experiences 
of Elijah do not typify some of the experiences of the 
Church from 1799 to 1914, as follows: 

(1) The rain (I Kings 18:41-45)— spread of Truth in 
publication and dissemination of Bibles and in the organization 
of Bible Societies. 

(2) Slaying of false prophets— overthrow of false 
doctrines, etc.— I Kings 18:40. 

(3) Subsequent flight to save his life— the complete 
separation of a class from the power of Jezebel in the 
interest of the new life, 1829 to 1846, corresponding to 
the Cleansed Sanctuary Class.— I Kings 19:1-4; Vol. 
III., pp. 83-119. 

(4) Elijah's first awakening (19:5) corresponds to 
the spiritual awakening of this class, known as the 
"Miller Movement." Special food was now due, viz.: 
the Ransom, the return of our Lord, and an understanding 
of prophecy. 

(5) "Fell asleep." "The Bridegroom tarried, and 
they all slumbered and slept." (Matt. 25:5.) See Vol. 
III., pp. 92-93. This covers the period of 1844 to 1874. 

(6) Second awakening, 1874 to 1914, during which 
time all the Elijah class shall be reached (touched) by 
the angel (messenger) whom the Lord has been using 
since 1874. This angel is the same one referred to in 
Rev. 3:14 and Luke 12:42. The food offered is Present 
Truth. This angel mentions a definite object before us, 
"a journey," and so the Lord's servant has clearly 
shown us the hope of our calling— that is, to be joint-heirs 
with our Lord. Never since the apostles fell 

asleep has the hope of the Church been as clearly shown 
as in the DAWNS and TOWERS prepared by this angel. 
Elijah was told that the "journey is too great for thee" 
unless strengthened by partaking of the food. So we 
are assured that only those who now put on the "whole 



armor of God" can (or rather, shall) "stand" and make 
the journey to the heavenly phase of the Kingdom— "the 
mount of God"— Horeb. This was the same mount 

R4212 : page 223 

from which the Law Covenant was delivered at the hands 
of Moses. Paul shows that this represents the heavenly 
Kingdom. (Heb. 12:18-25.) The parable of the 
Virgins shows that only those who appreciate Present 
Truth enter into the marriage since 1874. They must 
appreciate the "Presence." 

The forty days' and forty nights' journey (a day 
for a year, as in previous type of 1260 days) gives the 
length of the journey (time) from the beginning of the 
awakening by "that servant," angel, in 1874, until the 
last member of the Elijah class shall have reached the 
Kingdom (Mount of God, Heb. 12:22) "in [by] the 
strength of that food"— Present Truth. Then we shall 
meet our Lord and see him as he is. 

The subsequent manifestation of power shows, as you 
have told us, the three features of the overthrow of the 
present kingdoms of this world: (a) The winds (wars) 
now held back, show that the overthrow of present institutions 
will not take place until after the Elijah class 
has reached the Mount of God— actually changed. 
However, the elements are being prepared for the conflict 
before them, (b) Earthquake (social disorder) 
next follows, (c) Anarchy is the fire that completes 
the work. God was not in them in the sense that they 
were not of divine institution; nevertheless they were 
overruled to accomplish his purposes, (d) "The still 
small voice" (God's Word) which now speaks only to 
the listening ear (he that hath an "ear to hear") will 
then speak with authority in the Kingdom, saying, 
"Peace, be still." Verse 13— It seems that the type here 
changes to teach lessons regarding our present privileges 
and responsibilities. 

Yours in the One Hope, C. E. FOWLER. 



R4212 : page 223 

OUR LORD'S LAST DAYS 



CONNECTED BIBLE READING WHICH ACCOUNTS FOR EVERY 
DAY AND NIGHT OF THE LORD'S LIFE, FROM THE 
9TH TO THE 16TH OF NISAN, PROVING THAT 
HIS DEATH TOOK PLACE ON THE 
AFTERNOON OF FRIDAY, THE 14TH. 

BY C. J. WOODWORTH 

9th Nisan, 6.00 P.M. Saturday to 6.00 P.M. Sunday: 
John 12:1. "Then Jesus, six days before the passover, 



came to Bethany." This accounts for Sunday afternoon. 
10th Nisan, 6.00 P.M. Sunday to 6.00 P.M. Monday: 

John 12:2-11. Mary breaks the alabaster box. Sunday 

night. 

John 12:12-15 and Mark 11:1-10. Triumphal entry. 

Monday forenoon. 
11th Nisan, 6.00 P.M. Monday to 6.00 P.M. Tuesday: 

Mark 11:11. Lodged at Bethany. Monday night. 

Mark 11:12-18. Cursing the fig tree; cleansing the temple. 

Tuesday forenoon. 
12th Nisan, 6.00 P.M. Tuesday to 6.00 P.M. Wednesday: 

Mark 11:19. Lodged out of the city. Tuesday night. 

Mark 11:20; 13:37. Many parables delivered. Wednesday 

forenoon and afternoon. 
13th Nisan, 6.00 P.M. Wednesday to 6.00 P.M. Thursday: 

Mark 14:1-11. One of the two days before the passover, 

beginning on Wednesday night. 

Mark 14:12-16. The apostles make arrangements for the 

last supper, Thursday, daytime. 
14th Nisan, 6.00 P.M. Thursday to 6.00 P.M. Friday, the day 

before the Jewish passover, called the "Day of 

Preparation": 

Mark 14:17-65. Last supper, Gethsemane, trial before 

high priest, Thursday night. 

Mark 15: 1-34 and Luke 23:44-52. Trial before Pilate, 

crucifixion, body laid in tomb, Friday forenoon and 

afternoon. 

Luke 23:54. Here it is distinctly stated that the death 

of Christ took place on the "Day of Preparation." 

This day is reckoned as the first day and night which 

Christ spent in the tomb. 
15th Nisan, 6.00 P.M. Friday to 6.00 P.M. Saturday, Jewish 

passover Sabbath: 

Luke 23:54 and John 19:42. The Jewish Sabbath begins 

just as the "Day of Preparation" closes, at 6.00 P.M. 

Friday night. 

Matt. 27:62. The chief priests ask Pilate to place a 

guard about the tomb, Saturday morning. 

This day is reckoned as the second day and night which 

Christ spent in the tomb. 
16th Nisan, 6.00 P.M. Saturday to 6.00 P.M. Sunday, First 

day of week: 

Matt. 27:66. Watch set over tomb throughout Saturday 

night. 

Matt. 28:1, Mark 16:1,2, Luke 24:1 and John 20:1. The 

women come to the tomb early on Sunday morning and 

find the Lord is risen. 

This day is reckoned as the third day and night which 

Christ spent in the tomb. 



page 225 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXIX. AUGUST 1 No. 15 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

"If God Be for Us, Who Can Be Against Us?" 227 

"The Light of the World is Jesus" 229 

Victory Not to the Strong 232 

Israel and Israel's God Defied 232 

The Christian's Adversary and Conflict 233 

"Works of the Flesh and of the Devil" 233 

"We Wrestle Not With Flesh and Blood" 233 

"The Tongue is a Fire and a World of Iniquity"234 
The Spirit of Envy and Murder 235 

An Evil Spirit from the Lord 235 

Lessons for Spiritual Israelites 236 

"Jealousy is Cruel as the Grave" 236 

"The Lord God is a Sun and Shield" 237 

Letters Respecting the Vow 238 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 239 

page 226 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each MAY stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 



SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



PRIEST AND TABERNACLE ILLUSTRATIONS 



These are very nice, lithographed in colors. One shows 
a Jewish priest in his ordinary dress, a Levite in his, and a 
high priest in his robes of "glory and beauty." The other 
shows the Tabernacle of the Wilderness— its Court, Holy and 
Most Holy; the vails, altars, laver, candlestick, shewbread 
table, ark of the Covenant; all in their proper order as described 
in the Scriptures. They are glossy-finished to keep 
clean for years, and have metal binders and hangers. Confident 
that our readers would all desire these we ordered 15,000 
each, thus securing a very cheap price. We supply them at 
cost, postage included; 30 cents for both or four of each for 
one dollar. Order at once. 

INDIA PAPER DAWN-STUDIES 



We supply these now in all six volumes, but volume five 
has run ahead of the others in sales and is exhausted. It will 
take several months to get the India paper for a new lot. 
Prices of Vols. I., II., III., 75 cents each; Vols. IV., V., VI., 85 
cents each, postpaid. 

INDIA VOL. I., KARATOL 



It will be remembered that we had a special edition of 
Vol. I. DAWN-STUDIES, in India Paper, not quite up to the 
best standard, bound in imitation leather at low price. These 
were taken quickly. Now we have a new lot, Vol. I. only, with 
Tabernacle Shadows bound in, at 35 cents each, postpaid. 



R4212 : page 227 

"IF GOD BE FOR US WHO CAN BE AGAINST US?" 

-ROMANS 8:31.- 

WHAT wonderful thoughts these words arouse! 

God for us! God on our side! It means 

almighty wisdom enlisted in our interest, 

almighty power to be exerted on our behalf, almighty 

love and infinite goodness watching over us and caring 

for and helping us. What immeasurable lengths and 

breadths, heights and depths of infinite grace are here 



so forcibly and so concisely set before the mind! 

But we notice a limitation: The Apostle's suggestion 
is not that God is for every one, but for "us." 
To whom does he refer by this word "us?" Is it possible 
that divine love and energy, wisdom and power 
are not being exerted on behalf of the world, but only 
on behalf of the Church in this present time? 

Christian people are divided in their opinion respecting 
this matter. Our Methodist friends and generally 
Universalists and Unitarians hold that God is 
not for us, the Church, specially; but that he is for 
everybody, everywhere. They hold that he is today 
trying to save everybody, and that he has been so trying 
for the past six thousand years. They must of 
course admit, when making such a claim, that thus far 
the divine plan has failed of success for six thousand 
years; because men are not saved and only a small 
proportion have yet had the necessary opportunity for 
salvation; namely, a knowledge of the only "name 
given under heaven or amongst men whereby we must 
be saved." They must realize that the logic of facts is 
against their contention and against all hope that by 
present methods and arrangements the world would 
ever be converted; for they are aware that while it is 
claimed in a general way that nearly a million heathen 
have been converted during the last century (and it is 
safe to say that a very large proportion of these are 
not so thoroughly converted as might be desired; that 
comparatively few of them could be termed "saints"), 
yet, during the same time it is estimated that the numbers 
of the heathen have increased, in a natural way, 
to the enormous sum of two hundred millions. How 
long would it require at this rate, at this ration of conversion, 
one million converts to two hundred million 
births, to convert the world? All can see that such 
hopes are quite illogical. Nevertheless, we can sympathize 
with and greatly appreciate the warmth of 
heart on the part of many of these whose theology we 
now criticise. Many of them— at least the founders 
of the systems— were forced to such conclusions, 
namely, that God is doing the best he can do for the 
world, in opposition to the doctrine of election and 
foreordination, as it has heretofore been 
misunderstood. 

On the other hand, the great majority of Christian 
people, namely, the various branches of the Presbyterian, 
the Episcopal, the Lutheran, the Baptist and the 
Congregationalist churches deny the theory that God 
has been trying to save the world for the past six 
thousand years and has failed of his purpose. They 
hold, to the contrary, that his purpose has been to select 
or elect out of the world a Church and that this 
work of election has been progressing and will finally 
be consummated; and that thus God's Word through 
the prophets shall be fulfilled, "My Word that goeth 
forth out of my mouth shall not return unto me void; 



but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall 

prosper in the thing whereto I sent it." (Isa. 55:11.) 

They hold that, since all of God's purposes shall be 

accomplished, it cannot have been his purpose either 

to convert the world or to bring every creature 

to a knowledge of Christ during the past six 

thousand years; because neither thing has been accomplished, 

therefore neither thing could have been 

purposed. 

We were about to say that we agree with the last 
mentioned numerous families of Christians in reference 
to the doctrine of election; but we cannot make 
so broad a statement. While we find in the Scriptures 
the declaration that an election is in progress during 
this age especially, and to some extent during all the 
past, yet it is not the kind of election to which such 
large numbers of our Christian friends hold. Their 
view of divine foreordination implies not only the election 
of a Church, but the damnation of all who are 
not elected; and here we must differ; for we find nothing 
of this kind in the Word of the Lord. We find 
nothing in it to imply that all the non-elect are hopelessly 
lost; but, on the contrary, the teaching that the 
election of the Church (Christ the Head, the Church 

R4213 : page 228 

his Body), during this Gospel Age, is for the very purpose 
that they, as the "Seed of Abraham," may fulfil 
the divine plan as expressed in God's promise to 
Abraham, namely, that in this Seed (Christ and the 
Church— Gal. 3:16,29), as the heirs of the divine 
promise and benevolent intention, "all the families of 
the earth shall be blessed." Not only is the character 
of the Scriptural election a very different one from 
that which has generally been held by Calvinism, but 
the object of the election is as widely as possible different 
from their conception. We would use the same 
language as our Calvinistic friends in speaking of the 
"us" of our text, in that we would say that it refers to 
the elect Church, but we deny that the damnation of 
all others is either stated or implied. 

In the preceding verses (29,30) the Apostle explains 
the character and methods of the divine selection 
of the elect Church, and we cannot do better than 
notice its details, because so much depends upon this 
point. If we can find in the Apostle's description good 
and sufficient evidence to assure us that we are of 
this elect Church then we shall have great cause for 
thankfulness, confidence and joy, in realizing that God 
with all his almighty power and wisdom and love is 
enlisted on our behalf. A great difficulty with many 
seems to be, not that they doubt that there is such an 
election in progress, nor that they doubt that God is 
for some, but that they doubt that they belong to that 
elect class— doubt, therefore, that they are of the "us," 



and that God is for them; and that he is causing all 
things to work together for good to them. 

By reason of their natural constitution, some of 
the humble-minded of the Lord's people lack the confidence 
which they should have, while in some instances 
others who have such confidence have no real basis for 
it. Knowledge, therefore, clear knowledge of the 
Apostle's argument, is essential to proper faith respecting 
this subject, and proper confidence in God's care 
over those who have been adopted into his family and 
are seeking to make their calling and election sure. 
Our faith is made necessarily dependent to a large extent 
upon our understanding of the divine revelation 
on these subjects. Let us, therefore, critically examine 
the Apostle's statement with reference to the various 
steps in this election, and note our own connection with 
the same, step by step, that we may know to a certainty 
whether or not we are of the "us" class which he mentions, 
on behalf of whom the Lord's power and wisdom 
are and will be exerted. 

The Apostle begins by asserting divine foreknowledge; 
a divine attribute which will not be questioned 
by any Christian. God not only foreknew the sin that 
would enter into the world through the liberty given 
to father Adam and mother Eve, but he also foresaw 
the fall that would take place as the result of his own 
sentence, and the mental, moral and physical degradation 
which have resulted. Moreover, he foreknew 
that in due time he would send his "Only Begotten 
Son," our Lord, to ransom all from sin and its penalty, 
so that ultimately he might be the Deliverer of all who 
desire to return to harmony with their Creator. He 
not only foreknew the humiliation of our Lord, his 
First Begotten Son, from his condition of glory and 
spiritual nature to the lower conditions of human nature, 
but he foreknew his trials, and his faithfulness 
through them, even unto death, even the death of the 
cross. In all this he foresaw our redemption sacrifice. 
He foresaw also the glory which he designed to bestow 
upon our Lord Jesus following his obedience, as expressed 
by the Apostle Paul, saying, "Him hath God 
highly exalted, and given him a name [title, honor, 
etc.] above every name." 

But our heavenly Father foreknew and foreordained 
still more than all this— the selection of the Church 
to be the "Body" of Christ, the "Bride" of Christ, 
his associate, not only in the sufferings and trials of 
the present life, but also in the subsequent glory and 
great work of "blessing all the families of the earth." 
This is distinctly stated by the same Apostle in his letter 
to the Ephesians (1:4), where he declares that 
"God hath chosen us in him [Christ] before the 
foundation of the world." The same foreordination is 
distinctly stated by the Apostle Peter, who writes to 
consecrated believers, addressing them, "elect according 
to the foreknowledge of God, the Father, through 



sanctification of the spirit," etc.— I Pet. 1:2. 

But the predestination of this verse (Rom. 8:29) 
is not at all what has generally been understood: it is 
not said that God predestinates that some should go to 
heaven and others to eternal torment. That is where 
false human reasoning has corrupted the testimony of 
God's Word and made it of none effect, or worse— of 
bad effect. The Apostle's statement is very clear, that 
God predestinated that all who shall be of this elect, 
foreknown and foreordained Church in glory must 
first be "conformed to the image of his Son"; or as 
the literal reading would give it, "copies of his Son." 
How reasonable this predestination! How unreasonable 
the false view! God is calling a number of sons to 
"glory, honor and immortality," and has made Christ 
Jesus the Only Begotten, faithful in every trial, the 
Head or Captain of this foreordained company, whom 
he has since been calling, testing and preparing for the 
foreordained glory. And as it was but a reasonable 
thing that God should determine that if our Lord 
Jesus would be faithful he should receive the highest 
exaltation, so it was equally right and proper that the 
divine will should be forcibly asserted and that he 
should predestinate that none could be of that glorified 
"Body of Christ," except as they would become imitators 
of Jesus, who is the firstborn among these his 
"brethren." 

Having thus stated the matter concisely, the Apostle 
proceeds to apply it to the Church individually, 
and to show the steps which God is taking during this 
Gospel Age for the purpose of finding amongst men 
this class which he has foreordained shall be found. 
The Apostle gives the particulars in the following 
verse (30); and although it is simply stated, it has very 
generally been stumbled over, not only by believers in 
general, but also by the theologians, because of two things. 

(1) The last word of this verse translated "glorified" 
should be translated "honored"; and should be understood 
to refer to the honor conferred upon all who, 

during this age, are brought to any knowledge of 
Christ— the true light. This honor went first to the 
Jews, and selected a "remnant"; but when that nation 
proved unworthy of this "honor" it was turned to the 
Gentiles, to gather out of them a peculiar people, a 
holy nation, to bear the name of Christ. (Acts 15:14.) 

(2) The reader naturally expects the Apostle to begin 
with present conditions and trace them up to the grand 

R4213 : page 229 

result— the glorified Church— while on the contrary 
the Apostle very properly begins at the other end, and 
traces the results downward. He does not begin, as 
is generally supposed, by saying, God honored you 
with the knowledge of the Gospel of Christ, and when 
you believed he justified you, and after you were justified 



he called you, and if you are faithful to your 
calling he will by and by exalt you to the condition 
which he foreknew. Indeed, it would not be possible 
to state the matter truthfully from that side; because 
many are honored with a knowledge of the Gospel of 
Christ who are never justified (because they do not 
accept the knowledge, do not accept Christ), and of 
those who do accept Christ and who are thus justified, 
it would not be true to say that they will all be sanctified; 
nor would it be correct to say that all who once 
are sanctified will reach the condition of glory; for 
"many are called but few chosen": few "make their 
calling and election sure." 

But the Apostle argues the matter from the only 
proper and logical standpoint: having stated that God 
has foreknown or fore-intended the election of the 
Church, he steps forward to the time when God's purpose 
and intention will have been completed, accomplished 
—the time when the election will be finished 
and the Church accepted to glory. From that future 
standpoint he indicates the various steps which led up 
to it, saying, All those of the foreknown ones, glorified, 
will previously have been called; because it is a 
matter of grace, and no man taketh this honor unto 
himself, but "he that is called of God"— as the "Head 
of the Body," so each member of the Body. And, says 
the Apostle, every one thus "called" will previously 
have been "justified"; because God calls no enemies, 
no unreconciled sinners, to this high position. It was 
for this reason that Christ died, that through faith in 
his blood repentant believers might be "justified" and 
might be thus prepared to be "called." It is thus evident 
that the high calling to this glorious position of 
joint-heirship with Christ is a very different thing, indeed, 
from the calling of sinners to repentance. Sinners 
are called to repentance anywhere and everywhere 
and at any time. And when they repent, the Lord 
engages that in due time he will point them to 

"The fountain filled with blood, 

Drawn from Immanuel's veins; 
Where sinners, plunged beneath that flood, 

Lose all their guilty stains." 

When they have lost their guilty stains, through 
repentance and faith in the Redeemer, they reach 
the condition of justification, and are ready to 
be "called" to sonship and joint-heirship. But the 
Apostle is still going backward in the argument and, 

R4214 : page 229 

having told that the foreordained class would all be 
"called," and that they would all previously have been 
"justified," he declares that the justified ones would all 
previously have been favored or "honored" (not glorified): 



honored or favored with a knowledge of the 
truth, a knowledge of the gospel. 

Perhaps only a comparatively small number of 
Christians have realized what a great honor was conferred 
upon them in the first knowledge brought to 
them of the "Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of 
the world." This "honor" has been so widely dispensed 
that many forget that it is a special honor, a special 
favor, just as they forget to recognize as special blessings 
the sunshine and the rain. But this "honor" is 
not yet as common as some other of God's blessings. 
"He maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the 
good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust," 
throughout the whole world: but not so the gospel 
sunlight and the spiritual showers. These blessings 
have been general only in certain quarters. 

"THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD IS JESUS" 

When Christ as the "Great Light" arose in Palestine, 
and when on the day of Pentecost the Church 
was illuminated by him, as a light for the world, that 
light was not sent southward into the darkness of 
Africa: the Africans were not "honored" with having 
the gospel of Christ. Neither was it sent eastward 
through India to its hundreds of millions: India was 
not "honored" with the gospel of Christ. Neither was 
it sent still farther East to the hundreds of millions of 
China: China was not "honored" with the gospel of 
Christ. But it was sent northward and westward 
through Europe and America. These lands were 
"honored," these peoples "have seen a great light," 
and with that light have received a great blessing. But 
how comparatively few have really seen this light, even 
when it shone around them on every hand. Alas ! 
like the partly cured blind man of old they see a brightness 
and can discern something, but see nothing clearly. 
The Apostle explains their case, saying, "The god 
of this world hath blinded the eyes of them that believe 
not."-2 Cor. 4:4. 

Having followed the Apostle's reasoning, we are 
enabled to see clearly each step of divine providence 
taken in connection with the divine purpose and 
foreordination. 

(1) We see that first of all, to a certain extent, 
God was "for" us, for the people of Europe and North 
America: he was for them or favorable to them to the 
extent of "honoring" or favoring them with the light 
of grace "as it shines in the face of Jesus Christ, our 
Lord." 

(2) In a still fuller sense God was "for" or 
favorable towards those who accept the light of truth, 
those who through repentance and faith in the precious 
blood are "justified" from sin through his grace. 

(3) He was yet more "for" these justified ones, 
to the extent that he "called" them to suffer with 



Christ during this Gospel Age, and by and by to share 
his glory. 

(4) In a still fuller sense he is "for" all those 
who accept the call and who are seeking to "make 
their calling and election sure." God is in an especial 
sense "for" all these who are so running as to obtain 
the prize which he offers. "They shall be mine, 
in that day when I make up my jewels." 

It is to this called and faithfully running class 
that the Apostle speaks as "us." He and those whom 
he addressed ("called to be saints"— Rom. 1:6,7) had 
first been "honored" with the light; second, they, by 
repentance and faith, had accepted it and been justified; 
third, they had been "called"; fourth, they had 
accepted the calling and given themselves wholly to the 
Lord. And with the Apostle and the early Church 
all who to-day can recognize themselves in this same 
position, as having taken these same steps, may properly 
apply to themselves the Apostle's words and say, 
God is for us; who can be against us! 

All the "saints" throughout the whole world, who 

R4214 : page 230 

have taken the afore-mentioned steps, are probably altogether 

not a great multitude; but rather, comparatively, 

a "little flock": yet each one of these may say 

to himself, and realize to the very bottom of his heart 

as applicable to himself, these wonderful words— God 

is for us. He may endeavor to grasp the significance 

of these words, but he will surely fail to get all of 

their wonderful meaning. It is not possible for the 

human mind to grasp the riches of divine grace and 

love and power. We cannot comprehend them, we 

can merely apprehend them. If God be for us, with 

all of his infinite wisdom and power, it implies also 

that Christ is for us, for he is one with the Father; 

it implies also that all the angels, Cherubim and Seraphim, 

and all the heavenly powers of our knowledge 

and beyond our knowledge are for us— all enlisted 

upon our side, to do us good, to help us, to succor us 

in time of need, to uphold us in time of temptation, to 

strengthen us to do the Father's will. "All things are 

yours, for ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's." 

The view granted to Elisha's servant, of countless 
horses, chariots and horsemen of fire or like fire, was 
of course merely a vision, nevertheless it represented 
a truth— that divine power is round about God's people 
on every hand for their protection and their deliverance. 
"The angel of the Lord encampeth round 
about them that are his and delivereth them." "Are 
they [the angels] not all ministering spirits sent forth 
to minister for those who shall be heirs of salvation?" 
(Heb. 1:14.) Our Lord expressed the same thing, 
saying of his "faithful followers": "Their angels [messengers] 
do always behold the face of my Father." It 



matters not whether we shall understand this to signify 
that spirit beings continually surround those called 
to be the "elect" of the Lord, to guide and shape their 
interests for their highest good, or whether we shall 
understand it to be merely a figure of speech, signifying 
that divine power surrounds God's people; for the 
results would be the same; it matters not by which 
means the Lord would deliver them from the evil and 
help them in trial and adversity. The fact that God 
is "for us," and that he is making all things work 
together for good to those who love him, is the central 
thought, the essence, the strength of this message to 
"us." 

How wonderful is all this! Let us cast our minds 
for a moment over the world with its fifteen hundred 
millions of inhabitants. Let us remember that they 
are all under the "curse," under the sentence of divine 
displeasure, except the few who have heard of the redemption 
—of the Way, the Truth and the Life— and 
who have by faith and obedience "escaped the condemnation 
that is on the world" and come back into harmony 
with the Father and into fellowship with his 
Son. Let us imagine, if we can, this "little flock" of 
the "honored," "justified" and "called," heaven-led 
and heaven-blessed, scattered here and there amongst 
the fifteen hundred million fellow-creatures. Oh, what 
joy, what comfort, what peace, what strength the 
thought must bring to each one who can realize that 
he has taken all of these steps thus far, and that he is 
still pressing "toward the mark for the prize of 
the high calling!" This joy is not dimmed, but 
is greatly enhanced, by the thought that soon, 
in conformity with God's gracious foreordination all 
the "elect" may have a share in the great work of 
blessing with the knowledge of the True Light the 
masses who are yet in darkness, "without God and 
having no hope" in him. For although a redemption 
has been provided for all, the knowledge of God's 
grace has not yet reached any but the favored or 
"honored" minority. 

As the Apostle declares in this very same chapter 
(Rom. 8:22), it is indeed a groaning creation; it has 
been groaning ever since the sentence of divine wrath 
was expressed in Eden, and it must continue to groan 
until the great Deliverer shall have established his 
Kingdom, and shall have rolled back the "curse" of 
death and depravity. Oh, what riches of grace have 
come to "us" through Jesus Christ, our Lord! And 
yet, as the Apostle says, although we have all this 
blessing and favor, we have also with it certain trials, 
difficulties and painful experiences, which the Father 
sees necessary for our development in order that we 
may come up to the terms of his predestination, "copies 
of his Son." And in consequence of this, as the Apostle 
declares, "We ourselves also [as well as the whole 
creation] groan within ourselves [while suffering with 



the world, we suppress the groan, "We lay our burdens 
at his feet and bear a song away"] waiting for 
the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our Body"— 
"the Body of Christ," the elect Church. 

The word if in this text does not signify a doubt 
or question on the subject; but quite the reverse. The 
Apostle has given the evidence that God is for "us," 
in the preceding verses, and now uses if as though he 
said, If I have proved that God is for us, then who 
can be against us! 

"WHO CAN BE AGAINST US?" 

Who can be against us, if God is for us? The 
Apostle does not mean that, having God on our side, 
none would dare to oppose our way. Quite to the 
contrary, we have bitter enemies and relentless foes. 
Who are against us? Their name is legion. The 
devil is against us; as the Apostle declares, "Your Adversary, 
the devil, goeth about as a roaring lion, seeking 
whom he may devour." The Apostle Paul assures 
us that we must contend against "the wiles of the 
devil." St. James declares that we must "resist the 
devil." The Apostle informs us that Satan is cunning 
and deceitful, as well as desperately wicked; and says 
that therefore we must have a battle, and as good 
soldiers we must have on the armor of God and use 
it faithfully. Thus we are to resist the devil, and he 
will flee from us. We are to "quench all the fiery 

R4215 : page 230 

darts of the Adversary" in open attacks, and yet to remember 
that we battle not with flesh and blood, but 
with a demon host; with "principalities and powers and 
spiritual wickedness in high places."— Eph. 6:12. 

Nor is this all: we have a great enemy in ourselves, 
the "carnal mind," "the old man," reckoned 
dead, which must be kept in subjection. Perhaps the 
greatest battles and the greatest trials which we are 
called upon as "new creatures" to endure, are these 
battles of the new self, the mind of Christ, against the 
old fallen self, the mind of the flesh. 

Furthermore: we have the "world" as "children 
of darkness" arrayed in opposition to us. They love 
the darkness and consequently hate not only the light, 
but also the "children of the light." This our Master 
declared, saying, "Ye are not of the world, for I have 
chosen you out of the world." "Marvel not if the 

R4215 : page 231 

world hate you; you know it hated me before it hated 
you." "If ye were of the world, the world would love 
its own; but now ye are not of the world, therefore 
the world hateth you." And the world's hatred is not 



conducted along honorable lines of warfare. It would 
be ashamed to declare that it loved darkness, and 
ashamed to declare that it hated us because of the 
light. Its policy, rather, guided by the great Adversary, 
is to "put light for darkness and darkness for 
light"; to misrepresent our best efforts as evil and 
selfish, and to misrepresent its own selfish efforts as 
honorable and good. "Marvel not, if the world 
hate you." "The darkness hateth the light." 

Nor are these great adversaries the only ones to 
oppose us: we must expect to endure from still another 
quarter. As our Lord declared, "A man's foes shall 
be they of his own household." Those whom you 
have dearly loved of your own family circle, and with 
whom you have had Christian fellowship, may turn 
against you and hate you for the truth's sake. Nor 
will this always be because of wickedness of intention: 
sometimes at least the persecutions will come conscientiously; 
as for instance, Saul of Tarsus, who 
afterward became the great Apostle Paul, was once a 
persecutor of "this way," and ignorantly did many 
things against Jesus and those who loved him. He 
himself tells us that he obtained mercy because he did 
it ignorantly, thinking that he did God service. And 
so doubtless it has been with much of the persecution 
that has come to the Lord's faithful ones in every age. 
Much of it has been inflicted conscientiously. It is 
quite remarkable, too, how the Adversary succeeds 
sometimes in deceiving those who once knew better 
into thinking that anger, malice, hatred, strife, bitter 
words and slander, "works of the flesh and the 
devil," are "duty." Alas, how blinding is the spirit 
of the Adversary ! 

All these adversaries must be resisted unto blood, 
unto death, if need be; must not be permitted to hinder 
our walking in the footsteps of him who set us an 
example; must not be permitted to prevent us from 
becoming copies of our Lord and thus making our calling 
and election sure. But while resisting them with 
all our might, we must avoid carnal weapons and not 
render railing for railing; rather, so far as possible, we 
should use the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, 
and, Michael-like, say, "The Lord rebuke thee." God 
is "for us," and declares that in his due time he will 
right present wrongs and falsehoods, saying, "Vengeance 
is mine, I will render recompenses." Indeed, 
toward the class who war against us ignorantly and 
conscientiously we should feel no bitterness, but rather 
sympathy, love and an earnest desire and effort for an 
opening of the eyes of their understanding. 

The Apostle was not ignoring all of these great 
adversaries which, like "roaring lions," would terrify 
us, and if possible arrest our progress in the path of 
consecration and sacrifice, which leads on to glory. 
This is not his thought when he says, "If God be for 
us, who can be against us?" Quite to the contrary, 



his thought is, that notwithstanding all these things 
which are against us, we may realize that God is for 
us, that he has predestinated a Church in glory and 
has justified and called us to be members of it, and 
brought us on the journey thus far, through all of 
these various steps. And if we can realize that God 
has thus been leading us up to the present time, to bring 
us to share his glory, and that all things thus far have 
been working for our good, this is our assurance that 
all wisdom, power and love shall be exerted on our 
behalf down to the very end of the race course, if we 
continue to abide in Christ faithfully. 

What shall we fear? What could oppose our way 
so as to hinder it, if God be on our side? This reminds 
us of the adage, "God with one is a majority." So, 
God with us, and for us, and leading us, makes us 
mighty indeed, stronger than all these adversaries with 
all their arts and wiles and perversity, and able 
through his grace to come off conquerors, yea, more 
than conquerors through him who loved us and bought 
us with his own precious blood. 

We urge that each reader mark the various steps 
of progress through which divine grace has already led 
him, and that, whatever he finds to be his present 
standpoint, he go on as the Lord leads, not content 
with anything short of "the whole counsel of God." 
The reader has been "honored" with a knowledge of 
the grace of God in Christ: if he has not yet accepted, 
let him quickly accept this grace by repentance for sin 
and with faith in the ransom. If he has done this and 
has received the grace of justification, and, as the 
Apostle expresses it, has "joy and peace through believing," 
then let him remember that still there's 
more to follow, and that the justified are "called." 
Not called to glory merely, but called to obedience, 
called to present their bodies living sacrifices to God in 
his service, holy and acceptable through Christ. 

Alas! how many who have received the grace of 
justification stop there: they hear the call to suffer 
with Christ for the truth's sake, they hear the invitation 
to stand up for Jesus, in their thoughts and words 
and deeds, but heed not. They perceive that such a 
full consecration would necessarily mean not only the 
giving up of sinful pleasures, but also the giving up of 
some not sinful, that they might devote their words 
and thoughts and deeds as far as possible as he did, 
doing good to others. But of those who hear the call 
to present themselves, how few obey it, how few surrender 
themselves to him who bought them with his 
own precious blood! Yes, many are called; though few 
are chosen. All the justified are called to self-surrender, 
full obedience, full trust in the Lord and full submission 
to his will. And of those who do accept the 
call and who have made the covenant, and who are 
therefore of the "us" class mentioned by the Apostle, 
how many become "overcharged with the cares of this 



life, or the deceitfulness of riches," or the perplexities 

of poverty and so fail to obtain the fulness of heart-obedience, 

and consequently will fail to make their 

calling and election sure! 

We are not now discussing what will be the fate 
of those who fail to be victors and to gain a crown and 
to sit with Christ in his throne; we are considering, 
rather, the privileges of those who have been "honored" 
of the Lord and led step by step up to present 
attainments of knowledge and privilege. We are seeking 
to bring before our minds at least a faint conception 
of the wonderful provisions of divine grace, and 
the full ability of every one so called to make his calling 
and election sure by laying hold of this grace of 
God, provided in Christ, by which to them, all things 
shall work together for good, because they love God 
and are the called ones according to his purpose. 



R4215 : page 232 

VICTORY NOT TO THE STRONG 

--I SAMUEL 17:38-49-AUGUST 9.- 

Golden Text:— "In the Lord put I my trust."— Psalm 11:1. 

NOT long after David's anointing he became the 
hero of a most remarkable battle. The Philistines, 
residing on the seashore of Palestine, 
were the enemies of the Israelites from earliest 
times, and, as we have already seen, they held mastery 
over them at the time of Saul's coronation. Subsequently 
the victory gained over them by Saul was not 
complete, and they still occupied the city of Gath and 
considerable territory in the land given to Israel. In 
Gath dwelt Goliath, a descendant of the giants or Anakim, 
whose sight terrified the spies of Israel when they 
first essayed to enter the promised land. Goliath was a 
Philistine therefore, not by birth but by naturalization, 
as people of various nationalities become Americans. 
Goliath was in the prime of his manhood, proud of his 
size and strength. The Philistines, too, were vigilant 
and thought that with this champion and leader they 
might gain another victory over the Israelites. As a result 
they organized an army and marched northwesterly 
toward Jerusalem. King Saul, apprised of the fact, 
recruited an army to oppose them. The two armies 
faced each other on opposite slopes of the valley Elah. 
Evidently the opposing forces were fairly well matched 
and neither cared to make the attack. The Philistines, 
resorting to a method already known in history, proposed 
that a war be averted and that the issues between 
the two armies be decided by a personal battle. They 
sent forth Goliath as their champion and dared the 



Israelites to meet him. Similarly the Romans and the 
Albans, B.C. 667, settled the war by having three 
Roman Horatii and three Alban Curatii engage in mortal 
combat. The victory came to the Romans, inasmuch as 

R4216 : page 232 

one of their number survived. Similarly later, Sir 
Henry d'Bonham fought with Robert Bruce between the 
two contending armies in Scotland. 

Goliath was a giant indeed. His six cubits and a 
span, if estimated on the 16-inch cubit, would represent 

8 ft. 8 in., or counted by the 18-inch cubit would represent 

9 ft. 9 in. A cubit is the length of the human arm 
from the elbow to the tip of the little finger; a span is 
half a cubit. Encyclopedia Brittanica refers to several 
giants: one a Scotchman, whose height was 8 ft. 3 in.; 
another an Arabian of 9 ft.; Charles Birne, an Irishman, 
measured 8 ft. 4 in.; Patrick Cotter, 8 ft. 7-3/4 in.; a Russian 
giant, 9 ft. 8 in. There is nothing, therefore, impossible 

or improbable in the story of Goliath. The 
giant was elaborately armored and practically 
invulnerable. 

ISRAEL AND ISRAEL'S GOD DEFIED 

At that time each nation apparently stood for a religious 
system and their prosperity and influence were 
largely credited to the favor of their god or gods. For 
forty days Goliath, clothed in his resplendent, gleaming 
armor, with a loud voice had shouted defiance to the men 
of Israel and incidentally to the God they worshiped, 
thus endeavoring to shame them and drive them to an 
unequal contest, of which he felt sure he would be the 
victor. We cannot wonder that no Israelite was found 
foolhardy enough to undertake a battle with the giant 
on the terms and conditions then prevalent— a battle 
with sword and spear and javelin; ordinarily anyone 
would have been but a child at the mercy of the foe. 

Jesse at Bethlehem was only about twenty miles 
distant from the camp of the army, and on the fortieth 
day he sent David with greetings and delicacies for 
three of his elder sons who were in Saul's army and 
to bring back word of the progress of events. The 
ruddy youth, the shepherd boy David, with little 
knowledge of warfare, was surprised to see the challenger 
and that the God of Israel was thus defied by the 
heathen. By nature and by experience in the keeping 
of his sheep and the defending of them from wild animals 
David was courageous, fearless. Besides, he 
evidently was well born as respects reverence for God 
and faith in him. It was Goliath's defiance of the God 
of Israel that seemed to strike him most forcibly. He 
made inquiries as to why none of the Israelites in the 
name of the Lord had undertaken the battle, implying 
his own willingness to do so. Many of those with whom 



he communed on the subject were evidently impressed 
with his faith and ardor. But his own brethren were 
less appreciative, and sneered. However, the matter 
spread from mouth to mouth until it reached the ear of 
King Saul, who sent for David. 

Although the king for some years had been out of 
favor with the Lord, he nevertheless had good reason 
for believing in divine power, as it had already been 
manifested in his own experiences. He evidently 
queried if this proposition of David, his only hope, 
might not be of the Lord. David explained briefly his 
own prowess in connection with the slaying of a lion 
and at another time a bear in defence of his flocks. 
The king admired the youth, his courage and his faith, 
and consented that he should undertake the battle with 
the giant, hoping doubtless that God would favor his 
people with a victory even against such odds of physical 
strength. King Saul had the best armor, of course, 
amongst all the Israelites, and he proposed that David 
use it. But when the latter tried it on he felt himself 
constrained and declared that he would have less confidence 
in it than out of it. He went forth to meet Goliath 
in his own way, armed merely with a shepherd's oak 
stick and with a sling and a shepherd's bag. Selecting 
five smooth stones for use in his sling he approached 
the giant as the latter came forth as usual to dare the 
Israelites. 

The story of the conflict is quickly told. The Philistine 
was indignant that he should be asked to fight 
with a boy unarmored, and he cursed David in the name 
of his gods, saying, "Come to me, and I will give thy 
flesh unto the fowls of the air and unto the beasts of the 
field." David's reply was characteristic— full of that 
faith in God which marks his entire history from first 
to last, and on account of which the Lord speaks of him 
as a man after his own heart. He said to Goliath, 
"Thou comest to me with sword and spear and with 
javelin; but I come to thee in the name of the Lord of 
hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom thou hast 
defied. This day will the Lord deliver thee into mine 
hand; and I will smite thee and take thy head from thee; 
and I will give the carcasses of the hosts of the Philistines 
this day to the fowls of the air and to the wild 
beasts of the earth; that all the earth may know that 
there is a God in Israel. And all this assembly shall 
know that the Lord saveth not with sword and spear: 
for the battle is the Lord's and he will give you into 
our hands." Thus the issue was seen by both Philistines 
and Israelites to be as between the Lord, his 

R4216 : page 233 

people and their enemies. Hastening forward David 
threw his first stone, which struck the giant in the forehead 
and caused him to fall senseless. Directly David 
finished the conflict with Goliath's own sword, beheading 



him while the Israelites, their faith reviving, attacked 
the Philistines, whose courage fled. 

It is supposed that Goliath wore a helmet with 
moveable front common in those days, and that he 
laughed at the youth who was coming against him, and 
in so doing threw back his head, allowing the vizor of 
his helmet to open, exposing his forehead. Others 
suppose that he reached for his javelin, which he carried 
in a sheath between his shoulders, and in reaching back 
for the javelin the helmet opened at the opportune 
moment and admitted David's stone. However the 
matter happened we cannot doubt that David was 
quite correct in his understanding of the matter; that 
divine providence supervised the entire transaction and 
brought the victory. Nor was such marksmanship with 
the sling an unusual thing in those times, for we read 
how on another occasion 700 men of the tribe of Benjamin 
threw stones "to a hair's breadth."— Judges 20:16. 

THE CHRISTIAN'S ADVERSARY AND CONFLICT 

What lesson can the "New Creation" of the present 
time draw from this story of olden time? David, 
whose name signifies beloved, in many respects typified 
the Christ, Head and Body. His experiences with 
Goliath illustrate well first of all our Lord's conflict 
with the Adversary during the forty-days' temptation 
in the wilderness. Our Lord's victory over Satan on 
that occasion, his loyalty to the Father and the work 
entrusted to him, his own self-sacrifice, meant the victory 
for all the world of mankind desirous of being in harmony 
with God and his arrangement. Did he not declare 
to us, "Fear not, I have overcome the world"? In 
overcoming Satan, the prince of this world, he was 
gaining at the same time a victory over all the hosts of 
evil and servants of sin. He stood faithful to God and 
to his covenant relationship and responsibility and 
hurled at the Adversary the pebble of truth— "It is written." 
As Goliath fell before David, so Satan was vanquished 
by our Lord, who declares, "I beheld Satan 
fall from heaven," and declared also as a result of his 
victory, "All power is given me in heaven and in earth," 
and sent forth his disciples in his name to similarly 
battle in his strength and to come off conqueror and to 
ultimately share with him in his Kingdom, which is to 
"bless all the families of the earth." 

It is written of the Lord's faithful disciples, who 
shall constitute the Church of glory, that they must 
walk in his steps as he set the example. This means 
to them as to him a warfare against sin, its great representative 
and leader Satan, and all the hosts of deceived 
humanity who are on his side. Does not the Apostle 
intimate this when he says, We wrestle not with flesh 
and blood, but with wicked spirits in influential positions? 
(Eph. 6:12.) Our enemy is a giant in whose 
presence we are feeble indeed. The Apostle calls him 



a wily foe and our Lord taught us to pray the Father, 
"Abandon us not in temptation, but deliver us from the 
evil one." Very evidently, then, we need divine assistance 
in our unequal contest, as did David in his. 

"NOT BY MIGHT, NOR BY POWER, BUT BY MY SPIRIT" 

All those whom the Lord accepts to probationary 
membership in the Body of Christ, have been previously 
anointed and come under the divine power and guidance. 
They have had their experiences, too, in struggling 
against evil in general, even as David had his 
experience with the lion and the bear, and those experiences 
in the Lord's providence were merely preparations 
for the great testing, the great conflict with the 
Adversary and his various devices for our injury. The 
natural thought in connection with such a contest is to 
put on armor similar to that of our opponent, as Saul 
offered his armor to David. It is for each of the Lord's 
people, however, to learn that victory cannot be won 
along worldly lines. We cannot fight evil with evil, 
wrong with wrong, boasting with boasting and slander 
with slander, hatred with hatred, etc. If we undertake 
so to do we shall surely lose in the battle. Our course, 
like that of David, must be full reliance upon the Lord 
and the use of the sling and pebble of truth. If we cannot 
conquer along these lines we cannot conquer at all. 
Who is sufficient for these things?— for such an unequal 
contest with the prince of darkness and all the hosts 
of sin? Surely the one who would have confidence in 
himself would be unwise; hence, as the Apostle says, 
we place our confidence in God; if we are loyal to him 
victory will be ours, if we are careless or unfaithful we 
shall not be of the David class— not be members of the 
glorious Body of Christ, in which event we shall never 
reign with him, even as David, who received the anointing, 
would never have reached the throne, if he had 
fought the giant with Saul's armor. 

R4217 : page 233 

"WORKS OF THE FLESH AND OF THE DEVIL" 

The imperfections of the flesh with which we all 
must contend are indeed part of the works of the devil, 
for did he not in Eden accomplish the fall of our first 
parents, and thus the fall of our entire race into the sin 
and death condition against which we struggle in vain, 
except as we are rescued by him who loved us and 
bought us with his precious blood? But in addition to 
these inherited weaknesses of the flesh we must contend 
against the active works of the Adversary— not 
only his temptations to ourselves but his intrigues 
through mankind in general, for he is indeed the "one 
who now worketh in the hearts of the children of disobedience,' 
and they are much more numerous than the 



children of obedience. Hence our assailants are manifold, 

and in many of their assaults upon us they have 

at least the sympathy of our fallen flesh, however antagonistic 

our hearts, our minds as New Creatures in 

Christ. 

The Apostle helps us to get a view of the great 
enemy and the influences he is bringing to bear against 
us on every hand and every day. He sums them up as 
follows: "Now the works of the flesh are manifest which 
are these,— adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, 
idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, 
wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, 
murders [he that hateth his brother is a murderer], 
drunkenness [intoxication literally or symbolically with 
the spirit of the world, Babylon], revelings, and such 
like; of the which I tell you before, as I have also told 
you in times past, that they which do such things shall 
not inherit the Kingdom of God."— Gal. 5:19-21. 

"WE WRESTLE NOT WITH FLESH AND BLOOD" 

Behold in this list the Goliath with whom we must 
contend! The special weakness of one may not be the 
special weakness of another, but the list which the 
Apostle has here provided is sure to include the weak 
points of the flesh of every one of the Lord's consecrated 

R4217 : page 234 

people, every one who is a member of the David 
class, of the Beloved One, of the Christ. All who are 
anointed for the coming glory as kings and priests, as 
New Creatures, have a Goliath in their own flesh to be 
fought, and fought to a finish! Either the old nature 
must die or the new one must die. Exhorting along 
this line the Apostle says, Mortify, therefore, your 
members that are upon the earth— the downward 
tendency of your flesh. It must be killed, it must be 
beheaded, as was Goliath; but there can be no complete 
putting away of the earthly mind, the fleshly mind and 
its influence until first we in the name of the Lord 
have conquered by smiting it with the pebble of truth. 

As we look over the above list of the works of the 
flesh and the devil, we find that they are all rooted in 
selfishness; and as we look to the Lord as our pattern 
as New Creatures we find that all the fruits and graces 
of the Spirit are reversely centered in love. In proportion, 
therefore, as the New Creature lives, grows and 
thrives in love, the old creature, the works of the flesh, 
will perish with its selfishness. 

We might be inclined to reason amiss on the subject 
and to say with the Apostle, Having begun in the 
spirit, are you seeking to be perfect in the flesh? We 
might say, Surely all who have been begotten of the 
holy Spirit and who have reckoned themselves dead indeed 
to the flesh and its inclinations and desires— none 



of these, surely, could ever be influenced again to come 
under the Adversary's power and become a partaker of 
his spirit and participate in his works! 

This is a wrong thought! It is possible for some 
of the Lord's true children to be thus overcome. True, 
if thoroughly overcome by the spirit of selfishness it 
would mean the death of the New Creature, and this 
would mean the Second Death. The path from the new 
nature into the Second Death is not necessarily a very 
long one, but we have no reason to believe that it could 
be taken at merely one step. We remember that the 
new nature up to the present time, up to the time of 
our resurrection change, is but the new mind, the new 
will, the new disposition in harmony with the Lord, his 
righteousness, his love. We are to remember, as the 
Apostle suggests, that we have this new nature in an 
earthen vessel and that the earthen vessel has practically 
all of its original blemishes and fallen tendencies 
still as powerful as ever except as the new mind has 
these under its mastery and control; but if that 
mastery or control should be released even for a 
moment the result would be the awakening, the reviving 
of the old nature. And we may be sure that our 
Adversary is alert and fully realizes the situation and 
will do all in his power to put us off guard, even to the 
extent of endeavoring to make white appear black and 
black appear white before our judgment. The Lord 
very graciously shields us from temptations more than 
we are able to bear. Hence it is possible for us at all 
times to be overcome, not only in the infancy of our 
new nature, but also in its further development; but 
the testings permitted grow more severe, more crucial, 
as we near our spiritual graduation time. Nor can we 
object to this; it is exactly what we should expect. 

The Apostle, following this line of thought, declares, 
"I keep my body under;" and again he says, 
"Mortify, therefore, your members which are upon the 
earth"— your earthly ambitions, will, etc., everything 
in yourself that would tend toward envy, hatred, anger 
and strife— put these to death. Allow the new nature 
to have full sway and control in every thought, in every 
word, in every deed. And watch to this end; watch 
your thoughts, watch your words, watch your conduct. 
Many can watch their conduct who find it difficult to 
scrutinize and properly weigh their thoughts and their 
words. Truly the Apostle intimates that out of the 
heart proceeds envy, bitterness, evil speaking, back-biting 
and strife; unless they are in the heart the mouth 
cannot utter them, for it is out of the abundance of the 
heart that the mouth speaketh. 

"THE TONGUE IS A FIRE AND A WORLD OF INIQUITY" 

Alas, yes! our words do judge us; as the Master declared, 
"By thy words thou shalt be justified, and by 
thy words thou shalt be condemned." No wonder the 



prophet said, "I will set a guard upon my lips lest I 
sin with my mouth." The setting of a guard evidently 
means that we will practice great deliberation, great 
care in respect to everything that we say; that we 
should speak evil against none. Our evil speaking is 
not at all necessary to the Lord and to his cause; he is 
perfectly able to accomplish all of his purposes without 
our violating a single one of his wise arrangements on 
our behalf. If he is not wise enough to bring order out 
of confusion, surely we are not sufficiently wise, and it 
would be very presumptuous on our part to interfere 
with the Lord and his affairs, except strictly along the 
lines of the instruction of his Word. Let this be our 
authority; when he instructs us to speak let us speak, 
when he instructs us to be silent let us be silent. No 
other course is a safe one. 

The Apostle declares the "tongue setteth on fire 
the course of nature, and is set on fire of Gehenna." 
(James 3:6.) In other words, that which fires the tongue 
to evil is a spark which belongs to the Second Death, 
for all anger, malice, envy, hatred, strife, evil speaking, 
back-biting, are all works of the flesh and of the devil, 
which are tending toward the Second Death. As the 
Apostle says in enumerating these, "They that do such 
things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God." (Gal. 5:21.) 
They that do such things, if they continue in 
that evil course, will not only fail to get a share in the 
Kingdom, but fail to get a share in the Great Company, 
and will receive their portion in Gehenna— the Second 
Death. This is no exaggerated teaching on our part; 
it is the clear testimony of St. Peter and St. James. 
And not only is this the rule of this Gospel Age and the 
Church which is now on special trial, but the same will 
be the rule during the Millennium; those who will not 
come into harmony with the law of love, which is the 
opposite of all these works of the devil, will be counted 
as servants of sin and of Satan and will have their portion 
in the lake of fire, which is the Second Death.— 
Rev. 20:14. 

When the Apostle speaks of the tongue as setting 
on fire the course of nature, we believe that he is expressing 
a truth in full harmony with that set forth by 
the Apostle Peter, when he tells us that the symbolic 
heavens and the symbolic earth shall surely be on fire. 
The tongue, that little member, will thus set on fire the 
course of nature and eventually bring in the great period 
of awful anarchy with which present institutions will 
go down, preparing the way for the Kingdom of the 
Lord under the whole heavens. Whoever has an ear 
to hear can already perceive that bitter tongues are 
moving rapidly in the direction of the igniting of the 

R4217 : page 235 

great fire which the Apostle delineates. Passions are 
being aroused in Church, State, financial and political 



circles. Selfishness is more and more getting into 
command until by and by, as the Scriptures declare, 
there will be no peace to him that goes out or comes in, 
but every man's hand will be against his neighbor. 

If thus the tongue is to set on fire the course of 
nature in the nominal Church and in the social world, 
shall we suppose that the Church of the Living God, 
whose names are written in heaven, will be exempted 
from such trials, and shall we suppose that the tests 
will be less crucial with them than with the world? 
No, verily! We must expect that judgment will begin 
at the house of God and extend to the nominal house 
and to the world. It behooves each one to be awake on 
this subject of the unruly member, to bring ours into 
absolute submission to the will of the Lord; that we 
shall speak only those things which are edifying; that 
we shall speak evil of no man; that our tongues wherewith 
we bless and praise God shall be used only in 
blessing and assisting and uplifting and strengthening 
the Lord's cause. 

R4218 : page 235 

But since it is out of the abundance of the heart 
that the mouth speaketh we must keep our hearts with 
all diligence, we must remember their natural deceitfulness; 
we must be on guard lest they should deceive 
us now into thinking that evil is good, and that in promoting 
evil in speaking and slandering one another we 
are promoting good. This is a part of the artifice of 
the Adversary, and, as the Apostle says, "We are not 
ignorant of his devices." Let us, then, be more than 
ever on guard to scrutinize our motives, and not only 
so, but after finding good motives, let us scrutinize our 
methods and square them all with the Word of the Lord, 
especially remembering his instructions that we shall 
love one another as he has loved us— to the extent of 
laying down our lives for each other— and that we shall 
be obedient to him to the extent that we shall give heed 
to his Word, not forgetting his methods of procedure, 
as outlined to us in his own words.— Matthew 18:15-17. 



R4218 : page 235 

THE SPIRIT OF ENVY AND MURDER 

-I SAMUEL 18:6-16.-AUGUST 16.- 

Golden Text:— "The Lord God is a sun and shield."— Psalm 84:11. 

THIS lesson affords us a contrast between a 
spirit or disposition in harmony with the Lord 
and a spirit or disposition out of harmony with 
him and his arrangements. The first is exhibited in 



David, the shepherd boy, secretly anointed to the office 
of king and later brought into prominence through his 
victory over Goliath, recounted in our last lesson. So 
far as Saul is concerned the record is that an evil or 
malevolent spirit possessed him. On the contrary the 
Spirit of the Lord is said to have been with David from 
the time of his anointing. We are not to confuse in our 
minds those blessings of the Lord's Spirit in ancient 
times with the still more blessed experiences of God's 
people throughout the Gospel Age under the anointing 
of the holy Spirit, the begetting of the holy Spirit, the 
sealing of the holy Spirit as sons. Doubtless there 
would be much in common in the experiences of those 
who received the Lord's Spirit at that time and those 
who receive it now; but most certainly that which we 
now enjoy as the "house of sons" is far beyond anything 
that was possible for the "house of servants" to experience; 
because the holy Spirit as a comforter and guide 
into the truth and a seal of the new nature was not then 
given, because Jesus was not then glorified. Hence 
the blessing of the Spirit given at Pentecost and enjoyed 
by the Church since is peculiarly the Lord's blessing 
for the Bride class and has been possible only since 
their Advocate appeared in the presence of God for them 
in the merit of his own sacrifice. 

To whatever extent the holy Spirit was bestowed 
upon the "house of servants" it would necessarily be a 
spirit of moderation, of fellowship with God, of desire 
to do his will and of peace with him; and to this extent 
it would be the spirit of a sound mind, relieving its 
possessor of much of the nervous fret and strain, excitability 
and languor which might be his own naturally 
under trials and disappointments. Of Saul, it is said 
that an evil spirit entered into him, but this does not 
necessarily mean that he became obsessed of a demon, 
but rather that an evil mind, a perverse mind or disposition, 
an unhappy or melancholy mind took the place 
of the restful and peaceful and trustful mind which he 
previously had enjoyed. 

AN EVIL SPIRIT FROM THE LORD 

But we read that an evil spirit from God came upon 
Saul and he prophesied in the midst of the house. This 
would seem more like an obsession, or, as Dr. Merrine 
suggests in Bibliotheca Sacra, Saul had psychic epilepsy; 
he says, "Epilepsy may coexist with a healthy growth 
and development of the intellectual faculties, and a very 
high degree of intelligence and even genius may be associated 
with it. Julius Caesar, Augustus Caesar, Napoleon, 
Petrarch, Mohammed, Moliere, Handel and many 
other great men were epileptics. Certain peculiarities 
are common to the whole class of epileptics, and dominate 
their character, such as an explosive irritability of 
temper; in some instances a display of highest excitement, 
and again a gloomy stupor. Numerous criminal 



acts have been committed while in this state." 

We do not get the thought that this evil spirit was 
from the Lord in the sense that the Lord exercised this 
evil influence upon Saul, but we understand the word 
from in an entirely different sense, and signifying not of, 
contrary to: "An evil spirit [apart] from the Lord was 
upon Saul." The Apostle tells us that anger, malice, 
hatred, envy and strife are works of the flesh and of the 
devil, and hence to whatever extent Saul or anybody 
else came into sympathy with these works of the Adversary 
to that extent he would have, would be controlled 
by an evil spirit, an evil disposition, the Adversary's 
spirit; and, as a matter of fact, those who come 
consciously into accord with the Adversary in spirit become 
thereby exposed to obsession, to the intrusion of 
the evil spirits themselves. 

It is undoubtedly true that persons whose minds 
are in sympathetic accord with righteousness and truth, 
are proportionately surrounded by a protective influence 
which shields them from the intrusion of the evil spirits. 
This is the intimation of the Scriptures, which declare 
that the holy angels are ministering spirits for those 
who shall be heirs of salvation, and "The angel of the 
Lord encampeth round about them that fear him and 

R4218 : page 236 

delivereth them." (Heb. 1:14; Psa. 34:7.) But with 
any departure from the reverence of the Lord, with any 
departure from loyalty to righteousness and truth would 
come a corresponding separation from this holy protecting 
influence of the angels of the Lord and a consequent 
exposure of heart, of mind, to the malevolent influences 
of the fallen angels, who are ever ready to enter 
into such, and more seriously than ever defile them. 
This lesson seems to be enforced by our Lord's parable 
of the man out of whom a devil had been cast and his 
heart swept and garnished; not, however, receiving into 
it the good Shepherd of his soul, but, standing for 
righteousness merely in his own strength, he was assaulted 
by seven demons more wicked than the first and 
was overcome, and the last end of that man was worse 
than the beginning.— Luke 11:24-26. 

Thus it was with Saul; as a natural man he evidently 
had some noble characteristics, because of which 
Samuel loved him; but failing to make a full consecration 
of himself to the Lord he was continually beset by 
his own will, a spirit of selfishness, which hindered 
him from being a satisfactory servant of the Lord. As 
a result of this, the Lord's special protection and assistance 
were not afforded him, and correspondingly 
the spirit of selfishness grew. In our lesson we saw 
that so far from desiring that the will of the Lord 
should be done in him and in all of his affairs the very 
reverse spirit of selfishness, of self will, grew rankly in 
his heart. These heart conditions merely needed an 



opportunity to manifest themselves, and this opportunity 
came in connection with David. After the exploit 
with Goliath the fame of David greatly spread abroad 
throughout the cities of Israel. As the story was told 
subsequently that he with the army gave battle with 
the Philistines and victory resulted, his praises were 
sung after the custom of the time by women and 
children, who at the gates of the various cities saluted 
the returning victorious warriors. A song gradually 
spread, the chorus of which was, "Saul hath slain his 
thousands, but David his tens of thousands." 

It would have required a man of very large calibre 
in Saul's place not to be offended at this, not to feel 
jealous of such honors given to the young hero of the 
hour, implying that he had entirely eclipsed the king. 
But whatever might have been the natural sentiment of 
King Saul or others there can be no doubt as to what 
would have been the proper one. The king should have 
rejoiced and taken pleasure in honoring the young 
patriot, whose chivalry had been so blessed to the 
whole nation. To have done this would have been to 
evince the spirit of a sound mind, and it would have redounded 
to the honor of Saul himself. But it does not 
surprise us that it had an opposite effect upon him, 
knowing as we do the general spirit of the world in respect 
to such matters— the spirit of selfishness and 
pride. Saul was filled with anger and envy and eyed 
David jealously henceforth. He recognized in him a 
rival; he also perceived that David was a true servant 
of the Lord, and that the Lord's blessing was upon him. 
Jonathan, on the contrary, of a different cast of mind, 
loved David more and more, because of the very qualities 
which led his father to hate David. 

LESSONS FOR SPIRITUAL ISRAELITES 

Keeping in mind that the anointed David represents 
the Church, the Lord's anointed, who by and by with 
Jesus their Head shall occupy the throne of the world's 
dominion for the blessing and uplifting of mankind, 
and for the deliverance of all from the yoke of Satan, 
sin and death, we may properly enough apply the essence 
of this lesson to this class. Their victories over 
the evil one, over the power of sin in their own bodies, 
and their general fighting of the good fight of faith 
bring the approval of some of the Jonathan class, as 
well as the comfort of the "exceeding great and precious 
promises" of the Lord's Word. (2 Pet. 1:4.) But these 
victories over sin will not bring to this class the love 

R4219 : page 236 

of the world, the love of those who have not the Lord's 
Spirit, but a selfish spirit, the spirit of those represented 
by Saul. Of this condition of things the Lord 
forewarned us saying, "Marvel not if the world hate 



you; ye know that it hated me before it hated you." He 
tells us that we are the children of the light, and should 
let our lights shine, and that in proportion as we are 
faithful in so doing it will bring upon us the opposition 
of the children of darkness, who love the darkness 
rather than the light, who love sin rather than righteousness, 
selfishness rather than love. 

Perhaps, too, Saul represented those of the present 
time who in the nominal Church system, the nominal 
kingdom of God, affect to be reigning now. As they 
perceive the Lord's blessing on those who have no titles 
amongst men and whose anointing is not of man, neither 
recognized by man, they feel jealous of their success, 
they seem to realize that the prosperity of Present Truth 
in the world makes steadily against the institutions of 
Babylon. Every victory for truth, every evidence of 
the Lord's favor towards it seems to beget an evil spirit 
of indignation, of opposition, hatred, envy, strife— 
"works of the flesh and of the devil." 

Saul's coming under an evil influence, by which he 
prophesied, seems to correspond thoroughly with the 
power of evil spirits exercised at various times in the 
past. And speaking of the power that Babylon will exhibit 
in the near future, the Lord tells us that the image 
of the beast will become so alive shortly that it will call 
down fire from heaven upon all opposed; that is to say, 
it will, apparently in the name and power of the Lord, 
express imprecations and fiery vengeance from the Almighty 
upon all who are not in full sympathy and accord 
with it. It may even seek to destroy us with the javelin 
of bitter words, misrepresentation and slander, as Saul 
threw his javelin twice at David. But as the latter was 
not smitten with the javelin, so we shall not be injured 
as New Creatures, no matter what the Lord may permit 
to come against us according to the flesh. "All things 
work together for good to them that love God, to 
the called ones according to his purpose"— to his 
anointed. His Word is, "Touch not mine anointed, and 
do my prophets [ministers] no harm." (Psalm 105:15.) 
And again, "Nothing shall by any means hurt you," injure 
your real, highest interests. 

"JEALOUSY IS CRUEL AS THE GRAVE" 

These words of the wise man have been amply 
demonstrated as truthful through many centuries of the 
world's experience. Some one has said, "Jealousy is 
said to be the offspring of love. Yet, unless the parent 
makes haste to strangle the child, the child will not 
rest until it has poisoned the parent." 

The lesson to the New Creation is that we should 
be specially on guard against jealousy, envy, hatred 
and strife. We cannot doubt that much of the final 
testing of the "very Elect" will be along these lines. 

R4219 : page 237 



"Who shall be able to stand?" is a question, therefore, 

that appeals to all those who have taken their stand for 

the Lord, for righteousness, for truth— their stand for 

love of God and of the brethren. If, indeed, we have 

consecrated our lives, to lay down our lives in the 

service of the Lord and his truth and in the service of 

the brethren, what should it not mean to us as respects 

the manifestation of that love and faithfulness! Any 

root of bitterness, any word of bitterness, any thought 

of jealousy entering into our hearts might mean the defilement 

of not only the brother or sister against whom 

these are directed, but would surely mean the poisoning 

of our own hearts, the destruction therein of the spirit 

of love, the Spirit of the Lord; and possibly this evil 

spirit, far from the Lord, proceeding from us, might 

contaminate many members of the Body of Christ for 

their defilement. How much on guard, therefore, each 

of us ought to be; how we should analyze our thoughts, 

our motives, our intentions to see that they all square 

perfectly with the law of love to the extent that our 

Lord indicated, saying, "A new commandment I give 

unto you, that ye love one another as I have loved you;" 

to the extent of being willing to die for each other's 

interests and welfare and honor! 

On the contrary the Spirit of the Lord in David 
kept him sweet, kind, generous toward his enemies. 
He indeed fled from the king's presence when in a fit of 
anger Saul threw the javelin, and we may be sure that 
it was nothing less than faith in the Lord and in his 
divine providence that enabled David to continue to 
serve the king as his musician, and by the sweet music 
of his heart and of his voice, to cheer Saul and drive 
away his melancholy. Such should be our attitude 
toward those who oppose us. The natural disposition 
of an evil course toward us would be to arouse an antagonistic 
spirit in return, render evil for evil, railing 
for railing, accusation for accusation. The result of 
such a course would be our own injury as well as the 
possibility of further injuring our opponents. David's 
course was the proper one; he waited upon the Lord, 
he was submissive to what the Lord's providence permitted. 
In his estimation and ours nothing could befall 
him that would be outside the divine knowledge 
and the divine power to prevent. Hence these trying experiences 
meant for David a great development of 
character, a strengthening of his heart in harmony 
with the divine will. 

PROVIDENTIAL CHANGES ACCEPTED 

In various ways did Saul seek to arouse in David 
a spirit of antagonism; not only did he make an attempt 
to assassinate him twice, but he kept back from him a 
part of the promise he had publicly made, that the one 
who would gain the victory over Goliath should become 



his son-in-law. How foolishly shortsighted was Saul's 
course even up to this time! He might have fallen into 
line with the Lord's providences and have fulfilled his 
obligations to David, and by having David as a son-in-law, 
his own family would have been closely knit to 
that of David when the latter would ultimately come in 
possession of the kingly authority, as the Lord had ordained. 
But jealousy and hatred are usually blind to 
their own best interests. So Saul kept back his daughter 
from being the wife of David, and his next step was to 
send David to the army as the commander of a regiment, 
with the hope and the expectation that his boldness in 
war would mean his death. But the Lord was with 
David and blessed him, and the record is that "he behaved 
himself wisely in all his ways." 

So with all those who now have the Lord's Spirit 
in still greater measure and power for the illumination 
of their minds, their hearts and their guidance in the 
right way. All these, under this heavenly influence and 
as sons of the Most High, should behave themselves 
wisely, prudently, in a manner to glorify their Father 
in heaven, to honor the Lord Jesus, to make themselves 
helpful to all the household of faith, and to let their 
lights so shine before men that the latter may take 
knowledge of the fact that they have been with Jesus 
and learned of him. 

But the more wisely David conducted himself, the 
more envious did King Saul become. The more the 
Lord blessed and prospered David in his humility of 
life and wisdom, of course the more opposition did he 
have from the king. And so it will surely be with us. 
In proportion as we have the spirit of a sound mind and 
are zealous for the Lord and for the brethren, laying 
down our lives in the service of the truth, the more 
hatred and fear we may engender in the hearts of those 
who are out of heart-harmony with the Lord. But as 
we read of David that all Israel and Judah loved him, 
so we may be sure as respects the true people of God; 
for they are more and more loved and respected— those 
who have the Lord's Spirit, those who are of the David 
class. By and by when Satan shall have been bound, 
and when the Lord shall have established his Kingdom 
under the whole heaven, when all the blind eyes shall 
be opened and all the deaf ears unstopped, then all the 
people, all who are in accord with the Lord, shall recognize 
the faithfulness of the David class, the Christ, and 
shall glorify God on their behalf. 

"THE LORD GOD IS A SUN AND SHIELD" 

Our Golden Text is a great encouragement to the 
David class, the beloved class, the anointed ones, the 
members of Christ. To these the Lord God is both a 
sun and shield; he not only enlightens these but he will 
not suffer them to be injured by the blessings which he 
bestows upon them. He will shield them from all 



enemies and everything that would tend to injure them 
in any manner; all things shall work together for good 
to those that love him, to the called ones according to 
his purpose. (Rom. 8:28.) With such blessed assurances, 
then, we may look forward into the future with 
rejoicing and with confidence, trusting to have a share 
in the glorious rewards God has promised to the 
faithful. 

As it would not have done for David merely to have 
thought about his anointing to be king and the blessing 
that would then come to him, so it would not do for us 
merely to think about the Kingdom honors that God 
has promised to the faithful, for in so doing we might 
be puffed up and thereby made unfit for a share in those 
coming blessings. Rather our attention, like that of 
David, must be directed to the things of the present, 
without, of course, forgetting the blessed influence of 
the coming prospects. It is ours to do with our might 
what our hands find to do at the present time, remembering 
that only thus can we make our calling and 
election sure. 

As each step of opposition on the part of Saul 
worked out a blessing for David, giving him wider experiences 
and fitting and preparing him for his future 
usefulness as the king, so all of the trials and difficulties 
and the disappointments that the Lord will now 
permit to come upon us from the world, the flesh and 
the Adversary— all of these will prove but preparations 
for his glorious Kingdom privileges, if faithfully used. 



R4220 : page 238 

LETTERS RESPECTING THE "VOW" 

DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I write to say how much I appreciate the letter in 
the last TOWER on the proper conduct of brothers and 
sisters, and to tell you how glad I am that this matter 
has been brought thus to the notice of all concerned, 
and that increased blessings may result. 

The Vow you and others have taken, as given in 
the TOWER, I most heartily take also. Indeed, it expresses 
my deepest heartfelt expressions, and by God's 
help, through our dear Lord, I will endeavor to carry it 
out fully. 

Praying that each one who so vows may have the 
needed strength and help, and may be greatly blessed 
and made a blessing to all with whom he or she may 
come in contact, I am, 

With much love in the Lord, 

JAS. T. HODGE,-Eng. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I want to tell you of my joy and appreciation of 
June 15th TOWER. It came to me as a blessing from 
the Lord's own hand. I am glad to tell you that I have 
taken the Vow and am already receiving many wonderful 
blessings therefrom. 

I feel that it will be a great strength to me, and am 
thankful for it and the many blessings I have received 
through you. 

I assure you, dear brother, that I remember you at 
the throne of heavenly grace daily and also the dear 
Bible House family. With much Christian love, 

Yours in his service, STELLA WILSON, -Ind. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Your article in June 15th TOWER, giving a copy 
of the recent Vow to the Lord, which the Pilgrim 
brethren have all made, has made a profound impression 
upon me, and I feel sure it will be blessed of the 
Lord and result in greatly strengthening the brethren 
who consecrate anew themselves by following the example 
set. 

I write only a line to say that I have reverently made 
this Vow to my heavenly Father, and beg for your prayers. 
Yours in bonds of love, J. S. COLE,— Fla. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Christian greeting to you. I received the letter 
containing the Vow to the Lord, and gave it a somewhat 
lengthy consideration— to some extent forgetting its 
receipt until the matter was again brought to my mind 
afresh by the letter and comments in the June 15th 
TOWER. 

I have since more minutely considered its embodiments, 
and must say that to me there is nothing new in 
the Vow with the exception of the last clause or sentence. 

In view of this would say that should the child of 
God be thus thrown into the private society of some designing 
enemy of the "truth," he or she would have 
little help outside of the Lord against the false and 
slanderous reports which such an one might circulate. 
So, dear brother, we with you, and all of those pure and 
desiring to be pure in heart, Vow unto the Lord, that, 
he being our help, we will fulfil all the conditions of 
this Vow, and abstain as much as in us lies even from 
the "appearance of evil." 

And now, dear brother, may the Lord lead you and 
keep you in the peace of them that love his law. I remain, 
ever your brother and fellow-servant in the dear 
Redeemer, ANTHONY STONER,-Ohio. 



page 238 

MANY MORE ADVISE THAT THEY HAVE TAKEN THE VOW 

Sister H. C. Rockwell, Elizabeth Van Aken, Mrs. 
Alice A. Dobbins, Eli Ya, Bain Matthews, Flora L. Davis, 
Lionel Gelling, I. A. Walker, Ann Walker, Fred S. 
Stevens, Mattie Herbruck, A. M. LaDu, D. S. McConihay, 
Archie Connell, Mrs. C. W. Frazer, Mrs. H. K. Blinn, 
Frances Marion, A. P. Walker, Lou Clardy, Sister E. 
Ludy, Wm. Sinclair, J. F. Stephenson, Jr., C. W. Weyhe, 
G. M. Huntsinger, M. V. Tanner, Mr. and Mrs. Mack 
Hess, E. Edmundson, Eugene L. Nelson, Mrs. Ann 
Moore, Mrs. J. C. Wilson, C. H. Doliber, Forrest Harrison, 
Mrs. Eda Stucke, John Peifer, E. P. Demmon, 

F. C. Moulton, Florence P. Moulton, E. M. Pepper, D. 
R. Akin, Geo. R. C. Hill, John O. Moore, Fred Mangold, 
M. L. Eckles, Lewis H. Kirkpatrick, W. S. McNaught, 

G. W. Hinds, Grace Hogue, J. F. Dodge, Carrie M. 
Crippen, Joseph Greig, Jennie Cuthbert, N. J. Granbeck, 
Mr. and Mrs. H. E. Williams, R. M. Irwin, Carrie M. 
Way, Henry McGivern, Ida J. Moore, R. E. Blair, Mrs. 
G. W. Faulk, Mrs. M. E. Garinger, Edna Davis, Edith 
Morse, Frank M. Mitchell, F. A. Uhlrich, Reamie J. 
Harrison, C. H. O. Haughton, Wm. T. Krueger, V. C. 
Elder, J. W. Sherman, A. T. Johnson, James Hudson, 

Mrs. Helen Worcester, Wm. F. Eustace, Percy McCarmack, 
Mr. and Mrs. T. Bridgeford, Sister Babcock, E. 
B. Thorn, Evangeline Millish, Alexander Walker, T. A. 
Bailey, W. E. Abbot, Wesley W. McCown, Mrs. Geo. R. 
Paynter, Brother and Sister Robert Martin, S. E. 
Ranger, Brother and Sister S. W. Carpenter, Mrs. E. 
Lavealle, A. H. DeMara, F. H. Bradshaw, Brother and 
Sister A. W. Goodrich, C. E. Stewart, Mrs. A. M. 
Blanchard, F. W. Randall, Henry L. Hauerwas, Geo. A. 
Marks, Anthony Stoner, H. P. Welsh, G. S. Kendall, 
A. A. Baxter, Florence Soper, Mrs. H. Wakefield, E. 
E. Wakefield Schuller, Stephen Schuller, J. F. Shields, 
Ida E. Shields, J. Ries, Oscar Magnuson, Irene K. 
Magnuson, B. E. Campbell, I. Villman, Mrs. C. M. Utzler, 
Helena Dann, J. M. Bradford, Lorena L. Bailey, 
Ralph L. Bailey, Ida Argenbright, C. B. Gibson, Mattie 
J. Ransbottom, Mrs. J. L. Gibson, L. T. Arrington, C. 
J. Robinson, Imogene Robinson, Ed. F. Edinger, C. E. 
Mead, Mrs. J. D. Crawford, Mrs. Carrie Harper, J. T. 
Hodge, Mr. and Mrs. C. W. Blanc, J. R. Leonard, Roy 
Holliday, E. H. Conklin, H. A. Spink, Wm. L. Boerema, 

D. Koon, Leander Cole, A. G. Clark and wife, Margaret 

E. Beach, H. Schlatter, Sr., Frieda Schlatter, E. H. and 
H. A. Schlatter, Pauline M. Schlatter, Mary Schlatter, 
Mamie B. Schlatter, L. F. Snow, L. A. Snook and wife, 
Frieda Scheid, Mrs. G. Kenzer, J. White, J. S. Coles, 
Mrs. R. S. Snook, Mrs. W. E. Snook, Frank W. Main, 
Brother and Sister C. M. Urch, Ella M. Huyck, A. R. 
Croil, Mr. and Mrs. J. Hettenbaugh, Amos L. Wilkinson, 



Hallie P. Johnson, E. B. Ullery, P. J. Shoquist, 
Eliot H. Thomson, S. H. Dingus, A. E. Sarvis, C. E. 
Silver, Edna L. Johnson, Mrs. J. C. Lacy, Ethel White, 
John Mann, H. N. Fatzinger, E. N. Crosby, R. A. A. 
McEwen, Mr. and Mrs. A. J. Tolbert, S. L. Marker, 
Mrs. H. W. Deming, Effa Wilson, May French, Mrs. J. 
O. Moore, E. O. Hammond, W. F. Jackson, Morgan T. 
Lewis, Isaiah Richards, Mrs. G. H. Draper, Ralph L. 
Read, S. L. Price, C. E. Kerney, C. J. Moore and family, 
A. E. Osborn. 



page 239 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V. (E)* 

Questions on Study V.— The Author of the Atonement. 

AUGUST 2 

(15) If the word "beginning" here refers to the beginning 
of Jehovah God's creative work, state what 

that work was, and give three or more Bible proof texts 
on the subject? P. 86, par. 3. 

(16) If our Lord as Jehovah's Word or Logos was 
his first creation, whence came angels and men and all 
else that have been created? By whom were these 
created? P. 87, par. 1. 

(17) How should we understand the declaration 
that our Lord was rich and for our sakes became poor? 
P.87, par. 1. 

(18) How will this comport with our Lord's reference 
to his glory with the Father "Before the world 

was"? John 17:5; P.87, par. 1. 

(19) How can these Scriptures be answered by 
those who deny our Lord Jesus' pre-human existence? 
P.87, par. 2. 

(20) Do these Scriptures examined substantiate the 
thought that our Lord Jesus was the "only begotten" of 
the Father? (I John 4:9.) What does "only begotten" 
imply if not that none other than he was the direct 
creation of the heavenly Father? P. 88, par. 1. 

AUGUST 9 

(21) What Scriptures declare that God sent his 

son into the world, and thus imply our Lord's pre-human 
existence? P. 88, par. 2. 

(22) The Apostle says, "He was in the world, and 
the world was made by him, and the world knew him 
not." According to this Scripture, was it the Father or 
the Son who directly created the world? P. 88, par. 2. 



(23) If the Son created the world, by what power 
did he do it— his own, or the heavenly Father's? Quote 

a Scripture proving that it was the Father's power exercised 

through the Son. Did our Lord Jesus claim to 

be the Father as well as the Son, and to have sent himself 

into the world? Quote a Scripture on this subject. 

P.89, par. 1. 

(24) Quote four other Scriptures in which the Lord 
represents himself as having come down from a heavenly 
condition to an earthly state? P.89, par. 1,2. 

(25) Did Jesus claim that his existence antedated 
that of Abraham? Where? P.89, par. 1. 

(26) Explain in what sense our Lord was before 
Abraham? P.90, par. 2. 

(27) How shall we understand our Lord's statement, 
"No man knoweth the Son, but the Father"? 

Matt. 11:27; P.91, par. 1. 

(28) What is the key to this knowledge? Why cannot 
all understand such matters? P.91, par. 2. 

(29) Why was Nicodemus refused a knowledge of 
heavenly things? Why is it necessary to believe God's 
revelation respecting earthly things before we can understand 
heavenly things? P. 92, par. 2. 

AUGUST 16 

(30) How was our Lord's pre-existent condition 
referred to by the wise men? P. 92, par. 3; P. 93, par. 1. 

(31) In what sense was Christ "the first and the 
last?" P.93, par. 3. 

(32) What is the ordinary theory respecting "incarnation"? 
P.93, par. 3. 

(33) What is the correct theory respecting the text: 
"The Logos was made flesh and dwelt among us"? 
John 1:14; P.93, par. 3; P.94, par. 1. 

(34) When our Lord is referred to as a man in the 
Scriptures, does this imply that he was a blemished 
man— an imperfect man? P. 95, par. 1. 

(35) Quote two Scriptures which prove that he is 
not referred to as a sinner in any sense of the word. 
P.95, par. 2. 

(36) If our Lord had been of fallen human nature, 
could he have been our Redeemer? If not, why not? 

AUGUST 23 

THE MEDIATOR OF THE ATONEMENT 

THE UNDEFILED ONE 

(1) The Scriptures declare that a clean thing cannot 
come out of an unclean. (Job 14:4.) How does 

this agree with the declaration that our Lord was "holy, 
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners? P. 97. 

(2) Is a knowledge of the manner in which God 
accomplished this bringing of a clean thing out of an 



unclean essential to true discipleship? In other words, 
is the philosophy of the Atonement indispensable to 
faith? P.98, par. 1. 

(3) What is the Roman Catholic view of the "Immaculate 
Conception"? Does it apply to Jesus or to his 

mother? P.98, par. 2. 

(4) If Jesus' birth was out of the ordinary channel 

of affairs— a miracle— can it be said that there are other 
miracles in nature which are not so considered merely 
because they are more general? P.98, par. 3. 

(5) Give illustrations of two substances in nature 
which act contrary to the ordinary so-called laws of 
nature? P.98, par. 3. 

(6) Does existence or living energy come from the 
father or from the mother? P. 99, par. 1. 

(7) Does the body or form come from the father, 
or from the mother? P. 99, par. 1. 

(8) What is the significance of the word "father"? 
P.99, par. 2. 

(9) Is it because of this principle, that the life or 
being comes from the father, and organism from the 
mother, that children are spoken of as being of or from 
their fathers and born by their mothers? Gen. 24:47. 
Give several illustrations? P.99, par. 3. 

AUGUST 30 

(10) Does science agree with the Scriptures in this 
teaching as applied to humanity, and to all mammalia, 
that the life principle comes from the father, and the 
organism from the mother? P. 100, par. 2. 

(11) Give an illustration on this subject from the 
egg of a fowl? P. 100, par. 3. 

(12) In view of these facts, could it be possible 
for a perfect child to be born to a perfect father, 
even if the mother were imperfect? P. 100, par. 4. 

(13) Why is it true that "One man's meat is another 
man's poison? P. 101, par. 1. 

(14) Applying this principle, could a perfect race 

have been born had mother Eve sinned and become imperfect, 
and father Adam remained sinless and perfect? 
P.101,par. 2. 

(15) Would the reverse of this have been true? 

That is, suppose that Adam had sinned and mother Eve 
had remained sinless and perfect, could the race thus 
have retained its perfection through the mother? P. 101, 
par. 3; P. 102, par. 1. 

(16) Does the Scripture, "Who can bring a clean 
thing out of an unclean thing," refer, then, to Adam or 
to Eve— to the male or to the female? P. 102, par. 2. 



*Five years ago DAWN-STUDIES, VOL. V., was reset, and 
unfortunately the type was not exactly same size as before; and 
hence page for page they differ. The references given in these 



Berean Studies apply to the present edition, a copy of which 
postpaid will cost you but 30c. But keep your old edition, for 
unfortunately the New Bible helps refer to its pages. 



page 241 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXIX. AUGUST 15 No. 16 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

Our Western Convention Tour 243 

General Convention, Aug. 29-Sept. 7 244 

The Changed Heaven and Earth 246 

A Friend in Need a Friend Indeed 246 

The Basis of Loving Friendship 247 

How Love May be Developed 247 

"Do Good to Them That Hate You" 249 

"Deliver Thee Out of All Tribulation" 250 

No Murderer in the Kingdom 251 

Some Who Have Vowed are Blest 252 

page 242 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each MAY stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 



FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



DATES OF BEREAN LESSONS 



The Berean Lessons of our last issue, August 1st, by 
error were dated August instead of September. Please correct 
with pencil. 

"MARKED" NEW TESTAMENTS 



We still have some of the "Marked" New Testaments 
(passages relating to ransom and salvation marked); in cloth 
binding, 15c each, including postage. 

NEW WATCH TOWER BIBLES 



Our new edition will be ready about Oct. 1, but in our 
next issue we hope to be able to give a full description of the 
various styles and bindings and prices, so that you may be 
able to order in advance. Do not send money until you have 
full particulars. 

ANSWERS TO YOUR LETTERS 



Brother Russell would gladly answer every letter received, 
but with so large a mail this is impossible. Please accept 
the TOWERS and DAWNS as answers, with occasionally a 
post card or letter if some queries of your letters make this 
necessary. He is glad to have your letters, to know of the 
joy you have in taking and keeping the Vow, and that it 
assists you to "A closer walk with God." 



R4220 : page 243 

OUR WESTERN CONVENTION TOUR 

SUNDAY, July 5th, was Pittsburg's Convention day. 
The morning session was devoted to the exposition 
of the doctrine of Baptism. The afternoon service 
for the public was held in Alvin Theatre. There were 
about 1,000 present, of whom about one-half were strangers. 
Close attention was given to our topic, "Where are the 
Dead?" The evening service at Bible House Chapel was 



a Question Meeting, after which we took train on our western 
journey— accompanied to the depot by about a dozen of the 
friends. 

We stopped over with the Indianapolis friends and had 
a delightful meeting with about fifty-five of them from 8 to 
10 a.m. We remarked the love for the Truth which would 
bring together nearly the entire class on a Monday morning. 
They came not from curiosity— to see the speaker— for they 
had seen and heard him many times. They came not "to 
hear some new thing," for they are already well acquainted 
with the Divine Plan of the Ages, and knew that only "the 
old, old story" would be presented. Evidently the attraction 
was in the rehearsing of the old message of "love divine, all 
love excelling." 

Little Rock, Arkansas, was reached early on Tuesday, 
July 7. A little group awaited our arrival at the depot and 
greeted us most heartily. From 10.30 to 12 we talked to 
about sixty on the precious things of the divine plan— especially 
exhorting the interested. The afternoon session was 
for the public and was well attended for a week-day afternoon. 
About 200 to 250 very intelligent people listened 
with manifest interest for nearly two hours. We met with 
some of the dear friends in a social way until train time, a 
considerable number accompanying us to the depot. 

Houston, Tex., was reached on Wednesday at 5 p.m. 
All the sessions were held in the Public Park Theatre— two 
of them for the interested and two for the public. The attendance 
at the former was about 100 and at the latter between 
500 and 600. The interest was good. 

San Antonio, Texas, was reached next morning. An 
enthusiastic group met us at the depot and after refreshments 
we addressed quite a good congregation for an hour 
and a half, the essence of our theme being "Love the principal 
thing," and therefore the final test of saintly character. 
An afternoon meeting with the elders of the congregation 
took two hours and then we addressed the friends for an 
hour on the delusions coming on the world which, "if it 
were possible, would deceive the very Elect." 

The evening meeting for the public was in the Opera 
House, and surely brought the Truth to a large and very 
intelligent audience. We have excellent hopes for the results, 
but they of course are wholly in the Lord's hands. It 
is ours to do our best to present the Truth, but not ours to 
give the hearing ear. 

Dallas, Texas, was reached in season for a Saturday 
morning discourse to the interested. The session had already 
started with a Testimony Meeting and a delegation awaited 
our train and escorted us to the Maccabees' Temple. On 
our arrival the congregation of nearly 300 arose and joined 
in singing, "Blest be the tie that binds our hearts in Christian 
love." 

The afternoon session was addressed by Pilgrim Hoskins 
with excellent acceptance, and the evening meeting was 
held on Brother Rust's lawn in the suburbs. About 200 attended. 
The first hour was occupied by six speakers for 
ten minutes each and then we spoke for about an hour and 



a quarter on "the evil day" and its peculiar testings and 
needs for grace from on high. 

Pilgrim Parker addressed the Convention at its Sunday 
morning session and quite evidently pleased and edified 
those who heard. 

The afternoon session was specially for the public, 
the topic being, "Where are the Dead?" The audience was 
estimated at 700 and excellent attention was given. Our 
Sunday evening discourse to the interested has already been 
published and has reached many of you through the Dispatch, 
Enquirer and other journals. 

The Monday morning session of the Convention opened 
with a discourse on Baptism, by Brother Coward, and was 
followed by an immersion service. The afternoon session 
concluded the Convention, and consisted of brief addresses 
by a number of brethren, covering various phases of Love. 
We can give no particulars of Monday's sessions because we 
left at six a.m. for our next appointment. 

Oklahoma City, Okla., was reached about five p.m., 
Monday, July 13th. Our reception began at once as we 
alighted from the train; about 106 greeting us with hearty 
hand-shakes. It was our first visit to the friends of these 
parts, and we met the majority for the first time and received 
a hearty welcome. 

The evening service was for the public— "To Hell and 
Back," etc. About 500 heard for the first time and very attentively. 
The friends believe that a favorable impression 

R4221 : page 244 

was made for the truth. The meeting on the 14th was at 
Brother Young's home. About 125 were present and we had 
a very enjoyable time for three hours. A portion of the time 
was devoted to answering questions and the remainder to the 
discussion of Baptism. In the afternoon eleven were immersed 
in the White Temple Baptist Church, while others who would 
have been glad to do so, were prevented by our lack of 
time, but will be immersed later on the occasion of a Pilgrim's 
visit to their home towns. About 20 of the friends accompanied 
us on the north-bound train, getting off at various 
stations within 60 miles. But some of the dear friends drove 
as much as 65 miles. 

Topeka, Kansas, our next stop, was reached early, but 
two dear brethren met us, arising about three o'clock to do 
so. The morning session was a Rally and Testimony Meeting, 
in which we participated, appropriating the larger share 
of the time. The afternoon discourse for the interested was 
along the lines of Preparation for the Kingdom. The evening 
topic was for the public at The Auditorium. We had an 
excellent hearing and we trust for fruit to our labors ere long. 
About 80 visitors were present, some coming over 100 miles. 
The attendance at the public service was estimated at 550. 

St. Joseph, Mo., was reached the next day in season for 
a Morning Rally in the Y.M.C.A. Chapel. We heard some 
warm, loving testimonies to the power of the truth and the 
joys of living in full consecration to the Lord. Then we spoke 



for one hour on Baptism and its symbol, following which 
about 13 were baptized in water, confessing their death with 
Christ and their hope to live with him through the power of 
the First Resurrection. 

The afternoon subject in the same chapel to the interested 
set forth some of the evidences that we are in that 
"evil day," and pointed out some of the safeguards which the 
Lord has been providing during this "harvest" time, and the 
necessity for our appropriating these before the "overflowing 
scourge shall come" (Isa. 28:18), and before "the enemy 
shall come in like a flood."— Isa. 59:18-20. 

The public session was in the evening at the Opera 
House. It had evidently been well advertised, for we had a 
splendid audience, estimated at 1 100, which gave close attention. 
Brother Senor (at whose home we were entertained 
most hospitably) and several others accompanied us the following 
morning to our next appointment. 

Kansas City friends met us at the depot, and soon a 
Testimony Rally was in progress at the Music Academy 
engaged for the entire day. We had an excellent season of 
refreshing with the local Church and friends from surrounding 
parts— hearing their testimonies to God's grace and giving 
them ours. The afternoon service was for the interested and 
the evening session for the public. We believe that some 
good was accomplished and a blessing carried away by all 
the truth-hungry. 

Joplin, Mo., was our next stop and a very enjoyable one 
it was. All meetings were held in the fine new Opera House. 
The morning Testimony Rally was followed by a discourse 
for the interested, and the afternoon session was for the public, 
while before and after each session we greeted the friends. 
Some had come long distances to the meeting, and not by 
word only but by the earnestness of their hand-clasps and the 
moisture of their eyes did they tell us of their love, and of the 
blessings the Lord had graciously poured upon them through 
the channel of Present Truth. We were informed that seven 
"Reverends" were present at the public service, which was 
well attended for a very hot week-day afternoon. 

A goodly crowd assembled at the railway station to say 
a final good-bye and two accompanied us to St. Louis. As 
our train pulled out the throng was singing— Praise to him by 
whose kind favor heavenly truth has reached our ears. 

St. Louis was duly reached next morning (Sunday, July 
19). The Colporteurs had claimed the privilege of being 
the Reception Committee to meet our train, and there they 
were for nearly three hours because of a misunderstanding 
as to which train to meet. We had a most cordial reception 
also at the general meeting for the interested, which we 
addressed for nearly two hours. 

The public service was held in The Odean, from 2:20 to 
4:40. About 1100 were in attendance notwithstanding the 
oppressive heat. We had a joyful time telling the good tidings 
to so many whose interest was manifest by their close 
attention. A brother owning an automobile took us quickly 
to the five p.m. train. We reached home next morning— 
the entire circuit having been covered in one night more than 



two weeks. 



R4221 : page 244 

GENERAL CONVENTION AUGUST 29 TO SEPTEMBER 7, 1908 

ON PUT-IN-BAY ISLAND, LAKE ERIE, AND ABOUT 
THIRTY MILES FROM TOLEDO, TEN MILES FROM 
SANDUSKY, SIXTY MILES FROM CLEVELAND, 
FIFTY MILES FROM DETROIT 

WHAT we anticipate as the most blessed convention 
our Society has ever held has been provided for 
as above. We have arranged for the exclusive use 
of Hotel Victory, which is located about two miles from the 
steamboat landing and reached by an electric car line. The 
seclusion from the world and its affairs will, we trust, be 
conducive to our highest spiritual profit, and the nine days 
will give opportunity for reasonable rest and refreshment of 
body as well as of mind. Jesus said to his disciples, Let us 
turn aside and rest for a season, and we may do well to follow 
their example. 

The hotel grounds are spacious and beautifully kept 
and the house itself is an exceptional one. Besides large 
parlors and dining rooms it has more than 675 large, airy 
bed rooms. Experience shows that to enjoy spiritual refreshment 
we need to be physically comfortable and this comfort 
the Lord seems to have arranged for us on this occasion. 

The hotel management agrees to provide a very large 
tent, with a capacity of three or four thousand, and chairs 
on the hotel grounds. There is also on the premises a large 
swimming pool, where baptism may be symbolized. One of 
the main features of the Convention, we expect, will be the 
personal fellowship which the friends will surely enjoy. 

THE EXPENSE MODERATE 

Hotel Victory prices generally range from four to five 
dollars per day, but by our special contract with the management, 
and on an assurance that our people, although not 
wealthy, are genteel and refined, and that probably not a 
single cigar-stump or tobacco-quid will be dropped, our rates 
will be as follows: Six persons in a room, 50 cents per day 
each; two persons in a room, 75 cents per day each; one 
person in a room, $1.50. 

Meals will be provided on the hotel plan at 40 cents 
each, and on the home plan, a general table and general 
dishes, at 25 cents each. Besides, there will be a lunch-counter, 
at which sandwiches, cakes, pies, milk, coffee and 
tea may be had at five cents for each item. Thus it will be 
possible to regulate one's eating according to his appetite 
and pocket-book. We advise, however, that no one calculate 
on less than $1.25 per day. 



R4221 : page 245 

RAILROAD EXCURSIONS 

Friends from the west and south of Toledo will surely 
do best if they purchase "G.A.R. Encampment tickets" to 
Toledo and return. The Western Railroad Association has 
already "agreed to a rate of one and one-half cents per mile 
from all Missouri River points," and the Southern Association, 
we learn, "will give a one-cent rate." Probably by Convention 
time the Central Railroad Association will make some extra 
concession also. Such information, however, must be obtained 
from your Railway Ticket Agent. As for other points 
east of Toledo and in Canada each must determine for himself 
what will be the most economical arrangement. The 
Canadian friends should inquire for Excursion Tickets to 
the WATCH TOWER SOCIETY'S CONVENTION on the Certificate 
Plan— either to Detroit or Buffalo. Buy boat tickets separately. 
Be sure to get your Certificate. New York and New 
England friends may find this ticket cheaper than the G.A.R. 
rate and should inquire. 

BOAT EXCURSION RATES 

We have a boat rate from Toledo to Put-in-Bay and 
return for 50 cents. The Cleveland boat rate is $1.00; the 
Detroit boat charges the same for round-trip. The Buffalo 
rate to Put-in-Bay for the round-trip will be only $3.50. Ask 
for boat excursion tickets to the WATCH TOWER SOCIETY'S CONVENTION 
at Put-in-Bay. 

The Buffalo boat leaves at night, and Put-in-Bay is 
reached about noon of next day. The Cleveland boat leaves 
in the morning at 8:15 and reaches the Bay at noon. The 
Toledo boat leaves in the morning at 8:15, reaching the Bay 
at noon. But as Toledo will be crowded, and as most of the 
friends will embark there, we have chartered a night boat 
to leave at ten p.m. on Friday and Saturday nights, 
August 28 and 29, at same rate; 50 cents for the round-trip. 

APPLY FOR ACCOMMODATIONS SOON 

The hotel will be able to accommodate 2500 people; it 
is quite possible that the attendance may exceed that number, 
and provision has been made for some to be lodged in 
cottages not far distant from the hotel. However, those who 
desire rooms to themselves, or where six of one sex prefer to 
be in a room together, it would be safe to make application 
in advance. Address Hotel Victory, Put-in-Bay, Ohio. 

EXCURSION PARTIES 

Although each individual can buy his ticket as cheaply 
as others, some may desire to go in company with others for 
the sake of the fellowship. Thus a considerable number 
will be going from Pittsburgh via Cleveland, rate $7 for the 
round-trip, or 70 cents less where ten or more ride on a "party 



R4222 : page 245 

ticket." Leave via P.R.R. Friday, Aug. 28, midnight. Sleeper 
$1.50 extra. If going, advise at once "Convention Dept." 
Similar companies will be starting from Cincinnati, St. 
Louis, Chicago, Detroit, Cleveland, Buffalo, New York, Washington 
and Boston. Those who desire to join any of these 
companies we shall be pleased to supply with proper 
directions, which should reach you at least a week in advance 
of the Convention date. The Chicago friends advise that 
they will have a special train via the WABASH RAILROAD on 
August 28th. Any desirous of joining them may address Dr. 
L. W. Jones, 2024 Washington Boulevard, Chicago. 

PREREQUISITE TO A BLESSING 

Let us not forget, dear friends, that no matter how 
beautiful the surroundings and favored are the conditions 
and fellowship, our share in the blessing will be proportionate 
to our readiness of heart to receive it! Let each one 
purposing to attend prepare his heart in advance for a blessing; 
the words of the Apostle constitute one of the best prescriptions 
we know of for such preparation; he says, "Let us 
put away all filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit, perfecting 
holiness in the fear of the Lord." (2 Cor. 7:1.) With 
prayer and supplication let our request for the divine blessing 
be presented at the throne of grace, that the Lord may 
open to us the windows of heaven and pour out such a 
blessing as we shall not be able to contain— such a blessing 
as will overflow from those who attend the Convention to 
the other dear ones at home not thus privileged. 

The condition upon which the Lord promises this out-pouring 
of his blessing is that we bring our tithes into the 
storehouse; that we pay our vows unto the Lord; that we 
seek to appreciate and live up to our consecration, and to 
develop in harmony therewith more and more of the spirit of 
our Master— the spirit of Love. Come desirous of an opportunity 
for comforting and strengthening and refreshing others 
as well as with the desire to be comforted yourself. Thus 
drawing nigh to the Lord according to his arrangements we 
shall be sure to have his smile and his blessing. 

We were obliged to abandon the project of coming to 
Pittsburgh for the closing Sunday of the Convention, for two 
reasons: (1) The expense would be considerable. (2) The 
fatigue incident to such a program would be too great for 
the majority. Discerning this we considered whether it might 
be the Lord's will to have the entire Convention at Pittsburg, 
and we allowed the matter to be decided by our ability or 
inability to secure a suitable Convention Hall upon satisfactory 
terms. The result was our decision in favor of the quiet 
and restful season at Put-in-Bay for this year. Possibly the 
way may be open for a Pittsburgh Convention some time 
again, but we concede that Convention facilities here are not 
very favorable at present. 

Brother Russell expects to be at the Put-in-Bay Convention 



during its first Sunday, August 30, and during some 

of the week-days following, returning to Pittsburgh for Sunday, 

September 6th. 

COLPORTEURS AT THE CONVENTION 

Just in time, we trust, we have heard from the dear 
friend of the truth who last year assisted to the Convention 
the Colporteurs needing help. He writes:— 

"I dearly love the noble band of Colporteurs although 
not privileged to be one of them. Their heroism in leaving 
home and earthly comforts to preach the 'glad tidings' and 
to assist the Lord's poor, blinded sheep out of Babylon, 
specially appeals to me. I can well realize what a treat to 
such are the Conventions— what an uplift! I wanted to do 
this year as I did last year to assist some of them, but I learn 
that their number has increased, besides the year being less 
prosperous proportionately more may request the aid. What 
shall I do with no more money at my disposal? 

"I think of only one way of discriminating, and so 
(without any reflection on those who have not taken it), I 
decide to favor those who have taken "the Vow" published 
in the June 15 TOWER, which I also have taken and which I 
heartily commend to all in all of its provisions. 

"My offer then is this: I will pay through your Colporteur 
Department ONE-HALF OF THE MINIMUM EXPENSES of any 
Regular Colporteur on your list who has made reports or 
ordered books during June and July and whose financial condition 
makes necessary this aid, in order to his or her attendance 
at the General Convention at Put-in-Bay. Please publish 
the offer in the WATCH TOWER, but withhold my name." 

These funds will be disbursed at the Convention. Buy 
excursion tickets. The hotel expenses will amount generally 
to as much or more than the ticket; if not, write to the Colporteur 
Department at once. 



R4222 : page 246 

THE CHANGED HEAVEN AND EARTH 

"Thou, Lord, in the beginning hast laid the foundation of 

the earth, and the heavens are the works of thine hands: 

They shall perish; but thou remainest; and they shall 

all wax old as doth a garment; and as a vesture 

shalt thou fold them up, and they shall 

be changed; but thou art the same, 

and thy years shall not fail."— Heb. 1:10-12. 

THESE words are a quotation by the Apostle from 

Psalm 102:25,26. They are used to attest the 

fact that God had foreordained that our Lord 

Jesus should be very great— should be superior to all 

change. We quite agree with the Apostle's argument 

in our text and its context. However, a question arises 



in the minds of some as to how this declaration agrees 
with some Scriptural statements to the effect that the 
earth abideth forever, etc. 

We have already shown in DAWN-STUDIES, Vol. I, 
and elsewhere, that the words "heaven" and "earth" 
are used in a figurative and symbolical sense in the 
Scriptures, as well as literally. We have shown that as 
symbols they represent the present order of things, 
which is to pass away and give place to a new order 
of things. We have shown that this is the sense of the 
Apostle Peter's argument when he speaks of the world 
that now is and the present heavens and earth, which 
are to pass away with a great noise (2 Pet. 3:10), and to 
be supplanted by the new heavens and new earth. As 
already shown, we understand that our physical earth 
has been the basis for "the world that was," "the 
present evil world," and "the world to come," and 
that the word "world," even in this instance, signifies 
the order of things that was, the order of things 
that is, and the order of things to come. The figure is 
carried out in detail by speaking of it as a heaven and 
earth, because the word "earth" is used to represent 
the earthly systems, social and political, while the word 
"heaven" is used to represent the higher, the ecclesiastical, 
the spiritual things connected therewith. Thus, 
the heaven and earth which were before the flood perished, 
disappeared; not the literal heaven nor the literal 
earth, but the symbolical or figurative. That social 
order, or earth, that prevailed before the flood passed 
away, and at the same time there passed also the spiritual 
or superior rule of the angels which was connected 
with that epoch which preceded the flood. After the 
flood, a new order of things was instituted; society was 
reorganized under new conditions, but on the same 
physical earth, and a new spiritual government or rule 
or order obtained also. It is this symbolic heaven 
and earth that was organized after the flood which is to 
pass away with a great noise at the second coming of 
our Lord— not the physical earth nor the physical 
heaven. Similarly we understand the Apostle, "We 
look for a new heaven and a new earth," to refer not to 
some other planet, but to this same one, and to imply 
a new social order of things and a new ecclesiastical 
order or rule. 

In view of these things, we feel justified in interpreting 
the words of our text in harmony with the other 
Scriptures referring to the changes of dispensation 
which are foretold to be coming to the world. 

Hence, while agreeing with the Apostle's argument 
that our Lord Jesus was the Father's active agent in 
the creation of the physical earth and physical heaven, 
we understand the real thought to be that with him 
there will be no change, but with his creation, there 
will be change— not as respects the matter and form of 
the earth, but in respect to its highest interest, its 
social and religious order. To elaborate the statement 



further: The order which our Lord originally established 

in the world was right and proper— the Divine 

order. As for the earth, Adam was its king, created in 

the image and likeness of his Creator and given dominion 

over the beast of the field, the fowl of the heaven 

and the fish of the sea. As for the spiritual heavens, 

they recognized the supremacy of the Almighty and 

that his will must be law to mankind. This beautiful 

arrangement originally established by our Lord was 

changed twice by sin, until today we have what is 

known as "This Present Evil World," in which neither 

the heavens nor the earthly ideals, regulations and arrangements, 

are in harmony with the original, but on 

the contrary, are quite unfit and ready for dissolution. 

They are about to be folded up and to be changed. 

They need a change, not because of any imperfection in 

the original arrangement, but because it was departed 

from through sin, disobedience and the penalty death. 

The new heaven and earth which the Lord will establish 

by his Millennial Kingdom reign will be the original 

R4223 : page 246 

restored. The law of love will then prevail amongst 
perfect men, and a direct responsibility will be realized 
to God, the giver of every good and perfect gift, and to 
the Lord Jesus, who not only was the Father's prime 
minister and agent in creation, but who during the next 
age will be the Father's prime minister and agent in 
bringing all things back to their primeval condition 
with added splendors. 



R4223 : page 246 

A FRIEND IN NEED A FRIEND INDEED 

-I SAMUEL 20:3 0-42. -AUGUST 23.- 

Golden Text:— "A friend loveth at all times, 
and a brother is born for adversity." 

HISTORY does not record a more touching story of love 
than that which existed between Jonathan and 
David. Both were noble characters, capable of loving 
deeply, intensely, although in many respects they were men 
of entirely different stamp. David was the more versatile, 
His is the broadest character on record; says Charles Reade:— 

"In holy writ Moses, Elijah and Paul; in profane history 
Solon, Alexander, Caesar, Charlemagne, Napoleon and others 
excelled David in one quality or another. But David presents 
a greater number of distinct and striking features than 
any one of those great men; and that is why I style him the 
widest character on record— a shepherd, a soldier, a courtier, 
a famous friend, a fugitive, a captor, a marauder, a general, 



a king, a statesman, an exile, a priest, a prophet, a saint, a 
criminal, a penitent, and nothing by halves. His character 
was a harp of many strings." 

Jonathan, the son of King Saul and heir apparent to 
the throne of Israel, had also noble qualities. He was a 
faithful son, who alone could comfort his father in his times 
of disappointment. He showed himself an able warrior and 
displayed great faith in God; and his religious nature was 
apparently as fully developed as was that of David. Evidently 
these elements of honesty and devotion and reverence for 
God which these two men perceived in each other, constituted 

R4223 : page 247 

the basis of the great friendship which so spontaneously 
knit their hearts together in a wonderful bond of friendship 
—love. Indeed, according to the entire account, Jonathan 
would seem to have been the larger of these two great 
souls and his love the greater. From this standpoint alone, 
since love is the principal thing in the world, Jonathan may 
be considered to be one of the grandest characters in the 
world; for he loved much and against his own interests. 

DEEP FRIENDSHIP FOR HIS RIVAL 

At times friendships spring up based upon mutual admiration, 
and often with a measure of selfishness in cooperation. 
But in the instance under consideration selfishness 
would have operated against the friendship; it is, therefore, 
a sample of disinterested love. Every success and honor 
that came to David raised him as a popular idol to the place 
which Jonathan to a considerable extent had held. Every advancement 
of David meant the preparation of the people to 
receive him instead of Jonathan as Saul's successor. The 
king saw this, so did Jonathan; but they were reversely 
affected by it. The king was made jealous, angry; Jonathan, 
reversely, loved his rival, and that from the time of their 
first meeting, on which occasion he gave to David his armor 
and court robes. (1 Sam. 18:4.) We read, "The soul of 
Jonathan was knit unto the soul of David"; their natures 
interwove, intermixed— a beautiful description of the purest 
and truest of love. Alexander White says: 

"Had I read, 'Jonathan loved David as his own soul,' 
for once only I should have passed it by as hyperbole,... 
but as I read again the rest of the story, I found myself saying 
to the sacred writer, 'Lo, in all this speakest thou plainly, 
and speakest no hyperbole.'" 

THE BASIS OF LOVING FRIENDSHIP 

Friendship love is not a miracle, but results from certain 
combinations. The one we love need not of necessity be just 
like ourselves, but rather would appeal to us more as a 
counterpart possessing qualities which we admire, but 
do not so strongly possess. Darkness, however, never 
loved the light; the light never loves darkness. Hence for 



friendship-love on a noble plane both friends must have 
high ideals, noble aspirations, even though they may have 
these in different measure. Each should see in the other 
something to esteem and to look up to; although in the case 
of the Almighty this cannot be true; his love for us must be 
chiefly along the lines of sympathy for us and appreciation 
of our endeavors to attain to his character standards. We 
may be sure, too, that in Jonathan's case reverence for the 
Lord had much to do with estopping any feeling of rivalry 
and with encouraging his admiration for his rival. Who will 
not admit that such an appreciation of the divine will and 
providences would be a help to all friendship, a hindrance 
to all spirit of rivalry and in general a most valuable uplift 
in every Christian character? How much it means to us in 
the way of contentment to know that our heavenly Father is 
at the helm as respects all the affairs of his people! How 
much rest it permits in our own hearts! How much meekness, 
gentleness, kindness and love it prompts toward others, 
both to realize that they as well as ourselves are subjects of 
divine care, and to have a heart so fully submitted to the 
Lord as to desire that his will shall be done irrespective of 
our own temporal interests or those of others. 

Undoubtedly this was the good basis of Jonathan's love; 
and undoubtedly it is the fruitful soil out of which all proper 
love amongst the Lord's people will be developed. We must 
love the Lord with all our heart, mind, soul and strength before 
we shall be prepared to love our neighbor as ourselves, 
and to wish for him the same riches of grace that we desire 
for ourselves under the Lord's providences. Still more is it 
necessary to have this supreme love for God before we could 
in any measure approximate the degree of love which the 
Lord set before his followers as a new commandment, saying, 
"A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one 
another as I have loved you." Jonathan's love approximated 
this Christian love, this self-sacrificing love which so loved 
his neighbor as to delight to see that neighbor have the 
Lord's blessing upon him, even while this meant his own loss 
of honor, prestige and kingly power. Oh, that such love as 
this might more and more prevail in the hearts of the New 
Creation! It is to such that the Apostle says, "Let the 
brother of high degree rejoice in that he is abased, and the 
brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted"— under 
the Lord's providences. 

A DAVID AND JONATHAN BOND 

It is not necessary for us to form a society for the propagation 
of the Jonathan and David bond of love amongst us 
as the Lord's people. We have this organization which inculcates 
a love that is even greater. The head, the chief, 
the center of this organization is our Lord Jesus Christ, who 
not only exhorted us to the highest conceptions and practices 
of love, but exemplified this in himself when he laid down 
his life, not only for his friends, but also for his enemies. 
"Greater love hath no man than this." This greatest of all 
lovers, our Lord Jesus Christ, has organized an association of 



lovers, and has made membership therein dependent upon 
the willingness of his followers to take up the cross and follow 
him, to lay down their lives for the brethren. 

Only those who have made such a consecration of faithfulness 
to the Captain, faithfulness to the spirit of love, faithfulness 
to one another as members of the Body of the 
Anointed— only these are admitted to membership in this exclusive 
society, "The Church of the Living God, whose names 
are written in heaven." And more than this, the founder of 
our society has told us that he is the Vine and we are the 
branches; and that every branch in him that beareth not 
this fruit of love will be taken away, cut off from the Vine, 
disassociated from membership in this blessed Church. He 
assures us further, that our faithfulness to our covenant with 
this true Vine will bring upon us purgings, prunings from the 
great Husbandman, that he may develop in us more and more 
the fruits of the Spirit, the fruit of the Vine— meekness, gentleness, 
brotherly kindness, love; that these graces may be in 
us and abound; that thereby the Father may be glorified 
and blessed, and that we may be made ready, "meet for the 
inheritance of the saints in light." 

So then we see that we need no special organization, 
but are already members of such a company, if so be that we 
are disciples of Christ and united to him as members of the 
New Creation. 

HOW LOVE MAY BE DEVELOPED 

David, the younger man of the two, as we have seen, 
possessed by nature a deep, generous character, capable of 
intense love, but apparently time was required for its development. 
And as we perceive Jonathan's love for him, the 
brighter and more intense at first, we find that David's love 
was drawn forth, that he loved in return, just as God's love 

R4224 : page 248 

was first toward us and subsequently our love drew out toward 
him increasingly. Our lesson tells us how Jonathan 
endeavored to preserve peace between the king and David, 
but finding his father intent upon killing his friend, he took 
occasion to forewarn David that he must flee, as matters had 
come to that pass where his life would be unsafe anywhere 
near the king. This warning was given by a previous arrangement 
in a field at a distance from the palace. David 
was hidden behind a great rock. As an excuse, Jonathan 
went forth to practice archery, with a lad accompanying him 
to bring back the arrows. His real mission, however, was to 
advise David whether or not he must flee that vicinity. His 
words to the lad, "Make speed, haste, stay not," while appropriate 
to the arrows, were really intended for David, that he 
might know the urgency of the situation. Then, sending the 
boy with the weapons to the palace, Jonathan concluded that 
he must risk a few moments with his friend. By this time 
David was realizing the depth of Jonathan's love, which had 
been proved in so many ways and now finally in his willingness 



to protect David's life, when it would have been to his 
own interest to permit his father to wreak vengeance upon 
David. Such a love is rarely known, except amongst the 
saints; and alas, we fear not too much experienced even 
amongst these. When, however, we do find a friend who 
sticketh closer than a brother, we properly appreciate him 
all the more because of the rarity of his kind. 

At this meeting David bowed himself three times to the 
earth, an eastern custom expressive of humility and appreciation. 
The friends kissed each other and wept one with 
another, David ultimately appearing to be the more heartbroken 
of the two. Although confident in the Lord, he was 
leaving his home to be an outcast— an outlaw. He not only 
was losing the companionship of his dear friend Jonathan, 
but he would be considered by many of the people of his 
own nation as a traitor, because of the king's opposition and 
the necessity it would put upon him for becoming a kind of 
brigand. Then it was that Jonathan said to him, "Go in 
peace; forasmuch as we have sworn both of us in the name 
of the Lord, saying, The Lord shall be between thee and me 
and between thy seed and my seed forever." They parted, 
according to the record, and never met again except once, a 
year or two later, when David was pursued by Saul. Then 
Jonathan went again to his friend to comfort him and 
"strengthened his hand in God."— 1 Sam. 23:16. 

A glimpse of David's estimation of Jonathan and his 
love is given in what is termed "The Song of the Bow," 
David's touching lament at the death of his friend Jonathan. 
He exclaims, "I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan. 
Very pleasant hast thou been unto me; thy love to me was 
wonderful, passing the love of women." (2 Sam. 1:26.) But 
we, dear friends, know of a still more wonderful love than 
this, of which we sometimes sing, 
"Love of Jesus, all divine, 
Fill this longing heart of mine." 

Love begets love; and so the Scriptures tell us that it 
was not that we first loved God, but that he first loved us 
and manifested his love for us in the gift of his Son. So it 
was the love of Jesus that attracted us and drew forth our 
love in response. And day by day, as we come to appreciate 
more and more the heights and depths and lengths and 
breadths of the love of God and of Christ, which passes all 
human understanding, the more our love toward them will 
increase and abound. And as it increases we ourselves become 
more Godlike and correspondingly also from us proceeds 
a love for others who love us not; and our love for 
them will excite the love of some in return, and lead them to 
a greater appreciation of this principle which stands in opposition 
to the spirit of the world, the love of the world, the 
selfishness of the world. Let us then seek to cultivate this 
godlike quality. Let us notice not only that the Scriptures 
declare love to be the principal thing in the world, but that it is 
the very essence of the divine character, the very essence of 
the divine law which is fulfilled in this one word, Love. Let 
us remember then that in the exercise of this quality we are 
preparing ourselves for the glorious possibilities to which we 



have been invited, and which by our Lord's grace we are 
seeking to obtain by making our calling and election sure. 

In the Scriptures sharp contrasts are drawn; and while 
this love of Jonathan, and the love of the Father and of the 
Son are set forth as worthy of emulation, another kind of 
character is also pictured, as when our Lord is represented 
in the Psalms as saying respecting Judas, "Yea, mine own 
familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, 
hath lifted up his heel against me." (Psa. 41:9.) Let us 
see to it that this spirit of love, our spirit of friendship, proceeds, 
from the fountain of love itself; for God is love. Let 
us also have in mind the Apostle's declaration that there are 
only two great sources: a sweet fountain cannot send forth 
bitter waters, nor a bitter fountain send forth sweet waters. 
(James 3:11.) Let us, therefore, settle it in our hearts that 
any spirit of treachery toward a friend, toward a brother, is 
not in any sense of the word connected with the spirit of 
love, but in opposition to it. Let us remember that a sweet 
fountain, a pure fountain, a love-fountain, cannot send forth 
bitter waters of hate, of malice, of envy, of strife. We must 
recognize such a stream of evil as coming from a different 
quarter, a different fountain, from the enemy of God and 
man. These qualities are therefore set forth in the Scriptures 
as works of the flesh and of the devil. Let us remember, 
too, that a radical change from an attitude of love and friendship 
to an attitude of bitterness and enmity is not an instantaneous 
but a gradual work. In the case of Judas we 
see a gradual deflection, which at first merely murmured 
because others had honors bestowed from the Lord; yet that 
spirit of murmuring increased, until within a week it took 
delight in betraying the Friend of all friends, who was even 
then laying down life on his behalf. Let us remember that 
by nature we have seeds of evil, of selfishness, received from 
the Adversary through heredity, through the fall; and that 
we need continually to be on guard to uproot all such roots 
of evil, and need continually to be cultivating the tender 
plant of love, that its fragrance may fill our entire lives and 
prepare us for association with him who is love and with him 
who is the friend above all others. 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT 

Well has the wise man said that a friend loveth at all 
times. He who merely loves at a time when he thinks it 
will be to his own advantage to love knows not love. He 
who loves, and is a brother in prosperity merely, and whose 
love and friendship wither under the heat of persecution and 
adversity, has never known love in its true sense, but merely 
a certain brand of selfishness— the love of the world. 

As God commended his love toward us and showed us 
that not through selfishness, but generosity, at a great cost 

R4224 : page 249 

to himself, he provided us release from our prison, and gave 
us privileges of sonship, so true love will be willing to sacrifice. 



Let us judge then of our love for others, for the Lord, 
for the brethren, for our families, for our neighbors, for our 
enemies even, by our willingness to sacrifice in their interest 
and for their highest welfare. If we find ourselves sacrificing 
nothing in the interest of the Lord's cause, let us not 
delude ourselves by saying that we love the Lord. If we 
find ourselves unwilling to endure, to sacrifice in the interests 
of the brethren and others dear to us, let us not mistake the 
matter and call it love. If we find ourselves unwilling to do 
kindness even to our enemies when they are in need, let us 
make no mistake; for the Lord hath declared that a course of 
goodness and mercy and self-denial is the only index of a loving 
heart. If once we can see that such a love of heart is 
essential to a place in the Kingdom it will make us doubly 
earnest in the attainment of such a character. If still farther 
than this, we see that none will ever gain eternal life in this 
age or that which is to come, except as he or she shall possess 
a heart of love, it will help to awaken us to realize that love 
indeed is the principal thing, the most important thing to be 
attained and cultivated by ourselves, yea, by all. 

Note Canon Farrar's earnest words: "My brethren, the 
love that sees goodness and beauty in all human nature, 
helps to make goodness and to make beauty in human nature. 
To those who love, even a common person is a human soul, 
who walks in the transfiguring glory of their affection. You 
think a person dull. Why? That is because you are dull. 
An angel has been with you and you have known it not; and 
I imagine that to a spirit full of malice and self-conceit an 
angel would be very dull. Each human soul is like a cavern 
full of gems. The casual observer glances into it through 
some cranny, and all looks dark, sullen and forgotten. But 
let light enter into it; lift a torch up to the walls; let God's 
sunlight fall into it and flood its open recesses; and lo, it 
will flash with crystals and with amethysts, and each separate 
crystal will quiver under the touch of brightness with a 
transporting discovery of its own nature. If souls do not 
shine before you it is because you are bringing them no light 
to make them shine. Throw away your miserable, smouldering, 
fuming torch of conceit and hatred; lift up to them the 
light of love, and lo ! they will arise and shine; yea, flame 
and burn with an undreamt glory." 

"Was it friend or foe who spread these lies? 
Nay, who but infants question in such wise? 
'Twas one of my most intimate enemies." 



R4225 : page 249 

"DO GOOD TO THEM THAT HATE YOU" 

-I SAMUEL 26:17-25.-AUGUST 30.- 

Golden Text:— "Love your enemies; do 
good to them that hate you."— Luke 6:27. 



FOR seven years David was forced to be an exile from his 
home and nominally to fill the role of an outlaw. 
King Saul, troubled with evil spirits, was at times 
practically insane, and no doubt pursued David from place 
to place during those seven years as a relaxation, as some 
men take pleasure in hunting wild game. It is in this light 
that David himself in the Psalm presents the matter of his 
escape. A large band of discontented people gathered to 
David as their leader, mostly victims of Saul's persecution. 
These numbered 400 at least (1 Sam. 22:2) and later on 600. 
(1 Sam. 25:13,27.) David's own parents and brothers were 
amongst those persecuted, probably on David's account; also 
the prophet Gad, and the high-priest Abiathar, a son of the 
high-priest Abimelech (1 Sam. 22:22,23), also his nephew 
Abishai, subsequently a great general. (1 Sam. 26:6.) It 
is also noted that in the company were eleven mighty men 
of valor of the tribe of Gad (1 Chron. 12:8-14), and twenty-three 
Benjamite warriors who could shoot their arrows with 
both hands equally well.— 1 Chron. 12:1-7. 

Professor Wright suggests that under the circumstances 
then prevailing, to be an outlaw was creditable. He says: 
"To be an outlaw at such a time was not to be on the side 
of disorder; it was the beginning of a justifiable revolution. 
The dissatisfied men who gathered around David in the cave 
of Adullam were the true patriots of the time. ...This is 
evident from his message to Nabal, in which he claims that 
he had performed all the duties of a government in protecting 
Nabal from the incursions of the bordering tribes; so that 
the tribute he asked was not more than just taxation of established 
authority." 

There are many caves in that limestone region. The 
one credited as the Cave of Adullam has several apartments 
and space for a small army; it is located not far from the 
place where David encountered Goliath. Associated with 
its name are three items of considerable interest. One of 
these, told in 1 Chronicles 11:15-19, gives us a little picture 
of the fidelity of David's followers and of David's own unselfishness, 
which lay no doubt at the foundation of the love 
which his followers bore him. It was at a time when the 
Philistines were making an invasion and when David and his 
followers could not be on Saul's side, yet would not be 
against him. The Philistine camp lay between the cave and 
the spring of fine water at Bethlehem, David's home town. 
Thirsty, David had remarked longingly on the fineness of the 
Bethlehem spring. With devotion to their leader three of 
David's chief men ventured through the lines of the Philistine 
camp and brought him some of the coveted water. 
On receiving it David's heart was full of gratitude to God 
for such appreciation and love from his followers; yet considering 
the price it had cost them and the dangers they had 
risked, he felt himself unworthy, and tendered the water as 
a thank-offering to the Lord and as an expression to his followers 
of his highest appreciation of their kindness. Of this 
the poet says,— 

"And all the host looked and wondered, and those noble three, 



The mightiest of the thirty, felt their souls 
Knit closer to King David and to God." 
The second item of interest referred to was the taking 
of David's aged parents from Adullam on a long journey 
over the rocky hills and around the furthest end of the Dead 
Sea and up the mountains of Moab to a place of safety with 
the king of Moab. --1 Sam. 22:3,4. 

The third item of interest referred to was the sparing 
of the life of King Saul at this cave.— 1 Sam. 24. 

DAVID TESTED-SAUL SPARED 

The lesson of today concerns the second sparing of 
Saul's life by David. The King had come out against David 

R4225 : page 250 

and his band with a large army corps. After the manner of 

that day the camp had been set with the king's tent in the 

center, as indicated by the king's spear standing at his doorway. 

Possibly, however, at that time no tents were used in 

that country, where there would be no danger of rain and 

where it is customary for travelers even to wrap themselves 

in their outer garments and lie down to sleep at any convenient 

place. David with his scouts was familiar with the 

entire country and everything that happened; and one of the 

chiefs of his band suggested to him a daring plot for the 

overthrow of the enemy, for the rescue of the country from 

the rule of a partially demented sovereign, and for the rectification 

of his own wrongs and those of the company of faithful 

men with him. The proposer of the plan, provided David's 

consent could be obtained, was to steal into King Saul's 

camp while his soldiers were sleeping after the fatigue 

of the journey, and kill King Saul in his tent, and thus end 

all their difficulties which centered in him. The plan was 

one that would be considered proper by nine hundred and 

ninety-nine out of a thousand soldiers, yet it did not appeal 

to David. 

Taking the proper view of the situation David considered 
King Saul the divine appointee for the place and position he 
occupied although the anointing oil had come upon himself as 
Saul's successor. He properly reasoned that when the Lord's 
due time should come for his accession to the throne, the Lord 
could and would bring it about in his own way; and that it 
would be sin on his part to connive at the king's death on 
any ground. Not only would he not kill Saul, but he would 
not sanction another's doing it, not even by a half-hearted 
protest. On the contrary he would act as Saul's protector, 
so that the author of the bold scheme might have no opportunity 
for its execution. David went with him to carry out 
a different project; namely to bring away from the camp 
something that would prove to the king that he had been 
entirely within David's power, and that at heart David had 
no desire for Saul's injury, but the contrary. 

In execution of this plan David accompanied Abishai 
quietly, speedily, into Saul's camp. First they took Saul's 



spear from before his tent; then entering the tent they found 
near the king's couch a cruse or bottle of drinking water, 
which they took. The two then went to a hillside opposite 
Saul's camp and shouted to awaken the soldiers and Saul. 
David upbraided Saul's captain-general for his carelessness 
in not properly protecting the king, telling how he had invaded 
the camp and had taken the king's spear and drinking 
pitcher, not, however, revealing his identity. Soon the 
entire camp was awake, and it was the king himself who 
recognized David's voice and also the facts related— that his 
spear and cruse were gone. These David offered to return 
through a messenger, explaining that he had taken them 
merely to prove that he had no ill will to the king, no wish 
to do him injury. David did not attribute Saul's enmity to 
his own evil passions and selfishness, but very politely suggested 
that if it were of the Lord it might well cease with an 
offering to the Lord; but if the king were following the counsel 
of men these must be wicked men, for the effect of their 
counsel was to alienate a fellow-Israelite not only from his 
home and land, but also from his God and his religion, by driving 
him from amongst his people to the heathen. He assured 
the king that if his blood must be shed he preferred that his 
death should be in the land of Israel, and that this alone 
was his reason for not leaving his native land. But he suggested 
that for the king to be pursuing him as an enemy and 
thinking of himself and his associates as foes to the empire, 
was as ridiculous as to think of a hunting expedition against 
a partridge as being war. 

King Saul was honest enough to admit that he was in 
the wrong, and said, "I have sinned. Return, my son, David; 
for I will no more do thee harm because my life was precious 
in thine eyes this day. Behold, I have played the fool and 
have erred exceedingly." 

"DELIVER ME OUT OF ALL TRIBULATION" 

David's reply to the king is very noteworthy, and shows 
us that the center of the man's character and the guidance 
of his conduct was his reverence for the Lord, his faith. He 
said, "The Lord shall render to every man [according to] 
his righteousness and his faithfulness.... It was the Lord 
that delivered thee into mine hand today and I did not put 
forth mine hand against the Lord's anointed. And behold, 
as thy life was precious today in mine eyes, so let my life be 
precious in the eyes of the Lord and let him deliver me out 
of all tribulation." (Vs. 23,24.) How wonderful this expression! 
In it there is no appeal to Saul for mercy, no expression 
of dependence upon him, but an appeal to the Lord, 
an expression of absolute confidence in the willingness and 
ability of the Lord to deliver him. Moreover, David seems 
to have learned a lesson which many dear Christian people 
have not learned, even though possessed of education and 
advantages in the school of Christ which David never enjoyed. 
David's course and language show that he understood that 
portion of the Lord's prayer which says, "Forgive us our 
trespasses as we forgive those who trespass against us"— 



have mercy upon us as we have mercy upon others. This is 
the essence of David's statement, As I have shown mercy to 
you, King Saul, so may the Lord show mercy to me. 
"Then Saul said to David, Blessed be thou, my son 
David. Thou shalt both do great things and shalt surely 
prevail. So David went on his way and Saul returned to 
his place." But although invited to return, David realized 
that the word and the heart of Saul were unreliable. It is 
a lesson that we all need to note, that a wicked heart is an 
unreliable thing, though for the moment it may seem contrite, 
gentle and loving. This would not mean that we never 
again could have confidence in any one who had done evil 
to us or injury, or had done us harm; but it does mean that 
while not rendering evil for evil, bitterness for bitterness, 
malice for malice, slander for slander, we should nevertheless 

R4226 : page 250 

use wisdom and not entrust ourselves too fully to the 
power of such until we should receive not merely reassuring 
words but practical evidence of a change of heart; that the 
leaven of malice had been purged out. 

OTHER LESSONS FOR THE NEW CREATION 

David won a great victory over Goliath; but this lesson 
records a still greater victory over himself. As a natural 
man, not begotten again of the holy Spirit, he certainly exhibited 
wonderful self-control. We cannot say that it was 
his love for Saul that spared the king's life; rather it was 
his love for the Lord, his respect for divine authority. We 
can see that unless his devotion to the Lord had been very 
strong indeed the temptation would have swept him before it. 
To the average man eight reasons would appeal for a contrary 
course for killing his enemy. (1) It was legitimate 
warfare, as between the king and his army and David and 

R4226 : page 25 1 

his handful. In any army today such a surprise would be 
considered entirely justifiable. (2) His own self-preservation 
seemed to demand the king's death; and such preservation 
is recognized generally by the world as the first law of 
nature. (3) His desire to escape from his wandering life 
and to live quietly and peaceably as one of God's chosen 
nation, appealed strongly for action. (4) The fact of his 
anointing to be king and Saul's successor, and the prospect 
of soon coming to the throne would be a powerful reason with 
many. (5) Revenge for the things he had suffered from 
Saul would no doubt suggest itself. (6) His patriotism— his 
love for his country and his nation, and his appreciation of 
the fact that Saul was rapidly becoming unfit to be king— was 
another reason for Saul's death. (7) An opportunity for 
accomplishing the deed thus coming to his hand might have 
been construed as of divine providence; and a wicked heart 
and guilty conscience would have so decided. (8) The interests 



of all of his followers, amongst them those who had 
risked their lives for his comfort and defence, demanded that 
the king should be slain; and furthermore doubtless many of 
them would be unable to comprehend David's motives in sparing 
the king's life. To such his course would appear foolish 
almost to madness in letting escape such an opportunity. 
Thus he might alienate from himself his associates in 
tribulation. 

Surely a weaker man, or a man with less reverence for 
the Lord and less faith in him, would have yielded under 
the pressure of such inducements. The fact that David did 
not yield testifies loudly as respects his character, his 
principles. 

How is it with us who have had advanced lessons in 
the school of Christ, and who have the advantage of being 
begotten of the holy Spirit, and ability therefore to comprehend 
the deeper things as respects the divine character and 
will? Would we have been similarly faithful and generous? 
But surely the Lord would expect still more of us than of 
David; surely, therefore, we should expect much more of ourselves, 
who are of the "house of sons" and have much advantage 
every way over the "house of servants." Has not 
our Redeemer, our Master, our Teacher, instructed us and 
given us a new commandment saying, "A new commandment 
I give unto you, that ye love one another as I have loved 
you"? Again in the words of our Golden Text we are instructed, 
"Love your enemies, do good to them that hate you." 
How are we exhibiting our appreciation of the lessons, of the 
instructions we have received? How do we daily put in 
practice this law of love for God— for his instructions, for the 
brethren, for our enemies? 

NO MURDERER IN THE KINGDOM 

It may be said that no such test as David had could 
come to us today as Christians; but that if it did, surely no 
Christian, no saint, would be a murderer. We reply that it 
must not be forgotten that we under the new dispensation 
are under the same law, but with a higher definition or explanation; 
as for instance the Master's words, when he said, 
"He that looketh upon a woman to desire her hath committed 
adultery already in his heart;" and again, "He that is 
angry with his brother without a cause is in danger of 
the judgment." "He that hateth his brother is a murderer." 
(Matt. 5:22,28; 1 John 3:15.) Taking this higher definition 
of the divine law and its operation in our minds, 
we can readily see that opportunities may offer to every one 
of us very similar to this which came to David, opportunities 
to render evil for evil, railing for railing; opportunities 
to assassinate our neighbor, our brother— to kill his influence, 
his reputation, etc. 

How are we meeting these tests? Are we gaining victories 
over self, as did David, or are we being overcome by the 
wicked one? If the latter course is ours, we are thus proving 
ourselves not members of the David or Beloved class, 
but establishing a relationship with the Adversary as being 



to some extent partakers of his spirit, his disposition, and 
manifesting this to some extent in wrong doing, murdering our 
brother. Our Lord indeed seems to imply that in the end of 
this age there will be special trials coming upon his people 
along these lines. He declares that brother shall deliver up 
brother to death, and parents shall deliver up children; and 
that his faithful ones under such conditions may become 
hated of all men. To what extent are we conniving with 
or cooperating with the enemy in such matters? To what 
extent are we like David of old, so reverent toward the Lord 
that we dare not touch, harm one of the members of the 
anointed, nor even an enemy who seeks our life, who does 
us injury and who says all manner of evil against us falsely, 
as Saul did against David? 

A certain part of the temptation which comes to the 
Lord's people is well illustrated in this testing of David; viz., 
the opportunity to favor another's doing an evil work which 
we ourselves would not wish to do. How easy it would have 
been for David to say to Abishai, Proceed to do according to 
your judgment, I will hold aloof; but will say to you privately 
that I believe you will be doing a noble work for our nation; 
and it will even be to the king's interest, because he is an 
enemy even to himself and might the better die. Let us note 
how different a course David pursued; and let us judge 
that any other course would have been displeasing to the 
heavenly Father and would have meant David's failure in 
the test. 

Similarly with us. Not only are we ourselves not to do 
unrighteousness, not to speak evil, not to think evil, not 
to do evil toward friend or foe; but we are to be so 
heartily in sympathy with this procedure that if another proposes 
to do an evil in our interest, we would be so in sympathy 
with the divine will and the law of brotherly love that 
we would oppose the act with all our energy. 

During those seven years of trial David was being disciplined 
for the kingship. It was a school of adversity, of 
persecution and testing, in which he learned valuable lessons. 
Many of his most interesting psalms are credited to this epoch; 
as for instance, the thirty-fourth and fifty-seventh. Similarly 
the Lord's anointed of this Gospel Church are now in the 
wilderness of discipline pursued by our opponents; and with 
us this is the time to learn valuable lessons preparatory to 
occupying our kingly position; and this is the time in which 
our hearts may be drawn out toward the Lord in praise, and 
thanksgiving, in homage, as was David's. The difference in 
every respect is in our favor. His were typical and earthly 
things, ours are the antitypical, the heavenly things, the realities 
of priceless worth. What manner of persons ought we to 
be! How thoroughly we should learn these lessons! How 
great is the prize, the Kingdom we hope to attain! "If we 
know these things, happy are we if we do them."— John 13:17. 



R4226 : page 252 



SOME WHO HAVE VOWED ARE BLEST 

MANY letters are coming to us announcing that 

the number who have taken the Vow mentioned 

in a recent issue, June 15, is increasing. 

We are glad of this and believe that a blessing surely 

follows with it. Indeed, quite a number of letters are 

coming in telling us of the deepening of spiritual refreshment 

and blessing as a result of the Vow, a drawing 

nearer than ever to the Lord— an assistance in the 

narrow way. Some of these letters are of a private, 

confidential character and not suitable for publication, 

but in general they indicate a deep and spreading work 

of grace, which causes us to rejoice and to believe that 

this matter of the Vow is a part of the Lord's providence 

in connection with this harvest work, by which he would 

safeguard his people in respect to the various trials of 

this "evil day" just before us. Here is an illustration 

of how the matter has already worked advantageously: 

A Sister informs us that, caught in a shower, she 
heard the singing of a hymn and entered what appeared 
to be a place of worship. The speaker was a man of 
ability, a spirit medium, who was giving descriptions 
and demonstrations to those present. The Sister rejoiced 
in her heart that by the Lord's grace her eyes of 
understanding had been opened so that she was not deceived 
as were those about her, who thought they were 
having communication with their deceased loved ones. 
She was wishing that she had the power to make some 
of the deluded ones know that their communications 
came from the demons, the fallen angels, and not from 
the dead. While her mind was thus ruminating happily, 
the Adversary was preparing a snare for her. The 

R4227 : page 252 

minister looked straight down to her and, stopping in 

his discourse, walked to her in the rear of the room 

looking upon her intently, probably with a view to hypnotizing 

her. As he came quite close, the sister withdrew 

her gaze from his face and turned her heart to the 

Lord in prayer for protection. The medium stopped 

beside her and asked if he might shake hands with her. 

Remembering our advice, and in harmony with the Vow 

she has taken, to have nothing whatever to do with 

Spiritism or Occultism, she answered, "Excuse me, 

please, I think it is unnecessary." The man stopped 

for a moment, and, frustrated, returned to the platform. 

The Sister perceives that if it had not been for the 
warnings received through the Spiritism pamphlet (recently 
reiterated in connection with the Vow suggestions) 
she might have consorted to the extent of the simple 
act of shaking hands with the medium and might have 
come under a hypnotic influence by that indiscretion. 
She rightly perceives also that had she met the man under 
other circumstances where she would not have known 



him as a medium, the taking of his hand might have 
been an act of innocence, in which the Lord would have 
protected her from harm; but that giving her hand 
knowingly to a medium would have been placing herself 
to that extent knowingly under his influence, and 
the responsibility would have been with her for not 
having obeyed the divine command that we should have 
nothing whatever to do with the evil spirits or their 
"mediums." Indeed, we believe that the Sister, when 
she found herself in such a meeting, should have gone 
out at once and that, staying at all in such company, 
she was under responsibility. She at once took the 
Vow, realizing that even from thinking along its lines 
she had already received a blessing and a deliverance 
and that the lesson to her was a still greater care such 
as the Vow implied. 

A Colporteur brother writes us that shortly after 
taking the Vow, while canvassing a lady in her doorway, 
she asked him into the room and as soon as he entered 
she fell into a trance. Her lips spoke, but in a different 
tone of voice, and the evil spirits, speaking through 
her, used the plural form "we" and spoke of the woman 
in the third person, saying, "We brought her here," etc. 
They evidently desired to get the Colporteur into some 
dispute with them or to arouse his curiosity so that he 
would question them. But remembering his Vow he 
said not a word in reply. Presently the woman came 
out of the trance; it was for this he had waited, that 
he might explain to her that she was under the 
influence of the fallen angels, demons, and warn 
her to prayer and effort that she might be delivered 
from their power. While he was still talking to her 
she again went into a trance and the spirits, speaking 
through her, told him that he was entirely mistaken, 
that they were not evil spirits, that they were the spirits 
of dead humans and that he was the one who was deceived, 
etc. Again he answered not a word, but waited 
until the woman came out of her trance, then finished 
his conversation with her, interesting her in reading 
the Spiritism pamphlet and subsequently the DAWNS. 
How he might have been ensnared had it not been for 
the Lord's providence, not only in bringing to him a 
knowledge of the truth but also in bringing him to the 
point of making a vow that he would have nothing 
whatever to do with Spiritism, demonism. 

Others write that they have received great benefit 
from the Vow along the line of their greater reserve in 
respect to the opposite sex, and that they feel that the 
Lord has specially used the Vow for their assistance 
along the line of a general weakness in the human 
family, and that their greater isolation from the opposite 
sex has resulted in their closer fellowship with the 
Lord. Others write us respecting the feature of the 
Vow which refers to the keeping of the thoughts: that 
the Vow has helped them and is helping them "to bring 
every thought into captivity to the will of God in Christ." 



-2 Cor. 10:5. 

Let the good work go on, dear brothers and sisters. 
The Vow, if you please, is the fastening on of the armor 
which the Lord has been providing for us and which we 
have been fitting to ourselves for some time. We might 
perhaps consider it a girdle by which, as the Apostle 
says, we should "gird up the loins of our minds," 
strengthening our wills in respect to all the various 
features of our covenant with the Lord, and bringing 
our bodies under subjection. As the Apostle again says, 
"I keep my body under and bring it into subjection: 
lest by any means after I have preached to others I myself 
may become a castaway."— I Cor. 9:27. 

Are some inclined to be afraid of bondage? Let us 
remind all such that the bondage of Sin is the one to 
which we are in greatest danger and that the Vow has 
proven to many an assistance in getting free from much 
of the bondage of Sin into the liberty of Christ, the 
liberty of righteousness. As for our relationship to 
Christ let us remember, as the Apostle expresses it, 
that we are his bondservants, literally bondslaves. The 
Apostle gloried in the fact that he bore about in his 
body the marks of the Lord Jesus, marks of his slavery, 
of his full consecration, of his having no liberty to do 
anything except what would be the Lord's will. The 
Vow may in some respects mark us amongst the Lord's 
people, as taking less liberty than others along certain 
lines, but if it is a mark of our more complete submission 
to the Lord's will, then indeed we may glory in it. 

R4227 : page 253 

We believe that the number of those seeing the 
wisdom and expediency of the Vow and the blessings 
which it will bring will greatly increase. Let all remember 
that the Vow is not to us but to the Lord, but 
that we will be pleased to know of such as take the Vow 
that their names may be an encouragement to others 
and also a protection to themselves. If those who 
have taken the Vow and have informed us, do not see 
their names in the lists or if the names appear misspelled 
or with wrong initials, will kindly advise us 
that correction may be made, we will appreciate it very 
much. 

An article in our issue of October 1, 1907, presents 
reasons for concluding that the fallen angels will have 
special powers for materializing during the next few 
years. We learned only recently of their greater activities 
in this direction and that for fifteen months past 
spirit mediums have claimed that by the fall of 1908 the 
spirits will have full power of materialization in daylight 
and go about the streets as human beings. 
Whether or not they will attempt to palm themselves off 
as resurrected humans we know not, though we have 
learned of one such case. It is our duty to put all 
of the household of faith within reach of our influence 



on their guard against these wiles of the Adversary. 

We have reasons for concluding that with the power to 

materialize regained by the demons the effect will be 

much as it was before they were restrained, as recorded 

in Genesis 6:1-5, and that a spirit of licentiousness 

amongst humanity may correspondingly be expected. 

Our Lord's statement that in this harvest time it would 

be "as in the days of Noah," and "as it was in the days 

of Lot," should not be forgotten. Both of the times referred 

to were times of great licentiousness. It is true 

that we have claimed and still claim that the likeness 

of those days to these which our Lord emphasizes is 

laid upon the words, "and knew not;" but why may 

not both thoughts be true? We incline to so expect. 

It is written, "He shall give his messengers charge 
concerning thee, and in their hands they shall bear thee 
up, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone." We have 
seen that this Scripture applies to the feet members of 
the Body of Christ now living in the end of this age. 
We have seen how the Lord has provided helping hands 
for warning and guarding the Feet members for their 
protection in this "evil day." We believe that the Lord's 
providence in connection with this Vow matter is part 
and parcel of his general provision for the bearing up 
of the "feet" at this time. If such conditions prevail, 
as we anticipate, those taking the Vow will certainly be 
forearmed and protected in great measure thereby. 

It is not our thought to awaken needless alarm, but 
rather to call attention to the safeguarding and protecting 
arrangements which the Lord has provided, in the 
use of which the Lord's consecrated ones may be kept 
in perfect peace. Our thought is that in some manner 
there is a protecting influence surrounding human beings 
which safeguards them from the Adversary and 
his assistants except so far as they shall give a measure 
of their will or consent. This safeguarding influence, 
we believe, is manifold in the case of the consecrated. 
"The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that 
fear him, and delivereth them." This view is supported 
by the statement of Satan respecting Job— "Hast thou 
not made an hedge about him?" (Job 1:10.) Our thought 
is that as the Lord gave the Adversary permission 
against Job, so Satan will gain liberty in the impending 
hour of temptation which shall come upon all the world 
to try them that dwell upon the earth. (Rev. 3:10.) In 
that contest the only ones safe from all harm will be those 
who have made the Lord, even the Most High, their 
refuge and habitation; because no harm can come nigh 
that dwelling place. 

How important, then, that all the Lord's people 
forewarned by him should draw near to the Lord himself! 
The prophet represents the matter under the 
figure of a mother hen, which in the time of danger 
clucks for her chicks. They run to her and are safe 
while they look out from under her feathers at the 
dangers from which they had escaped. 



This is the Lord's picture in respect to the faithful 
ones, "Surely he will deliver thee from the snare of the 
fowler, and from the noisome pestilence. He shall 

R4228 : page 253 

cover thee with his feathers and under his wings shalt 
thou trust. His truth shall be thy shield and buckler." 
-Psa. 91. 

Someone writes fearful that the Vow would prove 
an embargo on marriage by hindering courtship. We 
reply, that if this be true amongst the Lord's people it 
would doubtless prove a blessing, in full accord with 
the Apostle's exhortation in I Cor. 7:7,8,25-35. However, 
we see nothing in the Vow to hinder a proper 
courtship and marriage. Assuredly there would be 
fewer unhappy marriages under the operation of the 
Vow. Those younger brethren and sisters who desire 
unhappy marriages, who desire marriages which could 
be led up to only under the exhilaration of animal passion, 
which beclouds their judgment and stifles the 
spirit of a sound mind— these should not take the Vow. 
But let us warn these that such an attitude of heart is 
apt to keep them out of the Kingdom. 

A doctor and also a nurse express fear that the Vow 
would conflict with their professional duties. We fail 
to see how! One doctor advises us that he finds the 
Vow a great blessing. Surely it is safe to have a third 
party present when treating one of the opposite sex 
"when reasonably possible." And that is exactly what 
the Vow expresses. What is "reasonably possible" is for 
each to decide for himself. A doctor or a nurse should 
do nothing to a patient that he or she would consider 
wrong or immodest, so that if necessity compelled the 
services might be rendered in the presence of a congregation 
of the Lord's people. 

LIFTING UP A STANDARD 

Some fear that we are lifting up too high a standard 
which will deter some from accepting other truths now 
due. But we ask, can we have too high a Scriptural 
standard in view of the strenuous times the Scriptures 
forewarn us to expect? May we not unconsciously have 
lifted up the very standard foretold by the prophet 
Isaiah (59:19,20), "When the enemy shall come in like 
a flood the spirit of the Lord shall raise up a standard 
against him, and the Redeemer shall come to Zion." 

We admit that too high a standard could be lifted 
up, an unscriptural one: For instance, "forbidding to 
marry" or demanding celibacy or requiring fasts or 
feasts or holy-days, or stipulating clothing or diet. On 
the contrary, the Vow we suggest merely emphasizes 
our Covenant of Consecration by specializing some of 
its features appropriately to "that evil day." 

However, let not us who have taken the Vow assume 



any "holier-than-thou" attitude toward those who have 
not taken it, nor in any manner make the Vow a test of 
fellowship. To the Master each is responsible, and 
each should exercise his own conscience in this and in 
every matter. While we believe that the spirit of the 

R4228 : page 254 

Lord has raised up this standard for the aid and protection 
of his people in this evil day, we cannot demonstrate 
the fact, and all of the members of the Body may 
not be able to "see eye to eye" on the subject. Love is 
the supreme and final test, we may be sure. 



A RE-STATEMENT OF THE "VOW" 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 

Dear Brethren:— We, the undersigned, 17 of the 
members of the Class of St. Joseph, have taken the following 
"Vow" before the Lord:— 

"Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. 
May thy rule come into my heart more and more, and thy will 
be done in my mortal body. Relying on the assistance of thy 
promised grace to help in every time of need, through Jesus 
Christ our Lord, I register this Vow. Daily will I remember 
at the throne of heavenly grace the general interests of the 
harvest work, and particularly the share which I myself am 
privileged to enjoy in that work, and the dear co-laborers at 
the Bible House, Allegheny. I vow to still more carefully, 
if possible, scrutinize my thoughts and words and doings, to 
the intent that I may be the better enabled to serve Thee 
and thy dear flock. I vow to thee that I will be on the alert 
to resist everything akin to Spiritism and Occultism, and that 
remembering that there are but the two masters I shall resist 
these snares in all reasonable ways, as being of the Adversary. 
I further vow that, with the exceptions below, I will at all 
times and at all places, conduct myself toward those of the 
opposite sex in private exactly as I would do with them in 
public— in the presence of a congregation of the Lord's 
people, and so far as reasonably possible, I will avoid being 
in the same room with any of the opposite sex alone, unless 
the door to the room stand wide open— in the case of brethren, 
wife, children, mother and sisters excepted, and in the case 
of sisters, husband, children, father and brother excepted." 

Yours in the service of the Master, Dr. S. D. Senor 
and wife, F. R. Gossin and wife, M. E. Reimer and 
wife, C. W. Orton, Sister L. Freydig, Hugo H. Reimer, 
Wm. Wild, Nettie M. Wild, John Freydig, Mrs. H. K. 
Reimer, Dora A. Reimer, Emily V. Reimer, Alice E. 
Stone, Clara L. Buehler. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 



I have been so situated ever since the publication 
of "the Vow," suggested in June 15th TOWER, that I 
could not give the prayerful attention to its consideration, 
which the sacredness and importance of this matter 
demanded, but I made the time today, and therefore 
write to announce the registering of my vow at 1.00 P.M., 
August 1st, 1908. I give the date thus explicitly, 
as it may assist in keeping it more clearly before my 
mind. I will also keep a copy of the Vow in the MANNA, 
and DAILY refresh my mind when I read the text and 
comment for each day. Pray for me! 

Several objections had been suggested to my mind 
by others, as well as by my own inner consciousness: 

1st. I felt that my consecration had included all these 
things, as I held very clear convictions, from the first, 
of the necessity for what you refer to as "antitypical 
fasting," explained in ZION'S WATCH TOWER, 1899, page 
140. But I reasoned that the taking of "the Vow" 
would mean only a more explicit statement in detail of 
what I had formerly striven to practice, therefore it 
could do no harm, even though it might not serve to add 
anything. First objection overruled. 

2d. It had been suggested that "the publication of 
names in TOWER implied an acknowledgment of past indiscretions, 
of present weaknesses and of future fears." 
But I replied to this, what right has any "member of 
the Body" to judge another in this manner? I said to 
myself, "What is that to thee? follow thou me." I would 
not wish anyone to judge me thus, so I would not thus 
judge another— "to his own master he standeth or 
falleth." Second objection overruled. 

3d. The Vow appeared to me something like the temperance 
pledge. I had never been a drunkard, never feared 
that I should become one, but for the sake of some 
other poor, weak, fallen wreck of humanity, who perhaps 
had inherited a weakness in this direction, 25 
years ago I signed this pledge in the hope that my example 
might serve to strengthen him in his efforts to 
take a stand against intemperance. I realize the power 
of numbers and example, and therefore, if my example 
might be used of the dear Master to encourage even the 
least of his brethren, I am glad to take this stand, "with 
meekness and fear," not knowing how weak my own 
flesh might become under temptations which others find 
hard to withstand. Third and last objection overruled. 

Pray for me, dear brother, as I do for you and all 
the dear Israel of God everywhere, that we may daily 
grow stronger and stronger in him and in the power of 
his might, that our faith may increase more and more, 
that we may all be made perfect in Love, "more than 
conquerors through him who loved us and died for us," 
our blessed Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ, whose 
we are and whom we serve, in whose likeness we hope 
to awake after the storms and trials of life are over and 
we have resisted even unto blood! 

With much Christian love to yourself and all the 



other dear friends at the Bible House, I am, 
Yours in his precious service, G. W. SEIBERT. 



MY BELOVED UNCLE:- 

Just a line to express to you my gratitude for the 
assistance which you have vouchsafed us in pointing 
us to an additional means for the strengthening of the 
cords of love which bind the sacrifice to the horns of 
the altar— viz., "the Vow" mentioned in June 15 TOWER. 
I feel that there is a blessing in thus definitely stating 
my heart's desires and intentions in these matters; for 
although realizing that the Lord knows this has been 
my heart's attitude since my consecration seven years 
ago, yet I think this particular statement of the same 
will be very beneficial; not only keeping more definitely 
before my mind my privileges and obligations, but also 
enabling me to better witness for the Lord and for his 
glorious cause. Praise the Lord for this additional 
assistance by the way! 

May the rich favor of the Lord continue with you, 
and may he continue to direct you in your earnest 
efforts to do and to assist others to do his blessed will. 

With much love, and hoping to see you soon, I am 
as ever, 

Your affectionate niece, 

ALICE LAND WILLIAMSON. 



R4229 : page 254 

OUR DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We wish to make mention to you of the means of 
grace and strength (spiritually) the recent Olean Convention 
was to us. Concerning "the Vow": On returning 
home, my dear husband and I reread the 
article in full, in the June 15th TOWER, and reconsidered 
it. We feared we had not given it due consideration 
before. 

We have also reread the October 1st, 1907, TOWER, 
on "The Judgment of the Great Day." We are so thankful 
to our heavenly Father for this meat in due season, 
which it truly is. 

Since entering the school of Christ we have tried 
daily to follow in the footsteps of the Master, striving 
toward the mark of perfect love— the love that thinketh 
no evil.— I Cor. 13. 

We have perfect trust that our heavenly Father will 
help us to carry out this Vow. Whatever our Father 
wants us to do that is what we truly wish to do. His 
will is our delight, and we gladly and prayerfully take 
this Vow. 

We do thank the heavenly Father that he has put 
his children on their guard. We also thank him for the 



channel he is using to dispense this meat in due season. 
May his richest blessings be yours. How we will praise 

R4229 : page 255 

him when this night-time of sin and weeping is over! 
Yours in Christian love and fellowship, 

RAY VAN HYNING AND WIFE. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Referring to your suggestion in ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER of June 15th, in regard to the proposed "Vow," 
we beg to state that we have taken it. It expresses 
to our understanding our definite and determined relation 
to the harvest work and its servants; great self-inspection 
in regard to present strong delusions which 
would "deceive if it were possible the very elect;" and 
finally a very guarded relationship to those of the opposite 
sex, in which we are to avoid, if possible, the very 
appearance of evil. 

Therefore, dear pastor, unitedly we thank you for 
calling our attention to this as well as to many other 
matters of importance. 

Yours in fellowship and service, 

L. JOSEPH LARSEN AND WIFE. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We, the undersigned of the Avalon Class who until 
now had not taken "the Vow" mentioned in the TOWER 
of June 15th, desire to register our names as having 
done so. Frank C. Roller, Patience M. McCauley, Mrs. 
M. L. Herr, Mrs. Margaret Wilson, Mrs. Laura B. Gasquoine, 
Geo. M. Wilson, W. D. Boder, Mrs. Mary A. 
Boder, Mrs. Margaret J. Boyd, Martha E. Dunbar, Mrs. 
Lillie A. Moore, Mrs. E. C. Whitehouse, Geo. A. Wilson, 
Mrs. G. A. Wilson, Mr. and Mrs. Sam'l McComb. 



MANY MORE ADVISE THAT THEY HAVE TAKEN THE VOW 

F. W. Williamson and wife, Clara Tomlins, Alfred 
W. C. Kuehn, Mrs. G. W. Seibert, L. C. Work and wife, 
Mrs. Lydia Messner, H. Hoskins, Jr., and wife, Emma 
Blumer, Katherine A. Baeuerlein, Mrs. Alex. Ogston, 
Bessie Ford, J. B. Alford, E. A. Saddler, Martha Wilson, 
Gerald Barry, F. P. Moulton, John Segergren, Bro. 
and Sr. J. A. Lehman, Bro. and Sr. Tallman, Henry 
Gindroz, H. C. Peck and wife, Mrs. H. Graham, Mrs. H. 
T. Whiteworth, Mrs. C. J. Williams, Miss Annie Williams, 
Mrs. Cornelia Winton, Maggie Millar, Alex. Laidlaw, 
Mrs. J. D. Wright, Miss. M. Persons, Mrs. J. H. 



Gourley, Aug. Lundborg, Mr. and Mrs. C. A. Russell, 
E. Detwiler, J. D'Cecca, R. G. Russell, T. W. Hill and 
wife, Francis Hill, J. Walter Davis, John Stephens, 
Katharine Ashby, Mabel Jette, E. S. Weekly, Emory 
Williams, Nellie Severance, L. J. Kihlken, G. A. Phillip, 
Warren C. Hickman, Walter Taylor, C. H. Booz, Joseph 
Levens, Mrs. Joseph Levens, John W. Jackson, Helen 
L. Jewell, John E. Hardie, Mrs. C. R. Zeh, Mrs. D. Antisdel, 
Mrs. W. Hewish, C. E. Phillips, A. W. Leflar, K. M. 
Welty, Sidney Morton, O. D. Deifer, Mr. and Mrs. H. C. 
Minkler, G. J. Redford, Virginia Noble, L. F. Zink, J. 
R. Brode, L. G. Clymer, E. L. Dockey, J. F. Shehorn, 
Gracie Doughty, Saml. and Mary Hammond, Cora 
Carmicheal, Geo. B. McCord, Joseph V. Waters, Mr. 
and Mrs. Chas. A. Ward, Mrs. Jane M. McCormick, 
Erma E. Mason, Mrs. Emma P. Mason, C. W. Mason, 
Mamie Mundy, M. L. Mcllvaine, E. P. Taliaferro, 
Thayle Gardner, Dr. W. W. Murray, E. L. Fletcher, Reginald 
Ward, Elizabeth Hoskins, Ellen Hoskins, Elizabeth 
Gillett, T. F. Williams, Mrs. D. H. Rodgers, G. 
Bolton, Sadie C. Redford, T. E. Banks and wife, J. R. 
Hill, Hans Finjord, Alex. Evans and wife, Mrs. Annie 
Hammond, Mrs. Minnie Ensley, James Marshall, Ethelinda 
Hendrickson, A. N. Pierson, Bro. and Sr. Gus. 
Smith, Isaac P. Noll, Edith S. Hanson, C. C. Waddle, 
Mr. and Mrs. G. W. Chamberlain, Thos. P. Yates, K. 
Yeo, C. A. Hewes and wife, C. W. Vord, Mrs. E. O. De 
Haven, Mrs. Geo. M. Hunt, Mrs. B. M. Stephenson, 
Mrs. C. P. Powley, Mrs. C. L. Knowles, Carmel Knowles, 
John H. Cart, Alice Nelson, F. E. Riley, H. Scott, 
Mrs. J. W. Burrows, Bro. and Sr. Aker, J. A. Hudspeth, 
Mr. and Mrs. O. R. Wilkins, Mrs. Nora B. Glass, C. L. 
and A. F. Crockett, Mrs. S. Stokes, Mabel E. Hewes, 
James S. Samuda, Wm. A. Baker, G. B. Raymond and 
wife, Anna H. Brooks, Willetta K. Bolger, Mr. and Mrs. 
C. S. Brooks, Belle Goodwin, J. W. Morris and wife, 
Beda Rahm, W. P. Hall, Mrs. L. F. Achor, Mrs. Catharine 
Rouch, K. W. Jackson, Leota C. Hall, Ruth Gregg, 
Mrs. G. P. Bronaugh, E. W. Reinbolt, E. W. Weld, 
Augusta E. French, Elmer G. Berry, Edward Worcester, 
Mrs. Catharine Roach, G. C. Elton, Mrs. G. C. Elton, 
W. A. Davis and wife, Frank French, Frank Gwillim, 
H. A. Remick, J. M. Campbell, J. H. Martin, Mrs. V. 
Banning, Nellie Bush, Herbert C. Robb, Willard Wells 
and wife, Mabel Wells, Carrie A. Dorst, Ellen J. Barnet, 
Dora Bailey, Margaret Hall, Mrs. Richard Schulze, 
J. W. Broom, J. F. Davault and wife, Emma C. Gill, 
R. J. Kilpatrick, F. W. Pattison, W. L. Dimock, Mrs. 
M. M. Harvey, Maggie Adams, W. M. Higbee, Erven 
Schlatter, F. Samuel Ganoung and wife, Wm. E. Walton, 
Evan T. Jones, Mattie Herbruck, Calvin Dodge 
and wife, Eva L. Adams, N. A. Linderberg and wife, 
W. B. Johnson, T. J. Beatty and wife, Mary A. Eldred, 
E. Gerber, Mrs. M. Hufford, F. G. Hammes, Clara 
Phillips, G. H. Wright, Mrs. E. Grimes, Mrs. H. C. Bell, 
John J. Stacey, Sue Bivens, Frank A. Shook, Mrs. Flora 



D. Bradley, G. F. Dillenbeck, Lucy J. Fleming, Edith 
S. Hansen, Lucinda Willey, Louise Fletcher, Carrie 
Beaty, Jr., Bee Beaty, Frank W. Wall, Josie House, 
Nannie M. Foster, Corintha K. Pendleton, Olive Pendleton, 
Ellen Pendleton, Clara Jackley, Adah Schath, 
Alice Ferguson, Geo. Moffatt, Cordia B. Rhodes, Ella 
J. Brown, Roxy Tyler, Agnes Wall, S. M. York, Miss 
Belle Hancher, Helen M. Hancher, Ruberta G. Brunig, 
Hattie Anna Miller, Horace C. Galloway, Mrs. A. Monro, 
Emma Bates, Sister Baltzell, H. W. Strasser, Emma 
Bowman, Mrs. A. Thomas, Lemuel R. Browne, Mrs. 
Ianthe D. Thurston, Howard B. Hale, Mrs. M. M. Harvey, 

B. S. Grubb, W. S. Dimock, Dr. John L. Wooding, 
Inez M. Merritt, H. T. Hixon, Miss Pearl Gilmore, Dr. 
Lora K. Barnes, Bro. and Sr. J. C. Garrison, Walter 
McLendon, Alfred Smith, Frank Vogler, Luther Fail 
and wife, Mrs. O. Margeson, Clarence B. Snow, Nora 
Peterson, Mrs. A. W. Peterson, F. A. Barnett, Joseph 
Isaac, S. H. Huston, Mary A. West, Edith E. Mason, 
W. Homer Lee, wife and son, F. B. Hindman and wife, 
George M. Haucher, Bro. and Sr. Boyeson, Harry 
Ehlers, Byrd McDonaugh, Mrs. Grace Marshall, 
Mary Stapleton, Susan Graham, Mrs. A. E. Morse, F. 
L. Spencer and wife, Mrs. C. M. Chase, Mrs. Harriett 
Broughton, Henry McClellan, Ruby L. Hotchkiss, Mrs. 

D. M. MacKay, Mrs. C. Johnson, I. I. Margeson and 
wife, Ida M. Finney, Henry H. Brown, Margaret R. 
Brown, Mrs. Ella F. Wilson, C. P. Bridges, A. Shipman, 
Sadie E. Davidson, Mercy Davidson, James A. Davidson, 
Arthur Hawley, Mary Orton, Wm. B. Wright, J. 

H. Wills, Mae Gage, Wm. Evans and wife, A. Hope 
Tate, Rilla Strawn, H. Manning, Phoebe Myers, Gertrude 
Swinney, Bettie Reynolds, Harry G. Davis, Joseph 
Cooch, T. H. Perkins, Ida M. Stewart, Ross W. 
Bailey, Mrs. Anna Fisk, W. E. Housman, Rudolf Selin, 
Lottie Bishop, Mrs. W. S. Lane, Mary Octavia Noe, 
Anna L. Bell, James Steele, Geo. A. Bail, A. C. Morgan, 
Helen M. Lemon, Nettie Thompson, E. C. Smith and 
wife, John Johnson and wife, Thomas Johnson and 
wife, Wm. Barth, A. Olson, Sietse Koopman, De Verne 

E. Corbin, M. W. Earl and wife, Sarah E. Rogers, W. 
H. Clark, L. F. Lartigue, J. F. Harding, G. S. ODowd, 
Mrs. J. E. Culver, R. Robt. Hollister, Wm. J. Hollister, 

C. E. Schiller, Ralph Snyder, A. J. Chidester, C. F. 
Bullard, Lillian A. Clingman, O. E. Staples and wife, 
Emma Beaner, Will J. Madole, Geo. D. Laing, Abner 
Duffield, E. B. Stinson, H. F. Jordan, H. C. Beebe, 
Clark L. Sharper, Mrs. Jennie M. Barber, Archie H. 
Frier, Mrs. H. T. Chase, Mrs. Una Snow, Hugh A. 
Piatt, Adolphine Lass, Mrs. W. A. Baade, Mrs. V. A. 
Fuller, Mrs. Margaret Foster, A. F. Binkley and wife, 

F. H. Taylor, Fred and Emmy Guard, August and 
Amelia Krueger, Ira K. Wilson, Benj. F. and Horace E. 
Hollister, Elders and Deacons of Bay City Class, Mich. 



page 257 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXIX. SEPTEMBER 1 No. 17 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 259 

Discouraged Preachers 259 

Tolstoi and the Peasant 259 

Mrs. Eddy's Ideas of the Bible 260 

America Needs Piety More than Enterprises 261 

Put-in-Bay Convention 262 

An Outline for Study of the Song of Solomon 262 

A Father's Letter to His Son 263 

King Saul's Ignominious End 264 

Made Mad by Jealousy 265 

David Attaining Kingship 266 

Let Your Moderation be Known 267 

Our Consecration Vow Emphasized 269 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 271 

page 258 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each MAY stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



BROTHER RUSSELL'S PERSONAL MAIL 



Announcements of having taken "the Vow" has swelled 
Brother Russell's mail greatly. All of your letters are very 
welcome; but he requests that you accept the WATCH TOWER 
articles and the DAWN-STUDIES as replies, except brief replies 
to special queries and then perhaps on post-cards. 

DURING CONVENTION SESSION 



Remember that during the nine days of the Put-in-Bay 
Convention the Society's workers will for the most part 
be absent from the office attending the Convention. Orders 
sent in then may be delayed. So far as possible send orders 
before or after the Convention dates. 

The Colporteur Department will be transferred to the Convention 
and will give all attention to Colporteurs in attendance. 

HYMN BOOKS AT THE CONVENTION 



Rather than use hymn-slips at the Convention we will 
supply the Dawn Hymn Books at 25c each, with music; saving 
you 10c postage. Book is such as usually sells at $1 to $1.50. 

SCRIPTURAL SOUVENIR POST-CARDS 



We have a beautiful assortment, very choice; 20c per doz. 
postpaid; by the gross, by express collect, $1.80. 



R4230 : page 259 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
DISCOURAGED PREACHERS 



MINISTERS are reported by one of their number 
to be in a permanent condition of "Blue 
Monday." The editor of The Standard (Baptist, 
Chicago) informs us that he was told by a friend 
not long ago that "nine-tenths of all the preachers in 
his circle of acquaintances are discouraged." This 



same Jeremiah "asserted that the great majority of 

pastors are practically hopeless of accomplishing anything 

worth while; that they are restless and discontented, 

and heartily wish that they had never entered the ministry." 

If he is right, the editor of The Standard observes, 

"we may add another to the tabulated reasons why 

young men do not enter the ministry." The editor 

thinks that the preacher, under stress of unusual discouragement 

himself, is mistaken, but the Rev. Dr. 

Aked, in a recent sermon on the alleged decay of 

Christianity in New York, practically asserted the same 

facts as falling under his observation when he first 

visited America. As quoted by The Examiner (New 

York), his words are: 

"One of the things that impressed me most when 
I came here for a month in the autumn of 1906, 
was the depression of so many preachers and recognized 
leaders in the churches of this city. I met 
many representatives of the denominations, and their 
discouragement about Christian work in this city 
seemed very strange to me. 

"It was unlike anything I had observed on previous 
visits, reaching back about fifteen years. It seemed to 
me, also, so unlike yourselves. The American people 
are not easily discouraged. There is in you a buoyancy 
of spirit, an irrepressible vitality, an intellectual and 
emotional agility which smiles in the face of difficulty. 

"We English people have shown through many 
centuries the grim determination we possess, and our 
Yorkshire saying, It's dogged as does it,' represents a 
national characteristic. With you it is different. It is 
not 'grimness' nor 'doggedness' that I find in you so 
much as a joyous and sunny disregard of difficulty, and 
the easy assurance of victory everywhere, which itself is 
more than half the battle, so that this attitude toward 
the problems of religious life struck me as significant. 

"I have heard much of that kind of talk since I 
came here more than twelve months ago. First, one 
well-known preacher or worker and then another has 
shown that in his opinion Christianity is not holding 
its own in this city. And lately some remarkable utterances 
have reached the public ear." 

The editor of The Standard attempts to furnish 
healing balm to the cases that may come under the 
preacher's classification. We read: 

"To be sure, almost every man, in the ministry or 
out, has his hours of depression. The minister who 
goes home from the Sunday evening service after speaking 
to a handful of people, a majority of whom are 
not members of his church, somewhat worn by the 
work of the day, casting about in his mind for something 
upon which to preach on the following Sunday, 
carrying in his heart the news, just made known to him, 
that one of his best families will soon remove to a 
distant State, will doubtless feel cast down. But even 
so, his courage is not utterly destroyed. After a good 



night's rest and a talk with his Master, he goes about 
the tasks of the new week with a good measure of hope 
in his heart. The man who is permanently disheartened 
by one difficulty, or two or three or a dozen, ought not 
to be in the ministry. In fact, it is difficult to think of 
a place in this world where he ought to be, for there is 
not a worthy activity of man that can be continuously 
prosecuted without meeting obstacles. The lawyer, 
the physician, the farmer, the merchant— each has his 
peculiar trials. If he amounts to anything among men 
he must do his work in spite of discouragements. The 
minister is no exception to the general rule."— Literary 
Digest. 

TOLSTOI AND THE PEASANT 



Not long ago a small party called on Tolstoi, of 
whom Ivanhoff was one. One of the visitors first conversed 
with the Count about political and social matters. 
Then Ivanhoffs turn came. He was resolved to hear 
from Tolstoi's own lips his religious position. The 
following conversation ensued. "Who are you?" asked 
Count Tolstoi. "I am only a peasant," answered Ivanhoff. 
"What have you got to say to me?" was the next 
question. "I wish to know your opinion about Jesus 
Christ, and about the Holy Scriptures?" "With regard 
to Jesus Christ, there is nothing to be said," answered 

R4230 : page 260 

the Count. "His Personality is not necessary to us, 
only his teaching." 

"That is very strange," said Ivanhoff; "if I found 
a letter in the street, the contents of which interested 
me, I would do all I could to find out who had written 
it. For me, at any rate, the writer is of more consequence 
than the letter. The writer can write one 
hundred other letters equally good, as this first letter. 
He himself, therefore, is of more interest to me than 
the letter. If I do not know him, I can only have this 
one letter; but if I am acquainted with him, I may be 
able to receive a hundred letters besides." 

"As you really want to know what I think of Jesus, 
I will tell you," said Tolstoi. "For me, Jesus Christ is 
a good man, a man such as all men ought to be. You 
and I ought to be just as he was. But to call him God, 
that is blasphemy. As regards the Holy Scriptures, 
take this Bible in your hand. The Old Testament, I 
don't read it; rather tear it out and throw it away. The 
Old Testament only causes, as the Dukhabors rightly 
say, a great deal of work and only leads to trouble. 
Then there remains the New Testament. Take the 
book of Acts and the Epistles, and then take Revelation; 
tear them out and throw them away. You have then 



only the four Gospels left. Take these Gospels, read 
them through and think over them. There are words 
there that Jesus said, and the Apostles have written 
down; there are also words that the Apostles have written 
of themselves. All that the Apostles have written, 
tear out and throw away. Now you retain only the 
words that Jesus himself spoke. Of these, there are 
two classes. Some of the words are dim and mysterious, 
and hard to understand. Lay them aside. It is best 
for you not to read them. Then you have left only the 
clear words, especially the Sermon on the Mount. Read 
it, for it is the teaching of Jesus. In this way, you will 
become a Christian." 

"Leo Nikolajewitsch," answered Ivanhoff, "I have 
understood what you have said. But you have not given 
me any right to do that which you have said. In one of 
the books you left me to retain is a passage spoken by 
Jesus Christ, that says: 'O fools, and slow of heart to 
believe all that the prophets have spoken.' (Luke 24:25.) 
You said to me, that I should throw away the Old 
Testament; but Christ himself— whom you call a good 
man— has commanded me to believe it all, therefore 
also the prophets. I hold that I have no right to throw 
away any book; yea, even more, that I have no right to 
throw away any one word that he has commanded me 
to believe." 

Tolstoi was evidently very uncomfortable. He took 
the Bible from Ivanhoffs hand, threw it on the table, 
and began walking up and down the room in an annoyed 
mood. Suddenly he stopped in front of Ivanhoff, 
and looking him straight in the face said, "It would interest 
me to know what you think of me?" 

Ivanhoffs friend wanted to come to his help, but 
he held him back saying: "If the Count had asked you, 
you could answer, but now he has asked me, and I want 
to answer him myself." He turned to Tolstoi saying: 
"I will tell you. In one of the books that you told me 
to take out and throw away, the Acts, is a story about 
a pious man, who gave many alms and always prayed 
to God. As you see, this man had the following virtues: 
He was God-fearing, merciful, did many good deeds, 
and he prayed— and yet, he was not a Christian. But 
an Angel appeared to him and commanded that he 
should send to Joppa and call Simon Peter, who would 
tell him what to do to be saved. And when Cornelius 
had fetched Peter and heard his words he became a 
Christian. Cornelius had, as you see, the following 
excellent qualities: He was pious, God-fearing, benevolent, 
and he prayed. In you, Leo Nikolajewitsch, there 
is not even all these, because you do not pray. And as 
you do not pray, I cannot call you a Christian." 

Tolstoi again began to walk to and fro in the room. 
At last he said: "When a chicken has once come out of 
the shell, it cannot be put back." With this Russian 
proverb, the conversation ended. 

"I have since told this little incident to several of 



Tolstoi's admirers," adds Ivanhoff. "They could hardly 
believe that I had dared to speak out so freely, because 
Tolstoi is to many thousands of the younger Russians 
almost an idol. It is said," remarked Ivanhoff at the 
close, "that Tolstoi has now begun to pray. If this 
man became a Christian, he would be Russia's Luther." 
—Quarterly Review. 

MRS. EDDY'S ABSURD IDEAS OF THE BIBLE 



Mrs. Eddy's exegetical theories are dealt with in 
the final article on the history of Christian Science in 
the June McClure's. The writer, Georgine Milmine, 
makes copious citations from Mrs. Eddy's famous book, 

R423 1 : page 260 

"Science and Health," and connects these by comment 
of her own. "Mrs. Eddy says that her theory of the 
universe is founded not upon human wisdom, but upon 
the Bible," reports the writer, adding, "and so it is, but 
she uses both addition and subtraction very liberally 
to get her Biblical corroboration." The account given 
of Mrs. Eddy's point of view is: 

"The Bible may be interpreted in two ways, Mrs. 
Eddy says, literally and spiritually, and what she sets 
out to do is to give us the spiritual interpretation. Her 
method is simple. She starts with the propositions 
that all is God and that there is no matter, and then reconstructs 
the Bible to accommodate these statements. 
Such portions of the Bible as can be made, by judicious 
treatment, to corroborate her theory, she takes and 
'spiritually interprets'; that is, tells us once and for all 
what the passages really mean; and such portions as 
cannot possibly be converted into affirmative evidence 
she rejects as errors of the early copyists. Mrs. Eddy 
insists that the Bible is the record of truth, but a 
study of her exegesis shows that only such portions of 
it as meet with Mrs. Eddy's approval and lend themselves 
—under very rough handling— to the support of 
her theory are accepted as the record of truth; the rest 
is thrown out as a mass of erroneous transcription. 
Mrs. Eddy's keen eye at once detects those meaningless 
passages which have for so long beguiled the world, 
just as it readily sees in familiar texts an entirely new 
meaning. She explains the creation of the world from 
the account in the first chapter of Genesis, but the unknown 
author of this disputed book would never recognize 
his narrative when Mrs. Eddy gets through with it." 

Beginning with the account of the creation, the 
writer takes her citations from the first edition of 
"Science and Health," which "remains practically the 
same in later editions under the chapter called 'Genesis.'" 
We read: 



"To begin with, Mrs. Eddy says, there was God, 
'All and in all, the eternal Principle.' This Principle 

R4231 : page 261 

is both masculine and feminine; 'Gender is embraced 
in Spirit, else God could never have shadowed forth, 
from out himself, the idea of male and female.' But, 
Mrs. Eddy adds, 'We have not as much authority for 
calling God masculine as feminine, the latter being the 
last, therefore highest idea given of him.' 

"Mrs. Eddy next sets about the creation. The 
'waters' out of which God brought the dry land, she 
says, were 'Love'; the dry land itself was 'the condensed 
idea of creation.' When God divided the light from the 
darkness, it means, says Mrs. Eddy, that 'Truth and 
error were distinct from the beginning, and never 
mingled.' But Mrs. Eddy has always insisted on the 
idea that 'error' is a delusion which arose first in the 
mind of mortal man; what is error doing away back 
here before man was created, and why was God himself 
compelled to take measures against it? Certainly the 
account of the Creation which came from Lynn is even 
more perplexing than that which is related in the 
Pentateuch. 

"With regard to the creation of grass and herbs, 
Mrs. Eddy eagerly points out that 'God made every 
plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every 
herb of the field before it grew.' And that, she says, 
proves that 'creations of Wisdom are not dependent on 
laws of matter, but on Intelligence alone." She admits 
here that the Universe is the 'idea of Creative Wisdom,' 
which is getting dangerously near the very old idea that 
matter is but a manifestation of spirit. Call the universe 
'matter,' and Mrs. Eddy flies into a rage; call it 
'an idea of God,' and she is serenely complaisant. 
There was certainly never any one so put about and 
tricked by mere words; on the whole, it may be said 
that the English language has avenged itself on Mrs. 
Eddy. 

"Arriving at the creation of the beasts of the field, 
Mrs. Eddy says that 'The beast and reptile made by 
Love and Wisdom were neither carnivorous nor poisonous.' 
Ferocious tendencies in animals are entirely the 
product of man's imagination. Daniel understood this, 
we are told, and that is why the lions did not hurt him." 
The treatment of the story of Adam is thus examined: 

"The history of Adam is allegorical throughout, a 
description of error and its results,' etc. Man was 
created in God's likeness, free from sin, sickness and 
death; but this Adam, who crept in (Mrs. Eddy does 
not explain how), was the origin of our belief that there 
is life in matter and was to obstruct our growth in spirituality. 
Mrs. Eddy says, 'Divide the name Adam into 
two syllables, and it reads, a dam, or obstruction.' 
This original method of word-analysis she seems to regard 



as final evidence concerning Adam. About the 
creation of Eve, Mrs. Eddy changes her mind. In the 
later editions of her book she says it is absurd to believe 
that God ever put Adam into a hypnotic sleep and 
performed a surgical operation upon him. In the first 
edition she says it is a mere chance that the human race 
is not still propagated by the removal of man's ribs. 
'The belief regarding the origin of mortal man has 
changed since Adam produced Eve, and the only reason 
a rib is not the present mode of evolution is because of 
this change,' etc. 

"Not to be warned by the footprints of time, Mrs. 
Eddy pauses in her revision of Genesis to wonder 
'whence came the wife of Cain?' But on the whole she 
profits by the story of Cain, for here she finds one of 
those little etymological clues which never escape her 
penetration. The fact that Adam and all his race were 
but a dream of mortal mind is proved, she says, by the 
fact that Cain went 'to dwell in the land of Nod, the land 
of dreams and illusions.' Mrs. Eddy offers this seriously 
as 'scientific' exegesis. 

"Mrs. Eddy's conclusion about the Creation seems 
to be that we are all in reality the offspring of the first 
creation recounted in Genesis, in which man is not 
named, but is simply said to be in the image of God; 
but we think we are the children of the creation described 
in the second chapter; of the race that imagined 
sickness, sin, and death for itself. The tree of 
knowledge which caused Adam's fall, Mrs. Eddy says, 
was the belief of life in matter, and she suggests that 
the forbidden fruit which Eve gave to Adam may have 
been 'a medical work, perhaps.'" 

Mrs. Eddy, continues this writer, "says that Christ 
did not come to save mankind from sin, but to show us 
that sin is a thing imagined by mortal mind that it is 
an illusion which can be overcome, like sickness and 
death. The Trinity, as commonly accepted, Mrs. Eddy 
denies, though she seems to admit a kind of triune 
nature in God by saying over and over again that he is 
'Love, Truth and Life.' The holy Ghost she defines 
as Christian Science; 'The Comforter I understand 
to be Divine Science.'" 

Mrs. Eddy is said to have revised the Lord's Prayer 
"a great many times." The form printed in the edition 
of 1902 is given and commented on thus: 

'"Our Father-Mother God, all-harmonious, adorable 
One. Thy kingdom is within us, Thou art ever-present. 
Enable us to know— as in heaven, so on earth 
—God is supreme. Give us grace for to-day; feed the 
famished affections. And infinite Love is reflected in 
love. And Love leadeth us not into temptation, but 
delivereth from sin, disease and death. For God is 
now and forever all Life, Truth, and Love.' 

"In this interpretation the petitions have been converted 
into affirmations, and Mrs. Eddy's prayer seems 
a somewhat dry enumeration of the properties of the 



Deity rather than a supplication. 

"This method of 'spiritual interpretation' has given 
Mrs. Eddy the habit of a highly empirical use of 
English. At the back of her book, 'Science and Health,' 
there is a glossary in which a long list of serviceable 
old English words are said to mean very especial things. 
The word 'bridegroom' means 'spiritual understanding'; 
'death' means 'an illusion'; 'evening' means 'mistiness 
of mortal thought'; 'mother' means God, etc. The 
seventh commandment, Mrs. Eddy insists, is an injunction 
against adulterating Christian Science, although 
she also admits the meaning ordinarily attached to it. 
In The Journal of November, 1889, there is a long discussion 
of the Ten Commandments by the editor, in 
which he takes up both personal chastity and the pure-food 
laws under the command, 'Thou shalt not commit 
adultery.'"— Literary Digest. 

AMERICA NEEDS PIETY MORE THAN VAST ENTERPRISES 



WILL BEAT TARIFF, RAILWAYS OR BUMPER WHEAT 
CROPS IN RESULTS 



BROTHER RUSSELL: What think you of this for a 
characterization of present society and for a prophecy 

R4231 : page 262 

that seems certain of fulfillment,— and from a Wall 
Street Trade Journal at that? Very cordially yours, 
JUNIUS M. MARTIN. 



"What America needs more than railway extension 
and Western irrigation and low tariff and a bigger 
wheat crop and a merchant marine and a new navy is 
a revival of piety, the kind mother and father used to 
have— piety that counted it good business to stop for 
daily family prayers before breakfast, right in the middle 
of harvest; that quit field work a half-hour Thursday 
night, so as to get the chores done and go to prayer-meeting; 
that borrowed money to pay the preacher's 
salary, and prayed fervently in secret for the salvation 
of the rich man who looked with scorn on such unbusiness-like 
behavior. That's what we need now to clean 
this country of the filth of graft, and of greed, petty 
and big; or worship of fine houses and big lands and 

R4232 : page 262 

high office and grand social functions. 



"What is this thing we are worshiping but a vain 
repetition of what decayed nations fell down and worshiped 
just before their light went out? Read the 
history of Rome in decay and you will find luxury there 
that could lay a big dollar over our little doughnut that 
looks so large to us. Great wealth never made a nation 
substantial or honorable. There is nothing on earth 
that looks good that is so dangerous for a man or nation 
to handle as quick, easy, big money. If you resist its 
deadly influence the chances are that it will get your son. 
It takes greater and finer heroism to dare to be poor in 
America than to capture a battery in Manchuria."— Wall 
Street Journal. 



page 262 

PUT-IN-BAY CONVENTION 

FOR particulars we refer our readers to our issue 
of August 15th, with the following items of added 
information:— 

The Pennsylvania Railroad Co. will run a special 
train for us from Pittsburg on Saturday, August 29th, 
at 6 a.m. (Allegheny 6.03 a.m. city time) to connect with 
the lake steamer at Cleveland, O. It will be run onto 
their lake dock, and the steamer will stop there to take 
our party aboard. The Washington and Baltimore 
friends will probably take a through sleeper on train 
No. 23, which will be attached to our "Special" at Pittsburg. 
The Philadelphia friends may do likewise. 

Friends can board this train at Beaver Falls, Pa., at 
5.30 a.m., or at Alliance, O., at 6.40, Central time. 

Friends from nearby places who find 6 a.m. too 
early for their connections will do well to remember 
the Friday midnight sleeper from Pittsburg, which can 
be entered at 10 p.m., $1.50 extra for a berth for two. 

Notify our "CONVENTION DEPT." at once which of 
these trains you decide to take, that provision may be 
made to avoid over-crowding and discomfort. 

POSSIBLY OTHER EXCURSION RATES TO PUT-IN-BAY 

Those who cannot purchase G.A.R. Toledo excursion 
tickets to advantage will do well to inquire for 
WATCH TOWER SOCIETY rates to Put-in-Bay, O., as the 
railroads may possibly yet make us a special rate via 
Cleveland, Detroit and Buffalo. 

G.A.R. WESTERN EXCURSION ITEMS 

DATES OF SALE.— From points in Missouri, Iowa 
and Omaha, Neb., tickets will be on sale August 27th 
to 30th, inclusive. From Mississippi River stations 
and East, tickets will be on sale August 28th to 31st, 



inclusive. 

RETURN LIMIT.— Tickets good returning leaving 
destination on and including Sept. 15th. 

DEPOSITING TICKETS. -It is NOT necessary to deposit 
ticket, unless you wish to remain longer than 
September 15th. 

EXTENSION OF LIMIT. -By deposit of return portion 
of ticket by original purchaser in person with the 
Validating Agent not later than 12 o'clock midnight 
on September 15th, and on payment of $1.00 at the 
time of deposit, extension of return limit may be obtained 
to leave Toledo not later than October 15th. 
Tickets so deposited will be executed by Validating 
Agent when withdrawn from the agency and will be 
honored to commence continuous return passage only 
on date of execution. 

St. Louis, Mo., rate, $16.50; Chicago, $8.25; Kansas 
City, Mo., $24.15; Omaha, Neb., $28.25. 

But consult your own railway agent in good season. 



R4232 : page 262 

AN OUTLINE FOR STUDY OF THE SONG OF SOLOMON 
C. J. WOOD WORTH 

1:1. The song of songs— The harmony of harmonies 
—the assembling in one beautiful picture of many of 
the most beautiful figures of the Divine Word— the song 
of songs because it expresses the mutual love of Christ 
and his Church in more ways than any other. 

Which is Solomon's— Type of Christ in glory, as 
David was a type of Christ in the flesh. 

1:2. Let him kiss me— A form of salutation which 
has always signified closest fellowship; greet all the 
brethren with an holy kiss; betrayest thou the Son of 
man with a kiss? 

With the kisses— The oft repeated endearments. 

Of his mouth— Of his Word, the Scriptures. 

For thy love— Thy caresses, the repeated assurances 
of guidance, protection, companionship, love and care. 

Is better than wine— Wine is a symbol of doctrine. 
They also have erred through wine. They are drunken, 
but not with wine. All nations have drunk of the wine. 
I will not henceforth drink of this fruit of the vine. Be 
not drunk with wine. Doctrine is not only important 
but necessary. If any man will do my will he shall 
know of the doctrine. The time will come when they 
will not endure sound doctrine. Speak thou the things 
that become sound doctrine. Earnestly contend for the 
faith. Although a sound faith is essential, yet of faith, 
hope and love, the greatest of these is love; therefore, 
love is better than wine. The Lord's assurances of love 
are even more precious to the Church than the precious 



doctrines so vital to her happiness. 

1:3. Because of the savour— The sweet perfume. 

Of thy good ointments— The holy Spirit, composed 
of the principal spices of myrrh (wisdom), cinnamon 
(understanding), calamus (knowledge), cassia (deputyship), 
the holy anointing oil of the priesthood. 

R4232 : page 263 

Thy name— Christ, which means "Anointed." 

Is as ointment— The holy anointing oil, the holy 
Spirit. 

Poured forth— At his baptism upon the Head, at 
Pentecost on the Body. 

Therefore— Because of their admiration and appreciation 
of Christ's holy Spirit. 

Do the virgins— The pure in heart. 

Love thee— Seek fellowship with thee, aspire to learn 
of thee, to cultivate thy graces, to be near thee. 

1:4. Draw me— No man can come to me except the 
Father draw him. All mine are thine, and thine are 
mine. All things are of the Father by the Son. 

We will run— Not sit in the seat of the scornful, 
nor stand in the way of sinners, nor walk in the counsel 
of the ungodly, but run with patience the race set before 
us; run for the prize; so run that we may obtain. 

After thee— The forerunner. The first-born from 
the dead. The first to pass over the narrow way. The 
Head, that in all things he might have the preeminence. 
Not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. 

The King— The Lord Jesus, typified by Solomon. 
So shall the king greatly desire thy beauty. 

Hath brought me— Even in the present life. 

Into his chambers— Into the "Holy," the spirit-begotten 
condition, the first heavenly condition; made us to 
sit down in heavenly places in Christ. 

We will be glad— Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, 
ye righteous. 

And rejoice in thee— And again I say, Rejoice. 

We will remember— Will meditate upon, think of. 

Thy love— Thy caresses, assurances of guidance, 
protection, companionship, love and care. 

More than wine— More even than the doctrines so 
precious to us. 

The upright— Those without deceit, the guileless, 
pure-hearted. 

Love thee— Seek fellowship with thee, aspire to 
learn of thee, to cultivate thy graces, to be near thee. 

1:5. I am black— The bride of Moses, Zipporah, 
type of the Bride of Christ, was an Ethiopian woman. 

But comely— The king's daughter is all glorious 
within; her intentions are pure, spotless in God's sight. 

O ye daughters— Professed children. 

Of Jerusalem— Of the Kingdom of God. The true 
Church instinctively recognizes that her detractors are 
to be found among God's professed people. 



As the tents of Kedar— Kedar was one of the children 
of Ishmael, and the name thus stands for the Ishmaelites, 
or Bedouins; their tents are their homes, and 
though outwardly stained and weather-beaten are often 
extremely luxurious in the interior, being hung with 
costly tapestries. 

As the curtains— Between the Holy and Most Holy. 

Of Solomon— Of Solomon's temple. These curtains, 
or rather a similar curtain which hung in Herod's 
temple, and which was rent in twain on the day of our 
Lord's death, was a most wonderful curtain, being 
some thirty feet long, fifteen feet wide and five inches 
thick. 

1:6. Look not upon me— Look not so upon me 
(Leeser); the Church kindly expostulates with her 
critics. 

Because I am black— Because I am somewhat black 
(Leeser); the Church does not deny her imperfections, 
but is not disposed to admit the contentions of her 
fault-finders that she is altogether worthless. 

Because the Sun— The searching light of the true 
Gospel which exposes every defect. 

Hath looked upon me— Judgment must begin at the 
house of God. The Church's sins are of the kind that 
are open beforehand, known to all men. God's Word 
fearlessly exposes the weaknesses of every noble character 
whose life is there recorded. 

My mother's children— Sitting and speaking against 
their brother, their own mother's son. 

Were angry with me— Your brethren that hated you, 
that cast you out for my name's sake, etc. The brother 
shall betray the brother to death. 

They made me— Elected me, appointed me. 

The keeper— Class-leader, Sunday-school teacher, 
etc. 

Of the vineyards— Sunday-schools, Christian Endeavor 
societies, Epworth Leagues, Young People's 
unions. 

But mine own vineyard— The cultivation of the true 
vine; I am the Vine, ye are the branches. 

Have I not kept— Because my Father is the 
husbandman. 



R4232 : page 263 

A FATHER'S LETTER TO HIS SON 

TO MY DEARLY BELOVED SON:- 

It has been on my heart for a considerable time to 
write you a letter, to be opened on your tenth birthday, 

, 1916, to endeavor to express something of the 

feeling of love and tenderness I have towards you, and 
to point out, for your eternal joy, and for your safety, 
certain principles, which I hope you will receive into a 



good and honest heart. At last a favorable opportunity 
has come, and as my last message to you I beg you to 
give earnest heed to all that this letter contains. 

At the present time your dear mother and myself 
are in good health, and the affairs of the world are 
moving along in about the same general way as they 
have always moved within my lifetime. The world in 
general expects it to continue in this way indefinitely, 
and yet, looking at matters through the Lord's Word, 
I know that when this letter is read your papa and 
mamma will have passed from earthly scenes forever, 
and the great time of trouble, "such as never was since 
there was a nation," will no longer be a matter of 
prophecy, but of history. 

It is needless for me to tell you, my dearly beloved 
son, what great tenderness and sympathy I feel for you 
in the thought that you will be bereft of earthly parents 
at such an early age, or with what compassion I think 
of the great suffering soon to come upon the world, and 
which, to some extent, you must share. But I know 
our heavenly Father and his goodness too well to think 
he has ever made a mistake, and am sure that beyond 
these special and peculiar trials lie special and peculiar 
blessings. It is of these blessings that I particularly 
wish to write. 

The reason that your dear mother and myself must 
die within the next few years is because the sufferings 

R4233 : page 264 

of the "Body of Christ" are not yet complete, and we 
have taken advantage of the great opportunity to make 
covenants to lay down our earthly lives, and are trying 
to carry out our covenants, before this great work, 
which was begun by Jesus himself at the time of his 
baptism, is forever finished. The time when the suffering 
shall be finished is now very near, hence it follows 
that, if we have proved sufficiently faithful to the Lord, 
the time is near at hand when we shall share with him 
the glory that is to follow. This means that very soon 
it will be true of us, as it is true of the Lord, that we 
shall be changed from earthly to heavenly conditions, 
and the world will see us no more, forever. 

The knowledge that the setting up of the Lord's 
Kingdom is at hand was brought to us by a study of the 
works of our dear Brother Russell. Ever since the 
various volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN, and the semi-monthly 
issues of ZION'S WATCH TOWER first came into 
my hands, I have sought to use all my time and talent 
in spreading the good news. As soon as you are old 
enough to understand these books and papers, I trust 
you will study them with the greatest care. You will 
be considerably assisted in this if you make use of the 
comments and other helps which appear in the Bible 
printed by the WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
in the fall of 1908. 



At the time this letter is written the Image of the 
Beast (the federation of so-called Protestant sects, with 
the Episcopal Church at the head) has not yet been developed, 
and yet, we know from Brother Russell's writings 
that within a very short time now (probably the 
Spring of 1909) it will begin its persecuting power, and 
in a very few more years its work will have been ended, 
and it, with all of Satan's devices to deceive and enslave 
the minds of men, will be utterly destroyed. I am telling 
you this now, so that when this letter is read, the 
fulfillments may prove to you that there is a God, and 
that he carries out all of his plans without the least 
danger of failure at any point. All that has been foretold 
in the Scriptures will surely be fulfilled, and exactly 
on time. 

I come now to the special object of this letter. 
The Scriptures indicate that in the year 1915, the year 
before this letter is read, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, 
Isaiah, Daniel, and all the holy prophets and patriarchs 
from Abel to John the Baptist, will have been raised 
from the dead and will be in charge of the earthly phase 
of the Lord's Kingdom, with headquarters at Jerusalem. 
The Lord's Word also seems to indicate that this truth, 
and the fact that there has been a change of dispensation, 
may possibly not be generally believed until the 
year 1918. I am writing this to you so that you will not 
be one of those who will be mistaken on this point, but 
will understand that, by the time this letter is read, the 
squaring and straightening of earth's affairs will be in 
progress from Jerusalem, at the hands of the Ancient 
Worthies. 

What I now wish to urge upon you, my son, is that 
you give your whole heart and life unreservedly to the 
Lord, or in other words that you make a whole-hearted 
consecration to him who bought you with his own 
precious blood, and that you grow up with the single 
ambition to do with all your might all you can to aid in 
carrying on the work which will then be under way at 
Jerusalem. I wish you to do this for your own joy of 
heart, because there is no joy comparable to doing the 
Lord's will, but not alone for this reason. The Scriptures 
show that every son and daughter of our race must at 
some time make an unconditional surrender to the Lord, 
a full consecration of heart and life to do his will, or 
else be destroyed. 

In addition to this I wish to hold out to you a hope 
which I feel justified in mentioning. There are some 
Scriptures which show that, after the close of the Millennial 
Age, the Ancient Worthies may possibly be given 
heavenly honors and stations, and there is some reason 
to believe that, as the child of consecrated parents, you 
may possibly be counted in with the Ancient Worthies 
if you make at once a full consecration of your heart to 
the Lord. If I understand the matter rightly, you occupy 
a different relation to our heavenly Father than other 
children, up until the time when you reach years of 



accountability, and I am hoping that you will take advantage 
of this special relationship to place yourself as 
close to the Lord and his work as it is possible for you 
to do. 

One thing more. Beware, oh beware, of ever resisting 
the Lord's will even in the smallest way! At 
the close of the Millennial Age there will be many who 
shall be destroyed, because at heart they are not fully 
submissive to the heavenly Father's will. 

Should it be the Father's will that you be permitted 
to be counted in with the Ancient Worthies, be assured, 
dear son, that a loving father and mother will 
greet you in the heavenly courts with joy untold, but in 
any event, you may be sure we shall always watch your 
course with fondest affection, doing all we can to aid 
you in carrying out your good resolutions, and hoping 
in the end to see you attain to perfect everlasting life, 
under the happy conditions to be obtained in the golden 
ages to come, after the last enemy has been destroyed. 
With tenderest love, 

Your devoted father, I. N. COGNITO. 



R4233 : page 264 

KING SAUL'S IGNOMINIOUS END 

--I SAMUEL 31. --SEPTEMBER 6.- 

Golden Text:— "Prepare to meet thy God."— Amos 4:12. 

SAUL'S career began under most favorable conditions 
and terminated most ignominiously in 
suicide. A man of manifest ability, as a general 
and a ruler he lacked in one thing, which made his 
career as a whole a failure. As we have seen, he was 
not irreverent, nor profane and vicious in the ordinary 
sense of those terms. In many respects he showed a 
deep reverence for the Almighty and a considerable desire 
to do his will. His failure, on the whole, was the 
result of a double mind. The Apostle remarks that "A 
double-minded man is unstable in all his ways." Our 
Lord states that we "cannot serve God and Mammon." 
King Saul was desirous of serving God, but was also 
desirous of serving self and Mammon. His proper 
course would have been full consecration, full submission 
of his will to the divine will. This is the principal 
difference between his course and that of his successor, 
David. Outwardly, perhaps, Saul was as noble in character 

R4233 : page 265 

as his successor; but the latter, putting God first 

and submitting his own will to the divine will, had the 

advantage, so that whatever natural blunders he made, 



whatever natural defects he shared in common with the 
remainder of the human family, these were offset by 
that heart loyalty to God which never permitted him to 
stray far, and which, after every transgression caused 
him to weep bitterly and to seek divine forgiveness and 
therefore a closer walk with God. Thus David was a 
man after God's own heart, not because of his perfection 
of the flesh, but because of his perfection of intention 
and heart desire. Saul's character is represented 
today in many worldly people, who by a full submission 
of their wills to the Lord, a full consecration, might become 
saints, but who, in endeavoring to maintain their 
own wills, make a failure of life and accomplish little 
that is praiseworthy. 

MADE MAD BY JEALOUSY 

Saul lamented his loss of divine favor, declared by 
the Prophet Samuel; but apparently the matter did not 
strike him so seriously until he began to notice that the 
divine blessing was with the youthful David. Jealousy, 
one of the most intense foes of human happiness, 
entered his mind and almost bereft him of reason. The 
more faithfully David served him, and the better the results 
obtained, the more did Saul recognize that this 
marked David as his successor in the Kingdom under 
the Lord's providence. This, as we have seen, led to 
the hate which sought to assassinate him and which 
later on led to Saul's hunting him as a brigand, with 
his troops. Various matters associated with the narrative 
clearly imply that the evil spirit which entered 
into Saul in connection with his envy of David was a 
spirit of an unsound mind, an evil or injurious spirit or 
disposition. There is a great lesson in this matter, not 
only for the worldly class represented by Saul, but a 
lesson also for ourselves of the New Creation. In our 
journey through life, almost daily we come to places 
and circumstances which, wrongly received, may change 
our entire course from fellowship and relationship to 
God to sin and opposition to him. What Christian has 
not realized certain crises in his life in which two voices 
seemed to speak to him; the one favoring humility and 
obedience to God at any cost; the other urging self-will 
backed by pride? If we are advanced Christians, 
who through numerous victories have gained a position 
where such besetments are rare, we still need to be on 
guard and to remember that we have a very wily Adversary, 
that we have the treasure of the new mind in an 
earthen vessel, and that in our flesh dwelleth no perfection. 
These recollections should make us very humble, 
and lead us to cling closely to the Lord, and to fear 
and abhor any attitude of conduct and even of thought 
that would in any measure seem to antagonize the 
divine will. Even if the Lord's favor seemed to be 
passing from us to another in certain respects, we 
should follow the course of Jonathan and know for a 



R4234 : page 265 

certainty that it would be folly to battle with God, for 
no blessing could possibly lie in that direction. 

THE PHILISTINE INVASION 

It would not be correct for us to suppose that Saul's 
persecution of David occupied all of his time and attention. 
Undoubtedly as a man of ability he exercised 
quite an influence throughout his Kingdom. This is 
evident from the fact that for seven years after Saul's 
death the ten tribes of Israel clung to his successor and 
declined to recognize David. On the other hand Saul's 
insane jealousy undoubtedly weakened him personally 
and also the resources of the people, so that the Philistines 
considered it an opportune time for an invasion 
of the land of Israel. The battle was not fought on the 
borders, and the invaders were not met promptly, but 
obtained a considerable foothold before the battle began. 
Meantime the attitude of King Saul's mind may 
be well judged from the incidents of his visit to the 
witch of Endor. Poor man! He had sufficient knowledge 
of God to have faith in him, but equally well for years 
he knew that he had been cut off from special divine 
favor, and that he had been vainly striving against God 
in his opposition to David. But with all this, in his 
vexation of heart he desired some superhuman counsel. 
Not only had he been seeking to take David's life, but 
he had slain the priest for giving David the shewbread, 
and in general had done everything he could to cut himself 
off from God's favor, even though he realized his 
need of it. 

VISITING THE WITCH OF ENDOR 

The fallen angels, demons, even back in Saul's 
time, sought to personate the dead, to hold communion 
with the living by representing themselves as their deceased 
friends. The Lord distinctly forbade such communications 
with demons; and the command throughout 
Saul's dominion had been that witches and those 
having familiar spirits, mediumship, should be put to 
death, with a view to driving them out of the land of 
Israel and thus to put away temptation from the Israelites. 
But now in his extremity doubtless, King Saul, 
disguising himself, sought the witch, that through her 
he might have communion with Samuel, the prophet. 
Evidently he had come under the delusion which was 
very rapidly making headway throughout the world, 
namely, that the dead are not dead, but merely disembodied. 
On this supposition he placated the witch and 
made his request for an interview with the Prophet 
Samuel. 

The manifestation that took place may be accounted 



for in two ways: 

(1) An evil spirit may have personated Samuel and 
foretold the results of the battle on the morrow. Doubtless 
it would have been easy for any one of mental acumen 

to forecast the predicted results. Besides we know 
not what facilities for information on such matters the 
demons may possess. Many of the things which today 
they tell through mediums are remarkable for their 
accuracy. 

(2) It is not said that Saul saw anything nor that 

he heard anything. His communications were through 
the witch; she saw, she heard, she told. Saul perceived 
from what the witch said that it was Samuel, recognizing 
the prophet from the description of his mantle, etc., 
which she gave him. But his boldness in still attempting 
to ascertain his future is remarkable. One would 
think that, with his knowledge of God and with his 
realization that already he was under divine disfavor, 
he should have feared God's further displeasure in doing 
that which was forbidden. There is a lesson, too, for 
the Lord's people here. What the Lord is not pleased 
to give us through proper channels we should realize 
we would be better without. It is in vain that any 
might endeavor to circumvent the Lord, to get ahead of 
him in any manner. Our Lord's words, "Agree with 
thine Adversary quickly while thou art in the way with 
him," would certainly apply in such a case as Saul's, 

R4234 : page 266 

when God had become his adversary. His proper course 
would have been to throw himself completely upon the 
Lord's mercy, assured that he is able to make all things 
work together for good. This should be our course. 
Faithfulness to the divine will is the only secure and 
happy course for us. 

SAUL AND JONATHAN SLAIN 

The next day the battle raged, and the army of the 
Israelites was worsted, and Saul and his three sons 
were slain, besides many of his troops. Our lesson 
tells of the suicide of Saul. He preferred to die by his 
own hand rather than to come under the control of his 
enemies alive. Poor man! The poet describes the anguish 
of his last hour, saying, 

"And the falchion at thy side 

To thy heart thy hand did guide; 

Crownless, horseless, headless, fall 

Son and Sire, the house of Saul!" 
The closing verses of the lesson tell us that the 
Philistines sent Saul's armor piecemeal to their various 
cities with reports of their victory, and that they fastened 
his dead body to the wall of Beth-shan. It will be 
remembered that at the very beginning of Saul's reign, 
forty years before this, the Ammonites, having made an 



attack upon the city of Jabesh, overpowered it and demanded 

the surrender, and would give no better terms 

than that the right eye of each Jabeshite should be destroyed; 

and that then King Saul went promptly to 

their deliverance and rescued them. It is worthy of 

note that the men of Jabesh, forty years after, had not 

forgotten Saul's energy on their behalf; so that when 

they heard that his body and those of his sons were 

ignominiously fastened to the outer wall of the city to 

putrefy and to be devoured by vultures, they went quite 

a distance and took down the bodies and burned them, 

so that no such indignity could further be expressed, 

and carefully buried the charred remains. Thus they 

attested their recognition of the king's kindness to 

them. Kind words and kind deeds can never die, and 

we are often surprised at what a power they exercise 

even over those who are not in any special degree the 

Lord's people. Such evidence of a spirit of appreciation, 

of kindness, illustrates the fact that, although our 

race is sadly fallen and bruised by the fall, nevertheless 

elements of the original image of God in the flesh 

are still traceable in the words and deeds of natural 

men. Without this, it might be said there would be 

nothing to work upon. How glad we may be to suppose 

that when the new dispensation shall have been 

ushered in, and when by reason of the binding of Satan 

and the restraint of evil it will be more easy to do right 

than to do wrong, then many will fall in line with 

righteousness and eventually learn to love righteousness 

and to hate iniquity! 

Our Golden Text, "Prepare to meet thy God," is 
appropriate to everybody in every time. But the right 
way to prepare to meet God and to hear his decision respecting 
the character is not, as usually supposed, to 
begin to get pious when we feel the approach of sickness 
or death or in the presence of calamity. From the 
moment we become believers in Christ and turn from 
sin and seek forgiveness and thus become eligible to 
God's favor, we are urged to present our bodies living 
sacrifices to him and thus to receive of him an adoption 
of his spirit to fellowship. This in turn proves to be 
but the entrance way to the school of Christ, where they 
are to be taught as sons of God, to be prepared for the 
glorious work in association with their Redeemer in 
his glorious Kingdom. As they grow in grace and 
knowledge, they grow in appreciation of divine favor. 
As the poet has said, 

"Oh, let no earth-born cloud arise 
To hide thee from thy servant's eyes." 

Such as are in this attitude of heart are prepared 
to meet their God at any time. Indeed their meeting 
with him has already begun, and anything that will 
serve in any degree to hinder its pleasurable continuance 
will be a disaster indeed. 



R4234 : page 266 

DAVID ATTAINING KINGSHIP 

-2 SAMUEL 2:1-7; 5:l-5.-SEPT. 13- 

Golden Text:— "David went on and grew great, and 
the Lord God of hosts was with him."— 2 Sam. 5:10. 

DAVID was in his 30th year at the time of King 
Saul's death. During the ten preceding 
years he had led a varied life. Banished from 
Saul's court through envy, hunted by the king as a 
wild beast, David's experiences were far from what have 
been considered ideal. Chased as a brigand and 
looked upon with distrust on the part of the majority 
of the people, who would know little about him except 
that while once high in the king's favor and having 
been the king's general, he was now in disfavor, it 
would be difficult for some to consider him otherwise 
than with mere envy. Others again, failing to consider 
that God appointed the rulers of Israel, might think 
David a usurper, seeking to profit himself at his master's 
expense. As a matter of fact we find that even in 
the demoralized condition of things which followed the 
death of Saul and his three sons in the disastrous battle 
of our last lesson, still the eleven tribes promptly 
rallied to the support of Saul's fourth son, Ishbosheth, 

R4235 : page 266 

and never seemed to think a moment of David. 

David, as the captain of his band of six hundred 
men, had been making his home at Ziklag, southwest 
of Judah. When David heard of the death of Saul, 
instead of determining what he should do according to 
his own judgment, he inquired of the Lord. It seems 
remarkable to us that a young man, driven from home, 
an exile, hunted as a bandit, and cut off from all the 
refining influences of life, should retain his reverence 
for the Lord to such a degree. Alas! how many Christians 
with every condition favorable, with Bibles in 
their hands and Bible-study helps, etc., manifest a 
much less loyal disposition! How frequently the Lord 
and his will are forgotten, while self decides and directs. 
Indeed it may be considered an evidence of a 
quite thorough submission to the Lord and development 
in grace to find a Christian earnestly seeking to 
know the will of the Lord in all the important undertakings 
of his life. "In all thy ways acknowledge him, 
and he shall direct thy paths." 

Although the school in which David was trained 
may be considered a rude one, nevertheless he evidently 
learned many lessons in it. His first inquiry 



R4235 : page 267 

was, "Shall I go up into any of the cities of Judah"? 
The answer was favorable. The next question was, 
"To which city?" Which city shall be my headquarters 
or capital? The Lord directed to Hebron. David 
wisely estimated that the people of his own tribe knew 
him well and understood why he was persecuted by 
King Saul. David was not without honor in his own 
country and not without confidence in his own tribe. 
But with all this he had special confidence in the divine 
wisdom and the divine power. He recognized that the 
Lord was directing him and that the anointing oil had 
already been poured upon him and that it was only a 
question of time when the Lord would point out the 
next step. Nevertheless he recognized it to be his duty 
to wait on the Lord and not attempt to grasp and take 
hastily the things which were his by promise. He had 
waited for more than ten years. He could afford still to 
wait patiently on the Lord. 

How important a lesson for the antitypical David 
—the Beloved— the Christ! The Apostle testifies this 
respecting our Lord Jesus, that he thought the Kingdom 
not a thing to be grasped or usurped. He waited 
the Father's time. He meanwhile humbled himself in 
harmony with the Father's will and gave evidence that 
he delighted to do that will at any cost. This faithful 
and patient waiting was pleasing to God in the One 
who was to be heir of all things and highly exalted. 
Similarly we, his followers and members, are to remember 
the Prophet David's words, "Wait, I say, on 
the Lord." Some of us have learned by experience 
that to attempt to go before the Lord in any matter is 
dangerous. We are not wise enough to guide ourselves. 
Indeed, as the poet has expressed it, 
"We fear to touch 
Things that involve so much." 
If we could recognize the delicacy of our situation at 
times, it would make us more modest and cautious. 
Not only our own interests and eternal glory are at 
stake, but also the interests of other fellow-members 
of the Body of Christ. A rash word, a thoughtless action, 
inconsiderateness in any sense of the word might 
lead to unfavorable conditions of heart, and, even though 
we gained the promise, it might be by tribulation rather 
than by the way in which the Lord would lead. 

LET YOUR MODERATION BE KNOWN 

Some, miscalculating David's temperament and 
sentiments towards Saul, supposed that they would 
gain his favor by reciting incidents showing how they 
had assisted in Saul's overthrow, but such met with 
prompt rebuke, David in every instance speaking of 
King Saul in considerate language, not merely because 
it would be wrong to speak evil of any man, but also 



because, as king, Saul had been God's representative, 
"The Lord's anointed," as David himself styled it. 
Quite to the contrary of any exaltation over the death 
of his enemy, David sent a special message of appreciation 
to the men of Jabesh who had given decent burial 
to Saul and his sons. He wished them to know that 
he did not regard this as an act of enmity to himself, 
but rather as an act of decency and loyalty in which he 
himself would be glad to have had a share. He said, 
Blessed be ye of the Lord that ye have showed this 
kindness. And now the Lord show kindness unto you 
and I will also requite you this kindness. Therefore 
let your hands be strengthened, and be ye valiant, for 
your master, Saul, is dead, and also the house of Judah 
have anointed me king over them. 

It may be contested by some that David's course 
was a case of policy and that he was too wise to antagonize 
the men of Jabesh in giving Saul and his sons 
decent burial. Even if this were the case it would reflect 
credit on David instead of discredit. It would 
show that he had the spirit of the Lord, the spirit of a 
sound mind. But we think it unnecessary to attack 
the motive of any person who wishes to do a kind act. 
Instead of attributing the motive to evil, we should 
"think no evil." The same principle is applicable to 
the Lord's people. They should not attribute wrong 
motives to business men who contribute money for 
benevolences, etc. It may, indeed, be true of some 
(perhaps of many) that the thought of gain associates 
with the gift, but it by no means follows that the act 
is destitute of generous motives and wholly sordid. 
We are the happier when we endeavor to think kindly 
in all the actions of life. A blind brother recently remarked, 
"I have no doubt that my blindness saves me 
from many disadvantages. When I meet people I endeavor 
to think of them as looking happy and generous 
and good; whereas if I had my sight I might consider 
it impossible to think of them as favorably and 
generously as I want to." 

David's adverting to the fact that he was not King 
of Judah was an intimation to the men of Jabesh that 
they would perhaps like to have him king over them, as 
he was now king in the place of Saul who had hunted 
him for ten years. It was an intimation that they 
might go farther and fare worse— all of which was 
true, as we know. 

WE WALK BY FAITH 

Quite probably King David expected after his recognition 
by the tribe of Judah that very speedily other 
tribes would rally to his banner. Nevertheless we are 
not informed respecting any move he made to accomplish 
this. He was waiting on the Lord. Surely it 
was a long wait, too. Abner, as the general of King 
Ishbosheth of the eleven tribes of Israel, waged war 



against the enemies of Israel and to some extent 
gained victories. King David had plenty of opportunity 
of wondering whether or not the Lord intended to 
carry out the programme instituted in his coronation. 
With the prestige of victories over outside enemies, 
King Ishbosheth turned attention to the tribe of 
Judah, claiming it was in rebellion against the lawful 
head. The result was a civil war, instead of an entrance 
upon a reign of prosperity. Brothers fought against 
brothers— one party of God's favored people against 
another. And this continued for two years, gradually, 
however, bringing successes to David and his army. 
Thus we read, "David waxed stronger and stronger 
and the house of Saul weaker and weaker." 

In considering the period of civil war and how one 
section of the Lord's people sought to injure others, 
we are reminded of Spiritual Israel and the fact that 
brethren in it sometimes become so estranged and so out 
of the leading of God's providence that they also become 
antagonists to each other. Alas, that this should be 
so!— that the love of God should at any time fail to 
constrain us so that we would not only turn from his 
love and fellowship, but that the sword should be used 
to smite down brethren! Get the picture impressed in 
our minds and sealed in our hearts of coming days 

R4235 : page 268 

with Spiritual Israel, when brother shall be against 

brother, which the Lord will permit just prior to the 

establishment of the Kingdom. Let us resolve that 

however others may fight, the weapons of our warfare 

shall not be carnal and that our battling shall not be 

against those who are the Lord's by covenant, but 

against the great Adversary. Carnal weapons are not 

merely guns and swords— but more injurious and death-dealing 

is the tongue when used to slander and wound. 

God forbid that our tongues, wherewith we praise God, 

should work injury to any man, but particularly to any 

of the household of faith. 

KING OVER ALL ISRAEL 

Ultimately King Ishbosheth and his general Abner 
were both foully murdered and we carefully note that 
David had no complicity in the matter, and that so far 
as the sons of Saul were concerned, David's oath of 
friendship with Jonathan was quite sufficient protection 
to them. However, the death of these men opened the 
way for the people of Israel to consider matters further 
and, as they considered, they perceived that God's 
favor was with David; that he was a man after God's 
own heart, and that as a ruler he was doing valiant 
service to the people who had accepted him as their 
king. The saner thinking amongst the tribes of Israel 
brought them to the conclusion mentioned in this 



lesson— "Then came all the tribes of Israel to David 
unto Hebron, and spake, saying, Behold, we are thy 
bone and thy flesh. In times past, when Saul was 
king over us, it was thou that leddest out and broughtest 
in Israel: and the Lord said to thee, Thou shalt 
feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be prince over 
Israel." Finally they had come to hearken to the voice 
of the Lord. No doubt the Lord could have brought to 
pass such a condition of things before. There was no 
divine purpose in the way. And so it is with all of our 

R4236 : page 268 

affairs, if we only knew it. God, who knows the end 
from the beginning, is wisely guiding for the good of 
his people and particularly of those who are individually 
his of the anointed class. 

Our lesson tells us that King David made a covenant 
or league with the people of Israel. By this is 
signified that he agreed to serve as king with a limited 
monarchy, under a constitution. He made a covenant, 
a constitution which was explicit as to what 
constituted the rights of the people and a delineation 
of what were the rights of the king. This institution 
in Israel indicates that they were the most advanced 
people in the world, for, so far as we can learn from 
history, the kings of that time were despots, who governed 
according to their own ideas, trampling upon 
the rights and liberties of the people. The interesting 
ceremonies connected with the exaltation of David as 
king over all Israel and the joy amongst the people in 
connection with David is amply recorded in 
IChron. 12:23-40. 

David's experiences in waiting for the kingdom 
and the lessons learned and the character developed 
and the preparation which made him wise and moderate 
all serve to illustrate a great lesson to the Gospel Church. 
We also are called to sit upon the throne of the Lord- 
to rule in his name. We also have been anointed to the 
office by the holy Spirit, which the Apostle declares is 
a foretaste of the glory and joys into which we shall 
enter when the crowning days shall have come. 
If discipline, self control, faith, moderation and hope 
were all requisite to make David a king over the Lord's 
people and to properly represent him in government, 
how much more severe lessons should be for us, who 
are called to so much higher a station— to the throne of 
earth as God's representatives and to the Royal Priesthood, 
ruling, judging and trying mankind, to the 
intent that as many as possible of them may be rescued 
from their degraded condition and be brought into full 
harmony with God! Surely we may say as David did 
that our trials and testings are much less than we expected 
them to be. 

If we carefully scrutinize David's character to note 
what constituted its strongest points, and what, therefore, 



we should seek correspondingly to cultivate, we 
shall agree that the strongest point was his will, which 
was rightly directed. It is difficult to estimate the 
power of the human will. Apparently God has placed 
all the interests of the present life under the control of 
our wills, and, indeed, much of the success in respect 
to the future life is similarly under the control of our 
wills. Apparently the will, rightly exercised against 
sin, is invulnerable. As we read, "Resist the devil and 
he will flee from you." Just what kind of dynamic 
force the mind, the will, can exercise against the Adversary, 
against sin, against sickness and disease, it is 
difficult for us to understand, but we have the Scriptural 
assurance that there is such a will, and our own experiences 
in its exercise have fully demonstrated the truth 
of our proposition. Strong wills are not confined to 
God's people. Satan and many of the depraved are 
strong-willed. Indeed, in this fact lies much of the 
suggestion of the spirit of wickedness. All who are 
the Lord's should recognize the value of determination 
and the unsatisfactoriness of vacillation. 

The Apostle declares truly, "A double-minded man 
is unstable in all his ways." Such a person makes a 
success of nothing. Whatever may come to him above 
the ordinary will surely be by accident. Herein we see 
the wisdom of the Lord's method of dealing with the 
Church in this Gospel Age. "He seeks such to worship 
him as worship him in spirit and in truth." He tells 
them of his goodness and gives sufficiency of help to 
encourage the person to will aright, with assurances 
that if he will do the willing the Lord himself will give 
the necessary assistance and succor in every time of 
need. And although the Adversary is stronger and 
wiser than we are, he shall not be able to hurt us because 
He who is on our side is greater than all who are 
against us. It is to this end that the Lord encourages 
us to make a covenant with him by sacrifice— to give up 
our all, our will to his guidance. Happy are they who 
do this. And these are few comparatively. With the 
majority there is a continuance of self and much of disputation 
in respect to things of the Lord— his will. It 
is in line with this endeavor to fortify the will and 
strengthen the character that we recognize such vows 
as would be of assistance. The Adversary is watching 
continually to touch the spots most liable to assault 
and we must make the fortification strong, striving to 
keep our sacrifice with the Lord and our wills firm to 
resist the Adversary— to serve the truth and all the 
household of faith, and to guard our own words, acts 
and thoughts. 

THE SONG OF MOSES AND THE LAMB 

With the inauguration of King David came the 
usual mirth and songs and exhibitions of joy. Indeed 



R4236 : page 269 

nearly every nation has its national anthem in which it 

memorializes the king and the kingdom. And is it not 

so with our Lord's Kingdom, which is shortly to be introduced 

with most wonderful demonstrations? Is not 

the glorious temple of God— the Church— the living 

stones of which are now being shaped, hewn and 

polished, hailing the great Capstone? The Head of the 

Church is Christ. Already we hail and crown him Lord 

of all in our hearts and look forward with joyful anticipation 

to the time when "every knee shall bow" to the 

Lord. 

Meantime we who hope to be members of the Bride 
class and "joint-heirs with him" are here expected to 
learn to sing the song of Moses the servant and the 
song of the Lamb, for "Worthy is the Lamb that was 
slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and 
might, and honor and glory, and blessing." "And 
they sang a new song before the throne: and no man 
could learn that song," except the anointed. And the 
Lord will be with him in Mount Zion, the Kingdom. 
Realizing that this song is the tidings of great joy which 
shall be to all people, we are correspondingly interested 
to know to what extent we have learned— to what extent 
we can sing it now. We find indeed that it is a 
life study to learn this lesson. We rejoice in the privilege 
to bear witness of our God to all those who have 
ears to hear, even though doing so brings reproaches, 
frowns, opposition. Our patience and our faith are to 
continue, and we are to wait for the Kingdom in its 
beauty and the glorious "change" in ourselves to tell 
to others more effectively than ever the blessed 
tidings. 



R4236 : page 269 

OUR CONSECRATION VOW EMPHASIZED 

THE friends are getting the correct view of the recently 
suggested "Vow," and their names are 
coming in freely. Some tell us of the blessings 
experienced, as they realize that all the features of the 
Vow were really included in their original consecration 
"even unto death" in the service of the truth and the 
brethren; the special features merely representing their 
appreciation of the strenuous times at hand and the 
need of safe-guarding themselves and all the dear 
brethren, against our wily foe, Satan. 

One dear brother is curious to know who suggested 
to us the "Vow" and who formulated its phraseology. 
We reply that no human being suggested "the Vow" or 
its phraseology to the Editor. He believes that the 
Spirit of the Lord guided him to lift up this high 



"standard" for the protection of the Lord's people, by 

showing him that the enemy is about to "come in like 

a flood," and that the specializing of several features of 

our consecration will enable many to "resist the devil 

that he may flee from them." (See Isa. 59:19,20.) The 

only modification to the Vow was the inclusion of 

brothers and sisters as exceptions, at the request of a 

"Pilgrim," who claimed that otherwise his conscience 

would hinder his kissing his sister, but who desired to 

join with the others that took the Vow. The Editor explained 

that there is nothing in the Vow to hinder the 

kissing of a brother or a sister, a nephew or a niece, 

because no one need be ashamed so to do before a congregation 

of the Lord's people who know of the relationship; 

and that any familiarity more than that would not 

be advisable. However, fearing that others might misunderstand 

the matter similarly, these exceptions were 

made before the Vow was printed in the TOWER. Be it 

understood, however, that only brothers and sisters of 

blood relationship are meant and understood— the very 

intent of the last clause of the Vow being to erect a 

helpful barrier between brothers and sisters in the 

spirit. 

Two or three have written asking if it would be 
right to take the Vow with certain other exceptions and 
reservations. We reply, that it is each one's own business 
whether he takes the Vow as published or modified 
or not at all. Our advice is that it be taken as 
published. The very fact that anyone feels fearful that 
he or she might not be able to fulfil its provisions would 
mean to us that such are the very ones who specially 
need the Vow in its very strongest form. It is the weak 
that need the fortification. Probably by far the majority 
of those who have thus Vowed had little or no need 
of it, but joined in lifting this high "standard" in the 
interest of the less strong brethren, and also for the 
worldly. 

R4237 : page 269 

The long lists of names coming in caution us that 
the printing of these in the TOWER will consume too 
much space. We are therefore discontinuing this 
method of publicity, purposing (D.V.) that with the 
close of the year we will publish an Alphabetical List 
of all who advise us that they have taken the Vow. 

Continue to send in your names as classes where 
convenient, and continue to address these Vow letters 
to the Editor. He is specially pleased to receive them 
and to know of the great joy so many are experiencing 
in connection with this movement in the narrow way. 
He would be pleased to acknowledge each letter, but 
this would be beyond his strength, even if the other interests 
of the work permitted, which they would not. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings in the Lord. I write you to say how 
pleased I was to see the TOWER containing "the Vow," 
and to let you and the "family" know I have registered 
it as mine. 

As a Colporteur I feel its need, although I have always 
endeavored to walk circumspectly, but feel much 
strengthened in mind now by the definite Vow. 

I thank our heavenly Father for harvest-work privilege 
and have much joy in the service, though it is uphill 
compared with the work in the United States. 

Yours in the dear Redeemer, 

HERBERT C. ROBB, Colporteur,-Ireland. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I want to tell you the joy which the June 15th 
TOWER brought. I am glad to tell you that I made the 
"Vow" to the Lord. This is just what I needed. 

Dear Brother, I wish you could know how much we 
appreciate the TOWER. It is to me like a letter from 
home; my joy is unspeakable. May the Lord ever keep 
you strong for your willing service. 

Yours in the Beloved, J. H. MARTIN. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It was with great joy and thankfulness to our dear 
heavenly Father that I read the TOWER of June 15th. 

The dear Lord's hand was indeed very evident in 
the wording of that "Vow." It indeed seems to include 
all the channels through which our great Adversary is 

R4237 : page 270 

at present seeking to overcome the Elect. I had so 
earnestly prayed that the dear Lord would in some way 
make manifest his protection and care over his own, 
and caution them against the subtle ways of the enemy; 
for the dear Lord has seen best that I should be made 
painfully aware of the fact that some associating themselves 
with the children of God are seeking to take unauthorized 
liberties, clothing themselves as angels of 
light, and claiming to be of great assistance. 

Words would fail me to express my joy and gratitude 
when I read the "Vow" and saw how indeed the 
Eternal God is our refuge, and underneath are the everlasting 
arms. How evident again is the care of our 
God in that this "Vow" has been published, and all may 
read and know our attitude. 

With joy I say the taking of "the Vow" has brought 
blessing upon blessing, and such an increase of love 
and joy in the Colporteur work. I ask an interest in 



your prayers, dear Brother Russell, that I may prove 
faithful unto the end. Thanking you again for all your 
kind helpfulness, I am, 
Yours in his service, S.WOLF. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

"Grace unto you and peace, from God the Father 
and the Lord Jesus Christ." (2 Thess. 1:2.) Although 
a little late I write to tell you how very much I appreciate 
the article in June 15th TOWER, "Pay thy vows 
unto the Lord." It appeals to me as being a very 
timely warning, as I have been so situated in the last 
two years as to understand the importance of such a 
warning. The Lord in his wisdom has seen best to 
place me where the Adversary has been busy trying to 
make the Lord's people believe that if they love one 
another, as the Word says we should (I John 3:16), they 
should show it outwardly. When spoken to about 
it the dear friends would say that we were evil surmising 
or perhaps had a great deal of false modesty which 
we must overcome. I had taken a similar Vow before 
the Lord, but have now taken this one, and feel that it 
will help me greatly in keeping the sacrifice on the 
altar, and while I realize my inability to keep it, yet I 
trust in him who has promised, "My strength is made 
perfect in weakness." 

Now, dear brother, I realize that the greatest test 
is more love for the brethren and less for self, and I 
ask that I may be remembered by you in prayer that 
by the Lord's grace I may stand these tests and fulfil 
my vows, that by so doing I may be the more able to 
glorify my dear heavenly Father, which is my chief desire 
in life. 

"Now, our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God, even 
our Father, which hath loved us and hath given us 
everlasting consolation and good hope through grace, 
comfort your heart and stablish you in every good word 
and work."— 2 Thess. 2:16,17. 

Your sister by his favor, NELLIE BUSH. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

At first reading I could assent to all the conditions 
of the Vow; yet I have not until today found time to 
consider them carefully and prayerfully. Having done 
so, I wrote out the Vow and on my knees registered it 
as my Vow before the Lord. I have placed the copy 
where I can see it the first thing in the morning and 
the last at night. I am sure that all who have taken it 
will realize that "oneness" that is so pleasing to the 
Lord and for which he prayed. 

I have always remembered all of the Lord's dear 
people in prayer, but especially those at the Bible 



House, and realize that the Colporteur work and 
workers are very dear to your hearts, and I more and 
more appreciate the great privilege which has come to 
me, "even me," which is just the training and discipline 
I need. 
With much love in the Lord, T. H. PERKINS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I write to tell you that I have taken the Vow given 
in June 15th TOWER, and I ask an interest in your 
prayers. I consider it a very timely precaution against 
the wiles of the Adversary, especially the various "New 
Thought" deceptions which are being promulgated 
with such subtlety, befitting one whose house is about 
to fall. I consecrated at the age of fifteen, and, realizing 
how little time I had to give in the service of the 
Lord, while under obligations to no one, decided I 
would never increase my obligations by marriage and 
expressed as much to the Lord in my consecration 
Vow. I have since received so many blessings and 
profited in so many unexpected ways by this Vow that 
I do not hesitate to strengthen it by the one given in 
the TOWER. 

I assure you, dear brother, that I remember you 
daily at the throne of grace, as well as all the Bible 
House family. With much Christian love, 

Yours in his service, MARY OCTAVIA NOE. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

After very carefully weighing "Vow" stated in June 
15th TOWER, with earnest and thankful heart I desire 
to have you enlist me as having entered into further 
covenant with the Lord, through the Vow. I shall 
only delight to remember daily before him all the stipulations 
contained in the Vow. 

Am noting with great pleasure the good fruit of 
your recent visit here at Little Rock. 

Yours in Christ, THOS. F. HUGHES, JR. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have been thinking of writing you for some time; 
now that I have made "the Vow" to the Lord I shall 
write. I am so rejoiced for the article in June 15 TOWER 
it certainly will be a great blessing to the blessed 
cause. The Father is so thoughtful of our every need, 
calling our attention to the snares of the Adversary, 
and bringing forth meat in due season; so we never lack. 

May God's blessings be continually showered upon 
you and all the dear household, is the prayer of a sister 
in his service, MRS. J. F. BEARD. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

In addition to any action as individuals that we may 
have or shall take in reference to "the Vow" proposed 
in the June 15th TOWER, as Elders of the St. Louis 
Church, we desire to unite in an expression to you of 
our hearty endorsement and approval of your presentation 
and suggestions in this regard, as being in our 
estimation, valuable means of safe-guarding the members 
of the Lord's flock in a time of particular trial and 
testing. We would state that we have each, individually, 
taken the obligation. 

With much love in our Head, and praying his blessing 
upon you and all his dear people, we remain, 

Yours in his service, JAMES LOCKWOOD, JACOB 
COBINE, MENTA STURGEON, HORACE E. HOLLISTER, R. 
ROBERT HOLLISTER. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I want to express my appreciation of the timely 
letter in June 15th TOWER. My heart overflows with 
joy and gladness for all the dear Lord's leadings. 

R4238 : page 271 

Every word in the letter and all of the article, "PAY 
THY VOWS," was read by me with very deep interest. 
I want to tell you I have gladly and reverently made 
this Vow to my heavenly Father and trust in his grace 
and strength that I may fulfil all his good will concerning 
me. May the dear Lord's richest blessings rest 
upon you, dear Brother Russell. 
Your sister in Christ, (MRS.) LYDIA MESSNER. 



page 271 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V. (E)* 

Questions on Study V.— The Author of the Atonement. 

OCTOBER 4 

(17) In what way may the mind of the mother affect 
her offspring before its birth, and how may the facts be 
seen to comport with the Scriptural declaration that 
our Lord Jesus was holy and separate from sinners, 
while his mother was imperfect like the remainder of 



the race? P. 102, par. 3. 

(18) What do we know in respect to Jesus' mother— 
her character, attitude towards God, etc., that would 
authorize the conclusion that she was holy-minded and 
that her influence upon her child would correspond to 
this? Quote and cite the Scriptures. P. 102, par. 3. 

(19) Whence came the perfect life principle, which 
resulted in the birth of Jesus— "holy, harmless, undefiled"? 
P.103,par. 1. 

(20) If life proceeds from the father and nature 
from the mother, of what nature was the "man Christ 
Jesus"? P.103, par. 2. 

(21) Is this same principle that the mother gives 

nature, the father life, borne out by the record of Gen. 6: 1-5? 
If so, how? P.103, par. 3. 

(22) What would have become of Adam's race had 

the fallen angels been permitted to continue the generation 
of a new race of humans, contrary to the divine 
arrangement and organization? P. 104, par. 1. 

OCTOBER 1 1 

(23) Did that new race of mental and physical 
giants dominate and intimidate humanity, and is it 
probable that their continuance in power and authority 
would eventually have crushed out Adam's race? P. 104, 
par. 1,2. 

(24) How is the principle we have discussed, namely, 
life from the father and form from the mother, illustrated 
in nature, by the fact that God is the great Father 

and Life-giver to angels of various grades, to man, to 
beasts and fowl and fishes? P. 104, par. 3. 

(25) The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ 
"hath begotten us as new creatures." Who was the 
mother in this case— mother of the New Creation? P. 104, 
par. 3. 

(26) What lesson can we draw from the fact that 

in the typical Jewish age each child ranked in favor and 
standing according to the dignity and rank of its mother 
rather than its father? P. 105, par. 1. 

(27) Is or is not this same principle illustrated in 
the birth of our Lord Jesus? If it is, show how. P. 105, 
par. 2. 

(28) In harmony with the foregoing, show how our 
Lord Jesus was a clean thing— a pure and holy being, 
undefiled by sin. P. 105, par. 2. 

OCTOBER 18 

(29) If our Lord Jesus is a new creature, spirit-begotten, 
and now highly exalted to the divine nature, 

and if it is declared that he will be the Father and Life-giver 
to humanity in its regeneration during the Millennium, 
what nature will the restored ones have— human 
or divine? P. 105, par. 3. 

(30) Show how this and related items are illustrated 



in the three wives of Abraham— Sarah, Hagar 
and Keturah. P. 105, par. 3. 

(31) Shall we not conclude that our Lord's birth 

was a miracle, wholly out of accord with Jehovah's usual 
procedures, or was it in harmony? P. 106, par. 1. 

(32) How was this illustrated in Adam? Who was 
his father and who his mother? P. 106, par. 1. 

(33) What is signified by the Apostle's statement 

that such an one "became us"— how and why? P. 106, par. 1. 

OCTOBER 23 

"MADE LIKE UNTO HIS BRETHREN" AND "TOUCHED 
WITH A FEELING OF OUR INFIRMITIES" 

(1) State briefly the two popular, erroneous views 
respecting his relations to God and to man. P. 107, par. 1. 

(2) State briefly the Scriptural view of Jesus' relationship 
to God and to man. P. 107, par. 1. 

(3) Would it have been possible for our Lord to 
keep the divine law and thus to inherit eternal life, if he 
had been a sinner, if his life had not come from above, 
but through Adam's line? P. 108, par. 1. 

(4) Since we were not by nature undefiled and separate 
from sinners, how can it be said that he was "made 

like unto his brethren"— in what respect was he made 
like us? P. 108, par. 2. 

(5) If we are not Jesus' "brethren"— in what respect 
was he made like us? P. 108, par. 2. 

(6) Cite seven Scriptures showing that we are 
Christ's brethren only after justification. P. 109. 

OCTOBER 30 

(7) Was our Lord tempted as the world is tempted 
in all points? P. 1 10, par. 1. 

(8) In our Lord's temptation in the wilderness at 

the beginning of his ministry, what was the first suggestion 
made by the Adversary as recorded, and was 
this a temptation to him as a New Creature or as a man? 
P.110, par. 3. 

(9) Do the Lord's "brethren" have similar temptations? 
If so, are these tempted as "New Creatures" or 
natural men, and what may be considered as some of 
the brethren's temptations? P. 110, par. 3. 

(10) Describe our Lord's second point of temptation 
from the Adversary in the wilderness. Show how 

it applied and whether it tested him as a "new creature" 
or as a man. P. Ill, par. 1. 

(11) Are the Lord's "brethren" tempted in like 
manner? Give illustrations and show whether these 
affect them as men or as New Creatures. P. 1 1 1, par. 2. 



"Five years ago DAWN-STUDIES, VOL. V., was reset, and 



unfortunately the type was not exactly same size as before; and 
hence page for page they differ. The references given in these 
Berean Studies apply to the present edition, a copy of which 
postpaid will cost you but 30c. But keep your old edition, for 
unfortunately the New Bible helps refer to its pages. 



page 273 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIX. SEPTEMBER 15 No. IS 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS. 

Halifax Convention Excursion 274 

"Pay Thy Vows Unto the Lord" 274 

The Put-in-Bay Convention 275 

Brief Reports of Twenty-Six Discourses by 
Various Pilgrim Brethren 276 

Group Portrait of About 2500 280 

page 274 

HALIFAX CONVENTION EXCURSION 
OCTOBER 15-18 



Arrangements are being made with the Dominion Atlantic 
Steamship Line for a special return rate from Boston on account 
of the Halifax Convention. The boat will leave Long 
Wharf, Boston, at 1 p.m., Tuesday, October 13th. The round-trip 
rate will be about $10. For friends going by rail the Certificate 
Excursion has been arranged. Ask for "Certificate" for 
Watch Tower Convention. 

R4238 : page 274 

PAY THY VOWS UNTO THE LORD 



A vow is a solemn promise, either to God or men. See 
any dictionary. It should not be followed by an oath, for 
the Christian's Yea should be Yea and his Nay should be 
Nay— as binding as though sworn to. Our Lord's words 
might be otherwise rendered, Let your avowal be a sufficient 
avowal and your disavowal a sufficient disavowal. 

Our "Consecration Vow"— our "Baptismal Vow"— if a 
proper one— was all-comprehensive. It included the sacrifice 
of all that we possessed or ever would acquire. That all 



has continued to increase as the eyes of our understanding 

opened, and those who would "draw back" from the obligations 

of further light would thereby prove themselves not 

"more than conquerors." Those of us whose eyes of understanding 

discern the expediency of the Vow lately proposed 

in the TOWER, in taking it have certainly acted up to our 

original Consecration Vow. In it we promised that our human 

wills would be dead and that we would do everything in 

our power to assist ourselves and others in the "narrow way." 

The few brethren who have expressed to us opposition to 
the Vow have all been married men, one of whom opposed 
merely the last clause, and intimated his pleasure in giving 
the "holy kiss" to sisters. We remind such as are living in 
wedlock that this matter is already covered by their "Marriage 
Vow," and besides that the Apostle referred to the "holy kiss" 
as being the Eastern custom of males kissing males. However, 
we do not claim that a kiss is sinful, but merely one of 
the things "not expedient" for us now. 

In the past we have opposed "Clerical Vows" and "Church 
Vows." And these we still oppose: they are vows to men and 
constitute a bondage, a slavery very injurious. We have never 
opposed vows to the Lord; on the contrary, these we have 
urged and still urge. Our "Consecration Vow," all comprehensive 
from the first, should be kept alive daily and should 
be enlarged daily, to cover new features of duty or privilege, 
as we come to see them. 

The Scriptures declare that it would be better that we 
should make no vow at all than that we should vow to the 
Lord and then break the Vow. (Eccl. 5:5.) Our Lord emphasized 
the same lesson. (Luke 14:28-34.) It is in harmony 
with this that we oppose so-called "Revival" methods and 
urge all to first "sit down and count the cost" before making 
the Consecration Vow— the Baptismal Vow. So now we are 
urging this further perception of the meaning of our Consecration 
Vow and the strength that will come to us all and to the 
cause by fully accepting it; and thus binding our sacrifices 
the more firmly to the altar on which they already are. To 
those who do see the Vow it is but a part of the original vow 
which MUST BE PAID. To those who do not so see we offer no 
condemnation. Each one is responsible to his own Master. 

Nevertheless we have a warning to give: Do not oppose 
the Vow. Use your own liberty in the matter and let others 
use theirs. If it is of the Lord, as we believe, none can overthrow 
it and whosoever opposes it will do himself injury. If 
in your judgment no "evil day," no "hour of temptation," no 
"strange work," no "strong delusion" is impending, you 
should be wise enough and kind enough not to oppose those 
who do so believe and who are getting ready for the same. 
Remember the Lord's words on this subject, "Behold, ye despisers, 
and wonder, and perish; for I work a work in your 
days, a work which ye shall in no wise believe, though a man 
declare it unto you." (Acts 13:41.) "Now, therefore, be ye 
not mockers, lest your bands be made strong." (Isa. 28:22.) 
Those who once take a stand of opposition will have all the 
more to overcome; pride not fully dead will assert itself and 
blind them. Hence our urgent appeal: If you do not take 



the Vow at least do not set either your heart or your tongue 
against it or against those who have taken it. And, contrariwise, 
we admonish those who take the Vow to do so in humility, 
not boastfully; and that they refrain from casting any reflection 
upon those who do not take the Vow. Time will tell 
whether or not we are foolishly careful about our words, our 
thoughts, our avoidance of Occultism, Spiritism, etc., and in 
our particularity of conduct toward the opposite sex. Already 
many report rich added blessing through the making and 
keeping of the Vow. Have patience with those who make 
slower progress and let your advantage be manifested. 

page 274 

1909--MOTTO CARDS--1909 



We have placed an order for 1909 Motto Cards. Some will 
have a calendar attached, others instead will have attached 
"the Vow" and an alphabetical list of names of those who have 
reported to us that they have taken the Vow. If your name 
is to appear it must reach us soon. We have ordered about 
twice as many with the Vow as without it, believing that your 
orders will be in such proportion. 

Should any write us that they are still faithful to their 
"Baptismal Vow" to be "dead with Him," but that they are 
opposed to this Vow as not being a part of it, we will be 
pleased to add a separate list of all such opponents. 



R4238 : page 275 

PUT -IN-BAY CONVENTION REPORT 

OUR Put-in-Bay Convention is a thing of the past, though 
its sweet memories, we doubt not, will be with us to 
eternity. It was not only the greatest convention ever 
held under the auspices of the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND 
TRACT SOCIETY, but in some respects it was one of the most 
remarkable gatherings of Christian people in modern times. 
The attendance was variously estimated at from 3,000 to 
4,800, probably 3,500 would be a safe estimate. With so many 
meetings on the programme and some of the visitors very 
weary from travel and under mental strain, it is safe to suppose 
that one-seventh of the whole might have been missing 
from any one service; and it is estimated that 2,500 were 
present on several occasions. 

It was a grandly inspiring congregation, because the 
faces were not only intelligent, but lighted up with a spirit 
of Christian love. It was a peculiar gathering in that it 
represented no sect or party, but professed the Bible creed 
alone. It was a peculiar audience further in that nearly all 
were consecrated people in the fullest sense of that term; 
it was peculiar in that so vast a company of Christian people 



were thorough believers in redemption through the 
precious blood of Christ, and disbelievers in the now popular 
but unscriptural Evolution Doctrine. The Pacific Coast 
from Washington to California, the Atlantic Coast from 
Maine to Florida, and all the States intermediate were well 
represented. The convention cost to those who attended it 
approximately $100,000. Each paid his own way, except in 
some noble instances, where the poorer friends were assisted. 
For instance, the Chicago Church voluntarily donated 
$1,500, and in so doing permitted the blessing of this 
convention to reach some of the dear friends who would 
not otherwise have enjoyed it. 

It can surely be said that this was the best of all the 
Society's conventions thus far held, and not merely the largest. 
The spirit of the convention was the spirit of brotherly 
love, which found abundant expression, not only in the meetings, 
but also in the social gatherings and dining halls. The 
dear friends had come for a blessing, and it was only what 
we expected— that the Lord fulfilled his gracious promises 
in granting us refreshment. Our cups of joy ran over, time 
and again. Our hearts were enlarged. Our capacity for 
spiritual joy was increased, and we came time and again to 
the Father's table and partook of the refreshments, giving 
thanks in Jesus' name. 

The place was in many respects ideal for such a convention 
—spacious, beautiful, quiet. The great hotel at which 
we made our headquarters accommodated about 2,400, while 
smaller hotels and cottages housed and fed the remainder. 
Naturally the crowd overtaxed the preparations and some 
of the dear friends were crowded more than we would have 
preferred. Nevertheless even the hotel people were astonished 
at the patience and kindly forbearance exhibited. In 
the congested condition, instead of murmuring, some of the 
dear friends assisted in waiting at the tables. Others helped 
by making up their own beds. Altogether the determination 
seemed to be a fixed one— that we had come together for a 
spiritual rest, a spiritual feast, and that nothing should hinder 
us from obtaining; and we got it according to the Lord's 
promises. Lessons learned in the matter of providing hotel 
accommodations will doubtless prove helpful to us, should 

R4239 : page 275 

we ever again attempt so large a convention, either at the 
same place or elsewhere. 

So important an event seemed to us to justify the devoting 
of one entire issue of our journal to a report of it. 
This we have done in a manner which, we trust, will be acceptable 
to all of our readers. We have not attempted to 
give a full report of any of the discourses, but divided 
equally the space at our disposal, giving a synopsis of each 
discourse. 

OPENING THE CONVENTION 

SATURDAY, AUGUST 29TH 



Brother J. F. Rutherford, chairman of the convention, 
presided. After the opening hymn and prayer he made the 
address of welcome, which we report as follows: 

"Dear Brethren in the Lord— We are glad to welcome you 
in the name of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society to 
this the greatest convention of the Lord's people that has yet 
been held, or that may be held, this side of the vail. We rejoice 
to come here, for some of the Lord's people have been 
looking forward to this day, believing that a great blessing is 
to flow out to his dear ones during the next ten days. We 
come here, dear friends, with the purpose of building one another 
up in the most holy Faith, and of giving thanks for 
what the Lord has done for all of us." 

The chairman made apt application of the statement of the 
Prophet that the Lord's praises should be declared in the "island." 
It was suggested that this convention, being held on an 
island, in the midst of the turbulent sea, symbolized the condition 
of heart of those who amid the distressed condition of society 
still had their confidence resting in the Lord; that the 
Lord's people are the stable ones in society now. It was also 
considered suggestive that so many of the dear friends were 
gathered together from various quarters, practically under one 
roof, and the name of the building "Victory." This was 
declared to be expressive of the common sentiment entertained 
by all of the Lord's people— Victory ! The brother further 
said: 

"Dear friends, we all desire the victory; we all desire 
to be victors, yea, more than conquerors." It was suggested 
further that this island in the midst of the beautiful seas 
was named "Put-in-Bay," which presented a further picture 
to the mind. A bay is a haven of rest from the storms that 
beat upon the sea. The brother very fervently urged that 
all of the dear friends have their hearts overflowing with 
the spirit of love; love for God supreme, love for the brethren, 
love for truth and righteousness and sympathetic love 
for the poor, groaning creation, now in darkness, waiting for 
the manifestation of the glorified sons of God. 

The chairman made it plain that every one who is a 
believer in the atoning blood of Christ would be made heartily 
welcome. Especially did he welcome the Colporteurs, 
likening them to the brave warriors of Balaklava, as they 

R4239 : page 276 

pass onward in their campaign against the stronghold of 

error, heeding not the undesirable circumstances and conditions 

with which they continually come in contact; heeding 

only the command of their King to be faithful unto 

death. 

Also the others specially engaged in the harvest work 
were very cordially welcomed— the volunteers and the pilgrims. 
The brother further stated that he felt sure that 
the hearts of all were united in love and appreciation for 
him whom God had so highly honored as to place in a position 
where he would be privileged to bring the precious 



truths of the harvest period to the attention of so many who 
are hungering and thirsting after righteousness. 

Each one of the dear friends was exhorted to bear in 
mind the nobility of his calling, and to conduct himself with 
appropriate dignity. The friends were given the comforting 
thought that even though the Adversary was in close proximity 
on the island they were absolutely invulnerable as long 
as they kept close to the Master and had his Spirit, banishing 
thoughts of hatred or fault-finding. 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S SALUTATION 

After Brother Rutherford's address a hymn was sung, 
"Blest be the tie that binds our hearts in Christian love," in 
the midst of which Brother Russell ascended the platform. 
He was greeted with the Chautauqua salute, the waving of 
handkerchiefs, and he returned the same, waving his own to 
the enthusiastic gathering. On being introduced by the 
chairman he said: 

"I am here on this occasion to offer you salutation. I 
salute you in the name of our great heavenly Father, in the 
name of our great Redeemer and Lord, and in the name of 
all the dear brethren and sisters who are interested in ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER and the truths which it continues to present 
to the best of its ability." 

The brother continued to state that he considered it a 
blessing indeed to have the privilege of greeting so many, of 
whom he supposed a large proportion were fully consecrated 
to the Lord. He expressed himself as thinking it a most 
wonderful thing indeed that so many had laid their all upon 
the altar for sacrifice, for most of the Lord's people, no 
doubt, had found by experience, by actual inquiry among 
their acquaintances and friends, that very few would be willing 
to say that they had made a full, complete consecration 
to the Lord, and while this was saddening to the heart, yet 
it demonstrated the truth of the Lord's own statement, that 
the "elect" class would constitute only a "little flock." 

He stated that it was not an uncommon thing for audiences 
of that size to be convened, but that it was a very 
uncommon thing to see an audience of that size composed 
of individuals, most of them not wealthy in this world's 
goods, who were attending for their own personal edification 
and not as paid delegates from large and wealthy 
congregations. 

He expressed gratification that the dear friends had 
come together for personal benefit, and felt sure that they 
could not have come with a desire to shine before the world, 
for nothing connected with the truth had that tendency. 
Rather, as the Apostle says, "We are counted fools." But 
this is merely the estimation of the world, which estimation 
is foolishness in God's sight. We have taken God's side and 
this is the foundation of our confidence and of our 
rejoicing. 

The brother stated that this was the only meeting in the 
whole world, so far as he knew, composed of so many whose 
hearts, as well as heads, were so thoroughly convinced in 



harmony with the Bible. While they were free from error 

and superstition, nevertheless they had come into a most abject 

bondage, bond-slaves of the Lord. On the one hand 

free, on the other hand bound; bounden by their minds 

and by their hearts; bound by love— "Blest be the tie that 

binds"— bound in that after their acceptance they are not permitted 

to do a single thing out of harmony with his will; 

that only upon these conditions is a man permitted to be the 

servant of the Lord. The speaker urged that they let nothing 

come between them and this spirit of service— 

"Oh, let no earth-born cloud arise 
To hide thee from thy servant's eyes." 

We are not bound for a day or a week or a month, but 
to the end of our journey, until we die. "Be thou faithful 
unto death," is the divine condition imposed for the obtaining 
of the crown of life. It is a full surrender to all 
eternity. He made the statement that it was no doubt true 
that those who had been in this condition of bondage for ten 
years had more joy, more rest in the Lord, than those who 
had been in that condition for only one year; that as our 
experiences increased, our blessings increased, from 
grace to grace, from glory to glory, in our hearts now, in our 
whole being now; and that by and by there would be the 
attainment of the glory that God hath in reservation for 
those that love him. 

The brother closed by exhorting the dear friends to be 
faithful, to keep their eyes on the final and glorious hopes 
and promises, on the grand consummation of our hopes, that 
we might be permitted to share in "the resurrection of the 
dead," and that each is assured of a share in the glory upon 
condition that he continue to share in the sufferings of this 
present time. 



The remainder of the afternoon was spent in prayer, 
praise and testimony and proved to be a very interesting 
and profitable service. 

After supper the friends mingled in sweet Christian fellowship 
in the spacious halls and parlors of Hotel Victory. 
In the immense parlors, offices, corridors and verandas the 
friends had full possession, and if any went away unblessed, 
unrefreshed, uncomforted, unstrengthened, we surely believe 
that it must have been for some cause of his own. 

SUNDAY, AUGUST 30TH 

For more than an hour in advance of the programme 
announcement the friends gathered in the vast auditorium. 
A praise and prayer service prepared for a discourse from 
Brother John Harrison, which we briefly report below: 

DISCOURSE BY BROTHER JOHN HARRISON 



"My dear friends, I esteem it a great honor as well as 
privilege to be permitted to greet you in the first service this 
morning. We come to you this morning with a message 
recorded in 2 Tim. 4:6-8, 'I am now ready to be offered, 
and the time of my departure is at hand. I have fought 
the good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the 
faith: henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, 
which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give 

R4240 : page 276 

me at that day; and not to me only, but unto all them also 
that love his appearing.' These words form a part of the 
last charge of the great Apostle to the Gentiles to his son 
Timothy. They form a climax to one of the greatest lives 
recorded in the annals of men. The Apostle Paul had but 
one superior, and that was our Lord Jesus Christ. 'Seeing 
the time is at hand, I am ready to depart.' We look at this 
character and are amazed that he ever could attain thereto. 
Paul had his fight. He had his hour of trial, moments of 
despair. His was a rough pathway. And the Apostle was 
almost overcome in the conflict. We are not surprised that 
the Lord let Christ set his heart upon him. He told Paul 
that he should suffer much for him. Paul was a man of no 
mean parts. He could boast of Roman citizenship and that 
he had been brought up at the feet of Gamaliel. He was a 
man full of wisdom, of zeal, of understanding, and he was 
zealous in persecuting the Christians, thinking that he did 
God service. The name of Saul of Tarsus is the only name 
recorded in the description of the death of Stephen. He 
it was who held the garments of those who crushed out the 
life of the martyr. Thus was Paul when he was taken captive 
by our Lord Jesus Christ. Blindness was his portion 
until mercy spoke and the scales dropped from his eyes. 
The foes were indeed mighty that confronted this man (a 
defender of the cross of Calvary) when he entered the narrow 
way. His conquest of himself was a mighty one. He 
made a complete sweep of the things of the earth when he 
entered this race. He eliminated all the ambitions of this 
life, recognizing the fact that it was for Christ's sake. Not 
many men can measure to that altitude of character. 

"Paul said, 'I am dead with Christ' But then, just then, 
began the greatest conflict— to bring everything into subjection 
to the will of God. 'The law of the spirit of life in 
Christ Jesus hath made me free from the law of sin and 
death.' Such a change in Paul's condition of mind must 
have been attended by a marvelous grasp of faith in the man 
whom he had persecuted in his previous life. I speak the 
experiences of many when I say that we did not fall into 
this way easily. What a wonderful conflict of soul there 
must have been when Paul turned about and recognized the 
Christ, the Truth. 

"I meet with different ones who say, 'I don't see how 
I can ever be an overcomer; how I can win the prize.' Let 
me ask you, who put you into the race? God did. Our 



R4240 : page 277 

heavenly Father knows all about you. And the Lord understands 

the whole situation, just as he did for Paul. Let 

no one take your crown. It has been assigned to you. 

"Paul was permitted to look into the future as well as 
retrospectively over the past. He was ready to say, no more 
conflicts, no more besetments, no more doubts. I am ready. 
We are in the last end of the age, whereas Paul stood in 
the first end of it. We stand in the last end of the Gospel 
Age and the first end of the Millennial Age. Paul said that 
there was a crown laid up for him, which the righteous Judge 
should give him in that day. We will receive it in this day. 
May our confidence become firmer, our rest in him become 
sweeter as the days go by." 

DISCOURSE BY BROTHER M. L. McPHAIL 

After another season of praise and prayer we heard 
from Brother M. L. McPhail on the subject of "Evil-Speaking 
and Judging." His text was:— 

"'Speak not evil one of another, brethren. He that 
speaketh evil of his brother and judgeth his brother, speaketh 
evil of the law and judgeth the law: but if thou judge 
the law, thou art not a doer of the law, but a judge. There 
is one law-giver, who is able to save and to destroy; who 
art thou that judgest another?'— James 4:11,12. 

"He that speaketh evil of another speaketh evil of the 
law. What law? The law of honor, the royal law, the law 
of Love. The law of love says, Love your neighbor as 
yourself.' If a man love another as himself he will cover 
the faults of that one just as he would his own. If a man 
with the law of love, the love of God, in his heart hears 
something about others, is he to keep it to himself or to tell 
it to others? The Apostle Peter says that above all things 
we should have fervent love amongst ourselves. A man 
never makes himself great in making another less. We have 
a rule for everything in Matt. 18:15-17, 'If thy brother trespass 
against thee, go to him alone' about it. And if he hear 
thee, what then? Ah! then thou hast gained thy brother. 

"Paul going to Damascus to persecute the Christians 
heard our Lord's voice saying, 'Saul, Saul, why persecutest 
thou me?' If it was hard for Paul, so it is hard with every 
fault-finder. If thy brother trespass against thee go and 
tell him alone, and if he will not hear, take one or two 
others. If he will not hear them, take it to the congregation 
that they may restore him. The Bible tells me not to speak 
evil of anyone. The Lord will judge righteously. The 
judges of the earthly courts cannot judge righteously. Many 
a man has been hung for the crime of another. And many 
a man has gone free who would not have done so with 
righteous judgment. Our Lord will know who is to blame 
and who is not. Judge nothing before the time. If you 
want to get on that judgment-seat in the Millennial Age, 
my friends, you must keep down now, 'Who art thou that 
judgest another?' Before you judge, find the book and chapter 



and verse in the Bible which gives you the authority to 
judge. We should consider it well to look into ourselves 
and to attend to our own business, to our own consecration. 
If we do this, we shall not have time to see the faults of 
others. The Apostle Paul said, 'I keep my body under, lest 
after having preached to others, I myself become a 
castaway.' 

"He who judges others lays the foundation for his own 
judgment. God will be just as loving and kind— and just as 
severe also— as we are to others. The Apostle James says 
that he who gives no mercy shall have judgment without 
mercy. God has no mercy for you if you have no mercy 
for others. 'With what judgment ye judge, ye shall be 
judged.' 

"Think for a moment of the words in the 15th Psalm: 
'Lord, who shall abide in thy tabernacle or who shall dwell 
in thy holy hill?' It is one thing getting in and another 
staying in. What is meant by taking up a reproach against 
a man's neighbor? To take up a reproach against a man's 
neighbor is to violate the law of love. So that if I hear 
anyone speaking against my sister or brother and do not 
oppose this I take up a reproach against him. We see then, 
dear friends, that a person is guilty if he listens to evil 
things. If we have the love of God in our hearts we will 
not believe anything against our brother until it is proved 
against him. But suppose a man tells us something about a 
brother high in the Truth. Should we not believe it? No! 
If an angel from heaven should tell it, do not believe it. If 
we have the love of God in our hearts we will not be against 
our brother unless he acknowledges the wrong. Love will 
cover a multitude of sins. When one is honored, all should 
rejoice. There is no envy in the true Body of Christ. 
Neither a back-biter nor one who listens to a back-biter will 
get into the Kingdom. In I Peter 3: 10 the Apostle says, 
'For he that will love life, and see good days, let him refrain 
his tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no 
guile.' Well, who does not love life and love the good days 
promised? If we want to get into the Kingdom, let us refrain 
from evil and speak no guile." 

DISCOURSE BY BROTHER B. H. BARTON 

The afternoon session opened at 2 o'clock with praise 
and prayer, after which Brother B. H. Barton was introduced. 
His subject was:— "Our Highest Motives." 

Brother Barton stated that it was customary to take a 
text and then to preach from that text, but that this time 
he intended to reverse the usual order, to preach the sermon 
and then have the text at the end. He had a special 
reason for this— to avoid the prejudice of the minds of those 
in the audience; that oftentimes when the text was announced 
it sounded so familiar that the opportunity for 
drawing specially helpful thoughts from that text was almost 
gone. 

The brother proceeding said that every individual member 
of the human race would spend eternity in one of four conditions. 



He cited Gen. 2:10-14 as containing a suggestion of 

what these four classes would be. The river that went forth 

out of Eden, he said, might represent the human race, which 

also originated in Eden and which was brought forth to be 

the crowning blessing to the earth. From thence the river 

was divided into four heads, so the human race has gone out 

of Eden because of sin, and since it has left the garden it 

has been divided into four classes. The first river was 

named Pison, which compassed the land of Havilah, where 

there was much gold, and the gold of that land was good. 

How often in the Scriptures gold is used to symbolize the 

divine nature, the condition of the "little flock." The second 

division was Gihon, corresponding to the servants before the 

throne, the palm-bearers of Revelation, touching a symbolical 

Ethiopia, for that country was used to represent servitude. 

The third division was Hiddekel, flowing toward Assyria, 

the world, the restitution class. And the fourth was 

Euphrates, the river which was made dry by Cyrus, and concerning 

which we read that it shall be dried up, like those 

who go into the Second Death, as unworthy of a continuation 

of the moisture of hope. 

The statement was emphasized that all must come under 
one of these divisions, and the query was given as to which 
of them would contain us. Some were represented as saying, 
"Oh, I would like to be of the company typified by the 

R4241 : page 277 

river Pison, flowing where there is much gold; I would like 

to be of that special class which shall have the divine nature 

rather than be of the restitution class." "But why this desire? 

What would be the reason; what the motive?" It 

was suggested that the individual might even be deceived for 

a time and not understand his own mind in this matter, as 

to what the real foundation motive was. Some of the motives 

that have been entertained are these: "I want to be of 

that class because I want the very best there is; others can 

have the second best." Such, however, will not be of that 

company, for their motive is selfish, the same spirit which 

actuated them before meeting with the truth. These feel 

that they could not be satisfied with any other position, not 

knowing the glories in store for the restitution class, when 

even the words which compose our language will be materially 

changed. Others state their motive as being a desire to 

see the Lord, to see him face to face, to enjoy his communion 

and fellowship. Others desire to be of that class because 

they want to help the world, they say. But so carefully 

is the foe entrenched in us that this even may be a 

snare. It was suggested that our desire may be that we 

may do this work; not so much that the work might be 

done, but that we might do it. No! we must "glorify the Son." 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S DISCOURSE 

Another praise and prayer service rested and prepared 
the congregation for Brother Russell's discourse. Jesus said 



to his disciples, "Come ye yourselves aside into a desert 
place and rest for a while." 

We do not report this discourse because so many of you 
as desire it already have a fuller report in various newspapers 
publishing these sermons every week. Clubbing rates 
can be secured by addressing the WATCH TOWER office. 

MONDAY, AUGUST 3 1ST 

In the two hours devoted to a praise, prayer and testimony 
meeting, the great congregation had an excellent opportunity 

R4241 : page 278 

for communicating the one to the other respecting 

the Lord's providences in their behalf and in praise and petitions. 

The time was well improved and many hearts were 

made glad. 

DISCOURSE BY BROTHER O. L. SULLIVAN 

'"Be ye not overcome with evil, but overcome evil with 
good.' (Rom. 12:21.) This question confronts all of us. 
The Church must overcome evil now; the entire world must 
overcome evil in the next age. The Apostle tells us that the 
Adversary as a roaring lion seeks whom he may devour.' 
The experiences of these times are going to be terrible. So 
were the closing scenes of Christ's life terrible. Do you 
esteem it a privilege to so suffer?" The speaker quoted repeatedly 
many forceful texts of Scripture throughout the 
entire discourse, going to the "Law and to the testimony" 
to prove all statements made by him. 

"The whole question with us," he said, "as we think of 
our text, is one of faith. It is already real in God's sight. 
Everything depends upon ourselves. There must be no 
schism in the Body of Christ. The Apostle says in Rom. 12:4,5, 
'For as we have many members in one Body, and 
all members have not the same office; so we, being many, 
are one Body in Christ, and everyone members one of another.' 
We are now the family of God." At this point the 
speaker quoted the following Scriptures:— Eph. 2:19-22; 
Rom. 8:29; Psa. 21:9; Eph. 5:15. 

"In the rules of consecration presented by the Apostle, 
we see that Love is the principal thing. The command of 
our Master is that we love one another. He shows us that 
we must hate evil and seek good. 'Be fervent in spirit' Do 
not render railing for railing. Provide things honest in the 
sight of all men. Love would not avenge itself. Instead of 
judging in an avenging spirit, this new mind will try to 
cover the fault. Again we say that everything rests upon 
faith. We see that Satan is now ruling; that Satan has 
caused all the sin and trouble; that God will destroy both 
sin and Satan; that God hath reconciled us to himself 
through Jesus Christ. It requires faith to abide in this 
world and not be of it. We must have faith. A want of it 
is fatal. Evil can be rooted out, overcome, destroyed by 



good. God's methods are exact and simple and true. We 

are laboring together with God. His Word instructs us. 

Just restraints are placed upon the souls hoping to become joint-heirs 

in the Kingdom with our Lord." Again the speaker 

drew from the numerous Scriptures which he cited many 

helpful illustrations for the child of God. 

"It is by prayer and fasting and supplication that we 
keep out of sympathy with the evil and in close touch with 
our Lord, until he turns loose upon us the holy Spirit. We 
cannot have the heart filled with two things at the same 
time. If we are filled with love there is no room left in our 
hearts for evil. (2 Cor. 10:5.) 'Casting down imaginations 
and bringing into captivity every thought to Christ Jesus.' 
There are two indispensable things for the Christian to do. 
He must study, study, study; and he must read, read, read. 
It does not require much to decide your chance. Love and 
trust the brethren if the heavens fall. You will be misunderstood, 
but God is for us. Keep with those who have the 
same mind that you have, the same hope, the same desires. 
What concord the Apostle advises! How can two walk together 
unless they are agreed? If ye do these things, ye 
shall never fail,' says the Apostle. By willingness to endure 
hardness the new mind must be polished and purified. Character 
must be established so that throughout all eternity there 
will be no deflection from the will of God. 

"Three things are necessary for us— God's power and 
help, our own co-operation, and our consecration. God is 
for us, if we can only grasp it. The world calls us fools, 
but God's Word calls us wise virgins. God will energize 
these new minds and we must press forward until we shall 
achieve and accomplish the victory. Satan is directing all 
his forces against us, but our Lord overrules all these things 
to our good. They have a contrary effect. Satan means 
evil against us, and the flesh rebels and cries out for ease 
and pleasure." 

DISCOURSE BY BROTHER GEORGE DRAPER 

"Other foundation can no man lay than that which is 
laid." Brother Draper's subject was, "The Ransom and the 
Philosophy of It." He took it for granted that most of 
those present recognized the necessity of comprehending the 
wonderful doctrine of the ransom. He realized with the 
rest that there are very few that believe in the doctrine of 
the ransom at the present time, simply because they have not 
comprehended that which is the foundation for all Christian 
faith. If it be not understood we lay ourselves open to all 
the wiles of the Adversary. He expressed his finding that a 
majority of the D.D.s seemed quite ready to lay it aside, 
without feeling very much concerned about the matter, declaring 
that there was no fall; that if man fell at all he fell 
upward. The speaker related having inquired of a learned 
doctor if he believed that "Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, 
tasted death for every man." The answer was: "No, I do 
not believe any such foolishness as that. No one but backwoodsmen 
believe that any more." Brother Draper was 



grateful that he was still a backwoodsman; that he recognized 
that had Christ not died there could no real blessing 
come to the human race; if Christ did not die, then the 
Scriptures are a farce from beginning to end. 

The speaker stated that in this time it is especially necessary 
to have a more clear understanding of the ransom 
from the standpoint of philosophy than it ever was at other 
times and ages because of the trying circumstances in which 
the Church finds herself. We understand that God had created 
man perfect, in his own image, that he fell into sin, into 
degradation, into shame, when he veered aside from the 
course of perfect obedience, and that the only hope for any 
restoration lies in the fact that a great price has been paid, 
even the death of our Redeemer. 

The love of the heavenly Father was pointed out in 
having caused the earth to be cursed and in arranging all 
of the circumstances in the most helpful way possible. How 
kind of him to make the sentence a death sentence lest wickedness 
abound even more than it has! When man was 
driven from the Garden of Eden it was necessary for him 
to begin to battle with the world in its imperfection, and 
hence he went down gradually into oblivion. The brother 
stated that according to the Scriptures there was just one 
little ray of hope found in the promise, "The Seed of the 
woman shall bruise the serpent's head." On went the years, 
sixteen centuries, and yet no further revelation, wickedness 
becoming so rife that it was necessary to cleanse the face 
of the earth by the flood. Four hundred years more; then 
came the promise of a blessing through the Seed of Abraham, 
yet no intimation as to what that Seed should be. Then 
"the Law was added because of transgression." 

It was clearly shown that the angels had failed in their 
attempt to lift the race to a righteous plane. The law had 
made nothing perfect, because an imperfect man could not 
keep a perfect law. Then in the fulness of time God manifested 
his love in that he sent forth his son to die as a 
ransom for all, the just for the unjust. He actually died, 
actually took the sinner's place. Wherever the sinner was, 
there the Lord went. He was as dead as the vilest sinner. 

It was impressed upon the hearers that it was this fact 
that made possible the promised blessing to all the families 
of the earth, as his death was the means which would be 

R4242 : page 278 

used to relieve the death sentence, and usher in the glorious 
work of the Gospel and Millennial ages. 

DISCOURSE BY BROTHER ISAAC HOSKINS 

Brother Hoskins sought to impress upon the minds of 
the dear friends the foundations of the things that had 
caused their gathering together. The brother remarked that 
our faith in God is not only that God intends to be good, but 
that he is good; that our faith not only affects our hope for 
the future, but gives us a foretaste of it in the present 



time; that it takes hold of matters pertaining to the present, 
not only the hope that now is, but also that which is to 
come. He impressed all with the thought of the dignity of 
their calling and with the necessity for walking in accordance 
therewith, remembering that we are being prepared to 
have a share in all the glories and wealth of the heavenly 
condition. 

The text was Matt. 25:21, "Well done, good and faithful 
servant." The special effort was to show what the divine 
approval signifies, and the value of it. Approval, he said, 
suggests the thought of having measured up to some standard, 
and that the standard with which the Lord's people are 
to measure is the standard of his Word, the standard of his 
own character, which is right and true and good. "Think of 
what the divine approval means," he said; "the approval of 
the mighty Maker of the Universe, the Self-Existing One." 
"The Lord, our God, is gracious in all his works. What does 
God want of you and me?" he queried. "We were able to 
judge of our present approval by the amount of joy which 
his promises inspire in us. Eternal life is God's favor, condemnation 
his disapproval, his disfavor. He endorses them 
because they are fully and completely in harmony with his 

R4242 : page 279 

arrangement." Brother Hoskins produced the Scripture 

proof that the human race as a whole had been in God's 

disfavor for now six thousand years, caused by the transgression 

of and nonconformity to the perfect law of God, 

and that the Lord could not endorse them in this condition. 

Yet it was shown that the Word of God was full of loving 

arrangements which the Lord had in store for the race and 

that it was a source of joy to all rightminded people to realize 

that the Lord, because of the ransom sacrifice offered 

in the person of his only begotten Son, could eventually establish 

favor to all the people. 

But how, it was asked, can we gain the divine approval now 
and prove ourselves worthy of God's eternal favor, eternal life? 
In the past God's favor was with Abraham, then with Isaac, 
then with Jacob, then with the whole Jewish nation in a 
special sense; but now the covenant entered into for 
the obtaining of favor is a special covenant, a covenant with 
God by sacrifice, first made acceptable by having received 
the merits of the ransom sacrifice, being justified by faith, 
legally at peace with God, meeting his approval thus far. 
But a fuller favor was granted by responding to the invitation 
extended to those thus justified to present their bodies 
as living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to the Lord. But 
even after having done these things, what then? he asked. 
Can we win God's final approval, the "well done, good and 
faithful servant, enter thou into the joys of thy Lord"? 
As an answer this text was read, "Work out your own salvation 
with fear and trembling." The dear friends were 
exhorted to continue to study to know the Lord and his will 
that they might conform themselves to his requirements, and 
their success depended upon the attitude with which they 



went about the matter; that "with God a meek and quiet 
spirit is of great price." He further urged that under the 
influence of the holy Spirit we should gradually attain a degree 
of actual righteousness, above that which we had when 
we entered into the justified state, and that thus cleansing 
ourselves of all filthiness of the flesh and spirit we would 
have the Lord's final approval, which is of inestimable value. 



This closed the third day of our blessed convention so 
far as discourses on the Truth were concerned. In the evening 
the Pilgrim brethren had a spiritual fellowship meeting 
amongst themselves, while the concourse of people walked 
and talked and sang in nearly every part of the spacious 
building and on its lawns. We are well satisfied that the 
feature of social fellowship is an added blessing when 
rightly exercised. True, it can be made a fruitful source for 
evil amongst those under the domination of the world, the 
flesh and the Adversary— as an opportunity for scandal-mongering, 
evil-speaking, slander, etc. We praise the Lord, 
however, for the evidences we have that the spirit of a 
sound mind is coming more and more unto the Lord's people, 
and the conversations seemed to be confined to the glorious 
hopes by the way. On other occasions where these 
meetings have been held the special opportunity for fellowship 
was lost. It is this particular feature that has become 
helpful and comforting upon this occasion. 

TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 1ST 

In harmony with the programme the day opened with 
a five-o'clock meeting. The original idea of having general 
testimony, praise and worship was not carried out, Brother 
Russell considering it an opportune time to deliver a little 
address, which is briefly given below. It was respecting the 
suggestive thought in the words of the Prophet, "Unto you 
that fear my name, shall the Sun of Righteousness arise 
with healing in his beams." 

The sun-rise service was an impressive one. At that 
early hour about 2,000 joined in praise and prayer most reverently, 
then listened with rapt attention to Brother Russell's 
address. 

DISCOURSE BY BROTHER W. M. HERSEE 

"This morning for a little while let us consider Paul's 
epistle to Timothy, first chapter, fifth verse: 'Now the End 
of the Commandment is Charity, Out of a Pure Heart, and 
of a Good Conscience, and of Faith Unfeigned.' Now the 
end of the command is love or charity which proceeds from 
a pure heart and from true faith and a good conscience. 
We find Paul, in addressing Titus, says also, 'Speak the 
things which mean sound doctrine.' 'My word, which goeth 
forth out of my mouth shall not return to me void.' The 
thought here is to show the incorruptness of the Word of 



Truth. Many Christians fail to rightly divide the Word. 

"God is gathering from the Gentiles a people to bear 
the name of Christ; but the seed of the flesh is not the 
Seed of promise. The Church will be part of that Seed by 
resurrection from the dead. So it is along this line that the 
Apostle Paul is addressing Timothy. He admonishes him 
to rightly divide the Word of Truth, which was given by inspiration. 
Rightly dividing the Word of Truth we see that 
Jesus came into the world to save sinners. We read that 
'By one man's disobedience' all were made sinners. By one 
man, Adam, death is reigning. And before God's justice 
could be appeased the price must be paid. 

"The members of the Body of Christ should have the 
same care for each other that the Lord has for them. If 
one member suffer, all suffer with it; or, if one member be 
honored, all rejoice with it.' We also find the Apostle Paul 
instructing Timothy not to rebuke an Elder and to endure 
hardness; in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves. 
Finally, in his closing epistle, Paul tells Timothy 
that much of his work would go to him. Paul says that we 
must have true faith, and that we must have our hearts 
sprinkled from an evil conscience. 

'"Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.' 
God not only loves the Church, but the world. He showed 
his love for us in that while we were yet sinners Christ died 
for us. Our Lord was at the mark of love at his consecration. 
He remained at this mark all through until he gave up 
his life. Remember Paul's words, 'Follow me, as I follow 
Christ.' He draws to our attention that those who are 
strong should bear the infirmities of the weak, and not please 
ourselves. It was for this reason that God placed in the 
midst of us some Apostles, some pastors. We need to have 
our minds girded about with the Word of Truth. The 
Lord's people who are in the narrow way must expect not 
only to appreciate justice, but also they must not look for 
justice from the world, who know it not. But they must be 
just and express love and compassion not only towards the 
brethren, but also to the world in general. There is only 
a little light shining here and there. And the light is with 
the Lord's people. Rejoice in your tribulations. It will increase 
your faith in the Lord. All will be made perfect 
through sufferings. These sufferings we ourselves are made 
partakers of. Let us more and more appreciate our privilege 
of suffering with Christ, that we get not discouraged. 
We realize that God is for us; and if God be for us, 
who can be against us? He that endures to the end shall 
be saved. He shall receive an abundant entrance into the 
Kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ." 

DISCOURSE BY BROTHER A. E. WILLIAMSON 

"He brought me forth also into a large place; he delivered 
me because he delighted in me."— Ps. 19:19. 

This Psalm, it was declared, was written under very peculiar 
circumstances by the prophet David, after his deliverance 
from Saul. The conclusion was drawn that this utterance 



applied not only to David but to the David class, that 

class of persons which God has been selecting to be heirs of 

the Kingdom, even as David had been anointed to the position 

of king. The context was brought in to show that some of 

the experiences could not have referred to David as an individual 

and must therefore be understood to apply in a prophetic 

way to the great antitypical David. 

The significance of the expressions that the Lord had used 
were brought forth. The bringing forth into a large place 

R4243 : page 279 

was the first experience and the deliverance because of the 

Lord's delight, the second. The term, "large place," was represented 

as specially emphasizing the thought of freedom, release 

from the condition of bondage— the place of freedom, 

of rest, to which the Master referred in his gracious invitation: 

"Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and 

I will give you rest"; that condition of freedom was described 

as being a large, gracious, refreshing place. But the large 

place of the text evidently referred to more than merely justification 

by faith and the accompanying peace with God, the 

blessing described evidently included the advance grace of 

Rom. 5:2, "by whom also we have access by faith into this 

grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in the hope of the glory 

of God." That, he said, was the large place in which those 

who properly appreciate the opportunities of the present time 

were privileged to be, the place of God's peculiar favor. They 

had taken a step beyond mere justification. Yet it was by 

reason of the step of justification that they might take the 

step of consecration. When these gave themselves to the 

Lord the Lord gave them something— the hope of the glory 

of God. This, it was claimed, was not true of those who had 

been merely justified, for even perfect human beings could 

R4243 : page 282 

not rejoice in the hope of divine glory, all they could hope 
for would be a restitution to the place once occupied by 
Father Adam in the Garden of Eden. But those who have 
presented themselves as living sacrifices have the hope of a 
heavenly inheritance because they have been begotten again to 
a hope of another life; seated with Christ in heavenly places. 

Special stress was laid upon the deliverance feature of 
the text. This could not apply to us as individuals, could not 
apply to any only as they were members of the Body of 
Christ, that great class in which he could delight. The deliverance 
was accomplished in two ways; deliverance out of 
the vexations and deliverance in the distresses. Sometimes 
the troubles, the trials, and difficulties were removed. Sometimes 
the Lord increased his grace and gave the ability to 
stand the trials, deliverance out of which would mean the depriving 
of the refining fire. Deliverance from worry was one 
of the chief blessings of the present experiences, according 
to the Apostle's exhortation, "Be care-full for nothing, but in 
everything by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, 



let your requests be made known unto God." 

Our trials need to be analyzed, he said, in order to determine 
their cause and in order that we might pray for and 
expect deliverance accordingly. The trial may have been 
caused by transgression of the covenant and would of course 
bring chastisement. Then we may have transgressed some 
natural law and we should not expect the Lord to work unnecessary 
miracles for us. It may be suffering for righteousness 
sake. But if it is none of these three then we may 
conclude that it is specially permitted for our development of 
character, like Paul's thorn in the flesh. 

DISCOURSE BY BROTHER A. E. BURGESS 

"The sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night." 

"The Scriptures abound in symbols, making use of many 
articles and objects in every-day life to represent certain 
spiritual truths for those who are taught of God. Our 
heavenly Father is represented in the Scriptures as a 'sun'; 
as the Psalmist says, 'The Lord God is a Sun,' whose glorious 
perfection is beyond all power of description. Inasmuch 
as he is beyond all comparison of Wisdom, Justice, Love and 
Power, he is well represented in that glorious orb of day— 
the Sun. The difference between the glory, power and majesty 
of Jehovah, as compared with that of the human race, 
is far greater than the difference between the glorious Sun 
and the grass under our feet. 

"Jehovah, in his infinite love and wisdom, foreseeing the 
blighting effect his glorious perfection would have upon our 
race, has provided a shield in the person of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, under whose protection those who desire may seek 
shelter. The length of God's wisdom provided everlasting 
life for all of his creatures who demonstrate their obedience 
to him. The breadth of God's justice, as represented in 
his divine law, is the full measure of a perfect man's ability. 
The depth of God's love was in providing Christ as a shield. 
The height of God's power was manifested in the resurrection 
of Jesus Christ from death, oblivion, to immortality. 

"The light or knowledge received by the justified individual, 
if not used by him for the purpose intended, consecration, 
does not continue. He has failed to render his 
'reasonable service.' Who were those of whom it was said 
that they should not be smitten? It was the class spoken of 
by the Prophet as having 'obtained a good report through 
faith.' 

"How wise are God's provisions. The spiritual phase of 
the Kingdom, composed of Christ and the Church, possess 
the characteristic of the Sun with its light and heating 
power, quickening into life the dead race, while the earthly 
phase of the Kingdom, being in the midst of the people, as 
dew from the Lord, will modify and temper the glorious 
rays to the proper degree, so that they will not wither and 
blight those who are designed to receive the blessing. That 
this is necessary is manifest by the words of the Apostle 
saying concerning Jesus Christ that he will 'in his own times 



show who is that blessed and only potentate, the King of 
kings and Lord of lords, dwelling in the light which no man 
can approach unto, whom no man hath seen nor can see.'— 
I Tim. 6:15,16. 

"Thus with these two phases of the Kingdom of God, 
Mount Zion, the New Jerusalem, in operation the words of 
the Psalmist will be fulfilled, 'Great is the Lord and greatly 
to be praised in the City of our God, in the mountain of his 
holiness. Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole 
earth, is Mount Zion on the sides of the North, the City of 
the Great King. God is known in her palaces for a refuge.' 
(Psalm 48:1-4.) And then indeed will mankind be filled 
with joy and gladness and life and happiness and be enabled 
to sing the praises of the Lord, 'Praise ye the Lord. Praise, 
O, ye servants of the Lord, praise the name of the Lord. 
Blessed be the name of the Lord from this time forth and 
forevermore, from the rising of the sun unto the going down 
of the same, the Lord's name is to be praised. The Lord 
is high above all nations, and his glory above the heavens. 
Who is like unto our God who dwelleth on high, who humbleth 
himself to behold the things that are in heaven, and in 
the earth. He raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and lifteth 
the needy out of the dung-hill; that he may set him with 
princes, even with the princes of his people.'"— Psa. 1 13. 

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 2ND 

This in the program was designated "Colporteur Day." 
It opened with prayer and praise service, and by 9:30 the 
spacious tent was filled to overflowing by the dear friends to 
hear Brother Russell's address to the 

"HARVEST CO-LABORERS" 

He said, "I address you as Harvest Co-Laborers because 
that will include nearly all of you— Pilgrims, Colporteurs, 
Sharpshooters, Volunteers. How wonderful it seems that 
the Lord has been pleased to associate us imperfect beings 
with his dear Son, the Chief Reaper, in this harvest time! 
How glad we all are that a place for each of us has been 
found in the work! The Lord and not man surely opened 
up the various avenues of harvest service— one and all so 
different from anything else in vogue to-day or at any time 
during the past. How wonderfully, too, the Lord has been 
blessing and prospering these various agencies is indicated by 
this immense gathering of Bible Students— not to mention the 
thousands whom we have left at home! 

"We do not boast, however, dear friends. All they of 'this 
way' are few, and amongst them are not many great, wise or 
learned, as the Apostle implies. God has been pleased to 
pass by the innumerable company of angels who would have 
been glad to be associated in this work, and has given the 
opportunities to us. Let us appreciate them and let us show 
our appreciation by using them solemnly, cheerfully, joyfully, 
with all our mind and all our strength. 

"I congratulate you also, dear friends, that although the 



quantity of tracts and booklets going forth from our office 
seems to be far exceeding those of our competitors, who are 
much better supplied with financial strength than we, 
our work, as you know, is carried on without appeals for 
money, while nearly all religious works make the money-getting 
feature extremely prominent. Thank the Lord for 
all of his blessings, mercies and privileges! Let us recognize 
his hand in the entire harvest work. Thus our faith, 
our love, our hope, will greatly increase. 

"ZION'S WATCH TOWER is still joyfully a servant of the 
Church, visiting its members in all parts of the world twice 
a month. I congratulate you that in the Lord's providence, 
and with your co-operation, the subscription list is increasing, 
tho not so rapidly as we could wish. We have reluctantly 
dropped recently quite a good many because neither request 
nor subscription price came to hand, as required by the new 
postal rules. 

"I remind you of the Pilgrim service, and the comfort 
and joy and blessing which it has brought to many of you, 
watering the seed of Truth and harrowing it. I remind you 
that there are certain recognized qualifications for this service 
—three in particular. (1) We inquire, Is the man consecrated? 
(2) Is he humble? (3) Has he ability? We look 

R4244 : page 282 

for these three qualifications in the order stated. Consider 
the Lord's providence in respect to the selection of these 
Pilgrims, that while they are widely different in their general 
characteristics, they are all men of more than average 
ability. Their training has chiefly been in the school of 
Christ, and it still continues, we trust, and will do so. We 
have no theological mill from which to grind them out. We 
prefer that their individuality be preserved, and that thus the 
Church, by the Lord's providence, should have the larger 
variety of talent in this service. Evidently the Lord has had 
to do with their preparation for the work. While urging 
that these Pilgrims receive encouraging words from you, we 
counsel you to be wise in the matter— not to spoil them 
through flattery and laudations. Remember that the ability 
manifested in these is not so much their natural talent, but 
rather the ability of the Truth, which has a refreshing taste 
and strengthening power however humbly and brokenly 
presented. 

"I remind you of the Colporteur work and its blessed 
opportunities. I suggest that each Colporteur, however humble 

R4244 : page 283 

his talents, has greater opportunities in this quarter of 

the Harvest field than he would have if chosen to be the pastor 

of the leading congregation of the land. In the latter 

position he would reach but a part of one congregation; 

while going from door to door he leaves a number of sermons 

wherever he makes a sale— discourses which may 

preach to many for many years. For your encouragement, I 



note the fact that although this is known as the panic year, 
nevertheless, the sale of DAWN-STUDIES is thus far in excess 
of last year's work, and we doubt not will maintain the ascendency 
until the close of the year. We find indeed that 
the peculiar financial conditions of the country have had a 
sobering effect upon many and that in consequence proportionately 
larger numbers are willing to examine the Truth. 
Doubtless, too, many of the books that are now being placed 
in libraries throughout Christendom will be diligently sought 
for by the Great Company during the Time of Trouble. I 
remark also that we find that territory is good for reworking 
within two years after it has been finished, and that generally 
the latter canvass yields the better results. We urge that all 
who can, employ the glorious opportunities of this department 
of the harvest work. 

"The Volunteer work seems to have been specially provided 
of the Lord for the help and development in courage 
of his dear flock. The numbers who engage annually in the 
distribution of this volunteer matter increases, and so far as 
our judgment goes, those most active in thus endeavoring to 
serve the Truth to others are amongst the most blessed. 'He 
that watereth shall himself be watered.'"— Prov. 11:25. 

BROTHER A. P. STEWART'S FUNERAL 

Brother Russell, in closing this address, informed the 
audience that he was called to St. Louis, Mo., to preach the 
funeral sermon of our beloved brother, Gen. A. P. Stewart, 
once of the Confederate army, and ranking Lieutenant-General 
in the same. The funeral address on that occasion, 
we believe, was published by several of the prominent newspapers. 
Brother Russell returned to the convention after an 
absence of two days. 

ADDRESSES TO THE COLPORTEURS 

At 2 P.M. began a Colporteur Testimony Meeting, which 
was extremely interesting. It gave good proof of the zeal 
of these dear harvest workers. 

From 4 P.M. to 5:30 short addresses were given along 
the line of encouragement to the dear Colporteurs and helpful 
suggestions as to the best methods of performing that particular 
feature of the Harvest work; suggestions as to how 
to prepare one's own heart and how best to conduct one's 
manner and speech while at the door. Talks were given by 
Brothers VanHyning, Hettenbaugh, LaFerry and Cole, presenting 
helpful pictures of the harvest work; how that when 
in the time of extremity even in an ordinary harvest the women 
sometimes left the housework to assist in the fields lest 
some of the grain be lost. Also beautiful examples of meekness 
on the part of some of the dear friends were recited to 
the encouragement of all. One brother suggested that we 
could not give out what we did not have ourselves. We must 
have our own hearts filled with the love of God before we 
can hope to influence others of the truth of our message. Examples 
of tact in the canvass were shown in a very 



interesting manner. Brother Cole closed the meeting with a 
very interesting and helpful rehearsal of the prophetic picture 
of the harvest work drawn from the incidents related concerning 
the rebuilding of the Jewish temple; how that all 
the circumstances which surrounded that experience seemed 
to be very illustrative of the conditions at the present time 
when the antitypical walls are in process of reconstruction to 
the glory of God. The thought was brought out that the 
Colporteurs corresponded to the masons who were laboring 
on the wall, who worked with the one hand and with the 
other held a weapon, the Sword of the Spirit. "Every 
one had his sword girded by his side, and so builded. And 
he that sounded the trumpet was by me." 

THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 3RD 

DISCOURSE BY BROTHER FRANK DRAPER 

On Thursday at sun rise, on the lake front, Brother 
Frank Draper delivered an inspiring discourse, listened to 
by about 1,200 of the friends. He said: 

"Gather my saints together unto me; those that have 
made a covenant with me by sacrifice." (Psa. 50:5.) "Bind 
the sacrifice with cords, even unto the horns of the altar." 
(Psa. 1 18:27.) "And they shall be mine, saith the Lord of 
hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels."— Mai. 3:17. 

In our Lord's parable of the sower and the seed the 
stony ground represented those who had no root in themselves. 
They heard the word and received it gladly, but 
when persecution arose for the Truth's sake they found that 
they had indeed entered the narrow way. They did not keep 
the covenant they had made with the Lord by sacrifice. They 
didn't have what our Lord called "root in themselves." 
Those who have root in themselves are the Lord's consecrated. 
These fully consecrated of the Lord have wills in 
harmony with the Divine will. They would not think of 
taking the sacrifice from the altar. They are glad to have 
the privilege of sacrifice. Each of these says, "I delight to do 
thy will, O God." These are jewels, diamonds. They have 
root in themselves. They are walking in the Master's steps. 

We are to love all except Satan. We can have no love 
for him. Do we have to make an effort to love our enemies? 
No! because we have this kind of love, "Blessed are the 
merciful, for they shall obtain mercy." How we love the 
brethren! not after the flesh, but after the spirit. We love 
each other from the Christian standpoint. Some people are 
very disagreeable in manner and hard to get along with. 
Those who have the love of God in their hearts will throw 
the mantle of charity over the faults of others. "In this we 
know that we have passed from death unto life because we 
love the brethren." 

This period is the acceptable time. Surely the acceptable 
time will end. Surely the Lord will rise up in authority. 
Let us fully resign our wills to him. Are we willing to do 
this? Yes, we are willing to do whatever is necessary to become 
the disciple of Jesus. Are you able? No, not of yourselves. 



Are you willing? Yes, by God's help, we are willing! 
Then, dearly beloved, my admonition is, "Enter now." Offer 
yourselves a willing sacrifice. There will be one great family 
in heaven and earth. Present your body a living sacrifice. 
No wonder our text says to "bind the sacrifice to the altar." 
It is a very hard thing to do— to "die daily." And this is true 
of all of the Lord's faithful. They are daily sacrificing 
their lives. That is the cost our Master referred to when he 
said, We must take up our cross daily. Burying our wills 
enables us to say, "Lord, thy Will be done. I have laid my 
body on the altar. I do not want to take it back. Do with 
this sacrifice, Lord, as you please." The Lord's love for the 
brethren who are in this attitude is manifest. The language 
of all such is, "I delight to do thy will, O Lord, thy law is 
written in my heart. " "This one thing I do." "I press toward 
the mark for the prize of the high calling." Remember 
that we do not glory in the flesh. God forbids that we should 
glory except in the cross of Jesus Christ. I am dead to the 
world. I am glad that I am the Lord's disciple. Can you 
bear the pain, sorrow and joy, as they come, rejoicing always 
in the Lord? Then you are a cross-bearer, and the Lord will 
say, "Well done." 

Let us examine this particular feature of the Abrahamic 
Covenant, "In thy Seed shall all the families of the earth be 
blessed." That Covenant had no mediator. It required no 
mediator. It will never have a mediator. Jesus is the Head 
of the Seed class. St. Paul shows us that those who are baptized 
with Christ are members of the Seed of Abraham, 
through which all the families of the earth are to be blessed. 

DISCOURSE BY BROTHER F. H. ROBISON 

Brother Robison's talk at 9:30 A.M. was on "Suggestive 
Features of the Tabernacle Structure." The text was I Cor. 1:30, 
"But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is 
made unto us wisdom and righteousness, and sanctification, 
and redemption." As the Apostle had made the statement 
that the things related to the Jewish polity were for a testimony 
of the things which were to be spoken after it was 
taken as probable that the Lord would indicate in the structure 
of the tabernacle the whole course of the Christian way 
from start to finish, from the outside world to the very 
throne of God. 

A comparison was drawn between the four steps of the 
text, which evidently begin with the first faint tendencies toward 
the Lord and righteousness and culminate in the "redemption 
of the Body," and the four positions connected with 
the tabernacle— Camp, Court, Holy, Holy of Holies. 

Wisdom, he said, was reasonableness, discretion, that 
characteristic which prompts us to pursue the right and appropriate 
course. "The fear of the Lord is the beginning of 
wisdom." The world in general, it was claimed, typified by 
the camp, had not even this initiative wisdom; in other words, 
they were foolish. They had not used their senses sufficiently 
to recognize the existence of the Lord and to revere him. 
Some, however, had been brought to a position where they 



R4245 : page 284 

were able to appreciate the Lord and where inspired with a 
desire to know him and to be in harmony with him, they began 
feeling after God if haply they might find him. To such 
the call went forth from the gate of the court, "Come unto 
me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you 
rest." To as many as had responded Christ was made unto 
them righteousness and they entered into the court or condition 
of acceptability before divine justice. 

The speaker brought Scripture citations to show that the 
court condition was only intended as a stepping-stone to ulterior 
graces. The justified individual was then able to have 
access by faith into the additional grace of presenting his 
body a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God. Then 
by a full consecration and begetting of the spirit he passed 
into the Holy, into the process or condition of sanctification, 
into the condition where the Lord agrees to make all the 
experiences of the earnest, honest Christian to work together 
in such a way that they will have a sanctifying effect upon 
him, making him meet for the inheritance of the saints in 
light whereunto he was called. 

On the left was the Golden Lampstand, the light from 
which typifies the light which the entrance of his truth gives. 
On the right was the table of shew bread, suggesting the 
holding forth or the witnessing of that truth to others. Both 
of these, it was stated, were great blessings, great favors, 
the one a left-hand favor, the other a right-hand favor; "it 
is more blessed to give than to receive." But the Golden 
Altar was declared to be the most desirable spot in the Holy, 
the mark of perfect love, the most advanced stage this side 
the vail, and occupied the most conspicuous position in the 
sight of the one entering the Holy. "Though I have all 
knowledge and understand all mysteries and have not love 
I am nothing." "Though I speak with the tongues of men 
and of angels and have not love, I am become sounding brass 
or a tinkling cymbal." 

It was also suggested that the relative sizes of the holy 
and the most holy were significant. As the holy of 
holies was a perfect cube and as it represented one condition 
of existence, it might be drawn that the holy, which contained 
two perfect cubes, represented two conditions, two 
realms of influence, namely, the will and the organism, and 
hence indirectly the two classes of spirit begotten ones whose 
courses are influenced by the disposition of the Lord and 
the disposition of the flesh respectively. All of these experiences 
were declared to be for the purpose of acquainting the 
royal priesthood with the characteristics of Wisdom, Justice, 
Love and Power. 

DISCOURSE BY BROTHER H. C. ROCKWELL 

Brother H. C. Rockwell spoke at 1 1 A.M. from the text 
found in I Tim. 5:7,8, "But refuse profane and old wives' 
fables, and exercise thyself rather unto godliness. For bodily 



exercise profiteth little; but godliness is profitable unto 

all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that 

which is to come." 

We find in the school of Christ, which is indeed the 
school of God, all the lessons that are necessary for the 
spiritual man. In these we may recognize seven cardinal 
points: (1) Dieting; (2) Exercising; (3) Resting; (4) Bathing; 
(5) Sun-light; (6) Cheerfulness; and (7) Breathing. 
These seven cardinal points are set forth in the Scriptures. 
We cannot expect to become strong in the physical lines by 
subsisting on chaff. A strong man cannot expect to remain 
strong by subsisting on milk alone. And so for us. We 
find that the Lord is regulating the diet. We find that when 
we were weak he led us along carefully, but as we grow 
stronger we receive stronger meat. 

Dear friends, after we have been members of the Lord's 
school for some time and have been partaking from the 
Lord's table for some time, we begin to grow and develop. 
But it is impossible to grow properly without breathing 
aright. The majority of people do not know how to breathe 
properly. Dear friends, the new creature, the new man, in 
order to develop along spiritual lines properly must breathe 
deeply of the holy Spirit of the Lord. Many breathe only 
on the upper surface. If we breathe properly we find in the 
course of time that our spiritual life is enlarged. Deep 
breathing tends to enlarge capacity for breathing. So then, 
dear friends, let us bear these things in mind— let us strive 
in all ways to be filled with the spirit of love. 

Hearken to our Teacher, consider our great Pattern, 
see where we come short and where we need development. 
So then it is imposed upon us most forcibly in order to attain 
that high development which the Lord wishes us to attain 
to that we be conformed to the image of Christ— to the 
glorious image shining through the mirror of the Scriptures. 
God wishes us to be "copies of his dear Son." The great 
Teacher, the Lord Jesus Christ, knows the experiences it is 
best for his people to go through in order that they may be 
properly developed. It requires constant experiences in order 
to produce proper development. If we do not have these 
experiences we may know that we do not belong to the 
School of Christ. It was the purpose of our Lord to glorify 
his heavenly Father; and so in giving instructions to his followers, 
he is giving them experiences in order to glorify and 
honor their heavenly Father. We should be submissive to 
our Lord. 

Another feature we examine is the rest referred to 
above. The children in the school of Christ are all specially 
exhorted to take rest— the rest of God, and rest of joy and 
of hope. There is a great time of trouble coming. The 
world sees this. They are disturbed. They have not the 
rest, the peace, that is reserved for the people of God. But 
the children enjoy this as a foretaste of what is beyond. 

As bathing is necessary to our physical health, so we 
find in the Scriptures that we are washed through the Word. 
We partake of the Water of Truth. Another important requirement 
is the Sun-light. "We are walking in the Sun-light 



all the way." It is our hearts' desire for the Lord to 
try and prove us day by day that we may be rounded out into 
his glorious likeness. The standard set before us by our 
Master is Perfect Love. Perfect Love means that we love the 
Father with all our heart and mind and soul. It also means 
that we love our brethren, and not only them, but that we 
love our enemies also. 

DISCOURSE BY BROTHER E. W. BRENNEISEN 

Brother Brenneisen's subject, at 2:30 P.M., was "The 
Three Ways." He declared that it was pleasant to repeat 
the old, old story, the message of salvation, according to 
which testimony the Scriptures declared one must speak, or 
be devoid of light. The intention was not to show the three 
ways of man nor any of man's devices, but the three ways of 
the Bible. 

He quoted from Isaiah's declaration respecting the height 
of God's plans and purposes and the surety of them, that his 
Word would not return unto him void, but it should accomplish 
that which he pleased and prosper in the thing whereunto 
he sent it. He affirmed that either the generally accepted 
thought concerning God's plans was not true or else 
the prophecy was not true; that if God's plan has been to 
convert the world he has made a failure. But, he urged, let 
God's Word speak though it make every man a liar. 

The attention of the friends was drawn to the divisions 
or dispensations of the chart which was used, indicating different 
features of Jehovah's plan, different methods of dealing 
with certain ones. 

Texts from Matt. 7:13,14 and Isaiah 35:8 were read: 
"Wide is the gate and broad is the way that leadeth to destruction, 
and many there be which go in thereat, because 
strait is the gate and narrow the way which leadeth unto life 
and few there be that find it." "And an Highway shall be 
there, and a way, and it shall be called the way of holiness." 

The broad way was opened up in Eden at the very beginning 
of mankind's experience with death, at the time of 
the loss of the homestead. The broad way was the way leading 
unto death, unto destruction, not to eternal torment, not 
to everlasting life in torture. The sentence was given, "In 
the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread until thou shalt 
return unto the ground." One could not return to a position 
which he had not previously occupied, and the Scriptural 
account made it clear that Adam had not been taken from 
eternal torment at the time of his creation, but that "The 
Lord God formed man out of the dust of the earth." Because 
of Adam's wilful disobedience he had brought upon 
himself the sentence of death— deprived himself of the privilege 
of indefinite existence under the blessing of the Lord. 
Being endowed with procreative powers he begat children, 
but as his own life rights and privileges had been subtracted 
he could not give a perfect life to his offspring; hence all of 
them partook of the death sentence, all of them began the 
downward course, which has of necessity become broad to 
be able to include every member of Adam's family, and 



which course finally terminates in oblivion for the individual. 

But because of God's love and mercy he has provided 
two ways of escape from this broad road leading to destruction, 
only one of which would open at any one time, however. 
First, after hundreds of years of waiting and of various 
experiences under the Lord's providence, came Jesus, the 

R4246 : page 285 

Messiah, who opened up the new and living way in contrast 

to the old and dying way. He brought life to light by giving 

himself a ransom for all and furnishing the opportunity 

for that ransom merit to become effective by faith to those 

who were hungering and thirsting after righteousness. 

Through this action they had an acceptable entrance into the 

narrow way, which, followed to the end, would mean a participation 

in the highest form of life, immortality. This way, 

however, was opened up not to convert the world, but to 

choose a peculiar people to be associated with the Lord in 

his spiritual Kingdom. 

Last is the highway, which shall be opened up at the 
beginning of the Millennial Age that the residue of men 
might seek after the Lord. This highway is designed to 
lead, not to the throne, but to the Edenic condition, from 
which the broad way had led them. 

DISCOURSE BY BROTHER J. D. WRIGHT 

Brother Wright spoke at 4 P.M., taking for his text 
Acts 3:19, "Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your 
sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall 
come from the presence of the Lord." The word "repentance" 
is not very well understood. It does not mean what 
it is often supposed to mean. Nor do we understand that 
it means a proper sorrow on account of sin. Nor does it 
mean a being frightened on account of eternal torment. Repentance, 
dear friends, is simply a change of mind or conduct, 
or both. And anyone who would come into harmony 
with God must repent of his sins. The next step we notice 
is that of conversion. They must not only repent, but they 
must be converted. What is conversion? Conversion means 
a turning or being changed. Repentance is included in conversion. 
But conversion means more than merely repenting. 
There are millions of so-called Christians in the world, 
but only a few real Christians. The conversion that 
the Church is to obtain is to be a complete conversion— a 
complete turning away from the things of this world. The 
Apostle tells us to "present our bodies a living sacrifice, which 
is our reasonable service." Now if we take this step we are 
that much more converted. And we must be fully consecrated 
to the Lord to prove what is that good and acceptable 
Will of the Lord. Some who become consecrated allow themselves 
to be conformed to the things of this world. These 
have not become transformed by the continual renewing of 
their minds. 

Paul said, "This one thing I do." So the Lord's people 



at this time are to be thoroughly repentant and thoroughly 
converted. Particularly are we to give heed to those Scriptures 
which will tell us if we have transgressed. If the Word 
tells us that we have transgressed we will acknowledge it. 
That is the only way to get along with the Lord— to go to 
him just as quickly as we recognize the transgression. He 
has promised to help in time of need. 

When the "Times of Restitution" shall have come that 
will be a time of refreshing. Then all sin will be eradicated 
and all mankind will be made perfect. Then the spirit will 
be poured out upon all flesh. For the Lord's people there 
is a refreshing shower at this present time. How refreshing 
to get together and talk about the precious things of the 
Lord! What great blessings we have time and again in these 
wonderful conventions! Surely the Lord is responsible for 
this refreshing ! Somehow or other the Lord provides that 
we may meet more and more. It is the Lord's will that his 
people shall convene more and more. And there is a reason. 

The time is coming for the One General Convention and 
the Lord wants his people to get ready. If we did not know 
what it is to love the brethren we might feel "like fish out 
of water" when we get on the other side of the vail. Dear 
friends, we want to get on and to keep on the upward track 
and get into the One General Convention! Thank God for 
this glorious time of refreshing! Let us notice that some 
have the idea that this matter of being repentant of our sins 
is so that we may go to heaven when we die. I think that 
there are very few who want to go to heaven if they had 
their choice. One man told me that he had a desire to remain 
here on earth, but that of the two evils of going to 
heaven or hell, he would choose to go to heaven. 

Had it not been for the fall of Israel we Gentiles might 
not have had the opportunity of coming "out of darkness into 
the marvelous light" of this Gospel favor, for evidently 
the Lord originally proffered to take the predestinated number 
from his chosen people, natural Israel. Let us seek to 
run patiently the race that is set before us, following in the 
footsteps of our Master. May the Lord's blessing be upon 
us continually as we thus seek to walk faithfully until death. 

FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 4TH 

DISCOURSE BY BROTHER P. S. L. JOHNSON 

Brother Johnson's discourse was on "Strengthening the 
weak Graces," applying the principle from the text, "Ye 
that are strong ought also to bear the infirmities of the 
weak and not to please yourselves." 

The Christian graces were classified into four classes: 
active, passive, quiescent, and mixed. Among the active were 
mentioned kindness, self-denial, appreciation, thanksgiving, 
patience, gentleness, adoration. Among the passive: meekness, 
forbearance, longsuffering, hope, joy, peace, humility. 
Among the mixed: sympathy, forgiveness, self-control, resignation. 
The graces thus developed will find themselves 
brought into play and they are made perfect through suffering, 



through trial and testing. The danger existed, he 

said, of some of our weak virtues coming in contact with 

forces that are stronger and of the former giving way because 

the individual had no knowledge of how to bring in 

relief from the other graces to act as a brace, to bear that 

which the weak grace was unable to bear, to bring in reinforcements 

from a quarter which had not been directly attacked. 

Heb. 12:2,3 was cited as an expression of this principle: 

"Who for the joy set before him endured the cross, 

despising the shame." Here the joy came to the support of his 

endurance and helped him win the victory. Sympathy for 

the poor, groaning creation inspired this joy. Another instance, 

"Your adversary walketh about as a roaring lion seeking 

whom he may devour, whom resist steadfast in the faith." 

Here the faith comes to the support of the resistance, or 

endurance. 

It was made plain that to be able to do this it was necessary 
to know oneself and to be able to recognize the graces 
which were being attacked and also the proper ones to send 
to their assistance. Self-control must always be present as 
well, a realization that in former experiences the Lord's grace 
has been effective toward a victory. Care must be exercised, 
he declared, not to throw all the burden on the strong graces, 
for that would evade the very benefit desired, the strengthening 
of that weak grace. 

For instance, suppose the faith were weak. How could 
it be helped? Hope would show that he has called us unto 
the glorious things described in his Word, the participation in 
the throne, etc., and the illumination which that hope gives 
relieves the weight which has been cast upon faith. Love, 
clinging to the Father's heart, would let the weak faith lean 
on it. Humility will not think that we are being treated in 
this matter unfairly. Meekness is here very helpful, and patience. 
Appreciation also comes to the assistance when it 
recognizes what great things the Lord has done for us. 

Hope was also taken up, and how it could best be 
strengthened when weak, when one desponds rather quickly. 
When the hope of finishing the race and coming off more 
than conquerors seems dim and the requirements seem so 
hard, then faith can be called on to support hope by bringing 
forth the earnest convictions from the promises of the Scriptures. 
Then love cheered the heart when hope was weak. 
Joy thrown in the balance would hold hope in the proper 
place. Patience and appreciation also strengthen hope. 

Likewise other graces were taken up and treated in the 
same way, all with a view to assisting in the strengthening 
of the weak graces, which graces, however, he said, should 
not always remain weak but should by this careful and prayerful 
process be gradually made stronger and finally meet for 
the inheritance on high. 

DISCOURSE BY BROTHER J. F. RUTHERFORD 

Brother Rutherford's topic was The Great Counselor. 
His text was taken from Psa. 73:23,24, Leeser, "Thou hast 
seized hold of me by the right hand, by thy counsel wilt thou 



guide me and afterward take me on to glory." The counsel 
by which the Lord guides us, he said, is his Word. We rejoice 
to be able to know what his counsel is, that God has a 
wonderful plan, that he is indeed a God of love: his counsel 
to the effect that mankind was under the condemnation of 
death, that a promised Seed of Abraham should come which 
should bless all the families of the earth, that the Lord Jesus 
did come from heaven and that in the fulness of time he died, 
gave himself a ransom for all, came to seek and to save that 
which was lost, and when he had died he was raised by the 
Father's own power and exalted to be the head of that Seed; 
that during the Gospel Age it was the Father's plan to choose 
out a special class which should be associated with the Head 
and all he comprehended as that Seed. The speaker also 
showed that our Lord as a natural man had no need of the 
Father's special counsel, that he was perfect and able to guide 

R4247 : page 286 

his own way in harmony with the Father's will. But as a 
spirit begotten individual he, like the members of his Body, 
needed the Father's counsel. Indeed the psalm referred only 
to the one class, the Christ class, and was misapplied 
when it was appropriated by any others. 

It was not the man Christ Jesus that was received into 
glory, for his flesh he gave for the life of the world, but 
the glorified Christ who was raised far above angels, principalities 
and powers and every name that is named after his 
lowly way was ended. He was put to death in the flesh but 
made alive in the spirit. He had absolute reliance in 
his heavenly Father, absolute reliance in the great Counselor. 
He reached his Gethsemane and there he knew that 
he must go into eternal destruction if he had failed in any 
way to heed the counsel of the Most High. 

Many, he said, had made wrongful claims concerning this 
promise. Some who denied the merits of Jesus' blood and 
who had made creed beds and provided themselves coverings 
would say, "Surely the Lord is leading us; see how we are 
increasing in numbers." But the Scriptures say, "Woe unto 
them that go down unto Egypt for help, that stay on horses." 

Those who were being guided by his counsel were those 
who had recognized the merit of the ransom sacrifice accomplished 
by the dear Redeemer and were justified by faith and 
who on the basis of that standing had presented themselves 
in sacrifice to the Lord and were striving faithfully to fulfil 
that covenant. 

There is a class, however, he claimed, which comes nearer 
home to us than those who are of the nominal brand, merely. 
There are those who recognize that we are living in the harvest 
time, who recognize that this is the truth, but who disregard 
the admonition to come out of her my people, who 
think they can accomplish more good by staying in the 
church and by teaching in the Sunday-school, etc. Then there 
were some, he said, who had come into a fuller fellowship 
yet, who had long enjoyed the privilege of associating with 
the friends of Present Truth and who then became careless 



in the heeding of the Lord's counsel in respect to love for 
the brethren and who were consequently drawn into a snare 
by the Adversary and moved to speak evil of the Lord's dear 
brethren. Others were not heeding the Lord's counsel in 
some other way. Some failed to recognize the ampleness 
of the Lord's providence in respect to the publishing of the 
truth and were driven by a desire to publish something of 
their own. But only those who were seeking diligently to 
know the minutest feature of the Lord's counsel would afterwards 
be received into glory. 

"BAPTISM AND ITS IMPORT" 

At 2.30 p.m. Brother Barton addressed the Convention 
on the subject of "Baptism," after which 292 brothers and 
sisters symbolized their burial into Christ's death by water 
immersion. Two other baptism services were held during the 
Convention to accommodate friends desiring the service previous 
to and after the general arrangements. These services 
furnished opportunity for a total of 363 friends to symbolize 
their covenant of consecration. 

SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 5TH 

Another delightful sun-rise meeting opened a splendid 
day. It was a Praise and Testimony Meeting. Brother 
Rutherford led it. It was good to be there. Testimonies 
turned to the Vow and the blessing of nearness to the Lord 
resulting. Some of these testimonies were remarkable, all of 
them refreshing. As only a few of the vast crowd could have 
opportunity to express themselves the leader suggested that 
those present who had taken the Vow and received a great 
blessing in consequence wave their right hand. The result 
indicated that a very large proportion of the friends had 
taken the Vow. 

DISCOURSE BY BROTHER F. A. HALL 

Brother Hall's discourse at 9:30 A.M. was on the 
"Bread of Life," from John 6:51. 'I am the bread of life, 
which came down from heaven; if any man eat of this bread, 
he shall live forever; and the bread that I will give is my 
flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.' Dear 
friends, the trouble with the world is that they are starving 
to death. Looking back into the Garden of Eden we see that 
when man lost his perfect human condition he began to starve 
to death. It seems to me that God placed there in the Garden 
of Eden a sample of what the whole earth will be in 
God's due time. I would think that God had arranged something 
very beautiful there as a picture of what earth restored 
will be. 

"As we look at the condition of sin in which mankind is 
wrapped at present, what a grand and glorious thing it is to 
know that our God is a God of wisdom! As we see God's 
wonderful provision for the uplifting of mankind, we see 
what a blessing is in store for the whole human race. It is 



necessary that we seek the knowledge of how God gives this 
blessing. First we must hear that God has made a way. 
We have to first become justified. All mankind has something 
of the original perfection left in them. 'Where sin 
abounded grace doth much more abound.' Now, dear 
friends, as we all received this reckoned justification by faith, 
we begin to feed upon this bread. All are by nature astray 
from God. When God accepted us he covered us with the 
righteousness of Christ. We know that in the Millennial 
Age God purposes that the Lord shall bring back the human 
family to perfection. God reckons us now to have attained 
to this perfection. The Apostle says that we are to put on 
the new man, which is created in righteousness and true holiness. 
It is no wonder that we are in trouble all the time, 
because we are a class of spirit beings living in a world of 
sin, offering our bodies living sacrifices. We see that this 
new life in Christ begins when we become new creatures. 

"Whatever are his thoughts, so is the man. If he has 
bad thoughts he has a bad character. If he has good thoughts, 
his character is good. The Lord shows us that if we would 
reign with Jesus we must give up earthly hopes— that we 
should willingly give up the hopes, aims and ambitions of 
earth. We are begotten to the spiritual nature and plant the 
seeds of spiritual thought one after another. The new creature 
can be developed in this way, dear friends. As this new 
creature grows we see that it becomes stronger day by day. 
Both the new and the old creatures are in the same house. 
They cannot both live compatibly in the same house. We 
must daily crucify and overcome the old nature. The many 
beautiful lessons received along the way will help us to do 
this. In order to crucify the old man it is necessary, dear 
friends, for us to control this organization by keeping the 
body under and bringing it into subjection, lest having 
preached the good tidings to others we ourselves become 
castaway. Considering the dual condition we are in it is 
necessary to see whether we are warring a good warfare. We 
are to give up the things of the old mind— to forget them. We 
are to give up not only sinful things, but even the things 
that are right— these latter are our sacrifices." 

DISCOURSE BY BROTHER M. L. HERR 

Brother M. L. Herr's discourse at 1 1 A.M. was on the 
subject, "The Lord be between thee and me."— I Sam. 20:23. 

Dear friends, with a very great deal of pleasure I bring 
to your mind the words from Genesis 3 1 : "Therefore was 
the name of it called Galeed; and Mizpah." The Lord, 
through his providence, is leading us all to an appreciation of 
this fellowship through Zion's Watch Tower. Our dear pastor 
"speaks often" to us through its pages. The things in 
our experiences that may seem small to us may be very important 
in God's sight. What words can more fully express 
these things which are of so vital importance to us than the 
words, "Beloved, the Lord be between thee and me forever." 
The new fellowship that never before was given is 
that we may love one another as he loved us. Does the 



Lord love the angels of heaven as he loved us? No! It is a 
sacredness not given to any other of his creatures. The Lord 
prayed to the Father, for us, "That the love wherewith 
thou lovest me may be in them." Was there ever uttered a 
prayer that carried such significance? We are having poured 
upon us the same love from the Father that he poured upon 
the Son. We are here because we were willing to forget our 
own people— to lay aside our own wills. We are offered a 
fellowship never before offered to any in the universe. We 
are to be lifted up, restored, cleansed. What in the sight of 
angels— what in the sight of men could be more desirable 
than this relationship! Only when we say "our brother" 
do we appreciate what a glorious thing this relationship is. 

"I have overcome the world." We do not have to do 
this. It is our privilege to accept the same mind which was 
in Christ Jesus. What mind? The same mind which enters 
into God's Spirit and views matters as God would view them. 
If we let this mind be in us which also was in Christ Jesus, 
then we are walking in the spirit. May the Lord help us 
everyone to look at matters as he looks at them and not 
as the world looks at them. "THE LORD BE BETWEEN 
THEE AND ME." We are to know our brother according 
to the spirit and not according to the flesh. If we are looking 
at our brother as the Lord looks at us that will be "The 
Lord Between Thee and Me." I prefer to take the Lord's 
way. The Scriptures show us a beautiful picture that the 

R4248 : page 287 

cherubim were made exactly alike. And then notice how 

the Lord represented his presence by the Shekinah light between 

—God's Spirit. Let us read the words of our text in 

two ways, dear friends: "Now the Lord be between thee and 

me forever." The Adversary be between thee and me never. 

I wonder if the Lord's people ever have any temptation 
to do "wooden swearing" or evil speaking? "Above all 
things, brethren, swear not." Why does the Apostle give 
such admonition to those who are walking in the Truth? 
Because those who lose their patience easily represent the 
ones referred to by the Apostle. "Be patient, therefore, 
brethren." Notice the language the Father used in the case 
of Adam. "Because thou hast sinned." And so we must be 
kind and gentle in the language we use to our brothers— not 
to use that of blame or condemnation. There are only two 
masters and there are only two condemnations. The one is 
the condemnation of the Lord. And if the righteous smite 
us we are glad. And there is the other condemnation of the 
devil. We do not want to fall under that condemnation and 
we do not want to give it to another. If we allow ourselves 
to be blamed— to receive condemnation, it requires a great 
deal of grace not to give it again. We are in the evil day. 

Let us remember the word "Mizpah" in connection with 
the WATCH TOWER service. What does it represent? The 
light. It is an exact representation of wisdom, love and 
power— this grand, glorious symbol of the divine Presence. 
Let us pray that the Truth may so keep our minds that the 



brethren may dwell in unity, and let us feel sure that it is 
"The Lord between thee and me." 

DISCOURSE BY BROTHER F. W. WILLIAMSON 

"But let all those who put their trust in thee rejoice: let 
them ever shout for joy, because thou defendest them: let 
them also that love thy name be joyful in thee."— Ps. 5:11. 

This, the speaker said, was a wonderful message to 
bring to such a gathering as the one he was then addressing 
and an exceedingly appropriate message to bring before the 
Lord's people, for those who love the name, the character of 
God, and to those who are endeavoring by his grace to develop 
it. Indeed it was for no one else, not for the world. 
The Lord had a message of joy for the world too, he said. 
Thank God for that, that the world in due time is to learn 
the joyful sound, the glad tidings of great joy which shall 
be to all people. But now the world does not know the joyful 
message, accordingly men's hearts are failing them for 
fear, looking forward to the troublous times that are coming 
upon the world. 

But it is true, he declared, that many of the Lord's 
people to-day find it hard to rejoice. In fact he had encountered 
a brother recently who thought it rather inappropriate 
to be in a rejoicing attitude of mind in consideration of the 
great responsibility which attaches to a knowledge of the 
truth; because, he had said, we should be so impressed 
with the feeling of responsibility that belongs to the children 
of the Lord, so impressed with the solemnity of the situation 
that we would have no time to feel joyful. But while it 
was realized that we ought to rejoice, remembering that the 
Lord's dealings were designed to work out in us a far more 
exceeding and eternal weight of glory, yet the matter is not 
presented to us in the Scriptures in a one-sided light. But we 
are also informed that the enemy, the great Adversary, is 
hurling his fiery darts against the children of the Lord and 
that they must rely solely upon him through all the persecution 
and the distress and the sorrow and the death. 

Let us, he said, examine some of the statements of the 
Lord's Word to see why those who put their trust in him 
are enjoined to rejoice, bringing to mind the covenant which 
they have made with the Lord, a covenant of suffering and 
death; then let us look at the other side, at the sustaining 
grace, so that we may be enabled to accomplish his good and 
acceptable will. What is it that the Scriptures point out to 
us as being part and parcel of our covenant? Is it not the 
"narrow way" entered by the strait gate, which few find and 
which implies suffering, "If any man will come after me, let 
him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me." 
Having entered into the narrow way, having placed ourselves 
under the particular care and keeping of the Lord, 
then we may appropriate the text which proclaims that his 
grace is sufficient for us, his strength is made perfect in our 
weakness. "They shall run and not be weary, they shall 
walk and not faint." "I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, 
so that ye can confidently say, 'the Lord is my helper, and I 



shall not fear what man shall do unto me.'" With this goes 
the promise that God will not suffer us to be tempted above 
that which we are able to bear. If suffering, are we rejoicing? 

DISCOURSE BY BROTHER SAMUEL KUESTHARDT 

"THE SCHOOL OF CHRIST" 

Brother Kuesthardt began to speak at 4 p.m. from the 
text, "I will instruct thee and teach thee in the way which 
thou shalt go: I will guide thee with mine eye."— Psa. 32:8. 

"We see here clearly that the one who is speaking through 
the mouth of the Prophet is a teacher, a teacher of Christians, 
to which class we consider ourselves as belonging. So 
let us keep in mind from this hour that it is the Lord 
Jesus Christ who is our teacher and let us go to our lessons 
in a prayerful spirit that we may receive a rich blessing. I 
take for granted that all here have made the Tabernacle 
Shadows a study. We know that the Lord gave Moses instruction 
how to construct the Tabernacle. We understand 
that the camp is the world. We see different compartments: 
first we find the court, then the holy, then the most holy. 
All those who have been justified by faith are in the court 
condition. This is the kindergarten of Christ. It is free to 
any one who wants to enter and the teacher is our Lord 
Jesus Christ. Who will come? Only a few know of it and 
those who enter there will be justified by faith. How can 
we know that we are justified? When we understand that 
he has given his life a ransom for all, that gives me a 
right to accept. 

A man once asked me, "Must I believe in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN to be saved?" I asked him how he would feel if he 
were invited to partake of some sugar that was laid up in a 
pile, there being old brass spoons to take it with and some one 
offered him a nice silver spoon with which to go and get 
the sugar. MILLENNIAL DAWN is the bright new help-the silver 
spoon. It is well for us if we make the proper use of 
this help. 

After the kindergarten let us go on further and enter the 
next compartment. You have to pay a tuition fee. The price 
we pay for tuition is that we present our bodies a living sacrifice. 
Now see if we can find the primary department. This 
is represented by the shew bread in the tabernacle. Whoever 
will partake of that table must stoop quite low. We find next 
the frankincense in the tabernacle. This is very precious. 
We realize that this had a sweet odor, but when we had eaten 
it became very bitter. From the primary department we go 
to the intermediate department. Here we find the candlestick. 
What do we find specially in this candlestick? We find that 
it gave the proper light. The very finest olive oil was used. 
But something else is needed too. We need a piece of wick. 
The Word of God is the only channel through which we receive 
the holy Spirit, but we ourselves are likened to the little 
piece of charred wick. We find that one who has attended 
thus far in the school of Christ and gets into opposition generally 
finally goes out of the camp— into death. Those who 



have received their lesson here in the intermediate department 
go into the high school. What is the significance of the 
smoke ascending and filling the holy and penetrating into 
the "most holy"? This means full obedience on our part to 
the Lord. And this is expressed through our prayers, both 
for ourselves and for all of the saints. 

So we find that the Lord at the present time is preparing 
the building stones for his spiritual temple. Do you consider 
yourself one of these stones? When stones are taken out of 
the quarries they are rough and unshapely. So is our condition 
when first taken out of the world. After the stones 
have been quarried and chiseled they must be polished. What 
is the polishing done with? It is done with the same material. 
So we are polished by our contact with one another 
and made fit for the Kingdom. 

SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 6TH 

THE FRUITS AND GRACES OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 

Sixteen brethren spoke ten minutes each, 
beginning at nine o'clock. 

Put off all these: (1) Anger; (2) Malice; (3) Envy; (4) 
Hatred; (5) Strife. Put on these: (6) Meekness; (7) Gentleness; 
(8) Patience; (9) Brotherly Kindness; (10) Love. Be 
ye clothed with (11) Humility; and add to your (12) Faith 
(13) Virtue, and to Virtue (14) Knowledge, that (15) Grace 
and (16) Peace may be multiplied unto you. 

A GREAT LOVE FEAST 

Brother Russell's discourse at 2.30 p.m. we do not print 
here, for those who desire same already have it in the newspapers. 
His text was Heb. 12:22,23. "But ye are come unto 
mount Zion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly 
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels, To 
the general assembly and church of the firstborn which are 

R4248 : page 288 

written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the 
spirits of just men made perfect." 

By four p.m. the Love Feast was under way and it was 
a most impressive service. The "Pilgrim" brethren present, 
about twenty, faced the congregation, the brethren at either 
end and one in the center each bearing a plate of bread. 
Brother Russell stood opposite and was the first to give the 
glad hand of fellowship. The Colporteurs present, about 400, 
preceded the congregation, filing past greeted each other with 
a warm clasp and a kind word, while the singers on the platform 
and the audience sang, "Blest be the tie," and other 
precious hymns. Many eyes were moist and many hearts 
evidently very tender when Brother Russell greeted them saying, 
"It is good to be here! It will be better to be there! 
As the Grand Army of the Redeemer, fight a good fight! 



We must die to win," etc. Undoubtedly a great blessing was 
carried away to the cheering and comfort of loved ones who 
could not be with us. 

R4249 : page 288 

MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 7TH 

This was Labor Day, so we held over until noon, affording 
opportunity to hear from two more dear Pilgrims. 

DISCOURSE BY BROTHER W. E. VAN AMBURGH 

Brother Van Amburgh's subject was from the text, 
"Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues 
of life." (Prov. 4:23.) Or the marginal reading, "Above 
all keeping, keep thy heart," intimating that we might be very 
careful and diligent in keeping our heads, our knowledge, our 
possessions, etc., and neglect the keeping of the vital thing, 
the heart, the affections. Whatever our minds feed upon, 
upon that would our minds build. If we feed upon doubts 
and trouble and worry, just so would our minds and characters 
be less stable, but having our minds fed with the Lord's 
Word we would not need to worry about the difficulties. 

He stated that there might be special trials after the 
convention, but that we need not anticipate these and spoil 
the pleasures of the present. Sometimes people may save 
themselves a great deal of distress in a storm-tossed sea by 
looking not at the breakers but at the land which is ahead 
of the breakers, realizing that that which is firm and abiding 
awaits after the distressing and disturbing experiences. "As 
a man thinketh in his heart, so is he." If we become fearful 
of the troubles and have fearful thoughts in our hearts 
it is doubtful if we will ever be more than conquerors. Instead 
it would be better for us to consider what a great God 
we have. Then we would find the knowledge of him so 
boundless that we would have no time to think of the trials 
that might be coming, and this knowledge of him is contained 
in his Word. "How firm a foundation, ye saints of the 
Lord, is laid for your faith in his excellent Word." 

The speaker said he had heard some complaining that 
they did not have enough pilgrim visits at their place and 
that while the desire for the association with different 
brethren was no doubt commendable, yet it was well to 
bear in mind that each one has the privilege of association 
with the Lord and the reading of his letters and of the comments 
which the Lord has provided, even in the most remote 
sections. Let the thought of gratitude keep us from 
worry when things arise which seem unpleasant. 

The Apostle gave a suggestion as to what was the proper 
food for the mind and heart. "Whatsoever things are true, 
think on these things." But as there were so many things 
that were true that would not minister to the edification of 
the new creature it was necessary to still further sift the 
thoughts. Much in science is true, much in art, much in 
other branches of study, but because of our very limited talents 



we ought to confine our thoughts and attentions to 

the Lord's testimony. Once on a railroad train, which was 

being run in such a way as to excite the trepidation of most 

of the passengers, a little girl was asked if she were not 

afraid, too, whereupon she replied, "I'm not afraid, my papa's 

on the engine." The thought drawn was one of increased confidence 

in his loving care. Our Father has provided the covering 

of Christ's righteousness, likewise he is providing all 

of our experiences if we are keeping close to him. 

In closing he urged further that we keep our hearts with 
all diligence, so that there would be no room for anger, 
hatred, strife, or anything of the kind. 

DISCOURSE BY BROTHER J. A. BOHNET 

Brother Bohnet's subject was "The Wise and Foolish 
Virgins." He stated, however, that it was not his intention 
to treat the subject in the way which would be generally supposed, 
namely, from the parable called by that name, but 
that he proposed to consider the fifth chapter of the Song of Solomon, 
which, he claimed, gave even fuller suggestions respecting 
these two classes than did the 25th chapter of Matthew. 
Supposing that some would declare that they believed 
in taking everything literally he read the chapter and asked 
how much could be gotten out of it from a literal interpretation. 
Then he proceeded to give an explanation, using the 
various expressions in a symbolic way and changing the Song 
from what appeared to be a silly, love-sick ballad into an edifying 
and instructive prophecy full of wisdom. 

"Awake, oh north wind, and come, thou south; blow upon 
my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out." This the 
speaker understood as follows: A wind is a force, an unseen 
force. The north wind is a wind of sorrow, trouble, disagreeableness. 
The south wind is a wind of pleasantness, 
joy, peace, etc. Blow (actuate) upon my garden (the great 
mass of nominal Christianity including the true Church) that 
the spices thereof may flow out (the graces of the spirit may 
become manifest). In other words, let the joys and sorrows, 
pleasant and unpleasant experiences, try the Church to demonstrate 
which is the true and which is the false. 

"I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse." It is 
the Lord who speaks in both of these verses, one utterance 
prior to his second advent, the other after his arrival. The 
garden is that aggregation of individuals which contains both 
the sister class and the spouse class, hence the wise and foolish 
virgins, the two classes which would be in evidence to the 
Lord at the time of his long-looked-for second presence. A 
sister is one who is related, who has many common hopes and 
interests but not experiencing the absolute union which exists 
between husband and wife, or even between lover and betrothed. 
So the foolish virgin class corresponds to the Great 
Company, the associated or sister class. The spouse is the 
chaste virgin betrothed unto Christ, eventually to be the 
Lamb's Wife. Then followed the description of the kind of 
food the Church as a whole has been appropriating during 
the Gospel Age, honey and honey-comb, wine (under the influence 



of which men are heard for their much speaking) 
and (the sincere) milk (of the word). 

"I sleep, but my heart waketh." This would indicate, the 
brother said, that in exact correspondence with other statements 
of the Scriptures the great body of nominal Christendom 
would be asleep when the Lord would come, but the 
heart, the little flock, the wise virgins, would be awake. 

Then follows the invitation of the Lord to open the door of 
the heart and admit him to govern their every action and 
word and thought. The reply is that she has put off her coat, 
has failed to recognize the necessity of the robe of Christ's 
righteousness and has esteemed it lightly. 

The symbolic picture was then drawn further to show 
that the Lord's presence would be made manifest in the early 
morning and also the manner and means of the annunciation 
of that presence. Finally the foolish virgins were awake and 
realized that the very thing for which they had been praying 
for eighteen hundred years was just now about to be consummated 
and their zeal was aroused to the extent of suffering 
bitter persecution and finally succeeding in interesting 
the Jews in the message of the Gospel. 



Questions were asked concerning the Vow which has 
recently been suggested in the TOWER. Answers were given 
along the lines of the comments which had previously been 
published; that it was not regarded as a law but that it 
rather came in under the head of expediency, that from the 
signs of the Scriptures, corroborated by the signs of the times, 
the Satanic hosts would have special liberty similar to that which 
they had before the flood, and that the world would be very 
generally deceived by their machinations because of the prevalent 
beliefs in Satan's lie, that the dead are not dead, and 
that this experience as a whole would assist very materially 
in sweeping the world with the besom of destruction as foretold 
by the prophet and from which bitter experience the 
Little Flock were to be spared. He said that he did not think 
it proper to make it a subject of controversy but that each 
one after careful consideration and prayer had a right to his 
own conclusions in regard to the matter and he himself 
claimed the same right, believing that it could not work other 
than blessing. 



The Hotel Victory manager gave us a very pressing invitation 
to return, assuring us that he had never entertained 
such people before, and that they had left a favorable impression 
upon his mind toward Christianity of our kind. 



page 289 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXIX. OCTOBER 1 No. 19 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 291 

More Miracle Wheat 291 

Seven-Headed Wheat Discovered 291 

Is Surgery a Cure for Crime? 291 

Churches Plunging Into Hypnotism 292 

Vow Letters Not a Few 293 

What Constitutes a Church? 293 

"The Evil One Toucheth Him Not" 294 

Parables of the Kingdom 297 

Saul and David in Review 298 

Hell Hath Enlarged Herself 300 

Watch Tower Bibles— New Edition 302 

New Edition of the Debates 302 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 303 

page 290 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each MAY stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



HALIFAX THREE DAYS' CONVENTION 
OCTOBER 15, 16, 17, 18 



In compliance with the request of the Newfoundland 
and Nova Scotia friends, a General Convention will be held 
at Halifax, N.S., October 15-18. 

Sessions will convene at 10 a.m. and 2.30 and 7 p.m. each 
day. On Thursday, Friday and Saturday in St. Paul's Hall, 
Argyle Street. On Sunday the meetings will be held in Orpheus 
Hall. All Believers in the Atonement by the precious 
blood will be welcomed. Boat excursions from Boston. Excursion 
rates on New England and Provincial railroads on 
"Certificate Plan" are hoped for. 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S SERMONS 



The cheapest way in which Brother Russell's sermons 
can be had regularly every week by the year in foreign lands 
is through the ENQUIRER, price $1.00 (4 shillings, or 4 marks, 
or 5 francs); this includes postage. Order through any of 
our Branches. 

Nine journals are now publishing Brother Russell's discourses 
weekly, and through these Present Truth reaches 
probably 800,000 people regularly. If only one in a hundred 
reads it means a wide influence for the honor of the Lord. 

VOLUNTEER MATTER, 1908 



We still have plenty and it is excellent; all who have 
the time and strength may use this opportunity to serve in 
the "Harvest" field. 



R4250 : page 291 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
MORE MIRACLE WHEAT 



OUR notice of the "Miracle Wheat" grown in Virginia, 
the grower reports, has caused him lots of trouble 
answering letters and returning money sent for small 
samples. He has shown us representative stalks of the wheat 



and photos of its growing in the field, fully corroborating all 
that we have published respecting the same. But he refuses 
to sell any of it until he has secured a fair stock, which will 
be in a few years hence. 

Meantime the matter has brought out the fact that others 
are also propagating "Miracle Wheat," as witnessed by the 
subjoined reports. We advise farmers to begin at once to 
inspect their wheat before cutting and cull out for seed the 
choicest, fullest heads or most "stooled." Our thought is 
that in this natural way God is preparing for the Millennium, 
when "the earth shall yield her increase." 

SEVEN-HEADED WHEAT DISCOVERED 

W. W. Ward, of Dayton, Washington, has discovered a 
new variety of wheat that has seven distinct heads united to 
a common base. And each head is larger than the ordinary 
wheat. Ward figures that the new variety will yield as high 
as 280 bushels to the acre, with an average of 200 bushels. 

Hundreds of farmers have visited the Ward ranch and 
are intensely interested in the new wheat. All have asked 
for a few pounds of the seed, but Ward is figuring upon 
further experiments and plans to plant all of this year's crop 
next season, enlarging his present area to about three acres. 

Ward has been experimenting for five years to get a 
wheat that will yield bigger crops, but never expected anything 
like the seven-headed variety.— Sioux City Tribune. 



Neither of the above notes relate to what is termed 
"Alaska" wheat grown in Idaho, which we understand 
had been repudiated by Government experts. 

IS SURGERY A CURE FOR CRIME? 



Is the modern criminal to be reformed by means of the 
surgeon's knife? Is our whole penal system— reformatories, 
jails, and asylums for criminal lunatics— to be abolished, 
while society depends for protection, and looks for the elevation 
to a higher moral standard of the thief and the murderer 
to a few inches of steel wielded by the hand of a strong-nerved 
genius of science? 

Recent miracles of surgery, such as those performed by 
Dr. Bernard Hollander, who has recently claimed that criminals 
should be judged according to a medical standard, suggest 
that we are on the eve of a revolution in our treatment 
of the criminal and insane, and that in a few years a dozen 
cuts of the lancet will effect a greater change in the moral 
equipment of the Ishmaelites of society than years of confinement 
in a jail. 

Look at the case of Holzay, otherwise known as "Black 
Bart," the terror of half-a-dozen states in America. No 
treasure on board a train was secure against his evil designs; 



no plans of the detectives were sufficient safeguard against 

his desperate courses. "Black Bart" stole and murdered 

with impunity; but in a slack moment he fell into the hands 

of the police and his criminal career was closed by a sentence 

of imprisonment for life. In a few weeks he was removed 

to the criminal lunatic asylum, and the prison surgeons, deliberating 

long and anxiously over his case, came to the conclusion 

that "Black Bart's" crimes were not so much the result 

of "cussedness" as a sheer inability to run in the straight 

and narrow path. His brain was affected by a tumor; remove 

the growth, they said, and it's a thousand chances to 

one that "Black Bart" will become a fairly decent member 

of society. The operation was performed, and in six weeks 

the nature of the once desperate criminal had completely 

changed. The knife, while removing the tumor, would seem 

to have removed his evil passions as well; his old blood-thirstiness 

had disappeared, and prison-wardens, who formerly 

hesitated to approach him unless in couples, found him 

as harmless as, and more tractable than, a child. 

Not long since a Welsh railway porter fractured his 
skull by falling off a truck. He was trephined, and apparently 
got well, but always suffered from epileptic fits. His 
usual alertness deserted him, and instead of being a bright, 
intelligent man, he became drowsy and listless, indifferent 
to all that was going on around him. In this condition he 
was taken to the Liverpool infirmary, where it was found 
that the old hole in the skull was an inch long, and that a 
flap of skin, including the old scar, was directly attached to 
the brain. What did the surgeons do? They scraped the 
folds of the brain clear of this skin, and placed between the 
brain and the bone a thin plate of gold in order to prevent 
them sticking together again. Over this the skin was neatly 

R4250 : page 292 

drawn and securely sewn. A week later the patient was 
sitting up in bed; in a month or less he was reading the 
newspapers, and taking a keen and intelligent interest in the 
busy world around him. The instruments of the surgeon 
had saved him from becoming a human log; they had 
brightened his brain, and sharpened his faculties as no treatment 
in an asylum could have done. 

A somewhat similar case was that of Jay Lentz, employed 
as a foreman at the Great Western mines at Harmon, 
in Virginia. He was caught under a fall of slate, his skull 
was broken, and a piece of his brain was torn from the main 
structure. Of course, his mental condition immediately 
changed for the worse. The doctors, faced by a terrible 
problem, resolved on heroic measures. The shattered brain 
was neatly dressed. A healthy yearling calf was tied down, 
her skull cut away, and a lobe of the brain removed and 
fitted into the cavity of Lentz' head. Slow, but sure, was 
the miner's progress towards recovery. As his physical health 
improved his old-time intellectual brightness came back, 
until he was able to resume his ordinary occupation in life. 

More marvelous still, however, is a case in which the 



surgeon's knife has been used to restore the moral faculties, 

with a boy as the subject. The boy is Carl Fredericks of 

Hoboken, whose brain is so peculiarly formed, say the doctors, 

that if left alone he would never do right. The growth of 

the brain matter has installed in him a tendency toward perpetual 

evil. Let us rid his skull of the excess, said the surgeons, 

and see if any moral improvement is visible. Certain 

parts of the brain, which were considered to cause the trouble, 

were cut away, and the effect was surprising. Carl is growing 

good; his wicked tendencies are gradually disappearing, 

and it is expected that in a few years he will have his full 

quota of moral faculties.— London Exchange. 

CHURCHES PLUNGING INTO HYPNOTISM 



About a year ago, two ministers of New England decided 
to try methods analogous to those used by Spiritists, 
Eddyists, Mormons and Hypnotists for the cure of diseases. 
They met with a measure of success, as do the others. The 
news of their methods is spreading, and a prominent publishing 
firm, with a Methodist D.D. at its head, is now sending 
circular letters to ministers everywhere, advertising two 
new books which they publish, explaining how the work can 
be carried on by any preacher along hypnotic lines. 

We print below extracts from a long article in the 
Kansas City Star, detailing the fact that Rev. A. T. Osbron 
of its city, is endeavoring to use hypnotism to regain his hold 
upon his dwindling congregation of Methodists. We quote: 

"It has been said of life insurance that 'You have to die 
to win.' Similarly the policy of the church has been to hold 
out promises of a happy reward to the faithful, but they had 
to die to get it. 

"The reason Christian Science numbers its converts by 
the thousands while the orthodox church complains of a 
falling off in membership is this: Christian Science holds out 
the offer of help to the afflicted, rest to the weary and health, 
wealth and prosperity for all. Its helping hand is extended 
now. Its promise of happiness is in this life. 

"The old church with its policy of 'suffer all manner of 
evil for great is your reward in heaven,' cannot compete with 
a creed which holds out such promises of immediate 
well-being. 

"The Rev. Mr. Osbron believes that all Methodist ministers 
not only should preach the gospel, but should "heal the 
sick" and comfort by the divine power in them. In his little 
church at 925 Newton avenue, Dr. Osbron has undertaken a 
movement portentous for the church and to humanity. It is 
a movement which its founder hopes will grow and encompass 
the earth. It is interesting to listen to the opinion of 
this prophet of the church that is to be. 

R4251 : page 292 

'"The fact that men care little about theory or doctrine,' 



said Mr. Osbron, 'explains why very sensible men become adherents 

to such unscientific and non-Christian organizations 

as the Spiritualist or Christian Science church. The truth is 

a large part of their membership is totally unfamiliar with 

the doctrines to which they have subscribed. Visible facts 

attracted them. They wanted results and that was all they 

cared for. Their interest was aroused by what the church 

did, not what it taught. 

"No one can deny that in practice the Christian Scientists 
do a great deal of good— that they relieve pain and cure 
some diseases! These are indubitable facts. 

"Many thousands there are who would gladly testify to 
the efficacy of their manner of treatment, and in the face of 
such a multitude of witnesses we can but hold our peace. 
True, it is urged that many of their patients die without 
medical aid. Just so do the patients of the doctors die in 
spite of their medicines. 

"The orthodox church must utilize the marvelous healing 
powers of suggestive or psychic therapeutics. This power 
has been possessed by individuals from the earliest times. 
By its means the early church-men performed miracles of 
healing by touch. Of late it has been disregarded by the 
church and the attention of followers called only to the 
miracles of other days. Quacks and charlatans have seized 
upon the psychic power and used it for their personal aggrandizement. 
It is time for the church again to take up this, 
their allotted task, and obey the Scriptural injunction, 'heal 
the sick,' as a part of the church's ministrations to its 
followers. 

"My method is in no sense that of the Christian Scientist. 
The Scientists deny the reality of pain, disease and sin. I 
believe they are very real. But I also know that much suffering 
can be relieved and many physical ills cured by suggestion 
and prayer. 

"There are thousands wandering in the shadow of insanity 
who might be saved by proper suggestion. It is 
astonishing to discover the number there are who are constantly 
harassed by fear in various forms. They screen these 
fears and fixed ideas from their friends, and suffer in silence 
until nervous breakdown, suicide or crime is the certain end. 
All these could be cured, criminal tendencies removed and 
the reform schools all but emptied by the proper use of 
hypnotic suggestion." 

"The minister's meeting of the Methodist church in 
Kansas City, after a discussion of a favorable character, appointed 
a commission consisting of the Rev. Ernest Claypool, 
the Rev. Daniel McGurk and the Rev. Arthur Barton, to keep 
in close touch with the movement, and to make an official 
report to the body on the first Monday of September next 
as to the class of work done." 



Let us not be misunderstood. We fully agree that the 
human mind can either greatly assist or hinder a disease or 
its cure. We advise all to mentally resist everything undesirable, 



mental and physical; and that God's children obey 
their Lord's advice and "cast all their care upon him," realizing 
that fear is a most dangerous thing, except the fear of 
displeasing God. But how sad it is to see professed ministers 
and professed people of God, rushing into Satan's trap, 
wholly negligent of and as above scoffing at the essence of 
the Master's teaching. He that saveth his life shall lose it 

R4251 : page 293 

and he that loseth his life for my sake and the Gospel's shall 
find it— preserve it unto life eternal. How remarkably few 
understand that the call of this Gospel Age is "to suffer with 
Christ," and to "be dead with him" that we may by and by 
live and reign with him. 

Let us, who are awake to the true situation act accordingly 
—avoiding Hypnotism, Spiritism and Occultism (demonism) 
in their every form of deception, and let us do all we 
reasonably can to spread a knowledge of the Truth to all 
people, especially to Christians. 



R425 1 : page 293 

VOW LETTERS NOT A FEW 

VOW letters from individuals and classes continue to 
pour in upon the Editor. He is glad to have them 
and requests that you excuse the impossible pleasure 
of answering every one of these by letter. He thinks 
none the less of some who have "sat down and counted the 
cost" before taking the Vow. 

Some of the letters wish that the matter had been presented 
sooner, as it might have saved them some painful experiences. 
Others find it "just in time" to forewarn and 
forearm them. One Colporteur reports that the first three 
parties canvassed one morning were Spiritualists. The 
thoughts presented in connection with the Vow held him 
back, and that night he made the Vow his own before the 
Lord. 

So many as recognize it as the Standard lifted up by 
the Lord (Isa. 59:19) for our help and for the assistance of 
others with whom we have influence— such of course will be 
prompt to take it and sure to keep it. Time will tell. Meantime 
those who have taken it relate that they experience 
fresh blessings and we rejoice with them. 

"Offer unto God thy thanksgiving: and pay thy vows 
unto the Most High; and call upon me in the day of trouble: 
I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me. But 
unto the wicked God saith, What hast thou to do to declare 
my statutes, or that thou shouldst take my covenant in thy 
mouth!" Psa. 50:14-16 and see 19-21. We can spare room 
for only one letter at this time: 

BELOVED PASTOR:- 



I can only add multiplied emphasis to the many expressions 
of joy and gratitude already given by the friends respecting 
the Vow and all the articles pertaining thereto, 
every word of which I have eagerly read and weighed and 
applied to myself. 

Very humbly I registered my Vow to the Lord, dear 
brother, not as one of those who had no special need of its 
protection, but as one who was in sore need. Reared in an exceedingly 
affectionate home and accustomed to excessive 
demonstration of love and affection, the breaking of the 
home ties when I entered the Colporteur work brought me 
much loneliness which the Adversary no doubt saw much 
sooner than I myself did and cunningly acted upon. My 
confidence in the Lord's people was unlimited— and not until 
recently have I seen the great danger confronting us all in 
this direction. The mistakes that I have been led into are 
painful memories, but I thank God have prepared me for his 
blessing. I am glad for the Vow— I am desirous of all the blessing 
it can bring. I remember at his throne every day all who 
have taken it. May his grace be richly with us all. 

With much love for you and deep appreciation of your 
faithful devotion to the Lord and careful attention to his 
flock, I am, 

Yours in the hope of perfect love, 



R4251 : page 293 

WHAT CONSTITUTES A CHURCH 

SINCE the appearance of the article, "The One 

True Church," we have received several communications 

inquiring as to the right or privilege 

of a portion of the congregation to split off and 

hold meetings by itself as a separate and distinct 

Church. As already pointed out in the article referred 

to, our Lord's words inform us of his willingness to 

recognize any two or three of the faithful, consecrated 

ones when they meet together in his name, and that 

the presence of the Head with such members constitutes 

a Church, in the Scriptural sense. 

But while this is true it is also true that the teachings 
of our Lord and of his apostles and the practices 
of the early Church all agree with the thought that the 
New Commandment, "that ye love one another as I 
have loved you," implies such a close fellowship of 
spirit amongst all of the Lord's dear people as will 
lead them to desire to come together rather than to disintegrate 
into smaller groups. We should notice carefully 
the words, "As I have loved you"; that they signify 
a very deep, earnest love and not a mere tolerance. 
The Lord loved us to the extent of giving his life for 
us, and the Apostle points to him as our example and 
declares, "We ought also to lay down our lives for the 
brethren." This is the love wherewith he loved us. We 



are to remember, too, that this is not a sectional or 
sectarian love for class or party in the Church, but is 
for all, because they are his. True, it is not possible 
to love all to the same degree of appreciation, but all 
are to be loved to the degree of a willingness to lay 
down our lives for them; because even the humblest of 
the Lord's little ones has a claim on the noblest of 
them, for does he not belong to the same great army of 
the redeemed, enlisted under the captaincy of Immanuel 
in the fight against sin and with a covenant agreement 
with his Master to lay down his life in his service? 
How could we help but love those who have 
devoted their all to the same Master whom we serve— 
and the fact that the Master accepts of such and is not 
ashamed to call them brethren is the best of reasons 

R4252 : page 293 

why we also should accept them and not be ashamed 
of them, but on the contrary love them and be glad to 
serve them, even to the extent of laying down hours or 
days of life itself in their assistance. 

Everything connected with the Spirit of the Lord 
and the instructions of his Word seem to antagonize 
the thought of division amongst the members of his 
Body. A beautiful illustration of this is found in the 
fact that the dear friends everywhere, as they grow in 
grace and knowledge, seem to become more and more 
imbued with the desire to come together— in the one-day 
conventions and still more so in the general conventions; 
and in these the thought is often expressed 
that our longings and fellowship for one another will 
not find complete satisfaction until we gather with our 
Lord and all his faithful in the General Assembly of 
the First-born, "whose names are written in heaven." 

We all remember the Apostle's arraignment of sectarianism; 
and it is well that we take note of the fact 
that he attributes it to a partisan spirit with which he 
had no sympathy and to which he refers as an evidence 
of carnality, fleshly-mindedness, indicating an immature 
development along spiritual lines. He says, 
"While one says I am of Paul, and another I am of 

R4252 : page 294 

Apollos, and another I am of Cephas (Peter), are ye 
not carnal? Is Christ divided?" (I Cor. 3:3,4.) He 
goes on to say that none of these redeemed us, but 
Christ alone, and that we are all baptized into his Body 
and therefore are related to each other, because we are 
related to him our Head; and he proceeds to say that 
there should be no schism in the Body; that is to say, 
no split, no division. 

Whether we are conscious of it or not, dear friends, 
it is doubtless true that a spirit that favors a division 
of the class, where such a division would not be due to 



distance hindering a proper gathering at one place, 
must be a spirit of sectarianism or partisanship. 
Sometimes this is a result of a brother desiring to be 
leader and wishing for a fuller opportunity for the exercise 
of his talents as a servant of the Church. At 
other times, as in the case the Apostle mentions, 
it is due to partisanship on the part of a portion of the 
Church who are desirous of following leaders, even 
when the leaders themselves do not desire it, as in St. 
Paul's case cited. In any event it would do us good in 
this connection to scrutinize our own hearts individually 
rather than to judge one another in this matter. 
Quite possibly in some places where there is a disposition 
on the part of some to split off and hold separate 
meetings there may be some real cause or reason; but 
the better way would be to correct that difficulty and 
remain united. Unconsciously sometimes the Lord's 
people become too narrow and control Church arrangements 
too much along the lines of the will of the majority, 
rather than endeavor to arrange such a programme 
as would as nearly as possible please, profit 
and happify all. 

The Apostle's exhortation is that we "consider one 
another to provoke unto love and good works." This 
signifies not merely that we should consider the tastes 
and preferences of the better educated or the naturally 
more noble or rich or refined, but that we should seek 
to consider all the dear members of the Body. It is 
easy comparatively to love the refined, the educated 
and the well-developed spiritually, and to love these is 
in harmony with what our Lord suggests that even the 
Gentiles do, "If ye love them that love you what thank 
have ye? do not even the publicans and sinners the 
same?" The brotherly love to which the Apostle refers, 
saying, "Hereby we know that we have passed 
from death unto life, because we love the brethren"— 
this love is not merely the love of the refined and elegant 
and accomplished and noble-minded. Many people 
love those who have not passed from death unto 
life. But it becomes an evidence of our having passed 
from death unto life if we love the brethren, of whom 
the Apostle intimates that many are ignoble; yea, even 
saying that "God hath chosen the mean things of the 
world." It is when we come to the place of loving 
those of the brethren who are naturally mean that we 
may consider it an evidence of the new nature being in 
control of the mind. We love them not for their meanness, 
nor for their ignorance, nor for their stupidity, 
nor for their poverty, but because they are his and because 
all his are ours, because they are enlisted under 
the same banner in the same fight with ourselves; because 
the Father hath acknowledged them as his children 
in the begetting of his Spirit. These reasons call 
for our love, for our sympathy and our help one for 
another in climbing Zion's Hill. 

Our Lord intimates that our love for him will be 



gauged by our love for the brethren, and the Apostle 

points out to us that as the Lord's compassion and 

grace are given to each of us in proportion to our 

needs, so our sympathy and love should be manifested 

to others according to their needs. To seek chiefly the 

company of those who are of our own plane of development, 

mental or spiritual, is to please ourselves, and 

the Apostle points out that we should love one another 

or serve one another and not please ourselves, pointing 

out further that even Christ pleased not himself. Furthermore 

he points out that as in our physical bodies 

we sometimes bestow more care upon a deformed hand 

or foot to cover the deformity than we do upon one 

that is natural, so we are to do in the Body of Christ; 

those who are most in need of our sympathy and assistance 

and fellowship should receive it, that the 

whole Body of Christ may be edified, built up and knit 

together in the bonds of love as the members of Christ 

under him who is the Head. 

We need each member of the Body, as the Apostle 
intimates, and as the trying times before us become 
more strenuous we all more and more need the actual 
cooperation and assistance and sympathy and love of 
each other. Let us, therefore, avoid schism as well as 
"ism" and let us have that spirit of oneness appropriate 
to the Body, for we are all one in Christ Jesus and 
members one of another. Let us seek more and more 
to see eye to eye in all these matters. 



Question.— Is it proper to choose as an Elder one 
who has not participated in symbolic water baptism? 

Answer.— While we urge that all of the consecrated 
and all who profess faith in the ransom and a full 
consecration to the Lord be accounted and dealt with 
as brethren and members of the Church, irrespective 
of their obedience to the water symbol, we would not 
think it either wise or in harmony with the Lord's 
teaching to select such a one to the eldership of the 
Church. We could not consider such a one sound in 
"the faith once delivered to the saints." We could not 
consider him as well developed in the Truth, even 
though we accept him as a brother. We could not, 
therefore, consider him a proper person to be specially 
chosen to instruct others respecting the divine plan, 
etc. 



R4252 : page 294 

"THE EVIL ONE TOUCHETH HIM NOT" 

"We know that whosoever is begotten of God sinneth 
not; but he that is begotten of God keepeth himself, 



and the Evil One toucheth him not."— 1 John 5:18. 

THIS text is not a guarantee of eternal salvation to 
those begotten of the holy Spirit. It is not a 
guarantee of their salvation from trials, temptations, 
difficulties, etc., as some have seemed to suppose. 
It does signify, however, that those consecrated believers 
whom God has accepted and who have been 
begotten again to a newness of life, to a new nature, 
are under special divine supervision. They will not 
sin (wilfully) because their seed remaineth in them, 
the begetting power of the holy Spirit. This seed being 
in them, they cannot sin wilfully. If they should sin 
wilfully, it would imply that the holy seed, the begetting 

R4252 : page 295 

of the Lord's Spirit in them, had perished; that 

they were no longer New Creatures in Christ Jesus, for 

whom old things had passed away and all things had 

become new. It would mean that they had turned 

again, as the dog to his vomit and as the sow to wallowing 

in the mire— to sympathy with sin and things contrary 

to the divine Word and its spirit. 

The Apostle declared that our Lord Jesus, the first 
begotten of the Spirit, will keep all these younger 
brethren begotten of the Spirit; keep them from the 
touch of the Evil One, from the injury which Satan 
would otherwise do them. As we have already suggested, 
this does not mean that they will be kept from 
trials, from temptations of the Adversary, for even our 
Lord was exposed to temptations from him; and these 
temptations, trials, oppositions, persecutions, we see 
to be necessary for our Christian character and for 
our development in our Redeemer's likeness of heart. 
The promise, therefore, signifies that in the midst of 
these temptations of the Adversary the Lord provides 
his faithful with such protection, such defense, such 
assistance, as is not only necessary for them to come 
off victors but to keep them from yielding to temptation. 
It is in harmony with this that we are taught to 
pray, "Abandon us not in temptation, but deliver us 
from the Evil One"— suffer him not to touch, to injure 
us, to overthrow us, to destroy us. 
"God moves in a mysterious way, 
His wonders to perform." 

While the Lord is abundantly able to work miracles 
for the protection of his faithful followers and for their 
deliverance from the Evil One, and while we feel sure 

R4253 : page 295 

that if every other means failed, a miracle would be 
wrought in our interest, nevertheless we are not to anticipate 
that the Lord will use miracles, but are to expect 
that generally he will use means, and oftenest 



human instrumentalities, for the protection and deliverance 
of the members of his Body, who abide in his love 
and are seeking to do those things pleasing to him. 

"IF POSSIBLE THE VERY ELECT" 

From the day of Pentecost until the present time 
the Lord's dear sheep have been beset by the same great 
Adversary, and have had fiery trials, and have also had 
the protection of him that was begotten of God, the 
Lord Jesus, who is keeping the faithful from the power 
of the Adversary. But the Scriptures unanimously 
point us to the end of this age as a time for special 
trial and testing, not only upon the world but also upon 
the Church, for "judgment must begin at the house of 
God." It is respecting this coming time that the Apostle 
forewarns the Church, saying, "Take unto you the whole 
armor of God, that ye may be able to stand in the evil 
day." He implies that the evil day with which this age 
shall end will have the severest trials ever known to 
God's people, and that they will have the greatest need 
ever known for the armor of truth and righteousness. 
The same fact is referred to by our Lord in addressing 
the sixth phase of the Church, the Church of Philadelphia. 
He says, "Because thou hast kept the word of my 
patience, I will also keep thee from the hour of temptation 
which is coming upon the whole world to try them 
that dwell upon the face of the whole earth." (Rev. 3:10.) 
The seventh stage of the Church, the Laodicean, will 
come into that hour of temptation; and we believe that 
it is already in part upon us. What we would have all 
see is that the time ahead of us must be very peculiarly 
a time of trial and testing, else it would not be so strikingly 
referred to in the Word of God. Nor do we wish 
to arouse the fears of the Lord's people, to terrify. Our 
thought is rather to offer the consolation which will 
keep them in perfect peace; as it is written, "Thou wilt 
keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on 
thee." The Lord's promises, exceeding great and 
precious, are enlarged before our minds at the same 
time, really in advance of the coming of the hour of 
temptation and trial, so that the man of God may be 
thoroughly furnished, thoroughly prepared. 

Our Lord's words respecting the temptations and 
trials of the Church assure us that this class shall have 
nothing to fear, that they will be kept, that it will not 
be possible for them to be tempted, for with every temptation 
the Lord will provide a way of escape. Let us 
remember in this connection the Apostle Paul's words 
respecting our day and its trials, "God will send them 
strong delusions that they may believe a lie, because 
they did not have pleasure in the truth." (2 Thess. 2:11.) 
What we do desire is that each consecrated child of 
God may see the way of escape which God has provided 
and may use the same, and thus be in line with the 
Lord's provision and amongst those shielded ones, the 



very elect— "called, chosen, faithful."— Rev. 17:14. 
THE WAY OF ESCAPE 

If it be conceded that we are down very close to the 
hour of temptation, when the Evil One will be permitted 
to bring extraordinary delusions and trials to bear upon 
the world and the nominal Church, then we are in the 
time when we ought to be looking about us to see what 
way of escape the Lord has provided for us. We believe 
that many of our readers will agree with us that 
the Lord's special provision for keeping us from the 
power of the Evil One is the Present Truth, which he 
has supplied largely through the WATCH TOWER publications. 
If any one is disposed to controvert this point, 
we shall not dispute it, but be glad if he has received 
more efficient assistance from other quarters, glad if by 
any means the Lord is upholding him, strengthening 
and arming him for the trials and besetments just before 
us. 

But whatever the channel of divine blessing by 
which the Lord would keep his own secure and restful 
in the coming time of stress, we may be assured that 
our personal cooperation is necessary to our deliverance. 
"Keep yourselves in the love of God" (Jude 21) 
was never a more necessary command to the followers 
of Jesus than at present; and we may expect that the 
temptation of this hour will be considerably along that 
line of abiding in God's love. This in turn will imply 
a love for the brethren; as the Apostle has suggested, 
"He that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, 
how can he love God whom he hath not seen?" (I John 4:20.) 
Indeed, the intimation clearly is that "The love 
of many shall wax cold." (Matt. 24:12.) A cooling of 
our love toward God will mean a loss of our desire to 
please him in our own thoughts and words and doings, 
which will include a cooling of our love for his service 
in the dissemination of the Gospel message and the 
gathering and feeding of the household of faith. Various 
things will conspire to this end— the love of money, 
the love of pleasure, the love of self, the love of earthly 
things in general, all of which were consecrated, devoted, 
before we received the spirit of adoption. If our 
love grows cold it will determine that we are not such 
as would be worthy to associate with our Redeemer in 
his Kingdom glory. 

R4253 : page 296 

In no way will this loss of the "love divine, all love 
excelling," be more manifest than in respect to our 
sentiments and conduct toward the fellow-members of 
the Body of Christ. The Apostle tells us of what our 
attitude of mind toward these should be, namely, that 
as Christ loved the Church and laid down his life on 
our behalf, we ought also to love the brethren so that 



we would be willing to lay down our lives on their behalf, 
in their interest. The love that would give up 
life itself for the brethren may certainly be expected to 
sacrifice smaller things in their interest. And indeed 
such are the tests which the Lord permits, declaring 
that he who is faithful in that which is least will be 
faithful also in much. It is therefore for us to see, to 
note, to criticise whether or not we have this love for 
the brethren which the Lord declares he will accept as 
love for himself, and without which we cannot be his 
disciples; for this was the new commandment which he 
gave to us, saying, "A new commandment I give unto 
you, that ye love one another as I have loved you."— 
John 15:12. 

LOVING THE MEAN THINGS 

It would indeed be easy to love the brethren and to 
lay down our lives for them if they were all like our 
dear Master and exemplar; but they are not. The inspired 
Apostle tells us that amongst the brethren are 
not many noble, not many great, not many wise, not 
many learned, not many rich. Again he says that God 
hath chosen the mean things of the world. Are we 
astonished at this? Does it seem like a reflection on 
the Church of Christ? Do we ask why divine grace has 
passed by some of the noblest of our race and accepted 
some of the meanest to discipleship? The answer of 
our Lord is, "Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in 
thy sight." The explanation is that many of the great, 
rich, learned, noble, have not sufficient humility to receive 
the divine message in the proper manner. They 
realize themselves to be superior to the majority and 
think it but just to have this acknowledgment; and, 
failing to see the divine arrangement, they assure themselves 
that if anybody will be saved it will be themselves, 
for they are the finer and nobler specimens of 
the race. They see not that God looketh upon the 
heart instead of upon the outward man, and that however 
weak and ignoble and fallen a person, his heart, 
his will may be thoroughly turned into harmony with 
God and to the service of righteousness. They fail to 
see that in God's sight such a meek and quiet spirit, 
such a humble dependence upon the Redeemer for salvation, 
such a faithful looking to the Lord for grace to 
help in every time of need, is much more pleasing in 
the divine sight than is the more proud attitude of the 
nobler ones; and that such humble, trustful, appreciative, 
faithful ones the Lord has designed shall be participants 
with Christ in his excellent glory, not because 
of the perfection of their flesh, but because of the perfection 
of their hearts, their wills, which continually 
strive to bring every thought and word and deed into 
harmony with the divine will. 

Now then, we may see why the Lord enjoined upon 
us that we should love one another, and rather implied 



that it would be a difficult matter to do so at all times, 
to make allowances for the weaknesses of the flesh and 
the imperfections of judgment in one another. And 
this is exactly what the Apostle John declares, saying, 
"We know we have passed from death unto life because 
we love the brethren." (I John 3:14.) Thus he intimates 
that a love of the brethren will be so difficult a 
matter as to constitute an absolute proof to us that we 
have passed from death unto life, from the death state 
in Adam, and have become New Creatures in Christ. 
It is easy enough to love some of the brethren. We 
are apt to love those who are about on our own plane 
and of our own style and liking; but the Lord anticipated 
this and said, "If ye love them that love you, 
what thank have ye? [What proof have you that you 
have passed from death unto life?] Do not the publicans 
and sinners the same?" (Luke 6:32.) It is 
easy enough to love some of the refined or wealthy or 
naturally noble or the educated, those who are on 
our own level or a little above, as respects earthly 
things. But this does not fill the Lord's requirement. 
We are to love one another as he has loved us. (John 13:34.) 

R4254 : page 296 

He commends his love to us in that it is to each 

according to his needs. The more noble, the less of 

the Lord's grace is sufficient for them; the more degraded, 

the more of the Lord's grace is necessary and 

will be supplied. Thus we are to love the brethren; for 

those who are less noble, yea, those whom the Apostle 

declares are amongst the mean things of this world 

from the world's view-point, will need our love the more 

because of a natural depravity and weakness and imperfection. 

And if we love as Christ loved, we shall be 

glad to give our lives to each and for each according to 

the needs of each, laying down our lives for the brethren 

in moments or hours or as each may need our help. 

Ah, what a new, what a different view is this of the 

love of the brethren! The practice of it would cut off 

some of our special fellowships with those who need 

our assistance little, and would transfer our fellowship 

and sacrifice of time to those of the brethren who need 

it more. And what a blessing, what an uplifting would 

come to some of the meaner ones, and what a blessing 

from the Lord would come more and more into our own 

hearts as we become more and more copies of him in 

thought and in deed! 

We have already pointed out that the time of trouble 
coming upon the world will be a result of the loss of 
love and the outworking of selfishness— no peace to 
him that goes out nor to him that comes in, for every 
man's hand shall be against his neighbor— for himself. 
This signifies almost a complete loss of confidence 
throughout the world. Shall we not suppose 
reasonably that this trial is the one which will begin at 



the house of God? May we not reasonably conclude 
then that the trial which will come upon the Church will 
be the same kind; namely, a testing of our love for the 
brethren and of our applications of the principles 
which the Lord has laid down for our dealings with the 
brethren? We believe that this is so, and that the 
Lord will judge his people along this line of love, which 
is the law of the new nature and the fulfilling of all law. 
Whoever lacks the spirit of love will possess correspondingly 
the spirit of selfishness, the spirit of the 
Adversary, the spirit of ambition, of pride, of anger 
and malice, and hatred and strife against all those who 
oppose or even seem to oppose his interests. Let us 
remember that such sentiments even in the heart, 
though unexpressed, are most dangerous to the new 
nature. Those who have such sentiments in their hearts 
are surely very close to the point where the Adversary 
would be able to touch them, influence them, injure 
them, bring them under his power, and very close to 
the place where the Lord would be willing to reject 
them from discipleship and to allow the Adversary to 

R4254 : page 297 

have them; even as in Judas' case, to whom the Lord 
said, "What thou doest, do quickly." 

But let us, on the other hand, make use of the various 
blessings and instructions which the Lord has 
given us; let us put on the whole armor of God; let us 
make our own the various truths which the Lord has 
put into our hands; let us apply them, put them on as 
an armor; let us be strong in the Lord, in the power, 
the armament which he supplies in his Word, and let 
us see to it that the spirit actuating us is that of love, 
which will be ready to sacrifice everything for the 
fellow-members and to count it all joy thus to lay down 
our lives for the brethren. Let us remember that not 
only is there a special blessing to those who shall assist 
the brethren, even the weakest of them, but that there 
is a special threat against those who shall harm or 
stumble or injure even the least of the Lord's little 
ones! 



R4254 : page 297 

PARABLES OF THE KINGDOM 

OUR DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

In a discourse on the "Parable of the Sower" (commonly 
so designated), as recorded in the 13th chapter of Matthew, 
a dear brother in the Truth, an Elder, by 
the way, of another local ecclesia, recently gave utterance 
to the following explanation or rather application, 
briefly summarized thus: 



"This parable divides mankind into four different 
classes, the wayside soil representing the children of 
disobedience (Eph. 2:2), the rocky ground representing 
all the incapables, including all heathens, idiots, 
etc., the thorny ground representing all the consecrated 
believers who fail to carry out their consecration vow, 
thus bringing no fruit to perfection, and go into the 
Second Death, and the fourth class representing all of 
the Lord's people." 

The writer's mind may be somewhat unduly balanced 
and his vision considerably beclouded, hindering 
him from receiving the force of the above application; 
but it does appear to me with an irresistible force of 
persuasion that the brother mentioned has taken by 
far too wide a scope, not by any means intended by the 
Master. From previous studies along these lines I 
would not understand that it would be your presentation 
of the matter, nor that it would be in harmony 
with the plan in general, wherefore I place myself as 
an inquirer, earnestly desirous of understanding it correctly. 
The force of the lesson, it appears to my mind, 
is almost entirely lost if we venture to apply it to the 
world at large, so much the more as the Master in his 
explanation of it very plainly and most emphatically 
asserts and reasserts that it applies exclusively to 
those who hear the word of the Kingdom as presented 
by himself, the Master Sower, the same being carried on 
through the instrumentalities of his chosen servants, 
the twelve apostles. "When any one heareth the word 
of the Kingdom, etc., this is he that received seed by the 
wayside; he that received seed into stony places is 
he that heareth the word; he that received seed into 
thorny ground is he that heareth the word; he that 
received seed into good ground is he that heareth the 
word..." From this it appears evident that the 
fourfold division does not in any sense of the word apply 
to the world of mankind at large which collectively 
are called "children of disobedience" or "children of 
wrath," but only to a certain limited class of all people, 
nations and tongues, first Jews and then Gentiles. 
Surely this would exclude from the four-fold division 
of the parable all the heathens who have not even 
heard the name of the King; it would equally exclude 
all deprived of reasoning abilities, the idiots, infants, 
etc.; and furthermore it would exclude from the category 
the great majority of so-called Christendom, 
whose hearing faculties have been greatly neutralized 
by the Antichristian systems of error, strong delusions 
in every conceivable form. Thus the four-fold division 
merely applies to a limited number, viz., those who 
hear the Gospel in its purity and not a perverted so-called 
Gospel. In other words it would comprise those 
only who by the Apostle Paul are designated the "honored" 
class, honored to hear the Gospel, whoever or 
wherever they be, or however they receive it. 

To the mind of the inquirer, even the majority of 



those who read the Bible do not hear the word of the 
Kingdom, because their minds are warped, twisted, 
prejudiced and beclouded, as was the case with the 
majority of the nation to whom as a servant the King 
first came. Before coming into Present Truth the 
writer of these lines had never heard the Word of the 
Kingdom, though he had made the Bible his special 
life study. Without going into any details whatever 
as far as the parable is concerned, thus briefly I submit 
to you the two views, both of which cannot be correct 
or in full harmony with the plan. 

In this same connection I shall take the liberty to 
trespass upon your valuable time, dear Pastor, in presenting 
to you another question, of less import perhaps, 
but of great interest, closely related to the one 
mentioned above. It refers more particularly to the 
"Parable of the Wheat and Tares," immediately following 
the other parable. These two obscure presentations 
of the Kingdom from different viewpoints being 
explained by the Master, conveys to the mind of the 
disciple, the learner, quite a few foundational truths, 
and consequently I have made the same a matter of 
profound and reverent study. 

While recognizing that the true wheat wherever 
found is acceptable to the Lord, and that in this harvest 
he will so supervise the issues of the work so that 
all the wheat will be garnered, nevertheless it appears 
to me that the world at large does not constitute the 
wheat-field, but only a portion of it. By reading the 
Acts of the Apostles, which constitutes a history of the 
sowing time of the present age about to close, we are 
naturally forced to the conclusion that the Lord had a 
definite choice in the matter as a part in his election or 
selection of the little flock, and that he outlined for his 
wheat-field mainly the nations of Europe, original and 
transplanted. I understand that North America, Africa, 
Australia, etc., are mainly transplantations of the 
various nations of Europe, and of a comparatively recent 
date. St. Paul, who was one of the most prominent 
sowers under the directions of and in harmony 
with the Chief Sower, carrying on what Jesus began 
both to teach and to do (Acts 1:1), was very explicitly 
directed to take his course toward Europe, and the 
Macedonian cry was irresistible when he was in doubt 
in taking the last step and would have preferred to 
take another course. Pressing onward toward the 
northwest he reached the most influential cities and 
the best seaports, by means of which the Gospel was 
carried to all the civilized world of that time until 
finally the Lord directed him to the imperial city of 
Rome, though he was conducted thither in a different 

R4255 : page 298 

way than he might have preferred if he had had the 
choice in the matter. Indications are strongly in favor 



of the view that he reached as far as Spain. However 
that may be, we know that it was his intention, and we 
do know that at the end of his active career he says 
that the Gospel had been preached under the whole 
heavens, evidently meaning the whole civilized world, 
residing around the Mediterranean Sea, and though 
this would not exclude a number of Asiatic provinces 
and the upper coast of Africa, it is a matter of history 
that since then Europe has been the great centre of 
ecclesiastical activity— the wheat-field in which shortly 
after the enemy sowed the tares of error. Neither at 
that time nor since has the Gospel of the Kingdom 
been generally sent to the aborigines of Africa, South 
America or Asia. Fragments of Truth at most have 
reached these benighted but ransomed people, but it 
does not on that account seem correct to say that they 
are included in the Lord's wheat-field mentioned in the 
parable. As a farmer may not despise the wheat that 
is found fruitbearing outside the regular wheat-field, 
especially if the latter is almost entirely overgrown by 
tares, necessitating that the ears of wheat be picked 
out one by one; so the Lord's people, the saints, whether 
picked from amongst the tare-field of Christendom 
or from amongst benighted heathenism are just as precious 
in his sight. But in view of the facts as recorded 
on the pages of prophecy and history, would it not 
be perfectly correct to say that the wheat-field is somewhat 
limited in its dimensions, and certainly does not 
include the whole planet? 

If the inquirer be incorrect he will be greatly indebted 
to you, Brother Russell, for putting him right, 
as you have done and are still doing in so many other 
perplexing questions. 

Furthermore, I am also writing you on behalf of 
the little class in this place whom I have the sweet 
privilege of serving in my humble capacity, and if the 
above suggestions, presented to you by way of inquiry, 
appeal to you as sufficiently important for other classes 
kindly give it room in ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

Apologizing for the length of the questions, and 
anticipating your kind favors in this as in all other 
directions, I am, 

Your fellow-servant in the Truth, very cordially 
and respectfully, L. JOSEPH LARSEN,-Wis. 



R4255 : page 298 

SAUL AND DAVID IN REVIEW 

-2 SAMUEL 5:12.-SEPTEMBER 20.- 

Golden Text:— "And David perceived that the Lord 
had established him king over Israel, and that he 
had exalted his kingdom for his people Israel's sake. 



OF the two men in review Saul certainly had the 
more favorable opportunities at the beginning 
of his life. Nature seemed to have so specially 
fitted him for the office of king that when he was brought 
to the attention of the people, they, recognizing these 
natural traits, received him without hesitation. For a 
little while, he walked in humility, carefully seeking to 
do the Lord's will, but not having fully submitted himself, 
it was not long until there was a combination of 
his own will mixing with that of the Lord. The result 
was disobedience, failure, a troubled mind growingly 
perverse almost to the point of insanity, and finally an 
ignominious death. The flaw in Saul's character was 
his lack of a full consecration to the Lord, his maintaining 
a certain amount of self-will. This seemed to have 
been the difficulty. A similar difficulty affects all who 
fail to make their calling and election sure. Whether 
they go into the Second Death or the Great Company, 
the fault of the failure lies in neglect to surrender fully 
to the Lord every interest of life and to accept in faith 
his leadings, his providences in all the affairs of life, 
seeking to do his will and ignoring— mortifying— self. 

David's character was in sharp contrast to that of 
Saul. Less favorably circumstanced at the beginning 
of his career, not so tall and commanding in appearance, 
probably of a less wealthy family, and possibly 
with no better mental endowment by birth, David's life 
and its results are in sharp contrast to those of Saul. 
Look wherever we will in his checkered career, we see 
courage and determination exercised along right lines, 
proper lines. He was not a wild animal hunter, but to 
protect the flock he slew the lion and the bear. He was 
not a pugilist nor a gladiator; yet at the proper moment 
he was ready to risk his life for the defence of his people. 
He appreciated highly the honor that had been conferred 
upon him in his anointing for the kingship, yet 
he held this with modesty— never boasted of it and never 
rashly attempted to hasten the divine programme. He 
endured patiently the opposition of the king, yet treated 
the members of the royal family with profoundest respect; 
and finally, instead of thrusting himself on the 
nation as king and demanding his acceptance, he still 
waited patiently the Lord's time. One of the results of 
studying the lives of great and good men is in seeing 
the way in which they were able to make the world 
better. 

"Lives of great men all remind us 

We can make our lives sublime, 
And, departing, leave behind us, 
Footprints on the sands of time." 

Many of those who have risen to prominence in the 
world have left no footprints that we can see; but when 
the Lord sets great examples before us, he shows us the 
footprints, and how some lead downward and others 
upward. Saul was of the former class, David 



of the latter. The important point to be noticed 
by us all is how much these footprints diverge, that 
we may avoid the one and profit by the other. 
The secret of David's success was not the mere 
fixity of his purpose, but additionally the fact that his 
purpose was kept fully in accord with the divine will. 
Even in telling to King Saul the story of his conflict 
with the lion and the bear, he gave glory to God as having 
delivered them into his hands. And so throughout 
his entire career. We notice this same desire, to give 
God the glory of his successes, and to realize that whatever 
failures there were in his life were either his own 
weaknesses or divine blessings in disguise. Thus we 
see David's whole existence exemplifying the words of 
holy writ— "In all thy ways acknowledge him," "and 
he shall give thee the desire of thine heart." 

VALUE IN HIGH IDEALS 

As we look about us in the world, and in the nominal 
church, we see vast numbers of mankind without 
any ideals, without any ambition. Alas, poor things! 
How can they ever have any pleasure or reach any noble 

R4255 : page 299 

goal when they see none? Looking again, we perceive 
some with only mean and groveling ambitions, worse 
than none. Poor creatures! Born in sin, shapen in iniquity, 
and perhaps reared in unfavorable environments, 
they are seriously handicapped in comparison 
with some others of the fallen race, less depraved and 
more favored. Looking again, we see a third class with 
noble worldly ambitions, seeking for wealth, influence, 
power, with a desire to use these honorably, nobly, not 
to the injury of their fellow-creatures, but to some extent 
the opposite. These are to be congratulated as 
having better motives in life than the first two classes. 
They were possibly better born and possibly had better 
environment. 

We look again and find a fourth class, whose eyes 
have by the grace of God been lifted from earthly 
things to the heavenly. To these, "Old things have 
passed away and all things have become new." The 
vision of heavenly joy, heavenly fellowship, heavenly 
service, has so transformed their minds that, although 
their flesh may still be weak, nevertheless they overcome 
by the new mind. This is the class which the 
earth could never satisfy. A new standard of values 
has come to them; and they both feel and know that the 
things of this life are "not worthy to be compared with 
the glory which shall be revealed in us." They find these 
things in comparison but loss and dross. This is the 
class which the Lord has under his special care and instruction. 
Because they have made their consecration 
to him, he is showing them something of the height 



and depth, the length and breadth of the "deep things" 

of God. Thus he is giving to them, through his 

knowledge and grace, a power divine, which is working 

in them both to will and to do his good pleasure. The 

secret of their attainment of this favored position is 

that, having heard of the grace of God, their hearts responded. 

They gave themselves to the Lord and the 

work of grace progressing in them is his work. "For 

we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto 

good works."— Eph. 2:10; Jas. 1:8. 

A DOUBLE-MINDED MAN IS UNSTABLE 

But now again we must recognize a division; for 
"they are not all Israelites who are of Israel." Some of 
this fourth class are more responsible and some less 
responsible as to the things which the Lord has shown 

R4256 : page 299 

them respecting his character and his plan. Some take 
a less positive stand and seek to gain the things of this 
world, its honor, as well as the honor of God and the 
world to come. In doing this, they are not heeding the 
words of the Master, who assures all his disciples that 
such a course would mean failure, that they would 
neither please the world nor would they succeed in 
pleasing the Lord. Such may eventually be brought to 
life eternal, but they are not the wise virgins. They 
will not reign in the Millennial Kingdom. The Lord is 
seeking those who worship him with all their hearts, 
with all their souls, with all their strength, and with all 
their minds. These whole-souled ones are the class 
the Lord is specially seeking as the Queen of the Millennial 
Kingdom, the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, and joint-heirs 
with him. He has already foreordained that only 
such may be members of the royal family and partakers 
of the divine nature, saying, "Whom he did foreknow, 
he did also predestinate to be conformed to the image 
of his Son." To these he will give grace and glory, and 
no good thing will he withhold from them, because they 
walk uprightly. Their hearts are upright, and their 
intentions are loyal to God and to his laws of justice 
and love. Let us get fixed in our minds the peculiar 
quality of this overcoming class, which is to constitute 
the Kingdom as Christ's joint-heirs, that they must be 
loyal to God, consecrated, determined, and full of faith 
and trust. 

These qualities cannot be expected to come to us 
instantaneously. Rather they are the gradual growth 
and development of the new mind, but the principle 
must be in the heart before development can be made 
along these lines— the principle of loyalty and determination. 
The little word "will" has its very important 
place, then, in the Christian's character. He must be 
a wilier, and the will must be rightly directed into full 



harmony with that of God. 

CARVING OUT THE IDEAL 

We said a moment ago that a high and good ideal 
is proper, is necessary, in every successful life. But to 
have the ideal will amount to nothing unless we are 
patient in its development. It is said of the great 
sculptor, Michael Angelo, that looking upon a block of 
soiled marble he began work upon it with hammer and 
chisel, apparently recklessly knocking off great blocks 
and pieces here and there. When asked what he was 
doing, he said, "I see an angel here and must get him 
out." He had the ideal in his mind, then laboring 
strenuously for the attainment of it, sculptured the angel 
out of the block of marble. So it must be with every 
successful life. We must have the ideal. We must see 
the angel. Then we must labor for its attainment, 
carefully, patiently, and prayerfully. The ideal set before 
the Christian is not only angelic, it is more; it is 
divine. Nothing less can be made out of the Apostle's 
words, God hath "given unto us exceeding great and 
precious promises, that by these ye might be partakers 
of the divine nature." 

The same thought is elsewhere presented by St. 
John. Now are we the sons of God, but it doth not yet 
appear how great we shall be made, what glory and 
honor shall be ours, but the Apostle assures us, "We 
know that when he shall appear we shall be like him; 
for we shall see him as he is." If then we are to be 
made like him by the "change" of the "First Resurrection," 
if we are to see him as he is, then we may 
apply to ourselves the glorious things of the Lord and 
his excellency, respecting which the Apostle says, "Him 
hath God highly exalted and given him a name which is 
above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee 
should bow, of things in heaven and things on earth 
and things under the earth;" and again, "He has 
ascended far above all principality and power and 
might and dominion and every name that is named." 
If we shall be like him and share his glory, then all this 
glory belongs to the glorious ideal which God himself 
has presented to our gaze. Who with such in view 
would not be willing indeed to submit himself to the 
blows of the Lord! Who would not be willing to endure 
the necessary chiselings and polishings! Who would 
not be willing to submit himself to tribulation, knowing 
that "Tribulation worketh patience, and patience, 
experience, and experience, hope"! These things shed 
abroad in our hearts make us neither barren nor unfruitful 
in respect to the knowledge of God, but obtain for us 
an abundant entrance into his everlasting Kingdom, 
in association with him who loved us and bought us 
with his precious blood. 

THE LORD HAD ESTABLISHED HIM 



Our Golden Text is quite in line with what we have 
just received, and shows us afresh the secret of David's 

R4256 : page 300 

successes and the line along which we also should be 

exercised in developing character which will be pleasing 

to the Lord. To some in David's place the thought 

would have been, "The Lord is very partial and has 

simply elected me to be the recipient of his favors. He 

cares more for me than for any other person in the 

nation." With this thought would have come a measure 

of vanity and pride which would have been very injurious 

to David (and to all others). These might also 

have said, "The Lord has seen that I am the fittest 

person in all this nation to be its ruler; and any person 

who does not fully agree with this sentiment is out of 

accord with the Lord and should have my frown and 

disapproval." Had David taken a position such as this 

it would have worked out a wrong character in him; and 

such a position taken by others would likewise work injuriously. 

It makes them boastful, arrogant, unloving, 

and unfits them for proper service to the Lord. 

David's thought on the subject was the proper one. 
He perceived that the Lord had established him king 
over Israel and that he had exalted him king for his 
people Israel's sake. So, too, we should remember that 
God has a purpose in the selection or election of the 
Church. As the Apostle says, "We are chosen for a 
purpose." God's purpose is a Kingdom which shall 
bless the world. And he has many others, angels and 
men, whom he could have chosen for this great purpose, 
and by his providence could have moulded and fashioned 
them for the accomplishment of his will. But by 
his mercy he has chosen "not many wise, not many 
noble, not many mighty," but "the weak things of this 
world" for the carrying out of his plans. Let this 
thought keep us very humble, very near to the Lord. 
Let us strive to learn the lessons necessary to fit and 
prepare us for the ruling, judging and uplifting "all the 
families of the earth." 



R4256 : page 300 

HELL HATH ENLARGED HERSELF 

--ISA. 5: 11-23. -SEPTEMBER 27.- 

Golden Text:— "Wine is a mocker."— Prov. 20:1. 

THE Lesson Committee assigned this as a temperance 
lesson: and undoubtedly it has in it a warning 
against intoxication. Nevertheless in our 



judgment, the context being considered, other matters 

are more reprehended in the lesson than intemperance. 

Undoubtedly there would be "woe to them that rise up 

early in the morning that they may follow strong drink; 

that tarry late into the night, till wine inflame them." 

However, they would be only moderate drinkers evidently 

who would, beginning so early, only by night 

become inflamed or drunken. We certainly can heartily 

endorse the thought that any indulgence of alcoholic 

spirits is dangerous— that intemperance lies 

at the foundation of many woes of life, sapping the manhood, 

the vigor, and undermining the moral sense and 

general character. We rejoice that the eyes of men's 

understanding are opening to more proper appreciation 

of the importance of this evil and that great good 

is resulting, not only to individuals, but to communities. 

Since the exhilarating effects of alcohol evidently 

deceive many, we think it well here to introduce a 

clipping which bears directly upon the subject. 

"ALCOHOL OUT OF THE RACE" 

"The contestants in the Marathon Race, which is 
run on April 19 from Ashland to Boston, twenty-five 
miles, were notified this year in the following terms: 
Alcohol in any form is positively forbidden before, 
during and immediately after the race. It never does 
good, and usually does harm. Disregard of the foregoing 
shall be considered sufficient grounds for disqualification 
by the physician in charge.' 

"In previous Marathon races some men who had 
become fagged had resorted to alcohol and other stimulants, 
and some of them fell unconscious soon after 
taking the stimulants. This year the six prominent 
Boston physicians who examined the one hundred and 
twenty-four men entered— one hundred and three of 
whom started and seventy-five finished— stated that 
the condition of the men was far superior to that of 
the previous year. So far as can be learned, no alcohol 
or drugs were used. No runner collapsed, and the 
record of physical endurance in this, the greatest race 
in America, if not in the world, is a wonderful one. 
The twenty-five consecutive miles, up hill and down, 
were run in an average of less than six minutes each, 
which is only a minute and a half slower than the majority 
of mile races on the best cindered tracks. Previous 
Marathon records were smashed, because the 
men depended on long and careful training rather than 
on stimulants. Alcohol was ruled out of the race, as 
it will be out of every contest of brawn or brains." 

R4257 : page 300 

SCOPE OF OUR LESSON 

The chapter of which our lesson is a part commences 



with a parable in which our Lord represents 
Palestine as his vineyard and the Jews as the choice vine 
of his planting, from which he would look for much 
fruitage of a choice quality. Instead it brought forth 
worthless grapes. Hence through the Prophet and 
parable he declares that having done everything reasonable 
and proper for the fruit, he would now take 
away its hedging and allow it to be trodden down by 
the wild beasts and to lie waste. (Vs. 1-7.) This parable 
our Lord almost duplicated and we may understand 
therefore that while it may have had some application 
to Isaiah's time as the period of 70 years desolation, 
nevertheless really the fulfilment on a still larger 
scale took place at the time of our Lord's first advent, 
when, because of their wrong condition of heart and 
rejection of him, he declared their house left desolate, 
and, as the Apostle says, "Wrath is come upon them to 
the uttermost." Verses 24 to 30 continue this thought 
and show the mighty power which caused the fall of 
the Jewish polity. 

The intervening verses, namely, from the 8th to the 23rd, 
treat of the reasons why the Lord was displeased 
with them and rejected them. 

(1) Their selfishness was foremost amongst their 
sins— the desire to join house to house, farm to farm- 
to become rich was put as the most prominent sin because 
that desire leads to other sin. As the Apostle 

suggests, "The love of money [wealth] is the root of 
all evil." The result of this was shown to be a land 
scarcity as respects the poor, and the Lord's resolution 
that he would punish such selfishness so that the 
homes would become desolate, empty, and the mansions 
uninhabited and the fields unfruitful, so that the practice 
of iniquity, injustice, lovelessness, spell "failure" 
in the end. 

(2) Next comes the verse 1 1 of our lesson, in which 
the Lord reprehends strong drink, the inflaming influence 

R4257 : page 301 

of wine, and the music and feasting indulged in 
by the wealthy who added house to house and field to 
field. It is evident that the wealthy consume considerable 
liquor and often without becoming seriously intoxicated, 
but no doubt the liquor has its influence in 
helping them promote selfish propositions, which disregard 
the interests of others, so that sometimes 
iniquities are hatched into activity which in sober 
sense would not have been countenanced. This is the 
essence of the Lord's complaint— "They regard not the 
work of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his 
hands." Money-making, feasting, music absorb the 
attention of the great and influential, which means the 
disregard of the more important things of the divine 
plan— the things to which typical Israel, as well as the 
things to which Spiritual Israel during this Gospel 



Age, have been called. 

(3) The result of all this was that the masses, lacking 
the proper influence from their more talented leaders, 
became expatriated— separated from the hopes and 
ambitions which were Israel's as a nation— the poor 
lost the ideals necessary to their progress in a good 
way and instead got wrong ideals along the line of selfishness, 
pride, worldliness— ideals which they would 
have longed to follow had they possessed the talents 
and ability. Thus the wrong influence of those intoxicated 
with the love of money and of pleasure not only 
affected themselves, but the whole people of Israel. 
Correspondingly in Spiritual Israel we find similar 
conditions. 

Verse 13 points out the effects of the wrong course 
upon the people, as seen from the divine standpoint. 
The Israelites had practically become the slaves of 
their brethren, the rich. They were in practical captivity 
through a lack of knowledge. The most honorable 
of them were famished from lack of proper ideals 
and nourishment from the prophecies of the Lord in 
instructions of his Word, and the whole multitude was 
parched with thirst, lacking vigor, vitality and energy 
as respects the Lord's great purposes, to which he had 
called them to be his special people. Similar conditions 
apply now to Spiritual Israel— Christendom. 
The greatest minds of the world have become absorbed 
in wealth and pleasure-getting, and direful have been 
the results upon the masses of Christendom. The people 
find themselves really starving, hungry and thirsty. 
They have not satisfied their cravings from an earthly 
standpoint, because under present conditions this is 
impossible, and as for spiritual food and drink these 
have been taken away by the evolutions of the higher 
critics, who plainly tell the people that the Word of 
God is not the bread of Truth, but poisonous food- 
error. As a result the masses of Christendom today, 
while prosperous outwardly as never before, are not 
really contented, but hungry for wealth and pleasure, 
and especially for happiness, which they will never 
find in the direction in which they are seeking it. 

HELL HAS OPENED HER MOUTH 

The word "hell" in verse 14 is sheol in the Hebrew 
and signifies the grave, the tomb, the abyss— oblivion. 
To the Israelites this may have meant that because of 
the wretched condition of the poor classes and the accumulation 
of lands, etc., in the hands of the wealthy, 
there was a great increase of mortality, of the death 
rate. But the application to Spiritual Israel may be a 
spiritual one, a reference to the fact that the spiritual 
hopes and ambitions of many are going down into 
oblivion— that faith is perishing among the people. 
How true this is! The Prophet says that thousands 
shall fall to one who stands. Oblivion is rapidly swallowing 



up the multitude, including also those who have 
once rejoiced in faith. The mean man is brought 
down and the great is humbled, and also the lofty— the 
proud. The full scope of this judgment of the Lord on 
Christendom is not yet manifest, but in the end the 
Lord of hosts shall be exalted and honored in respect 
to the judgment he will bring upon the people and the 
righteousness he will manifest. Then the gentle 
lambs will feed in the pastures which he will provide 
and the wastes which the profligate had taken possession 
of as their own shall be turned over to others 
whom they would not recognize. 

DRAW INIQUITY WITH FALSEHOOD 

Another statement of the evils which caused the 
overthrow of typical Israel is shown in verse 18. A 
special wound had come upon the influential ones who 
had been disposed to use falsehood as cords in carrying 
forward their inequitable schemes. It may be 
safely said that falsehood is the outgrowth of selfishness 
and that nearly all the lying that is done in the 
world is in its interest to accomplish iniquity. The 
Prophet's words are, "Woe unto them that draw iniquity 
with cords of vanity." These are represented as 
scoffing at the second coming of Messiah. Inflamed 
with the wine of Babylon and with their love of money 
and pleasure they disbelieve the glorious promises of 
Messiah and his Kingdom and say, "Let him make 
speed, and hasten his work, that we may see it; and 
let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw nigh and 
come that we may know it." In other words they claim 
to be in full accord with the Lord, to be perfectly ready 
for his Kingdom if he had one and if it ever will come. 
They claim to be wise and call those who trust in the 
Word of the Lord fools and tell them that if they had 
the knowledge of the Higher Critics they would no 
longer trust to the Bible. 

CALL EVIL GOOD AND GOOD EVIL 

Continuing the picture the Lord declares that there 
will come woe to them because they have called the 
evil things which they practice good, and because 
the good things, truth and equity, they have 
treated lightly and spoken of as evil— nonsensical. 
They, Higher Critics, call darkness light, and the light 
of truth they call darkness. They put the bitter of 
error instead of the sweet of truth. This will mean to 
them very shortly trouble. The Lord continuing says 
that "woe will come unto them because they are so 
wise in their own eyes and prudent in their own sight." 
They have a wisdom and prudence which is of the 
earth earthy— sensual, devilish. They neglect the wisdom 
which comes from above, which is "first pure, 
then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full 



of mercy and good fruits." They are mighty to drink 
the wine of Babylon, intoxicating from the dark ages— 
they can swallow these doctrines and not be intoxicated 
by them as are the masses. They are men of 
strength and can drink mingled strong drink— strong 
doctrines. 

These strong doctrines may perplex the masses of 
Spiritual Israel, but these strong men have a way of 
taking all the creeds, all the doctrines, and mingling 
them together, declaring their full harmony and that 
separately and as a whole they are splendid. Thus at 
this present time they are making a union of all the 
different creeds and saying that any strong-minded 
person should be able to drink all these creeds without 

R4257 : page 302 

injury. The Prophet says that these are they "which 

justify the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness 

of the righteous from him." If, for instance, 

a professed servant of God shall declare that he disbelieves 

practically all the teaching of God's Word, they 

stand ready to justify him in his wickedness, if he 

claims the right still to continue to pose as a servant of 

God. Why? For a reward. That they may in so doing 

justify their own belief and that they may maintain 

their standing and honor of men in silence and 

pose as strong-minded men, able to drink much strong 

drink. They are ready, also, to take away the righteousness 

of the righteous, to subdue those who speak 

the Truth, to slander them, to say all manner of evil 

against them falsely. Why? They do this also for a 

reward. Because they desire to be on the popular 

side and to retain the rewards which are accorded 

such. 

R4258 : page 302 

The lesson to all who seek to be in harmony with 
the Lord is that they are not to follow the course of the 
great and the influential of Christendom, but to follow 
the Lord, to hearken to his Word, and to humbly follow 
in the footsteps of our dear Redeemer. 



page 302 

WATCH TOWER BIBLES-NEW EDITION 

WE have concluded to get out two editions of the 
WATCH TOWER BIBLES. We expect to be ready to 
begin filling orders for them between October 1st 
and 15th. Your orders may be placed at once, in harmony 
with the following descriptions: 
It will be noticed that none of these Bibles is quite 



so cheap as the cheapest of last year. There are two causes 
for this: (1) To our special helps of last year we have 
added about 300 pages of new matter, so that the comment 
represents the TOWERS of the past 30 years, as well as the 
DAWN-STUDIES and tracts and sermons, etc., published in newspapers. 
(2) Our cheapest book this year has linen instead of 
paper lining and thus corresponds in binding to the next to 
cheapest of last year. 

BIBLE NO. 1918, PRICE $1.65, POSTPAID 

Minion type, India paper, references, French seal (best 
sheep) binding, red under gold edges, silk head-band and 
marker, linen lined, maps, TOWER and DAWN 
Comments, Instructor's Guide, Berean Topical 
Index, Difficult Texts Explained, Spurious passages 
noted. This additional matter will fill about 
500 pages. Size, 5x7x1 inch. 

BIBLE NO. 1928, PRICE $2.50 POSTPAID 

This Bible is exactly the same as No. 1918, 
except that the leather is genuine Levant Morocco 
leather and leather lined. This should be a very 
durable binding— fine-grained leather. 

BIBLE NO. 1938, PRICE $3.00 POSTPAID 

This Bible is of a larger size and of a bolder, blacker 
type. It is rather large for a pocket (5-1/2x7-1/2x1-1/4), but is 
light and convenient for handling. The helps are the same 
as in those described above. India paper, red under gold 
edges, silk head binding and marker. We are binding these 
only in the better leather, Levant Morocco, recommended as 
very durable. See representation below of bold-faced type. 
Calf lined. 

BIBLE NO. 1948, PRICE $3.25 POSTPAID 

This Bible is exactly the same as No. 1938, except that 
it contains additionally the Bagster Bible Concordance, Index 
of Proper Names, Alphabetical Bible Index, etc. Size 
5-1/2x7-1/2x1-1/2. Sample of type below. 

WATCH TOWER HELPS SEPARATE 

About 500 pages, on India paper, in paper covers, 50 
cents; in plain cloth binding, 75 cents each; in cheap 
leather binding, $1.25 each. Our advice 
is that as the Bibles cost so little more all 
who can should procure them. Besides 
it is very convenient to have the Scriptures 
and the helps under the same cover. 
Any regular TOWER reader who cannot 
purchase these helps, even in their 
cheapest form, may state his case to us, 



as a brother in Christ has kindly offered 
to supply a few paper-bound copies to 
such. 



R4249 : page 302 

NEW EDITION OF THE DEBATES 

A NEW edition of the White-Russell Debates has been 
prepared for us by the Cincinnati ENQUIRER. The 
previous edition was of 200,000, this edition 300,000. 
These are revised, the stenographers' and printers' 
blunders being remedied. The type used is larger and the 
several topics are made very conspicuous. 

Already we have orders for one-half of the new edition 
and we invite further orders, to be filled after the Convention, 
September 15th. The price is 5 cents per copy, 10 for 
30 cents, 40 for $1.00. 

We know of nothing better than this for awakening an 
interest in the Truth. The Truth shines the more brightly 
in contrast with the error. And then some will read both 
sides who would not read our side alone. When the Eaton-Russell 
Debates were published one brother said to another, 
"John, here, Brothers Russell and Eaton are to debate their 

R4250 : page 303 

differences and these are to be published. I will get these 
and then you can see the two sides in contrast." "No," said 
the brother, "I do not care to read them." Later, when the 
reports were received and read by the brother in the Truth, 
he said to the other, "John, here, read what Dr. Eaton says; 
never mind what Bro. Russell says, since you are so opposed: 
just read Dr. Eaton's side." The brother read as requested 
and then could not restrain his curiosity respecting the other 
side. He read, and, being an honest man, was convinced 
and is now active like his brother in scattering the good tidings. 



page 303 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V. (E)* 

Questions on Study V.— The Author of the Atonement. 

NOVEMBER 1 

(12) Name one of the chief battles of the Christian 
seeking to be a good soldier, loyal to the Captain of 
his salvation. P. 112, par. 1. 



(13) Why is fixity of will essential to our victory? 
P.112, par. 2. 

(14) What was our Lord's third temptation in the 
wilderness? Explain the intimations and suggestions 
of the Adversary's words as they would apply to our 
Lord. P.112, par. 2. 

(15) What was there in Satan's past career that 
probably led up to this request? What ambitions of 
his were not fully satisfied? Why would he evidently 

have preferred to have our Lord as a partner in the dominion 
of earth and under better conditions than those 
of the reign of sin and death? P. 113, par. 1. 

(16) Did Satan's temptation imply a new remedy 

for sin and his willingness to cooperate in its application? 
What may we reasonably surmise as respects 
Satan's motives, etc.? P. 114, par. 1. 

(17) What was our Lord's decision and was it hard 
to reach? P. 114, par. 2. 

(18) Are the Lord's brethren subject to temptations 
along this same line? P. 114, par. 3. 

NOVEMBER 8 

(19) Cite illustrations of Satan's temptation of the 
Church to seek for other means of saving the world 
than that which God has outlined in the Scriptures and 
tell why other plans than the Lord's seemed to many 
preferable. P.l 14, par. 3,4. 

(20) Do these temptations to the brethren come in 
various forms? If so, state some of these— especially 

some prevalent in our Lord's day. P.l 15, par. 1; P. 116, par. 1. 

(21) Since our Lord was not fallen, depraved, but 
holy, harmless, separate from sinners, how could he be 
"tempted in all points like as we are"? P.l 17, par. 1. 

(22) Mention some of humanity's weaknesses and 
besetments and explain the difference between these 
and the temptations of our Lord and his "brethren." 
P.l 17, par. 1. 

(23) Since the temptations of the New Creatures 
are thus different from the temptations of those of the 
world, explain the relationship between the weaknesses 
of the flesh and temptations of the spirit or new nature. 
P.l 17, par. 2. 

(24) Quote and cite the Scripture which declared 
that the Captain of our salvation was made "perfect 
through suffering," and state whether or not this signifies 
that he was imperfect as a man and attained human 
perfection, or what does it signify? P.l 18, par. 1,2. 

NOVEMBER 15 

(25) What motive is Scripturally assigned to our 

Lord as influencing him in his consecration and sacrifice? 
Quote and cite the Scripture. P. 118, par. 3. 

(26) What four different features of joy actuated our 
Lord? Let us discuss these one at a time. P.l 18, par. 4; 



P.119, par. 1,2,3. 

(27) Was this joy set before our Lord as a certainty 
or as a contingent reward for faithfulness? and 

if the latter to whom was he to be faithful and to what 
degree? P.119, par. 4. 

NOVEMBER 22 

(28) Did our Lord learn obedience through the 
things which he suffered in order that he might become 
a Son of God? If not, for what did he suffer? Quote 
and cite the Scriptures demonstrating this. P. 120, 

par. 1,2,3. 

(29) To whom did our Lord Jesus demonstrate or 
prove his fidelity and what results followed? P. 120, par. 4. 

(30) Apply this same principle to the Church, the 
Body of Christ, and explain what we should expect in 
ourselves and in each other, and in God's dealings 
with us. P. 120, par. 5. Discuss this matter thoroughly. 

NOVEMBER 29 

(31) When we read in the Scriptures that our Lord 
was made "in the likeness of sinful flesh" just what 
does this signify— that he was a sinner?— that he was 
just like a sinner?— or what? Cite the Scripture and 
paraphrase it so as to bring out its proper thought. P. 121, 
par. 1. 

(32) What bearing would the doctrine of the ransom 
have in respect to the above questions? If Jesus 

had been born of a human father and thus partaken 
of a blemished, fallen, human nature, like sinful flesh 
in general, could he have been our Redeemer, our ransom? 
If not, why not? P. 122, par. 4. 

(33) We read, "Himself took our infirmities." 
Does this signify that the man Christ Jesus was born 
with human infirmities? Cite the occurrences of the 
statement in the Old and New Testaments and explain 
their proper signification. P. 122, par. 2. 

(34) Our Lord, according to the Scriptural accounts, 
was in some respects less vigorous than some 

of his disciples and some other men at the time of his 
death. How could this be, if they were born imperfect 
and he was a perfect being, unblemished? Explain 
the philosophy. P. 122, par. 3; P. 123, par. 1. 

(35) Does Matthew's Gospel offer an explanation 
of the Prophet's words under consideration, "Himself 
bare our sicknesses"? What is the inferable explanation? 
P.124, par. 1,2. 

(36) Did our Lord Jesus use his own physical 
strength in the healing of sickness or was it done by 
special outside strength supplied? P.124, par. 3. 



"Five years ago DAWN-STUDIES, VOL. V., was reset, and 



unfortunately the type was not exactly same size as before; and 
hence page for page they differ. The references given in these 
Berean Studies apply to the present edition, a copy of which 
postpaid will cost you but 30c. But keep your old edition, for 
unfortunately the New Bible helps refer to its pages. 



page 305 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIX. OCTOBER 15 No. 20 
A.D. 1908--A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 307 

England Face to Face with Socialism 307 

Revulsion Against Hell Torment 308 

Homing the Ark at Jerusalem 308 

"Obedience Better Than Sacrifice" 309 

Other Lessons for Spiritual Israel 310 

Sweet Day of Rest (Poem) 311 

There Has Not Failed One Promise 311 

"The Lord Will Build Thee An House" 311 

His Throne for Evermore 312 

"As by One Man's Disobedience" 313 

What the Word Vow Signifies 314 

"What Spirit Ye Are Of " 318 

Is the Vow Extreme? 319 

page 306 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each MAY stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ORDER NEW BIBLES IN BUNCHES 



In our issue of October 1st, the friends have fullest particulars 
respecting our New Bibles with DAWN and TOWER 
helps. We now suggest that wherever convenient the friends 
would do well to order together— several copies to the same 
address. There will be no saving in this (except if twenty or 
more go by freight), but there will be some convenience and 
saving in the getting of Money Orders; and those in bunches 
will be shipped by the publishers and go out earlier. Be sure 
to give the number of the Bible desired, not the description. 

PATENT THUMB-INDEX 

We advise against this, but some prefer it. If you wish 
it on your Bible say so and add 25 cents to price. 

HALIFAX CONVENTION ASSISTANCE 



A dear Sister has handed us some money to be used in assisting 
any of the Lord's poor who may attend the Convention. 
Let such get their ticket with a Certificate that they are to attend 
the WATCH TOWER CONVENTION OF BIBLE STUDENTS. 
On arrival see the Convention Secretary who will provide for 
entertainment and return transportation free. 

LOST ARTICLES FOUND 



Quite a number of articles lost at the Put-in-Bay Convention 
were found, but never called for. These include Spectacles, 
Breast-pins, Stick-pins, Pocket-books, Watch-charms, 
Coat, Satchel and contents. 

Send us a description of the articles you lost, and if they 
are amongst these we will be glad to send them to you. Address 
—Convention Department. 

VOLUNTEER MATTER IN MANY LANGUAGES 



We have a good supply. If you have time and a willing 
heart you can have plenty to do. Advise what quantities you 
can use wisely and promptly. We will supply you free of all 
charges. 



R4258 : page 307 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
ENGLAND FACE TO FACE WITH SOCIALISM 



ONE hundred and fifty archbishops and bishops, a multitude 
of minor clergy, and an assemblage of laymen 
and laywomen outnumbered any hitherto gathered 
in Albert hall. 

The bishop of Birmingham, who was scheduled to preside, 
was absent owing to illness. He sent a paper, which 
was read by his substitute, the bishop of Manchester, the keynote 
of which was the injustice of the existing division of the 
profits of industry. After contrasting the grinding poverty of 
the workers with the extravagant luxury of the idle rich, he demanded 
from the church "a tremendous act of penitence for 
having failed so long and so greatly to champion the oppressed 
and weak." 

RISING TIDE OF SOCIALISM 

The Rev. J. G. Simpson, principal of the clergy school 
at Leeds, assured the vast audience that all over the north of 
England they were face to face with the rising tide of Socialism, 
which they were powerless to stem even if they wished 
to do so. Countless workers in the forges, furnaces, and mills 
of the north had adopted the Socialistic idea and held to it 
like a religion and loved it like a bride. He demanded that 
the church give free field to Socialism. He appealed to it to 
try to understand it and not hasten to discount it. 

More significant than the speeches themselves was the 
keen interest shown in the Socialistic pleas and earnest enthusiasm 
with which such points as those given were greeted 
from all parts of the hall.— Chicago Daily Socialist. 

"MEN'S HEARTS FAILING THEM" 



"Daily it becomes more manifest that political America 
is separating into two camps— the Individualists and the 
Socialists.. .A new party has been created, and it is not 
extravagant to intimate that it will poll two million votes 
next November. It threatens to destroy the Democratic party 
(though that is a job the Democratic Party has already accomplished 



to all intents and purposes), and will then strive for 
the mastery against the Republican Party. That would fetch 
the new alignment of conservative vs. liberal, of Individualism 
vs. Socialism. That is what is coming."— Washington Post. 

THE JEWISH OUTLOOK 



The recent quiet Turkish revolution, which has brought 
to the front the "Young Turk" party, is said to be favorable 
to the hopes of the Jews in respect to their securing some 
kind of a footing in Palestine with a subordinate self-government. 
The new government is credited with being quite 
liberal toward Jews and Christians. 

Rabbi Judah Leon Mages says: 

"Since Titus razed Jerusalem thousands of years ago, 
Israel has been a wanderer among foreign nations, an alien 
among strangers; at first bitterly persecuted, then barely 
tolerated, and latterly beginning to be respected and honored, 
but still an outcast, with no home toward which to 
turn his wandering footsteps. And yet, remarkable as is 
the fact, he has preserved his individuality through it all. 
Whether he is a professor in a German university, or a 
banker in France, or a statesman in England, the Jew is a 
Jew still, and under the veneer of environing social life lies 
the tearful yearning for his native land. 

"When we turn our footsteps toward Zion," continued 
the doctor, his eyes kindling with enthusiasm, "we shall 
number among the citizens of the renewed Jewish commonwealth 
some of the most famous men of modern times, men 
who are engaged in creating the world history of today. Our 
government will serve as a model for the whole world. And 
in the arts and crafts Jerusalem will be a standard. I have 
no small faith in Israel. What he is doing now, scattered 
throughout the world, he will be able to do tenfold when 
he is united, safe from the fear of hate or prejudice. 

PURCHASING PALESTINE HOLDINGS 

"This is not all purely visionary. The work is already 
going on rapidly in Palestine. We have acquired extensive 
tracts of land from the Sultan of Turkey, and we are constantly 
increasing our holdings. Very soon we will be in a 
position to ask for a release from the authority of the Sultan. 
England favors the project, and we are sure of the assistance 
of the United States. Large areas of land are already under 
cultivation, and we are planting an immense grove of olive 
trees, to be called the Theodore Herzl Memorial Grove, in 
memory of the revered founder of Zionism. 

"Israel was originally a farmer. It was only upon his 
expulsion from his native land, forbidden to hold territory 
in any of the countries he sought to make his home, that he 
became a trader, and by his native wit became so apt at it 
that it has almost become a characteristic of the race. Now, 
however, in his own home, at peace with all nations, and 



with the latest inventions of science at his command, he will 
make the beautiful valley of the Jordan to 'blossom as the 
rose.' And there under the serene eastern sun, he can let 
his soul drift back softly into the meditations of his beloved 
religion and live out his days 'a blessing and a comfort to 
the nations.'" 

R4258 : page 308 

REVULSION AGAINST HELL TORMENT TOWARD 
FAITHS WITHOUT FOUNDATION 



The Rev. J. R. Hutton, D.D., of Glasgow, preaching 
in New York City, said:— 

"We hear much in these days of the fascination 
which Roman Catholic or High Church views are having 
for many minds. Now, the claim that these 
churches really put forward is that the Church, 
through its sacraments and the prayers of the saints, 
will take the responsibility for the souls of its members 
and so relieve them of a certain 'intolerable strain.' 
We hear that the claim is proving the attraction. I 
think the significance is just this, that these systems 
put the accent and emphasis not on what the worshiper 
does for himself but on what God has done for 
him and is prepared to do. 

"Take another movement which I think has a very 
close resemblance to this drift toward the Roman Catholic 
attitude in England. I mean the movement originating 
in America, but which has its agents in all cultured 
lands, which goes variously by the name of 
Christian Science, Mind Culture and the rest. It has 
succeeded because with a certain passion and unfairness 
it rejects from the entire life of the soul such 
words as 'striving,' 'wrestling' and 'fighting.' The 
movement has won a success just because it promises 
to take the strain off our minds, because it bids men 
to stop thinking about themselves and begin thinking 
out of themselves toward the infinite peace of God. 
All that is true in both these movements is not new, 
and all that is new is not true. There are signs that 
the human soul is tired of the ethical whip, tired of the 
summons to strenuousness, and is determined now to 
try the life of faith." 



What man really needs is the Bible faith, the faith 
once delivered to the saints, but now, alas! obscured 
to almost all. 



R4258 : page 308 



HOMING THE ARK AT JERUSALEM 

-2 SAMUEL 6:l-12.-OCTOBER 4.- 

Golden Text:— "Enter into his gates with thanksgiving, 
and into his courts with praise."— Psa. 100:4. 

THE Ark of the Covenant, wherein was deposited 
the tables of the Law, the basis of God's covenant 
with Israel, and Aaron's rod that budded, 
and the golden pot of manna, was the most sacred article 
of typical Israel's religious emblems. Its lid, consisting 
of a golden plate surmounted with two cherubs, 
constituted the mercy-seat— the meeting place between 
God and the officiating priest, who acted as mediator 
between God and the nation of Israel. When in the 
Tabernacle, the divine presence was manifested upon 
the mercy-seat between the cherubim by a miraculous 
light called the shekinah glory. For seventy years 
prior to our lesson the Ark had been neglected and in 
considerable degree the religion of the nation had likewise 
been neglected, though it is presumed that their 
devotions as individuals were not entirely forgotten, 
even as in David's case, we note his continued reliance 
upon the Lord and appeals to him. 

It will be remembered that the Ark was in the Tabernacle 
of the Lord at Shiloh when Samuel was a boy 
and Eli was high priest, and that later, when the latter 
was aged and Samuel was grown, in a battle with the 
Philistines the sons of Eli, who were disreputable, self-seeking 
grasping characters, took the Ark into battle 
as a talisman or mascot, believing that the Lord would 

R4259 : page 308 

protect the Ark and that thus the army of Israel with 
it would have success. But the iniquity of Eli's sons 
had reached its full and God willed that they should 
fall in the battle and that the Ark should be captured 
by the Philistines and that Eli himself should die of 
heart failure upon hearing the news of the disaster, 
and that Samuel should occupy the place of judge, 
prophet and priest to the Lord. 

It will also be remembered that while the Ark was 
with the Philistines it brought them no blessing, but 
on the contrary sickness, trouble, etc., or "bad luck," 
as some would say. It was thus sent from one Philistine 
city to another, each being glad to get rid of it 
until finally they put it upon a cart and started it eastward 
to the land of Israel. There it was received by 
the priest Abinadab and lodged in his own house. 
There it had remained for several years up to the time 
of this lesson, when David had become King of Israel. 

FERVENT IN SPIRIT 



As we have already seen King David possessed a 
very deep religious nature, whose center or will had 
been early turned in full consecration to the Lord. 
Realizing that God was the real King of Israel and that 
he himself was merely God's vice-gerent or representative, 
David sought to fulfil the divine will and 
arrangement by inaugurating the Tabernacle and its 
religious services, as God had appointed through Moses. 
Accordingly a royal decree went forth summoning the 
priests, Levites and tribal princes and religious people 
of the various parts of the dominion for the reinauguration 
of the public worship of Jehovah God. The 
scope of the decree may be judged from the assembled 
multitude— 30,000. It matters not to us that some are 
inclined to impugn the motives of the king and to claim 
that this was merely a policy stroke of the king for the 
binding of the people to himself through his religious 
instincts and a revival of ancient customs. If it were 
merely policy on David's part, it was good policy, wise 
policy, helpful policy as respects the people, as well as 
in respect to unifying and solidifying his Kingdom. 
To be religious did not necessitate the avoidance of 
such things as would be good for the people, even 
though some might impugn the motive. But the love 
which thinketh no evil should be experienced and the 
king should be given credit for the best of motives in 
calling for the fulfilment of divine commands given 
through Moses. 

Indeed, those who have learned to look for the 
Lord's leading, amongst the Lord's people, in all the 
affairs of life should be convinced that God did not 
leave the affairs of his people Israel in the hands of 
David— that the Lord himself was King and Director 
of all of the interests of that chosen and covenanted 
people. In our estimate, therefore, it matters not what 
motive David may have had in calling this convocation, 
because God was behind it and David, wittingly or unwittingly 
was being used as the divine agent in accomplishing 
the divine purposes. And it will surely do us 
good to call to mind that similarly the Lord has a special 
interest in all the matters which pertain to Spiritual 
Israel and that no great or important matters that 

R4259 : page 309 

pertain to Spiritual Zion take place without his notice, 
without his permission. Only those who thus recognize 
the divine supervision of the Church's interest can 
rest their hearts in faith and confidence or feel assured 
that God is working all things according to the counsel 
of his own will. 

We feel specially impressed with the special evidences 
which show that God's supervision was particularly 
with Israel in their harvest time, at the end of the 
age, in all of the affairs pertaining to our Lord's first 



advent: his birth in the "fulness of time," his death 
"in due time," the number of his disciples, the 
one that should betray him, his crucifixion as a 
malefactor, the rejection of Israel because of the rejection 
of Messiah, the anointing of the "most holy" 
at Pentecost, the final overthrow of the nation, 
A.D. 70. And if we note such particular care by the 
Lord over natural Israel, may we not experience as 
much faith in his care for Spiritual Israel in the present 
harvest time? Surely the lessons we have learned in 
the Scriptures respecting the harmonious parallels between 
the Jewish Age and the Gospel Age, between 
the harvest of that age and the harvest of this age, 
justify fully our expectation that the Lord will be 
equally careful in overruling even the smallest affairs 
in the harvest of this age. 

Whoever can by faith reach and maintain this position 
will surely have a confidence in the Lord which 
will be very helpful to him. The trials and difficulties 
of the Jewish harvest seemed like calamities at the 
moment of their permission, and it is only by hind-sight 
directed by the holy Spirit and prophetic Word that we 
are able to discern God's providences there. Similarly 
calamities, adversities, peculiar conditions, etc., are to 
be expected in this harvest, which at the time of occurrence 
will not be understood by any except those of 
large faith and intimate acquaintance with the prophecies, 
and even they will be obliged to walk by faith and 
not by sight. It will be afterward that the divine supervision 
in every detail will be discernible. Meantime 
the Lord wills evidently that the Spiritual Israelite, instructed 
in the school of Christ, shall have learned the 
lessons of faith and obedience from the harvest time 
of typical Israel. 

"OBEDIENCE BETTER THAN SACRIFICE" 

The occasion of bringing the Ark of God to the 
capital city of the nation was to be a gala day of rejoicing, 
long to be remembered from one end of Israel's 
land to the other. King David rejoiced at the unanimity 
of religious sentiment everywhere prevalent with 
the people who accepted his instructions. The players 
of musical instruments of every kind had been engaged 
so as to accompany the procession. An ox-cart, specially 
prepared, was provided and the Ark was put 
upon the cart and the two sons of the high-priest 
accompanied it, the one preceding and the other driving. 
The good intentions of all concerned are not 
to be misjudged, but a serious error was made in that 
the divine order in connection with the matter was 
neglected. 

(1) God had made no such arrangement of transferring 
the Ark on a cart, however honorable that may 

have seemed to David and to the priests. 

(2) It was not the business of the priests at all to 



transfer the Ark, for, although they ranked high in the 
Lord's services, it was the Levites who were commissioned 
to bear the Ark by its staves on their shoulders. 
In neglecting these divine provisions an opening was 
made for all kinds of irregularity in connection with 
the services of the Tabernacle, which the Lord designed 
should not be reinaugurated. It was proper that the 
king, the priests, the nobles of all the tribes and the 
religious people of the nation should have a lesson 
that would not soon be forgotten respecting the importance 
of carrying out every detail of the divine law in 
respect to the worship and services of the Tabernacle. 
The lesson which the Lord gave on this occasion not 
only was profitable to the king and the nation, but has 
been profitable in a large degree to Spiritual Israel 
during this Gospel Age. 

When the time came for the manifestation of the 
Lord's disapproval of the neglect of the Law on the 
part of those who desired to honor him, the oxen stumbled 
and, to steady the Ark, Uzzah, an under-priest, 
put forth his hand, when immediately God's displeasure 
was manifested in his falling down dead. The 
gala day was suddenly spoiled. The joy of the king 
and of the people vanished. Instead came distress 
and fear— if because of some blunder even one of the 
priests should be thus smitten down of the Lord, what 
would be the dangers as respects others! King David 
promptly concluded that he dare not have the Ark with 
him and near his own house at Jerusalem, as previously 
intended. The procession stopped and, turning aside, 
the Ark was deposited in the home of Obed-edom. 

"THE FEAR OF THE LORD IS THE BEGINNING OF WISDOM" 

One of the first lessons necessary for every Israelite, 
natural and spiritual, is reverence. Without this 
quality we shall be sure to err. There is an old and 
true adage, "Familiarity breeds contempt," and this applies 
to religious things and to God, as well as to 
earthly things and to men. The worship of God, which 
King David was to inaugurate in the typical temple 
built by Solomon, must be founded upon a proper base 
of respect and reverence. It must be recognized as 
fundamental, that obedience is a pre-requisite to the 
offering of acceptable sacrifices to the Lord. 

The fact that this lesson was taught at the expense 
of human life has seemed to us terrible, because of our 
delusion in respect to eternal torment, which led us to 
suppose that poor Uzzah not only ceased from human 
activities and pleasures but that he was immediately 
dropped into a seething abyss of hell-flames and torture. 
Now, by the grace of God, we see that this is not 
the teaching of the Scriptures, and this relieves the 
narrative of its distressing features. We perceive that 
Uzzah lost his life a year or so earlier, as the case 
might have been, than he otherwise would have lost it, 



and that it was for the Lord's glory and for the good of 
the people that he died as he did and not by disease or 
accident. We are to remember that he was already, 
like the rest of the race, under condemnation of death 
and that God had a perfect right to require his life at 
any moment. We are to remember that all that he lost 
was of God's purpose and in God's time will be made 
good to him, in his awakening in the resurrection of 
judgment, when he shall come forth from the tomb to 
more favorable conditions than those under which he 
was living— to the antitypical jubilee of restitution to 
all who will receive it. 

Spiritual Israelites must learn this lesson— that in 
handling the holy things of the divine Word, the divine 
plan, the services of the Truth, the ministry of the 
Church of Christ, they are not at liberty to do as they 
please, merely assuring themselves that their motives 
are good. It is their duty to note carefully the divine 

R4260 : page 310 

will and to follow out the program in the order of the 

directions of the divine Word. Furthermore it is for 

us to learn, too, that God designs that not all the services 

are to be performed by one or two persons, but 

that there is a part in the service of God for all of the 

consecrated and that each is to be granted the opportunity 

for such service, as the Lord has planned. Some 

may occupy the priestly service, which others may not 

enjoy, and some may occupy the Levites' service, and 

their opportunities are not to be taken from them. 

Again another important lesson to be learned by Spiritual 

Israelites is that God is guiding his own affairs; 

that he is as much interested in them as we are and 

more, too, and that he is fully capable of their management. 

Some of the Lord's people carry great burdens 

which do not belong to them and which hinder them 

from the rest and joy which otherwise might be theirs. 

Others are so active, so zealous, that they fancy that 

the work of God would not be accomplished at all unless 

they did it. The Lord wishes us to learn the important 

lesson, "In all thy ways acknowledge him," "and 

he shall give thee the desires of thy heart." Only by 

recognizing the Lord as first in every feature of his 

work and by recognizing ourselves as honored by him 

in every opportunity of service shall we be able to bring 

blessing to ourselves and to others. 

PROFITING BY EXPERIENCE 

If we think of David's course in refusing to bring 
the Ark to Jerusalem, as at first intended, as a 
mark of petulance and anger against the Lord for 
spoiling the gala day, we shall make a great mistake. 
David's character was too reverential for 
anything of this kind. He was the man who could 



fight Goliath, but not the man who could fight 

against God. Every act of his life was marked by reverence 

and humility and a recognition of God's justice 

and power and love and of David's own humility in the 

Lord's sight. Meantime the Lord was teaching a great 

lesson to the whole nation, which heard of the sad disappointment 

of the people with reference to the great 

gala day and that God's displeasure was shown in such 

a striking way that even a priest was stricken down 

for neglect of the divine supervision, and that the Ark 

was now in the house of Obed-edom. 

King David was watching, and noted these results, 
and again his heart went out longingly with the wish 
that the chief emblem of divine worship should rest 
under the shadow of the Lord, near to the Lord and to 
the shekinah glory. Evidently he made investigation 
as to the handling of the Ark and concluded that the 
mistake was that of himself and of the priests and 
that God's blessing and not a curse would go with the 
Ark. So at the end of three months he made arrangements 
afresh for the bringing of it to his capital. 
Again the visitors came, the bands of music in order, 
and the procession accompanied the Ark again towards 
Jerusalem. We read that David brought the Ark from 
the house of Obed-edom unto the City of David with 
gladness and with joy. 

A description of the festival procession may be 
found in I Chron. 15 and 16. It was decidedly the 
greatest day in David's career. But this time, in harmony 
with the lesson taught, there were no innovations, 
no cart driven by priests after the manner of the heathen, 
but instead a strict adherence to the divine direction. 
The Ark was borne on the shoulders of the Levites. 
The lesson was learned that obedience to the letter is 
better than sacrifice. In the joyous procession the 
king apparently led, playing upon the harp, while with 
him the singers and the musicians were divided into 
several companies which sang parts in alternation. 
See Psalms 105, 96 and 106. The 24th Psalm is supposed 
to have been sung as a marching accompaniment 
as the procession was entering Jerusalem, where 
a tent or tabernacle had already been placed for the 
reception of the Ark. Seven choirs formed part of the 
procession, according to Josephus. 

OTHER LESSONS FOR SPIRITUAL ISRAEL 

Members of antitypical David— the Christ— are to 
learn lessons from all the experiences of life; that 
with them it may be as it was with David in this case, 
when the proposed gala day was turned into a day of 
mourning and fear. Similarly our mistakes are to be 
received rightly and the reasons for them rightly appreciated 
that, instead of stumbling-stones, they may 
be stepping-stones which shall draw us "Nearer, my 
God, to thee." Another lesson is that we should desire 



to be nearer to the Lord. 

The Ark in the Tabernacle near to David's home 
represented not its glorious resting place, but its present 
dwelling. The condition of the Church in glory is 
represented by the Temple of Solomon. We, of course, 
long to be there and to enter into all those glorious 
things of the future, but that is impossible until the 
Lord's time, even as David was not permitted to build 
the Temple. Thus his life shows a picture not of the 
Beloved in glory, but of the flesh in the trial state below. 
As David desired to be near to the Tabernacle, 
close to the Lord, so we, members of the Beloved, should 
find ourselves longing for a closer walk with God, a 
nearness to his arrangement of the mercy-seat— Christ 
Jesus. This will signify a desire to be near to the 
members of his Body, the Church, to have fellowship 
with them, because the condition of things is represented 
as being the "holy" of the Tabernacle, with only 
a vail between this and that glorious condition beyond 
the vail. And is it not so that whoever desires to be 
near to the Lord and to those in fellowship with him, 
along the lines of the new nature, will give heed to 
the privileges of showing forth his praise by manifesting 
their love for the brethren and their confidence and 
faith in the Lord and in his light and wisdom and love? 

"ENTER INTO HIS GATES WITH THANKSGIVING" 

In some respects the City of God is the Church- 
not the nominal system, but the true Church, whose 
"names are written in heaven." According to the 
Apostle the justified believers can enter into this City 
only by consecration. The Apostle exhorts, "I beseech 
you, brethren, present your bodies a living sacrifice." 
There are some who seem to enter this gateway of sacrifice 
in sorrow and with a measure of regret— with a feeling 
that they are sacrificing too much. They either overestimate 
the things sacrificed or they underestimate the 
things which they are securing. It would have been 
better for such if they had sat down and counted the 
cost before taking the step of consecration. The proper 
attitude of all is to take a right view of that which 
now is and that which is to come and what we have 
contracted to do as priests, doing it, then, joyfully. 
And thus this lesson is learned, that we "Enter into 
his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with 
praise." The appreciative child of God will be able to 
"count it all joy" when he falls into various difficulties, 

R4260 : page 311 

because it will be a trial of his faith that "Tribulation 
worketh patience; and patience, experience; and experience, 
hope," which maketh not ashamed and is a 
preparation for the glories of the Kingdom. 



R4262: page 311 

SWEET DAY OF REST 

(Tune: Saved By Grace) 

I know some day my Lord will come, 
And stand within my humble home; 
His glorious presence in the room 
Will make it like a rose in bloom. 

CHO.— Then haste, Oh! hasten, day of rest, 
When I shall be forever blest! 

His voice, like music on my ear, 
Will banish every thought of fear; 
He'll fold me closely to his breast, 
And there in peace I'll sweetly rest. 

And oh, my Lord, on that sweet day, 
I know the words that thou wilt say: 
"It is enough, my child, come home, 
Thy work is done, beloved, come." 

Then I'll arise and go with thee, 
Across the shining, crystal sea, 
Until we reach that blissful shore, 
Where we shall dwell for evermore. 

G. W. Seibert. 



R4260 : page 3 1 1 

THERE HAS NOT FAILED ONE PROMISE 

--ICHRON. 17:l-14.-OCTOBER 11.- 

Golden Text:— "There hath not failed one word 
of all his good promise."— 1 Kings 8:56. 

KING DAVID prospered under the Lord's blessing, 
and he established Israel's kingdom upon a 
good footing, which assured peace and respect 
from the surrounding nations. Living now in a palace 
in Jerusalem, with the tabernacle of divine service near 
by, the king bethought him of the incongruity of his 
living in a grander house than that of his God, and of 
the fact that the heathen built temples for their idols. 
The Prophet Nathan was a friend and close counselor 
of the king, and to him David made known his thought 
of building a temple. Possibly he had the suspicion 
that such an innovation might not be proper and that 



he would do well to have counsel on the subject. Doubtless 
the lesson of Uzzah made him more careful respecting 
everything purposed or done in connection with the 
tabernacle and its services. To the prophet the suggestion 
seemed a good one, reverential, proper. He 
endorsed it, saying, "God is with thee," therefore doubtless 
he will prosper you in this good thought in respect 
to this generous impulse of your heart. 

God was doubtless pleased also with David's 
reverent devotion. Nevertheless he disapproved the 
scheme and sent to the king a message by the mouth of 
the prophet, "Thou shalt not build me an house." Here 
again we are to notice that "obedience is better than 
sacrifice" in God's sight. God is not dependent upon 
the thoughtfulness nor the negligence of mankind in 
respect to his arrangements, but takes an oversight. 
It was not the part of the divine programme that David 
should build the tabernacle, but that his son Solomon 
should do so. David and Solomon and their surroundings 
were to constitute types of glorious things to come 
later pertaining to the antitypical David and his Kingdom. 
In I Chron. 22:8 and 28:3 a reason is given why 
David should not be the builder of the temple. He was 
a man of experience in fighting enemies of the Lord, 

R4261 : page 311 

and his people should serve to typify the battling of 
Christ and the Church while in the flesh. Solomon's 
kingdom of glory and riches and honor and peace would 
serve to illustrate better the Millennial Kingdom of the 
Christ in glory. 

"THE LORD WILL BUILD THEE AN HOUSE" 

The Lord explained through the prophet that he 
had never wished a temple— had never given a command 
to that effect— that this was a matter of his own 
choice and not neglect upon the part of the Israelites 
during the centuries since the Lord had established his 
presence with them at Mount Sinai. Then, as though 
to console David and to assure him that God appreciated 
his good intentions, the prophet was directed to 
recite the evidences of divine care and supervision of 
the king's affairs— that God had taken him from the 
shepherd's position and made him a prince and leader 
of his people, conquering his enemies before him. He 
assured him that such a blessing would continue with 
him until his name should be known amongst the great 
of earth. Prophetically the Lord declared also a blessing 
for Israel, when they should be no more oppressed 
nor scattered by their enemies. That prophecy had a 
temporary fulfilment under David and Solomon, but is 
to have its real accomplishment under the Kingdom of 
God's dear Son. 

Proceeding (I Chron. 17:10) the Lord assures David 



that he would build a house for him— that is to say, 
that he would not cut his family off from the throne, as 
in the case of Saul. The house of David was indeed 
perpetuated through Solomon and continued its dominance 
in Judah for several centuries, but this would not 
completely fulfil the Lord's promise, which, although 
not understood by David, was evidently meant to refer 
expressly to Messiah and his Kingdom. 

One of the familiar titles of our Lord was, "The son 
of David," and this was in harmony with the expectation 
of all Israel— that ultimately Messiah, the Seed of Abraham, 
would come through the seed of David and would 
be the everlasting King. This promise is referred to as 
"The sure mercies of David." It was in accord with 
this expectation of the Jews that our Lord said to them, 
"If Messiah is the son of David, why is he also called 
David's Lord?" where he says, "Sit thou on my right 
hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool." 

Our Lord shows that David thus prophetically declared 
that David's son would be David's Lord or superior. 
"He is the root and offspring of David," through 
whom David and Israel and all the families of the earth 
shall yet be blessed. 

"HE SHALL BUILD ME AN HOUSE AND I WILL ESTABLISH 
HIS THRONE FOREVER. I WILL BE HIS FATHER 
AND HE SHALL BE MY SON"-V. 12 

It will be noticed that these words were primarily 
applicable to Solomon, who did build the typical temple; 
but the weight of the promise belongs to the antitype, 
Christ, the Messiah. He it is who will build the real 

R4261 : page 312 

temple of God in and through which a blessing shall 

proceed to all the families of the earth. It will in the 

highest sense of the word be "an house of prayer unto 

all people." During the Millennial Age, when the glorious 

temple of God, the Church of the living God, shall 

be in the glory of the Kingdom, all prayers to God and 

all blessings from God will pass through that glorified 

temple which, under another figure, Head and Body, is 

referred to as the Mediator between God and men. It 

will be remembered that while King David was not permitted 

to construct the temple he was privileged to 

prepare for it vast treasures of gold, silver, brass, 

precious stones, marbles of various colors, iron and 

wood. 

As it was in David's heart to build the temple, so 
naturally the desire comes to the Lord's people in the 
present time to establish the things of the Lord and his 
Kingdom. Some, anxious to do this, have not taken 
counsel of the prophets of God to know his will, but 
have presumed to build up earthly institutions quite 
contrary to the divine intention as respects this present 



age. Catholicism has built wonderful institutions, 

which it invites the whole world to join. Various denominations 

have erected temples or systems, each of 

which claims to be God's Kingdom, God's temple, but 

the Lord disowns all of these and declares that he is 

now with his people, under temporary conditions tabernacling 

with those who are his wherever they may be 

and not wishing at the present for any such organizations 

as men have supposed. The Apostle expresses 

this when he says, "We who are in this tabernacle do 

groan, being burdened." Our conditions are not fully 

satisfactory, but they are all that the Lord sees best for 

us to have at the present time. 

The Apostle calls the present condition of the Body 
of Christ, "Our Body of humiliation," but he assures us 
that at the second coming of our Lord he will "change 
our vile body" (our ignominious condition) so that it 
may be fashioned properly, as his glorious Body, as 
the glorious temple of the living God. Now is the 
time for gathering the various elements, gold, silver, 
precious stones, etc., which by and by shall constitute 
the Lord's temple. Now is the time, not only for the 
quarrying of the stones, but also for the shaping of 
them for their various positions in the temple of God. 
Now, as the Apostle Peter suggests, "We are living 
stones, to be built together for a habitation of God 
through the spirit." The preparation of the stones 
will continue until eventually all shall be properly fitted 
into the building. We are now under the process of 
shaping, being "made meet (made fit) for the inheritance 
of the saints." All this is being done under the 
present condition of wars and strife and confusion. By 
and by, "Without the sound of a hammer," every stone 
of that glorious structure shall be fitted together, all 
being perfected in heart reckonedly will in the resurrection 
"change" be actually perfected and "changed"; 
as the Apostle says, "Sown in weakness, it is raised in 
power; sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual 
body." 

HIS THRONE FOREVERMORE 

The throne of David and of Solomon was not perpetually 
established. Indeed, as heretofore shown, 
our Lord, according to the flesh, sprung not from Solomon's 
line, but descended from another of David's 
sons. This makes it the more evident that Christ was 
meant by the divine prophecies as the heir of David's 
throne who should establish it forever to a consummation 
—reigning, ruling, blessing, uplifting, bringing it 
into perfect accord with God. This gives us a good 
opportunity of noting how God hides and reveals the 
Truth at the same time and why it is that the "line 
upon line, precept upon precept," is to one flock food, 
refreshing, strength, and to another stumbling-blocks, 
etc., which, according to Higher Criticism, overthrows 



all confidence in the Bible as divine revelation. Thus 
is illustrated the saying that "one man's meat is another 
man's poison." 

How much depends upon the attitude of our 
hearts! We are to "become as little children." Our 
Lord said, "I thank thee, O Father, that thou hast hid 
these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed 
them unto babes; even so, Father, for so it 
seemed good in thy sight." God's people are to learn 
the lesson of trust and patience. 

"God's plans, like lilies pure and white unfold; 

We must not tear the close-shut leaves apart; 

Time will reveal the calyxes of gold." 

"THERE HATH NOT FAILED ONE WORD" 

Our Golden Text is a precious one and fully corroborated 
by every faithful follower of the Lord who has 
had experience in the good way. The difficulty with 
those who have not had this experience is that they 
have not been particular to note the difference between 
God's promises recorded in his Word and the traditions 
of men, which misrepresent the Lord's promises. 
All about us today we see great disputations amongst 
the nominal Church and the impression that God's 
purpose is meeting with disappointment. The thought 
has been prevalent that God designed the various sects 
to build for themselves temples and to bless and convert 
the world. The fact that after eighteen centuries 
the world is far from God and his will far from being 
done on earth as it is done in heaven is most evident; 
and when it is recollected that the number of the heathen, 
according to public statistics, has doubled in the 
last century, it is no wonder that our friends, who think 
that they have been laboring under a divine commission 
to use all their efforts in converting the world, should 
feel disappointed. 

Let us note carefully the promise as it is outlined 
in this lesson, namely, that the Temple of God is not 
to be built in this age and the world is not to be 
blessed now; and the construction of the Temple is 
not to take place until all the stones shall be prepared. 
So the work of blessing all the families of the earth 
through that Temple and its great Head, Priest and 
Prophet, King, Judge and Messiah cannot be accomplished 
until all the stones are prepared and the Temple 
of the Lord, the Church, has been glorified. Let 
us not blame God with a non-fulfilment of our expectations, 
but on the contrary, let us examine the Word and 
assure ourselves that we are not building wood, hay 
and stubble, which will surely be destroyed, but that 
we are building upon the precious promises of the 
Word. From this standpoint all the trials and difficulties, 
all the battling with the world and the Adversary, 
all the adversities coming to ourselves and to others of 
the Lord's consecrated, are but encouraging evidences 



that we are the Lord's and that he is working out for 

R4262: page 312 

us, as well as in us, his good pleasure. With this 
view before our mental vision the Spirit of God witnesses 
with our spirit that we are having exactly the 
experiences which his faithful should expect and that 
all things will work in us for our welfare— because we 
are his— and for the glory of his Kingdom. 

"His love in times past forbids me to think 

He'll leave me at last in trouble to sink." 



R4262: page 313 

"AS BY ONE MAN'S DISOBEDIENCE" 

ONE of our readers inquires how Christ could "appear 
for us," the Church, without appearing for Adam or 
having atoned for him, when Adam was the real 
transgressor and we merely sharers in transgression through 
our relationship to him. 

We reply that the questioner really answers his own 
argument: Adam alone was perfect— Adam alone was placed 
on trial and he alone by disobedience came under a direct 
sentence of death. Of his posterity it was written that we 
were "born in sin and shapen in iniquity." In this imperfect 
condition we were unfit for another trial, as was demonstrated 
by the Jews, who, as a special favor, were put under the Law 
Covenant, which they thought they could keep, and under 
which they expected to gain eternal life. But the Apostle explains 
that under its terms they were condemned to death. 
The same would have been true of all the remainder of mankind 
under similar conditions, but no such conditions were 
either thrust upon or offered to mankind in general. Israel 
alone was put under that Law and is guaranteed a certain 
blessing as a result of the experiences then unsatisfactorily 
endured. Be it noted here that the fact that they were put 
under that special trial, and thus specially condemned, made 
it necessary that they should be redeemed as a nation. Thus 
we read that our Lord was "born under the Law (Covenant) 
that he might redeem them who were under the Law (Covenant)." 
(Gal. 4:5.) Had he been born outside of the Jewish 
nation the redemption of the world in general would have 
been the same as now, but the Jewish nation would not have 
shared it because by their Law Covenant sealed at Sinai 
they were, so to speak, lifted out from the remainder of mankind 
and given a separate trial— as a nation— as the adopted 
family of Moses, their recognized mediator. 

As the Lord could make a conditional covenant with 
natural Israel through Moses, their mediator, so likewise he 
could make a conditional arrangement with Spiritual Israel 
through Christ our Head and Representative. God's arrangement 
with believers during this Gospel Age is by a faith -justification 



of all those who turn from sin and accept Jesus 

as their Redeemer. He "appeared for us" who are of this 

class; he now represents us to the Father, appropriating to 

us the merit of his sacrifice, thereby making it possible for 

those of this "household of faith" who make a full consecration 

of themselves to the Father to be acceptable through 

Christ Jesus, who accepts these consecrated ones as his 

"members in particular"— his Ecclesia, his Church. Their 

acceptance is based upon their covenant to walk in the steps 

of their Redeemer as living sacrifices. Only those who maintain 

this relationship faithfully will attain the heart-likeness 

of their Redeemer and become worthy to be of the "little 

flock," which the Father has predestinated must be individually 

heart-copies of his Son. 

ADAM ONLY WAS CONDEMNED 

So far as the divine program is concerned only the one 
man sinned, only the one man was sentenced to death and 
only the one man Christ Jesus needed to die for the redemption 
and the complete deliverance from death of the whole 
human family. Nevertheless the one sacrifice of Christ would 
be necessary for the delivery of any one man of the whole 
world, because all are imperfect and under the demands of 
Justice none can claim release from death. It follows then 
that our Lord, when he had ascended up on high, had in his 
hand a price sufficient to pay the penalty for any one member 
of the race or for all of them or for as many as he chose 
to apply it for. He did choose, according to the Scriptures, 
to make application of that merit only in behalf of those who 
should believe during this Age— the antitypical Atonement 
Day. As a consequence of that application in "our behalf" 
we who believe have been privileged to return to God's favor 
and to enjoy the opportunity of becoming joint-heirs with our 
Redeemer. 

The divine purpose in the redemption provided was to 
bring a blessing to all the families of the earth— a release 
from sin and death conditions and a return to divine favor 
to all who would be obedient; hence our Lord's work did 
not end with the application of his merit to those who were 
accepted of the Father as members of his Body. Rather the 
sacrifice was allowed to continue on a larger scale— a sacrificing 
of the Church, the members of his Body being counted 
as a continuation and a completion of our Lord's own personal 
sacrifice. When all the members of this great mystical 
Body shall have "suffered with him"— when he as the great 
antitypical High Priest shall have offered up not only himself 
but us, his adopted members, then justice will have all 
that it ever demanded and much more. It will have the one 
great valuable sacrifice of Jesus and additionally the sacrifice 
of his members— 144,000 justified through faith in his 
blood, whose sacrifice the Apostle declares to be in God's 
sight "holy and acceptable."— Rom. 12:1. 

Would it be right for justice to accept 144,001 sacrifices 
when only the one was really demanded? We answer, Yes. 
Justice is not hindered— divine justice would not be stopped 



from receiving all of those sacrifices in the manner arranged. 

Justice could not have demanded more, however, nor accepted 

less, than the one perfect life. We are to remember that none 

of these sacrifices was demanded nor compelled by justice— 

merely a high reward for faithfulness was held out for the 

time. Our Lord was attracted thereby and "For the joy that 

was set before him endured the cross, despising the shame." 

As a matter of fact the divine plan through him opened the 

door of opportunity to others who have his spirit (disposition) 

during this Age, to a limited fore-ordained number, 

which we believe to be 144,000. Their sacrifice was not demanded. 

It was voluntary and because they saw riches of 

grace and divine rewards which they esteemed to be their 

privilege to attain. Thus in the divine plan the world has 

been redeemed much less directly than we may have imagined, 

but much to our advantage, in that it has permitted us to become 

members of the Bride Class, members of the Body of 

the Great Mediator, whose work throughout the Millennial 

Age will be that of Intercessor and Go-between and Mediator 

between God and men— the world in general. We, who 

now come in under this arrangement as members of the Body, 

members of the "Seed of Abraham," members of the Great 

Antitypical Mediator, Prophet, Priest, King, Judge, are as his 

members under his supervision yielding up our lives in sacrifice 

during this Age, and these sacrificed lives counted in 

with his constitute the blood of The Christ, which seals the 

New Covenant between God and the world. That New Covenant 

will not be sealed until all the blood of the Great 

Mediator has been shed. Then Head and Body, Bridegroom 

and Bride, we shall be presented before the Father and the 

blood of the Great Christ, as shown in the types of Leviticus, 

will then avail for the cancellation of the world's sin, even 

as the blood of Jesus now avails for our sins. 

R4263 : page 314 

Meantime in advance of the sealing of that New Covenant 
Jesus and all the members of his Body are "able ministers 
of the New Covenant"— qualified ministers or servants- 
qualified to offer the necessary sacrifice— qualified to represent 
God and to tell to those who have the ear to hear the 
terms and conditions of that New Covenant of the future 
and the terms and conditions by which we become its ministers 
or servants and ambassadors for God and of his 
righteousness, which the New Covenant will introduce to mankind 
in general. 

THE LAST FIRST-THE FIRST LAST 

Coming back then to the original question we remind 
all that the Apostle shows that "We are all sinners"— that 
"the whole world is guilty before God," not in the sense that 
each has been tried and sentenced, but in the sense that all 
have inherited weaknesses and imperfections which would 
prove them guilty and bring upon them condemnation if 
they were put upon trial at the present time. Hence, instead 



of putting mankind on trial, as Adam was on trial before the 
bar of divine justice, God has arranged the Millennial Age 
as the period in which the whole world shall be instructed, 
enlightened, corrected in righteousness and helped out of 
their sins and death conditions back to perfection, if they 
will. During the Millennium none will be on trial before the 
bar of divine justice. Indeed, as the Apostle suggests, it 
would be "a fearful thing" for any to drop out of the hands 
of Christ into the hands of the living God, because the divine 
provision for mercy and forgiveness is all in Christ. Hence 
there is no salvation through any other name nor in any 
other way than by faith in and obedience to the Great 
Mediator. 

But it is in no sense necessary that this work of reclaiming 
the race should begin in Adam— quite to the contrary, 
the last will be first and the first last, so far as the divine 
arrangement is revealed. Adam, who enjoyed 930 years of 
experience, will be amongst the last if not the very last to be 
awakened from the tomb and to be tested as respects his 
willingness hereafter to be in harmony with the divine program 
in every detail. Not until the close of the Millennial 
Age will Adam and his race be turned over to the Father. 
They will then "fall into the hands of the living God" without 
injury because the Mediator will have previously brought 
them to full perfection of mind and body— all the unwilling 
and disobedient and refractory being destroyed in the Second 
Death throughout the Millennial years. But naturally and 
properly at the close of the Millennium the Kingdom shall 
be delivered up to God, even the Father. (1 Cor. 15:23-27.) 
Then the first work of the Father with these will be to test 
their loyalty as he tested father Adam in the beginning. 
Whichever of these shall sin after having had the experiences 
of the fall and the recovery will not only be condemned to 
death, but that death will be a finality. "Christ dieth no 
more." No provision has been made but by the one Redemption 
and one Restitution. 



R4263 : page 314 

WHAT THE WORD VOW SIGNIFIES 

IT seems evident that a few ordinarily bright brethren 
have missed their education as respects the meaning 
of the word "Vow"; or else, that our great Adversary, 
opposed to the Vow recently suggested in these 
columns, is using every means to confuse their minds, 
to disorder their judgment in respect to it. The said 
few appear to be awfully distressed by the Vow and 
protest vociferously against it, against those who take 
it, and against the Editor for advising it. Their arguments 
are amusing, ridiculous and self-contradictory; 
but with all their brightness these brethren fail to see 
this. We pray for them a still wider opening of the 
eyes of their understanding, and in harmony with our 



prayers we proceed to discuss this subject, condescending 
to details which should be quite unnecessary; our 
excuse is, love for the brethren, and a clear realization 
that they are taking a wrong stand, supporting a wrong 
standard, and overlooking the fact that there are but 
two Princes or Leaders— the Prince of Light and the 
Prince of Darkness. 

The Vow suggested had a small beginning, but the 
Lord's providence led up to its general presentation to 
the Church and our advice that all of the consecrated 
of the Lord's people take the Vow— not as a new consecration 
but as bringing their original consecration up-to-date 
—as drawing tighter the girdle of consecration 
which holds to us our bridal garment and "girds up the 
loins of our minds," making us the more ready and the 
more strong from day to day in the fight of this "evil 
day." It may be helpful to some to be informed regarding 
the leadings of the Lord in respect to this Vow. 
Hence we will state the matter briefly: 

Some of the dear friends naturally and properly are 
very jealous of the Truth and of the influence and 
reputation of those who represent it— especially the 
"PILGRIMS," all of whom should be noble characters, 
and, we believe, are such— of far higher than average 
standing amongst Christians and ministers. We may 
add here that we exercise a great deal of care in the 
selection of these representatives of the Society serving 
the Lord's work— that they shall be moral men, consecrated 
saints, humble, clear in the Truth, and of some 
ability in its presentation. 

The Pilgrim service during the last year has been 
represented by some twenty-five men of this stamp, and 
our confidence in them is represented by our endorsement 
and appointment of them to the service of the 
Truth. However, we received from dear Christian 
friends criticisms applying to several of these dear 
Pilgrims, not criminal, not sinful, but suggestions that 
they should be warned to be still more discreet toward 
the opposite sex, more careful than other ministers, 
since the Truth and its servants are looked upon most 
critically, often maliciously. These letters, received 
with appreciation, we acknowledged, assuring the dear 
friends that it is our desire that all who bear the vessels 
of the Lord's House in connection with the service of 
the Present Truth, should not only speak and think 
along the highest planes but in conduct also should be 
"blameless"; and that we were sure that no evil was in 
any way intended, and that our bringing the matter to 
the attention of the Pilgrims would be all that was 
necessary. 

The fact is that those who receive the Truth in the 
spirit of it feel a warmer affection for each other than 
could result from any earthly relationship. It is not 
our thought that this spiritual oneness is wrong or that 
it should be set aside or quenched. It is indeed the 
spirit of Christ in the members of his Body. We do 



think, however, that outsiders cannot understand this, 

R4263 : page 315 

and hence that the deportment and language and letters 
between the friends should be so seasoned with grace 
and wisdom that our most critical opponents would 
pronounce them "blameless." Furthermore we do not 
forget that the Lord's people, "new creatures in Christ 
Jesus," have "this treasure in earthen vessels," all of 
which are more or less imperfect through the fall. We 
have learned that some are weaker in one respect and 
others in another and hence, as the Apostle says, "We 
that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak 
and not to please ourselves." (Rom. 15:1.) Hence our 
true love for others of the Lord's people ought to produce 
in us great self-restraint and uprightness lest we 
injure the weaker, of whose weakness we properly may 
not know. These undisputed facts should appeal to all 
of the Lord's saints in favor of self-restraint to the last 
degree. 

As an illustration of the unwisdom complained of 
we cite one instance which may be as instructive to 
others as it was to ourself. A noble brother in the 
Truth came to us saying, "Brother Russell, do you approve 
of the Pilgrims kissing the sisters? I was much 
shocked to see one kiss a sister." We replied, No, 
Brother! While we find no mention in the Scriptures 
that kissing would be a sin, we do feel that for the Pilgrims 
to practice such familiarity would be to lower 
their influence and endanger the interests of the Truth. 
Did you speak to the Pilgrim on the subject according 
to Matt. 18:15? He answered, "I did do so, but thought 
that as the Pilgrim represented the Society it was my 
duty also to mention the matter to you as its representative" 
—relating the circumstance. We replied, I assure 
you, dear Brother, that the Pilgrim you name is a very 
honorable man, and the kiss was surely not thought of 
by him as anything either sinful or impure. But I am 
glad that you are so particular, and I am sure that when 
I call the matter to the Pilgrim's attention he will fully 
agree to the unwisdom of the course, however pure his 
motives. The Brother replied, "Yes, the Pilgrim told 
me that the Sister was one with whom he had been very 
intimately acquainted for a long time, and that his kiss 
was merely a greeting. I accepted his statement of the 
matter, Brother Russell, though I cannot understand it, 
for I assure you that I could not have given the kiss 
without improper feeling." 

That statement was a revelation. Our mental cogitation 
was, How differently people are constituted. 
One might kiss a thousand without an impure thought 
or sentiment; another would be injured by a single 
kiss. We realized, as never before, how careful the 
Lord's people should be to lift all of our standards high 
enough to protect the very weakest, and to avoid everything 



that might have even the appearance of evil. We 

saw at once how a kiss that to one person would be as 

innocent as the shaking of hands might to another be 

a very different matter. This thought helped us to appreciate 

why some regard kissing as representing an 

impurity, whereas others, differently constituted, would 

R4264: page 315 

never think of such a thing except by such a lesson as 
this. Another lesson we drew was on the danger of 
misjudging one another. "With what judgment ye 
judge, ye shall be judged." 

Not long after this, meditating on all these facts, 
and calling to mind as well that our own conduct had 
been evil-spoken of, we thought up the Vow for ourself 
and for one Pilgrim specially needing it, and later 
thought of its value for all of the dear Pilgrims. Another 
matter which influenced us in the preparation of the Vow 
was the general view the Lord seemed lately to have been 
giving us respecting the peculiar trials, difficulties, besetments 
of the last seven years of the Harvest period and 
the accumulating evidences that during this time Satan 
and all of the fallen angels will be permitted of the Lord 
in various ways to assault the whole world along the lines 
of Spiritism, Hypnotism, Occultism, etc., the general 
tendency of all which will be to lead to gross immoralities. 
We said to ourself, Surely we are in the special 
time foretold by the Word of God as the "Hour of temptation," 
"That evil day," etc., in which, "if it were possible, 
the very elect would be deceived"; and in which 
surely "Every man's work shall be tried so as by fire." 
(I Cor. 3:13.) The Spirit of the Lord said to us through 
these Scriptures, and this mental picture of things at 
the time before us, It will surely behoove every child of 
God, and especially every public minister of the Truth, 
to look well to the straightness of his paths and to walk 
in extreme circumspection. It was under these influences 
that we prepared the Vow, as representing a 
very high standard of Christian living. 

We had it written out in duplicate, and sent copies 
to all the Pilgrims just before our journey to Britain, 
at the time having no thought of publishing anything 
respecting it. Later on we reflected that if the dear 
friends who had written us in criticism of some of the 
brethren could know of the Vow and perceive how the 
slightest indiscretion, either real or apparent, would be 
guarded against by it, they would have an increased 
confidence in every member of the Pilgrim force. 
We concluded for this reason to publish the Vow and to 
give the names of those who had made it their Vow to 
the Lord. 

Just at this time we received Brother Hollister's 
letter referring to a carelessness between brothers and 
sisters in their greeting, which was sometimes so genuine 
and hearty as to be liable to be misunderstood by 



others of the Church and by the world. Believing that 
the time is ripe for such a stand and the exhibition of a 
high standard, we published that letter with our approval 
and comments as introductory to the submitting of the 
Vow and the names of the Pilgrims taking it. After the 
matter was in type, but before it went to press, we got 
a letter from a Colporteur brother and Church Elder, 
who said he had seen a copy of the Vow in possession 
of a Pilgrim, told of his appreciation of it, and 
that he at once made it his own before the Lord. 
We took this as a hint from the Lord, for it appealed to 
our judgment as representing his Will— then, on the 
proof-sheet we added the suggestion that all Colporteurs 
take the Vow and all Elders and Deacons of Churches. A 
little later came the thought, "Are not all of the Lord's 
people representatives of God, who are offering sacrifices 
—his ambassadors and ministers of the Truth? 
And would not this Vow prove a blessing and assistance 
to all, male and female?" Our judgment of the Lord's 
Will confirmed the thought, and thus the matter reached 
you in the June 15th TOWER. 

The suggestion was not that you take this Vow to 
us or to each other, but that you make the Vow to the 
Lord, and that we would be glad to know of the step 
having been taken and to have a word to that effect 
from any pleased to inform us. The promptness 
of the responses and the assurances from many of increased 
blessing in their hearts and nearness to the 
Lord have convinced us that the Lord guided in respect 
to the preparation and circulation of that Vow. Likewise 
a small but vigorous opposition to the Vow, and a 

R4264: page 316 

desire to fight it and to hinder some from taking it, 

suggests to our minds that the Adversary is displeased 

with the course we have taken and that he is more or 

less blinding and, we fear, stumbling a few and, to 

some extent, suggesting and putting before their minds 

light as darkness and darkness as light. Indications 

are that the Adversary will make this a case of sifting 

amongst the consecrated. Of course none but the consecrated 

can take the Vow, hence a considerable number 

in sympathy with it but not consecrated may be disinclined 

to take it; but we warn them that while it is 

entirely proper for them to count the cost and decide 

on their own course of action, they will, by opposing it, 

get under the wrong banner and in support of the wrong 

Prince and be thereby injured. 

THE STANDARD DICTIONARY'S DEFINITION 

To vow is (1) to promise solemnly; especially to 
promise to God. (2) To declare with assurance or 
solemnity; to aver; to avow. 

The noun vow is thus defined: (1) A solemn promise 



to God. (2) A solemn engagement to adopt a certain 
course in life, pursue some aim, observe some moral 
precept or surrender one's self to a higher life of holiness; 

(3) also a pledge of faithfulness as marriage vows; 

(4) a solemn and emphatic affirmation. 

As showing the confusion of thought on the subject 
we remark that some have endeavored to set forth that 
a vow is an oath and hence that our Lord Jesus prohibited 
making of vows when he said, "Swear not at 
all." Nothing can be farther from the truth. In that 
very connection our Lord was saying, "Let your Yea be 
Yea; and your Nay, Nay; for whatever is more than 
these cometh of evil." A vow is merely a Yea or a positive 
affirmation. A vow is not to be sworn to, for that 
the Lord prohibits. The vows of his people are to be as 
sure and truthful as though backed by an oath. 

Another brother writes us, "If the Vow were published 
as a resolution I would have no objection to it 
whatever in any way, and would be most happy to be 
enrolled in the list of resolution-takers." The Vow is a 
resolution, not to one's self, but to the Lord. Note in 
the above definitions the Synonyms— promise, declare, 
engagement, affirmation. A vow is a covenant. But 
the term covenant is not as favorable and does not express 
the matter as thoroughly as the word vow; because 
the term covenant is generally used as respects 
a matter having two parts, a giving and a receiving, 
dependent one upon the other; as for instance, in business 
a firm covenants or contracts to ship goods of such 
a quality and kind at such a time, in consideration of 
such a price to be paid for them. 

Thus, also, the New Covenant between God and 
men has requirements on both sides, and The Christ, 
the Mediator, stands good as the intermediate to guarantee 
both sides of that covenant. There is one covenant, 
however, which corresponds exactly to a vow, 
namely, the Abrahamic Covenant, because it is a one-sided 
covenant. In it God made all the promises and 
made no condition, and hence no mediator was needed 
for it. In a word God vowed that, in Abraham and 
through Abraham's seed all the families of the earth 
would ultimately receive a blessing. No conditions are 
mentioned. It is a definite agreement. In addition to 
the vow God bound it with an oath, which definitely 
shows that a vow and an oath are two separate and 
distinct things. 

The Vow which many of us have taken and which 
we earnestly recommend to all, is a statement to the 
Lord of our willingness and determination by his assisting 
grace to follow a certain course of conduct, which, 
we believe, will be pleasing to him and advantageous 
to ourselves and to others. Surely the eyes of misunderstanding 
which see everything amiss in such a 
course are crossed by prejudice or ignorance or some 
element of darkness. 



THE WATCH TOWER IN OPPOSITION 

Here we are met with the astounding proposition 
that ZION'S WATCH TOWER has always opposed vows. 
One dear Brother has sent us six pages of quotations, 
but his quotations are all wrong because misapplied. 
The WATCH TOWER never had a word to say against 
the making of vows to the Lord. On the contrary, it 
has urged that they be made, and has declared that 
none could expect to receive the holy Spirit and be begotten 
thereby to a new nature unless he first vowed to 
the Lord a full surrender and full submission of himself, 
"Even unto death." Similarly the Apostle Paul 
urged the same vow, saying, "I beseech you therefore, 
brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your 
body a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which 
is your reasonable service." The Apostle did not mean 
that we were to go to heaven and there give our bodies 
to the Lord, but he did mean that by some vows we 
should consecrate our earthly talents, powers, privileges, 
opportunities to the service of the Lord. Does 
not the Apostle urge the Baptismal Vow and show its 
necessity, saying, "So many of you as were baptized 
into Jesus Christ were baptized into his death?" (Rom. 6:3.) 
What is this but the urging of the Vow, the consecration 
vow? When the Apostle wrote, "If we be dead 
with him we shall also live with him," and again, that 
we should "bring into captivity every thought of our 
minds in obedience to Christ," was he not in these and 
in all his various public writings urging the fulfilment 
of our consecration vows, our baptismal vows? 

What we have opposed in the nature of vows are 
those which are the most common amongst men and 
amongst professing Christians— namely vows to one 
another. In these, we believe, there lurks a great 
danger to Christian liberty. Presbyterians vow to each 
other to support and uphold their profession of faith 
and church organization. Methodists do similarly and 

R4265 : page 316 

so do all denominations and secret orders of all kinds. 
These vows are injurious because they are not on the 
proper basis. All our covenants or vows should be 
made with the Lord. Our responsibility should be 
realized to him and not to men. "Pay thy vows unto 
the Most High."-Psa. 50:14. 

There is one exception to these vows made to our 
fellow-creatures which we have never opposed, but upheld, 
namely, the marriage vow, by which each member 
of a married couple binds himself for life to the other. 

Following the custom of our Lord and the apostles 
throughout the New Testament we quote from the Old 
Testament Scriptures on the subject of vows. As the 
Prophet David frequently represented The Christ, Head 
and Body, so his vows represented those of Christ and 



the Church. In one sense our vows may be considered 

from two different standpoints: (1) That we will put 

off the old man with his affections and desires, and (2) 

that we will put on the new man, which is renewed in 

righteousness. We may divide this vow or covenant or 

engagement into several more; as the Apostle says, 

"Put off all these: anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy, 

strife; and put on all these: kindness, meekness, long-suffering 

love." 

R4265 : page 317 

Every spirit-begotten child of God has surely vowed 
all these vows and others, whether he thinks of them in 
this itemized form or not. We perhaps more frequently 
speak of the entire transaction as one— as our Consecration 
Vow, our Baptismal Vow; because this vow 
takes in and includes everything that we have and are 
or shall have or possess— even unto death. The vow of 
the Christian in response to the Apostle's appeal, "Present 
your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to 
God, which is your reasonable service," is all-comprehensive. 
In it he gives away every right, every liberty, 
every choice, and agrees with the Lord that his own 
will shall be dead and the divine will accepted in every 
affair of life and in respect to all his words and thoughts 
and doings. Thus we see that a Christian, as the 
Apostle has expressed it, is a bond-slave in the most 
absolute sense. No slave could have less rights, less 
freedom, since these are pledged to the extent of ability 
to bring even the very thoughts of their hearts into 
conformity to the will of their Master. 

In view of the foregoing, it can readily be seen that 
the Vow we have suggested, if in line with this, is really 
a part of it and merely stated afresh for emphasis, to 
bring the matter up-to-date, and to impress it upon our 
minds. If it can be shown that the items recited are a 
"reasonable service," that the doing of them would glorify 
our Father and our Lord, that they would be helpful to 
others of the household of faith or to ourselves, then we 
are bound to take this Vow— all consecrated Christians 
would be bound to take it, so soon as they should perceive 
in it the qualities specified. For such to fail to 
take it would be for them to fail to keep their Baptismal 
Vow. And they would be bound to announce the Vow 
publicly if convinced that the announcement of it would 
be helpful to others or to themselves. 

AN ANALYSIS OF THE VOW 

Let us make no mistake. Let us not deceive ourselves 
nor others. If we have any objection to the Vow 
let us not deceive ourselves as to what it is and what it 
is not. It is a prime requisite of a Christian that he be 
honest, that he deceive not himself and that he understand 
that his Creator cannot be deceived. The Vow 



naturally divides itself into several parts, which, for 
convenience, we will number, and as we read these let 
us jot down which of them we object to— which of them 
is in opposition to the Scriptures— which of them would 
be dishonorable to God or injurious to ourselves or to 
others. 

(1) Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be 
thy name. May thy rule come into my heart more and 
more, and thy will be done in my mortal body. Relying 
on the assistance of thy promised grace to help in 
every time of need, through Jesus Christ our Lord, I 
register this Vow. 

(2) Daily will I remember at the throne of heavenly 
grace the general interests of the harvest work, and 
particularly the share which I myself am privileged to 
enjoy in that work, and the dear co-laborers at the 
Bible House at Allegheny and everywhere. 

(3) I vow to still more carefully, if possible, scrutinize 
my thoughts and words and doings, to the intent 

that I may be the better enabled to serve thee, and thy 
dear flock. 

(4) I vow to thee that I will be on the alert to resist 
everything akin to Spiritism and Occultism, and 

that remembering that there are but the two masters, I 
shall resist these snares in all reasonable ways, as being 
of the Adversary. 

(5) I further vow that, with the exceptions below, 

I will at all times and in all places, conduct myself towards 
those of the opposite sex in private exactly as I 
would do with them in public— in the presence of a 
congregation of the Lord's people. 

(6) And so far as reasonably possible I will avoid 
being in the same room with any of the opposite sex 
alone, unless the door to the room stand wide open. 

(7) Exceptions in the case of Brethren: wife, 
children, mother and natural sisters. In the case of 
Sisters: husband, children, father and natural brothers. 

OTHER OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED 

One brother says, "I cannot take that vow. I am 
afraid that I cannot keep it." We ask which part of it 
could a consecrated child of God not keep, if he is keeping 
his Baptismal Vow and hopes to hear the Master 
say, "Well done, good and faithful servant, enter thou 
into the joy of thy Lord." "Another says, I do not need 
the Vow." The dear brother who has this opinion is 
mistaken. He is the very one who does need it. The 
Apostle carries this thought when he says of himself, 
"When I am weak, then I am strong"; for by antithesis 
when one feels strong and self-confident and needing 
no assistance he is then weak. Indeed, we have come 
to the conclusion that nearly as many fail on their 
strong points as on their weak ones, because, less on 
guard in respect to them, they are the more easily entrapped 
by the Adversary. 



Another writes that we should not force the Vow 
upon the Church. We have not done so, nor shall we 
do so. We have neither authority nor wish to do so. 
A vow made under compulsion would not be of any advantage, 
but on the contrary, an injury. We have commended 
this Vow because it is part and parcel of our 
original Baptismal Vow— a re-statement of it, brought 
up-to-date with a view of stirring our pure minds by way 
of remembrance. The fact that there is any opposition 
engendered by it is an evidence that some had forgotten 
their comprehensive Baptismal Vow. We have the 
Apostle's word as our justification for urging this Vow, 
and in his language will say that "We beseech you, 
therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present 
your body a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto 
God, which is your reasonable service."— Rom. 12:1. 

If any Scripture can be quoted against the Vow in 
any one of its seven items, we will be glad to have it 
brought to our attention. One brother quotes a 
Scripture against the Vow and fails to see that it is in 
harmony with it and against him. It is Prov. 20:25. 
"It is a snare for a man to devour that which is holy, 
and after vows to make inquiry." The brother who 
offers this as an objection claims to have already made 
the all-comprehensive Baptismal Vow. He thus devoured 
that which is holy, and is only now making inquiry 
about it, and surprised to see that the portion we 
have suggested as bringing it up-to-date was not understood 
by him, not comprehended. He is at the present 
only making inquiry, only informing himself in respect 
to his original vow of twenty-five years ago. No wonder 
if this matter prove a snare to him, as the proverb says 
—not by setting him wrong and out of harmony with 
his original vow, but by showing that he is wrong and 
has been wrong and out of accord with it until now. 
It would be a blessing to that brother if he would make 
thorough inquiry now and register afresh this consecration 
vow. If he made the vow and now makes inquiry 
about it, and finds it greater and more comprehensive 
than he at first supposed, let him not break it, but 
thank God, and resolve in the language of the Psalmist, 
"I will pay my vows unto the Most High."— Psa. 50:14. 
Now a word to such, from the wise king. "When thou 
vowest a vow unto God defer not to pay it; for he hath 
no pleasure in fools; pay that which thou hast vowed. 
Better it is that thou shouldst not vow than that thou 
shouldst vow and not pay."— Eccl. 5:4,5. 

R4265 : page 318 

LIFT UP A STANDARD FOR THE PEOPLE 

In Isaiah's prophecy we read, "When the enemy 
shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall 
lift up a standard against him. And the Redeemer 
shall come to Zion and unto them that turn from transgression 



in Jacob, saith the Lord."-Isa. 59:19,20. 

The context, for instance verses 17,18, distinctly 
describe the time in which we are living and the years 
of trouble before us; and in our judgment the Lord has 
guided, at this due time, to the lifting of this Vow 
amongst his people as a high standard for them, for 
their protection. 

Our 1909 motto will be, "My Help Cometh from the 
Lord." This help comes to us now; primarily through 
the death of our Lord; secondarily through our becoming 
his disciples and sharing his death. And this Vow 
is emphasizing this covenant to death and drawing to 
our attention some of the snares of the Adversary. It 
will surely prove a valuable aid to all who are seeking 
to make their calling and election sure. 

R4266 : page 318 

We notice that this text is variously rendered in the 
different translations, but the one furnished in our Common 
Version seems to fit all the conditions better than 
any of the others. The stress of difference affects the 
word "standard." The Hebrew word is defined by 
Young's lexicon— "To cause to flee, lift up an ensign." 
Strong's lexicon amongst other definitions gives, "To 
be displayed, make to flee, put to flight, lift up a 
standard." 

The Revised Version renders it, "For he shall come 
as a rushing stream which the breath of the Lord 
driveth." 

Leeser's translation reads, "For there shall come 
distress like a stream which the spirit of the Lord urges 
forward." 

Young's translation renders it, "When come in as a 
flood doth an Adversary, the spirit of Jehovah hath 
raised an ensign against him." 

On the whole we decidedly prefer the reading of 
our Common Version, and note its harmony with the 
statement of the Prophet a little further on, "Go through, 
go through the gates; prepare ye the way of the people; 
cast up the highway; gather out the stones; lift up a 
standard for the people." (Isa. 62:10.) Whether these 
Scriptures refer to the Vow now lifted up as a standard 
amongst the consecrated, or whether they refer to something 
else, none can dispute the fact that the Vow represents 
a very high standard of Christian living, which 
few would have the courage to attack as in any sense 
of the word injurious. 

We decidedly urge the Lord's people on to victory 
as overcomers of the world, the flesh and the Adversary. 
Enrolled as soldiers of the cross we recognize this high 
standard as of the Lord's providence. Nevertheless, 
let not an unkind word or reflection be uttered against 
any who temporarily or permanently may be unable to 
see the standard or be fearful to accept it as a part of 
their vow to the Most High. It is not for us to judge 



one another in connection with the Vow or otherwise, 
but for us to seek to assist and encourage one another 
in every way possible. It is written, "The Lord will 
judge his people." 

PUBLISHING THE NAMES OF VOWERS 

A few have objected to the publication of the names 
of the vowers, but only one of these has notified us that 
he has taken the Vow. True, we very rarely publish 
any names, but this is not because there would be 
anything wrong in our keeping, for instance, a list of 
those declaring their Baptismal Vows. On the contrary, 
it might frequently be a very convenient list to have. 
It, however, would not claim to represent all of God's 
people nor that all on the list would come off victorious. 
So with those who take this Vow and whose names appear 
on our list. The name there will in no sense imply 
that the victory has been won, but merely that these 
persons have taken this solemn Vow; and that all their 
Church brethren and the world and their families may 
know just where they stand, and see this high standard 
they lift up, under the present conditions of distress, 
before themselves and each other and the people. The 
list, however, will not purport to be a list of the "little 
flock." Oh no! Far be it from us to draw the line or 
to judge our brethren. 

Nothing in the Scriptures intimates that our vow to 
the Lord must be kept secret. Indeed our Baptismal 
Vow we are required to symbolize or profess publicly. 
To the contrary, also, David, in one of the Messianic 
Psalms in which he prophetically speaks for Christ, 
says, "I will declare thy name amongst my brethren. 
In the midst of the congregation will I praise thee," and 
adds, "My praise shall be of thee in the great congregation: 
I will pay my vows before them that fear him." 
(Psa. 22:25.) In Psalm 116 the prophet twice declares 
that his vows shall be made public, saying: 

"What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits 
toward me? I will take the cup of salvation, 
and call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my 
vows unto the Lord, now, in the presence of all his 
people." And as though the vow referred to symbolized 
death to self and the world, as well as to sin, the Prophet 
continues, "Precious in the sight of the Lord is the 
death of his saints"— his holy ones. (Psa. 116:14,15-18.) 
Again he says, "In God have I put my trust: I will not 
be afraid what man can do unto me. Thy vows are upon 
me, O God: I will render praise unto thee. For thou 
hast delivered my soul from death; wilt thou not deliver 
my feet from falling?"— Psa. 56:11-13. 

However, dear friends, in the interest of these 
brethren whom it would offend let us forego the publishing 
of these names, at least until the necessity for so 
doing is more apparent. Take the Vow, solemnly, to 
the Lord, and live it every word and every day. It will 



surely draw you closer to the Lord to exercise such a 
scrutiny of every act and word and thought. It will 
help you to realize what it is to dwell in the secret place 
of the Most High, and under the shadow of the Almighty. 
No harm can come nigh that dwelling place. 

Continue to advise us, if you please, when you take the 
Vow. We will preserve an alphabetical list which may 
be of some use some time. 



R4266 : page 318 

"WHAT SPIRIT YE ARE OF" 



THE number of the Brethren who have expressed opposition 
to the Vow as already stated is small, but they 
have ability and influence. The virulence of their 
opposition has amazed us. Never have we been more deeply 
stabbed and "wounded in the house of our friends"— by some 
whom we still esteem and love as dear brethren and who still 
declare their love for us. 

One writes (A) that he perceives that the Editor has "a 
lying, evil spirit," because in the September 15th TOWER we 
said that the few brethren who had expressed to us their opposition 
to the Vow were all married men, while he thinks 
that one unmarried man wrote in opposition to the Vow. Our 
reply is, that we do not recall the letter; possibly it was 
couched in such terms that we did not consider it as OPPOSITION 
TO THE VOW, but merely a declaration of why the writer 
thought best not to make the Vow his own. But in any event, 
suppose this brother were wholly right and we wholly in error, 
suppose we thus demonstrated that our memory is not infallible, 
would that prove that the Editor is obsessed of a lying 
devil? Are all people of defective memory possessed by lying 
devils? We never so thought, nor do we now. This brother 
objects, too, that the same article urges "If in your judgment 
no 'evil day,' no 'hour of temptation,' no 'strange work,' no 
'strong delusion' is impending, you should be wise enough and 
kind enough not to oppose those who do so believe and who 
are getting ready for the same." This statement, he insists, 

R4266 : page 319 

is a further evidence that we have "a lying, evil spirit." He 
intimates that he does believe that serious trouble is impending. 
Alas! that our poor brains should become so confused. 
Let us take an illustration. Suppose a crowd of people on 
and close to a railroad track, and that some realized and 
others did not, that an express train was almost due. Suppose 
that one hearing the whistle and realizing the danger 
urged all to clear the track, and to go no closer than five 
feet to be out of danger. Suppose another like (A) took 
offense at the announcement and claimed that it should not 
have been made. Surely the one giving the alarm would be 
justified in adopting our very words, "If in your judgment no 



train is approaching and there is no danger at hand justifying 
our warning and advice, you should be wise enough and 
kind enough not to hinder those who do so believe and who 
are striving to get out of danger." 

Another dear brother (B), denouncing the Vow, tells us 
that he knows that it is of the devil, etc. He then tells us 
that he knows he is all right, is one of the elect soon to judge 
the world, and that he is conscious of the Lord's favor and 
blessing upon him now. Finally, he threatens us that if we 
do not recant and contradict what we have already set forth 
on the Vow subject, he will do terrible things and teach us 
a lesson we will never forget. 

We thanked the dear brother and expressed confidence 
in his conscientiousness, but declined to allow him to control 
either our conscience or the columns of the WATCH TOWER. 
We pointed out to him his boastful spirit and that he was 
attempting to judge us before the time, and without showing 
us any authority from God why we should accept his view 
of matters as God's view, and set aside our own convictions. 
We reminded him that he was derogating to himself the fourfold 
office of accuser, judge, jury and executioner, and 
that he would best go slowly lest lack of humility and lack of 
brotherly love should ultimately bar him from any share with 
those to whom the Lord will say, "Well done good and faithful 
servant, enter thou into the joys of thy Lord." 

We do not say that these brethren have ceased to believe 
with us, nor that they do not grasp the situation fully, 
though the latter seems the more generous explanation of 
their course. If this is not the true explanation of their opposition, 
pray what is? What feature of the Vow itself can 
they oppose? 

Another (C) bitterly denounces not only the Vow but 
other things which do not please him in the conduct of the 

R4267 : page 319 

Harvest Work. He intimates that the vials of his wrath will 
be poured upon us speedily if we do not quickly move the 
reverse lever. Some of these dear friends appear to be perfectly 
willing that the nominal control of the WATCH TOWER and 
the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society should remain in 
the hands to which the Lord entrusted it, provided, Brother 
Russell will hearken to and follow the voice of the Lord 
through them; others would evidently prefer that the Harvest 
Work be blown to atoms that they might become more prominent. 
As a sample of this critical, bombastic, self-righteous 
and domineering spirit, we quote the closing words of C's 
letter; (Italics are ours):— "Unless steps are taken to correct 
this evil I shall pray for the overthrow of the arrangement, 
that it may come into judgment; but at present I will pray 
that you may be able to see the matter in its true light, and 
I am assured that the prayer of a righteous man availeth 
much, and the Apostle cites the prayer of Elias, to show how 
the Lord hears our petitions. With much Christian love, etc." 

Thus our Lord's words are fulfilled in us over and over 
again from every quarter, "They shall say all manner of evil 



against you falsely for my sake." And as the Master was 
called Beelzebub we are said to have a "lying, evil spirit." 
We tremble not at the threat that we shall be prayed against 
as above, with its intimation that the Lord has been neglecting 
the Harvest Work, waiting for this dear brother to give 
the intimation as to what must be done. We fear none of 
these fears. We weep not for ourself; our sorrow is for these 
poor, deluded brethren. We perceive that they are being 
weighed by the Lord. We fear that they will be found wanting 
in brotherly love— the one important test of membership 
in the Body of Christ— the requirement of the one commandment 
which the Lord gave to his people.— John 13:34; 15:12. 

Yes, we may well fear for these, and pray for them. 
We ask all who claim membership in the Anointed to join 
petitions with ours that these dear ones may be recovered 
from their present blindness. 

The Apostles James and John, indignant at the refusal 
of the people of Samaria to sell food to our Lord and his disciples, 
asked our Master, "Lord, wilt thou that we command 
fire from heaven to consume these men and their city?" Our 
Lord replied, "Ye know not what spirit ye are of." 

So now we say to the few dear brethren so deeply exercised 
concerning the Vow, "Ye know not what spirit ye are of." 
You have been confused. At heart you surely do not mean 
all that you are hinting, saying, threatening and doing. We 
judge you not, condemn you not; but we do ask you to judge 
yourselves. Are you exercising the spirit of love which you 
assured us is your real heart sentiment? "By their fruits ye 
shall know them," said our Master. Let us each look after 
the fruitage of his own heart and life. "God is not mocked." 
Anger, malice, envy, hatred, strife, are works (fruits) of the 
flesh and of the devil. 

IS THE VOW EXTREME? 



We hold that the Vow is not extreme in view of the condition 
of things which our understanding of God's Word leads 
us to expect as "nigh, even at the door." We remind you of 
the Apostle Paul's declaration of his willingness to take a 
Vow, "to eat no meat while the world standeth," if such a 
course should seem to him expedient, in the interest of 
weaker brethren. The Vow which we advocate as now very 
expedient is far less exacting than the one the Apostle declared 
would be proper if expedient. But taking it, let us 
keep it in letter and in spirit. "Vow and pay unto the Lord 
your God."— Psa. 76:11. 

Someone opposing the Vow suggests that those who take 
the Vow are so bound by it that should they through sickness 
or for other reasons forget or neglect to daily remember in 
prayer the Harvest Work, etc., it would be an unpardonable 
sin. We will not call in question the sincerity of those who 
thus pervert the truth in their attempt to hinder others; we 
will suppose that they spoke out of the abundance of their 
ignorance. 



As above set forth the Vow is a solemn engagement 
which should not be broken. So is our Baptismal Vow, our 
Consecration Vow— to be dead to the world and self and sin. 
Suppose that having Vowed to the Lord to walk in the footsteps 
of Jesus in the narrow way, and that at some unguarded 
moment you side-stepped— what then? Were you doomed 
therefore to the Second Death? 

Oh no! for just such errors we pray, "Forgive us our 
trespasses as we forgive those who trespass against us." "If 
any man [in Christ] sin we have an Advocate with the 
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous." "The blood of Jesus 
Christ cleanseth us from all sin." "Let us come boldly to 
the throne of the heavenly grace that we may obtain mercy 
and find grace to help in every time of need." 

As already elsewhere pointed out a wilful, deliberate 
violation of a Vow would bring the full sin penalty. A mixed 
sin, partially wilful, would be partly forgivable and partly 
subject to stripes or punishment. A wholly unintentional sin 
would be wholly forgiven upon request. We repeat, therefore, 
our exhortation, that the Vow be taken by all of God's 
consecrated children; but not without careful examination 
and in full determination. 



page 321 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXIX. NOVEMBER 1 No. 21 
A.D. 1908--A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 323 

Israel's Interest in Turkey's Troubles 323 

News from Judea 323 

Union of Baptists and Disciples 323 

Is Christianity Decaying? 323 

"Loving Kindness, O How Great" 324 

Lessons for Spiritual Israelites 325 

Lord, This Vow That I Have Taken (Poem) 327 

A Man After God's Own Heart 327 

"Love Divine All Love Excelling" 328 

What Sins the Scape-Goat Bore 331 

Letters Acknowledging "Vow" Blessings 332 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 333 

Catalogue of Bibles, Testaments, Helps, etc 334 

page 322 

Address Business Communications and Remittances to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA. 
-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH, WETER STRASSE, 39, BARMEN-ELBERFELD 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH, EQUITABLE BULDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



CHRISTIAN HOME EMBELLISHMENTS 



For several years we have been supplying our readers with 
handsome text and motto-cards for the walls of their homes. 
Their influence is excellent; for they continually and cheerfully 
catch the eye and remind the heart of our great favors 
present and to come, based upon the "exceeding great and 
precious promises" of our Father's Word. We commend these 
as helps in the "narrow way"— helps in character-building. 
(These we import from London subject to custom duty, hence 
our London office can do still better for our British friends. 

We have a very choice assortment of these this year. For 



your convenience and ours we put these up in packets of 
choice assortments, as follows: At $1.00 each, postpaid. So 
doing we are enabled to give you twice as many mottoes for 
your money as you could purchase elsewhere. Besides, we 
select the styles and mottoes with great care. The following 
packets represent our assortment. Order by number: 

No. Ma— Contains only small mottoes of assorted texts 
and styles, 22; all beautiful. 

No. Mb— Contains medium and small mottoes assorted, 
11; all choice. 

No. Mc— Contains medium mottoes, 10; all handsome. 

No. Md— Contains medium and large mottoes, 5; all 
elegant. 

No. Me— Contains large mottoes only, 4; all desirable. 

No. Mal/2— Is a 50-cent packet of small mottoes. 

1909-MOTTO-CARD AND CALENDAR-1909 



These are elegant, 7-3/4 x 12 inches, an ornament to any 
parlor, a work of art. Besides a Calendar it contains "the 
Vow," which can be torn out by those who do not prefer it. 
These, postpaid, would not be dear at 50c each, but getting 
them in quantities we can supply them at 15c each. 

"DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA" 



Those who use this book as we recommend are surely being 
blessed. It should be on your breakfast table regularly. 
Its daily text should be read and commented on freely by all. 
Then the Manna comment should be read. Introduce it to 
your friends as a help toward Godly living. See prices in our 
November 1st issue. 

Do not expect New Bibles before November 15th. 



R4267 : page 323 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
ISRAEL'S INTEREST IN TURKEY'S TROUBLES 



LIKE a bursting bomb, disturbing European peace, 
has come the announcement of a rupture of 
the "Berlin Treaty" by Austria's annexing two 
Turkish provinces. Russia at once announced her desire 
that the Treaty be revised, and Bulgaria declared 
her independence of Turkey. The "Berlin Treaty" of 
thirty years ago claimed that the Turks were unable 
properly to govern portions of their territory in which 



Christians resided, and divided the supervision of these 
amongst the other powers. Bosnia and Herzegovina 
were two of these, put under Austria's care. It will be 
remembered that Palestine was put under British protection, 
and Egypt unitedly under French and British 
supervision, but that France avoided her responsibility 
in favor of the British. 

Whether the present trouble shall result in a general 
war or not it probably will mean the rupture of the 
"Berlin Treaty," and that the several provinces supervised 
by other nations will come more completely under 
their control. 

This would make Palestine a British province, like 
Canada, and mean as full liberty to the Jews as they 
have in Canada— to buy, build, elect local government, 
etc. We are not, however, to expect for Palestine full 
independence before 1915. 

NEWS FROM JUDEA 



In a recent letter from Jerusalem, Mr. W. H. Dunn 
refers to the remarkable development in the Jewish 
National Zionist movement which took place in Jerusalem 
during the fifteen months he was in England: 
"Great numbers of Jews are returning to Jerusalem, not 
for repentance or confession of sins, but simply because 
they must go somewhere, and the Sultan allows them 
to enter without hindrance. In that short time no 
fewer than 5,000 Russian Jews landed at Jaffa. These 
Jews are investing what money they have in buying 
land and buying and building houses. So great is their 
activity that it is a matter of concern to the foreign residents. 
The Moslems sell to them however without demur. 
They believe this land really belongs to the Jews. 
The development in Jewish education is also striking, 
and kindergarten schools are being opened for the 
children. Hebrew is being taught and becoming a 
living language, and new Hebrew words are being 
formed so as to make the old tongue helpful for up-to-date 
use. It is common to hear Hebrew spoken in the 
streets. " —Exchange. 

UNION OF BAPTISTS AND DISCIPLES OF CHRIST 



The Rev. I. J. Spencer, pastor of the Central 
Christian Church (or Disciples of Christ, the term used 
by members of this denomination), will accept an invitation 
to address the National Baptist Congress, to be 
held in Chicago, November 10 to 12, upon the subject, 
"What Definite Steps Should Be Immediately Taken 
Toward the Union of Baptists, Free Baptists, and Disciples 
of Christ?" Other speakers representing the first 



two denominations also will discuss the topic, and it is 
expected that the discussion will result in a long stride 
toward the union of the two denominations— Baptists 
and Disciples of Christ, the first steps toward which 
were taken two years ago. 

At the National Congress of the Disciples in Indianapolis, 
in March, 1908, by invitation Dr. E. Y. Mullins, 
president of the Southern Baptist Theological Seminary 
of Louisville, and Mr. Spencer discussed the topic: 
"What Does the New Testament Teach Concerning the 
Doctrine of the Remission of Sins?" One session of 
the congress was entirely given to the addresses. 

The similarity of the teachings of the denominations 
on vital points aroused great enthusiasm. This 
gave rise to the suggestion that through committees the 

R4268 : page 323 

two denominations might learn as exactly as possible 
just what are their doctrinal differences. 

The original drafts of the statements have been completed 
and are before the members of the committee for 
suggestions. When finally revised these statements 
will be given wide publicity through the religious press, 
and in the course of time will come before the congress 
of the denominations. The rough drafts show that 
they are surprisingly alike. When this is known through 
publication, the belief is held that in a spirit of fraternity 
and desire for unity the denominations will waive 
minor differences and merge congregations, acting as 
individuals, yet probably in concert, pursuant to a 
recommendation from their congresses. 

In western Canada, Disciples and Baptists have already 
united, are using churches in common and share 
things alike.— Courier-Journal. 

IS CHRISTIANITY DECAYING? 



The pastor of the Fifth Avenue Baptist Church, 
New York City, Rev. Dr. Charles F. Aked, who came to 

R4268 : page 324 

its direction from a London pulpit, in his sermon Sunday 
said: 

"When I first came to this great city of New York, 
the center of empire, its broad avenues thronged with 
eager, strenuous crowds, pulsating with energy and 
hope, I saw the buoyancy of the American people. I 
learned of their hope and endeavor and electric activity. 
Now, I want to learn the signs of the times. What is 
the condition of Christianity in New York? When I 
interview my parishioners, and they are among the most 
representative in the city, I find the spirit of religious 



depression very unlike the spirit of abounding enterprise 
in business, in manufacturing, in engineering and 
construction. 

SOME BIG LOSSES 

"To turn to that mighty religious organization, the 
Catholic Church, to which over 1,000,000 New Yorkers 
give fealty, even there the losses are heavy. I think 
that church is doing a magnificent work, but with all 
its enthusiasm and rallying force it does not nor ever 
did hold its own in this city or in the nation at large. 
There are about 16,000,000 Catholics in continental 
United States. Now, in our immigration for ninety 
years back, no less than 15,000,000 were Catholics. If 
all remained loyal to its tenets they would number 
45,000,000 now instead of 16,000,000. 

"The Protestants have lost ground, too, when the 
filling up of the country is counted. Our own denomination, 
the Baptist, reflects the general trend. The increase 
among the Baptists of America has been equal 
to only one-fourth of the birth rate among us, proving 
that three out of four of our Baptist population have 
fallen away from us. We have in this city 40,000 
Baptists. If we held all that was coming to us we 
should have had at least 150,000. All the Christian 
churches in city and country in this nation show a 
similar condition. 

"The decline of Christianity is universal. In England, 
in France, in Spain, in Italy and Germany we hear 
the same cry. 

"Only lately I was talking to an English clergyman. 
He told me that not merely is there a great falling off 
in church-goers in England, but that the class of people 
who frequent churches are becoming inferior. 

THE BLAME 

"The church here is out of touch with the masses. 
Everything has progressed except Christianity. Many 
thinking and progressive young men and women have 
been driven from the church by the stupidity of the 
preachers. The pulpit has too many bigots, too many 
bores, too many hell-fire screechers for the enlightened 
thought of the day. Compelled to a life of grinding 
poverty, treading always the same old paths of a 
thousand years, hide-bound and restricted, the church of 
Christ has become a laughing stock— parrots of the dead 
church cry instead of preachers of the living Christ. 

THE AWAKENING 

"The church is obliged to accept any applicant for 
the ministry who is respectable. Even with this latitude, 
Baptist, Presbyterian and Methodist vocations 
show a remarkable falling off in 25 years, while the 



needs for an enlarging clergy were never felt so much 
as now. There must come an awakening when pious 
and God-loving men will see a paramount duty in 
actively enlisting in the cause of salvation and finding 
its exposition in preaching the Gospel and in doing 
good to everyone within the sphere of their influence." 
-Utica Globe. 

REV. DR. GOODMAN'S METHOD 



Five hundred men packed the new Men's Church at 
Atlantic City Sunday night, and puffed cigars and 
pipes furnished by Rev. Sidney Goodman during the 
sermon, which was sandwiched between a special entertainment, 
also provided by the pastor of new ideas. 
Moving pictures, stereopticon views illustrating the 
parables, and singing by professionals who volunteered 
from beach-front cafes and theatres, made up the remainder 
of the programme.— Exchange. 



R4268 : page 324 

"LOVING KINDNESS, O HOW GREAT!" 

-II SAMUEL 9.-OCTOBER 18.- 

Golden Text:— "And be ye kind one to another, 
tender-hearted, forgiving one another."— Eph. 4:32. 
"I love them that love me; and those that 
seek me early shall find me."— Prov. 8:17. 

THE Lord gives us a deep insight into David's 
character, and shows us one of the abilities he 
possessed which constituted him "A man after 
God's own heart." Entirely overlooking and forgetting 
the evils which he experienced from King Saul during 
the years in which the latter sought his life, King David 
remembered with appreciation the conduct of Saul's 
son, Jonathan; how the latter had befriended him, and 
how he had made a covenant that in turn he would show 
kindnesses to Jonathan's family. For a time, busy with 
the affairs of the kingdom, King David apparently forgot 
to make any special inquiry respecting the family of 
Saul, but something occurred which brought prominently 
to his mind his obligation to Jonathan. Presumably 
this was about the middle of his reign; and quite possibly 
it was David's serious sin with Bathsheba and his 
hearty repentance therefore that now quickened his 
mind in respect to his responsibilities to those about 
him, including the family of his deceased friend. 
Ziba, chief servant of King Saul, was called to 
David and inquiry was made respecting any of the remaining 



members of Saul's family. This disclosed the 
fact that there was still living a son of Jonathan, who 
was a child of five years at the time of the death of 
Saul and Jonathan, and who was lamed in his feet by 
falling from his nurse's arms as they fled at the news 
of the defeat. 

King David explained to Ziba that he desired to do 
kindnesses to Saul's posterity, and bade him bring to 
court Jonathan's lame son Mephibosheth. The King's 
command was obeyed, although it must have been received 
with great fear and trepidation and doubt with 
respect to its sincerity. It was the custom at the time, 
that when one king succeeded to the dominion of 
another all the heirs of the throne should be sought and 
killed, lest they should give trouble later to the new 
dynasty. This was evidently expected of King David, 
and hence the secrecy in respect to the whereabouts of 
Jonathan's son was kept so that the King knew not of 
him. However, Ziba was a man of large family interests 
and realized that it was incumbent upon him to perform 
the King's bidding, even if it should mean the death of 
Saul's heir. And the latter, being lame and knowing 
that his present residence was known to the King, could 

R4268 : page 325 

do nothing less than respond and present himself at the 
court. His fear that the King's words might be treacherous, 
his thoughts that so great a generosity as has been 
suggested could not be expected or trusted, doubtless 
caused him fear and trepidation as, coming to the 
presence of the King, he prostrated himself at his feet, 
saying, "Behold thy servant!" 

"Fear not," said David, "for I will surely show thee 
kindnesses for Jonathan thy father's sake, and will restore 
thee all the lands of Saul, thy father; and thou 
shalt eat bread at my table continually." 

With the people of oriental lands the eating of food 
together as friends implies a pledge of friendship and 
fidelity; and to eat continually at the table signifies 
membership in the family. We are not to consider this 
a light matter, for David had two wives and their 
children were hopeful of being his successors to the 
kingdom and this bringing a stranger into the family 
might properly be considered as a menace to their interests, 
especially as that stranger already, according 
to the usages of nations, had a prior claim to the throne, 
superior even to that of the King. 

The entire operation shows us the fearlessness of 
the King and confidence that the kingdom should not 
be taken away from his posterity; and it shows us also 
the confidence which all the members must have felt 
towards him and respect to his judgment as to the 
affairs of the home and his headship in his home. This 

R4269 : page 325 



headship we cannot suppose was used in an austere 
and arbitrary manner, but with loving kindnesses and 
generosity and in the interest of his entire household. 
He who could be thus kind to the son of a friend, 
certainly could be kind and generous also to the members 
of his own family. 

LESSONS FOR SPIRITUAL ISRAELITES 

The most advanced even of the Lord's consecrated 
people may draw some helpful suggestions from the 
incidents of this lesson. 

(1) A friend in need is a friend indeed. Jonathan 
had been David's friend in his time of need and thus 
had attested his nobility of character, his faithfulness 
to principles of righteousness, his loyalty to the Lord, 
even when the Lord was taking his kingdom power to 
give it to David. David's friendship came in time of 
need to the poor man with lame feet, who lived in secret, 
fearful that anyone should recognize him lest his life 
should be taken. 

(2) David's searching for the opportunities to do 
good reminds us that such should be our attitude; that 
we should not merely wait until circumstances force 
upon our attention the troubles of others and their need 
of assistance. Well do the Scriptures say, "Blessed is 
he that considereth the poor." This is a God-like 
quality, and whoever practices it is to that extent godly. 
The Apostle says of God, that he looked down and beheld 
the "groaning of the prisoners" in their condition 

of sin, degradation, dying. He looked further to note 
that there were no other means of assistance, that they 
were wholly dependent upon him; then his own arm 
brought salvation. The arm of the Lord Jesus was revealed 
for man's uplift from the condition of death 
back to harmony with God. Our Lord suggested, "Be 
ye kind even as your father in heaven; for he is kind 
unto the unthankful and the evil and the good." 

In harmony with this, our generous sentiments and 
helpfulness should not be confined to those who have 
claims upon us through love relationship. Our generosity 
is to go beyond, even to our enemies. "Yea, if 
thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him 
drink." So shall we be the children of our Father in 
heaven; so shall we show that we have his disposition, 
"the mind of Christ," who, when we were enemies, died 
for us. We are not, however, urging the same degree 
of love and benevolence toward all. The Lord specially 
loves those who are in accord with him— and so 
should we, but our love and sympathy and assistance 
must not be confined only to these, for we have the admonition 
that "If ye love them that love you, what thank 
have ye? And if ye do good to them that do good to 
you, what thank have ye? for even sinners do the 
same." But God commended his love to us as an example 



of what ours should be in that his Son, "Christ, 
died for the ungodly." 

(3) David's justice and generosity are both manifested 
in the course he pursued. Instead of coveting 
Saul's possessions and using his power to attach these 
to his own he deliberately settled the matter that the 
profits of Saul's estate should all go to his son, who 
at the same time would be continually partaker of the 
King's bounty at his table. Comparatively few would 
have been so just and so generous. The incident gives 
David's character a fresh luster and helps us to understand 
why he was so beloved of the Lord. He was not 
content with merely wishing to do right, willing to do 
right, he went forward and dealt justice. He put his 
bright thoughts and generous impulses into practice, 
and made "footprints on the sands of time" which have 
helped to mark the proper pathway for the millions 
who have since examined these in the holy records. 

OUR FIRST GOLDEN TEXT 

While the Scriptures everywhere inculcate the 
thought that God's people are to be generous towards 
strangers as well as their own people, they make common 
the thought that they should have a special interest 
in one another, as the Apostle expresses in these words, 
"Be ye kind one to another, tender-hearted, forgiving 
one another." Ah! Yes. Kindness is certainly one of 
the elements of love, as the Apostle says, and tender-heartedness 
must characterize those who would have a 
participation with our Lord in his Kingdom. Hardness 
of heart and cruelty are evidences of degradation— the 
loss of the image of God. The coldness and the hard-heartedness 
of the world make countless thousands 
mourn, even more than their circumstances necessitate. 
As the Apostle declares, "The whole creation groaneth," 
waiting for the King of Glory, who will bring in restitution. 
And it should be a part of the mission of every 
member of the Body of Christ to do something to help 
ameliorate the world's difficulty. And each may do 
something, even if it be no more than the cheering word. 
Indeed, we rejoice as we see the manifestations of the 
coming Kingdom of our Lord, "The times of restitution 
of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all 
his holy prophets since the world began."— Acts 3:20. 

"FORGIVING ONE ANOTHER" 

Are not the Lord's people commended "to be perfect, 
even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect"? 
And if this is so, what in each other's conduct would 
they have to forgive? Ah! there it is. At heart they 
must will perfection absolutely; but how to perform it 
they find not; hence, as the Apostle says, in many things 
we all fail. "There is none righteous; no, not one." 
More than this, the Lord's elect are not, according to 



the flesh, the highest, the noblest, the best. "Not 
many great, not many noble, not many rich hath God 

R4269 : page 326 

chosen." While the Apostle intimates that some great, 
some rich and some noble may be expected amongst 
the elect, he emphatically declares that God has chosen 
chiefly the mean things of the world, and the things 
that are despised, and the things that are not, to bring 
to naught the things that are. How strange! Nevertheless, 
it is just like the Lord to pass by the self-righteous 
and the proud, and to declare that "Only those 
who humble themselves shall be exalted and those that 
exalt themselves shall be abased." This fact, then, that 
God will accept none but the humble, accounts for the 
fact that those who have received the message in humility 
are chiefly the mean, the ignoble. It is only the 
humble-minded, taught in the school of Christ, who are 
able and willing to accept the ignoble ones who rally 
to the Lord's standard and who may be accepted. To 
love the ignoble signifies that we must view them from 
the divine standpoint and love them as God loves them 
—not because of their ignoble and mean qualities, but 
in spite of these; because of their heart's desires towards 
God and righteousness. As we come to love and 
appreciate all those who stand for and strive for those 
principles, we take our position with God and view the 
situation from the divine standpoint, having compassion 
upon those who are weak and out of the way and 
doing all we can to assist them, if they are of those who 
love righteousness and hate iniquity and are striving 
in harmony with their ideals. 

The more such have to contend with the more will 
they call forth the love and sympathy of God and all 
who are his. God has promised to "cover their 
blemishes" and this must be the sentiment of all who 
are on his side. As the Apostle said in this text we 
must be disposed to forgive one another and, as he 
again in I Cor. 12 teaches, that "Those members in the 
Body of Christ which are most ungainly," upon them 
we should bestow more efforts and energy for their 
assistance, especially covering their blemishes, especially 
assisting them. Along this line the Apostle elsewhere 
says that we ought to follow the example of Jesus 
in laying down our lives for the brethren— "We that are 
strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and 
not to please ourselves."— Romans 15:1. 

Too often the Lord's people forget this injunction 
and are disposed to lay down their lives for themselves, 
for their own comfort, or to lay down their lives, their 
time, their energy, in fellowshiping with those of the 
brethren most congenial to them in cultivation or in 
advancement. Is not this pleasing ourselves in ignoring 
to serve those members of the Body who need our 
assistance most— the more ignoble? 



OUR SECOND GOLDEN TEXT 

The Sunday-School Lesson Committee have appointed 
this date for a special prayer to God in behalf 
of Sunday-School people the world over. While the 
lesson itself does not seem to have been chosen in connection 
with this thought our second Golden Text is 
very appropriate to it, "I love them that love me; and 
those that seek me early shall find me." This is said 
respecting wisdom, but God himself is the very personification 
of wisdom, and hence this applies to God. 
Similarly to those who are privileged to hear of God's 
grace, Christ is wisdom. As the Apostle declares, "He 
is made unto us wisdom"— unto all who rightly, properly 
accept him. 

It is not our thought that the Gospel call was sent 
especially to children, nor do we find our Lord's teaching 
specially adapted to the child mind, nor that he 
taught children, nor that he or the apostles established 
Sunday-Schools. (See our comment on Sunday-School 
work in DAWN-STUDIES, Vol. 6, pages 544-7.) We 
may properly say, however, that whatever were the 
limitations of the Jewish Law which hindered Christ 
and the apostles from becoming ministers of the Truth 
until after they were thirty years of age, there are no 
such limitations applying now, and hence "Whosoever 
has an ear to hear, let him hear," however old, however 
young. 

We encourage the dear brethren of the Truth everywhere 
to see to it that their children have the very best 
religious instruction, as well as their own example 
in daily living. Every home should have its Sunday-School 

R4270 : page 326 

class, even though there be but one child. Every 
Sunday should have its quiet, sacred hour of fellowship, 
communion and praise, participated in by the parents 
and the children. It is beautiful to note the influence 
of a proper home-life in the families of some— in joy 
and love and truth. Will not all so resolve and by the 
grace of God fulfil? 

There is a charm about childhood— its innocency, 
its faith— and the child-mind is peculiarly susceptible 
to the Truth and its spirit, too, the spirit of consecration. 
How blessed it would be if all of our children 
from earliest infancy were taught to love the Lord as 
the Giver of all good; to consider his will, to consecrate 
their little all to him ! Such children so instructed often 
become teachers of their parents, showing forth the 
true spirit of devotion. Here and there on our Pilgrim 
visits we are introduced to little ones thus early given 
to the Lord and trained in harmony with his will. Some 
of these have the spirit of devotion so strongly developed 
that any pennies coming to them, instead of 



being spent for sweets, are laid by as consecrated to 
the Lord, to be sent to Brother Russell from time to 
time to print tracts to help the people understand the 
Bible and to see that God is love. We seek not the 
pennies of the dear children, but their welfare, the 
great spiritual blessing which comes into their lives 
and which will surely go with them through coming 
days to their comfort and joy. The little, loving hearts 
thus early given to God, surely find a blessing and a 
protection from much of the evil that is in the world. 

Many of the little ones who thus began a life of consecration 
and self-denial for the Truth's sake before 
they could rightly appreciate the situation in full have 
since matured most remarkably, and at twelve and 
thirteen years have requested opportunity for symbolizing 
their consecration, and have given clear evidence 
of a comprehensive knowledge of the fundamentals of 
the Gospel and of a heart-appreciation of the sacrifice 
presented to the Lord. 

Our Lord said, "I pray not for the world, but for 
those whom thou hast given me." And similarly our 
prayers need not go up on behalf of the world, for 
whose blessing the Millennial Kingdom and its opportunities 
have been provided, but our petitions may 
ascend on behalf of those who have become consecrated 
to him, our brethren in Christ, and this will include the 
younger ones of the consecrated as well as the aged. 
We may also in a general way include those whom the 
Father has given to us as our wards, as being under 
our care and instruction; we may pray for these favorable 
providences of God for their highest welfare, and 
for ourselves wisdom and grace, that we may present 
to them the Lord's message in its best form and exemplify 
the same in our daily conduct and in our dealing 
with our children. 

R4270 : page 327 

LORD, THIS VOW THAT I HAVE TAKEN 

(Tune: Nettleton) 

Heavenly Father, I adore thee! 

Hallowed be thy holy name; 
Mighty angels bow before thee, 

Should not mortals do the same? 
May thy rule of love control me, 

And thy will in me be done; 
Hear the Vow I make before thee, 

In the name of Christ, thy Son. 

Daily will I pray, remember 

All thy servants, dearest Lord, 
Those who labor as one family, 

To dispense thy precious Word; 
Those who lonely go, as Pilgrims, 



Those who travel two by two, 
Those who volunteer to scatter 
Golden gems, like morning dew. 

O'er my thoughts, and words and actions, 

I a closer watch will keep, 
That I may be used more freely 

In the feeding of thy sheep. 
Oh, I want thy power to cleanse me, 

By its power to set me free, 
From all fleshly imperfections, 

And to make me more like thee. 

Lord, I know the powers of evil 

Are increasing every day; 
Trying to ensnare and hinder 

Those who walk the narrow way. 
Never will I listen to them; 

Lord, I fear their subtle power, 
From their every snare protect me, 

Help me, keep me, every hour. 

Lord, in all my daily dealings 

Toward my brethren in the Truth, 
I will not by word or action 

Do what thou wouldst not approve. 
Purity shall mark my conduct; 

Chaste in thought and word I'll be, 
That the image of my Master 

May be perfected in me. 

Lord, this Vow, that I have taken 

I could never keep alone. 
When I think of self, I tremble; 

When I look to thee I'm strong. 
Leaning on thee, in my weakness, 

Trusting thee for promised grace, 
I will take this Vow and keep it, 

Till I see thee face to face. 
Rebecca F. Doney. 



R4270 : page 327 

A MAN AFTER GOD'S OWN HEART 

--PSALM 32.-OCTOBER 25.- 

Golden Text:— "Blessed is he whose transgression 
is forgiven, whose sin is covered." 

AFTER a most prosperous career, about thirty 

years from the time of his anointing and when 

he was somewhere about fifty years of age, 

King David fell into most grievous sins. In quick succession 



he violently broke three of the ten commandments. 
He coveted Uriah's wife; he committed adultery 
with her, and he indirectly murdered her husband. 
Dividing the ten commandments into two parts, the one 
appertaining to the Lord and the other to humanity, 
King David certainly violated the second portion about 
as grievously as could be possible. A fouler record 
than this of man's inhumanity to man can scarcely be 
imagined. The Scriptures offer no apology, nor do they 
in any degree shield the offender or justify his course. 
In view of these admitted facts skeptics sometimes inquire, 
"How is it that such a man is regarded as a great 
prophet of the Lord? How is it that of him it is said 
that 'He was a man after God's own heart'? Does God 
approve of such a course as his, represented by those 
sins?" 

We reply: Those transgressions do not represent 
David's course of life. They were exceptions; they were 
contrary to his heart; they were repented of; they were 
punished; David was forgiven. Today's lesson is intended 
to bring this matter fully and clearly before our 
attention; to show us the underlying principles connected 
with what God approves and disapproves in his 
creatures. There is a philosophy connected with all of 
the divine dealings, the appreciation of which is helpful 
to such as desire to be in harmony with the Lord, 
because it will enable them the better to govern their 
course of life, that we may also be as was David, men 
and women after "God's own heart"— such as please 
him. 

ONE PECULIARITY OF THE BIBLE 

The Bible holds up before us the naked facts of its 
heroes as no other religious book does, and in this particular 
it commends itself as truthful testimony of the 
Lord. It tells not only of Samson's strength, but also 
of his weaknesses. It tells of Rahab's favor and of her 
previous immorality. It tells of Peter's denying the 
Lord with cursings, as well as his noble traits and faithfulness 
to death. It tells us that amongst the early 
Church was a Judas as well as an Ananias and 
Sapphira. It tells of Adam's disobedience and condemnation 
to death, as well as of Christ's obedience 
and his voluntary sacrifice for the redemption of Adam 
and incidentally his race. So, then, the mention of 
David and his experiences in sin, sharply contrasted 
with the majority of his experiences as a faithful servant 
of God, is not our keeping, but the Scriptural usage, 
though it is out of accord with the custom of men and 
of other religious writings. Instead of upsetting our 
trust in the Lord and his Word, these facts only 
strengthen our faith and give us assurance of the 
truthfulness of the narrative and the good intentions of 
their writer, and of the wisdom and power of God in 



R4271 : page 327 

respect to the use of all these weak servants in connection 
with the ministry of the Truth. 

It might be said in extenuation of King David's 
course that in ancient times kings were accorded despotic 
powers and esteemed to be above the laws of 
their realm. This, however, is no real excuse, for 
King David understood well that he was not superior 
to the divine Law, but on the contrary amenable to it. 
We find even amongst heathen kings a much higher 
standard of morality, a more close approach to the requirements 
of the divine law, "Thou shalt love thy 
neighbor as thyself." [Note the attitude of King 
Pharaoh towards Abraham's wife. (Gen. 12:18,19.) 
Similarly the conduct of King Abimelech.— 
Gen. 20:2-5,9-11.] 

COMPASSION, FORGIVENESS, SIN-COVERING 

Another peculiarity in respect to the Bible is that 
the God which it reveals is a merciful one. The gods 
of the heathen are cold, merciless, terrible— deficient of 

R4271 : page 328 

any attribute of love and compassion. The God of the 
Bible commends himself to us in that "While we were 
yet sinners, Christ died for the ungodly," and made it 
possible for God to be just and yet be also the justifier 
of repentant sinners believing in Jesus and returning 
to his favor through faith in and obedience to Jesus. 
This is the essence of the lesson, and we have no hesitancy 
in saying that David's sincere repentance for his 
sins and the declaration of God's forgiveness and the 
continuance with David of divine favor have been a 
lesson of great value to many poor, weak, fallen members 
of our race, as they have attempted to come into 
the presence of the holy Jehovah and have realized 
their own blemishes and unworthiness of his favor. 
Well do the Scriptures declare, "There is forgiveness 
with thee, that thou mightest be feared," reverenced. 
Moreover it is this quality of the divine character that 
calls forth more than fear, more than reverence from 
those who appreciate it; it calls forth love; as it is written, 
"We love him because he first loved us, and sent 
his Son to be a satisfaction for our sins." Well has the 
poet declared that this is 

"LOVE DIVINE, ALL LOVE EXCELLING" 

This love of God, as we come to appreciate it, becomes 
a constraining, drawing, influencing power in 
the hearts and lives of his people. Thus the Apostle 
declares, "The love of Christ constraineth us," for if one 
died for all, then all were dead (under dying conditions): 



and we who live (we who through faith in Jesus' 
sacrifice have passed from death into life— justification) 
should henceforth live not unto ourselves (selfishly), 
but unto him who died for us. 

The Psalm which constitutes our lesson is supposed 
to have been composed by the Prophet after his 
heart had returned to peace with God through assurance 
of divine forgiveness of his sins. Its opening 
sentence takes this standpoint. David was the blessed 
man who had experienced divine forgiveness and covering 
of his transgression, his sin. He was the man to 
whom the Lord no longer imputed iniquity and in whose 
heart was no deception, no secret longing for sin, with 
merely the restraints of fear, but who had a heart and 
mind fully turned away from sin and in absolute accord 
with divine justice and all of its righteous requirements. 

Instead of rebelling against the laws of God as 
hindrances to wilfulness and wickedness, the King delighted 
in the law of the Lord and meditated therein by 
day and by night. He was pleased henceforth to 
measure all of his conduct, yea, his thoughts also, by 
the divine standard, realizing that these were not only 
righteous altogether, but that every contrary course 
would surely meet out to him discomfort, trouble. 

GROANING ALL THE DAY LONG 

Verses 3 and 4 briefly rehearse the King's unhappy 
experiences during nearly a year. The King's transgression 
began in his mind, as do all sins. It is on this 
account that the Scriptures urge the Lord's people to 
"Keep their hearts with all diligence, for out of them 
are the issues of life." The King coveted his neighbor's 
wife, and in the language of our God, "He committed 
adultery with her in his heart." The first step of sin 
having been taken the King's conscience was hushed to 
sleep in some unaccountable manner, while the strength 
of his vigorous mind was turned aside to the gratification 
of unholy desires. These accomplished, his case 
seemed to him hopeless except in one direction. Regret 
and remorse, already begun in his mind, brought terrors 
as he realized that under the Jewish Law both parties 
were to be stoned to death at the instance of the 
wronged person. Hence his command to his chief 
general, Joab, that Uriah, the wronged husband, be 
placed in the front of the battle and then be deserted 
by the remainder of the corps, that he might be slain 
by his enemies. Joab understood the situation. Indeed, 
the whole matter probably leaked out, and poor 
David was in serious trouble every way. Not only had 
Uriah been one of his prominent, valued men, but 
the grandfather of Bathsheba, Ahithophel, was King 
David's chief counsellor in State. That the incident did 
lead to an estrangement between this man and his sovereign 
is quite evident; later on in Absalom's rebellion 
he joined his cause as against the king. Apparently, 



too, these various burdens upon David's mind and heart 
brought upon the king a spell of sickness. 

Sin is always a disturbing element under all conditions, 
and more particularly as the sinner has light 
and responsibility and therefore condemnation of conscience. 
Indeed, we may well suppose, as the Psalmist 
intimated, that the chiefest of his troubles consisted in 
his separation from the Lord; his realization that the 
Lord's favor was justly turned from him, and that in a 
certain sense he was forsaken of the Lord as an intelligent 
transgressor of his Law. It may, indeed, be generally 
recognized as a principle of the divine government 
that anything which separates the Lord and 
his people brings upon them the deepest melancholy, 
and incidentally is sure to affect their health. 
On the contrary, we may well realize it as a fixed principle 
that "the peace of God" is sure to be favorable to 
physical health and happiness. Thus continually we 
find amongst the Lord's people that as they grow strong 
in the Lord there is very apt to be a measure of physical 
rejuvenation also. 

THE PROPHET'S PARABLE 

Apparently for a time the King had smothered his 
conscience; had, perhaps, come to think of himself as 
a sovereign to some extent exempted from the laws 
governing others, and had this condition been allowed 
to progress it might have meant a complete estrangement 
of the King from the Lord. But because he had 
made a covenant with the Lord and the Lord had accepted 
him and warranted unto him "the sure mercies 
of David," therefore he was not allowed to pass into a 
comatose condition morally, but the Lord sent the 
Prophet Nathan, who, by a parable of the wealthy man 
stealing a sheep from a poor man, aroused in the King 
a sense of justice and a demand that the thief should 
be severely punished. It was then that the Prophet declared, 
"Thou art the man," explaining to him that 
he had not only stolen Uriah's wife, but had sinned still 
more grievously, and that he must expect chastisements 
from the Lord for his wrong doing. 

Honest at heart the matter appealed to the King 
immediately, and he saw himself a grievous sinner. He 
went to the Lord and said, "Against thee and thee alone 
have I sinned and done this great evil in thy sight." 
True, he had sinned against Uriah, but since the latter's 
death there was no means of making amends for his 
misdeeds; no restitution was possible. To the Lord 
only could he go asking forgiveness. Although the 
Lord is very gracious and very merciful, he apparently 
permitted David to lie under the lashings of his conscience 
for a considerable time before he restored unto 
him the joys of his countenance. This should not intimate 

R4271 : page 329 



an unwillingness on the divine part to forgive, 
but the wisdom of divine grace which will permit the 
lesson as a means of blessing and as a safeguarding 
against the future. 

Wonder is often expressed that some of the most 
notorious evil-doers in the world appear to have no conscience, 
no realization of their own wickedness; and 
still more wonder is expressed that these often pass 
through life with no chastisements, no punishments for 
sins such as came upon King David for his sins. The 
explanation of the situation is given by the Apostle, 
saying, "Some men's sins go before unto judgment, and 
some follow afterward." The world in general will find 
that transgressions in the present life, violations of 
conscience, have a degrading influence upon them 
which will make their climbing from sin and imperfection 
to righteousness and perfection during the Millennium 
all the longer and more difficult. Thus the 
judgment or penalty for their sins will follow after and 
they will be obliged to reckon with them during the 
Millennium. On the contrary, the Lord's consecrated 
people of the Gospel Age, and his specially consecrated 
people of the Jewish Age, shall have had their stripes in 
the present life, because they are not to share with the 
world in the experiences of stripes, disciplines, etc., 
during the Millennium, but to do so now that they will 
be ready for a share in the resurrection of life; to come 
forth from death perfect beings in full harmony with 
God. This constitutes an ample explanation as to why 
the following is true, That the Lord's true followers receive 
chastisements, stripes, for their correction while 
the world in general escapes, except in so far as human 
laws and nature's laws may chastise them; or in a case 
such as the Amalekites and Amorites; their iniquities 
came to the full, reaching the point where to have 
allowed them to go further would have been inconsistent 
with the divine program, and they were cut off from life 

R4272 : page 329 

to hinder them from greater degradation. 

THE LORD'S CHASTENING HAND 

In one of the Psalms David wrote, "Thy rod and thy 
staff, they comfort me." Verses 3 and 4 tell us something 
of the King's experiences under the rod of 
chastisement, which the pride of the Lord's favor calls 
elsewhere, "The light of thy countenance." At first the 
King kept silence. He was ashamed of himself and 
knew of nothing he could say to the Lord in extenuation 
of his conduct. But the burden grew heavier and 
heavier for both mind and body. He seemed to age 
rapidly that year. His "bones waxed old"; he became 
enfeebled prematurely. Day and night the Lord's 



chastening hand was heavy upon him, so that all the 
freshness, vigor and joy were consumed as by a drouth. 
What a poetic picture of a child of God under the ban 
of divine displeasure— mourning after a manner that 
the world could not understand! The result, however, 
was joyous, because when the Lord restored to David 
the light of his face, and again, when David's cup ran 
over with divine favor and blessing, he was able more 
than ever to appreciate the value of the Lord's smile. 
All of the Lord's people must learn the value of the 
blessing of the Lord in the fellowship divine. Here 
they can sing, 

"O, let no earth-born cloud arise 
To hide thee from thy servant's eyes." 
Fortunately not all of God's dear people need such 
severe discipline. Nevertheless, for all there is the 
comforting thought that even if any should be taken in 
grievous sin, there is still mercy with the Lord, which 
is to be sought for. But still more are the blessings 
for those children who possess more of the Lord's character, 
so that from their hearts they can say, "I delight 
to do thy will, O God; thy law is written in my heart." 
These also require lessons, chastisements, for even our 
dear Redeemer himself "learned obedience from the 
things which he suffered." He learned the cost of obedience, 
as he has since learned the value thereof in the 
Father's estimation— who raised him to glory and immortality. 
Similarly all his followers must learn in his 
school. Each one whom the Father will receive must 
be an under-study of the great Chief Shepherd. Each 
one must by experiences learn the value of the Father's 
smile and fellowship and gracious promises for the 
present and the eternal life. 

THOU FORGAVEST THE INIQUITY 

Various erroneous views are entertained respecting 
the forgiveness of sins and the stripes which sometimes 
follow after the sins have been forgiven. King David's 
experiences demonstrate the truth on this subject. 
After he sinned there was a period in which he seemed 
to appreciate the facts— their enormity. Then came all 
the force of awakening and self-abasement and contrition 
of heart and humbling before the Lord in 
acknowledging the sin, in confessing the transgression 
before the Lord. Then came in due course the Lord's 
forgiveness and by and by the King's appreciation of 
the fact that he had been forgiven, and, as a result, the 
restoration of the joys in life's experiences. Nevertheless 
we find that the end was not yet; that years afterwards 
the Lord allowed a very severe, heavy discipline 
to come upon the King and his family, apparently as a 
retribution. Absalom's rebellion against his father, 
King David, and all the train of evil experiences which 
followed as a part of the same, were recognized by 
David himself as permitted of the Lord as a chastisement 



on account of his transgression which had been 
forgiven. 

How can this be understood? How can a sin be 
forgiven and yet punishment be inflicted on its account? 
The right thought on this question is that divine forgiveness 
signifies that God gives over or relinquishes 
his indignation against the sin and the sinner and deals 
with the sinner henceforth from the standpoint of favor. 
Justice, however, still maintains a hold and must be 
satisfied. Justice knows no forgiveness. It requires a 
full payment, "An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth." 
Applying the matter to ourselves, to Christians of this 
Gospel Age, we remark that Justice has been satisfied so 
far as "believers" are concerned by the death of our Lord 
Jesus. His merit has been appropriated to us. Is this 
only a part of the demands of justice? We reply that it 
was for all of our wrong-doing or short-coming or such 
proportion of it as was unwilful. In a word, God's provision 
in Christ for our forgiveness does not cover a 
wilful sin, of which the Apostle says, "He that sinneth 
wilfully is of the devil." It merely covers the unwilful 
sins, or in the case of sins that are partly of weakness, 
partly a temptation and partly of wilfulness, it covers 
all the unwilful features, but leaves us responsible for 
whatever portion of wrong-doing on our part was wilful; 
hence the Apostle said to the Church, "If we sin 
wilfully after we have received a knowledge of the 
Truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, but 
a fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation 
which shall devour the adversaries."— Heb. 10:26,27. 

R4272 : page 330 

As a matter of fact, it is safe to presume that, surrounded 
by the weaknesses of others and beset by the 
weaknesses of our own flesh, very few of the Lord's 
people reach this point of full, complete, deliberate, intentional 
sin, the penalty of which is the Second Death. 
In nearly all sin, therefore, there is room for a measure 
of divine forgiveness, proportionate to the willingness 
or weakness. The sins of the Lord's people repented 
of are graciously forgiven in the sense that divine disfavor 
and withholding of the Lord's countenance are no 
more in evidence and the individual is restored. Still 
there hangs over him a responsibility for whatever 
measure of wilfulness is connected with the misdeed. 
And the Lord will see to it that he receives the necessary 
stripes. We are not to think of this as vindictive, 
but rather as a measure of justice, that thus is learned 
something of the exceeding sinfulness of sin, its undesirability, 
and that good always brings its reward. 

In harmony with this thought there are numerous 
Christians today who have come into full harmony with 
the Lord Jesus and every blessing of fellowship with 
God's children, who are, nevertheless, suffering physically 
the penalty for indiscretion, sins of their earlier 



life. The sin has been forgiven in the sense that it is 
not held against them so as to bar their fellowship with 
the Lord. It is covered, but it has left its mark upon 
their flesh and causes them distress in various ways. 
Indeed, a general blight is upon the whole human family, 
which is covered in some respect to those who have 
accepted Christ. The scars and weaknesses of the 
present persist in our mortal flesh, and we have no hope 
even to get rid of these. They belong, however, to the 
mortal, which having been reckonedly justified through 
faith in Christ and consecration to God's service, will 
not be gotten rid of until the "change" in the First 
Resurrection, when we shall be granted new bodies. 
Then the sins which are now covered or hidden in the 
Lord's sight will be absolutely effaced, and we shall 
know them no more. This seems to be the Apostle 
Peter's thought when he says, "Repent and be converted, 
that your sins may be blotted out when the times of 
refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord." 
(Acts 3:19.) In a word, our sins may be covered, but, 
at the second coming of our Lord, they will be blotted 
out completely and forever. 

WHEN THOU MAYEST BE FOUND 

Thinking of the Lord's favor to himself, the Prophet 
by inspiration sets forth a principle applicable to all of 
the Lord's— to all people at all times, saying, For this 
[cause— because of God's mercy], everyone that is 
godly may pray unto thee in a time when thou mayest 
be found: surely, when the great waters overflow, they 
shall not reach unto him. In other words, there is a 
time limit to divine mercies. The Lord will not always 
chide, neither will he keep (restrain) his anger forever. 
There came a limit to his merciful dealing with natural 
Israel. When that point had been reached a separation 
took place between those who were Israelites (the 
wheat) and the remainder (the chaff). The former 
were received into the Gospel dispensation, the others 
being scattered in the destruction of Israel's national 
polity in A.D. 70. 

Similarly in dealing with the Gospel Church, a 
reasonable period seems to be allowed to each individual 
to make his calling and election sure, who, if he 
fails to do so, may drop into the Great Company, but 
whose only hope of attaining this place is through fiery 
trials in which, if still unfaithful, the end will be destruction 
in the Second Death. Similarly in the end of 
this Gospel Age comes the testings of the nominal 
systems, with the Lord's declaration that some will 
stumble and fall and be overwhelmed in the anarchy 
impending as Babylon is cast down, while the faithful 
will be "changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an 
eye." Similarly during the Millennial Age, when the 
knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth and 
every member of the race shall be privileged to see the 



"true light which lighteth every man that cometh into 
the world," everyone will be obliged to make a start in 
righteousness by obedience to God's laws; and those 
who refuse will, as the Prophet says, die the Second 
Death: "There shall be no more thence an infant of 
days, nor an old man that hath not filled his days; for 
the child shall die an hundred years old, and the sinner 
an hundred years old shall be accursed."— Isa. 65:20. 
David seems to speak prophetically for those in the 
end of this Gospel Age, saying, "Thou art my hiding 
place; thou wilt preserve me from trouble; thou wilt 
compass me about with songs of deliverance." As 
the faithful were delivered in the great trouble that 
came upon the Jewish nation, so the faithful will be 

R4273 : page 330 

delivered from the great trouble impending upon 
Christendom. This does not necessarily imply that 
they will be taken away before the trouble. It is 
"Through much tribulation we shall enter the Kingdom." 
As of old the three Hebrews who were cast 
into the fiery furnace were uninjured, while those who 
threw them in were slain by the heat, smitten to death, 
so in the coming trouble the Lord's faithful will not be 
injured by the fiery trials through which they will pass. 

GUIDED BY GOD'S EYE 

The last four verses of our lesson represent our 
Lord as speaking to his people, "Ye righteous." In 
view of the context this is not to be understood to 
represent any absolutely faultless. "There is none 
righteous; no, not one." The righteous here addressed 
are such as the Lord reckons righteous, because of their 
heart attitude of faith and desire to be obedient to his 
will. To these he says, "I will instruct them and teach 
them in the way in which they shall go; I will guide 
them with mine eye." 

This may be understood to signify that the Lord's 
eye will watch over us that he may give us the necessary, 
proper counsel. Another way in which it may be 
viewed, is represented by an exhibition which some of 
us have seen of a horse driven without reins or bridle, 
simply directed by the eye and watching for the master's 
will, the animal being without restraint. But this is 
true of only those who have had exceptional training. 
A horse and a mule, as the next verse tells us, are without 
understanding and require bit and bridle to make 
them serve us properly. We are exhorted not to be 
driven in this manner, because such is not acceptable 
to the Lord. "He seeketh such to worship him as worship 
him in spirit and in truth." 

Those of God's children who fail to learn this lesson 
will never constitute the members of the Elect 
class, will not be "fit for the Kingdom of heaven." 



True, the Lord will deal with the world in general 
along these lines during the Millennium. With bit and 
bridle they will be restrained. Nevertheless, even the 
restitution class must advance beyond this place else 
they will never be fit for eternal life at the close of the 
Millennial Age. Whoever sees the principle here involved, 

R4273 : page 331 

that if he has any hope or desire for joint-heirship 

with Christ in his Kingdom, must learn the 

lesson of serving the Father and his cause of righteousness 

gladly, willingly; must be guided by his eye; must 

follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth. 

SORROWS TO THE WICKED 

"Many sorrows shall be to the wicked; but he that 
trusteth in the Lord, mercy shall compass him about." 
Those who trust in the Lord, to all outward appearances, 
have as many sorrows as their less pious neighbors. 
Nevertheless God's promise is sure, his grace is 
sufficient for them. They may rest assured that "All 
things work together for good" to those who rejoice in 
tribulation, knowing that tribulation worketh patience; 
and patience, experience; and experience, hope, which 
maketh not ashamed those in whose hearts the love of 
God is shed abroad. 

BE GLAD IN THE LORD, AND REJOICE AND SHOUT FOR JOY, 
ALL YE THAT ARE UPRIGHT AND HONEST IN HEART 

We trust that all of our readers are coming to appreciate 
this blessed message more and more— to be 
glad in the Lord— a very different thing from being 
glad in the trifling things of this world. He whose 
affections are set upon this earth will continually find 
tribulations which hinder his rejoicing. But he who 
has set his affections upon things above, on the Lord 
and the glorious things which he has promised us, may 
indeed rejoice, for our Lord changes not. "Not one of 
his good promises shall fail." Let all who are honest 
in hope, in intention, in endeavor, speak forth the 
Lord's praise and shout for joy, not merely that their 
unintentional imperfections according to the flesh are 
covered, but also in the thought that the reign of 
righteousness, the Millennial Kingdom, is now at hand, 
and that under its domination all the families of the 
earth shall be blessed after the great Adversary, Satan, 
shall have been bound. 

"Tis sorrow builds the shining ladder up, 
Whose golden rounds are our calamities; 
Whereon our firm feet planting, nearer God, 
The spirit climbs and hath its eye unsealed." 



R4273 : page 331 

WHAT SINS THE SCAPE-GOAT BORE 

FOLLOWING the account of the Day of Atonement in 

Leviticus 16— after the account of the first sacrifice 

of the bullock for the sins of the High Priest's body 

and house and the sacrifice of the Lord's goat for the sins 

of all the remainder of the people— we read that the High 

Priest took the Scape-goat and laid his hands upon its head 

and confessed over it "all the iniquities of the children of 

Israel and all their transgressions in all their sins, putting 

them upon the head of the goat, and shall send it away." 

We have interpreted this Scape-goat to be a type of the 

"Great Company" of Rev. 7:9-15. We have pointed out 

that the Lord's goat and the Scape-goat, both tethered at 

the door of the Tabernacle, represented the two classes who 

during this Gospel Age make full consecration to the Lord 

and are accepted of him and begotten of the holy Spirit. 

The one class goes on in harmony with its consecration, following 

the example of Christ, who is in type represented by the 

bullock. The other class, equally consecrated and begotten of 

the Spirit, fails to avail itself of the privilege of "suffering with 

Christ." It is allowed to escape the sufferings implied in 

the covenant of sacrifice. The question arises, What were 

those sins that were laid upon the head of the Scape-goat 

and what do they represent in the antitype of the Great 

Company? We answer that they do not represent the same 

sins which were laid upon the bullock, which made atonement 

for the household of faith; neither could they represent 

the sins that were previously atoned for with the blood 

of the Lord's goat. The sprinkling of the blood for those 

sins entirely cancelled them for "all the people." 

The explanation of this seeming incongruity of first 
making an atonement in the Most Holy "for the sins of all 
the people," and then "laying the iniquities of the people 
upon the head of the Scape-goat" is explained by the fact 
that there are two kinds of sins and that the sacrifice of 
Christ and the Church, typified by the sacrifice of the bullock 
and the Lord's goat, atoned for one kind of sin and not 
for the other. Thus of our Lord it is written, "Behold the 
Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world," and 
this Lamb has associated with himself the Church, whose 
sacrifice is represented in the Lord's goat. The sin of the 
world is the Adamic sin, to which the Apostle refers, saying, 
"By one man's disobedience sin entered into the world, and 
death as a result of sin, and so death passed upon all;" 
that sin and its penalty was upon everybody alike regardless 
of his wishes, for all were born in sin, shapen in iniquity 
—blemished, incapable of righteousness in the absolute 
sense. It was for that one sin, and that only, that Christ, 
the Head and Body, pays the penalty. 

Aside from this general sin, however, there are "iniquities 
of the people" in which some share more and others 



less and others not at all. These are the more or less wilful 
wrong-doings which prevail throughout the world— violations 
of justice and love beyond the degree of inherited 
weakness. In these things, therefore, there is a measure of 
responsibility proportionate to the knowledge and ability to 
resist. These are the sins of the world that will be confessed 
on the head of the Scape-goat class and for which 
they will be permitted to suffer. An illustration of this is 
found in our Lord's words respecting typical Israel and the 
awful trouble which came upon those of the Jewish nation 
found unworthy, who had enjoyed the great privileges and 
were still found unworthy of the high calling. 

Of that time of trouble our Lord spoke freely in Matt. 24, 
and the Apostle, speaking of it, says that "God poured 
upon that nation his wrath to the uttermost, that all things 
written in the Law and the prophecies concerning them 
should be fulfilled." Why should such great severity come 
upon them more than had come upon their forefathers? 
Why should so great tribulation as the Scriptures foretell 
come upon the Great Company in the end of this age more 
than came upon others of previous times? Our Lord 
dropped a word which gives us the key to the situation: 
"Of this generation shall be required all the righteous blood." 
(Luke 1 1:50,51.) And similarly respecting the end of this age 
the Scriptures imply that there is a great back-account of 
retribution owing to the rest of the world which will be fully 
squared in the awful trouble with which this age will end. 
For instance, those who suffered earlier in the age are represented 
as beheaded souls under the altar crying, "How long, 
O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our 
blood on them that dwell on the earth?" (Rev. 6:10.) The 
answer given them implies that their blood, the wrong and 

R4273 : page 332 

injustice done to them as well as the wrong and injustice 
done to others since their day, is kept strict account of and 
will all need to be settled in the end of this age. 

Those who made a covenant to sacrifice their lives in 
the service of the Lord, the Truth and the brethren, and 
who on the strength of this were begotten of the Spirit to a 
spirit nature, and who subsequently neglected to fulfil their 
covenant or vow, would be liable to the Second Death on 
this account; but in great mercy the Lord purposes to pass 
them through a "great tribulation" and to accept as "conquerors" 
those who will stand the tests of that time of trouble 
loyally. But their sufferings will not be on their own 
account. They will suffer for the sins of others— the accumulated 
sins of this age against light and knowledge will be 
required of those who in this day of the "bright shining" of 
the light of Truth have still held back from the voluntary 
sacrifice to which they devoted themselves in consecration. 

However, eventually this Great Company, passing their 
tests, proving themselves loyal to the Lord, at last will receive 
a great blessing, even though it will not be so grandly 
glorious as that which the Lord will give to the Little Flock, 



who willingly, gladly, lay down their lives in harmony with 
the privileges and instructions of the Word. They will be 
invited to participate in the marriage festival of the Lamb. 
-Rev. 19:9. 

Some have written us lately the assurance that they 
know that the Great Company will be blessed on the earthly 
plane. We reply that it is true that a great multitude will 
be blessed during the Millennium under the restitution blessings 
and privileges— "all the families of the earth." But the 
Great Company of Revelation 7:9-15 is specially identified 
with the Church and separate from the world. They will 
come up to their station through "great tribulation," while 
the world will be led upward along the grand highway of 
holiness, on which there shall be no lion or ravenous beast, 
and in a time when nothing shall hurt nor destroy in all that 
holy Kingdom. 

If there were no references to the Great Company in 
the Bible we should be inclined to look for one, or else know 
with sorrow that many shall go into the Second Death. 
Surely of all that consecrate fully and are begotten of the 
holy Spirit to new nature only a "little flock" make their 
election sure by compliance with the terms. The remainder, 
unfit for the glories to which they were called, must, it 
would seem, either die the Second Death or have their new 
natures developed in fiery trials and great tribulations "for 
the destruction of the flesh that the spirit may be saved in 
the day of the Lord Jesus." 



R4274 : page 332 

LETTERS ACKNOWLEDGING "VOW" BLESSINGS 

[QUERY:— What if health or weather hindered leaving 
the door open, and one were alone in a room with one of 
the opposite sex? Or what if it were in an office or room 
not under the control of the one who took the Vow? 

ANSWER:— Both of these and every other contingency 
are fully met by the words "so far as reasonably possible," 
and it is your own judgment that decides. It would 
not be reasonably possible for anyone to regulate an 
office or room that is only partly or not at all under his 
control.! 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I write to tell you that I have taken the Vow. I 
was influenced to come to the point by reading a paragraph 
of an article in the TOWER entitled, "David Attaining 
Kingship." The paragraph was this: 

It is difficult to estimate the power of the human 
will. Apparently God has placed all the interests of 
the present life under the control of our wills, and, indeed, 
much of the success in respect to the future life 



is similarly under the control of our wills. Apparently 
the will, rightly exercised against sin, is invulnerable. 

I humbly pray that God may "work in me both to 
will and to do of his good pleasure." 

Sincerely yours in Christian fellowship, 
F. I. PARMENTER. 



DEAR BROTHER IN THE LORD:- 

I don't want to wait another hour to register my 
Vow to the Lord. I am very sorry I waited this long. 
I am so glad it is not too late. I have hesitated because 
I was afraid I could not keep the Vow, and know it is 
worse to break than to pledge myself at all. Since 
praying and thinking it over I know that I can, with the 
help of our dear Master, live up to the Vow. 

I surely need it as much or more than any one else. 
My life previous to consecration was most sinful, and I 
regret that I cannot tell you that I have made no great 
mistakes since. 

My sacrifice is such a small, miserable thing; but 
I do want to bind it firmly to the altar. 

Remember me in your prayers, dear Brother, and 
give my love to all the dear ones at the Bible House. 

Yours in Christ, . 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We wish to add our names to those of the dear 
friends who have made the Vow unto our heavenly 
Father, and are very thankful for the privilege. 

As God's children we are willing to do anything 
that will help us along the narrow way and bring us 
nearer to our heavenly Father, and this we know the 
Vow is doing. We cannot have too much of a good 
thing if we use it properly. 

We think we should have taken the Vow even if we 
had no need of it at this time, for we do not know what 
we shall need in the "evil day," except keeping close to 
the Lord. 

And so, dear brother, we ask that you remember 
us in your prayers that by his strength we may keep 
the Vow we have made. With much Christian love and 
best wishes, we remain, 

Your brothers in Christ, W. T. BAKER, 
A. SMITH. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Beloved Brother in the Lord. It has taken considerable 
time, and a severe conflict with the old self, 
to reach the point of sending in my name as a signer 
and endorser of the Vow in all its particulars. 



I must confess that I was somewhat opposed to the 
matter at the first. However, I prayed very earnestly 
for guidance and wisdom to decide the matter aright. 
Have just now finished a re-reading of it, and am 
wondering how I found any objection, for my heart and 
head both endorse in the fullest possible manner its 
every detail. Sister Kendall and I now feel convinced 
that our heavenly Father in his loving kindness has 
sent this Vow as a special safeguard to his children 
in this time of special need, and I have been prompt 
to send my name as soon as the matter was made plain 
to my mind. It will surely prove a source of great blessing 
to all the pure in heart. Doubtless it will sift out 
some who are not. Tis always so. Therefore, with 
greatly increased thankfulness to our loving heavenly 
Father for this further evidence of his care over us, and 
with renewed assurance, dear Brother, of our perfect 
confidence in your own Christian deportment and integrity, 
we gladly and solemnly and reverently register 
this Vow before "Our Father, which art in heaven," 
praying that he will enable us to keep it inviolate. 

With much Christian love, 

MR. AND MRS. S. C. KENDALL. 

page 333 

PILGRIM PARKER NOT AFRAID 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

In making Pilgrim visits from place to place, I 
sometimes encounter opposition to the Vow, and to the 
publishing of names of those who have taken the Vow; 
and I have just had a letter from a brother who thinks 
Brother Russell is going too far, and that he feels that 
he must write Brother Russell in remonstrance. I have 
just replied to this letter as follows: 

"I do not think you look at the Vow properly. If 
you could know what I do you would be heartily in 
favor of it. I think I have had a few friends tell me of 
their objections to the Vow, and in every instance I have 
been made to see that those who object to it need it much 
more than many of those who have taken it gladly and 
are praising God on account of it. 

"In every instance of objection made to me, I have 
been able to see that there is a little false pride left, 
which is a good thing for Satan to work on, or else (this 
chiefly on the part of brethren) there is a natural propensity 
(and sometimes it has been cultivated) to 
associate too freely with the opposite sex. In either 
case the Vow would be a safeguard. As to the Vow 
being published I like this feature particularly. I want 
my wife and children to look at the Vow each day and 
say to each other, 'Papa is trying to live up to that Vow. 
The Lord keep him true to the end.' I hope my name 
will appear on a card and that my neighbors, not in the 
Truth, will read it when visiting my home. It may 



be they will catch the spirit of it and inquire of my wife, 
'What is it your husband is preaching? What is this 
thing which leads you to make such sacrifices as you 
and the boys do, in remaining at home alone, weeks at 
a time, while your husband is visiting other parts of 
the country.'? 

"If we are living up to our Consecration Vow, then 
we are confessing him before men every day, and it 
will be readily seen by men that we are 'Paying our 
Vows unto the Most High.' 

"Then why not register one and place it where it 
can be seen, that others may see what kind of standard 
we set in making our Vows? Then let us so live each 
day that those who read the Vow we have taken, 
will say, 'Those people not only register a Vow, but they 
keep it!' 

"Thus we may please the Lord in fulfilling Matthew 5:16. 
Take the Vow, brother." 

Yours in brother love, J. A. PARKER. 



[We fully agree to the advantage of publishing the 
names of those who have taken the Vow. Nevertheless, 
let us exercise charity and patience toward all, the fearful 
and the weak included, and forego for a time at least 
our rights and privileges lest some should be stumbled. 
Once they realize that this Vow is now "meat in due 
season," intended of the Lord to stimulate his people 
spiritually and draw them closer to himself, we may 
reasonably expect that every truly consecrated brother 
and sister in the Truth will be anxious to join us in 
making this Vow unto the Lord, and in paying it faithfully 
in the presence of all the people.— EDITOR.] 



page 333 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V. (E)* 

Questions on Study V.— The Author of the Atonement. 

DECEMBER 6 

(37) If vitality went forth from Jesus to heal the 
sick, did it cause him proportionate weakness? pain? 
sickness? And can similar instances be cited of others 
to a less degree? Pp.125, 126. 

(38) Should we say, then, that suffering is the wage 
of sin which our Lord bore for mankind? P. 126, par. 2. 

(39) How did our Lord pour out his soul unto death? 
What part of his experience paid our penalty? P. 127, 



par. 1. 

(40) When our Lord cried, "My God! My God! why 
hast thou forsaken me"? whom did he address? and 
what did the expression imply? Was such an experience 
necessary? If so, in what way? P. 127, par. 2. 

(41) What was the effect of these trying experiences? 
What purpose was served? Who will ever profit by 
them and how? P. 128. 

DECEMBER 13 

THE MEDIUM OF THE ATONEMENT 

(1) Why do we speak of "the man Christ Jesus" as 
the Medium of the Atonement rather than refer to the 
Logos, or pre-human One? P. 129. 

(2) In considering our Lord's genealogy as a man, 

what is the explanation of the conflict between the accounts 

in Matthew 1 and Luke 3? Explain why they 

differ and the value of the two, and why one says that 

Joseph was the son of Heli while the other declares 

him the son of Jacob? P. 129. 

(3) If Jesus was a descendant of King David by 
both Joseph's and Mary's lineage, to which is he really 
accredited? Quote the Scriptures proving the point. 
Pp. 130-132. 

(4) Why and how was the line of our Lord's descent 
changed from Solomon's to Nathan's? P. 133. 

DECEMBER 20 

(5) When Jesus' mother poetically sang of the putting 
down of the mighty from their seats and the exalting 
of those of low degree, to what did she refer? P. 133, 
par. 5. 

(6) When did our Lord become the "righteous 
branch" of David's stock? When did he become David's 
root? What different thoughts do the two words express? 
P. 134, par. 1,2. 

(7) In John 1:1 the Logos is referred to as a God; 
and in Matthew 22:43,44, we read: "Jehovah said unto 
my Lord (Master) sit thou," etc. What is the proper 
relationship of these statements? When did Christ become 
Lord both of the dead and living? (Rom. 14:9.) 

Pp. 134-136. 

DECEMBER 27 

(8) When our Lord is styled the Second Adam, 
what feature of his work is referred to? P. 137, par. 1. 

(9) When did our Lord become the Second Adam 
and how and when will he regenerate the first Adam 
and his death-stricken family? Pp.137, 138. 

(10) Did it cost our Lord anything to become the 
Second Adam? If so, what? P. 138, par. 2; P. 139, par. 1 . 

(11) How will the Lord's first work for his Church 



correspond with his whole work for the world by and by? 

(12) How is the expression, "root and offspring," 
well illustrated in the Scriptural figure of Christ and 
the Church (a grape-vine)? Note and explain the 
figures. P. 140. 



*Five years ago DAWN-STUDIES, VOL. V., was reset, and 
unfortunately the type was not exactly same size as before; and 
hence page for page they differ. The references given in these 
Berean Studies apply to the present edition, a copy of which 
postpaid will cost you but 30c. But keep your old edition, for 
unfortunately the New Bible helps refer to its pages. 



page 334 
Bibles, Testaments, Students' Helps, Etc. 

SUPPLIED AT WHOLESALE COST PRICES 



THIS LIST SUPERSEDES ALL PREVIOUS LISTS 

Bible publishers announce that, owing to increased cost of material 
and labor, they have found it necessary to advance the price of 
many of the cheaper grades. 

IN presenting our list of Bibles this year, we have dropped a number 
which we previously carried and have selected others which we 
think more desirable. We give below a list which, although not 
very large, we think will cover a range sufficiently broad to suit the 
wants of nearly all. However, should any of the friends desire a 
more complete list to select from, we shall be pleased to mail publishers' 
catalogues upon postal card application. 

First in importance among Bibles we rank the 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE 

described on next page. 



TEACHERS' BIBLES 

No. (Add Postage on these, 20c each.) Pub. Our 

04403 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., round corners, Price Price 

red under gold, references, 

7-1/4x5 $1.35 $ .94 

8301 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, illustrated, full teachers' helps, references, 

linen, 7-3/4 x 5-1/4 1.60 1.00 



4412 Black Face Brevier— easy to read. Egyptian 
Morocco, div. circuit, head bands and marker 

round corners, red under gold, 5-1/8 x 7-7/8 2.30 1.25 

(Add Postage on these, 26c each.) 

8701 Long Primer, French Morocco, div. cir., red 
under gold, helps, references, concordance, 
illustrated, linen, 8-1/2 x 6 2.10 1.38 

8702 Same as 8701, leather lined 2.50 1.58 

COMBINATION TEACHERS' BIBLES 

These Bibles show the variations of the Revised Version at the 
foot of each page. Otherwise they are ordinary "Teachers' Bibles," 
with maps, concordance, etc., illustrated. 
(Add Postage on these, 28c each.) 
610 Bourgeois, French Seal, div. cir., red under 

gold, 8 x 6 x 1-3/4 5.00 1.35 

614 Same as 610, leather lined 6.00 1.63 

LINEAR TEACHERS' BIBLES 

Hitherto these Bibles have been sold by Subscription Agents 
only. Their special feature, differentiating from other Teachers' 
Bibles, is that they show the readings of the Common and Revised 
Versions side by side in the same line, self -pronouncing. 
(Add Postage on these, 30c each.) 
350 Small Pica, French Seal, red under gold, full 

teachers' helps, 8-3/4 x 6 x 1-1/2 6.00 2.10 

360 Small Pica, Levant Morocco, kid lined, otherwise 
same as 350 10.00 4.25 

POCKET BIBLES 

(Add Postage on these, 15c each.) 
01 153 Ruby, French Morocco, round cor., red under 

gold, div. cir., text only, 5-1/2 x 3-7/8 x 1-1/8 95 .63 

01329 Same as 01327, leather lined to edge 1.60 1.05 

194 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, text, 5-7/8 x4x 1-1/4 1.10 .75 

INDIA PAPER POCKET BIBLES 

"Mite" Bible (the smallest Bible) 
093x Venetian Morocco, div. cir., gilt edges with 

magnifying glass, 1-3/4 x 1-1/4 x 5/8 1.00 .75 

(Add Postage on these, 8c each.) 
01 103 Diamond, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, text only, 4-1/2 x 2-1/2 x 1/2 1.40 .98 

01112 Persian Morocco, leather lined to edge, otherwise 

as 01103 2.00 1.35 

01157x Ruby, French Morocco, div. cir., leather lined, 

red under gold, text only, 5-5/8 x 3-7/8 x 9-16 2.00 1.35 

03029x Pearl, Alaska Seal, div. cir., leather lined, silk 

sewed, red under gold, references, 5-1/8x3-7/8x5/8... 3.25 2.15 
03114x Ruby, Persian Levant, div. cir., leather lined, 

silk sewed, red under gold, references, 5-5/8x4x3/4.. 3.25 2.15 



(Add Postage for these, 4c each.) 

0612 Diamond, Persian Morocco, div. cir., leather 

lined, red under gold, text only, 3-3/4 x 2-1/2 x 7/8 2.25 1.55 

02002x Brilliant, Persian Morocco, div. cir., leather 
lined, red under gold, maps (smallest reference 
Bible made), 3-5/8 x 2-1/2 x 5/8 2.50 1.70 

INDIA PAPER BIBLES 

(Add Postage for these, 15c each.) 

8635 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, references, maps, 7 x 4-3/4 x 5/8 1.75 1.13 

8636 French Seal, leather lined, otherwise as 8635 3.00 2.14 

9635 Brevier, large face, French Morocco, div. cir., 

red under gold, references, 7-1/8 x 5 x 1 2.75 1.90 

THUMB INDEX ON A BIBLE, 25c EXTRA 
INDIA PAPER BIBLES-(Continued) 

9636 French Seal, silk sewn, leather lined, otherwise 
as 9635 4.00 2.85 

03265x Minion, Levant Morocco, div. cir., calf lined 

silk sewed, red under gold (thinnest minion 

reference Bible), 6-7/8 x 4-3/4 x 5/8 4.25 2.85 

03274x Minion, Alaska Seal, div. cir., leather lined, silk 

sewed, red under gold, references, index, concordance 

and maps, 6-7/8 x 4-7/8 x 7/8 4.50 3.00 

03554x Brevier, black face, Alaska Seal, div. cir., leather 

lined, red under gold, references, index, self-pronouncing, 

concordance and maps, 8-1/8 x 

5-1/2 x 7/8 5.50 3.60 

0358 lx Long Primer, black face, same as 03554x, 7-3/4 x 

5-1/4 x 15-16 6.00 4.00 

0865-l/2xLong Primer, Levant, div. cir., calf lined, silk 

sewed, red under gold, teachers' helps, arranged 

as cyclopedic concordance, 7-3/4 x 5-1/4 x 

1-1/8 8.35 5.25 

AMERICAN STANDARD REVISED BIBLE 

(Add Postage on these, 20c each.) 

160 Bourgeois, Cloth, references 1.00 .80 

172 Bourgeois, Egyptian Seal, references, red under 

gold, div. cir 2.00 1.60 

(Add Postage on these, 30c each.) 

260 Long Primer, Cloth, references, 8-3/4 x 6-3/4 1.50 1.15 

272 Long Primer, Egyptian Seal, references, red 

under gold, div. cir., 8-3/4 x 6-3/4 3.00 2.25 

(Add Postage, 15 cents each.) 
Minion, black faced, reference edition, self-pronouncing, a 
fine edition— 4-3/4 x 7. 

152 Egyptian Seal, div. cir., red under gold 1.75 1.38 

154 Persian Levant, leather lined to edge, otherwise 

same as 152 3.25 2.35 

(Add Postage, 12 cents each.) 
152x India paper edition of 152 2.75 1.97 



154x India paper edition of 154 4.00 2.81 

LAP BIBLES FOR THE AGED-References, Light 
Weight, Large Print 

(Add Postage on these, 25c each.) 

2002 Pica, Cloth, red edges, 9-1/4 x 6-1/2 x 1-1/4 2.00 .90 

2014 Pica, French Seal, limp, size same as 2002 2.75 1.43 

2022 Pica, French Seal, div. cir., size same as 2002 3.50 1.75 

2032 Arabian Morocco, grained leather lining to 

edge, silk lined band and marker 6.00 2.80 

CHILDREN'S ILLUSTRATED BIBLES 

(Add Postage on these, 1 lc each.) 
216 Minion, French Morocco, limp, red under gold, 

5-3/4x3-5/8 1.15 .82 

215B Minion, French Morocco, references, div. cir., 

red under gold, 7-1/4x5-1/4x7/8 1.50 .85 

TESTAMENTS 

(Add Postage on these, 3c each.) 
21 13 Nonpareil, French Morocco, limp, gold title, side 

and back, gold edges (vest-pocket edition), 

4-3/8x2-7/8x1/2 40 .22 

21 13P Same as above, with Psalms 50 .27 

2115 Same as 2113, with div. cir., and red under gold 56 .30 

2115P Same as 2115, with Psalms 66 .35 

013RL Same as 2113, with words of our Lord in red 

letters 60 .33 

015RLSameas013RL, with div. cir., red under gold 80 .42 

2142X Nonpareil, French Seal, limp, grained leather 

lining, red under gold, gold roll (thin), 4-3/8 x 

2-3/4x3/8 85 .43 

2142PX Same as 2142X, with Psalms 1.00 .50 

010 Diamond, Venetian Morocco, limp, gold edges, 

3-3/4x2-1/4x1/4 50 .35 

014 Diamond, Arabian Morocco, div. cir., leather 

lined, red under gold, India paper, 3-3/4x2-1/4x1/4.. .90 .65 
(Add Postage on these, 5c each.) 
287 Brevier, Roan leather, flexible, gold edges, with 

Psalms, 6-1/4x4-1/2 42 .42 

NEW TESTAMENTS FOR THE AGED 

(Add Postage on these, 10c each.) 

212 Small Pica, Roan, square cor., 5-3/4 x 8-1/4 45 .45 

283 Same as above, with Psalms, 8-1/4x5-1/2x3/4 50 .50 

REVISED TESTAMENTS 

0100 Brevier, Cloth, red edges, 16 mo., including 
postage .23 

TEXT BIBLES 



(Postage, 7c) 
178 Agate type, cloth, red edges, 4 x 5-3/4 17 .17 

(Postage, 12c) 
131 Nonpareil type, cloth, red edges, 5-1/4 x 7-1/4 25 .25 



page 335 

CONCORDANCES AND OTHER BIBLE STUDY HELPS 

First in this list we mention the several volumes of 

"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURE" SERIES 

—referring inquirers to the second page of each issue of this journal 
for prices, etc. We commend also, as aids, the following publications 
by other presses, which we supply at specially low prices because of 
the assistance they will lend to the study of God's Word. We mention 
these somewhat in the order in which they seem to us to be desirable 
aids. 

THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE 

STUDENTS' EDITION 

We specially recommend this Bible 
for its smallness of size, lightness of weight 
and good-sized print, and above all for the 
helps to Bible students and teachers 
bound with it. Printed on India paper; 
excellent press work. Its special feature 
distinguishing this Bible from all others is 

ITS BEREAN BIBLE 
TEACHERS MANUAL 

Parti. 

Brief Scripture Commentary based 
on expositions of Dawn-Studies, ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER and Brother Russell's 
published sermons, tracts, etc., with 
references to these for fuller comments. 
Part II. 
INSTRUCTORS' GUIDE TEXTS 

Texts topically arranged for use in 
teaching divine plan privately or publicly. 
Part III. 

BEREAN TOPICAL INDEX 
Part IV. 

DIFFICULT TEXTS EXPLAINED 
SPURIOUS PASSAGES NOTED 

WHOLESALE PRICES 
IN ANY QUANTITY 



POSTAGE, OR EXPRESSAGE INCLUDED 

MINION TYPE EDITION, 4-1/2 x 6-3/4 
inches. Sample of Type in our October 
1 issue. 

No. 1918-So-called French Seal, 

red under gold, round-cornered, 

divinity circuit, linen-lined. ...$1.65 
No. 1928-Same as 1918, bound in 

Levant Morocco, fine-grained, 

very durable, leather lined 2.50 

BOLD-FACED TYPE EDITION. 

SAMPLE OF TYPE IN OCTOBER 1 ISSUE, 
PAGE 302, SIZE 5-1/2 x 7-1/2 INCHES. 

No. 1938-The Helps in this Bible 

and the binding are exactly the 

same as in the above described 
No. 1928. (We have these only 

in the better binding "Levant 

Morocco.") Price $3.00 

No. 1948-This Bible is exactly 

the same as No. 1938, except 

that it contains additional matter 

desired by some, namely: 

the Bagster Concordance, etc., 

which adds to its bulk. Price... 3.25 

Patent index 25 cents extra, but we do not advise this on so 
small a book. The above very special price was secured only by our 
placing a very large order— 10,000 copies. This is probably the 
largest-sized single order ever placed for India paper Bibles. 

DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA 

FOR THE HOUSEHOLD OF FArTH. 

This publication, we believe, will be in great demand as soon as 
known. It is a text-book for each day in the year— and good year 
by year continuously. 

But this is more than a text-book; it has an appropriate comment 
under each text selected from the columns of back issues of 
ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

Our new edition of the "Manna" contains the same texts 
and comments as the former one; but it has twice as many 
pages. Every alternate leaf is blank ruled, for use as an 
Autograph and Birthday record. It is printed on fine bond paper 
and bound in handsome dark blue cloth. It would be well worth 
$1.00 or more, in any book store. 

NEW PRICES, WHOLESALE AND RETAIL. 



The new "Manna" will be sold by Manna Colporteurs and others 
at 50 cents each (60 cents when gotten by mail or prepaid express). 
The wholesale rates, open to any TOWER reader, are as follows, 
cash with order:— 

1 copy, postpaid $ .35 

10 or more copies, by express, prepaid, each 30 

10 or more copies, by freight or express, charges collect, each .20 

We, of course, prefer the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES to be colporteured; 
but a good follow-up work can be done with "Manna" 
by those who cannot do the regular work with the STUDIES. 

We hope this little book will find a place at every breakfast 
table; and that spiritual refreshment may thus be enjoyed with the 
natural food, stimulating thankfulness to the Giver of all Good and 
thus inducing the peace of God and favoring both spiritual and natural 
health and well-being. 

THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT 

This very valuable work, published under the author's copyright 
by Fowler & Wells Co., New York City, has been sold by them at 
$4 in cloth and $5 in half leather binding. For several years a friend, 
an earnest Bible student, desirous of assisting the readers of our 
Society's publications, has supplied them through us at a greatly 
reduced price; now he has purchased the copyright and plates from 
the Fowler & Wells Co., and presented the same to our Society as a 
gift, under our assurance that the gift will be used for the furthering 
of the Truth to the extent of our ability, by such a reduction of price 
as will permit the poor of the Lord's flock to have this help in the 
study of the Word. 

REDUCED PRICES.-These will be sold with ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER only. In cloth binding $1.50 (6s. 3d.)— includes postage and, 
as a Premium, one year's subscription, new or renewal, to Z.W.T. 
On thin paper, in full morocco leather, divinity circuit, red under 
gold edges, silk sewed, leather lined, $2.50 (10s. 6d.)— includes postage 
and one year's subscription to W.T. 

THE TISCHENDORF NEW TESTAMENT 

This is the ordinary Common Version in cloth binding. As 
footnotes it gives the reading of the three oldest Greek MSS., Sinaiticus, 
Vaticanus and Alexandrine, wherever these differ from the Common 
Version. This is a very valuable little work, published in Europe, 
which we specially import for the benefit of our readers. Price, 50c, 
including postage. 

LEESER'S TRANSLATION OF THE OLD 
TESTAMENT 

This is the standard translation amongst English reading 
Hebrews, by one of their own rabbis. It is not perfect, but is a 
valuable aid in critical study of the Old Testament. Our special 
price, in leather binding, including postage, is $1.10. 

ANALYTICAL CONCORDANCE TO THE 
SCRIPTURES 



In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Young (Presbyterian). 
A valuable work for all critical students. Price, in cloth binding, $5, 
including postage. We are not permitted by the publishers to cut 
this price; but may and do give postage free and give besides a 
premium of any four volumes of the SCRIPTURE STUDIES series in cloth 
binding with each Concordance, or six volumes if purchaser pays 
the expressage. 

THE EXHAUSTIVE CONCORDANCE TO THE 
SCRIPTURES 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Strong (Methodist). 
This is also an able work and useful in critical study. It has some 
advantages over Young's; after getting used to it we prefer it. 
Special reduced prices,— in cloth binding, $3; half leather, $5. 
Carriage prepaid, 65c. extra. 

CRUDEN'S CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES 

A valuable work, but scarcely necessary to those who have either 
of the above mentioned. English only. Cloth binding, $1, 
delivered. 

SMITH'S BIBLE DICTIONARY 

This is one of the most desirable editions of Prof. Smith's work. 
It is a large volume of 1020 pages. In cloth binding, $1.30, including 
postage. 

"BIBLE TALKS IN SIMPLE LANGUAGE" 

This is the best book of its kind we have ever seen. It presents 
the Bible stories in simple, but not childish language, and seems 
remarkably free from the bad theology so common in this class of 
books. All Christian parents should have a Sunday Bible lesson 
with their children, and this book furnishes interesting topics, to 
which may be added as much concordant "Present Truth" as the age 
of the children will justify. Parents are responsible for their children's 
training in theology as well as morals. This will assist you in 
the discharge of this duty, and thus be a blessing to yourself as well as 
to your children. 

624 pages, 250 illustrations; cloth sides, leather back and 
corners, gilt edges. A subscription book at $3. Our special price, 
75 cents, plus 25 cents postage. 

SCRIPTURE STUDIES-INDIA PAPER 

Calls for SCRIPTURE STUDIES divided into small portions, light 
convenient for the pocket, that could be read on the cars, etc., led 
us to prepare an India-paper edition. The entire volume is on this 
very fine paper reduced to three-eighths of an inch in thickness and 
about four ounces in weight. [The type is exactly the same size as in 
the regular editions.] It is a beauty. Leather covers, gold edges. 
Its cost, with postage, is now 75c each for the first three volumes 
and 85c each for the remainder per volume, at which price it is 
supplied to WATCH TOWER subscribers. 



We have a Karatol (imitation leather) bound edition on poorer 
paper, but very choice, at 35 cents— first volume only. 



page 337 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXIX. NOVEMBER 15 No. 22 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS. 

The Nova Scotia Convention 339 

Pride, Ingratitude, Hypocrisy, Rebellion 340 

A Murderer of the Brethren 340 

"Just for Today" (Poem) 342 

Love in Return for Treachery 342 

Victory for the Right 343 

"The Lord is My Shepherd" 344 

"My Sheep Follow Me" 345 

"Green Pastures and Still Waters" 346 

Evil Speaking— Busy-Bodying— Truth-Hiding 348 

"Suffering as a Busy-Body" 349 

A Truth-Telling Obligation 350 

Don't Tell or You are a Tell-Tale 351 

Public Ministries of the Truth 352 

page 338 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each MAY stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



NEW BIBLES FURTHER DELAYED 



We hope to begin shipping the New Bibles about Dec. 1st. 
BROTHER RUSSELL'S SERMONS 



FRIENDS WRITING approvingly to journals publishing 
Brother Russell's sermons, should word their letters so that if 
they were published the public would know to whose sermons 
they refer. 

1909--MOTTO CARDS--1909 



These are very handsome, made specially for our use. 
Velvety green card with inset flowers and text, and with a 
calendar pad, and a copy of "the Vow." Those preferring 
not to have the Vow can tear it out without damaging the 
calendar. Price, 15 cents each, includes packing and postage. 

COLPORTEUR BAGS AND DAWN-MOBILES 



Dear Sister Brown of Washington City, finding that canvas 
bags, to hang on the shoulder and under the coat, are a 
great convenience to Colporteurs, has gladly assumed the 
service of supplying these to the regular Colporteurs of our 
list free. She has supplied us with a lot, which we will be 
glad to forward to those not yet supplied. 

Brother Cole's kind offer of Dawn-Mobiles free to Colporteur 
Sisters is still open. Others desiring to purchase the 
device may remit $2.50 for one, to be sent charges collect. 

TABERNACLE SHADOWS-Leather, 50c; Cloth, 15c. 



R4274 : page 339 



THE NOVA SCOTIA CONVENTION 

THE JOURNEY from Allegheny to Halifax and back 
was approximately 3000 miles— a long distance to 
go to a Convention where only comparatively a 
small number could be expected. However, the Nova 
Scotia friends were anxious for a Convention, as were 
also some of those at Boston born in Nova Scotia. This 
helps to account for the fact that 75 of the Boston friends 
attended. From various parts of Nova Scotia about 125 
more completed the total of 200 in attendance. Everything 
considered this was an excellent turnout. We 
had a very enjoyable time and parted company, longing 
for the time when "those of like precious faith" will be 
forever with the Lord and with each other. 

The Convention had been in session two days by 
the time of our arrival and continued two days more. 
The chairman was Brother Marchant, and discourses 
were given by Brothers Streeter, Bridges, Barker, Brenneisen, 
MacMillan and Russell on various features of 
the Divine Plan. Seventeen symbolized their consecration 
by water immersion, and when it came to the closing 
service— the LOVE FEAST— the blessings seemed 
to overflow out of all our hearts. The experience was 
both a solemn and happifying one, well calculated to 
remind us all of the perfect union with our Lord, in 
which we hope to join in the General Assembly of the 
Church of the First-Borns. 

The largest attendance at the Convention was, of 
course, on the occasion of the discourse to the public, 
on "The Overthrow of Satan's Empire." The audience 
was variously estimated above 2000, but we accepted 
the most conservative estimate of 1200, and felt very 
glad that that number of people was privileged to hear 

R4275 : page 339 

of the "good tidings of great joy." The audience was 
a very intelligent one. 

A GRAND TIME AT TRURO 

The Truro friends bespoke the day following the 
Convention, and on its acceptance made considerable 
preparation. From the Halifax Convention a train-load 
of 140 went to Truro, a distance of about one hundred 
miles. Their presence was very gratifying to all concerned. 
On arrival we had time for a Colporteur meeting 
before noon, all participating, though the total 
number of Colporteurs present was twenty-five. In 
the afternoon we had a symposium on "The Principal 
Thing," participated in by sixteen brethren, to each of 
whom was allotted ten minutes, and between whom 
were divided the various items of interest pertaining to 
the Christian character, and what should be put on and 



what should be put off. 

The High School chapel had been secured for the 
evening meeting, to which the public was invited by 
liberal advertising. It was the largest available auditorium, 
and it was crowded, over 600 being seated, 
while more than 100 stood during the two hours' 
services. Many of those familiar with the subject gave 
place to the people of the city by attending an overflow 
meeting. We believe that we never had any more 
thoughtful and attentive hearing. We trust that some 
good seed was sown in some good hearts. At the adjournment 
of the meeting at 10:30 p.m., a special train 
took back the friends who had come from Halifax and 
vicinity and Boston, while another train bore ourself 
and others in the opposite direction. The scene at the 
depot was very inspiring. Inside and outside the 
songs arose, "God be with you till we meet again," and 
"Blest be the tie that binds our hearts." The experiences 
of the day will long be remembered by us. 

THE GATHERING AT BANGOR 

A ride from 11:00 p.m. until 1:30 p.m. the next day 
brought us to Bangor, where we had accepted another 
invitation for a stop-over. We were heartily welcomed 
and generously entertained. The afternoon session for 
the interested was attended by about seventy, who had 
gathered from various districts around about, some of 
them residents of Quebec. The evening session for the 
public as in the Universalist meeting-house and there 
was an attendance of about 700, who gave strictest attention, 
and many of them indicated their endorsement 
of the presentation during the service, as well as 
afterward. 

More goodbys and then a midnight train, which 
brought us to Boston the next morning and from there 
a ride of a day and a night returned us safely to Allegheny, 
weary but very thankful to the Lord for the 

privilege of service we had enjoyed and from the encouragement 
we had received from the loving zeal manifested 
by so many of the dear friends. 



R4275 : page 340 

PRIDE, INGRATITUDE, HYPOCRISY, REBELLION 

-2 SAMUEL 15:l-12.-NOVEMBER l.~ 

Golden Text:— "Honor thy Father and thy Mother, 
that thy days may be long in the land which the 
Lord thy God giveth thee."-Exod. 20:12. 

LESSONS may be drawn from the lives of the ignoble, as 
well as from those of the noble. As the poet says:— 



"Lives of great men all remind us, 
We should make our lives sublime, 
And, departing, leave behind us 
Footprints on the sands of time." 

This being so, then surely it is true also that the footprints 
of the evil-doers on life's pathway have lessons for us 
also, indicating to us which paths should be shunned, which 
elements of character should be restrained, which ambitions 
should be curbed. Following this course of instruction the 
divine Word holds up before the Spiritual Israelites not only 
noble precepts and counsels and examples of heroic devotion 
to truth and righteousness, but illustrations also of the course 
of evil-doers. Our lesson today belongs to this latter class. 
It considers Absalom, the son of King David, who at the time 
of this lesson was presumably nearly thirty years of age. His 
father, the Lord's anointed king over Israel, his mother, the 
daughter of a king of a neighboring realm, Absalom inherited 
princely qualities and manners and, being very beautiful, 
became a center of Israelitish pride. "In all Israel there 
was none to be so much praised for his beauty. From the 
sole of his foot, even to the crown of his head, there was no 
blemish in him"; and the hair of his head is a proverb to this 
day. 

It is worthy of note that those who are highly favored 
by nature, richly endowed in appearance or mental ability, 
are subject to temptations to a far greater degree than their 
fellows who are less talented, less handsome. Their besetting 
weakness is apt to be pride, self-esteem, to which ambition 
is apt to lend a helping hand. Thinking of Absalom 
and his beauty and his high position in the kingdom, reminds 
us of Lucifer and the glorious description given of him in the 
Scriptures— his high position and honor and his pride and 
ambition and the downfall to which they led. The very 
suggestion of these two characters, from this standpoint 
should bring a thrill of fear to the hearts of all who realize 
that we today of Spiritual Israel are princes, highly favored 
of our Father, the Great King, and greatly blessed with the 
beauty and perfection which come to us through our justification 
and greatly honored of our Father in the gracious 
hopes set before us in the Gospel of glory, honor and immortality, 
and greatly blessed also in the light of divine 
revelation granted to us, which gives us a wisdom superior to 
that of the world. 

What if these blessings and mercies and favors should 
have their wrong effect upon us and bring us eventually to 
disaster, as was the case with Absalom and with Lucifer? 
The thought is sufficiently appalling to remind us of the 
Apostle's words, "Let us fear, lest a promise being left us of 
entering into his rest [of becoming joint-heirs with our Redeemer], 
any of us should seem to come short of it"— 
through a lack of loyalty, a lack of allegiance, a lack of faith, 
a lack of humility. 

A MURDERER OF THE BRETHREN 



It will be remembered that David's eldest son was Amnon, 
and that he had defiled his half-sister Tamar, the full 
sister of Absalom. King David, sorely vexed at the matter, 
appears to have been at a loss as to what manner of punishment 
he should properly meet out for the offense, so that two 
years passed without any being inflicted. Then Absalom 
took upon himself to be his sister's avenger. He made a 
feast, to which were invited all the King's children by his 
several wives. In the height of the feast, in disregard of the 
rules of etiquette and the claims of natural affection, Absalom 
slew his brother and then fled, from fear of justice, 
which, under their code, centered in his father, the King. 
What lesson is there in this experience for us? What should 
we copy? What avoid? In Spiritual Israel we are all 
princes, sons of the Great King, who is also the Judge. The 
lesson to us would properly be that the authority and responsibility 
for meeting out justice is not in our ambitions, 
but with the Father. 

As the Scriptures declare, "Vengeance is mine; I will 
repay, saith the Lord." We are not to wait what seems to us 
a proper length of time, and then, if we see no divine punishment 
for what we consider to be no longer tolerable, to take 
the matter in our own hands— to murder one another. Nay, 
the command of our Great Teacher is, "A new commandment 
I give unto you, that ye love one another, even as I have 
loved you." The lesson for us to learn is expressed in the 
Master's words, See to the beam in thine own eye, rather 
than put thyself to too much inconvenience examining the 
mote that is in thy brother's eye. To his own Master he 
standeth or falleth. 

The parallel would not imply that literal murder would 
here be accomplished amongst the Lord's children. No, thank 
God! The world is too far advanced in civilization to make 
such a course practicable; but where the Absalom spirit is— 
the spirit of hatred, anger, envy, bitterness-strife is also. 
There is a modern method of assassination by the use of 
slanderous words, by insinuations, by the shrugging of the 
shoulders, etc. And this modern kind of murder is oftenest 
committed in the presence of the members of the royal family, 
the heavenly brotherhood. How terrible! do we say? Let us 
take heed that such blood-guiltiness, such "works of the flesh 
and the devil," be not upon us, else we shall never inherit 
the Kingdom. 

THE UNGRATEFUL SON-TRAITOROUS 

Absalom remained for three years at the court of his 
grandfather, Talmai, king of Geshun in Syria. By the murder 
of his elder brother he had put himself next to the throne of 
Israel, heir-apparent, and this, possibly, was considerably his 
inspiring motive in the crime, although he affected that the 
crime was committed in defense of justice and principle. 
Alas! how treacherous is the human heart! How frequently 
do we find double motives operating therein! We see the 
advantage of those who, as children of God, follow implicitly 



the Father's Word and leave all the results to him. They 

thus show their faith in God's power, as well as in God's 

justice, and thus, as the Apostle intimates, they show that 

they have become partakers of a holy spirit of wisdom— 

"wisdom from above; first pure, then peaceable, easy of entreatment, 

full of mercy and good fruits," a spirit of wisdom 

which leaves in the Lord's hands his own matters and trusts 

fully to his care. This is indeed "The spirit of a sound mind." 

Let us, dear brethren of the Royal Spiritual Family, apply 

R4276 : page 341 

this principle in all of our dealings and thus receive thereby 
increasing blessings. 

But Absalom realized that as an exiled prince his 
chances for acceptance as king of Israel would be comparatively 
small, in the event of his father's death. He therefore 
instituted an ingenious scheme by which his case was brought 
to his father's notice under most favorable conditions, and 
finally a respite or forgiveness or an invitation to return to 
his homeland was sent to him. As a continued showing of 
disfavor, his father, loving him the while, refused for two 
years to invite his wayward son to a personal visit and fellowship. 
Meantime the ambitious murderer skilfully managed 
his affairs so that, as the Scriptures declare, he "stole" the 
hearts of the men of Israel. He did not openly plot mischief 
against his father, the king, nor speak vilely respecting him, 
nor manifest any antagonism; he was too deep, too adroit, 
too wise with earthly wisdom for such a course. He stole 
the hearts of the people away from the king to himself by 
feigning extreme humility and extreme zeal for justice, and 
by careful attention to his personal appearance and by attention 
to those in influential positions. He got up early, 
contrary to the usage of princes, and went forth to the King's 
gate, where he could see the people who, some justly and 
some unjustly no doubt, were awaiting the king, hoping for 
contracts and decisions in their favor, etc. These, beholding 
the handsome and elegantly-dressed prince, bowed themselves 
to the ground after the manner of the east, only to be 
lifted up by the hands and kissed and told with affected 
modesty and love that they should not do that; that it was a 
king's business to serve his people and that the prince was 
merely sorry, so sorry, that it was not in his power to do for 
them all and more than they asked. 

Thus for two years Absalom, the hypocrite and sycophant, 
endeavored (and was considerably successful in so 
doing) to draw to himself the love, the loyalty of the nation, 
which had belonged to his father David as the Lord's anointed. 
Evidently the young man was leaning to his own understanding 
and forgetting, if he ever knew, that the Lord God was 
the Ruler of that nation, and he alone had the power to 
designate who should be and who should not be his representative 
upon the throne. 

ABSALOM'S OPEN REBELLION 



Our text says, "After forty years," but scholars are 
agreed that this is a copyist's blunder and that it should 
read "four years." Some ancient authorities read this "four 
years"; so does Josephus. Feeling sure that his mock humility, 
combined with his handsome appearance, gentle manners 
and affected love for the people and for justice, worked successfully 
on the minds of the people, Absalom was ready for 
his next step— open rebellion against his father, the king of 
the nation and the appointee of divine providence. Surely 
he did not realize his situation in the odds of divine power 
against him. Continuing his practice of hypocrisy he requested 
of his father the privilege of visiting the neighboring 
city of Hebron, which had been the capital before Jerusalem 
was taken. 

He said he desired to do sacrifice there in fulfilment of 
a vow. He affected to be very humble and very religious, 
while his heart certainly was far from the Lord. "Do men 
gather grapes of thorns or figs of thistles?" The king granted 
the request, which included the privilege of taking a certain 
number of companions and chief people from Jerusalem, 
without anything amiss being thought of it. What worldly 
wisdom this young man had! And how ignominiously his 
mock humility stands out to his discredit! And how his ingratitude 
to his father, and his lack of every element of principle 
and righteousness are conspicuous! For us, dear friends, 
to see in ourselves anything in any degree or measure apparently 
approaching such a picture, or in our course anything 
in any degree corresponding to this, should be to horrify 
us, to rebuke us, to quench the kindling fire. 

Into the conspiracy was drawn King David's most valued 
counselor, Ahithophel, whose presence with the prince as 
one of his friends on the occasion would mean a tower of 
strength to his position and the attainment of his ambition. 
Many of the people, deceived for years, were drawn into this 
conspiracy. Besides, Absalom had carefully appointed men 
throughout the various tribes and various parts of the 
land district, who were posted for his designs and in full 
sympathy with them, and whose business it was to create a 
stampede in his favor, and to help by expressing evil insinuations 
against the king and expressing hopes of wonderful 
things, if Absalom took the kingship. These were to congratulate 
the tribes that they now had a most worthy king 
in Absalom, and to explain to them that when the trumpets 
were heard blowing this meant not that Absalom aspired to 
the kingship, but that he already was king. 

Alas, that history shows so many perfidious characters 
like Absalom! And alas, dear friends, let us remember that 
while we have become New Creatures in Christ, we still have 
to contend with the mean, perfidious dispositions that were 
ours according to the flesh! Let us remember, too, that "we 
wrestle not with flesh and blood" merely, but additionally 
"with principalities and powers and wicked spirits in high 
positions." Let us on the contrary remember the Apostle's 
words, "Humble yourselves, therefore, brethren, under the 
mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time."— 
1 Pet. 5:6. 



"My soul, be on thy guard, 
Ten thousand foes arise; 
The hosts of sin are pressing hard 
To draw thee from the prize. 

"O watch and fight and pray, 
The battle ne'er give o'er; 
Renew the conflict every day, 
And help divine implore." 

To those about to enter, or who have entered the narrow 
way, as well as to those who have already been on it for a 
time, there comes a suggestion that we must "mark well the 
pathway and make straight paths for our feet, lest that which 
is lame be turned out of the way." We are all lame according 
to the flesh; some more, some less, but all need to observe 
the heavenly course and to walk circumspectly, seeing that 
pride and ambition are the greatest of foes to humanity and 
faith. We are reminded here of one feature in the story of 
"Pilgrim's Progress": When Christian and Hopeful had 
escaped from the dungeon of Giant Despair and returned to 
the Highway leading to the Celestial City, they erected a 
monument near the entrance to Bypath Meadow, which had 
led them astray. On the monument they put the following 
words, "Over this stile is the way to Doubting Castle, which 
is kept by Giant Despair. He despises the King of the 
Celestial Country and seeks to destroy his holy Pilgrims." 

Satan is the great giant who through these many centuries 
seeks to draw us away from the narrow path, away 

R4276 : page 342 

from full confidence in God and away from reliance on God's 
power and his wisdom and his Truth, by which alone we can 
ever become heirs of the Kingdom. 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT 

While fully commending the propriety of honor to 
earthly parents, and appreciating the Lord's promise of blessing 
to such as obey it, we have in mind that the Great King 
Eternal, the Creator, has adopted us into his family and 
given us the spirit of sonship whereby we cry, "Abba, Father." 
He has given us "exceeding great and precious promises, that 
by these we might become partakers of the divine nature" 
and sharers with our heavenly brother Jesus in his Messianic 
Kingdom. How we should honor him! How it should be 
the chief endeavor of life to us to glorify our Father in 
heaven! How we should hearken to his words and keep 
them before us— "If ye love me, keep my commandments!" 
How we should realize that the end of his commandment is 
Love— out of a pure heart, fervently! How we should realize 
that hereby we know that we love God, if we keep his commandments 
—and his commandments are not grievous unto 
us, if we delight to do his will! Of this character are the 



sons who, as copies of the Redeemer, will be the heirs of God, 
joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord in his Kingdom. Let 
us make no mistake, but remember that the "Well-done" 
blessing will be given only to those who attain such a character 
development. 



R4283 : page 342 

"JUST FOR TODAY" 

"Just for to-day!" O depths of faith, 

I need to help me say, 

"Thy Will be done"— "Thou leadest me,' 

Just step by step today. 

I do not know tomorrow's ills 

Or joys— which may befall; 

But whatsoever may betide, 

Thy grace will cover all. 

"Just for today!" O blessed thought 

That cheers my fainting heart! 

I cannot wander far from thee 

If I but do my part, 

Which is to trust and never fear 

What man may do or say, 

But only "look to thee in prayer" 

And trust, "Just for today!" 

"Just for today!" How many saints, 

Now gone to their reward, 

Have trod this narrow path of faith 

By "Leaning on the Lord," 

Not knowing what each day might bring 

Of joys or trials severe; 

Not even caring, for by faith 

They knew the Lord was near! 

"Just for today!" Yea, all his flock, 
His "Body," these "Last days" 
Rejoice to follow in his steps, 
And lift their hearts in praise. 
For well we know "a little while" 
Is all we have to stay. 
How glad we are he helps us pray, 
"Dear Lord, just for today!" 

"Just for today!" This "Day of Trial," 

When Satan seeks to sift; 

When God permits "such polishings" 

We praise him for "the Gift" 

Of One who's mighty to direct 

The work, till he shall say 

"Enough! the Jewel shines! 'Tis mine! 

I'll gather it today!" 



"Just for today!" Then, brethren dear, 

Be neither weak nor faint, 

But "watch and pray" to be kept free 

From sin's dread power and taint 

That ye with Christ may "live and reign" 

Till sin and death shall cease, 

And Earth shall have her Jubilee 

Of Everlasting Peace! 

W. Homer Lee. 



R4277 : page 342 

LOVE IN RETURN FOR TREACHERY 

-II. SAMUEL 18:24-33.-NOVEMBER 8.- 

Golden Text:— "A foolish son is a 
grief to his father."— Prov. 17:25. 

KING DAVID, thoroughly unsuspecting Absalom's duplicity, 
was completely taken by surprise with the 
proclamation that Absalom was King of Israel, with 
Hebron as his capital. "To the pure all things are pure," 
writes the Apostle, and as David's heart was guileless towards 
his son, it was far from his thought to imagine such 
deceit and treachery as had been practised against him in a 
cunning and underhanded manner for two years preceding 
the opening battle. 

Hearing that Absalom had started on his march of 
twenty miles toward Jerusalem, intent upon the capture of 
his father and the overthrow of his kingdom, King David 
hastily retreated, accompanied by his bodyguard of 600 men 
and a comparatively small number of people who manifested 
sympathy for him and went with him to share his fortunes. 
Doubtless several motives combined to lead up to this decision 
to retreat. (1) He wished to avoid, especially in his 
capital, the horrors of civil war. (2) He was overwhelmed 
with grief that his antagonist, his enemy, was his own son. 
(3) The evidences were plentiful about him that Absalom 
had stolen the hearts of the people and that his former 
friends had become his enemies, who now jeered at his discomfiture, 
and anticipated with evident pleasure the oncoming 
of Absalom and the establishment of his kingdom. "God 
is not in all his thoughts," says the inspired writer. (Psa. 10:4.) 
So evidently the people of Israel failed to think of 
what would be the Lord's will in the matter, and this was 
their great mistake. 

That must have been the darkest day of King David's 
eventful life. Accompanied by his bodyguard, most of whom 
were foreigners— and of his own nation comparatively few 
with him— he fled from his own family and the capital city 
of his kingdom, which he had established, and from the 
people in whose interests he had given the best years of his 



life in harmony with the divine anointing. He fled from the 
face of the people who some years before had sung his 
praises as their deliverer from the hand of the Philistines— 
"Saul hath slain his thousands, but David his tens of 

R4277 : page 343 

thousands." Poor old man! The street rabble cursed him 
and threw stones and dirt at him. Amongst the persecutors 
was one of Saul's sons, to whom David had shown great 
kindness, sparing his life and providing for his maintenance 
and comfort. Here certainly was an occasion for the trial 
of David's faith and patience and love. What he would have 
done in earlier life we cannot tell. His history in every 
place shows him to have been a man of well-balanced mind, 
but his chief protection was his possession of a Spirit of a 
sound mind, the spirit of consecration to the Lord, the spirit 
of faith and trust and loving devotion. Instead of threatening 
the mob or returning railing for railing, or in any way 
defending himself, King David gave instructions to his guard 
that no harm should be done to those who were speaking 
evil of him, slandering, smiting. "The cup which my father 
hath poured for me, shall I not drink it," were our Master's 
words in his dying hour (John 18:11), and we can see his 
spirit exemplified in King David, who typified him in some 
respects. 

It is supposed that the fourth Psalm and portions of the 
third were written from the standpoint of David's experiences 
as an exile from his capital. Dean Stanley says, "It has 
been conjectured with much propriety that as the first sleep 
of that evening was commemorated in the fourth Psalm, so in 
the third is expressed the feeling of David's thankfulness at 
the final close of that twenty-four hours." The king's objective 
point was a fortified city, Mahanaim, on the east side 
of Jordan; but the little army camped on the west side for 
the night. 

ABSALOM THE HEARTLESS 

Starting from Hebron with 200 men, Absalom's army 
made rapid increase, the population evidently rising en masse 
to share his sedition. Alas for the weakness of humanity. 
This scene reminds us of our Lord's experience, of his 
triumphal entry into Jerusalem, the multitudes shouting 
Hosanna to the Son of David, and five days later shouting, 
Away with him, crucify him, release unto us Barabbas. They 
were Jews in both cases; but we have no reason to suppose 
that they were more fickle than others of our race. 

Absalom had a triumphal entry into Jerusalem and 
quite probably was intoxicated with the success. The records 
of his doings, of the various ways in which he endeavored to 
cast dishonor upon his father and to arouse the bitter prejudice 
of the people about him, all correspond with the vain, 
treacherous, ignoble character which we see displayed in this 
young man of large opportunities. We, who belong to the 
King's sons of a higher plane, should search our hearts diligently 



and scrutinize critically our every thought and word 

and act to make sure that we are thoroughly loyal to the 

Lord, our Father, the Great King; that we are not self-seeking, 

nor humble merely in outward appearance, but humble 

of heart, and that we are fully desirous of doing the Father's 

will, and that his will is not grievous to us, but that we can 

sincerely say, "I delight to do thy will, O my God."— Psa. 40:8. 

VICTORY FOR THE RIGHT 

For three months the rebellion seemed to grow and 
prosper. The seeds of slander and disloyalty which Absalom 
had so carefully sowed through others, while quiet himself, 
had taken deep root in the hearts of many, who joined their 
cause with Absalom as rebels against the Lord and his 
anointed. The army of Absalom was increased rapidly from 
various quarters, while few came to the cause of King David. 
The size of Absalom's army is not stated, but can be conjectured 
from the fact that more than 20,000 wee slain, while 
apparently the great mass was discomfited and fled in the 
battle of the Wood of Ephraim. What may have been David's 
sentiments during these three months of trial of faith and 
love, we can merely conjecture; but we have every reason to 
believe that he was a victor along all these lines. His 
patience certainly was manifested. His faith must have held 
secure to the Divine promises that the Lord would not take 
from him his sure mercies; but that he would deliver him out 
of all evil. And as for his love, even for his wicked, treacherous 
son, it surely was very great, as we shall see. 

The attack was evidently led by Absalom and his army, 
while David's forces were divided into three little bands under 
three of his able generals. Apparently with purpose they 
drew the battle into the woods, where their smaller forces 
would have the advantage over the attacking party. The 
result of the battle was the complete defeat of Absalom's 
forces, and the death of the latter. Riding on his mule 
through the woods, his head was caught between the forks 
of a branch, his mule going on, leaving him hanging by the 
head while the army was in rout. One of King David's 
soldiers found him, but would not kill him because the King 
had strictly charged all the soldiers before they left for the 
battle that they should do Absalom no harm. But when the 
soldier reported the matter to Joab, the King's chief general, 
the latter without hesitation slew the traitor, and at his command 
he was buried under a huge pile of stones. 

"IS THE YOUNG MAN ABSALOM SAFE?" 

King David had proposed going with his army, but wiser 
counsel prevailed, for because of his advancing age (about 
62 years), and because of his grief, and because of his love 
for his enemy, he would not be so competent as others to 
have charge of the battle. Conforming himself to the advice 
of his generals and counselors, he remained at Mahanaim, 
waiting near the gate for tidings from the battlefield to be 
brought by couriers, runners. On a lookout, a watchman 



perceived one of the runners, and, recognizing him by his 
movements, announced that it was Ahimaaz. King David at 
once remarked, He is a good man and undoubtedly will have 
good tidings for us. (v. 27.) What a lesson there is in that 
very expression! As our Lord said, "A good man, out of the 
good treasure of his heart, bringeth forth good things." 
(Matt. 12:35.) On the other hand, from a bitter heart proceed 
bitter words, evil speaking, injurious arrows. Our lives 
should be so that all of our friends and acquaintances would 
be ready to say of us, He is a good man; his message will 
have something of consolation in it. He is never a strife-breeder, 
nor a heart-wounder, nor a betrayer of confidences. 

When the runner reached the King, he prostrated himself 
to the King, saying, "All is well." This was indeed good 
tidings to the King, but we note his love for his dishonoring, 
treacherous, enmitous son, evidenced by his first inquiry, "Is 
the young man Absalom safe?" Some may consider that the 
King had a love for his son to the extent of weakness. 
We will not dispute that, but we will hold that if he must 
err on the one side or the other, it was far more pleasing to 
the Lord that he should love his enemy too much rather than 
too little. That loving expression gives evidence that the 
King had under divine discipline learned considerable of the 
"Love divine, all love excelling." If King David loved and 
pitied Absalom in his rebellious condition, how much more 

R4278 : page 344 

intently he must have loved him when he was in harmony; 
and so, if God so loved us while we were yet sinners that he 
gave his Son to die for us, how much more does he now love 
us since we are no longer aliens and strangers, but brought 
nigh by the precious blood and begotten of his holy Spirit 
through consecration, sanctification! (Rom. 5:8.) It does 
us good to see an illustration of great earthly love, because 
it pictures favorably to us the great lesson that the Master 
impressed by the words, "The Father himself loveth you." 

With such an illustration before us of David's love for 
his son, we may safely surmise that to some extent he misrepresented 
the sentiments of his own heart during the two 
years after Absalom had been permitted to return from his 
foreign exile. The King refused to see him during that time, 
and thus possibly encouraged Absalom's defiance and hatred. 
We mention this because we believe there is a lesson in it 
for many parents. It has seemed to us frequently that for 
some reason parents are disposed to treat their children 
much more harshly than they really feel, and thus misrepresent 
to their children their real heart attitude of affection. 
Whatever severity or austerity may be necessary, whatever 
chastisements appropriate in dealing with children, all should 
be done in such a manner as to fully assure them always 
of the parent's love, and that the punishments inflicted are 
given with a view to duty, and for the good of the 
children. Justice is excellent, Wisdom is valuable, punishments 
are necessary, but above all, "Love is the principal 
thing." Let us, therefore, judge ourselves along the lines of 



this divine standard— our acts, our words, our very thoughts. 
Whatever acts, words or thoughts will not fully square with 
the purest of love will be injurious to us as well as to those 
upon whom they are exercised. 

"O ABSALOM, MY SON, MY SON!" 

The good messenger broke the news as gently as possible 
to the King. He knew of the general rout of the enemy 
and of the concourse in connection with Absalom; but instead 
of telling all that he knew and, drawing upon his imagination 
for details, his goodness of heart led him to say 
little except that there had been a victory and that it seemed 
a great tumult, but did not know all of the particulars. 
Presently Cushi, a second runner, came, announcing the 
death of Absalom. King David's heart was bowed with 
great grief. This was what he evidently had feared. He betook 
himself to a room in the tower, on the way sobbing, 
"O, my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! would God 
I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son!" Of these 
words one writer says, "There is not in all of the Old Testament 
a passage of greater pathos than this. The simple 
beauty of the narrative is exquisite; we are irresistibly reminded 
of him who, while he beheld the rebellious city of 
Jerusalem and thought of the destruction it was bringing 
upon itself, wept over it."— Luke 19:41. 

The expression, "Would God I had died for thee," finds 
two parallels in the Scriptures. Moses, Israel's mediator 
under the Law Covenant, gave vent to a similar expression 
when the people had come under divine displeasure and 
were threatened of the Lord because of their sin. St. Paul 
gave utterance to a similar sentiment when he said, "I could 
wish that myself were accursed from Christ for my brethren, 
my kinsmen, according to the flesh." I could wish that 
I might be separated from membership in the glorious 
Church of Christ, and have my share with the earthly restitution 
class, if by the sacrifice I could bring to my kinsmen 
the great blessings of the Gospel privileges which they are 
missing. (Exod. 32:32; Rom. 9:3.) We are reminded here 
of the words of Longfellow, the poet:— 

"There is no far nor near, there is neither there nor here; 
There is neither soon nor late, in the Chamber over the Gate, 

Nor any long ago, 

Nor any cry of human woe, 
'O Absalom, my son!' 

"That 'tis a common grief, bringeth but sweet relief; 
Ours is the bitterest loss, ours is the heaviest cross; 

And forever the cry will be, 

'Would God I had died for thee, 
O Absalom, my son!" 

If in Absalom's perverse course of vanity, treacherous 
sedition, and in its ruinous end we find a lesson respecting 
the undesirable, evil, godless way, in King David's course 



we find the opposite lesson of faith and submission and 
growth in grace, knowledge and love. In a previous lesson 
we have noted the fact that David committed a most awful 
crime, violating three of the divine commands most wantonly 
and inexcusably— coveting his neighbor's wife, committing 
adultery with her, and indirectly murdering her wronged 
husband. The Scriptures most pointedly condemn those sins, 
and intimate that the severe experiences which we have just 
recounted were permitted of the Lord to come upon him as 
retributive justice. Yet David's recognition of his sin and his 
penitence for it testify distinctly that at heart he was not a 
murderer and not an adulterer. The Lord who looketh at 
the heart approved him ultimately, while reprobating his 
misdeeds and permitting him to suffer therefor. 

We can draw a great lesson and a profitable one from 
the lives of these two men without copying either of them. 
We are not to feel that it is necessary that the man who 
would preach temperance should be able to say, I was once 
a drunkard in the gutter; neither is it necessary for us to 
follow David into his sins in order to profit by the lessons 
taught us by his experiences. 

"Happy the man who learns to trace 
The leadings of Jehovah's grace." 



R4278 : page 344 

"THE LORD IS MY SHEPHERD" 

-PSALM 23. -NOVEMBER 15.- 

Golden Text:— "The Lord is my Shepherd; 
I shall not want."— Psalm 23:1. 

OF ALL the beautiful symbolic pictures which the Lord 
gave us through the Prophet David, none seems 
more forceful than that of the Psalm which constitutes 
our lesson. The eastern shepherd and his love and care 
for his sheep are given us as an illustration of our heavenly 
Father's care over us. It is true that our dear Redeemer was 
sent forth as the Good Shepherd who gave his life for the 
sheep, and by his death opened the door into the sheep-fold 
of divine love and favor and rest and peace. This was a 
favorite picture that our Lord Jesus gave us of himself: "I 
know my sheep, and am known of mine"; "My sheep hear 
my voice, and they follow me"; "A stranger will they not 

R4278 : page 345 

follow, for they know not the voice of a stranger." The 
Apostle followed the same thought when speaking of our 
Lord's return. He refers to him as the Good Shepherd of 
the flock: "For ye were as sheep going astray; but are now 
returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls." 



(1 Pet. 2:25.) The same thought is maintained when the 
elders of the Church are referred to as pastors and "overseers 
of the Church of God. "--Acts 20:28. 

But while it is refreshing for us to take a comprehensive 
view of the divine favor and care manifested in provisions 
made for our welfare as the Lord's sheep, it is well 
that we should ever keep in mind that the under-shepherds 
do not own the flock, and that their value to the flock as 
overseers consists in their faithfulness in making known to 
the sheep the message of the Great Shepherd and, to the extent 
of their ability, communicating his tone and his spirit 
with his Word. The faithful of these, like the Apostle, may 
urge, "And ye became followers of us, and of the Lord."— 
1 Thess. 1:6. 

On the other hand the sheep are called upon to mark 
the spirit of the under-shepherds, whether or not it comports 
with that of the Chief Shepherd, so that they be not led 
astray. They are to try the spirits of those who pose as 
pastors or under-shepherds, to note whether they be of God 
or whether they speak of themselves; whether their words 
and deeds are according to love or according to selfishness. 
They are enjoined to note these under-shepherds who feed 
upon the flock, but do not feed the flock. 

Examining our text critically, we perceive that the 
Shepherd is not any of the under-shepherds, nor even our 
Lord Jesus, but the heavenly Father. The Hebrew word 
here rendered Lord is Jehovah. This fact greatly enhances 
the value of the entire picture. While it is proper for us to 
love all the sheep and the "under-shepherds" and the 
"Good Shepherd" of the flock, it adds to our joy to know who 
is the "Great Shepherd" and to hear the "Good Shepherd," 
his Son, assure the sheep of the Father's love, saying, "The 
Father himself loveth you." How wonderful that the heavenly 
Father, surrounded by the sinless angelic hosts, should feel 
an interest and a care for his human sheep of the earthly 
plane, who, through Adam's disobedience, were plunged into 
death; and how precious to us is the knowledge that at great 
cost he sent his Son to be our "Good Shepherd," and to 
bring back to the divine fold all of the sheep that are desirous 
to return ! 

"OTHER SHEEP I HAVE" 

Our Lord Jesus declares, "Other sheep I have which are 
not of this fold; them also I must bring, that there shall be 
one fold and one Shepherd"— ultimately. Those other sheep 
we understand to be the Restitution flock, which, during the 

R4279 : page 345 

Millennial Age, the Lord will shepherd, gathering to his 

right hand of favor the willing, obedient class, who will ultimately 

be ushered into the blessings he has provided for the 

good sheep. The wayward goats he will ultimately destroy 

in the Second Death. We are glad, indeed, that the light of 

Present Truth shows us clearly that the thousands of millions 



of heathen and ignorant that have gone down into the prison-house 
of death are neither to suffer eternally nor to be hopelessly 
destroyed, but are to be awakened and granted full 
opportunity to come to a knowledge of the "Good Shepherd" 
and to be guided by him into the path of life, by the following 
of which, with his assistance, they may be fully recovered 
from all the imperfections entailed upon them by the fall. 

But we are specially glad to know of the "little flock" 
which the Lord is now selecting from the world, and we are 
specially glad to be privileged to join its numbers now and 
our Redeemer-Shepherd" through evil report and through 
good report," whithersoever he may lead us in the "narrow 
way" of self-sacrifice. We rejoice that we hear his encouraging 
voice; that our present trials and difficulties are all foreseen; 
that he knoweth the way that we take, and that he is 
able and willing to make all things abound to our highest 
good. It gives us special comfort to have this assurance that 
the "Trial of our faith is much more precious than that of 
gold"; and that as the metalurgist would carefully watch 
the gold tried in the fire, lest it should be destroyed by too 
intense a heat, so our Lord, our Shepherd, will watch over 
the interests of those that are his, and not suffer us to be 
tried above that we are able, but with every temptation will 
provide a way of escape. And if, perchance, our pathway 
may entail special trials, we have the "Good Shepherd's" 
assurance that these should be considered as "light afflictions" 
in comparison with the blessings to which they lead; that if 
rightly received they will work out for us "A far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory." 

"MY SHEEP FOLLOW ME" 

Our lesson relates, not to the flock of the future, but to 
the one of the present— the "little flock" which the Lord, 
during this Gospel Age, is now gathering out of every nation, 
people, kindred and tongue. It is the Father's flock, and his 
Son, our Redeemer, represents him, as he tells us, "As I hear, 
I speak"; "I came to do the will of my Father in heaven." 
Thus the Shepherd's Son fully and completely represents the 
Great Shepherd; as he says, "All mine are thine, and thine 
are mine." And again, "Thine they were, and thou gavest 
them me." 

The wealth of our relationship to the "Great Shepherd" 
and his Son increases in our appreciation in proportion as 
we grow in knowledge. As our Redeemer said, "This is life 
eternal, that they might know thee and Jesus Christ, whom 
thou hast sent."— John 17:3. 

"No good thing will he withhold 

From sheep which stray not from his fold." 

How comforting is the declaration, "I shall not want!" 
Our Lord illustrates this lesson by pointing out that a kind 
earthly father would not give a stone instead of bread, nor 
a serpent instead of fish, and so he assures us that our 
heavenly Father, much more loving and tender, will withhold 



from us nothing that will be for our good. We are to remember, 
however, that it is not as human beings that he 
does this, but as "New Creatures" in Christ Jesus. It is not 
the justified believer merely that is a member of this Little 
Flock at the present time, but the sanctified believer, fully 
consecrated to walk in the "Good Shepherd's" footsteps, to 
hear his voice and follow him. Our Lord informed us at the 
start that following him as his disciples, as his sheep of the 
Little Flock now being selected, must signify to us, as to him, 
worldly disfavor and opposition, not only from the prince of 
darkness, but also from those deluded by him and under the 
sway of his spirit of anger, malice, hatred, envy, strife, backbiting 
slander, evil-speaking, etc. And in addition to these 
things we are to expect to contend with our own blemishes 
and weaknesses. Such a picture of the "narrow way" would 
indeed have terrified us had it not been for our Shepherd's 

R4279 : page 346 

assurance of succor in every time of need, and his assurance 
that these trials to the flesh rightly received would constitute 
a part of our development in the spirit and preparation 
for the "Rest that remaineth for the people of God." 

"I shall not want" may be applied to the necessities of 
the present life. We are assured that "No good thing will 
he withhold from us;" but he specially means that we shall 
not want, not lack the disciplines, the trials, the instructions, 
the encouragements, the reproofs, and the assistance necessary 
to our attainment to all "The glorious things that God 
hath in reservation for those that love him." The only condition 
connected with this promise is that we shall abide in 
his love, abide in his flock, continue to hearken to his voice 
and to follow his directions. How dangerous then to all of 
the true sheep would be any measure of worldly ambition, 
pride or self-esteem! How necessary that the heart should 
be right, desirous of knowing and obeying the Shepherd's 
voice! With what care should the sheep scrutinize the motives 
which actuate their daily conduct, their words and the 
thoughts of their hearts! 

"GREEN PASTURES AND STILL WATERS" 

Professor G. A. Smith says, "A Syrian or an Arabian 
pasture is very different from the narrow meadows and 
fenced hillsides with which we are familiar. It is vast, and 
often virtually boundless. It has to be so, for by far the 
greater part of it is desert— that is, land not absolutely barren, 
but refreshed by rain for only a few months, and through 
the rest of the year abandoned to the pitiless sun that sucks 
all life out of the soil. The landscape the Psalmist saw 
seemed to him to reflect the mingled wildness and beauty of 
his own life. To him human life was just this wilderness of 
terrible contrasts, where the light is so bright, but the 
shadows the darker and more treacherous; where the pasture 
is rich, but scattered in the wrinkles of vast deserts; where 
the paths are illusive, yet man's passion flies swift and 



straight to its revenge; where all is separation and disorder, 
yet law sweeps inexorable, and a man is hunted down to 
death by his bloodguiltiness." 

More and more as "New Creatures" we are learning to 
appreciate the barrenness of worldly hopes and ambitions 
and knowledge. And more and more we should be giving 
heed to the leadings of the "Good Shepherd," who is guiding 
his flock of "New Creatures" for their spiritual refreshment 
through the labyrinth of the "present evil world." Those 
sheep which keep nearest to the Shepherd secure the fattest 
and richest experiences and refreshments. On the contrary, 
the sheep which stray looking for pastures green on their 
own account, or following the voice of false shepherds, are 
the ones that are likely to become hungry and eat of the 
poisonous growths and fall into the pitfalls of sin and be 
devoured by the ravenous beasts of passion and worldliness. 
Happy is the sheep who learns to know the voice of the true 
Shepherd, and whose faith is such that he follows closely 
and not afar off! 

LYING DOWN IN GREEN PASTURES 

To lie down is to be at rest, to be happy. This is the 
privilege of all the Lord's true sheep. Outwardly they may 
be distressed and "on the run," assailed by the world, the 
flesh and the Adversary, but as "New Creatures" they may be 
at rest, at peace, because of their nearness to the Lord, the 
Shepherd, and because of their faith in his overruling providence, 
which is able to make "all things work together for 
good." "Great peace have they that love thy law, and nothing 
shall offend (stumble) them." These let the "peace of 
God rule in their hearts. ..and are thankful." It is to 
these that our Lord's words apply, "My peace I give unto 
you.... Let not your hearts be troubled, neither let them 
be afraid." 

This rest, this peace of heart, is absolutely essential to 
our development as "New Creatures," even as the crystals 
are deposited from the liquids when they are quiet and not 
when they are in agitation. So the crystalline character 
which God is developing in us absolutely demands that a 
condition of rest, peace, quietness of heart, shall be attained; 
and to the attainment of this condition patience, faith and love, 
the chief graces of the spirit, are necessary. 

THE LABYRINTH OF LIFE 

"A labyrinth is a species of structure full of intricate 
passages and windings, so that when once entered it is next 
to impossible for an individual to extricate himself without 
a guide. The one in ancient Egypt, near Lake Moeris, was 
composed of twelve great palaces containing, according to 
Herodotus, three thousand chambers and halls. The palaces 
were connected by courts, around which ran a vast number 
of most intricate passages. Around the whole was a wall 
with only one entrance." 

"Some years ago," writes Hawthorne, "a minister was 



rambling in the famous labyrinth of Henry VIII, at Hampton 
Court near London, where the common children's puzzle is 
wrought out on a large scale by paths between high and 
thick evergreen hedges. He wandered about if for a time, 
but when the time for closing drew near, with all his efforts 
he could not find his way out, and he feared that he might 
have to remain all night. At last he looked up, and saw a 
man in the tower in the center of the labyrinth who had 
been watching him all the time, and waiting to catch his 
attention. The eye above could see all so hidden from the 
man within, and soon guided him out of his difficulties. 

R4280 : page 346 

Visiting this labyrinth with Deacon Olney, we purchased a 
chart for our guide, remembering my friend's experience. 
When the time came for us to find our way out, we took the 
chart, and by careful study and exactness in following the 
designated way, we threaded the mazes of the labyrinth with 
success. Life is such a labyrinth. No person knows enough 
to guide his course unaided. He cannot see where the paths 
lead. The picture of the future is a sealed book to all." 

One of the important lessons for every sheep to learn is 
need of the Shepherd's care and guidance through the labyrinth 
of life. "Who is sufficient for these things," writes the 
Apostle. Then he declares, "Our sufficiency is of God"— in 
Christ. He who redeemed us has gone the way before us 
and directed that we walk in his steps. Those who become 
so wise in their own conceits that they fancy there are nearer 
ways and shorter cuts and more flowery ways to Paradise 
are deceiving themselves. If those who recognize the 
message and are walking in the Master's footsteps and 
are walking circumspectly, neglect these and become overcharged 
with the world and earthly ambitions and joys and 
toys, they are surely unwisely selling the glorious heavenly 
birthright for a mess of earthly pottage. On the contrary, he 
who carefully follows the Master, experiences the truth of 
the declaration, "He restoreth my soul." Some find their 

R4280 : page 347 

spiritual strength refreshed as they walk in the paths of 
righteousness in which the Lord leads. He leads them "for 
his name's sake." This is one of the considerations. Our 
Lord, the Shepherd, has undertaken to do a shepherding 
work; to gather a flock. His promise is involved; his honor 
is at stake! We may be sure that not only because of his 
love for us will he guide us aright, but because it would be 
a dishonor to him to make the slightest mistake in respect to 
our guidance. He is the Faithful Shepherd. The angelic 
hosts are watching and learning lessons in respect to all 
this shepherding of the flock through the narrow way. 
"Which things the angels desire to look into."— 1 Pet. 1:12. 

"THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW OF DEATH" 



This valley was entered by our race because of our first 
parents' disobedience. We have been in the valley more than 
6000 years. The shadow of death has been over the human 
family, and its accompaniments of sickness, pain and sorrow 
have extended to every creature, so that the Apostle truly 
said, "The whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain 
together, waiting for the manifestation of the sons of God"— 
waiting for the uplifting power of the Millennial Age, waiting 
for the sons of glory, Jesus Christ and his Church, to bring the 
promised Restitution and uplifting out of "the valley of the 
shadow of death" back to the heights of light and love and 
the divine likeness. 

The fear of evil, of trouble, of disaster hangs over the 
world and is accentuated by its ignorance of God and of the 
future. Satan, taking advantage of this spirit of fear in the 
fallen race, has so terrorized mankind with horrible pictures 
of purgatory and eternal torment as to thoroughly separate 
the human heart, if possible, from its Creator, while feigning 
to be its Shepherd. Under the influence of "doctrines of 
devils," the Adversary has made God's character and his 
Book repulsive to mankind in general and well-nigh quenched 
their love, while fanning their fears. 

Our text represents the true sheep as saying, "I will fear 
no evil." How appropriate; how true! Weak and poor and 
insufficient and surrounded by foes, we nevertheless need 
not fear, and the developed sheep does not fear what the 
demons may seek to do, knowing that "all power in heaven 
and earth" is in the hands of our Shepherd King, and that 
he is directing our ways, and has guaranteed that our every 
experience shall work out a blessing, and that in permitting 
trials he merely designs our correction and instruction in 
righteousness and to draw us nearer to himself and make us 
copies of his Son, to the intent that by the First Resurrection 
change he may take us to himself and give us a share in the 
Millennial Kingdom. Ah! how true it is that we do not fear 
—because the Shepherd is with us! We have his promise, 
"Lo, I am with you, even to the end of the age." And furthermore 
we have the light of his Word, showing that the Shepherd 
is to be present with his sheep and to care for them and 
develop them. 

"THY ROD AND THY STAFF COMFORT ME" 

The shepherd's rod or club was of hard wood, sometimes 
open and preferably of the shape of a golf stick, except 
that it was shorter and much heavier. With it the shepherd 
was prepared to defend the flock, combating every foe. 
The staff was lighter and more like a cane and longer, with 
a crook at the end. With its point the shepherd at times 
prodded the sheep that were careless, and with the hook he 
sometimes helped out one that had stumbled into the ditch, 
by putting the crook under its forelegs. Our Shepherd, too, 
has a rod for our enemies and a staff for his sheep— the one 
for our protection, the other for our relief and assistance and 
correction. How glad we are to know that all power is committed 
unto him in heaven and in earth and that under his 



protecting care nothing shall by any means harm us! What 
a comfort is here! No wonder that under such circumstances 
the sheep may enjoy "the peace of God which passeth all 
understanding," resting themselves, comforting themselves in 
the assurance that all things shall be overruled for their 
eternal welfare ! 

"THOU PREPAREST A TABLE FOR ME" 

The picture of the shepherd and the sheep has been 
gradually fading, and now is in the past. Instead of pastures 
and the water-brooks we now have the table and the cup. 
We hear the under-shepherds say, "This is the Bread which 
came down from heaven, and this cup is the blood of the 
New Covenant." He whose name is the Truth gave us his 
flesh to eat. He sacrificed his earthly interests that we might 
partake of them through faith and be justified thereby and 
appropriate to ourselves more and more the benefits of his 
sacrifice. He passes to us the cup of his suffering, his shame, 
his ignominy, his death, saying, "Drink ye all"— drink it all. 
By thus appropriating the merits of his sacrifice and participating 
with him in his sufferings we are his sheep; or, in 
another figure, we are the branches of the True Vine; or, 
under another figure, we are members of his Body and he 
the Head; or, under another figure, he is our Bridegroom 
and we his Bride. This provision is made for us in the 
presence of our enemies. 

"Marvel not if the world hate you," said our Master. 
Yet even in the presence of the opposition of the world and 
our Adversary and all of the besetments of the hosts of 
demons, we are privileged to partake of these rich blessings 
and privileges! Yea, even in the presence of our besetments 
of the flesh, which are also our enemies, we can feast 
with our Lord and naught can make us afraid. All this has 
been true throughout the Gospel Age, but it is all accentuated 
now in this harvest time by reason of our Lord's 
presence in the consummation of the age. 

In harmony with this promise of the Scriptures, to all 
who open their hearts to receive him, he comes in and sympathizes 
with them. Yea, he girds himself as a servant and 
comes in and serves us, setting before us rich things from his 
storehouse— things new and old. Under this service all the 
old truths become fresh and appetizing, refreshing and 
strengthening. And new truths are ours, fitting to the peculiar 
time in which we are living and the special trials and 
tests now due to come upon the Lord's faithful brethren. 
They are ushered into the eternal Father's presence, where 
is fulness of joy forevermore. 

MY HEAD ANOINTED, MY CUP OVERRUNS 

Let us not spoil this beautiful picture with any thought 
of anointing a sheep's head, etc., but rather take the higher 
and grander and nobler view that our Lord Jesus is the 
Christ, the Anointed; and that his anointing was typified by 
the anointing of Aaron with precious oil (which typified the 



holy Spirit), which ran down his beard and unto the skirts 
of his garment. Let us think of this as the holy Spirit of 
Pentecost, which has anointed all the sheep which have come 

R4280 : page 348 

into the fold and the Body of Christ. Let us appreciate 
this anointing and abide under it, allowing it more and more 
to be what the Apostle terms an unction from the Holy One, 
affecting our every talent and power and bringing them all 
into subjection to the divine law of love. 

"Let my eyes see Jesus only; 

Let my feet run in his ways; 

Let my hands perform his bidding; 

Let my tongue speak forth his praise." 

"My cup runneth over." Our Master's cup was one of 
suffering, ignominy, shame and death. We partake of it. It 
becomes our cup also; but he promises us a new cup of joy 
and rejoicing, which he will share with us fully in the 
Kingdom. That cup of joy and peace and divine favor and 
blessing our Master partook of by faith. And we now also 
have the same cup full to overflowing; but we cannot appreciate 
it fully until we shall be changed and made like 
our Head and share his glory. By faith we can enjoy it now 
and realize that it is full to overflowing. And our joys in 
the eternal future will be exceedingly and abundantly more 
than we could have asked or thought. 

"GOODNESS AND MERCY PURSUE ME" 

"Surely goodness and mercy shall pursue me all the 
days of my life." This appears to be the stricter translation 
and it contains a beautiful thought. These sheep of the 
Lord's "little flock"— these "New Creatures" of Christ Jesus, 
instead of being pursued by fears and terrors and trapped 
and ensnared, are following the Good Shepherd and hearkening 
to his voice; and, according to his promise, God's goodness 
and mercy are pursuing them, keeping after them, watching 
over them, assisting them, caring for them, upholding 
them in trials. These are the messengers of the Lord, of 
which the Apostle wrote, "Are they not all ministering spirits, 
sent forth to minister unto those who shall be heirs of salvation?" 
Surely this is so. Looking back we can praise the 
way in which goodness and mercy have pursued us, never 
leaving us! 

"Angels watch him on his way 

And aid with kindly arm; 

And Satan, seeking out his prey, 

May hate, but cannot harm. 

O, child of God; O, glory's heir; 

How rich a lot is thine!" 

The conclusion of the whole matter— the end of the 



journey, is what? To occupy a place in the heavenly 

mansions in our Father's house! What a glorious consummation 

to the grandest of all hopes! Why should we murmur 

or complain at the roughness of the journey which will 

bring us to such a glorious goal? Let us say with the 

Psalmist:— 

"What shall I render unto the Lord my God for all his 
benefits toward me? I will take the cup of salvation, and 
call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto 
the Most High!" 



R4281 : page 348 

EVIL SPEAKING-BUSY-BOD YING-TRUTH-HIDING 

"Speak evil of no man." (Titus 3:2.) "Let none of you 
suffer as a busy-body in other men's matters." (1 Pet. 3:16.) 
"Speaking the truth in love."— Eph. 4:15. 

ALL Christians who have made advancement in the 

development of the graces and fruits of the 

Lord's Spirit accept as true the texts of 

Scripture cited. They cheerfully admit the correctness 

of the points these texts set forth, and agree that it is 

their duty and the duty of all Christian people to very 

carefully, very rigidly follow these divine instructions. 

But, strange to say, it appears that in the majority of 

minds the reasoning faculties become more or less entangled 

so that very wrong constructions are put upon 

the words of heavenly wisdom. The result is that many 

of the Lord's dear people find the Episcopal confession 

fitting to them. "We have done those things which we 

ought not to have done, and we have left undone those 

things which we ought to have done." One peculiar 

feature connected with the matter is that some of the 

Lord's dear people, sincerely desirous of doing his will 

and naught else, after making blunders and getting into 

a great mess of trouble, fail to discern wherein they 

erred; hence with them the experience has brought no 

lesson, and instead of being helps and bright-shining 

lights they are stumbling-blocks to a considerable degree 

and thus offset largely the good they desire to do, 

or perhaps really do accomplish. It will be clearly understood, 

then, that the object of this dissertation is not 

to hurt, wound, offend, but to assist the members of the 

Body of Christ to accomplish more fully the essence of 

their covenant with the Lord and the desire of their 

hearts. 

"WHAT IS EVIL SPEAKING?" 

We answer: That to speak anything that is derogatory 
respecting another, to tell things uncomplimentary 
of them, is evil speaking. Some have the impression 



that evil speaking is lying and consider that speaking 
the truth is always in order. This is a misconception. 
The speaking of anything that is prejudicial to the 
character of another, whether it be truth or falsehood, 
is evil speaking in the proper acceptance of that term. 
The Lord's Spirit, as well as his Word, forbids evil 
speaking because the Lord's Spirit is the spirit of love 
and kindness, and evil speaking, true or false, is repudiated 
by love, is contrary to love, is born of some evil 
motive, either busy-bodying and gossiping, or, worse 
still, malice, envy or strife, and all of these the Apostle 
designates in his list of "the works of the Devil." 

It is said that there are "exceptions to every rule," 
and so there are to this one. For instance, if you were 
a witness to a murder, a theft, or any other heinous 
crime, it would be a duty to society to speak of the evil, 
to report it to the proper authorities, the mayor, chief 
of police, or whoever. This would be evil speaking, it 
is true, but this is an exceptional case and requires exceptional 
treatment. It does not, therefore, imply any 
wrong motive on your part in respect to the wrong-doer 
—anger, hatred, malice or strife, but is called for 
by the interests of society and your appreciation of the 
spirit of love to them. Indeed, in some States the law 
holds a silent witness as jointly responsible with the 
principal offender. In the Church also there is an exception 
noted in the Scriptures, namely, that if the 
trespass be of sufficient importance and likely to break 
our fellowship with the offender we may go to him and 
discuss the matter with him alone— not with a view of 
judging him, condemning him, etc., but with the object 
of helping the brother out of some view of matters or 
course of conduct that seems to us to be wrong, sinful, 

R4281 : page 349 

contrary to the Word of God. Before going to him or 
her, we are to make self-examination to see that we are 
not in a fault-finding mood, and that the matter is one 
that really concerns us, either in our personal relationship 
to the brother or in our mutual relationship to the 
members of the Church of Christ, whose interest we 
believe might be injured by the brother's course. We 
should go kindly and with the hope in our hearts that 
the matter which seemed strange and in violation of 
God's Word might prove upon explanation to be nothing 
of the kind. 

We are to go hoping that in any event the Lord will 
bless our mission, not to the injury of the brother or 
sister, but to his or her comfort, succor, deliverance 
from what we believe to be a wrong course. It is only 
after we have taken this step and the wrong course is 
persisted in, either to our injury or to the injury of the 
Church— only then are we permitted to speak to another 
of the thing which we consider to be an evil. Even then 
the speaking must be done in the presence of the accused, 



that he may have the fullest opportunity to present 

his view of the matter, as set forth in the Scriptures 

in Matt. 18:15-17 and explained in detail in DAWN-STUDIES, 

Vol. VI. If it were not so pitiable and so 

grievous an error it would be amusing to note how some 

conscientious brethren and sisters dodge this matter of 

evil speaking and seemingly its point entirely. For 

instance, one of these may say to another, "I have just 

heard something about Sister C which shocked me fearfully. 

I do not know what to think about it. I should 

like to have your advice, but of course I could not tell 

you what the matter is, for that would be evil speaking, 

which, as the Lord's follower, I would not be privileged 

to speak and you would not be privileged to hear." Poor, 

silly sheep ! Such seem not to discern that they are at 

the time engaged in the very worst kind of evil speaking. 

In nine cases out of ten, if they would tell all that 

they know, the impression upon their auditor would not 

be one-tenth as bad as the one given. This serious 

error, which is doing so much harm in the whole world 

and amongst the Lord's people, is an evidence of two 

things: (1) A lack of reasoning power, (2) a lack of 

the spirit of love. 

We are trying in this article to correct the first defect 
and to help some to reason more correctly; but it 
is not ours to help them over the second defect, their 
lack of love, which really lies at the foundation of the 
wrong. If they had loved the sister of whom they had 
heard the evil report, they would never have breathed 
a word of it to another soul, but would have gone 
directly to the condemned one in love and with a hope 
that the report was false, and would have told her, as a 
friend and as the spirit of love would prompt, all that 
they had heard or seen or misunderstood, and would 
have assured her that they hoped there was some explanation 
of it; but in no event should any hint of the 
matter escape them. 

"SUFFERING AS A BUSY-BODY" 

There are generally two sides to a matter. In 
nearly every instance in which one person violates the 
command, "Speak evil of no man," assistance is rendered 
by the one to whom the evil is told. He or she "draws 
the matter out" by questions or hints or suggestions or 
looks of interest or encouraging comments, etc. Undoubtedly 
such a hearer of evil is in the Lord's sight 
equally guilty with the speaker of the evil. The difficulty 
with both is that they lack the spirit of love, 
which the Apostle refers to, saying, "Charity thinketh 
no evil," but "covereth a multitude of faults." The first 
intimation that something scandalous or unkind is 
about to be said respecting another should lead us to 
shrink back and feel the fear and realize that the Adversary 
is near to assist in any evil work. The wise course, 
as already seen, would be to say promptly, "My dear 



Sister or Brother, excuse me, but are not you and I both 
the Lord's children, and can we not please God better 
and advance our own spiritual welfare more by giving 
heed to his Word and developing in our own hearts and 
minds the spirit of love, instead of back-biting and devouring 
one another? Let us think of each other's 

R4282 : page 349 

good traits, good qualities, as the Apostle would have 
us do." If such a proper course lose you the friendship 
of anyone it will be to your advantage, for if he or she 
were right-minded such kindly treatment would be helpful, 
and you would be at once advised that they fully 
agree with you and are also striving in the same 
direction. 

How often have we heard people say, "Yes, indeed, 
I wish that I had never heard it! It has caused me a 
deal of trouble and suffering." These are the people 
mentioned by the Apostle— who are suffering as busy-bodies 
in other men's matters, contrary to the divine 
direction and the spirit of love. They are getting their 
deserts, and the chances are that they will do spiritual 
injury to themselves and also do spiritual injury to 
others through their busy-bodying. Few of us have 
time enough to attend to all of the affairs of the 
world and still give proper attention to our own. 
"Sweep before your own door" has become a proverb, 
the intimation being that those who pay great attention 
to their neighbors' affairs are neglecting home duties 
and responsibilities and that they are likely to get themselves 
into trouble in so doing. The Christian of advanced 
experience emphasizes the fact that he has 
quite a sufficiency of knowledge of evil in himself and 
his environment without making special search for the 
weaknesses and blemishes of others or for their liberties, 
which perhaps to him seem to be sin; as in the 
Apostle's case when he speaks of some who "Crept in 
to spy out our liberties." We may be sure that all to 
whom the Apostle referred were in a dangerous position 
by reason of their busy-bodying, and we may be equally 
sure that the same principle will always hold good. 
However good our intentions, none will be crowned for 
striving unlawfully.— 2 Tim. 2:5. 

There are some so constituted that it is second 
nature for them to attempt to regulate everybody else 
according to their own ideals and standards, forgetful 
of the fact stated by the Apostle, "To his own Master 
every servant stands or falls." Our limitations respecting 
what we may and may not do by way of interference 
in the affairs of others are very many. To some 
in olden times it was a terrible sin to eat meat 
such as was generally sold in public because it was 
previously offered to an idol. The Apostle took a larger, 
broader, truer view of the subject when he declared that 
the idol was nothing anyway, recognizing the fact that 



the offering of the meat to the idol could do the meat 
no harm. There were some, however, ready to spy in 
such matters and to busy-body themselves with other 
men's affairs, and some of these were perhaps stumbled 
by reason of their busy-bodying tendencies. The fact 
that the Apostle was very willing to yield to these weaker 
brethren and say that he would abstain from meat 
entirely does not prove that he was wrong and they 
right. It merely proves that he was large-hearted 

R4282 : page 350 

enough to forego his own liberties— which were in no 
wise condemned in the Scriptures— for their sakes because 
of their weaknesses, their lack of logic, and their 
weakness along the lines of busy-bodying. Our Lord 
addressed busy-bodies when he suggested that they 
were like the man who went to his neighbor and desired 
to help him to get a mote out of his eye, without being 
aware of the fact that he had a whole beam in his own 
eye. Jesus said to such, "First pluck out the beam out 
of thine own eye, and then shalt thou see clearly to 
pluck out the mote out of thy brother's eye."— Luke 6:42. 

A TRUTH-TELLING OBLIGATION 

We have already pointed out that it is not permissible 
even to tell the truth where it would be slanderous 
or injurious or calculated to bring dishonor to our 
neighbor; that to tell the truth under such circumstances 
would be evil speaking from the Scriptural 
standpoint and forbidden, not only by the Word of the 
Lord, but by the spirit of love for the brethren, and 
that it would be wrong even to listen to such a statement, 
and that rather the one attempting such evil-speaking 
should be in love rebuked and helped to overcome 
the weakness. But there is a truth-telling which 
is in harmony with love. If a scandal-monger and 
back-biter and slanderer and evil-speaker has disclosed 
some matter to us, it is our duty not to repeat 
the matter and not even hint of it to others, but it is our 
duty to tell the matter and all that we know about 
it to the one who has been slandered, vilified, spoken 
against. Why is it our duty to do this? We answer, 
that the same spirit of love which would prompt us not 
to speak derogatively of another to others should 
prompt us to tell the aggrieved one the facts: (1) It 
will put him on his guard and assist him in overtaking 
the falsehood or misrepresentation, and all lovers of 
the truth and righteousness should be glad to assist in 
such a manner. (2) It would be very helpful, doubtless, 
to the slanderers, evil-speakers; a practical lesson 
would thus be brought home to them, and they might 
learn before it was too late for learning, that they are 
still cultivating the works of the flesh and the devil, 
which must be eradicated from their hearts before they 



would be ready for the glorious change of the First 
Resurrection and a share with Christ in glory, honor 
and immortality. (3) This course would be profitable 
to ourselves because it would assist in developing in 
each true courage on the side of right, on the side of 
truth, the Lord's side, and against the side of the devil, 
the side of slander and evil speaking. 

Strange to say, something in our crooked heads or 
something of the Adversary's deception at times leads 
some of the Lord's true people into a very wrong course 
in respect to this matter. For instance, a case came 
under our observation recently which illustrates this: 
Mr. A communicated "lovingly" some slanderous information 
to Mrs. B respecting Mrs. C. Mrs. B "lovingly" 
heard the awful news and then communicated with Mrs. 
D, saying that she had heard some awful things about 
Mrs. C and was greatly distressed thereby. Mrs. D, 
intimately acquainted with Mrs. C, assured Mrs. B that 
there was certainly no foundation for any evil speaking. 
Mrs. B said that she would like to tell Mrs. D the whole 
of it, but dared not do so, as it would be evil speaking. 
Mrs. D urged that in any event Mrs. B should go to 
Mrs. C and tell her the evil things that had been spoken 
about her and give her the name of her traducer, so that 
she might go to him in harmony with Matt. 18:15-17; 
but dear Mrs. B was horrified at the suggestion and 
declared that not for her life would she be so untrue to 
Mr. A, and thus "speak evil" of him. 

Now notice the mistakes made all through these 
transactions: (1) Mr. A began the matter as a back-biter, 
speaking evil of Mrs. C. (2) Mrs. B, in listening 
to that and not rebuking it promptly and before allowing 
it to proceed, was a partaker in the guilt. (3) Mrs. 
B became a slanderer and evil-speaker and back-biter 
on her own account when she communicated the slander 
in vague terms to Mrs. D. It matters not that she did 
not go into details. She gave the bad impression, 
possibly a much worse impression than if she had told 
all that had been told to her. (4) Mrs. D was possibly 
at fault also in listening at all to the slanders, but she 
took the right course in attempting the defence of one 
who had not been heard, and in urging that the whole 
matter be taken at once to Mrs. C that she might know 
of the evil that was being done her in the robbery of her 
good name by Mr. A. (5) Mrs. B's suggestion that 
she would be "evil speaking" in taking this open, aboveboard 
course shows that she labored under serious misapprehension 
of the points of equity. She was partaker 
with the thief in his robbery of a reputation. (Psa. 50:18.) 
The reputation of another had been stolen and 
she was helping to secrete the thief. Yet, as we say, 
the delusions of our twisted minds and the cunning of 
the Adversary get some of the Lord's people into these 
difficulties so that they take unwittingly the side of the 
Adversary, who puts light for darkness and darkness 
for light. Mrs. B "would not for the world" expose Mr. 



A, believing that in so doing she would be "evil speaking." 
What sophistry! The very opposite of the truth! 
That was the one and only time she should have told 
the matter, apologizing at the same time for her own 
share in the sin. The person against whom the evil 
was spoken is the one and the only one to whom it 
should have been mentioned at all, and as for Mr. A, if 
it turned out to be discreditable to him and he lost 
some of his prestige thereby, it might mean the greatest 
blessing that had ever come to him and might recover 
him from the snare of the Adversary, which, if not recovered 
from, would most assuredly hinder his entrance 
into the Kingdom. 

ANOTHER PRACTICAL ILLUSTRATION 

Here is another instance which came under our observation 
and which illustrates the awful danger of this 
pernicious principle of "evil speaking," slandering, 
back-biting and the subtle forms it may take and the 
great danger to be accomplished. 

Mrs. V took offense at Mr. W. (It matters not for 
this illustration whether there was ground for the 
offense or not.) Being very conscientious she felt that 
she could not tell the circumstance to her friends; and 
indeed probably another consideration weighed in this 
matter. She felt that to tell the truth would not serve 
her purposes, as many would doubtless consider that 
the wrong and blame belonged to herself. Under the 
Adversary's guidance, of which doubtless she was unconscious, 
she began to slander Mr. W in a pantomime 
way— by looking hurt, acting offended and disconsolate. 
As she foreknew, this led her friends to question 
her: What is your trouble? Indirectly and with apparent 
unwillingness she intimated that Mr. W was the 
source of her grief, but that it was too deep for her to 
mention and that she was too noble to speak evil even 
with a cause. Promptly her friends, X, Y and Z, took 

R4283 : page 351 

the bait, rallied to her support and, true to human 

nature, struggled to see which could be the chief busy-body. 

Incidentally we point out that they should have 

remembered the Scriptures cited at the head of this 

article and should have given Mrs. V the Scriptural advice, 

Go to Mr. W and deal with him along the lines of 

Matt. 18:15-17. They should not have picked, meddled, 

busy-bodied, and, in violating this divine rule, they 

suffered the consequences. These well-meaning busy-bodies, 

X, Y and Z, began the system of "investigation," 

declaring to their own hearts and each other that it was 

the love of God alone which was prompting them to 

help a poor Sister. We will not question the honesty 

of their claim, but content ourselves with pointing out 

that their love was not properly exercised along 



Scriptural lines. They began with Mrs. V— Did Mr. W 

do thus or so? Mrs. V's conscience would not allow 

her to say, "Yes," because their surmise had quite overshot 

the mark of any grievance she could have claimed. 

But she was in the humor to crave sympathy and to forward 

her designs of bringing contumely upon Mr. W, 

hence she merely sighed and looked sad and refused to 

answer Yes or No. The busy-bodies, X, Y and Z, held 

a consultation and concluded that the reason she did 

not answer their question was that her trouble was far 

worse than anything of which they had dreamed. 

Again they approached Mrs. V with sympathy and condolences, 

telling her that they knew now that it was 

worse than she had first suggested and that they had 

concluded that it must be something even worse than 

they could even imagine or suggest. 

Mrs. V was somewhat shocked that her method of 
slander by insinuation and silence had succeeded so far 
beyond her original intention. But she felt that she 
could not go back on the matter now and tell the sympathizers, 
X, Y and Z, the plain, simple truth, because 
then they would forever lose confidence in her and discern 
that by her methods she deceived them. Thus 
from step to step Mrs. V became involved and her conscience 
injured until finally she felt that her only course 
to preserve her standing with her friends, X, Y and Z, 
was to take the position that their worst insinuations 
respecting Mr. W were well founded. Her conscience 
squirmed for a time, but love of sympathy and of the 
esteem of others and the fear that the truth would cause 
the loss of these, bound her hand and foot to the falsehood 
which she had acted and slander which she had 
suggested by action, insinuation and silence. The result 
was that for a time all four of those ladies were in 
great danger of losing the Truth and going into outer 
darkness— yea, into the Second Death. 

I am glad that we do not have to record such an outcome, 
but the dangers were certainly sufficiently thrilling 
for all concerned. How promptly all of that evil 
condition could have been nipped in the bud. When 
Mrs. V was overtaken in the fault and began to slander 
Mr. W by intimation, her friends, X, Y and Z, should 
have remembered the Apostle's words; Ye that are 
spiritual restore such an one in a spirit of meekness, 
remembering yourselves also, lest ye should be tempted. 
(Gal. 6:1.) If Mrs. V had refused to be restored and 
continued her process of vilification by conduct, these 
friends, acting along the lines of the Golden Rule, 
should have gone to Mr. W and told him of the matter, 
Mrs. V's conduct, insinuations, etc. What a great help 
this proper Golden-Rule course would have been to Mrs. 
V, Mr. W and the three friends! How it would have 
saved them from the Adversary's snare, which for a 
time enwrapped them and caused them a spiritual 
blight. 



DON'T TELL OR YOU ARE A TELL-TALE 

Mark those persons who request you to keep secrets 
from those to whom they properly belong. We do not 
mean by this that there are no proper secrets in business, 
in the family, etc., but we do mean that if anyone 
has a tale to tell us derogatory to another, and first attempts 
to bind our reason and judgment with a vow of 
secrecy, it is time for us to be on guard against that 
person, and to tell him or her in no uncertain terms that 
we believe that such an attempt to bind our conscience 
or judgment in advance is belittling to us and ignoble 
to him. Let us tell such in kindly terms that their ways 
are ways of darkness, whether they are aware of the 
fact or not; and that we decline to be a companion in 
the dark ways which their language intimates, and that 
we advise them to come out of the dark into more honest 
methods and practices. Let us tell them this in such 
a manner as will wound them as little as possible, but 
in such a manner as will settle it for all time as between 
them and us and that we do not wish to have their dark 
secrets— we do not wish to be sharers in their slanders 
and back-biting and "evil speaking" and thieving of 
reputation. 

Fear of being called a tell-tale has been the Adversary's 
method for secreting wrongs these many years, 
and not infrequently it is used as a lash to hinder "overcomers" 
from doing their duty. They must overcome 
this, and must learn that it is a sin not to tell the truth 
to the right person for fear of offending a slanderer, 
equally as wrong as to tell a slander to the wrong 
person. 

This is a part of the overcoming, the victory which 
love and justice gain in our hearts. We must learn to 
pay no attention to the world's false standards and 
sneers of "tell-tale" and to pay every attention to the 
divine standard, the Golden Rule. It is the duty of 
every clerk or employee to make known to his employer 
any matter of consequence seriously affecting his interests, 
either financial or moral, as according to the 
Golden Rule he would wish that employer to do to him 
if their situation in life were reversed. It is the duty 
of every one hearing slander and defamation of a 
friend's reputation to give that friend the fullest information 
respecting the matter, just as much as under 
common law it would be his duty to report the matter 
if he were a witness to a theft of material goods. Fear 
of consequences must not hinder our faithfulness to 
this divine principle, this Golden Rule. 

Let us fix it in our minds as an inviolable element 
of the Golden Rule by which we are bound, that if evil 
speakings come to our knowledge without our being 
in any sense a party to them or able to prevent them we 
will always and promptly bring the matter to the attention 
of the brother or sister or person whose name or 
reputation is traduced and will tell that person all that 



has been heard and the name of our informant, and everything 

else that will enable him or her to pursue the 

traducer, according to the instructions in Matt. 18:15-17. 

Whoever fails to see this, the proper course of a 

Christian, fails to appreciate, we think, the Golden Rule, 

which is binding upon all the disciples of Christ. 



R4276 : page 351 

"The Father himself loveth you." 

"Have faith in God." 

"Keep yourselves in the love of God." 

"The Lord will judge [correct] his people." 

"All the wicked will he destroy." 

"Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth." 

"Faint not when reproved of him." 

"The Lord doth prove you whether you do love." 

"Love is the fulfilling of the Law." 

"He that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God." 

"He shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty." 

"He that hateth his brother is in darkness." 

"Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer." 

"Anger, malice, hatred, strife, evil-speaking, are 

works of the flesh and of the devil." "Put off all these.' 
"Love is the principal thing." 



page 353 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXIX. DECEMBER 1 No. 23 
A.D. 1908--A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 355 

Church Union Skilfully Arranged 355 

The King of Peace Inaugurated 357 

We are in Training for a Throne 358 

"Let Us Draw Nigh With a Pure Heart (Poem) 358 

Christendom's Temperance Lesson 359 

Proud of Their Tables No Longer 360 

The Work of Dragon Alcohol 361 

Give Me Submission, Lord (Poem) 362 

Desire and Choose, Then Seek and Attain 363 

Lessons from This Story for Our Day 363 

Joint-Heirs with Christ 364 

Judgment of Fallen Angels 365 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 366 

page 354 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each MAY stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, 
CANADA 



"LET NOT YOUR HEARTS BE TROUBLED" 



"Trust in the Lord and do good and verily thou shalt be 
fed"— both physically and spiritually. 

Give no heed to the wise who manifest their lack of humility 
in their boastful assurance that they have obtained 
special revelations. Remember that "He giveth grace to the 
humble." "Thou couldst have no power at all except as permitted 
of the Father," is still true of Satan and of all his unwitting 
servants. The Father's will we must not fear, but desire. 

"THE WONDERFUL STORY OF GOD'S LOVE" 



This is the title of a poem of 56 verses by Sister M. M. 
Land. It is a beautiful little booklet, appropriately illustrated, 
and suggested for use as a Christmas token. Price, 15c or 
$1.50 per dozen, postpaid. 

INFORMATION FOR COLPORTEURS 



Several of our most successful Colporteurs are finding 
rural districts and country roads excellent territory; better, 
they say, than cities. Remember to suggest DAWN-STUDIES 
and Manna for Christmas presents. 

GERMAN VOLUNTEER LITERATURE 



We have an excellent and large supply of German Volunteer 
Tracts on hand. Let all those whose hearts have been so 
greatly blessed by the Truth herald forth the "good news" to 
others. Order at once the quantity you can judiciously use. 



R4285 : page 355 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

ALTHOUGH this Journal does not pretend to keep 
track of politics in the ordinary sense of the 



term, it seems scarcely proper to allow a matter 
of so world-wide an interest as the election of a 
President to pass without comment. The leaders of 
both of the prominent parties are men of such high 
character and ability that in our judgment the interests 
of the public would be quite safe in the hands of either. 

Now that Mr. Taft has secured the prize of the most 
honorable station of service in the gift of this nation, 
he is to be congratulated upon his popularity. Nevertheless 
he also deserves our sympathy, for however 
generally popular and successful his execution of 
the laws may be, faithfulness to his responsibilities 
will present an arduous task. Besides, if our estimate 
of the conditions that will prevail during his regime 
prove correct, he will face grave responsibilities and 
more trying conditions than the present incumbent of 
the office— strenuous though those have been. As for 
Mr. Bryan, perhaps he is worthy of congratulations 
also, in that he has escaped arduous duties and responsibilities, 
severe trials and difficulties. If it be true, as 
we have heard it intimated, that he is a consecrated 
Christian, he may properly enough apply to himself the 
Scriptural declaration that "All things are working together 
for his good." We can readily surmise that 
many other positions in life will be more favorable to 
saintship and growth in grace than is the one which he 
has just missed. 

Recognizing the fact that we are now in the Harvest 
time of this Age, and that the Great King is taking a 
hand in all the affairs of the world, we may be sure 
that the election just closed has brought the results 
which he prefers. In this connection it may not be 
amiss for us to suggest what may be the probable influence 
of the election of Mr. Taft and a Republican 
Congress by so strong a majority. To us it means a 
strong sentiment of conservatism on the part of the 
majority and fear of anything radical in any direction. 
The large Republican majority in Congress, and particularly 
the election of Speaker Cannon, will be considered 
an endorsement of a strongly conservative 
policy, in harmony with the Republican party and high 
tariff and trusts, more than an endorsement of President 
Roosevelt and his more aggressive policy and 
utterances, of which Mr. Bryan seemed a more thorough 
exponent than Mr. Taft. 

This will probably mean, at least temporarily, a 
more favorable outlook for business prosperity than if 
Mr. Bryan had been elected. But even if a measure of 
prosperity should ensue, we must not forget that, according 
to the Scriptures, we are to anticipate further 
financial spasms, "As travail upon a woman with 
child," with increasing severity, until the climax shall 
be reached. 

Mr. Taft's broad-mindedness and worldly wisdom 
will make him popular with all religious people, Protestants 
and Catholics, and be very favorable to the expected 



federation of Protestants and their sympathetic 
cooperation with Catholicism in a combined effort to 
bring Church and State into very close relationship, 
which the Scriptures lead us to expect within the period 
of Mr. Taft's administration. 

It will be remembered that in this very month there 
is to meet in Philadelphia a council of various denominations, 
with a view to deciding on such a federation 
as we, so far back as 1881, pointed out was coming. 
The method to be followed, we surmise, will be somewhat 
after the suggestions of the article following this 
one. The results will be a seeming strengthening of 
all the forces of earth, making for law and order and 
good government, and "Peace, Peace," will be loudly 
proclaimed in many quarters. But, according to the 
Scriptures, the power will lead to very stringent laws 
and regulations and enforcements, which ultimately will 
result in a revolutionary upheaval and the predicted 
"time of trouble, such as never was since there was a 
nation"— Anarchy. 

CHURCH UNION SKILFULLY ARRANGED 



Special interest attaches to the proposed union 
between the Presbyterian and Anglican churches in 
Australia, which is described as "the most elaborate 
program of reconciliation between episcopacy and 

R4285 : page 356 

presbytery which has been worked out since the 
sanguine days of the Savoy Conference in London 
just after the restoration of Charles II." Although 
the compact of union has been drawn up by a joint-committee 
comprising on the Episcopalian side the 
Archbishop of Melbourne, three other bishops, six 
priests, and two laymen, and on the Presbyterian side 
two ex-moderators of the General Assembly, nine other 
ministers, and two laymen, the scheme has yet to go before 
the Presbyterian General Assembly and the Anglican 
General Synod. According to The Interior, a Presbyterian 
paper published in Chicago, "it is already plain 
that the High-church party in the Anglican fellowship 
throughout the world will move heaven and earth to 
prevent the ratification of the agreement on the Episcopalian 
part." From the same source we learn the following 
interesting details of how the joint-committee 
approached a problem so bristling with difficulties: 
"They began work by the model of the so-called 
Lambeth quadrilateral, and speedily agreed on the first 
three points— that the Scriptures of the Old and New 
Testaments should be accepted as an infallible rule of 
faith and practice; that the standard of doctrine should 
be the Apostles' and Nicene Creeds, and that the sacraments 



observed in the United Church should be the 
Lord's Supper and Baptism. On the fourth point, 'the 
historic episcopate locally adapted,' there came a hitch, 
and it took long and patient negotiation to find a way 
out satisfactory to both parties. 

"After a year of conferences, the joint-committee 
announced the adoption of an extended minute agreeing 
on the following principles and provisions: The United 
Church shall be an independent church without any connection 
with the State. It shall recognize that the same 
succession of ministerial orders was common to all 
Christians up until the Reformation, and since then the 
succession has been maintained with equal validity in 
the Anglican Church through ordination by bishops, 
and in the Presbyterian Church through presbyteries 
presided over by moderators. In forming the United 
Church there shall be held to be no difference whatever 
in the standing, rights, and privileges of Presbyterian 
ministers and of Anglican priests. (To this clause, 
which is the hardest point for High-churchmen to get 
over, a minority of the Anglican committee would give 
only a qualified assent.) 

"After the two churches are united, all ministers 
shall be called presbyters. Some form of superintendence 
will then be necessary, and the church shall 
therefore have power to elect any presbyter to be a 
bishop. But the church in its duly constituted legislative 
body shall have power not only to enact the laws 
which bishops must obey, but shall also have power to 
determine their tenure of office in the jurisdiction to 
which they are elected. Candidates for the ministry 
shall be first ordained to preach, without right to administer 
the sacraments, and shall then be called 
deacons or licentiates. When they are ordained as 
presbyters with power of administering sacraments, the 
act shall be performed with the laying on of hands of 
one bishop and at least three presbyters. 

"When a presbyter is consecrated to the bishopric, 
three bishops and a committee of presbyters appointed 
for the purpose shall 'take part'; it is not stated who 
shall lay on hands. The Book of Common Prayer is to 
be sanctioned, and additional forms of worship with it; 
but local congregations, if they prefer, may adhere to 
non-liturgical services. Church wardens and ruling 
elders shall be superseded by an order of local lay 
officials, for whom no name is yet designated, who shall 
have oversight of the local congregation, but shall not 
have right to participate in the dispensation of the 
communion. 

"In the actual consummation of the union it is proposed 
that the primate of the Anglican Church shall 
take every Presbyterian minister by the hand and confer 
upon him 'all the rights, powers, and authorities 
pertaining to the office of a priest in the church as set 
forth in the ordinal of the Church of England.' Then 
the moderator of the Presbyterian Assembly shall in 



turn confer by name on every Anglican priest 'all the 
rights, powers, and authorities pertaining to the office 
of a presbyter in the church as set forth in the ordinal 
of the Presbyterian Church.' It is understood that before 
entering the union the Presbyterian Church of 
Australia will consecrate a few of its own pastors to the 
bishopric, so that they may be immediately assigned 
to dioceses along with present Anglican incumbents." 
—Literary Digest. 



The combination above suggested impresses us as 
a most skilful one to accomplish a church union without 
seemingly wounding the pride of the participants. 
By the method suggested, the sanction or blessing of 
the apostolic succession would be imparted to the Presbyterian 
ministers without any acknowledgment on 
their part of receiving the boon, because the presiding 
officer of the Presbyterian body would simulate a similar 
blessing upon the Episcopal clergy. Nobody would 
be deceived, yet everybody would affect to be deceived. 
Apparently, by the assistance of some cunning fox, the 
way at last has been opened for a reuniting of Protestants 
of all denominations with the Episcopal system. 

This, as our readers generally know, we have been 
expecting for a long time— since 1880, when first we saw 
it outlined in the Divine Word as the imparting of "life 

R4286 : page 356 

to the image." (Rev. 13:15.) It will probably require 
two or three years to effect such a union and another 
year for it to develop and exercise its power, but this 
is surely what is coming sooner or later. When first 
we drew attention to the matter, union and everything 
akin to it was being opposed, and the claim of the 
various denominations was that the cause of Christ 
prospered better by divisions. What a change has 
come to pass in the intervening twenty-eight years! 

WHY A MINISTER QUIT 



"Most of the ministers today are out for the money," 
said the Rev. Arthur Gee, in an address to his flock of 
the Arlington Baptist Church. "I am not out for the 
money, and I'll quit. There is too much commercialism 
in the churches. Churchianity is taking the place of 
Christianity. I won't accept any creed to bind my faith. 
I want liberty of speech and freedom to preach. I can't 
get these in the churches. That's why I quit." 

MR. TAFT'S VIEW OF MATTERS 



Mr. Taft, in his Kansas City speech, said: "Vigorous 
action and measures to stamp out the existing 
abuses and effective reforms are necessary to vindicate 
society as at present constituted. Otherwise we must 
yield to those who seek to introduce a new order of things 
on a socialistic basis. Roosevelt leads his party as 
Lincoln led his, as McKinley led his, to meet the new 
issues presented, to arm our present civilization and fit 
it with a bold front to resist the attacks of Socialism." 



R4286 : page 357 

THE KING OF PEACE INAUGURATED 

--I KINGS l:32-40,50-53.-NOVEMBER 22.- 

Golden Text:— "Know thou the God of thy 
father, and serve him with a perfect heart, 
and with a willing mind."— 1 Chron. 28:9. 

SOLOMON'S name signifies peaceful. Nathan, 
the Prophet, who was his tutor, called him 
Jedidiah, which signifies, "beloved of Jehovah." 
Apparently he inherited certain natural traits which 
were much to his advantage, and under special divine 
blessing gave him properly the title, "the wise man." 
A writer says of him:— 

"His parental inheritance was remarkably strong 
in several directions. His father David was in the maturity 
of his age; his mother was the grand-daughter 
of the Prince Ahithophel, whose advice 'was as if a 
man had inquired at the oracle of God.' He thus inherited 
from his mother sagacity, quickness of judgment, 
judicial insight and perhaps some sensual weakness; 
from his father, thoughtfulness, literary taste, 
the skill of ruling and an interest in religion. His 
bodily form and countenance must have borne the graceful 
characteristics of all David's children; and, if we 
may follow the description given in the Canticles, he 
was fair, with bushy locks, dark as the raven's wing, 
yet not without a golden glow, tall and imposing." 

He was about twenty years of age when his reign 
began. His father, King David, was about seventy 
years old and quite feeble, and it was manifest to all 
that a successor to the throne must soon be found. 
David's eldest son, Amnon, was murdered by Absalom, 
who was next in years, and the latter was slain in the 
battle of his rebellion. The next in age, "the heir apparent," 
was Adonijah, who evidently understood that 
his father, the king, premeditated that Solomon should 
be his successor, and this purpose he sought to thwart 
by himself seizing the kingdom on the pretext that his 



father was now too old to administer its affairs. 

When Adonijah thought his project ready, he invited 
his adherents with all of the king's sons— except Solomon, 
who seemed to have shared his jealousy— to a 
great banquet in the "royal garden." Here, amid the 
mirth of the festival, a preconcerted cry was raised, 
"Long live King Adonijah"! Joab, King David's able 
general, now advanced in years, and Abiathar, the 
High Priest, were among his abetters. Thus the second 
conspiracy was hatched in David's family. 

"THE KINGDOM OF THE LORD" 

"God is not in all their thoughts," writes the Prophet. 
This was true of Absalom's conspiracy, and again of 
Adonijah's. They did not consider that the kingdom 
of Israel was the special institution of the Lord, different 
from other kingdoms, so that, as the Scriptures declare, 
it was God's Kingdom. Thus we read, "Solomon 
sat upon the throne of the kingdom of the Lord in the 
room of his father David." Had the conspirators realized 
that they were really attempting an interference 
with the Divine arrangements, surely neither attempt 
would have been made. God's people of today should 
be on the alert to discern in all of life's affairs, the will 
of the Lord. We surely should know that the Lord's 
wisdom and power are with the interests of Spiritual 
Israel in all of their affairs, in such a manner and to 
such a degree that human conspiracies and oppositions 
can work only harm to those who foment them. Though 
the Lord may permit these to go to great lengths and to 
have apparent success, as in the case of the conspiracy 
of the high priests and Scribes and Judas against our 
Lord, or in the case of Absalom and his coadjutors 
against King David; but the assurance given to all who 
have the faith to receive it is that "all things must work 
together for good to them who love God, who are the 
called ones according to his purpose," and that it must 
always be true in the case of all the Lord's people; as 
Jesus said to Pilate, "Thou couldst have no power at 
all except it were permitted thee of my Father." The 
Father will permit nothing which would interfere with 
his glorious plans. He assures us of this, saying, "The 
word that goeth forth out of my mouth shall not return 
unto me void; it shall prosper in the thing whereto I 
sent it, and accomplish that which I please." 

SOLOMON CHOSEN, ANOINTED, PROCLAIMED 

In due time, Divine providence drew the attention 
of King David to Adonijah's conspiracy— in proper 
time for him to take the necessary steps to accomplish 
the Divine will. Our lesson tells of how David called 
another priest, Nathan the Prophet, and Benaiah, 
another general, and sent them with his son Solomon 
to the valley just outside the city gate and near the very 



place where Jesus later rode on the ass. Solomon was 
directed to ride on King David's own white mule, an 
act which would of itself proclaim him David's appointed 
successor. With this special envoy went the two 
companies of the king's special body-guard, the 
Cherethites and the Pelethites. Presently, the anointing 
performed, the trumpet was blown announcing 
Solomon king, and the people unanimously confirmed 
this with great shouts and rejoicing. Thus was Solomon 
brought in state to the palace, where he reigned 
jointly with his father David for some six months until 
the death of the latter. 

SOLOMON'S WISDOM AND MODERATION 

The king was a very young man for the heavy responsibilities 
devolving upon him, and the moderation 
displayed shows him to have been not merely well-balanced 
but well-trained. Solomon was born when 
his father was in his 53rd year, and at a time, doubtless, 
when he had learned from experience that he had been 
too indulgent to the remainder of his family. David 
had not brought them up with sufficient strictness. He 
had not realized sufficiently the need of training them in 
the nurture and admonition of the Lord. Great affairs 
of state had claimed his attention and the children had 
been left too much to the care of others not so reverential 
as the king. Himself religious from his youth, he 
seems to have supposed that his children would possess 
similar qualities of heart and mind. Evidently he had 
not sufficiently realized the demoralizing influence of 
wealth and earthly honors; that these do not make for 
godliness but, to the contrary, cultivate pride, worldliness, 
godlessness. 

It was doubtless due to David's increasing reverence 
for the Lord, and his realization of the mistakes 
made in the training of his other children, and his desire 
that his successor to the throne should honor the 
Lord and carry forward the interests of religion— these 
things doubtless led the king to put his son Solomon 
under the special care of the Prophet Nathan, with the 
view to his preparation to serve the Lord and his 
kingdom righteously, and to build the temple of the 
Lord which David had purposed to build but was not 
allowed. The Prophet Nathan knew of the temple 
project and of God's promise that it should be built 

R4286 : page 358 

by David's heir, and that Solomon was the chosen of 
the Lord and of the king. We can imagine the Prophet's 
faithfulness in the training of Prince Solomon for the 
duties of the position he was intended to fill. 

Respecting Adonijah it is written, "His father had 
not displeased him at any time." (I Kings 1:6.) Evidently 
he was a spoiled child, and one that probably 



felt glad that his father had never put him under the 

tutelage of so religious an instructor as the Prophet 

Nathan. He no doubt considered that Solomon was 

specially hampered and hindered from certain pleasures 

and "sowing of wild oats" and in general had too much restriction. 

Solomon, however, seems to have been greatly 

pleased by this experience, which illustrates well the 

fact that the twig that needs to be bent should be dealt 

with early. Fain would we impress this lesson upon 

all parents and guardians— that their wards need supervision 

and loving religious control, and that it is a mistake 

to allow the early years of life to be wasted through 

inattention and lack of training and then expect good 

results. 

R4287 : page 358 

WE ARE IN TRAINING FOR A THRONE 

Our Father is the Great King and he has promised 
that the Christ shall sit upon his throne, and we have 
been invited to become parts of the Christ, the Anointed, 
the Messiah. Shall we wonder that we need training 
for this important position; shall we be surprised if 
disciplines are imposed and requirements made of us 
more than are imposed upon those not intended for this 
high position! Surely the arrangements of our Father, 
the Great King, are wise and righteous altogether. 
Therefore, those who are in full sympathy and accord 
with him will be anxious to learn the lessons and to 
make the preparations necessary for the Kingdom 
honors. These must not wonder if they are excluded 
from the companionship and feastings of the Absalom 
and Adonijah types. They may be disesteemed by their 
ambitious brethren and may be evil spoken of, from the 
Head down to the last member of the Body, but if they 
have the Divine favor, theirs shall be not only the 
anointing but also the acceptance to the throne. "Have 
patience, brethren, the hour of your deliverance draweth 
nigh"; "Humble yourselves, therefore, under the mighty 
hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time." 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT 

"Know thou the God of thy father, and serve him 
with a perfect heart and a willing mind." There is a 
golden sentiment expressed in these words. Outward 
service is not sufficient in our dealing with the Lord. 
"He seeketh such to worship, as worship him in spirit 
and in truth." Solomon's excellent start in his high 
office and the favor of God which then came upon him 
had been preceded by years of study. Under the 
Prophet's direction and under his father's suggestions 
he was enabled to enter into the spirit of his father's 
plan respecting the erection of the great temple at Jerusalem 
which would put religion, the true religion and 



worship of God, in the most prominent position before 
the nation of Israel. He got, sympathetically, the spirit 
of his father which discerned that the whole nation of 
Israel would be specially blessed in putting God and 
his worship in advance of every other thing and interest. 
He was informed respecting the stores of material and 
wealth gathered by his father for the temple purposes 
and consecrated to that service. In these things Solomon 
found abundant opportunity for the exercise of 
his intelligence and his ambitions along proper and 
helpful lines, which drew him nearer to the Lord and 
taught him how better to serve the Lord and his people 
Israel as his father's successor. 

So we see, as we seek the Lord with all our hearts 
as "dear children," and with willing minds, that he 
makes known to us his great plans and purposes respecting 
the future. He makes known to us his purpose 
to have a temple, and preparations already made 
therefor, and how and when it will be built and its 
object: the blessing of all the families of the earth. 
At each step of the way, as we the more fully enter into 
sympathy with God's great plan of the ages, it serves 
to develop us the more and to prepare us for the share 
in that Temple and Kingdom. 

SOLOMON'S WISE MODERATION 

Our lesson closes with the account of Solomon's 
magnanimity toward his brother Adonijah. It seems 
to have been the custom of that day amongst other 
kingdoms that as soon as the king was installed in 
office, others who might become his rivals and opponents 
were put to death. Adonijah, probably judged 
Solomon by himself, and concluded that his life would 
be in danger, and laid hold upon the altar in the tabernacle 
court as a place of safety until he would get a 
message from the king assuring him that he would 
suffer no harm for the rebellion he had almost inaugurated. 
Solomon's words to him, as well as his conduct, 
were wise and kind— "If he will show himself a worthy 
man, there shall not a hair of him fall to the earth, but 
if wickedness be found in him, he shall die"; and when 
he presented himself before Solomon the latter said to 
him, "Go to thine house." In other words, no punishment 
of any kind was to be inflicted for the past, and as 
for the future, he was on his good behavior. Generosity 
is always a good sign wherever it is displayed, and in the 
children of the heavenly Kingdom it is an indispensable 
quality; as our Master said, "Be ye like unto your 
Father in heaven, for he is kind to the unthankful and 
causes his sun to shine upon the just and unjust, and 
sendeth rain upon the good and upon the evil." 

God purposes that ultimately all the wicked will he 
destroy, and he extends his present kindness and mercy 
to his enemies and the enemies of righteousness by 
reason of the fact that ignorance and weakness have 



such a hold upon the human family that they are not so 
responsible as they would be under full light and ability. 
It is only when we get this broad view which God's Word 
emphasizes that we can exercise loving benevolence 
toward all men, yea, against our enemies also, realizing 
that they like ourselves are encompassed with weakness, 
frailties and ignorance, by which their responsibility 
every way is largely controlled and which God 
has arranged to cover and ultimately remove through 
the merit of our Redeemer. As he generously overlooks 
these inherited blemishes, so we shall— all who have 
his spirit and are guided by his Word. 



R4295 : page 358 

"LET US DRAW NIGH WITH A TRUE HEART" 

Betake thyself to prayer, dear child; 
A time like this demands 
An oft communion with thy Lord, 
A closer grasp of hands. 

Spend seasons sweet and precious, child, 

Confiding all thy ways; 

Herein lies strength and succor full 

To meet these evil days. Joseph Greig. 



R4287 : page 359 

CHRISTENDOM'S TEMPERANCE LESSON 

-ISAIAH 28:l-13.-NOVEMBER 29.- 

Golden Text:— "I keep under my body, and 
bring it into subjection."— 1 Cor. 9:27. 

OUR lesson pertains to natural Israel and the fact 
that it was drunken with pride and prosperity 
and because of these warned of a coming overthrow. 
Only those who recognize that there is a Spiritual 
Israel, antitypical, are able to appreciate many of 
the promises of the Old Testament. The Apostle Peter 
declares that "Not unto themselves, but unto us they 
did minister the things now freely reported to you." 
(I Pet. 1:12.) Whoever, therefore, merely reads the 
Old Testament prophecies as relating to matters and 
conditions then present and impending fails to get the 
real instruction and blessing designed of the Lord. 
Applying the lesson to Spiritual Israel, so-called 
Christendom, we find similar declarations of drunkenness 
referring to an intoxication of error, false doctrines 
and theories. Thus we read that the scarlet woman 



held in her hand an intoxicating cup wherewith she 
"made drunk all nations." (Rev. 17:2; 18:3.) This 
figurative use of the word drunkard is more noticeable 
in Isaiah 51:17; 63:6; Jer. 46:10, and 51:57 than in our 
lesson. The vomiting mentioned in our lesson is also 
figurative, as we shall see. We are not disputing that 
intemperance proportionately prevailed in olden times 
and that it does now prevail in Christendom. We are 
merely pointing out that the Lord's disputation is less 
with the literal drunkard than with the mentally and 
morally intoxicated of our day. 

As prosperity led the way to the intoxication of 
pride, so the prosperity of Christendom during the past 
century has led up to great boasting, pride and self-consciousness. 
One denomination boasts that it completes 
a new meeting-house for every day in the year. 
Others boast of the amount they expend upon missions, 
and altogether they felicitate themselves on their conversion 
of the world to Christ. Little do they seem to 
realize that if the heathen were all converted to the 
same condition which prevails in Christendom it would 
mean that they would be just ready to convert over and 
over again. Still worse! It would mean that larger 
percentages than at present would be put into prisons 
and insane asylums. Little do they seem to realize 
that the number of the heathen is twice as great as a 
century ago, according to their own statistics. 

FALL BACKWARD, BROKEN, SNARED 

These words from the last verse of our lesson remind 
us of similar words in the Psalms, when applied 
to the stumbling and fall of natural Israel from God's 
favor upon their rejection of Christ at his first advent. 
(Rom. 1 1:9; Psa. 69:22.) Our lesson applies to the fall 
of Babylon (Christendom) now in the end of this age, 
at the time of our Lord's second advent. 

From this standpoint is seen in our lesson God's 
prophecy of the doom of Babylon the Great, the mother 
of harlots, and of her daughters, the various Babylonish 
systems which have sprung from her. Verses 3 and 4 
tell us that the crown of pride will quickly fade, and the 
beauty of the great system which human ingenuity has 
built up and named Christendom will be like a fading 
flower, and like the early fruit it will quickly disappear; 
but that "in that day shall the Lord of hosts be for a 
crown of glory, and for a diadem of beauty unto the 
residue of his people." That is to say, the earthly 
beauty of present ecclesiastical systems will disappear; 
but to a remnant of faithful ones here the Lord himself 
will become more glorious, because in this day this 
remnant, or "little flock," specially blessed of the Lord, 
will be enabled to see the breadth, height and depth of 
the love of God, passing all understanding. More than 
this: this class will have a spirit of judgment, justice, 
and balance of mind in respect to the wonderful events 



transpiring, so that they will not be overtaken unawares 
in the day of the Lord, which will come, however, as a 
thief and a snare upon the great mass, upon the world 
in general. Furthermore, the Lord in this day to this 

R4288 : page 359 

class will be a strength and power, enabling them to 
"turn back the battle at the gate." (Vs. 6.) So that 
while outwardly there may be conflicts, inwardly they 
will have peace. 

"THEY STUMBLE IN JUDGMENT" 

Returning again to the nominal system, which is to 
fall, the Prophet points out that the priests and the 
prophets of the Church have erred through the intoxication 
of false doctrine. On this account "they err in 
vision, they stumble in judgment." They do not stumble 
in their feet, but in their minds. An actual spree would 
surely do them far less harm than the mental intoxication 
under which they are laboring, because it would be 
far easier to escape from the former than the latter. 
The intoxication from the cup that has made all nations 
drunk affects various subjects. The intoxicated think 
that they are about to convert the world, instead of remembering 
that the Redeemer said, and also the 
apostles, that our Lord would come at his second advent 
and that he would receive his Bride to himself, set 
up his Kingdom and then conquer the world. (I Cor. 15:23-25.) 
Their intoxication of error leads them to 
fear that the Almighty has predestinated that all the 
world, except the "little flock," the Elect, are bound 
for either purgatory or eternal torment. Such as get 
sobered up from this false doctrine are apt to become 
intoxicated with the spirit of the world and the mingled 
drinks of Evolution, Higher Criticism, Agnosticism, 
Christian Science, New Theology, etc., and this last 
intoxication is, if anything, worse than the first. All 
of these intoxications of error pervert the judgment 
and hinder a proper view of the divine Word and the 
simplicity of the Gospel of which Saint Paul was not 
ashamed. 

"ALL TABLES FULL OF VOMIT" 

It is not supposable that all the tables of the people 
of Israel were literally full of vomit, with no place clean. 
Not literal tables were intended. In Romans 11:9 the 
Apostle, speaking of the Israelites, said, "Let their 
table be made a snare, and a trap, and a stumbling-block, 
and a recompense unto them." The Israelites 
had but one table, the table of divine truth, which God 
spread for them and upon which he heaped bountifully 
his gracious promises from the Law and the prophecies. 
The Israelites stumbled over those promises and became 



proud and vain and imagined that God's favor 
would not pass them by, and thus they stumbled as a 
people, and left the way for us who are Gentiles to be 
brought nigh to God, that we might have access to the 
spiritual table supplied with the "exceeding great and 
precious promises" of God's grace and Truth. 

Our lesson refers to tables, whereas Israel had but 
one table. Christendom today is divided into various 
sects and parties and each has its own party which it 
calls the table of the Lord. Each claims that its doctrinal 
table is of divine provision. Examining these creed-tables, 

R4288 : page 360 

these confessions of faith, we find they do indeed 

present their votaries certain Scriptural truths, 

but alas, these have been so mixed and conglomerated 

with human traditions of the dark ages as to be unwholesome 

and some of them nauseating! None of 

them is presented in attractive, appetizing form. What 

is true of one is true of all, with slight modifications. 

Our Presbyterian friends on their table make a specialty 

of such dishes as Sovereign Grace, Divine Foreordination, 

Predestination, Election and Reprobation. 

There is an element of Truth running through all of 

these; but alas, in the condition in which these were 

prepared in the Dark Ages, so much of the old lady's 

leaven is intermingled that now they are thoroughly 

fermented, injurious! 

The Methodist table is slightly different. It omits 
the special viands preferred by Calvinists and instead 
has dishes labeled Free Grace, God's Love, A Chance for 
All, etc.; but when we look into these dishes our disappointment 
is unspeakable. The dish, Free Grace, 

simply signifies that God is will-less, or powerless, respecting 
the salvation of mankind and, doing his very 
best, will rescue but a handful of saints, while the 
great masses of mankind will be eternally lost. The 
dish labeled "Love of God," upon examination, proves 
to be merely a statement of God's willingness to show 
his love to his saints and "little flock," but that for the 
masses of mankind he has provided eternal torture as 
an expression of his love for his enemies, quite in contradiction 
to his instruction to his saints that they should 
love their enemies and do good to them ! 

Peering into the third dish to see what kind of 
chance for all is provided, we find that, stripped of 
subterfuges, it really means not a chance, but a certainty 
of eternal damnation and torture to every member 
of the race except the few who in the present life 
hear of the "only name" and accept the Gospel proposition 
and take up their cross to follow Christ. 

The Roman and Greek Catholics have their tables, 
too, and, in contrast, these tables, perhaps, are not so 
bad as either of the foregoing. Their main dish is 
Purgatory and the redeeming feature of it, of which 



they boast, is that its roasting and boiling, frying and 
stewing will not be endless, but that, by virtue of 
masses, indulgences, popes' jubilees, etc., the hundreds 
and thousands of years due to be spent by mankind in 
the horrible place may be somewhat curtailed. 

Our Baptist friends have the same dishes upon 
their tables that the Presbyterians and Congregationalists 
have on theirs— Election, Predestination, etc., with 
eternal torment for the non-elect, but they have one 
large central dish of which they principally take note 
and draw to our attention. This is labeled Immersion. 
However, instead of this dish enlarging the scope of 
the Elect, it seriously contracts it by claiming that 
while the Elect will be saved and all the non-Elect be 
lost, there is the further test that all the Elect must be 
immersed in order to gain numbers for the Church of 
Christ, which alone they claim is to be saved. 

PROUD OF THEIR TABLES NO LONGER 

The time was when each denomination prided itself 
respecting its table, and publicly advertised its various 
dishes and the Christian strength and refreshment to 
be obtained from these; but that time has gone. They 
boast of their doctrinal dishes no longer. They are 
ashamed of their visions and prophecy, of the things 
they once saw to be beautiful and declared to be such. 
Now, instead of boasting of these, they seek to hide 
them. Their nausea as respects their own doctrinal 
standards is graphically pictured by the Lord in the 
words of the Prophet when he declares that "All tables 
are full of vomit and filthiness, so that there is no place 
clean."— Vs. 8. 

Alas, alas! the Editor, and perhaps a large majority 
of this journal's readers, once sat down to those tables. 
But, thank God, clearer light upon his Word has led us 
to reject and eject the cruel misrepresentations of the 
divine character and plan which once intoxicated us! 
Our dear friends of the Presbyterian denomination felt 
so disgusted with the Westminster Confession that 
they spread a new cloth over it all and adopted a very 
short and colorless creed for public use. They made 
a mistake, however, in allowing the filthiness of the old 
table to remain. They should have gotten rid of the 
entire mass and should have sought the Lord and his 
Word for the better spiritual food he is so willing to 
supply. Thank God some of us have realized the Lord's 
willingness to spread for us a fresh table directly from 
his Word, laden with the true promises of the Scriptures, 
exceedingly great and precious! How our souls now 
rejoice and we desire to continue always at this table 
feasting upon the "things new and old"! How we see 
fulfilled to us our Lord's promise that at his second advent, 
if we should hear the knock of his presence and 
open our hearts by faith to receive him, he would come 
in to us and cause us to sit down to meat and come 



forth and serve us— "things new and old" ! What a 
rich, blessed feast we have had! Our only sorrow 
seems to be that our dear friends still stick by the tables 
and the denominational names, which in spirit they reject, 
and refuse to come with us and partake of the Lord's 
bounty, "Which satisfies our longing as nothing else 
can do." 

"WHOM WILL HE TEACH KNOWLEDGE?" 

The point here is that Christendom is astray and 
stumbling, because intoxicated with error, and the 
question is pertinent, How can the Lord correct them 
and teach them knowledge?— substitute knowledge for 
ignorance and superstition. He has given us in the 
Gospel of Christ a most glorious message, "Good tidings 
of great joy, which shall be to all people"; but whom 
will he make to understand this? This is the query of 
the Prophet. The answer is given, "Them that are 
weaned from the milk and drawn from the breast" ; them 
that are no longer babes in Christ, but willing to feed 
upon the strong meat of the divine Word. 

But alas! many of these, awakening from their intoxication 
of error, are inclined to stumble into agnosticism 
in some of its forms. They are not willing to look 
for the Lord's message in the way he has been pleased 
to give it— "Here a little and there a little." They want 
to open their Bibles and to read therefrom, directly and 
explicitly, what will be harmonious and reasonable. 
But this is not God's way. They must accept the Truth 
as he provides it for them, "Here a little, and there a 
little." They must be prepared to receive the message 
of Truth and Grace— because it is the Lord's— from 
other lips than those of their own denomination and in 
quarters from which they had not expected it to come. 
Whoever is really Truth-hungry and sincere must thus 
be marked out and separated from others. And this 
is the will of God, for he is seeking those who follow 
not human tradition, but who hearken for and follow 
the voice of the true Shepherd. 

R4289 : page 361 

THEY WOULD NOT HEAR 

God's message to his people is for those who have 
"an ear to hear"— not to the others. To the hearing 
ear he says, Follow my voice, by whomsoever it is proclaimed 
and through whatever lips, and study my Truth 
and receive spiritual strength therefrom— "Line upon 
line, and precept upon precept, here a little and there 
a little," and this will give you rest, peace, satisfaction. 
This is the rest wherewith he causes the weary to rest 
and this is the refreshing which he has provided for 
the true sheep. But others will not hear. The spirit 
of the world and its various intoxications attract them, 



hold them; and hence the Lord's final message to these 
is that because of their rejection of the Truth in the 
form in which he had presented it they will "fall backward 
and be broken and snared and taken." But the 
"little flock" who accept the divine terms are being 
richly blessed. These are his jewels whom the Master 
is now polishing and will shortly translate to glory by 
the First Resurrection, that they may constitute the 
joint-heirs in the glorious Millennial Kingdom, which 
shall rescue eventually all the world of mankind who 
desire divine favor from the blindness and intoxication 
and deceptions of our Adversary, the devil. 

"I KEEP MY BODY UNDER" 

Our Golden Text is a great lesson of itself. It 
brings to our attention the fact that, like the Apostle, 
we should recognize ourselves as New Creatures in 
Christ Jesus, for whom "old things have passed away 
and all things have become new," and, acting from this 
standpoint, the New Creature should keep a continual 
supervision of the old nature, its desires and affections, 
and should keep these continually under or subject to 
the new nature, and the higher law should bring it 
gradually into full subjection, yet hoping, yet praying 
for the glorious consummation of the First Resurrection, 
when the New Creature, the new mind or will 
shall be clothed upon with the spiritual body. Such a 
keeping under of the body will include wisdom and 
control in respect to what we eat, as well as what we 
drink and what we wear, and our every act, word and 
thought. 

Those who selected today's lesson as one that 
would assist the cause of total abstinence undoubtedly 
had excellent intentions, and we desire that it may be 
profitable to some that we quote here some logical 
reasons presented favoring total abstinence. Surely 
all of the Lord's saintly people must feel a deep, sympathetic 
interest in every move made for the restraint of 
the great alcohol dragon which has already accomplished 
so much harm and which we cannot expect will be 
brought under full control until Messiah's Kingdom 
shall exercise its power and Satan shall be bound. So 
while we cannot take our time from the still more important 
message of the Kingdom, we certainly can express 
our sympathy towards all who take their stand 
in opposition to this dragon and on the side of the Lord 
and general righteousness. This is our excuse for the 
following Peloubet quotations, which may be helpful 
to some and specially to the children in the families of 
our readers:— 

THE WORK OF DRAGON ALCOHOL 

"We visit a hospital in company with Dr. Wilcox and 
inquire whether the dragon alcohol, as some say, will 



make you strong and healthy. Suppose we go out to 

the Erie County Hospital and ask Dr. Gilray, the superintendent, 

how many sick he had in the hospital last 

year, and he tells us two thousand. Well, what made 

them sick? Oh, a lot of causes. But did the dragon 

alcohol bite any of them? Oh, yes, about one-half of 

them were made sick because of the dragon's bite. Yes, 

I guess more than that if you count those whose parents 

were bitten by the dragon, and who fell ill because their 

parents were not strong. 

"Again, the dragon's friends will tell you that his 
bite will give you a clear brain, and make you a jolly 
good fellow. All right, we all want clear brains in this 
world, so let us go to some place where they make a 
study of brains. The man who knows the most about 
brains in this vicinity is Dr. Hurd, at State Hospital on 
Forest avenue. Suppose we say to him, 'Doctor, how 
many people in your hospital this morning?' He replies, 
'Seventeen hundred.' 'What made them insane?' 'Oh, 
a lot of reasons.' 'Well, are any of them insane because 
they have taken poison into their systems?' 'Yes, lots 
of them.' 'How many of them?' 'Well, perhaps half of 
them have either been poisoned themselves or born of 
parents poisoned.' 'What kind of poison?' 'Oh, alcohol 
generally.' 'Oh, then they have been bitten by the 
dragon alcohol?' Yes.' 'Well, Doctor, do you think 
any of them were made insane because they ate too 
much ice cream?' 'Oh, no, never heard of such a case,' 
'Too much meat, too much milk? will any kind of healthful 
food make one crazy?' 'Oh, no!' 'Well, then, Doctor, 
if alcohol is a food, as some chemists claim it is, and if 
it is the only kind of food which ever made people crazy, 
would you advise our taking it and giving it to our 
friends?' 'Well, no; I wouldn't' 

"But we want a little more light on this subject of 
clear brains, so we take a journey down the Lackawanna 
railroad to the Craig Colony, where the epileptics are 
cared for, and we ask Dr. Spratling, 'How many of the 
patients are epileptics because of alcohol?' And he 
answers, 'About forty per cent.' Now suppose we go 
to Massachusetts prison for the criminally insane, and 
ask the same question; then listen to the awful answer. 
'Ninety-three per cent from alcohol.' Well, if that is the 
way it makes people have clear brains, I guess we had 
better eat ice cream, cake, bread and butter, etc., which 
have never been known to make epileptics, idiots, or 
lunatics." 

The doctor's office is not far away. It is a good 
place for making inquiries, for the desire of good 
doctors is to prevent people from injuring their health, 
as well as to cure their diseases when they have them. 
Let us listen to a little company of them as they express 
their opinions. 

Victor Horsley, M.D., F.R.S., Professor of Clinical 
Chirurgy, University College, London, speaks: "The 
bad effect of alcohol on persons performing muscular 



work is well-known. The evidence is overwhelming 
that alcohol in small amounts has a most harmful effect 
on voluntary muscular work." 

Dr. T. D. Crothers, superintendent of Walnut Lodge 
Hospital, Hartford, Conn., declared that alcohol is more 
dangerous than the disease it is given to correct. "Both 
alcoholism and tuberculosis, one the 'great white plague' 
and the other the 'great black one,' are a menace to 
civilization." 

Adolf Fick, M.D., Professor of Physiology, University 
of Wurzburg, states that "Every dose of alcohol, 
even the most moderate, diminishes strength. All that 
man asserts of the strengthening effects of alcohol is a 
delusion. The well-known poor man's glass during 
working hours is beyond question injurious. Every 
penny which the workman spends for alcoholic drinks 
is not only wasted but employed for a destructive 
purpose." 

August Forel, M.D., Professor of Psychiatry, University 
of Zurich, says: "Life is considerably shortened 
by the use of alcohol in large quantities. But a moderate 
consumption of the same also shortens life by an 
average of five or six years." 

THE BUSINESS VIEW OF ALCOHOL 

From the doctor's office we go to the Insurance 
offices, where a most careful and scientific investigation 
has been made. The editor of the Trumpet Call introduces 
us, as they tell how alcohol takes away health 
and life. 

R4289 : page 362 

Aetna Life: "Drink diseases the system and shortens 
life." 

Dominion Life: "Weakens constitution to resist 
disease." 

Equitable Mutual Life: "Drink impairs vitality; 
less likely to throw off disease." 

Hartford Life: "Moderate use lays foundation for 
disease." 

Knights Templar and Masonic Mutual Aid: "Total 
abstainer the better risk." 

Massachusetts Mutual Life: "Drink reduces expectation 
of life nearly two-thirds." 

Pacific Mutual Life: "Predisposes to disease." 

Royal Templars of Temperance: "Death rate much 
lower among abstainers." 

For the last place we can visit on this day's excursion, 
we will go into a Court House and listen to the 
judge. Rev. J. F. Hill of Pittsburg, secretary of the 
permanent Committee on Temperance of the Presbyterian 
church, will introduce us. When the judge tells 
his court-house story he is sitting at a banquet with the 
city council and the jurymen in a noted case that had 



just closed. 

"No, I thank you, I never indulge," said the judge, 
as his companions passed the sparkling wine to him. 

His companions rallied him on his change to total 
abstinence. "Isn't it sudden?" "Wife object?" "Nothing 
short of the tragic could have made a prohib. out 
of you." 

"Oh, come, tell us what brought you into the teetotaler 
army!" 

Reluctantly the judge told his experience: 

"Five years ago— it was five years ago this very 
day— strange!" A pause. 

"You remember the Rushworth case being tried in 
Sawyer county? It was the longest trial known in the 
state, and everybody was getting tired of the complications. 
I was on the bench, and on the day in question 
had taken something to encourage me, and had also given 
the jurymen enough to put them in the best of humor. 
The verdict was 'guilty.' After passing the sentence I 
asked the young criminal if he had anything to say. 
He was only twenty years of age. I was sorry for him, 
but duty is duty, and I felt at that time that I had done 
mine honorably and justly. The court was packed, and 

R4290 : page 362 

as the boy arose, a hush prevailed. His mother, father, 

and two sisters sat in the gallery near the door. His 

fine eyes lit up as he caught his mother's look of love, 

and then he said, in a voice I have never been able to 

forget: 'I am guilty of the charge. I deserve the 

punishment. I do not wish to place the responsibility 

of my crime on any shoulders but my own. I am everything 

the judge says I am— a gambler, a forger, and a 

heavy drinker, and, as the last witness said, not fit to 

be in the presence of honest men and women. I am 

glad the judge has granted me the privilege of speaking. 

I see some of my old chums here, and what I say 

may do them a little good— may keep them from stumbling 

over the rocks that ruined me." 

He looked around until his eyes rested on the seats 
at the right of the entrance. 

"Dr. Pickets, I took my first lesson in gambling 
from you ! You said there was no harm if I did not 'go 
in too heavy!' I went 'too heavy,' it seems. The 
boy laughed nervously, and the doctor flushed crimson, 
and loosened his cravat. 

"I took my first lesson in forging from you, Mr. 
Wyatt. The juror at my right hand jumped from his 
chair as if shot from a cannon, but said nothing. His 
adeptness with the pen was well known, and his head 
drooped with a sense of guilt. 

"I took my first drink of brandy from a lady, who 
serves drinks that sting." A woman started up, she 
was one who had entertained royally. 

"Judge, I am all you say, a gambler, a forger, a 



drinker, and now you have given me another name- 
convict. Twenty years— is that the sentence?" 

"Father," he said, turning his eyes toward the gallery, 
"you had a great future planned for your son. I'm 
sorry I have disappointed your hopes and darkened 
your home; forgive me!" 

"Four months later," continued the judge, taking a 
paper from his pocketbook, "I received this letter from 
that young man. 

"I always carry it," he said. "This, friends, is 
what made a teetotaler of me. I've heard the greatest 
sermons of the greatest preachers, but nothing ever 
came so near making a Christian out of me as did this 
letter from that boy in prison. I hope it may yet. That 
boy had a martyr's spirit, and I feel sure that if I am 
ever permitted to pass through that strait and narrow 
gate, Albert Rushworth will have more to do with my 
entering than any other human being I ever knew." 
Judge Morse held the soiled paper nearer the light, and 
read the last words from the boy he had sentenced to 
"twenty years at hard labor." 

"Judge, I've tried to escape, and am writing this 
from the hospital ward. I was not quite brave enough 
to bear the thought that I must pass twenty years in 
this tomb. I much prefer the one I am about to enter— 
the grave. I feel sure that if you had been sober the 
last day of my trial, my sentence would not have been 
for twenty long years. I tried to escape, and the guards 
shot me; the doctor says I cannot recover, so you see 
my term will soon end. Be careful of Clarence; it is 
pretty hard for young men to resist the temptations 
that are sanctioned by law, and patronized by those in 
civil power. Be careful of Clarence; boys follow where 
men lead, and to be or do like some men is the highest 
ambition boys have. I followed the wrong kind of examples, 
but cannot die without sending you this parting 
message: Be careful of Clarence. 

Albert Rushworth, No. 187, cell 18." 

"Clarence is my second son's name," said the judge, 
folding the letter away in his note-book; "and he and 
Albert had been the closest of friends for a long time. 
I felt every word of that letter as a message to lead me 
into a better life." 



R4290 : page 362 

GIVE ME SUBMISSION, LORD 

Dear Father, hold my trembling hand, 

And bid my heart be still, 
And help me while I waiting stand, 

To know and do thy will. 

Teach me, when grief has touched my heart, 



Or when my pulses thrill 
With some exquisite new-found joy 
To trust thee and be still. 

For only thou who formed the mind 

Canst all its workings know; 
And in thy love and pity kind 

Compassion thou dost know. 

For thou canst school each wand'ring thought 

Till it revert to thee; 
Thou canst direct each deed that's wrought 

Till we thy purpose see. 

Thou canst our hearts emotions calm, 

Our best affections claim, 
Till by thy spirit's soothing balm 

They glorify thy name. 

Thus what we know, and do, and feel 

We give into thy hand; 
Use all according to thy will, 

For thou dost understand. 

Thine is an "everlasting love," 

And therefore thou has "drawn;" 
Thou art our magnet from above, 

And so we "follow on." 

We follow on by day, by night, 

Whate'er thy leadings be, 
Knowing the path, if dark, or bright, 

Leadeth thine own to Thee. G. V. G. Calkins. 



R4290 : page 363 

DESIRE AND CHOOSE, THEN SEEK AND ATTAIN 

-I KINGS 3:4-15. --DECEMBER 6.- 

Golden Text:— "The reverence of Jehovah 
is the beginning of wisdom."— Prov. 9:10. 

KING SOLOMON began his reign with a reverent 
heart, as evinced by his offering sacrifices at 
Gibeon. In this he evidenced the faithfulness 
of our Golden Text, which prepared his heart for the 
blessings which he subsequently received of the Lord. 
We note the wide difference between his attitude and 
that of his two brothers, who had sought the throne of 
Israel in an ambitious spirit and in a traitorous manner, 
as described in preceding lessons. So far as the 
record shows Solomon manifested in this matter a 
proper respect for the Lord and his Divine appointments. 



In this he may be considered an illustration of 

our Lord Jesus and of the Church, which is his Body; 

even as Absalom's career corresponded to the course of 

Satan and all those who follow his disobediently ambitious 

course. 

Possessed of reverence for the Lord and acknowledging 
him before all the people as the real Ruler 
of Israel, and by sacrifice confessing him as Israel's 
Ruler, the young king was in just the right attitude of 
heart to receive a blessing. He slept— he dreamed. 
Whether the dream was the outworking of his own devotion 
of heart and the Lord's response to it or whether 
the Lord, noticing his teachable attitude of mind, 
gave the dream as a lesson respecting Solomon's 
proper course, none can say, because the matter is not 
revealed; but, at all events, the young king had a most 
beautiful dream, which, in view of later developments, 
can be considered only as a true reflection of Solomon's 
attitude of heart. 

He dreamed that he was in the presence of the 
Almighty, who graciously inquired what were his desires. 
Solomon's answer was a most humble one. It 
intimates that he realized that it was not of any worthiness 
or merit of his own that God's favor was thus indicated, 
that it was merely the continuation of the 
Divine mercy which for years had blessed his father, 
King David, "according as he walked before thee in 
truth and in righteousness and in uprightness of heart 
with thee; and thou hast kept for him this great kindness, 
that thou hast given him a son to sit on his throne, 
as it is this day." (I Kings 3:6.) How beautiful an 
adornment is humility! The fact that few possess it 
should make it all the more estimable to us. It is like 
salt to our food. It adds a blessing to every other grace 
and talent we may possess. 

"I AM BUT A LITTLE CHILD" 

We have nothing to indicate that Solomon ever became 
very haughty, proud, though he certainly would 
have been a marvelous man had his great wisdom and 
honor and wealth not affected in some degree the childlike 

R4291 : page 363 

simplicity which he expressed to the Lord in this 
dream, saying, "O Lord my God, thou hast made thy 
servant king instead of David my father; and I am but a 
little child; I know not how to go out or come in [how 
to conduct myself in public or in private before the 
people]. And thy servant is in the midst of thy people 
which thou hast chosen, a great people, that cannot be 
numbered nor counted for multitude. Give thy servant, 
therefore, an understanding heart to judge thy people, 
that I may discern between good and evil; for who is 
able to judge this thy great people."— Vs. 7-9. 



The simplicity of this prayer is beautiful. In it 
Solomon recognized his own littleness and need of assistance 
and God's greatness and ability to help. He 
recognized also that the people were not his, but God's; 
and that he was not really the king, but God's servant 
appointed to judge or rule the people according to 
Divine standards. He recognized that good might appear 
evil and evil might appear good to his imperfect 
judgment; and his prayer, therefore, was for wisdom; 
not that he might be reputed the wisest man in the 
world, nor for any other selfish purpose or ambition, 
but that as God's servant he might faithfully and wisely 
administer the duties of his office, and honor God and 
bless his fellow-Israelites. Would that all rulers and 
judges today might have a similarly humble opinion of 
themselves and a similarly broad appreciation of the 
duties and the responsibilities of their office, and a 
similarly child-like faith in God's ability to guide 
them, to use them, to bless the work to which he has 
appointed them! Would that they could recognize 
that all people are God's people, and that they themselves 
must render an account to God which will be 
exacting to the extent of their knowledge and ability. 

"THE SPEECH PLEASED JEHOVAH" 

We do not wonder that the record shows that the 
Lord was pleased with his choice— because Solomon 
asked neither long life, nor riches, nor the lives of his 
enemies, but something far better— wisdom. Then, 
just as we might expect, with our present knowledge 
of the Lord's bounty and mercy and generosity, Jehovah 
declared to Solomon that his request for wisdom 
was granted, but that with it he would add riches and 
honor above those of any other human being of his day; 
and he promised also that if Solomon would continue 
in this way he would lengthen his days, give him an increase 
beyond the limitations of his natural powers. 

When Solomon awoke and found that it was but a 
dream, doubtless there was a measure of disappointment 
in connection with it, but it brought before his mind, 
clearly and distinctly, just the condition of heart and 
mind most pleasing to the Lord. And be it remembered 
that for a considerable number of years Solomon maintained 
his humble attitude of heart and faithfulness to 
God. He returned to Jerusalem and there, through the 
agency of the priest, made various additional offerings 
and sacrifices to the Lord, the flesh of the peace-offerings 
constituting a feast for his servants, including 
many of the royal citizens. Thus was his reign reverently 
and wisely inaugurated and the foundation laid 
for his personal prosperity and that of the nation, 
which, as God's representative, he both ruled and 
served. 

LESSONS FROM THIS STORY FOR OUR DAY 



The word opportunity signifies "standing at the 
door." We have seen how great opportunities stood at 
Solomon's door and how he embraced them. Similarly 
opportunities stood at the door of his two brothers and 
they embraced them for sin and treason. Let us note 
that opportunities for good and for evil come to all of 
us at some time and it is for us to decide which we will 
grasp. But before the opportunity, comes the desire. 
If the desires be impure, an evil opportunity in harmony 
therewith will be found. If the desires be good, noble, 
true, loyal, opportunities in harmony with these will 
come to us. The thought to be impressed upon our 
minds, therefore, is that the desires of our hearts should 
be noble in every respect, and that all ignoble desires 
be studiously and promptly set aside, to the intent that 

R4291 : page 364 

only the good opportunities may come to us. But desire 
and opportunity are not enough. Many a man has had 
both and gotten nothing. When the good desires have 
been cultivated and developed and by and by a noble 
opportunity stands before us, then comes the responsibility 
of seizing it— decision. Probably more people 
make failure of life at this juncture than at any other. 

Our counsel to the worldly would be along these 
lines: That first they should have noble ambitions; 
that they should resist all others; that they should be 
on the lookout for opportunities in harmony with their 
noblest sentiments and should seize them with all the 
energy of their being, when they come within their 
reach, and should never let them go. It is worthy of 
note, too, that very few are so meanly born or unfavorably 
environed that they are utterly devoid of noble 
principles or incompetent of discernment as between 
these and ignoble ones. True, born in sin and shapen 
in iniquity and surrounded by others in similar conditions, 
none can help it if ignoble suggestions come to 
his mind. But it is within his power to exercise his 
will to resist the evil suggestion and bid it be gone and 
to entertain only noble, pure, true sentiments. This 
is illustrated by the adage which declares that "We cannot 
help crows flying over our heads, but we can prevent 
them from building nests in our hair." 

The difficulty is that where an affinity exists between 
the evil suggestions and the fallen nature, the 
will may not be prompt enough to rid itself of the intrusion. 
The battle of the will, therefore, is not merely 
with the crow thoughts that desire to nest with us, but 
additionally the wrong disposition which desires the 
crow company. A child's hand was stuck in the narrow 
mouth of a vase. He called for aid and the father suggested, 
"Open your hand loosely." "I know," replied 
the child, "that if I do that, I'll drop my penny." The 
thought is that to release ourselves from the power of 



sin requires such an exercise of the will as would enable 
us to drop the cost of our release, "the pleasures of sin 
for a season." 

THE NEED OF CHRIST WITHIN 

Our Lord gave a parable respecting a man possessed 
of an evil spirit who got rid of it and got his heart 
swept and garnished— but empty. By and by the evil 
spirit took with him seven others more wicked than 
himself and they overpowered him and his last end was 
worse than the first. A valuable lesson can be drawn 
from this. It illustrates that under present adverse 
conditions we are unable to keep ourselves, and that 
even if we were relieved from the power of sin, even if 
we were justified freely from all the sins that are past, 
we would be unable to keep ourselves— the world, the 
flesh and the Adversary in manifold forms will surely 
overpower our good resolutions and desires for purity 
and uprightness. What we need is an occupant for our 
hearts— the Divine One. If Christ be enthroned in our 
hearts, if our wills be turned over to him in full submission, 
he is able to keep our hearts, to guard our 
hearts. Respecting such he says, the Father and 
myself will come in to them and abide with them. Oh, 
the security this implies! Let us not forget that the 
will is the doorkeeper of the heart and that the Lord's 
presence will not remain except as we will to have it, 
and that if we admit to our hearts evil thoughts, evil 
surmisings, the Lord will not hear us, will not abide 
with us, but will proportionately vacate and leave room 
for more and more of the evil influences to enter into 
us and to possess us. 

Hence the admonition, "Keep your hearts in the 
love of God." The Evil One and entrenched sins will 
endeavor to remain in our hearts and fight against our 
wills. But not so with righteousness and the laws of 
God. These are easily offended and easily driven out. 
Hence with the Psalmist we should pray, "Oh, Lord! 
take not thy holy Spirit from me." Remember also the 
exhortation of the Apostle, "Grieve not the holy Spirit 
with which ye are sealed unto the day of redemption." 

If we know these things, happy are we if we act 
upon them. Happy are we if we realize the primary 
necessity for good desires and for the rejection of evil 
desires. Happy are we if, when the message of God's 
grace came to us as an opportunity of return to his 
favor, we promptly embraced and received at his hands 
justification by faith, through the merit of the precious 
blood. Happy are we if being thus swept and garnished 
and delivered from the power of the Adversary, we 
promptly recognized our obligation to the Giver of all 
blessing and sought relationship with him. Happy are 
we if, learning of his willingness to accept the keys of 
our hearts, to accept our will, we should give it to him 
fully, completely, forever! Happy are we if we maintain 



this same attitude of heart-purity and desire for 

the Lord's will instead of our own, and if more and 

more we allow the Spirit of the Lord to fill every nook 

and corner of our hearts and to drive out, not only sin, 

but every worldly ambition, that we may be fully and 

wholly possessed by the Spirit of our Lord, the holy 

Spirit! Happy are we if we continue to manifest meekness, 

gentleness, patience, long-suffering, goodness, 

brotherly kindness, peace, love, so that anything which 

would mar this heavenly bliss or quench this holy flame 

or offend our Master or lose us his smile, would be considered 

as indescribable disaster! Happy are we if the 

joys of the Lord thus continue in our hearts and rule 

our lives and make us joyful in our pilgrimage towards 

the heavenly city and its glories! Happy are we as we 

find the Spirit of the Lord working out through hands 

and feet and tongue and every power to glorify the name 

R4292 : page 364 

of our Redeemer and to bless his children and as many 
others as possible of the groaning creation! 

JOINT-HEIRS WITH CHRIST 

Dear fellow-members of the Royal Priesthood, in 
a certain sense we already have received the anointing 
of the Great King, which constitutes us in an embryotic 
sense the Kings and Priests of the future. We are at 
the threshold of a great work. We are to be associates 
with our Lord in the Kingdom, that we may be his assistants 
in conferring Divine blessings upon all the 
families of the earth. Our position, therefore, is not 
so unlike that of Solomon. We, like him, have turned 
aside from service for a time that we may offer sacrifices 
to the Lord. Each has a sacrifice to bring, his justified 
self, his will, his time, his influence, his talents. 
Now is the time of our dream. Now is the time when 
the Lord has appeared to us, revealing himself to the 
eyes of our understanding through his Word. He invites 
us to choose. He wishes us to see of what spirit 
we are. Day by day we are making choice, either wisely 
or unwisely. And day by day he is taking note of those 
who make a wise choice, as did Solomon. 

Do we ask for long life by seeking chiefly self-preservation? 
Do we ask for riches by giving the best of 
our time and talent to their accumulation? Or do we 
ask for triumphs and trials of an earthly kind over 
others? If we ask any of these things or all of them, 
as some seem to do, we are not choosing the better 

R4292 : page 365 

part, and the Lord will sooner or later advise us that 
our choice is not pleasing to him. Are we day by day 
seeking at the Lord's hand and through his Word an 



understanding heart, that we may know his will and 
obediently follow his instruction? If so, we are choosing 
wisely, reverently— "The secret of the Lord is with 
them that reverence him, and he will show them his 
Covenant." 

Our desire to know the secret of the Lord should be 
two-fold: (1) That we may fill the office and service to 
which he has so graciously called us; and (2) that 
we may be prepared in his providence for the blessing 
of all with whom he will bring us in contact, not only 
in the present life, but also in that which is to come. 
It should be our desire, as it was Solomon's, to realize 
our own littleness, our own unworthiness of so great an 
honor; to realize that we have the Divine favor only because 
of our relationship to the typical David, the Beloved, 
our Redeemer. We are reminded of our Saviour's 
words, "Except ye become as little children ye can in no 
wise enter into the Kingdom of God." Here again is 
the thought of simplicity and humility and teachableness, 
and not the thought of littleness of stature or immaturity 
of judgment. The thought of what we have 
been called to, in the Lord's providence, in connection 
with his Kingdom, should lead us to be very humble in 
the present time, to learn all the lessons which our 
heavenly Father would give to those who shall be associated 
with him in his Kingdom, "To the called according 
to his purpose." 

All of the Lord's people are sheep. All are under 
the Good Shepherd. But amongst the sheep he has appointed 
some to measurably represent him and to assist 
and guide the sheep in right paths. These may get the 
special blessing from this lesson by applying the suggestions 
to some extent to their present relationship to 
the people of God. None of the elders of the Church of 
Christ should ever be heard saying, "My people!" "My 
flock!" "My Church!" "My congregation!" Rather in 
humility he should be feeling himself as a little child 
needing the Divine wisdom to guide, direct, feed the 
Lord's people, whose interests are so great, so momentous, 
and the corresponding need of assistance on 
the way to the Kingdom. 

To all who thus choose, to all whose hearts are 
firmly fixed unwaveringly upon these principles and desires, 
the Lord declares his approval and assures them 
that while now granting them the desires of their hearts 
in respect to wisdom and knowledge, he will by and by 
give them still more wisdom and, in addition, riches 
and honor and length of days— eternal life. If this 
matter of consecration has been thus far but a dream, 
let us awaken to realities and permit the good promises 
of the Lord to awaken in us, not only to will and to do 
aright the Father's good pleasure, but also to cultivate 
in word and deed, and the thought and intent of our 
heart, the good purposes of his will. So doing, we 
shall shortly enter into the "Joy of our Lord." 



R4292 : page 365 

JUDGMENT OF FALLEN ANGELS 

A REPLY TO SOME QUERIES 

YOUR favor of the 23d is at hand, and I much appreciate 
its loving spirit. With very much of it, dear brother, 
I am in very hearty accord and have offered some 
suggestions in the DAWNS and Tracts, especially respecting 
the fact that the angels were preached to, taught a great lesson 
in connection with our Lord's sacrifice and resurrection, 
and that some of them probably have taken their stand for 
righteousness and perhaps suffered from some evilly-disposed 
on this account. I do not see, however, as you seem to intimate, 
that their trial is wholly in the future. As the trial of 
the Gospel Church has continued throughout this age, but 
will terminate with severe testing, so I understand that the 
fallen angels have been on trial— but in their case for over 
4300 years; that some have been taking their stand and that 
now what remains of trial for them is a short, sharp, final 
test similar to the one that will come to the world at the 
close of the Millennium. 

Your suggestion that these fallen angels must see and 
appreciate the testing of the Millennial Age before their trial 
could be complete does not to me appear sound. They have 
knowledge, not only of the primeval condition, witnessing 
the degradation occasioned by sin in the world, but also of 
heavenly conditions and their own harmony at one time with 
these conditions. With mankind the matter is different. We 
have had comparatively no knowledge or illustration of perfection, 
but only of sin, degradation. God's purpose to give 
mankind an uplift and a knowledge of the good seems 
reasonable, for man has by experience no knowledge of the 
beauties and grandeurs of the heavenly estate for his instruction 
by contrast. 

Assuming, as I do, that there have been good and bad 
fallen angels since Christ preached to them, and assuming 
that this knowledge brought to them responsibility, trial, testing, 
my understanding is that the culmination of their testing 
is about due. I do not understand these to be the angels 
of the devil mentioned in Matthew 25. Those I understand 
to be the goat-class, messengers of Satan, who love unrighteousness 
and who during the Millennium will pass to 
the left hand of the great King and Judge as "goats." 

The judgment of the great day, I believe, is upon us, 
testing the Church, the world and the fallen spirits, and, 
I believe, will produce an awful time of trouble. We are to 
remember that, according to the parallel dispensations, the 
King came in, or assumed his power in 1878. He then called 
for his servants and began to reckon with them respecting the 
pounds and talents. 

If we are correct in our supposition, the majority of the 
"little flock" is now with the Bridegroom beyond the veil and 



assisting in the work of judgment already beginning. Why 
may not we on this side of the veil have some share also in 
the matter? If the judgments of the Lord are already abroad 
in the earth and have to do with the fiery trials which are 
trying the Church, "When every man's work shall be tried so 
as by fire," and when the "great company," thus tried, shall 
suffer loss of all their Kingdom privileges, yet themselves be 
saved so as by fire, is not this a part of the Lord's judgment 
which begins with the house of God, which extends to Babylon 
and involves the whole world? Is not this the time of 
which it is written, "This honor hath all his saints, to execute 
the judgments written"? Will not this execution of the judgments 
written constitute a large part of the great trouble just 
before us? Again, in his statement, "To him that overcometh 

R4292 : page 366 

will I grant power over the nations, and he shall dash them 
in pieces as a potter's vessel," does not our Lord suggest 
that the Church will have a share in this work? To suppose 
the Head and the majority of the members in glory, and the 
Feet still in the earth and in the very midst of much of the 
trouble, but shielded from it by their close relationship to 
the Lord, as the three Hebrews in the fiery furnace were protected 
—does not this fit all of the conditions? 

Consider now the part of the fallen angels. In the 
"lying wonders" would not the expression "lying" convey the 
thought of deception? And could any wonder be greater 
than an apparent resurrection of the dead? And would it 
be more deceptive or a greater lie than for the fallen angels 
to personate the dead? It seems to me that the acquirement 
by the angels of the power to materialize and personate the 
living and the dead will most wonderfully accord with the 
various declarations respecting "all manner of deceivableness 
and lying wonders." 

My thought is that God's restraint upon the fallen angels 
was not merely one of command, but included also his taking 
away from them the powers of materialization, which once 
they misused. I do not think of divine power as returning 
to the demons the liberty and authority to materialize, but 
understand that whatever success they may have in this 
direction and the still further success they are expecting is 

R4293 : page 366 

all the result of their finding out a method by which it might 
appear to them that they had circumvented the divine mandate. 
Thus they would seem to triumph over God and be 
able to work their orgies in defiance of his power. 

Here would be the sublime test, which would demonstrate 
not only the gross wickedness of those of them who for 
centuries had defied God and righteousness and injured 
humanity, but it would be the supreme test also upon that 
other company of the fallen angels who, we are assuming, 
are sick of sin, abstaining from it and longing for divine mercy 
and reconciliation. The breaking loose of such evil spirits 



and the resulting pandemonium would imply amongst them 
a climacteric test, the decision in which would be final. It 
not only seems to me that no such tests would be possible 
for those demons during the Millennium, when nothing shall 
hurt or destroy, but it also seems incongruous to me to suppose 
that there would be any hope for those who are in a devilish 
attitude now after having witnessed the fall and its terrible 
consequences, and the goodness of God manifested in Jesus' 
death and resurrection and the faithfulness of his followers 
in being baptized into his death. 

I am not urging this matter, dear Brother, merely explaining 
the matter as it appears to my mind. In doing this 
I, of course, wish to thoroughly arouse the Lord's people in 
due time, to put them on guard, to forewarn and forearm. 
And incidentally, we know not but that we are forewarning 
and forearming those of the demons who have turned their 
faces again towards God and his righteousness. It is far from 
our thought to terrify the Lord's people or others. Rather 
we point them to the only sure place of safety, and admonish 
them that in abiding therein they need have no fear. The 
Vow we have recently suggested is a finger pointing in the 
right direction— to the fullest imaginable degree of consecration 
to the Lord and his service, and to love for the 
brethren and to separateness from sin. These, abiding under 
the shadow of the Almighty, need fear no evil. The Lord 
will be their refuge and habitation, and no evil can come 
near that dwelling-place. 

In a word, those who are living as closely as possible to 
the Lord in faith and obedience and knowledge are absolutely 
safe and need fear none of the powers of darkness. 
We believe that all others are unsafe propositions, as they 
are distant from this safe habitation. 



page 366 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V. (E)* 

Questions on Study V.— 
The Author of the Atonement. 

JANUARY 3 

"THE EVERLASTING FATHER" 

(1) What titles are given to our Lord in Isaiah 9:6? 

(2) In what sense should we understand that our 
Lord Jesus was the Mighty God? How the Wonderful 
One? How the Counselor or Teacher? How the Prince 
of Peace? P. 141, par. 2. 

(3) Does the application of the title, The Everlasting 
Father, to our Lord Jesus, in any manner conflict 



with the application of such a title to Jehovah? 
If not, why not? P. 141. 

(4) Quote one or more Scriptures which refer to 
the heavenly Father as one person, and to the Son of 

the Father as another person, and which declares Jehovah 
to be the Father of our Redeemer. P. 141, par. 3. 

(5) Is Jesus now the Everlasting Father or will he 
become such in the future? Under what circumstances 
will this be to him a proper title? P. 141, par. 3,4. 

(6) What relationship will the perfected world hold 
at the end of the Millennium to the Son— and what to 
the Father? P. 141, par. 4. 

(7) Explain the Scripture which says, "Instead of 
thy fathers shall be thy children," etc. (Psa. 45:16.) 
Who are the fathers and whose children will they become 
and by what process will the change be effected? 

P. 142, par. 3. 

(8) Is our Lord Jesus ever spoken of as the Father 
of the Church? If not, why not? P. 143, par. 1. 

(9) What is the relationship between Christ and 
the Church, Scripturally stated? Prove your view by 
several quotations. P. 144. 

(10) If this particular relationship between Christ 

and the Church is the "mystery" of the Scriptures, explain 
it and show why. 

JANUARY 10 

"THE SON OF MAN" 

(1) How does this title, "The Son of man," apply 

to our Lord Jesus, since the Scriptures declare that he 
was born of a virgin, and since he never acknowledged 
Joseph as his father? P. 149. 

(2) Cite a few of the texts in which our Lord 
applied to himself the term, "The Son of man." P. 150. 

(3) Is this to be applied to our Lord merely respecting 
his earthly ministry or is it also applied to him relative 
to his glory of the future? P. 150. 

(4) Since the evidence is conclusive that our Lord 
Jesus was not Joseph's son, has it any weight that his 

page 367 

human nature was sacrificed forever? Why should he 
adopt this title which so clearly identifies him with 
humanity? P. 151. 

(5) Who was The Man of the human race, aside 
from our Lord Jesus? P. 152, par. 1. 

(6) Quote from the Psalms showing that Adam was 
ordained of God to be the head of his race. P. 152, par. 1. 

(7) Is Christ to inherit that which was originally 
Adam's? Quote a Scripture in proof of this. P. 152, par. 2. 

(8) If Adam's inheritance was lost through sin, 
how does it come to Christ as The Son of The man? 
P. 152, par. 2. 



(9) Does the Greek text connected with our Lord's 
title, "The Son of Man," show any peculiarity? If so, 
what? P. 153, par. 1. 

(10) Why should this title, "The Son of Man," apply 
to our Lord Jesus not only after his resurrection, 

but after the Millennium— to all eternity? P. 153, par. 2. 

JANUARY 17 
"THE MAN CHRIST JESUS" 

(1) Is it conceded even by the enemies of the Gospel 
that Jesus was a remarkable personage? If so, on what 
account? Cite some Scriptures in proof of this. P. 153, 
par. 3. 

(2) What was the significance of Pilate's expression, 
"Behold the man"? Where should the emphasis 

be laid and what significance should be attached to his 
words? P. 154. 

(3) Quote Rousseau's eulogy on "The Son of the 
Man." P. 154, par. 2. 

(4) Quote Napoleon Bonaparte's eulogy on "The 
Man Christ Jesus." P. 155. 

(5) Why should the world be excusable for considering 
Jesus more than a man? P. 155, par. 4. 

(6) Was he not more than a man— not only more 
than sinful man, but more even than a perfect man? 
Where, how and when did he receive this greatness? 
P. 155, par. 4. 

JANUARY 24 

"NO BEAUTY THAT WE SHOULD DESIRE" 

(1) Quote the text of Isaiah 52:3 and show comparison 
with Leeser's or Young's translation. 

(2) Does this Scripture imply that our Lord Jesus 
was of mean personal appearance? P. 156, par. 2. 

(3) Mention various views of honorableness, beauty, 
etc., and show which of these ideals our Lord disappointed 
and why. P. 156, par. 3. 

(4) What were the Scribes, Pharisees and rulers of 
the Jews expecting in Messiah from his reign? And 
how did our Lord disappoint these expectations. P. 157. 

(5) In what respect was our Lord's appearance 
undesirable and disappointing to those men? P. 158, par. 2. 

(6) What can we say of the expression, "His visage 
was so marred?" Is it not out of harmony with what 
we should expect of a perfect man and what we should 
expect in the light of various Scriptures referring to our 
Lord? P. 158, par. 3. 

(7) Give a better translation of the passage of this 
prophecy and show its application. P. 159, par. 1,2. 

(8) If our Lord was "touched with a feeling of our 
infirmities" might not this include possible lines of 
sadness on his face? Explain this fully. P. 159, par. 3. 



(9) Would our Lord, the Perfect One, suffer more 

or less from his environment because of his perfection? 
P. 160, par. 1. 

(10) How did these outward conditions probably 
affect our Lord's personal appearance? And would 

they assist in appreciating human conditions sympathetically? 
P.160, par. 2. 

(11) Review the questions of this lesson and point 
out what beauty there is in the expression, "The chiefest 
among ten thousand." P. 161, par. 2. 

JANUARY 31 

THE CHANNEL OF ATONEMENT--THE HOLY SPIRIT 

(1) Does the holy Spirit have an important part in 
connection with the Reconciliation of At-One Ment of 
the Church of God? If so, what is its part? And why 
could we not without it appreciate the Divine will or 
understand the "deep things" of God's promises? 
Pp.163, 164. 

(2) Will the holy Spirit be an instrumentality of 
blessing to the world also during the Millennium? 
Quote a Scripture in proof of this. P. 163; P. 164, par. 2. 

(3) What reason can be assigned for the blessing 

of the world being mentioned by the Prophet in advance 
of the blessing of the Church, when really other 
Scriptures show us that the order was reversed? P. 164, 
par. 1,2. 

(4) Quote another Scripture in the New Testament 
which shows that the holy Spirit will operate during 
the Millennium for the blessing and assistance of the 
world.-Rev. 22:17. P.165. 

(5) What Doctrine arose in the Church after the 
death of the apostles— after the New Testament had 
been completed— and beclouded the Truth in general 
and the operations of the holy Spirit in particular? 
P.165, par. 1. 

(6) Does the word Trinity or Trinitarian occur 
in the Bible? If not, by what authority are these 
terms so generally applied as names of doctrines, 
churches, etc.? Are the Scriptures consistent and harmonious 
on the subject of the relationship of the Father 

to the Son and the holy Spirit, and how? P.165, par. 2. 

(7) Is the expression, "These three, the Father, the 
Son, and the holy Spirit, one in substance, equal in 
power and glory," a Scriptural quotation? If not, 
where is it found? P. 165, par. 2. 

(8) Explain how three persons could be one person, 
or how one person could be three persons. And if 
merely one in kind or substance be meant, and not one 
in person, where would be the proof of their equality, 
since the Father is always mentioned first— mentioned 
as the God and Father of our Lord and Saviour Jesus 
Christ? P. 166. 

(9) Give references to the holy Spirit under sixteen 



different terms or titles in the New Testament. P. 167. 



*Five years ago DAWN-STUDIES, VOL. V., was reset, and 
unfortunately the type was not exactly same size as before; and 
hence page for page they differ. The references given in these 
Berean Studies apply to the present edition, a copy of which 
postpaid will cost you but 30c. But keep your old edition, for 
unfortunately the new Bible Helps refer to its pages. 



page 369 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXIX. DECEMBER 15 No. 24 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS 

Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society's Report 
for 1908 371 

The Watch Tower Subscription List 372 

Our Correspondence Department 372 

Evangelizing Through Newspapers 372 

The Society's Colportage 373 

The Tract and Volunteer Work 373 

The Pilgrim Service 374 

Summary of the Year's Work 374 

The Temple of God is Holy 374 

The Greater Than Solomon's 379 

A Review Lesson— December 27 381 

Resolved, by God's Assisting Grace 381 

Fourteen Elders and Others 382 

page 370 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 



they send a Postal Card each MAY stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



"THE WONDERFUL STORY OF GOD'S LOVE" 



Just issued— a poem of 59 verses by Sister M. R. Land. 
It is a beautiful little booklet, appropriately illustrated, and 
suggested for use as a Christmas token. Price, 15c or $1.50 
per dozen, postpaid. 

DANO-NORWEGIAN AND SWEDISH LITERATURE 



Tabernacle Shadows and Spiritism booklets in the Dano-Norwegian 
language, 10c each. Also excellent Norwegian 
Volunteer matter. 

The Hell Booklets in cloth at 10c and in board covers 
at 15c, in Swedish; also Spiritism and Tabernacle Shadows 
treatises in TOWER form, in Swedish, at 5c per copy. Tabernacle 
Shadows in booklet form at 10c each. Plenty of good 
Swedish Volunteer matter. 

Volume 1 in Hollandish is now in stock at 25c per copy. 

MOTTOES, POSTCARDS and BOOKLETS for CHRISTMAS 



We have a choice line at very low prices, as set forth in 
our issue of November 1st. Also "Sermonette" Postcards, 15c 
per dozen, postpaid. 

Glacier Window Mottoes, like those exhibited at the Convention, 
30c per dozen, postpaid. 

OLD THEOLOGY QUARTERLY 



We are about to discontinue these Tracts. Order at once all 
you can use, so we need not move the stock to our new quarters. 



R4293 : page 371 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY'S REPORT 

-DECEMBER 1, 1907, TO DECEMBER 1, 1908.- 

FOR many years the work of the Society has shown 

phenomenal progress, our last report being the 

best of all— an astonishment even to the most 

hopeful. Of course, in the face of the financial depression, 

we had not the courage to hope that the present 

year would even nearly come up to last year's remarkable 

showing. We are confident, therefore, dear brethren, 

that you will be overwhelmed with surprise to learn that, 

notwithstanding the adverse conditions to which the 

panic led, the present year not only shows as favorably 

as last year, but shows a great improvement. We may 

well rejoice with one another and give to our Lord all 

the praise. Surely without him we could do nothing, 

in the face of the opposition which we continually meet 

from the world, from the flesh, and, above all, from our 

great Adversary, who works in and through the blinded 

children of disobedience. Ah! more and more do we 

realize the meaning of the Apostle's words, when he declares, 

"We wrestle not with flesh and blood, but with 

wicked spirits in high positions."— Eph. 6:12. 

The contest is so unequal that if we did not have 
the supervision and protection of our Lord through his 
various agencies, we would surely be deceived and 
thwarted in every direction. As it is, in the light of 
our Lamp, the Word of God, we know what to expect; 
that for the harvest testing, which begins with the 
house of God and extends to the nominal systems and 
the world, there will be a relaxing of the Divine restraints 
upon the evil spirits, permitting their greater 
activity and correspondingly more and more severe 
tests upon all mankind. We remember our Lord's words, 
to the effect that the deceptions would ultimately prove 
so severe that they would "deceive, if it were possible, the 
very elect." It will not be possible, because for this 
class the Lord will provide special protection, special 
warnings, special assistances. We note the Apostle's 
remark that if it began first with us, what will the end 
be upon those who obey not the Gospel? "If the 
righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly 
and the sinner appear?"— I Pet. 4:18. 

While the report shows progress in the work accomplished 
in extending the Truth to others, our chief 
cause for rejoicing lies in the fact that a deep work of 
grace seems to be in progress in many places; we believe 



very generally throughout all the Harvest work, considered 

as a whole. We are able to form, we think, 

fairly good estimates along these lines from the phraseology 

of the letters we receive and also from the reports 

made to us by the "Pilgrims." The spirit of brotherhood, 

the spirit of love, seems to be on the increase, 

even as the reverse spirit is increasing and manifest in 

the world— a spirit of strife and envy, evil-speaking and 

hatred. 

We have been pleased to note the remarkable progress 
made by some dear friends who have come into 
the light of Present Truth recently. The rapidity with 
which they grasp the outline of the Plan in many details, 
and the zeal with which they undertake to "let their 
light shine," and to bring their thoughts and words and 
doings into line therewith, are evidences of the power 
of the spirit of the Truth working in them, and are 
gratifying indeed. But alas! a faithful "View" from the 
Watch Tower reminds us of the fact that the harvest 
time is not alone for gathering the wheat from the fields, 
but a time also for threshing and winnowing it, for the 
separation of the chaff from the wheat, that the latter 
may be ready for the garner. We should, perhaps, expect 
that the remaining years of the harvest will be 
conspicuously marked in this manner. While we expect 
a large ingathering of ripened grain, we must also 
expect that the flail of trial and testing will fall heavily, 
swiftly and repeatedly upon the wheat, that it may be 
thoroughly threshed, that every grain may be thoroughly 
separated from the hull or chaff. Results may sometimes 
be very disappointing as we find ourselves mistaken 
in our estimates; as we find some fall whom we 
had no doubt would stand firmly with us to the end of 
the journey and enter the garner of the Kingdom. 
However, the work is the Lord's, and not ours. It is for 
us to do with our might what our hands find to do, and 
to leave all results in the Divine care, knowing that our 
Lord is too wise to err, and that his love for all of his 
dear people is far more intense than ours, and that 
nothing in their interest, for their correction in 
righteousness, etc., will be left undone. 

It is ours, therefore, to do our part and leave the 
remainder with him. We cannot share the sentiments 
of our opponents that the Lord has allowed the harvest 
work to progress thirty-four years along wrong lines, 
and now wishes three or four self-appointed brethren to 

R4293 : page 372 

take direction of affairs and say what should and what 
should not appear in the columns of this Journal, etc. 
This very same thought, as some of our readers know, 
has twice in the past led to conspiracies on the part of 
misguided brethren to turn the channel of the Stream 
of Truth more to their pleasement. As those efforts 
failed, so, we believe, other efforts, of a slightly modified 



form, will fail. These endeavors cause us sorrow 
of heart indeed, but in no sense or degree shake our 
confidence in the Lord and his perfect mastery of the 
situation and the carrying out of the harvest work. Our 
sorrow is for the deluded brethren whom the Adversary 
thus sifts out. It is not for us to question the methods 
of Divine Wisdom, but rather to remember that "The 
Lord knoweth them that are his." We may esteem 
brethren too highly or insufficiently, but the Lord 
knows the heart and makes no mistake. Then, too, 
each of the called ones has a will of his own. It is not 
our flesh that is being tested, but our wills; hence the 
necessity for watching our hearts and keeping very 
humble; otherwise pride or ambition may enter and in 
a few months, or even a few days, or hours or moments 
might work havoc to all our character development, 
from the Lord's viewpoint. 

Ah! how carefully we should heed the words, "Keep 
thy heart with all diligence (thy will, thy affections), 
for out of it are the issues of life"— life eternal or death 
eternal.— Prov. 4:23. 

We have some very important and very interesting 
things to present to you respecting the grand outlook 
for the work in 1909, but that properly belongs to the 
"View" of our next issue, and we must not trench 
upon it here. Suffice to say that it contains wonderful 
hopes and prospects, under the Lord's continued 
guidance, and your continued cooperation. 

R4294 : page 372 

THE WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTION LIST 

With the New Year we expect to drop the word 
"Zion's" in the title of our Journal, because many of 
the friends inform us that the word is objectionable, 
having been so much used by Mr. Dowie and his followers. 
They report that our Journal is frequently 
cast aside under the supposition that it is published 
under Dowie's auspices, or in some manner affiliated 
with Zion City, which he founded. The new name, THE 
WATCH TOWER, is the one by which the Journal is 
usually mentioned. It appears, further, that African 
churches and papers use the word Zion extensively, 
which has led to the inquiry whether or not our Journal 
is published and generally read by colored people. 

We consider the subscription list of our Journal the 
surest and safest criterion, as respects the numbers of 
our deeply interested ones. Our present enrolment is 
25,000. This is only half the list we think we should 
have. It is the only discouraging feature connected 
with this report. It shows no increase over last year. 
For our encouragement, however, we must remember 
that during this year the Postoffice Department put into 
effect with all publications a rule intended to cut off the 
lists the names of all who do not actually subscribe and 



pay the money for their subscriptions, or have it paid 

for them by others. This meant the cutting off of 

large numbers of names from our list. Otherwise the 

list would probably show at least 5,000 stronger. As 

it was, our Society advanced to the TOWER account 

moneys representing the subscriptions of those who requested 

the Journal as the Lord's poor, and also advanced 

arrearage for those requesting the TOWER continued 

to them on credit. The Society is pleased to do 

this, as the work is one in any event, and any surplus 

which might accrue from the WATCH TOWER would belong 

to the Society. We state these matters in explanation 

and wish all our dear readers to know that we are 

as glad to have their names on the list, if they are poor 

and unable to pay for themselves, as if they were rich. 

We are continually reminded of the Scriptural declaration 

that amongst the Lord's consecrated flock there 

are not many rich nor great, but chiefly the poor of 

this world, rich in faith. 

We offer no premiums to obtain subscriptions. We 
rely upon your loving interest in this Journal and in 
the Truth it presents and in the brethren whom we believe 
will be blest and profited by the reading of it. 
On these high grounds we appeal to all the consecrated 
in sympathy with this Journal and its mission, to see 
to it that the names of all the interested promptly get 
on our lists, whether as paying subscribers, or on 
credit, or as the Lord's poor. 

What can and will you do in this direction for the 
coming year? Those who are on the list of the "Lord's 
poor" will please remember that their requests for renewal 
need not be sent to us now, but next May. We 
thus arrange so as to save our office force, for whom 
the present is the very busy season. 

OUR CORRESPONDENCE DEPARTMENT 

We esteem this department very highly, because it 
permits us to keep closely in touch with the dear friends 
of the Truth, and to know of their joys and sorrows, 
and to give them advice along various lines of their 
special requests. We want you to know how much your 
letters are appreciated; how pleased we are to have 
them, and we want you to understand why only an 
occasional letter receives a response, and that, sometimes, 
a very brief one (perhaps on a postal-card). It 
is because we trust that you accept the DAWN-STUDIES 
and TOWERS and Tracts as answers. Whenever a letter 
contains a direct question, we endeavor to give it 
a direct answer, and very frequently can do this best 
by citing the volume and page of the DAWN or TOWER 
in which it is treated much more fully than a private 
letter would permit. We offer the suggestion that in 
writing to us you endeavor to keep the business part 
of your letter separate from the more social portion, 
and, if you ask questions, please make them pointed as 



possible. Say as much as possible in few words, and 
your letter will receive more, rather than less care and 
attention. Let us assure you that the Lord has greatly 
blessed many of your kind letters to our refreshment of 
heart, during various trying experiences, which he has 
wisely and lovingly permitted, and against which we 
do not murmur nor repine. 

Your assurances of your prayers and love and progress 
in the Truth and its service have been specially 
helpful. Continue, dear friends, to remember us and 
all the dear colaborers in your prayers. We feel sure 
that this is true in the case of all those who have informed 
us that they have taken the Vow. 

EVANGELIZING THROUGH NEWSPAPERS 

The newspaper has become the great factor in the 
daily life of the civilized world. The Lord seemed to 
point us to this way also of forwarding the interests of 
the Truth, and opened a wide door for us in connection 
with the publication of the debates. We have sought 
wisdom and grace to use this opportunity to the Lord's 
praise and to the finding of his people, and their liberation 
from the chains of error. The Lord has greatly 
blessed the effort so that at the present time the editor's 

R4294 : page 373 

weekly sermons are published in eleven newspapers 
regularly, representing a combined circulation of 402,000. 
This is equivalent to a circulation of 400,000 tracts 
per week, or 21,000,000 per year, with the advantage 
that it reaches people in a manner which some prefer; 
for quite a good many dislike to be seen receiving or 
reading a tract. Surely this is an excellent field, well 
worthy of cultivation as one of the best means of reaching 
the reading public. 

Brethren familiar with newspaper methods advise 
us that Allegheny is practically unknown, that Pittsburgh 
is noted more for its smoke and dirt, steel and 
iron, Homestead riot and millionaires, than for anything 
along the lines of science, literature or religion. 
They assure us that if the weekly sermons emanated 
from a more favorable quarter it would possibly result 
in the publication of the sermons all over the United 
States; that within a year there might be hundreds of 
papers publishing them regularly. Investigation and 
reflection seemed to teach that Chicago and St. Louis, 
although central in a large degree, have a stock-yard 
and big reputation, rather than a religious one; and 
Boston, although cultured and scientific, has a reputation 
for unorthodox fads along religious lines. Altogether 
we concluded, after seeking Divine guidance, 
that Brooklyn, N. Y., with a large population of the middle 
class, and known as "The City of Churches," would, 
for these reasons, be our most suitable center for the 



harvest work during the few remaining years. Besides, 

the brethren of the office force, always zealous to use 

their time, energy and opportunities in holding meetings, 

will find in Brooklyn and surrounding cities a vast field, 

only partially cultivated at the present time. Within 

the radius of a few miles reside seven and one-half 

millions of civilized people of every nation— the two-hundredth 

part of the population of the whole earth— 

the one-fiftieth of civilization. There are more Jews in 

New York City than in all Palestine, and more Irishmen 

than in Dublin, the capital of Ireland. We trust that 

our proposed move will commend itself to all of our 

dear friends. In our next issue we will briefly explain 

to you some of the Lord's remarkable leadings in connection 

with the selection of the new Bible House, which 

is undergoing extensive repairs to adapt it to the needs 

of the work. 

THE SOCIETY'S COLPORTAGE 

When a year ago we looked at our reports, a month 
after the panic began, we concluded that the Colporteur 
work had reached its climax, and that whatever success 
might attend other parts of the work, it would be impossible 
for the dear Colporteurs to make ends meet, 
in the face of a money stringency; that they would be 
obliged to retire, and hence that the sales would drop 
off greatly. Your surprise can be no greater than ours 
to find that, notwithstanding these various difficulties, 
the year 1908 stands head and shoulders above its predecessor 
and every other. True, the shutting down of 
works spoiled some of the territory entirely, but even 
this worked a blessing and led the Colporteurs to try 
the small villages and rural routes, with surprisingly 
good results, carrying the Truth to hungry hearts, who 
might otherwise not have been brought in contact with 
it. The total output of DAWN-STUDIES for the year 
shows an average of more than 2,000 volumes for each 
working day of the year. And the best of all— the last 
two months have been the best two of this, the best 
year. 

We note a great work of grace amongst the dear 
Colporteurs themselves— a deepening, mellowing, enriching 
of the Lord's holy Spirit of love and zeal. Not 
content with colporteuring merely, they seek, in harmony 
with our suggestions, to water the seed which seems 
to have fallen into good ground. By the time the Colporteur 
is ready to leave the city or town, he generally 
finds a number of interested ones ready to form a 
Berean Class for further study of the Word, by the aid 
of the Society's "Helps," which, we believe, the Lord 
has specially provided for this harvest time and this 
"hour of temptation." 

Let us all continue to remember these dear, loyal, 
faithful servants of the Truth in our petitions to the 
Throne of Grace. We scarcely dare hope that the year 



1909 will show a further increase upon the present one 
in this department; for we constantly say to ourselves, 
"Will wonders never cease?" No such sale in subscription 
books was ever known. Undoubtedly the Lord is 
using this method, not only to reach many of his ripe 
and Truth-hungry saints, but also to put the Truth 
into the homes of others, where it will be sought and 
devoured, and give strength during the "time of trouble," 
especially to the Great Company class. 

R4295 : page 373 

THE TRACT AND VOLUNTEER WORK 

Tons of literature have gone forth this year. The 
present report does not include the German and Scandinavian 
Tract distribution, which will be set forth 
later. However, the totals in the English are astounding. 
When it is remembered that these Tracts are nested 
four in one, and separate, it gives us a total of over 
thirty millions. You would be much interested in the 
details of this distribution— to know that not only 
Pilgrims and Colporteurs, but also doctors, merchants, 
housewives, etc., carefully plan to redeem their time 
from secular pursuits that they may give the more time 
and energy to this branch of the work. God is blessing 
it, too. In various ways we can note that those who 
are "not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ," but are 
zealous to serve it, are blessed of the Lord in their 
hearts and heads, and granted increasing privileges of 
service in various ways. It is certainly true that a great 
blessing goes out from this work to every one that participates 
in it, and that it would be well worth while to 
continue it for their sakes, if not one of these seeds of 
Truth fell into good and honest hearts and brought 
forth fruitage; but, on the contrary, the reports we receive 
show that gradually the Truth is making headway 
against opposition and finding the "Israelites indeed, 
in whom is no guile." 

The Postoffice Department has not yet restored to 
us second-class privileges in connection with the Old 
Theology quarterly, hence we think of discontinuing it. 
Order all you can use of the old stock that we need not 
"move" it. The present form of the Old Theology 
Quarterly has become widely known, and may have 
gained some enemies, as well as friends. Look out for 
the new quarterly, "PEOPLE'S PULPIT." We propose 
transferring the subscriptions of the Old Theology 
Quarterly to "PEOPLE'S PULPIT," confident that this 
change will be satisfactory to all of the subscribers. 
But the Postoffice Department may demand to see our 
authorization of such substitution. We request, therefore, 
that you address our Society by Postcard, saying 
in so many words that you will be pleased to receive 
"PEOPLE'S PULPIT" for the remainder of the time that 
Old Theology Quarterly would be coming to you on 



your subscription already paid. 
R4295 : page 374 

THE PILGRIM SERVICE 

During the forepart of the year, when financial matters 
looked unfavorable, we made no special attempt to 
increase the number of the Pilgrims, but, as the year 
advanced, and we found that instead of the Tract Fund 
donations decreasing, they were increasing, we began 
to put on more force, and today have several new Pilgrims 
and some others ready to start early in the New 
Year. This branch of the service is greatly blessed of 
the Lord, especially in connection with the interested. 
A special effort seems to be necessary to successfully 
reach the public. For the new year we plan to have 
several Pilgrims do a special evangelistic work with the 
public in cities and towns where we have, and where 
we have not, interested readers and classes. 

Our thought is to have these services in good localities 
and well advertised. We are selecting the brethren 
whose talents, we believe, will best qualify them for 
this department, leaving to the others the special work 
of more particularly ministering to the household of 
faith, as heretofore. We appreciate very much the helpfulness 
of all the dear friends along this line of service 
and trust and believe that the Lord has fully rewarded 
their self-sacrificing labors, in connection with the arranging 
and advertising. Only beyond the veil will we 
fully know what are the results. Now we see by faith, 
but are sure that the Lord's Word will not return to 
him void, but will prosper in the thing whereunto it 
was sent, and that our endeavors, on behalf of others, 
will bring refreshment to ourselves. 

In the financial department, it will be noticed that 
the expenses of the Pilgrims run up into larger figures 
than ever before. This does not signify extravagance 
on the part of any of the dear brethren, but is owing to 
the following: Many of the dear friends go to considerable 
expense in hiring halls and advertising the one-day 
conventions (and sometimes the Pilgrim visits), 
and these outlays in the service of the Truth we have 
asked them to report to us, so that this money also can 
appear in our reports as so much money contributed to 
the Society and paid out by the Society for said meetings, 
etc., even though our treasury never actually received 
the money, nor paid it out. The money was 
spent for the propaganda, and had it not been so spent, 
quite probably it would have been sent to the Tract 
Fund. Have this in mind, therefore, when noting the 
summary of cash received and cash paid out, against 
Pilgrim expenses. 

TRACT FUND RECEIPTS 



Confident that it would not be the Lord's will that 
we should go in debt, we are very careful not to undertake 
larger contracts than we feel reasonably sure we 
can meet financially. But as the year passed and the 
funds accumulated, we concluded that the Lord had in 
view a widening of the Work, and was preparing us for 
it. It is our thought that the increase of financial 
power put into our hands should not lead to less economical 
methods, but to an enlargement of the Work. 
We remember the Lord's statement, "He that is faithful 
in that which is least would be faithful in that which 
is greater." We go to our new quarters, therefore, 
financially well equipped for the opening of the work 
on a larger scale. 

Our reasons for believing that a large number of 
the Lord's people are to be brought into the light of 
Present Truth during the year just beginning we will 
set forth in our January 1st "outlook." We believe that 
you will all agree with us on this subject, after reading 
the evidences. 

SUMMARY OF THE YEAR'S WORK 

Letters received 75,569 

Letters sent out 61,573 



DAWN-STUDIES sent out-all volumes, all languages... 728,474 
Average per working day 2,372 



TRACTS circulated free 7,686,500 

TOWERS circulated free 445,000 

SERMONS in newspapers, about 11,500,000 

Foregoing in tract pages as usually stated 308,000,000 



Pilgrims in service 47 

Miles traveled 235,750 

Public meetings held 2,527 

Parlor meetings held 6,077 



FINANCIAL SHOWING. 

Balance from 1907 report $ 9,260.42 

"Good Hopes," 1908 93,994.26 



$103,254.68 
Expended in Foreign Missions: 

Great Britain $ 2,789.32 

Australasia 2,945.89 



Germany 9,826.41 

Scandinavia 3,583.67 

Jamaica 1,794.73 

Switzerland, France and Italy 232.95 

Africa 1,704.84 

China 232.85 



Total $23,110.66 

Expended for Tracts, Postage, etc 34,468.72 

Expended for Pilgrim Service, 

Conventions, etc 20,074.96 

Brooklyn Realty 17,500.00 

$ 95,154.34 



Balance for 1909 $ 8,100.34 



The above account of DAWN-STUDIES put into circulation 
includes the foreign work; but the other items 
do not. The reports of foreign branches we hope to present 
in our next issue. 

We congratulate you, dear friends, on the Lord's 
blessing upon our mutual efforts. The realization of 
our own insufficiency for the great work which seems to 
be opening up before us for 1909, properly makes us 
feel very humble and dependent upon the great Chief 
Reaper. "Greater is he who is on our part, than all 
that be against us." Let us look carefully for his leadings 
and abide in his love by keeping his commandment, 
"A new commandment I give unto you, that ye 
love one another, as I have loved you." 



R4296 : page 374 

THE TEMPLE OF GOD IS HOLY 

--I KINGS 8.--DECEMBER 13.- 

Golden Text:— "I was glad when they said unto me, 
Let us go into the house of the Lord."— Psa. 122:1. 

NEARLY twenty years elapsed between the incidents 

of our last lesson and those of the 

present one— the dedication of the temple of 

God, built by Solomon chiefly of materials accumulated 

by King David, his father. There were no methods of 

rapid construction in those days such as we have now. 

Solomon, with all his wisdom, had not invented steam-saws 

for cutting stone and wood and iron, nor steam-hoists 

for elevating materials into place, nor traveling 

cranes, nor hundreds of other useful conveniences 

R4296 : page 375 



which help to make our day so wonderful, in contrast 
with every other time. We are not for this to plume 
ourselves on a greater brain capacity or wisdom, but 
rather to accept the Scriptural interpretation that God 
specially lifted the curtain and disclosed to us these 
blessings, as part of his preparation for the Millennium, 
incidental also in bringing in the great time of trouble, 
with which the Scriptures declare this age will end. 
Nevertheless, Solomon's temple was one of the grandest 
buildings in the world in its day, although we consider 
the following comment by Edersheim rather exaggerated. 
He says:— 

"Alone and isolated in its grandeur stood the temple 
mount. Terrace upon terrace its courts rose till, high 
above the city, within the enclosures of marble cloisters, 
the temple itself stood out, a mass of snowy marble and 
of glorious glittering in the sunlight, against the half-encircling 
green back-ground of Olivet.... Nor has 
there been in ancient or modern times a sacred building 
equal to the temple, whether for situation or 
magnificence." 

THE GREAT COST OF THE TEMPLE 

Estimates of the cost of the temple are made, which 
we consider very unlikely— estimates running up into 
the hundreds of millions, and even as high as thousands 
of millions of dollars. On this fact was based an argument 
that Christian people today are well justified in 
building grand and costly edifices for divine worship, 
chiefly used one day in seven. It is not for us to find 
fault with others of a different view who choose thus to 
invest their energies. It is their own concern and 
they are right in following the dictates of their own 
consciences. We remember, however, that the temple 
at Jerusalem was the house of prayer for all the people 
of that nation, numbering millions, and that it is also 
styled, "A house of prayer for all nations." 

We remember that at the beginning and at the middle 
of their year were festivals, which God's people from 
all parts of the land of Israel and the whole world were 
expected to attend personally or by representative. 
Thus viewed the temple, even from the standpoint of the 
natural man, was a very different structure from a local 
church meeting-house. The Jews had meeting places 
styled synagogues, and they were generally quite humble 
and simple. Fault is sometimes found with us that 
we take a different course in this matter. Instead of 
erecting grand edifices in which to worship, we are poor 
and cannot attempt so to do except by solicitation of aid 
from the world, which is contrary to our judgment of the 
Lord's will, contrary to our conscience. Instead, our 
benevolences go towards the propagation of the Gospel 
by word or printed page. We have very economical arrangements 
for our little assemblies and also for our 



Convention spiritual feasts. We, of course, consider 
that our view of the matter is the correct one. 

IN THE DIVINE LIGHT 

There might be room for dispute amongst the Lord's 
people on the subject of costly church edifices, until we 
get to see the subject in the Divine light of God's Word. 
Thereafter there should be no room for discussion. 
That Divine light shows us the temple at Jerusalem as 
more than a house of worship for its time, as a type of 
a greater Temple to be built by a greater than Solomon. 
That greater Temple, the New Testament assures us, 
is the Church, the Body of Christ, of which he is the 
Head. This is the Temple of which St. Peter declares 
that himself and all of the Lord's thoroughly consecrated 
followers are antitypical, the living stones or 
members. This is the Temple of which our Lord declares, 
"Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the 
Temple of my God." This is the Temple of which our 
Lord again said, "Destroy this Temple and in three 
days I will rear it up"; he spake of the Temple of his 
Body, not of his own flesh, for that was but a tabernacle 
and was not reared up by our Lord. The Father raised 
him from the dead, but in a new body, a spiritual one. 

Of the Temple, the Body of Christ, the Church, he 
declares, "I will raise him up at the last day." The last 
day, the seventh day, the Great Millennium, is the third 
day referred to by our Lord. He was living in the fifth 
thousand-year day, there following the sixth, and the 
seventh has just begun, and with it, we believe, the 
raising up, the "change" to glory of the "Church, which 
is his Body." 

Of this Temple St. Paul writes, "The Temple of 
God is holy, which Temple ye are." (I Cor. 3:17.) He 
here referred to the Church in its present condition, on 
probation, as though it were a finished Temple, because 
by faith may be realized the Lord's presence and protecting 
care amongst these members in their temporary 
organization as the Church of Christ. But the same 
Apostle shows that this Temple is not quite complete, 
saying, "Ye are built upon the foundation of the 
apostles, Jesus, Christ himself being the chief cornerstone; 
in whom all the building fitly framed together 
groweth unto an holy Temple in the Lord." (Eph. 2:20,21.) 
In a word, as St. Peter suggests, the Lord's consecrated 
ones, as living stones for the glorious spiritual 
Temple of the future beyond the veil, are now being 
shaped, chiseled, polished, fitted for their places. 

THE ANTITYPICAL TEMPLE 

That glorious Temple, The Christ, in the power of 
the First Resurrection will share in the glory, honor 
and immortality of the divine nature; and through it 
during the Millennium, the heavenly Father will communicate 



his blessings to the world of mankind for their 
uplifting out of sin and death. Thus, as the High Priest 
in his robes of glory and beauty represented The Christ, 
the Messiah, Jesus the Head and the Church his Body, 
so the temple in which he served likewise symbolizes 
the same Redeemer and the same Church. The one 
illustration discloses one relationship or communication 
between God and men. The other represents 
another feature of the same ministry of reconciliation, 
as it will ultimately reach the world of mankind. 

From this standpoint we can readily see that God's 
temple, built by Solomon, represented so glorious a 
class and such rich blessings of God to men that it was 
very appropriate that the type of these riches of grace 
should be costly, ornate, beautiful in the highest degree. 

But now in the strict sense of the word these living 
stones are undergoing the process of chiseling and 
polishing, and the stone-yard and surroundings are not 
gorgeous and beautiful. Rather, as the Apostle declares, 
the Church in its present condition is a body of 
humiliation, or, as improperly translated, "Our vile 
body." The Church in the present life, like her Lord, 
is disesteemed in the world, despised, persecuted, 
"counted as fools all the day long," and "the filth and 
offscouring of the earth." It is in full harmony with 
these actual conditions pointed out in the Scriptures 
and known to us by experience that we see it to be the 
will of God that our present religious conditions should 
be very humble ones, unostentatious, inexpensive, to 
the intent that our energies may be the more efficaciously 
used in the forwarding of the work at the 
present time, rather than in attempting to make further 

R4296 : page 376 

types of the "glory that is to follow" our Resurrection 
"change." 

This is further shown in the type. God's association 
with his people now is represented in the tabernacle 
and its court and its tent, all of which were 
temporary. Thus the Apostle speaks of us who are in 
this tabernacle as groaning, waiting for our house from 
heaven, waiting for our "change" to the Temple condition 
through the power of the First Resurrection. 

"THE GLORY OF THE LORD FILLED THE TEMPLE" 

The record tells us that the stones and timbers of 
the temple were brought to the spot all prepared, shaped 
and marked for their several positions, so that the actual 
construction was a quiet one. We read that, "The parts 
came together without the sound of an hammer." The 
antitype of this is that the chiseling and polishing and 
preparing of God's saints in the present life and the 
marking of them for their several places, by which God 
sets the various members in the Body as it hath pleased 



him, will leave the work of the First Resurrection a 
very quiet one, so quiet that the world is not aware that 
it is now in progress. Thank God it is not yet finished, 
and there is yet hope and opportunity for some of the 
consecrated now living to "make our calling and election 
sure," and by the final "change from glory to glory" to 
be placed in the great spiritual Temple, in the particular 
niche or position for which under Divine providence we 
shall have been prepared. This resurrection "change" 
will make us all glorious and like unto our Lord and 
Redeemer, who is the express image of the Father's 
person. 

Our Lord described the assembling of the representatives 
of all the tribes of Israel for the grand occasion. 
The festival apparently lasted more than two 

R4297 : page 376 

weeks, certain prominent features marking each day of 

the time. The priests bore the ark from Zion, the city 

to which it had been brought by King David, as described 

in a previous lesson on, "The Homing of the 

Ark." Mount Zion was one division of the City of Jerusalem, 

while the temple was built in another division 

called Mount Moriah. At one time they were separated 

by considerable of a valley, but the topography has 

greatly changed in the intervening period and the bottom 

of the valley is filled in some places twenty feet 

and more. The city wall surrounded both of these 

mountains, or, as we would say, hills, for Jerusalem 

is built on a mountain. 

There were great demonstrations of joy in connection 
with this dedication of the temple. It meant much 
to the holy people as they realized that the great Creator 
had deigned to approve the erection of a dwelling-house 
with them. As the ark came forward the Levites 
sang and chanted, probably some of David's psalms, 
which apparently by inspiration were written for the 
occasion. (Psa. 47, 98, 99, 107, 118, 136.) The theme 
of the occasion seems to have been, "For his mercy endureth 
forever." Ah! how that oft-repeated expression 
of the Psalmist will be understood, appreciated by mankind 
shortly. When the priests with the ark shall have 
entered in, and when the Levites of the future, the 
Ancient Worthies and others, shall chant the praises of 
Jehovah throughout all the earth, making known to the 
people "That his mercy endureth forever" and that 
during the Millennial Age, in and through the Anointed, 
The Christ, they will have the privilege of returning to 
God and to all that was lost, how joyful indeed will 
be the occasion! How world-wide the blessing! Then 
every knee shall bow and every tongue confess to the 
glory of the Father! 

THE DEDICATION SERVICES DESCRIBED 



Prof. W. J. Beecher, after studying the account, 
offers the following suggestions respecting the order of 
ceremonies observed. We think it not unreasonable 
and quote as follows:— 

(1) "Then spake Solomon, the Lord said that he 
would dwell in thick darkness"; the declaration of 

1 Kings 8:12,13; 2 Chron. 6:1,2. 

(2) King Solomon then turned and blessed the 
standing congregation.— I Kings 8:1; 2 Chron. 6:3. 

(3) King Solomon then delivered an address to the 
standing multitude.— I Kings 15:21; 2 Chron. 6:4-11. 

(4) King Solomon then offered a dedicatory prayer, 
the multitude kneeling.— I Kings 8:23-53; 

2 Chron. 6:14-40,54; 6:3. 

(5) Psalm 132 was then chanted: "Arise, O God"! 
Then fire from the cloudy pillar descended upon the 
Mercy Seat, the Shekinah, and the glory of the Lord 
filled the house and the multitude outside prostrated 
themselves.— 2 Chron. 6:41; 7:1-3. 

(6) The Congregation then said, "For his mercy 
endureth forever."— 2 Chron. 7:3. 

(7) King Solomon closed the ceremony with an 
address and benediction, the multitude standing.— 
I Kings 8:54-61. 

"HE SHALL PRESENT YOU FAULTLESS" 

As living stones of the Spiritual Temple requiring 
much chiseling and polishing to prepare us for places 
in the heavenly temple, let us appreciate these. Instead 
of seeking to avoid them, let us rather thankfully welcome 
whatever experiences of this kind the Heavenly 
One shall see fit to permit us to have. We are his workmanship, 
created in Christ Jesus unto good works. Our 
present disciplines are intended to develop in us the 
character necessary to the great service for which our 
Creator intends us. 

The good works, the great works of God to some 
extent, are most abundantly manifested in this "New 
Creation," the Church, and some of our good works are 
as colaborers with God and Christ in shaping and up-building 
one another in the most holy faith. The great 
good work of God to which he has called us is that 
mentioned in the oath-bound Covenant to Abraham, "In 
thy Seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed." 
-Gal. 3:29. 

While we longingly look forward to our glorious 
station of the future, when the glory of the Lord shall 
fill the Temple, "When we shall know as we are known," 
let us not forget that unless we are submissive to the 
molding and fashioning influences of the School of 
Christ, we shall be set aside. Our names will be blotted 
out of that special role and our crowns apportioned to 
others. It is in full view of the possibilities of so great 
a loss of so great a prize that the Apostle wrote, "Let 
us fear lest a promise being left us of entering into his 



rest, any of us should seem to come short." 

The cultivation of pride along any line, the development 
of an unsanctified ambition, are amongst the 
greatest dangers to these living stones now in preparation. 
Such flaws developed would render us unfit for 
this special service. And if they should develop in us 
headiness or high-mindedness, they would probably 
also develop envy, malice, hatred, strife, evil-speaking, 
evil-surmisings, all of which are contrary to the Spirit 
of Christ and would soon render such "none of his." 



R4284 : page 377 

YOUR "GOOD HOPES" FOR 1909 



[The plan here proposed we designate "GOOD HOPES," 
because nothing is actually promised— only your generous 
hopes expressed, based upon your future prospects as they 
now appear to you. The plan proved not only so beneficial 
to the cause of truth, but also so blessed to the hopers, for 
some years past, that we again commend it to all as Scriptural 
and good. Those who desire to make use of this plan 
can fill out both these memoranda. One should be kept 
for the refreshment of your memory; the other mail to us.] 

To the 
"WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY." 

Dear Friends:— I have read with interest of the openings 
for the Dawn and Tract work in foreign lands and here 
at home. I need not tell you that I am deeply interested 
in the spread of the Glad Tidings of the lengths and 
breadths, the heights and depths of redeeming love expressed 
for us in God's great Plan of the Ages. 

I am anxious to use myself— every power, every talent, 
voice, time, money, influence, all— to give to others this 
knowledge, which has so greatly blessed, cheered and comforted 
my own heart and placed my feet firmly upon the 
Rock of Ages. 

I have been considering carefully, and praying to be instructed, 
how to use my various talents more to my Redeemer's 
glory and for the service of his people— those 
blinded by human tradition who are, nevertheless, hungering 
for "the good Word of God," and those also who are 
naked, not having on the wedding garment of Christ's imputed 
righteousness, the unjustified, who stand at best in 
the filthy rags of their own righteousness. I have decided 
that so far as my "money talent" goes, I will follow the rule 
so clearly laid down for us by the great Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 16:2), 
and will lay aside on the first day of each week, according 
to my thankful appreciation of the Lord's blessings 
during the preceding week. Out of this fund I wish to contribute 



to the several parts of the Lord's work specified on 
the back of this letter. Of course, I cannot in advance 
judge or state particularly what the Lord's bounty may enable 
me to set apart weekly, and hence you will understand 
the sum indicated to be merely my conjecture or hope, based 
upon present prospects. I will endeavor to contribute more 
than I here specify; and should I not succeed in doing as 
well, the Lord will know my heart, and you, also, will know 
of my endeavors. 

My only object in specifying in advance what I hope to 
be able to do in this cause is to enable those in charge of 
the work of publishing and circulating the Tracts, etc., to 
form estimates, lay plans, make contracts, etc., with some 
idea of what I will at least try to do in the exercise of this 
my highly appreciated privilege. 

My present judgment is that during the coming year, by 
self-denial and cross-bearing, I shall be able to lay aside on 
the first day of each week for Home and Foreign Mission 
Work (to assist in circulating Scripture Studies in foreign 
languages, and in publishing the "Old Theology Tracts" in 
various languages, and in supplying these gratuitously to 
brethren who have the heart and opportunity to circulate 
them widely, and in meeting the expenses of brethren sent 
out as "Pilgrims" to preach the divine plan of salvation, 
and in general to be expended as the officers of the Society 
may deem best), the amount of per week. 

To comply with United States Postal Laws, all or any 
portion of my donation may be applied as subscription price 
for Watch Tower or O.T. Tracts sent to the Lord's poor 
or others, as the Society's officers may deem advisable. 

That the work be not hindered, I will endeavor to send 
you what I shall have laid aside for this cause at the close 
of each quarter. I will secure a Bank Draft, Express Order 
or Postal Money Order as I may find most convenient, and 
will address the letter to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 

"Bible House," Allegheny, Pa. 

or, 24 Eversholt St., London, N.W., England; or, Equitable Building, 
Collins St., Melbourne, Australia. 

(Name) 

(Post Office) (State) 



CUT HERE AND SEND OUTER-HALF TO THE SOCIETY'S ADDRESS, 
FILLING OUT THE BLANKS, IF YOU CHOOSE. 



R4284 : page 378 

WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTIONS 



ON "GOOD HOPES" ACCOUNT 



The friends who contribute to the "Good Hopes" (described 
on the reverse of this sheet) at times desire to send 
the WATCH TOWER to friends who are not yet interested enough 
to subscribe for themselves; or to deeply interested friends 
who are too poor to subscribe and backward about accepting 
our Lord's Poor offer. They are invited to give us such addresses 
below— the expense to be deducted from their donations. 
Give full addresses, and write very plainly, please, 
mentioning the length of the subscriptions. 



page 378 

Watch Tower Subscription Renewals 



Most of our subscriptions end with the year, so we take 
this opportunity to remark that we shall be glad to hear 
promptly from such as desire the visits of the WATCH TOWER continued. 
The Lord's Poor friends have been requested to send 
their applications in June. When names are dropped and 
afterward renewed it makes us unnecessary trouble. When 
desiring to know date of expiration, look on your TOWER wrapper. 
Date is given in lower left-hand corner. 

Hymns of Dawn with Music 



Our readers have for years inquired for this book. We 
now have it for you in handsome cloth binding and at cost 
price. It is the best and the cheapest hymn book in the world, 
at 35 cents per copy, postpaid, and contains 333 of the choicest 
hymns of all ages. By express, collect, 25c each, in any 
quantity. 

Watch Tower Binders 



These are substantially made of stiff cloth boards, and 
can hold two years' issues of the WATCH TOWER. They prevent 
soiling and loss. Price, postpaid, 50c. 

Christian Home Embellishments 



For several years we have been supplying our readers with 
handsome text and motto-cards for the walls of their homes. 



Their influence is excellent; for they continually and cheerfully 
catch the eye and remind the heart of our great favors 
present and to come, based upon the "exceeding great and 
precious promises" of our Father's Word. We commend these 
as helps in the "narrow way"— helps in character-building. 
(These we import from London subject to custom duty, hence 
our London office can do still better for our British friends.) 

We have a very choice assortment of these this year. For 
your convenience and ours we put these up in packets of 
choice assortments, as follows: At $1.00 each, postpaid. So 
doing we are enabled to give you twice as many mottoes for 
your money as you could purchase elsewhere. Besides, we 
select the styles and mottoes with great care. The following 
packets represent our assortment. Order by number: 

No. Ma— Contains only small mottoes of assorted texts 
and styles, 22 in number; all beautiful. 

No. Mb— Contains medium and small mottoes assorted, 
11; all choice. 

No. Mc— Contains medium mottoes, 10; all handsome. 

No. Md— Contains medium and large mottoes, 5; all 
elegant. 

No. Me— Contains large mottoes only, 4; all desirable. 

No. Mal/2— Is a 50-cent packet of small mottoes. 

Daily Heavenly Manna 



Those who use this book as we recommend are surely being 
blessed. It should be on your breakfast table regularly. 
Its daily text should be read and commented on freely by all. 
Then the Manna comment should be read. Introduce it to 
your friends as a help toward godly living. See prices in our 
November 1st issue. 

1909-Motto Card and Calendar- 1909 



These are elegant, 7-3/4 x 12 inches, an ornament to any 
parlor, a work of art. Besides a Calendar it contains "the 
Vow," which can be torn out by those who do not prefer it. 
These, postpaid, would not be dear at 50c each, but getting 
them in quantities we can supply them at 15c (7d.) each 
postpaid. 

New and Old Tracts 



Tracts for distribution among friends, house to house, for 
enclosure in letters, and in general for use in such ways as 
seem judicious, are supplied free. The expense entailed by 
the great demand for these is borne by the Tract Fund of 
voluntary contributions. Write for the tracts as you feel able 
to use them, even if not so well able to contribute toward 



the expense; some who are able, and do contribute, do not 
have opportunities personally to use all that their contributions 
pay for, so that the matter is equalized and all may 
have a part in this service of disseminating the truth. The 
January issue of each year is prepared in special quantities 
for general use, the other issues for special uses. 

Tracts in foreign languages free. Say how many you 
can use. 

A Privilege and a Service 



We are convinced that the WATCH TOWER lists do not contain 
the names of one-half of those deeply interested in its teachings. 
The total is small enough surely, and we are not content 
that the name of any should be missing. We believe that 
all such will be stimulated and encouraged on the "narrow 
way" by its semi-monthly appearance on their table, reminding 
them afresh of spiritual matters which the world, the flesh 
and the devil continually tend to crowd out of mind and heart. 

Hitherto we have required that all desiring the WATCH 
TOWER on credit, or free, as "the Lord's Poor," should make 
personal application; but now we request every subscriber to inquire 
among those whom he knows to be interested in Present 
Truth, and to obtain the consent of all such to send in their subscriptions 
either on credit or free, as their circumstances may 
necessitate. Any getting it on credit may at any future time 
request that the debt be cancelled, and we will cheerfully comply. 
We desire that as nearly as possible the WATCH TOWER 
lists shall represent all those deeply interested in its message. 

Our object is not the gain of "filthy lucre," but "the perfecting 
of the saints for the work of ministry"— present and to 
come. (Eph. 4:12.) We offer no premiums, desiring the co-operation 
of such only as appreciate the privilege of being 
co-workers with us in this ministry. Our list is now about 
25,000; but it should be at least 30,000, and we confidently 
expect the above program to bring it to that figure. Let as 
many as appreciate it as a privilege, join at once in this service. 



R4297 : page 379 

THE GREATER THAN SOLOMON'S 

-I KINGS 11:4-13; LUKE 8:20. -DECEMBER 20.- 

Golden Text:— "For unto you is born this 
day in the city of David a Saviour, which is 
Christ the Lord."— Luke 2:11. 

THE object of this lesson is to show the downfall of 
the kingdom of Solomon the wise, the rich, the 
great, and the necessity for the greater Kingdom 
than his, which divine wisdom and love have designed, 



and which Divine power is to inaugurate in due time. 
In Solomon's experiences we have a most remarkable 
lesson of a most remarkable man; illustrating the 
tendencies of wisdom and riches to lead the imperfect 
children of men away from God, the Source of wisdom 
and riches, and away from all the highest ideals. 

The accounts of Solomon's prosperity are set forth 
in the books of Kings and Chronicles, and indicate that, 
under his wise administration, numerous public works 
were carried on, royal palaces built, great roads engineered, 
and water works and store-houses and armories 
constructed, etc. The nation of Israel, under 
Solomon's regime reached its highest position of power 
and influence in the world and dominated its largest 
amount of territory. But as Solomon prospered, he 
grew less pious. He became what the world would call 
broader-minded. The royal families of surrounding 
nations were pleased to have their daughters become 
Solomon's wives, and he generously accepted them 
from every quarter. The effect, however, was injurious 
to the King and to his entire people, because each of 
these prominent wives felt that she must represent the 
dignity of her own home land at the Jewish capital, and 
specially must represent its religious sentiment. Thus 
the heathen religionists all felt a great jealousy for the 
great temple of Jehovah and its elaborate services; and 
these wives, as representatives of the religions of their 
fathers, urged upon King Solomon, insistently, that 
they must have the opportunity of serving their gods, 
and that proper breadth of mind on his part would lead 
him to accede to their demands and to erect altars to 
their heathen divinities. 

The King, rolling in wealth, yielded to these importunities 
of his wives and established for them and their 
foreign ambassadors and visitors shrines, altars, holy 
places, dedicated to the various false gods of surrounding 
nations— not that the King believed in these or worshiped 
them himself, but, through a mistaken view of 
broad-mindedness and a mistaken form of generosity 
to his wives and their sentiments, he violated his 
highest sense of responsibility to his own Lord, Jehovah. 
Gradually that devotion which had been his at first, and 
which the Lord had blessed by two special manifestations, 
yielded, and the King became less and less a man 
after God's own heart; possessed of less and less of his 
father David's loyalty of heart and zeal for the Divine 
will and worship. 

SOLOMON'S DISLOYALTY REBUKED 

Our lesson tells how the Lord rebuked Solomon for 
his course; doubtless through the Prophet Ahijah. (Vs. 29-37.) 
The Lord assured Solomon that, because of his 
unfaithfulness, the major part of the kingdom would be 
rent or torn with violence from his son and come under 
the rule of one of his servants— Jeroboam. This man 



had been a trusted officer in the raising of taxes and the 
levying of workmen for the King's business. The same 
Prophet anointed Jeroboam, in the name of the Lord, 
to be king over the ten tribes; but, instead of waiting 
for the Lord's time, as David had done, Jeroboam instituted 
a rebellion against the King, in which he was 
unsuccessful and obliged to flee from the King's forces 
into Egypt. Afterward, in God's due time, he became 
the King of the ten tribes. Incidentally we note here 
a lesson for all of God's people; that we should wait 
upon the Lord for his times and seasons, in respect to 
all of life's affairs, great and small. It is for us to be 
faithful and alert and on the lookout for the Lord's 
providence; but not to anticipate them, not to make a 

R4298 : page 379 

move in advance in any event of the Lord's own time. 
"His purposes will ripen fast, 
Unfolding every hour; 
The bud may have a bitter taste; 
But sweet will be the flower." 

THE ANTITYPICAL KINGDOM 

It is only when we remember that the Kingdom of 
God under Solomon was a foreshadowing of the Kingdom 
of Christ that we get the proper view of the situation. 
It was God's typical kingdom and Solomon sat 
upon its throne as God's representative. So a greater 
than Solomon is eventually to sit upon the throne of 
earth and extend the Kingdom to the uttermost bounds 
and bring to the Kingdom riches, honor, wisdom and 
power greater than we can now properly appreciate and 
but feebly foreshadowed in Solomon's experiences. 
Solomon's blemishes are not to be considered as typical 
blemishes in the Kingdom of Christ, however. They 
teach another lesson, namely, that all power and wisdom 
in the present time are hindered by the unfavorable 
conditions surrounding, so that they become traps 
and snares, even to the wisest and best intentioned of 
men. Meantime the Lord's promise through Moses and 
the prophets was for a greater than Solomon, and wiser 
than he, and richer and more powerful than Solomon; 
able and willing to execute the Divine will amongst 
men, and to bring in a Kingdom of everlasting 
righteousness. That Kingdom has not yet appeared 
amongst men, and hence we still pray, "Thy Kingdom 
come; thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven." 

When we remember that this Kingdom is hinted at 
in our Lord's declaration, that "The Seed of the woman 
should bruise the serpent's head," and that it was later 
more particularly referred to in the promise made to 
Abraham, "In thee and in thy Seed shall all the families 
of the earth be blessed," we readily see that, from the 
human standpoint, this hope is long deferred. Israel 



hoped to constitute that Kingdom and waited for Messiah, 
its head and Lord, to rule their nation, to use it, 
his elect people, to bless all the nations of earth. But 
when Messiah came into the world and to his people, 
that consecrated nation, he found them not worthy of 
the Kingdom blessings; nay, not even 144,000 worthy 
to constitute his Church, his Bride, members of his 
Body class, to be joint-heirs with him in his Kingdom. 
This was what God had foreseen and foretold, saying, 
"Though Israel be as the sand of the sea, only a remnant 
shall be saved." (Rom. 9:27.) This does not signify 
that the mass of that nation is lost in an irretrievable 
sense, but rather that only the remnant was saved 
in harmony with their expectations, saved as respects 
their relationship to the Kingdom class. This worthy 
remnant probably constituted in all not above 20,000, 
who were gathered out during the period of our Lord's 
ministry and the ensuing thirty-seven years of the 
Jewish harvest time and begetting of the holy Spirit. 

R4298 : page 380 

These became the nucleus of Spiritual Israel, and since 
then, in harmony with prophetic declaration, the Lord 
has been using various agencies for gathering out a 
similar class from all nations, peoples, kingdoms and 
tongues. Soon, we believe, the total number of 144,000 
will have been tested, proven, and accepted beyond the 
veil— "changed in the twinkling of an eye," from human 
conditions to heavenly conditions— to the divine nature. 

The long-promised Kingdom waits for the development 
of this "little flock" of Kings and Priests, who 
shall reign with Christ in the earth, as members of the 
Messiah company, of which he is the Head and Lord, 
as well as the Redeemer. With the glorification of the 
last member of this elect class comes the due time for 
the setting up of the Kingdom of God's dear Son in 
power and great glory. Then will be fulfilled the 
promise, "In thy Seed shall all the families of the earth 
be blessed," because the elect Church is a part of the 
seed of Abraham; therefore the promise of which they 
are heirs with Christ cannot be fulfilled until their 
selection and glorification shall be completed. Toward 
that glorious consummation of human redemption all 
the promises and arrangements of the Divine Word and 
Plan are bent: 

A SAVIOUR, WHICH IS CHRIST 

This brings us to the second part of the appointed 
lesson, which stands more particularly related to the 
Christmas season. It matters not particularly that 
December 25 is not the anniversary of our Lord's birth, 
according to the Scriptural account; that really he was 
born about September 25, nine months later. One day, 
as well as another, will serve us to commemorate our 



Saviour's birth in the flesh, as a gift of God's love to a 

condemned and dying world. Indeed, in some respects 

December 25, which corresponds to the date of our 

Lord's annunciation or begetting by the holy Spirit in 

the womb of Mary, may be considered even more appropriate 

for celebration than the day of his death. Was 

it not there that the Father began the sending of his 

Son, began to give us the gift of the man Christ Jesus? 

Indeed, at his birth he was not yet the man, and he 

could not save us as the babe. His begetting and birth 

were important, but incidental to the man at thirty years 

offering the sacrifice and saying, "Lo, I come, as in the 

volume of the book it is written of me, to do thy will, O 

God." (Heb. 10:7.) There the great Sacrifice for sin 

was offered to the Father and was accepted, and the 

acceptance was indicated by the bestowing of the holy 

Spirit, which begat our Lord again to a spiritual nature 

on the divine plane. 

For the three and a half years of his ministry his 
sacrificed flesh, laid upon the altar, was being consumed, 
while the New Creature was growing, being 
tested and approved, and finally, in his resurrection, 
he was justified in spirit or perfected as a New Creature. 
Our Golden Text is in full accord with this. The day 
of our Lord's birth the Saviour was born, the One who 
was to save his people, not only from their sins, but 
from the penalty of those sins, the death penalty— save 
them from the tomb. He did not really become the 
Saviour until he was thirty years of age. Indeed, in 
a larger sense of the word, he has not yet become the 
Saviour, the Deliverer. 

What he did during his earthly ministry and sacrifice 
of himself was merely to lay the foundation for the 
world's salvation by his own sacrifice— dying, "the Just 
for the unjust." After finishing this part of his work 
he at Pentecost began a work of saving the "little flock," 
"the elect," those who accept his favor by faith. Yet 
even with these the salvation is not yet completed; as 
the Apostle declares, "We are saved by hope." 

By faith and by hope we may accept the Lord's 
promises of a resurrection from the dead in due time. 
And these promises may operate in us so fully, so 
thoroughly, as to permit us even now to speak and 
think of ourselves from the Scriptural standpoint, as 
no longer dead with the world, but reckonedly risen 
with Christ, in newness of life, which brings us blessings 
of a spiritual kind today, but which costs us sacrifices 
and sufferings until death. The salvation we are 
looking for and which the Lord promises we shall ultimately 
have is, as the Apostle tells us, "At the appearing 
of our Lord Jesus Christ."— I Tim. 6:14. 

SALVATION BY HOPE AND ACTUALLY 

Whoever fails to see the difference between the 
hope salvation of the present time and the actual salvation 



of the resurrection morning has not the key necessary 
to enter into and enjoy, in a deep sense, the Divine 
Word and Plan. However precious the hope of the 
present time, it would be of small value alone, without 
the reality which it foreshadows. The salvation which 
Christ came to bring to mankind is not merely a hope 
such as we may enjoy, but a bona-fide reality such as 
he has promised us shall be realized in his Millennial 
Kingdom. The whole work of the Millennial Kingdom 
will be a resurrection work. Not merely will all mankind 
come forth from the grave, as Jesus has promised 
(John 5:28), but they will come forth for the purpose 
of being resurrected out of present sin and death conditions 
to the glorious perfection of perfect human beings 
—which Adam lost by disobedience— to the image 
of God, plus invaluable lessons gained during the reign 
of sin and death. 

THE EMBRYO KINGDOM OF CHRIST 

Messiah's Kingdom is to be a world empire, in 
which every knee shall bow and every tongue confess 
to the glory of God; when "the knowledge of the Lord 
shall cover the whole earth," and none shall need say 
to his neighbor, "Know thou the Lord; for they all shall 
know me, from the least to the greatest." That Kingdom 
we still pray for and have not yet received, but the 
"little flock," the "elect," who hear the call and obey it 
—these are spoken of as the Lord's Kingdom in embryo, 
for two reasons: (1) They voluntarily submit their 
hearts to him and seek to have his will done in them, 
in thought and word and deed, and increasingly as the 
days go by; and (2) because they are to be members of 
the royal family, which shall reign during the Millennium, 
under the Headship of Jesus, the great Prophet, 
Priest and King. These shall be his joint-heirs, whose 
office or service shall also combine Kingship and 
Priesthood. 

GOD'S GIFTS NOW 

Let us, then, rejoice at this joyful season of the 
year and have our hearts filled with appreciation of the 
Divine love and generosity, which gave us the great 
gift of Messiah, and thus indirectly a knowledge of the 
Kingdom yet to come and of our share in that Kingdom, 
which shall bless the world. As we have freely received, 
let us freely give, and thus copy our Lord and 
the heavenly Father. Some may have the opportunity 
of giving many gifts of many kinds. All will have the 
privilege of offering to their fellows, directly or indirectly, 
gifts of God's love, by making known to them 
the riches of his grace, as presented in the "Divine Plan 
of the Ages." 

R4299 : page 381 



The message of God's love is the most precious 
thing we have ever received, and let us have this in 
mind when offering gifts to others that, whatever else 
we may or may not be able to give our dear friends and 
neighbors and loved ones, we may offer them this; and 
our manner and general deportment should show how 
we value it above rubies, and thus we may best commend 
the gift of God to others and help them to appreciate 
it. In such presentations kind words, kind 
looks, will proceed from the loving heart, which has 
itself been saved by the power of the Truth from the 
domination of the Adversary and sin and selfishness. 
Let us learn to scatter these gifts of grace and Truth 
and happifying influences to all about us, not merely 
once a year, but every day and every hour, and not 
merely upon our friends, but, God-like, upon our enemies 
also, for "He is kind to the unthankful, and causes 
his sun to shine upon the evil and upon the good." 



R4299 : page 381 

A REVIEW LESSON-DECEMBER 27 

Golden Text:— "Keep thy heart with all diligence, 
for out of it are the issues of Life."— Prov. 4:23. 

A REVIEW of the lessons of the past six months 
will, no doubt, prove profitable to us all. But 
we suggest that as we are at the closing of the 
year, we each individually take a review of our lives to 
see what the year has brought us in the way of lessons 
and experiences and trials and testings, and how we 
have received these, and to what extent we have profited 
by them. We should remember that through life's 
trials and difficulties the Lord is teaching us lessons 
and showing us features of our own characters which 
we may improve. Without these experiences we might 
not know of certain defects nor appreciate the necessity 
for overcoming them. Therefore, to the faithful of 
the Lord's people every trial and every difficulty of life 
is a special blessing. We are to remember the Apostle's 
words, "If ye be without chastisements, ye are bastards 
and not sons," for "Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, 
and scourgeth every son," that such may be fitted and 
prepared for service hereafter. 

Our Golden Text furnishes us a very valuable seed-thought 
for the closing of the old year and the opening 
of the new. If we keep our hearts, our words, in the 
love of God; if we do this diligently, carefully, watching 
thereunto day by day, we shall be following the wise 
course. To whatever extent we have done this through 
the year closing, we have surely been blessed and 
profited. Whether we have succeeded well or poorly, 



whether, therefore, we can congratulate ourselves or 
not, the duty of the hour is to resolve that by the Lord's 
grace we will follow this course diligently during the 
year 1909. 

Many write us of the great blessing they have received 
from the Vow, and of the assistance it has 
rendered them in exercising diligence in the keeping of 
their hearts in the love of God, and in fellowship and 
communion with those who are actively engaged in the 
harvest work. Let us continue in those things which 
have blessed us in the past, and let us remember that 
part of the value of the Vow is in connection with its 
statement that its various features will be remembered 
daily at the Throne of Grace to the Father. Surely 
those who are in harmony with that Vow are seeking, 
if possible, more diligently than ever, to scrutinize 
every word and thought and deed, and to bring all of 
these into closest harmony with the Lord's Word and 
Spirit. These cannot fail to have a blessing every day. 
Let us continue in love and humility and in fervency of 
spirit, serving the Lord with all our hearts, and keeping 
our hearts with all diligence, that from them shall 
be excluded everything that would be defiling or dishonorable 
or disloyal to the Lord and to his brethren. 

"Out of the heart are the issues of life." Ah, yes! 
This is true in two senses. The issues of life as respects 
the words and deeds of life are all guided and 
influenced by the heart. If our deeds and words would 
be pure and holy and helpful, they must be backed by 
a loyalty of heart. Again, "Out of the heart are the 
issues of life" in the sense that the ultimate results that 
we shall obtain are not according to any formula of the 
Vow which we make, nor of any creed to which we 
might assent, nor of any course of study which we 
might undertake; but those issues would be dependent 
upon and determined by the real attitude of our hearts, 
because all the lessons of life, if they extend only to 
the outward man, and not the inward springs, will 
never bring us to the life eternal, which the Lord has 
promised to those that love him with all their hearts, 
to those who are fully consecrated in heart to him and 
his service. Let us close the old year with the right 
sentiments and proper self-examination, and begin the 
New Year with the proper diligence and proper resolutions 
out of good and honest hearts. 



R4299 : page 381 

RESOLVED, BY GOD'S ASSISTING GRACE 

ONE dear Brother writes that he feels fearful of the 
word Vow, but that he would have much pleasure 
in taking the Vow, if it were termed merely a Resolution. 
We mention this fact because there may be others 



similarly confused as to the meaning of the word Vow. A 
Vow, as defined by the dictionary and set forth by the WATCH 
TOWER, is merely a Solemn Resolution of the heart expressed 
to the Lord,— nothing more, nothing less. "Lord, I Vow," 
merely signifies, "Lord, by thine assisting grace I have resolved, 
and do resolve, that I will do and be," etc. 

By all means let those who have any mental conscientious 
scruples against the little word Vow make it in the form 
of a Solemn Resolution, as above outlined. Encouraging reports, 
from every direction, are constantly coming in, many 
of them from classes. 

We again urge the dear friends who have taken the Vow 
that they do not speak or think unkindly of any who have 
not taken it, but that they remember that "To his own Master 
each must stand or fall." Let us think kindly, lovingly, of 
those who follow not with us in this particular. Let no unkind 
word or criticism be uttered. Similarly we urge those 
who have not taken the Vow that they will do wisely not to 
oppose the brethren who have taken it— not to "smite" them 
with their tongues or otherwise. 

If this Vow is of the Lord all of his faithful ones by and 
by will recognize it. Let us remember that one of the chief 
tests of this harvest time is love for the brethren, and that 
another is humility. Let us each see to it that these fruits 
of the Spirit, love and humility, are very prominent in our 
own words, thoughts and acts. And let us mark those who 

R4299 : page 382 

cause divisions amongst you by a lack of these, by harsh and 
unkind words and by bombastic claims of superior wisdom, 
etc. "Do men gather grapes of thorn-bushes?" "By their 
fruits ye shall know them."— Rom. 16:17; Phil. 3:17. 

Remember the words "reasonably possible" in the Vow 
and give them full weight. They cover practically every 
exigency that could arise. If, for instance, one is in the house 
of another, it is not reasonably possible nor proper that he 
should attempt to regulate the doors, but merely have a 
preference, in harmony with the Vow. Even in his own 
house the temperature of the weather, or other considerations, 
might make it unreasonable or improper to have the door 
open. One who opposed the Vow objected that if he took it 
and should happen to be alone with one of the opposite sex 
in a railroad car, he would be obliged to get out. But this 
is an absurd application, contrary to both the letter and the 
spirit of the Vow, which makes no mention of elevators, etc. 

The natural man will find the Vow very close and 
stringent. The New Creature will find a sufficiency of elasticity 
in the words "reasonably possible," and, "As he would 
do in the presence of a congregation of the Lord's people." 
For instance, a physician and patient would properly prefer 
that necessary treatment be less public than before a 
congregation, yet they would prefer a third party to be present 
and, in any event, would desire and endeavor that the 
entire procedure be as modestly performed as though an 
entire congregation were onlookers. This is both the letter 



and the spirit of the Vow. 

We again remind you that through love for the brethren 
and fear of stumbling some who take a peculiar view of this 
matter, we have decided not to publish the names of those 
who have taken the Vow, or made this Resolution. We have 
no desire to make it a test of fellowship; still, it is our confidence, 
that under the Lord's leading, all of his consecrated 
people will shortly see "eye to eye" on this subject. We remark, 
however, that the number of those who have taken a 
stand in opposition to the Vow is comparatively small— about 
a score. But they seem to make up in bitterness of spirit 

R4300 : page 382 

what they lack in numbers. Let us hope and pray that the 
Lord will recover them from this snare, so that brotherly 
love and humility may again be controlling influences in 
their hearts, and also control their tongues and pens. 

Meantime let us make sure that no roots of bitterness 
are planted by us who have taken the Vow. One of its 
special provisions is "A closer scrutiny, if possible, than ever, 
of our words and thoughts and deeds," to have all in harmony 
with the Lord. Let us not forget that the benefits we 
derive from the Vow are not from the taking of it merely, but 
from the keeping of it, from permitting it to draw us nearer 
to the Lord— "Under the shadow of the Almighty." 



R4300 : page 382 

FOURTEEN ELDERS AND OTHERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Last night being the first Sunday night in the 
month was our regular monthly testimony meeting in 
the Chicago Class. It was such a good meeting that I 
thought I would write to you about it. 

The testimonies were all along the line of the "Vow." 
The time at our disposal was too short for all to tell of 
the good they had received since making the Vow their 
own. Some of the testimonies were to the effect that 
now the Scriptures seemed so much clearer; others 
testified that now they felt so much more closely drawn 
to the Lord and the brethren. Others stated how the 
sermons at the Convention and discourses in general 
appealed to them so much more than in the past and 
that they could understand them better; that since 
taking the Vow a damper, so to speak, had been opened 
in their heads, which allowed the Truth to get in. 

In this connection I might state how this meeting 
came to be along the line of the Vow. Some three or 
four weeks prior, the Chicago Elders, as a body (14 in 
all), took up the question of the Vow at one of our 
Elders' meetings, and decided unanimously that it 
would be a good thing to send in our names to the 



TOWER office as having taken the Vow, and to invite 
any in the congregation that wished to send in their 
names with ours. Accordingly three copies of the Vow 
were prepared and opportunity given at the various 
Sunday meetings since for any who wished to sign their 
names to these lists along with the Elders. The list of 
names has been growing each week, and after sufficient 
time has been given, so that all may have had an opportunity 
to sign, our Secretary will send in the list. 

When the Vow first came out many thought it was 
all right for others to take it and send in their names, but 
that it was not necessary for themselves. Noting, however, 
cases where much sorrow and trouble would 
have been prevented had the Vow been taken in times 
past, and noting on the other hand the good that came 
to those who have taken it, the Elders therefore decided 
that we wanted to lend our names and influence along 
with others in holding up this Standard to the Lord's 
people. 

With Christian love and greetings from all to all, I 
remain, yours in his service. 

L. W. JONES, (M.D.),-Chicago. 



DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

I presume that you long have noticed the following 
facts and indications, namely: 

While attending Conventions during the past two 
years, particularly the one at Put-in-Bay, I was impressed 
by the great number who have been in the 
Truth for a comparatively short time. A large number 
informed me that Put-in-Bay Convention was their first. 
Of course in such a large number there were many whose 
faces were familiar by reason of meeting them at former 
conventions. No doubt many whom I have met at other 
conventions were detained at home by various causes, 
but still this fact was so marked that I spoke of it to 
others. 

Does this mean that some are losing their crowns? 
And these later comers into the truth are received in 
their place? When the boats were leaving the wharfs 
at Put-in-Bay, on the last day of the convention, the 
one going to Toledo and the other to Cleveland, the 
great numbers of people who crowded the decks sang 
as the boats began to separate, inspiringly sang "God 
be with you till we meet again"; but my heart was sad 
with the thought that so many singing so joyously, 
would not be met again, because they would not be 
faithful and some one else would receive the crown now 
awaiting the determination of their faithfulness. 

What a great blessing the "Vow" has been to me, I 
will not take your time to describe. I cannot see how 
it can be other than a blessing to each one who takes it 
"to the Lord." I pray the Lord, daily, that he will continue 
to bless you as his wisdom sees you need, that 



you may continue to minister his Truth to the household 
as he sees they need. And that he will help us to 
trust more and more in his precious promises and grow 
in the knowledge of the Word, that we will be able to 
overcome in all trials and testings through which we 
must pass to become copies of his dear Son, our 
Redeemer. 
Your fellow-servant in the harvest work, 

C. C. SEABROOK, (M.D.),-Kan. 



We must remember that the number of interested 
is multiplying. This, thank God, accounts for the increased 
size of our conventions. It is a fact, nevertheless, 
that the "wheat" as gathered must be flailed, 
threshed, and winnowed before it is ready for the 
garner. We must not "think it strange," therefore, if 
some whom we loved dearly and hoped great things for, 
should under divine inspection be found to have less of 
the spirit of love than we had surmised.— Psa. 91:1-9; 
2Thess. 2: 11-17. -EDITOR. 



