A New World Satisfying to All
AS HARD as it may be to believe, a new world actually is at hand. It will arrive in time to rescue our earth before its ability to sustain life is completely destroyed. And this new world will remove all the dangers threatening human existence. How will it do this?
After pointing to the criticalness of the world situation, historian Arnold J. Toynbee years ago asked: “What shall we do to be saved?” Answering his own question, he said: “In politics, establish a constitutional co-​operative system of world government.”
However, though being a “co-​operative system,” the coming new world will not be “in politics.” It will not embrace democracy or any other man-​made political ideology. This new world will achieve its goals because only one government will rule over it. In an astonishing series of moves, this global government will quickly eradicate all the problems facing humanity today. How? By abolishing the causes of these problems and the obstacles that so often frustrate efforts to correct them.
Realistically, how could that ever be accomplished? Would not imperfect people still be ruling, people who have proved to be corrupt and incapable of solving man’s problems? Well, just imagine if there were perfect rulers of this world government, with the interests of their subjects unselfishly at heart. Then consider how problems could be solved.
Simultaneous Solutions
With a global government of perfect rulers, no longer would each nation and its particular form of government exist. Statesmen, ambassadors, and other politicians would no longer exercise authority over the many nationalities, tribes, and races of mankind. Many local and national capitals, along with their buildings and official residences, would not be needed. This would end the costly upkeep of such edifices, as well as travel expenses of officials attending sessions, committee meetings, and national and summit conferences. Gone, too, would be all the wasteful government bureaucracies, with their numerous assistants, secretaries, and clerks, along with the red tape that impedes progress.
Peace would become a reality because divisive nationalism would be gone, replaced by a unified global authority. Armies, navies, and air forces, with all their weapons, staffs of high-​ranking commanders, and subordinate officers, would no longer be needed to protect each nation’s sovereignty. Nor would there exist any espionage systems. Under a global government with perfect rulers, there would be no open or black markets in which weapons could be bought or sold; neither would there be any disputed territories. All the peoples of the earth would be one indivisible brotherhood. Therefore, nationalism would disappear.
Consider further benefits that would accrue to the people under one undivided government with perfect rulers. Powerful businessmen, such as armaments manufacturers, would have no way of influencing politicians so that they could continue to produce and sell their destructive products. There would be no more clever lobbyists manipulating officials on certain laws or bills affecting purely local interests; no more tangle of specialized government departments working at cross-​purposes, spending huge sums of money on useless projects that benefit only a few; no blocking of solutions to pollution problems for selfish commercial reasons (to keep profits high); no defeating of laws that would protect endangered species by powerful special interests.
Other Problems Corrected
Such a perfect world government would not tolerate injustice. Upon taking control, it would see that criminal acts were dealt with in a proper, just manner. Thus, citizens would be freed from the fear that more dangerous murderers might go on killing sprees.
And what about the globe-​encircling network of organized crime syndicates and powerful drug cartels? A perfect world government could end these completely. National extradition laws would no longer be a safe haven for such international criminals. The shrewd use of loopholes in local laws and influential political connections by these lawbreakers would be a thing of the past. The single act of eradicating crime would also rid the earth of many other social blights, such as gambling, gang wars, pornography, prostitution, and smuggling. What an efficient and economical correction!
Yes, all the perplexing, knotty, and thorny problems that are baffling the most brilliant minds of mankind today would be completely solved in such a new world. And each one would be corrected permanently​—once and for all. Later generations would never have to suffer them again.
Not a Pie-​in-​the-​Sky Dream
‘But,’ you may ask, ‘from where will the perfect rulers come to rule over such a new world?’ Man’s Creator will provide them! Does this seem too good to be true? Well, just consider: If you had the power to do so, would you not bring to an end all the conditions on earth that cause so much distress? Of course you would! Should we think, then, that our Creator will do any less?
The fact is, our loving Creator purposes to create a new world, and the means for ushering it in is a righteous world government. This is what his Son, Jesus Christ, taught humans to pray for with the words: “Let your kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.”​—Matthew 6:10.
That Kingdom is a real government, a world government. Its King, Jesus Christ, “will have subjects from sea to sea and from the River to the ends of the earth.” (Psalm 72:8) And it will soon replace all human governments, as God’s Word promises when it says: “In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom [the government ruled by God’s King, Jesus Christ] that will never be brought to ruin. And the kingdom itself will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these [present-​day] kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.”​—Daniel 2:44.
Since this world government set up by the God of heaven will be administered by superhuman rulers, it will accomplish all the good things human rulers are unable to do. The Bible describes God’s government as a celestial monarchy that will consist of the King, Jesus Christ, assisted by a staff of 144,000 spirit persons. All these rulers will be trustworthy persons who showed impeccable integrity during their life on earth before they were resurrected to life in heaven. All of them will be in an excellent position to work for the good of humankind because they experienced the needs of humans while they lived on earth.​—Revelation 14:1-3.
Think of the problems this eliminates. Because of having immortality, these spirit rulers will never weary or die. (1 Corinthians 15:50, 53) And they cannot be corrupted by temptations to pervert justice or to show favoritism in exchange for gifts. After all, what can one slip as a bribe to an immortal spirit person? Money, a case of expensive liquor, a trip to an exotic island, or tickets to some show or concert? These material things may tempt flesh and blood but not these spirit creatures. So the people governed by these rulers will not suffer the corruption of governments so common today.
The New World Will Satisfy You
Are you an older person? Think of all the knowledge, skills, and experience you have acquired over the years. But have you noticed that while your mind or mental faculties may be fine, there is a gradual but steady weakening of your physical abilities? Your body no longer responds to your mental commands as it once did. Yes, your reflexes are slowing down, your strength is waning, and your endurance is lessening. Your eyesight and hearing are getting poorer and your muscles are getting weaker while pains are getting more frequent.
But try to imagine wisdom acquired over many years of life within a young body even better than the one you had when you were in your 20’s​—yes, your physical abilities being on a par with your mind. Think of the many things you could do with your healthy physique! Why, with such a well-​tuned body responding to your mature mind, you would find that any work you tackled would be very enjoyable. Your experience would enable you to do things much more efficiently, which would add so much to your satisfaction. And if you are a young person, imagine the exhilaration of keeping your youth and strength while gaining wisdom, knowledge, and experience forever.
Now, take this a step further, and think of your colleagues and friends, companions and relatives, all in this same condition. Imagine what all of you could accomplish in the way of construction, building, or crafts. Oh, what marvelous prospects this would hold for talented people, such as artists, musicians, designers, landscapers, gardeners, and botanists! Their works would be amazing. The exquisite paintings, homes, gardens, parks​—yes, the production of fine musical instruments and the art of mastering them are just a few.
This new world government has as one of its aims the rejuvenation of the human race to bodily perfection. Your vision, hearing, and other senses would be operating at their peak. For how long? Well, if a human government offered you therapy that guaranteed a 50-​percent renewal of all your bodily functions for a year for just a nominal fee, would you not be first in line to get it? This new world government guarantees a full, 100-​percent rejuvenation for free​—not for one year, 5 years, or 50 years, but for all eternity.
Do not dismiss as unbelievable this marvelous prospect that is certain to be enjoyed by humans on this very earth. Consider, on pages 7 to 10, some of the blessings lovers of God will enjoy.
[Box/​Pictures on page 7-10]
What the New World Will Bring
An End to Crime and Violence
“As regards the wicked, they will be cut off from the very earth.”​—Proverbs 2:22.
An Elimination of War
“They will have to beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning shears. Nation will not lift up sword against nation, neither will they learn war anymore.”​—Isaiah 2:4.
Plenty of Good Things for All to Eat
“There will come to be plenty of grain on the earth; on the top of the mountains there will be an overflow.”​—Psalm 72:16.
Fine Homes and Enjoyable Work for Everyone
“They will certainly build houses and have occupancy . . . They will not build and someone else have occupancy; they will not plant and someone else do the eating.”​—Isaiah 65:21, 22.
Peace Between People and Animals
“The wolf will actually reside for a while with the male lamb, and with the kid the leopard itself will lie down, . . . and a mere little boy will be leader over them.”​—Isaiah 11:6.
No More Sickness, Old Age, or Death
“He will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”​—Revelation 21:4.
A Resurrection of Dead Loved Ones
“The hour is coming in which all those in the memorial tombs will hear [Jesus’] voice and come out.”​—John 5:28, 29.

