Choose Life in That New World
OBVIOUSLY, God had a purpose in creating this unique little gem of a planet. And he destined humanity to play a key role in it. (Isaiah 45:18) The terrible condition into which our earth has fallen brings no credit to God. But do you really believe he will allow this situation to continue? Surely not!
Man’s yearning for a new world is actually in response to a longing for something mankind once possessed. That was a real, tangible, earthly paradise. The first human couple were placed in such a home, and it was the Creator’s original purpose for humankind to enjoy that Paradise on earth forever.​—Genesis 1:28.
Jehovah God is now offering you an opportunity for life in his new world, where he will bless faithful people with the desires of their hearts. (Psalm 10:17; 27:4) Will you choose to live there?
You Have a Choice
The Israelites who heard Moses’ farewell speech had a similar decision to make. They had to choose either God’s rule or that of the nations of that time. Here was Moses’ advice: “I have put life and death before you . . . You must choose life in order that you may keep alive, you and your offspring, by loving Jehovah your God, by listening to his voice and by sticking to him.” (Deuteronomy 30:19, 20) Yes, your choice is also a life-​and-​death matter.
This is why these articles on God’s new world are published— to touch your heart so that you may choose it rather than put your hope in the vain promises of humans to create a new world. There are many wonderful things you need to learn about God’s new world.
For example, what evidence is there that this new world is near at hand? How will it replace all the governments of the earth? What events will lead up to this? How can we be sure that what the Bible promises will come true?
The answers to these questions and many others are available. Jehovah’s Witnesses would be happy to show you the verses in your copy of the Bible that not only describe the blessings of God’s new world but also indicate just when and how God’s government begins its rule and eventually expands that rule to govern the entire earth.
You are urged to respond as did the Beroeans of the first century who listened to the apostle Paul. They spent time “carefully examining the Scriptures daily as to whether these things were so.” (Acts 17:11) Wisely, you should do the same. Be assured that your Bible discussions with Jehovah’s Witnesses will bring you great spiritual satisfaction as you learn about the delightful future that God promises us.
You need to make a choice​—either to serve God and the interests of his Kingdom government or to put your trust and hope in human efforts at self-​rule. We encourage you to learn as much as you can about God’s promises so that your decision will be an informed one. Acquiring Bible knowledge not only will enliven your hope for the future but will help keep you spiritually alive through the final days of human rule.​—2 Timothy 1:13.
Man’s many years of yearning for a new world are almost over. Jehovah’s Witnesses want you to gain admittance into that new world and enjoy life forever. That is what God wants too. It is sincerely hoped that you will choose God’s new world. If you do, then you will see that mankind’s yearning for a new world was never in vain.

