From Our Readers
Gambling  Your series “Gambling​—Does It Pay?” (June 8, 1992) was excellent in showing the effects of compulsive gambling, but it was not balanced. To illustrate: Drunkenness is wrong, but drinking is not wrong in itself. Similarly, gambling can be a legitimate activity when it’s done in a balanced way. The occasional gambler is not necessarily lazy or desirous of dishonest gain.
J. R., United States
We do not agree that occasional gambling can be compared to moderate drinking. The latter is not condemned in the Bible. However, the Bible categorically condemns both greed and any appeals to “the god of Good Luck.” (Isaiah 65:11; 1 Corinthians 6:9, 10) A person who gambles even on a casual basis [occasionally] may still be motivated by the greedy desire to get something at the expense of others. Indeed, experience shows that compulsive gambling often begins as a casual pastime. Christians therefore wisely avoid all forms of gambling.​—ED.
Dowsing  I’d like to express my gratitude for the excellent article “Dowsing​—Scientific or Occult?” (April 22, 1992) My father did occasional water witching. Each bob of his rod would indicate one foot of the total depth to the water source. While in South America, I saw dowsing performed similarly. However, there each bob indicated one meter. Why the change to metric? Obviously, the hidden intelligence is likely of demonic origin.
W. B., United States
Aliens  Thank you for the series “Help!​—We Are Aliens.” (May 8, 1992) Three years ago I decided to move to Japan but was unable to do so. I have always felt it would have been best if I had made the move. After reading your article, though, I realize that I was not prepared, as far as knowing the language and culture was concerned.
D. G. A., Brazil
The article reminded me of my own experience. Although I am native to the United States, several years ago I moved to an area of that land in need of evangelizers. I experienced some of the problems aliens go through in adjusting. I had to learn to broaden out and not compare my new home to the one where I grew up. I even learned about local plant and animal life. The article was a great help to me, and I’m sure it touched many others.
K. H., United States
Unbelieving Parents  I was encouraged by the article “Young People Ask . . . What if My Parents Don’t Support Me in My Faith?” (January 8, 1992) My parents are ardent ancestor worshipers and want me to quit being one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. I’ve often been discouraged, but when I saw the opening words of the article, I realized I’m not the only one in this situation.
Y. M., Japan
My parents are Catholic and do not allow me to attend meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses. They’ve even threatened to kick me out of the house. I was therefore thrilled when a friend brought the article to school for me to read. It gave me the strength to persevere, and now I am confident that my efforts are not in vain.
H. W., United States
The article couldn’t have come at a more appropriate time. Being the only one in my family who is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, I’ve experienced many trials from my parents. Your article helped me appreciate the support of my Christian brothers and sisters and how they help me to maintain my spirituality.
D. H., United States

