Wyndham’s Faith​—How It Has Affected Others
AWAKE! magazine of August 22, 1991, published an article about Wyndham Cook’s faithfulness to the law of God that commands Christians to abstain from blood. (Acts 15:20; 21:25) Wyndham had varicose veins in his throat, and he was a partial hemophiliac. The article reported that he survived several bleeding incidents, one in which his hemoglobin blood count dropped below 2. Sadly, a footnote to the article observed: “As this magazine was going to press, Wyndham died after suffering another bleeding incident.”
Effect on Fellow Youths
Many young people in the United States wrote Awake! expressing appreciation for the article and describing the effect that it had on them. One from Clinton, Iowa, said: “When I read how this 15-​year-​old boy stood up to the doctors and patiently explained to them why he refused blood, it made me question my own faith and ask myself what I would have done. Wyndham’s faith and endurance made me feel more determined than ever that if I was in a life-​and-​death situation, I would take a stand the way he did.”
A letter from a 15-​year-​old from Maiden, North Carolina, said: “After reading about Wyndham’s sufferings and his reliance upon Jehovah even to death, I cried. I asked myself that heart-​searching question, ‘Would I under such circumstances put my life in God’s hands and put complete trust in him to remember me?’
“I’ve reread the article many times, and I intend to refer to it any time I feel sad because of this oppressive world. Wyndham’s faith supplies encouragement. I look forward to meeting him in Jehovah’s promised new world.”
Another youngster, from New York City, wrote: “I often imagine myself being in a situation similar to Wyndham Cook’s and wonder what I would say if my doctor told me that I was going to die if I did not accept a blood transfusion. I am always filled with courage and strengthened by powerful examples, like Wyndham’s, to do my utmost in service to Jehovah.”
A youth from Kent, Washington, explained: “I picked up the magazine from my post office yesterday and had it read before I returned home. I called many friends from the congregation to recommend the article. Then that evening we studied it for our family study.” Noting the effect it had on her, she said: “It not only proved to be encouraging and faith strengthening but made me, at age 17, ask myself if I would be able to stand up to such a test.”
A youngster from North Berwick, Maine, wrote: “I could relate to Wyndham because I too am 15 years old. I can’t say how much his endurance and courage has moved me to do my utmost in Jehovah’s service. If he could do so much to please God even in his weakened state, then what reason do I have for holding back?
“When I finished reading the beautiful article, my eyes were filled with tears. I felt that I had known Wyndham all my life. I wish I had. Then I looked at the picture of him and his parents and thought of how I couldn’t wait to see his beautiful smile again after the resurrection when he’d suffer no more pain.”
Another 15-​year-​old wanted to let Wyndham’s parents know how she felt about the article. She wrote: “Wyndham’s courage helped me to see that I need to be prepared to stand up for my beliefs. At any time I could be in a similar situation. I just wish that if the time should ever come when I need to take a stand, I will be as courageous and determined as Wyndham was in following what the Bible says.
“I never knew Wyndham, which I’m sure is a loss in itself, but I am really looking forward to knowing him when the new world will be here. His story has inspired me to do all I possibly can in Jehovah’s service and do it down until the end.”
Faith Strengthening to All
A parent from Newark, New Jersey, explained: “I’ve been one of Jehovah’s Witnesses for 22 years but attended meetings before that time. I have on a regular basis read all my magazines, but I’ve never read a story that was more touching and encouraging than that of Wyndham Cook.
“Now I can only continue to fulfill my God-​given role as a parent by helping my ten-​year-​old daughter stand strong and make a defense for the faith as Wyndham did. Whether it be the blood issue, drugs, sex, or any of the vices that Satan brings on all of us, especially our young, we must continue to remain strong by building up our faith.”
A Witness from Cadiz, Kentucky, expressed similar sentiments, writing: “This is one of the most touching articles I’ve ever read. Wyndham was such an excellent example for all young ones to follow. I cried as I read what this fine young Witness had to go through. I realized how all of us, young and old alike, should follow his courageous stand. Wyndham’s example made me reexamine myself. It has made me try even harder to work whole-​souled for Jehovah, always trying to set a fine example, like Wyndham, to sanctify Jehovah’s name.”
Another Witness, from Palm Springs, California, wrote: “This article particularly touched my heart. I have five children, and I would hope and pray that if ever faced with this kind of ordeal, they would have the strength of faith that Wyndham had. . . . Wyndham is a fine example for our youths.”
Genuine faith is the assured expectation of things hoped for even though one has not yet seen or experienced these things. (Hebrews 11:1) Wyndham had faith in God’s new world and the resurrection of the dead because of accurate knowledge of the Bible’s promises. (Acts 24:15; 2 Peter 3:13; Revelation 21:3, 4) Such faith, demonstrated even in the face of death, surely is strengthening to the worldwide brotherhood.​—1 Peter 5:9.

