From Our Readers
Rain Forests  Thank you for the clear and comforting information you published on rain forests. (May 8, 1998) It is sad to see how man’s insanity and greed are destroying our planet and its precious fauna and flora. It makes me happy to think that shortly our Grand Creator, Jehovah, will step in and defend this precious jewel and its living organisms.
F. A., Brazil
I am glad to say that your article has shed much light on the many problems and issues that concern the destruction of our rain forests today. I would particularly like to thank you for providing the information in the last paragraph—the fact that there is hope for our remaining forests and that a future generation of rain forests will be sure to thrive.
J. T., Australia
I have just read the admirable issue of Awake! magazine given to me by a friendly stranger who is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. I am a member of the Edinburgh University Ecological Society, having taken a degree in forestry at Edinburgh University in 1939. We were taught a lot about the tropical rain forest. I do congratulate you and your assistants on the excellence of the series “Can Our Rain Forests Be Saved?” I read every word of it. May your sacred movement flourish! It will flourish.
L. M., England
The Year 2000  The article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: How Significant Is the Year 2000?” in the May 8, 1998, Awake! was a welcome reminder. I appreciate your forthrightness in laying to rest any tendency to speculate and your honesty in explaining past statements concerning the timing of Jehovah’s day.
S. W., United States
Victorious in the Face of Death  It’s a pleasure to write to you and thank you for publishing the experiences of our brothers during the second world war and afterward, such as those in the series “Victorious in the Face of Death.” (May 8, 1993) That series incited me to continue to serve Jehovah, following in the footsteps of his victorious Witnesses. Even the threat of death didn’t stop them from loving Jehovah.
A. A., Albania
Life and Death in Cambodia  Thank you for the article “My Long Journey From Life and Death in Cambodia.” (May 8, 1998) It is wonderful to serve Jehovah faithfully and to know that like Wathana Meas, who as a soldier killed others to survive, many are following this same road despite sad memories. I was shocked to read that he spent three months hidden in a pit. Little did he know that he was soon to experience the greatest privilege of his life—getting to know Jehovah!
C. M. S. L., Brazil
Do You Judge by Appearances?  Appearances can be deceptive, as was well illustrated by the folktale about Nasreddin Hoja. (May 8, 1998) Thank you for reminding us that we should not judge others favorably or unfavorably merely on the basis of their appearance—and that Jehovah judges us on our heart condition, not our appearance.
A. O. F. A., Brazil
Love Never Fails  Thank you from the bottom of my heart for the concise, excellent article “‘Love Never Fails’—Do You?” (May 8, 1998) The ideas that were developed in connection with the different facets of true love deeply moved and encouraged me, especially as the article arrived just when I really needed help. I am now convinced that whatever the circumstances, true love never fails.
S. G., France

