Jehovah Gives the Victory
IN CANADA the clergy’s ministerial association in one city became concerned with the preaching work of Jehovah’s witnesses in the community. It engaged the services of a man from out of town to address churchgoers there and answer their questions about the Witnesses. Notices were published in newspapers that welcomed the public to the talk he would give. Church members began to make insinuations that the Witnesses would be in a bad way as a result of this clergy action. But the Witnesses remained calm and undisturbed about the matter. They assured those who brought up the matter that they were not worried and that honesthearted persons would be helped by what would be heard, that those looking for the truth would be able to distinguish between truth and falsehood.
Those who brought up these things to the Witnesses were among the more prominent ones of the churches. When they saw that the Witnesses were not worried, then they themselves became disturbed. They called their ministers and told them that there was no sense in paying them a salary if they had to hire an outsider to speak about Jehovah’s witnesses. Although it was late to do so, the visit and the talk were both canceled.
That same Sunday the local Baptist minister and his leading deacon came to the public talk and The Watchtower study. During the study they would snicker and poke one another to show their amusement at points of the discussion. At times they would raise their hands as if to take part in the study but then cover their mouths if the chairman looked their way. What the clergyman and his deacon did not know was that one of their members was just a few rows behind them, observing their antics. This young man had just been to a few Bible talks at the Kingdom Hall and was still a member of the church. After the study the clergyman saw this young man and said to him: “Let us get out of here. They twist the Scriptures to suit their own needs.” The young man replied: “No thanks! I have seen enough to know that Jehovah’s witnesses have the truth.”
When Jehovah’s people are courageous and keep trusting in him, he will give the victory: “Any weapon whatever that will be formed against you will have no success.”—Isa. 54:17.

