Question Box
▪ How can we ensure proper timing of congregation meetings?
Time moves swiftly when we are sharing something good with friends. For this reason, it can be a challenge to handle meeting parts within the allotted time. What can help?
Start on time. When the entire congregation meets, it may be helpful to invite the audience to take their seats a minute or two beforehand so that the meeting can begin at the designated time in an orderly way. (Eccl. 3:1) Meetings involving smaller groups, such as meetings for field service, should not be delayed to wait for those who may arrive late.
Prepare thoroughly. A key to good timing is advance preparation. Get the objective of the assignment clearly in mind. Identify the main points, and make these stand out. Avoid getting sidetracked by minor details. Keep the presentation simple. If the part includes demonstrations or interviews, rehearse them in advance. To the extent possible, time your part while practicing it out loud.
Apportion your material. Whether your assignment is a talk or an audience discussion, you may find it helpful to divide the material into sections. Decide how much time to spend on each section, and indicate this in the margin of your notes. Then monitor your timing during the presentation. In an audience discussion, avoid the pitfall of entertaining so many comments in the introductory portion that you have to rush through weightier material that appears later. Watchtower Study conductors should allow sufficient time to consider the review box at the end. They should also be careful not to infringe on the time allotted for the concluding song and prayer.
Conclude on time. If a meeting consists of several parts, such as the Service Meeting, each speaker should be conscious of when his part is to begin and end. What can be done if the meeting is running behind schedule? One or more of the brothers may be able to make up the time by focusing on main points and eliminating some details. The ability to do this is one mark of a skilled teacher.
As an audience, we can assist the brother conducting by keeping our expressions brief and to the point. All of us, therefore, can contribute to meetings that take place “decently and by arrangement.”​—1 Cor. 14:40.

