The Excelling Value of Divine Wisdom
 1. How do many people view the Christian ministry of Jehovah’s Witnesses?
1 Some people think that Jehovah’s Witnesses should focus their efforts more directly on helping to alleviate the problems facing mankind today. Such persons fail to see the excelling value of our Bible educational work. It is as the apostle Paul wrote: “The speech about the torture stake is foolishness to those who are perishing, but to us who are being saved it is God’s power.” (1 Cor. 1:18) Indeed, we know that the Christian ministry is the most important work being done on earth today.
 2. (a) What has been the fruitage of human efforts to solve mankind’s problems? (b) What results has the Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making work produced?
2 A Better Life Now: Human efforts to solve mankind’s problems have yielded very limited results. Legislation has not stopped the proliferation of crime. Peace treaties and peacekeeping forces have not brought an end to war. Social programs have failed to eradicate poverty. (Ps. 146:3, 4; Jer. 8:9) In contrast, the Kingdom message has transformed the lives of millions by helping them to put on a new personality that is acceptable to God. (Rom. 12:2; Col. 3:9, 10) In so doing, they enjoy an improved quality of life right now.​—1 Tim. 4:8.
 3. In what ways have you personally benefited from divine wisdom?
3 A Bright Future: In addition to helping us meet the immediate challenges of life, divine wisdom enables us to plan effectively for the future. (Ps. 119:105) It spares us the futility of trying to reform the present system of things. (Eccl. 1:15; Rom. 8:20) How grateful we are that we are not squandering our lives in pursuit of goals that are only an illusion! Rather, we center our efforts on Jehovah’s sure promise of “new heavens and a new earth” in which righteousness will dwell. When Jehovah’s day of judgment arrives, it will be unmistakably clear that those who relied on divine wisdom made the right choice.​—2 Pet. 3:10-13; Ps. 37:34.
 4. What might you say to help people in your territory see the excelling value of the wisdom contained in God’s Word?
4 Although divine wisdom may seem impractical to those steeped in “the wisdom of this system of things,” it is in reality the only practical course to follow. (1 Cor. 1:21; 2:6-8) Hence, we continue to proclaim throughout the earth the message that originates with God, who is “wise alone.”​—Rom. 16:27.

