Presenting the Good News​—Where There Is No Ready Response
1 What can be done to terminate a call tastefully when you discern that the householder definitely is not interested? (Prov. 15:23; 25:11) Should continued efforts be put forth to stimulate interest or to place literature until the door is forcibly closed, or would it be better for you to terminate the call, respecting the householder’s wishes at the time?​—Eccl. 3:7.
2 Discerning publishers know there is a difference between offering the Kingdom message in a clear and understandable way, letting the householder then decide what his response will be, and trying to force the message on someone, using pressure methods such as worldly salesmen employ. Jehovah does not force anyone to worship him but rather lets each one choose whom he will serve. (Josh. 24:15) If we have clearly presented matters so the householder knows what is being offered to him and he then indicates he is not interested, there is satisfaction in knowing we have done our best to give a clear and understandable presentation, isn’t there?
3 When a person declines the literature offered or a home Bible study, there is no need now to view him as an “enemy.” People can change, as we know. We can still be friendly, possibly saying: “I’m glad we could talk for a few minutes. Maybe we can visit again for a few minutes the next time I call.”
4 What is accomplished by doing things in this way? The householder, for one thing, should be impressed with the fact that you have considered his viewpoint, respected his right to decide personally in such important matters. Possibly by the reasonableness shown in your yielding instead of pushing matters to the point where he gets irritated and feels the need forcibly to terminate the call, he will be more inclined to listen on subsequent calls made in the future.
5 Where it is not possible even to get a brief discussion started because the householder says he is busy we could kindly acknowledge his objection, possibly commenting, “Getting enough time to care for all the many things we want to do is an increasing problem isn’t?” and offer a handbill, suggesting, “When you have a few minutes you may want to consider the thought on the back of this handbill (mention whatever it is briefly) and maybe we can talk about it the next time I call.”
6 It could be that the person was really busy, but in many cases people say this so as not to get involved in a lengthy discussion, which may have happened previously when a Witness or a worldly salesman called. Or he may feel that his best defense is not even to let you get started. As a result of your understanding response and consideration he may even indicate a willingness to continue the discussion right then. If so, use discernment in determining when to terminate the call.
7 Our following such suggestions does not mean that no effort is put forth to handle objections or that we are going to give up easily in our efforts to persuade individuals to accept the Kingdom message. (2 Cor. 5:20) Time and circumstances may determine a person’s interest or response, so we are careful not to judge persons on the basis of their response to our presentation on a single call. But when we discern that a person’s mind is closed we know there is no need to keep talking until the door is closed if this can be avoided. Rather, we can accomplish much good by using discernment in how we terminate calls where there is no real interest manifested.

