Regular Coverage of Territory
1 Because we are sincerely interested in helping all persons living in the congregation’s territory to hear and respond to the Kingdom message, we call on them repeatedly. Various literature offers and a variety of approaches are used in an endeavor to stimulate their interest in God’s Word.
2 We try not to neglect any in our territory. With that in view, many field overseers find it helpful periodically to review the territory record form (S-13), making a notation of territories that have not been worked for the longest period of time. Then, when you request territory they can readily let you know which territories are most in need of coverage.
3 It is reported that, in some places, prior to the circuit overseer’s visit a request is made that all territories be turned in even if they are not completely worked. Is that really necessary? It would mean that none of the publishers would have territory in which to work. However, every time you cover a territory, it would be appreciated if you would notify the brother who cares for the territory records so that these will be up-to-date and will provide a meaningful record of the work that is being done and that needs to be done in the congregation’s territory.
4 Have you had a territory out for more than four months and not been able to complete it? Then why not ask the book study conductor to arrange for some publishers to help you to complete the territory? Thus the people living there will not be deprived of the opportunity to hear the good news regularly.
5 Thorough territory coverage is important, as you know. Therefore, before turning a territory back in, it is beneficial to make an effort to contact all who were not at home. If your congregation is covering its territory every month or so, then give particular attention to trying to contact persons who were not at home on the initial call, making repeated efforts on various days. One sister makes a note of the name and address where older magazines are left at not-at-home calls and then when she gets home that same day she calls the person on the telephone. Possibly you, too, would get good results by doing things in this way.
6 Have you held the same territory for quite some time? There is benefit in having the same person work a territory a number of times. But it is also true that one publisher may succeed in presenting the good news to a person who was not willing to listen to others. Realizing that, after you have worked it once, or possibly several times, you may want to let other publishers have that territory so that the persons who live there will benefit from their different approaches and presentations.
7 Our interest is certainly not merely in seeing how often we can cover the territory. Lives are involved. And as people hear and embrace the truth, there is increased praise to Jehovah. So, work closely together to care well for the part of the field that has been entrusted to the care of your congregation.

