Steadfast in Faithful Service
1 We have good reason to be steadfast in our service to God and Christ. That service has brought us refreshment. (Matt. 11:28-30) No longer are we laboring under burdensome religious traditions. We have learned how to spend our time, abilities and assets purposefully, to the praise and honor of our Creator. We find pleasure in associating with loving brothers and sisters. We enjoy peace of mind and heart because of having a clean conscience before God and men. And before us there is the glorious prospect of life in God’s new order​—life free from sickness, old age and death.
2 Many honest-hearted people very much desire what we are enjoying. Are you eager to help them? During the month of June we will be offering the New World Translation and the Peace and Security book on a contribution of $1.25.
3 True, many people have a Bible. But few read it. One reason for this is that the archaic language of a number of popular translations has discouraged them. Undoubtedly they will find reading the New World Translation a refreshing change. Others do not even have a copy of the complete Bible in their home. Do they not need the “word of life”? At times older ones remark that they have difficulty in reading the small print in their Bible. You may want to show them your personal large-print New World Translation when you return, or show the print size from the folder that you carry with you describing Bibles and Bible study aids.
4 Then, too, some people are interested in the Bible from a student’s or scholar’s standpoint. If informed about what is available they may want to get the translation by Byington, The Kingdom Interlinear Translation, the Comprehensive Concordance or Aid to Bible Understanding. It may be that these publications will aid such ones to come to know Jehovah. Also offer them to those with whom you conduct Bible studies.
5 It is good to keep in mind our main objective for being steadfast in faithful service​—to glorify our heavenly Father. Even if our territory is covered often, our work is not done. Jehovah God wants humans to have ample opportunity to repent. It is his will, therefore, that we speak to our fellowman again and again.​—2 Pet. 3:9.
6 We do not know just how many people will change their attitude and be among the “great crowd” that will survive the approaching “great tribulation.” (Rev. 7:9, 14) But as things worsen in this old system, more persons are having their eyes opened. Never have we had such increases as in recent months. Also, our repeated calls cause people to take notice, particularly when they see that we speak with conviction about our God-given hope. Truly, now is no time to slow down and to devote less time to the field service. Rather, it is a time for zealous activity.
7 Whether you have been sharing the “good news” with others for many years or just a few months, continue steadfast. Many persons are listening appreciatively to the good news. Do not become discouraged when others do not listen with appreciation. Few responded to Jesus Christ, but he continued steadfast. Even if you are able to say just a few words, you are still bearing fruitage, for your appreciative heart is motivating you to bear witness. (Matt. 13:23; Luke 6:45) You are showing love for Jehovah and deep concern for fellow humans. So continue to rely on Jehovah and the help of his spirit to strengthen and sustain you in faithful service. Remember, “God is not unrighteous so as to forget your work and the love you showed for his name.”​—Heb. 6:10.
[Blurb on page 1]
Steadfast While Looking at the Inheritance.
[Blurb on page 4]
Offer the Word of Life During June.

