From Our Readers
Surgery  My husband and I thank Jehovah from the bottom of our hearts for the article “Surgery Without a Scalpel.” (February 22, 1998) My husband was scheduled to go in for invasive brain surgery for his arteriovenous malformation. The article was like an answer to our prayers. My husband had the surgery with the procedure mentioned in the article, and all is going well.
L. J., United States
Russian Press  Many thanks for the article “Russian Press Praises Jehovah’s Witnesses.” (February 22, 1998) I just wanted you to know that it is not the first time my eyes have filled with tears on reading one of your wonderful articles. It is good to know that the whole earth will one day be as beautiful as the new branch facilities of Jehovah’s Witnesses at Solnechnoye.
I. C. S. A., Brazil
Unbelieving Father Changes  The article “His Heart Was Touched” (February 22, 1998) reminded me of my own family. My husband is also an unbeliever. The article gave me hope that one day his heart may be touched.
S. M., United States
Family Resists Nazis  Never have I read a more wonderful experience than that of Horst Henschel, in the article “Motivated by My Family’s Loyalty to God.” (February 22, 1998) I had to take many breaks between paragraphs to control my weeping. Horst’s father was certainly someone who persevered under pressure, and his example is one I’ll always hold dear.
A. K., United States
Horst Henschel’s experience was very moving. His courage and love for Jehovah motivated me. I can never forget the words that encouraged him while he was in prison: “Fear not those who kill the body.”
J. V. S., Brazil
I am ten years old, and I wanted to tell you how encouraging it is to know how Jehovah’s Witnesses had to live then—how if they didn’t say “Heil Hitler!” they might have lost their lives. But the Witnesses kept strong and didn’t say it.
R. B., United States
Racial Pride  I was elated to read the article “Young People Ask . . . What About Racial Pride?” (February 22, 1998) Many times I have been asked, “What’s your nationality?” Unable to trace my family line, I’d answer jokingly, “Mongrel!” A traveling minister said, “When anyone asks you what you are, just say, ‘I’m one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.’” I’m proud to be in an organization that recognizes all races as being equal.
D. H., United States
I am 14 years old and want to thank you for the article. My racial pride had turned into racism. The article made me understand that in Jehovah’s eyes we are all equal.
I. P., Italy
When I was young, many of my schoolmates took pride in their race and color, saying they were of Spanish blood, while I belonged to a minority group. I developed an inferiority complex and a lack of self-respect. I’ve sometimes felt, ‘I hate my color!’ The counsel in this article helped me to regain my self-respect and to feel content with what Jehovah has given me.
A. G., Philippines
I really had a distorted view, thinking that people born in wealthier countries were superior. Your article helped me to see that there is really only one race—the human race.
L. G., Brazil

