VOL. XXXI JUNE 15 No. 12 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

Bro. Russell's European Tour— Sec. 2 195 

Mementos of the Darker Past 195 

"The Secret of the Lord" 197 

Does Our Lord Now Own the Human Race? 199 

The World Asleep in Jesus 200 

The Church Alone Redeemed Thus Far 200 

The Price One Thing— The Application 

of It Another Thing 201 

Good Seed for Good Ground 202 

The Wheat and the Tares 203 

"Let Both Grow Together" 203 

Pictures of the Kingdom 204 

The Pearl of Great Value 205 

The Net Gathered of Every Kind 205 

Jesus Did Not Forfeit Earthly Life 206 

Jesus Had the Right to the Earthly Nature 206 

Imputing His Merit Now to Those 

Who Covenant to Sacrifice It 206 

Letters Re Volunteer Work 207 

page 194 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION 
CONVENTIONS 



For list of June Conventions see page 172. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., JULY 3 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 o'clock, 
in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, 13-17 Hicks street. The evening 
meeting at 7:30 o'clock will also be in the Tabernacle. 
Discourse for the Public at 3:00 P.M. in the Brooklyn 
Academy of Music, Lafayette avenue and St. Felix street. 
Topic: "True Liberty." Visiting friends will be warmly welcomed. 

ERIE, PA., JULY 10 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 10:30 
o'clock, Zuck's Hall, corner 16th and Peach streets. Service 
for the public at 2:30 P.M. in the Majestic Theater, Tenth 
street, near State street. Topic: "Hereafter." Visiting 
friends will be warmly welcomed. 



R4644 : page 194 

BRO. RUSSELL FLOODED WITH LETTERS 

Brother Russell's home coming has brought to him 
thousands of congratulations and good wishes from friends 
far and near. Brother Russell appreciates greatly these 
evidences of the love of the brethren! He sends, in this 
item, his acknowledgments and thanks and good wishes. 
The general interest of the harvest work forbid any attempt 
to respond personally. Please accept his love and 

page 194 

Christian greetings! 



R4629 : page 195 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S EUROPEAN TOUR 

[SEC. II.-ROME AND HOMEWARD BOUND.] 

SUNDAY, May 1st, was spent in Rome. We 

had a public service which indicated the 

deep interest of the comparatively few 

present. Possibly as many grains of wheat 

were found as though the meeting had been 

larger. "The Lord knoweth them that are 

his." On the whole, however, the meeting 

was quite a disappointment and came far 

from fulfilling the prophesy made respecting 

the large attendance— based upon what 

were supposed to be very liberal arrangements for a large 

central auditorium and very liberal advertising. The dear 

Brother who had the matter in charge no doubt used his 

best judgment, but his experience in such matters was 

limited. We spelled our disappointment with an "H," 

and trusted that the Lord could and would overrule the 

matter according to his own wisdom. We hope to hear 

of further interest on the part of some present on that 

occasion. Our text was from Romans 1:16. 

We had no appointment at Venice or Vienna, and went 
on to Warsaw, Russia. There we had a very enjoyable 
time with the class of about twenty. Brothers Rutherford 
and Koetitz accompanied us, and the latter served as 
interpreter. The very closest attention was given while 
we endeavored to show forth various features of Present 
Truth— especially did we emphasize the doctrine of the 
Ransom. We especially endeavored to make clear how 
that Jesus gave himself sacrificially to the Father and 
what he laid down of earthly right was the Ransom Price, 
which, in due time, at the end of this age he will make 
over to justice on behalf of "the sins of all the people." 
We showed that this has not yet been done, that the world 
still "lieth in the Wicked One," and are children of wrath, 
and that only the Church has escaped. 

We pointed out that the restitution blessings which are 
to go to the world very shortly, are not the blessings 
which we seek who hope to be of the Bride-class, and to 
attain the spirit nature, and joint-heirship with our Lord. 
We pointed out that the ransom-price, not yet paid over, 
is in the hands of Justice, to our Redeemer's credit, and 
that during this Gospel Age he imputes the merit of his 
sacrifice to all who become his footstep followers. To 
these he imputes a sufficiency of merit to cover their 
blemishes that thus their sacrifices may be acceptable. 
On the basis of this imputation the sacrifices are acceptable 
with the Father, as saith the Apostle (Romans 12:1), 
"We beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of God, that 
ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable 
to God, which is your reasonable service." We spoke 
to the dear friends for about four hours, had luncheon 



with them, and took the night train for Berlin. 

At Berlin we had a similarly interesting season of fellowship 
with the friends of the Truth. We had a social 
dinner together— about two hundred. Subsequently we 
addressed them for nearly two hours, the topic being 
the same as at Warsaw. Then came a Social Tea generally 
participated in, and later our evening meeting, which 
was well attended. Many of the friends accompanied us 
to the railway station, bidding us good bye as we departed 
for the German Branch Office at Barmen. 

We had an enjoyable season at Barmen for nearly two 
days, speaking to the dear friends for nearly seven hours 
in all. One service was for the public and was attended 
by nearly 800, many of whom manifested deep interest. 
The meetings of the Church varied in number, as not all 
were able to attend all the meetings, on account of business 
and other obligations. Here again we emphasized 
the Atonement for sin, and showed the work of the Mediator 
between God and men during the Millennial Age to be 
wholly based upon the meritorious sacrifice of our Redeemer, 
begun at Jordan and finished at Calvary. We 
pointed out the gracious arrangement whereby the merit 
of that sacrifice is imputed to us who accept the Divine 
invitation to become heirs of God and joint-heirs with 
Jesus Christ to the heavenly inheritance, and in the work 
of blessing all the families of the earth, as the Seed of 
Abraham. 

We endeavored to make very plain that the merit of the 

R4630 : page 195 

atonement lay in the Redeemer's sacrifice, and that the 
Church is honored in that she is permitted to suffer with 
her Lord, and that this is a condition without which she 
may not hope to reign with him. After a delightful 
season of fellowship and study together of the Word of 
God we parted from the dear friends, many of whom 
accompanied us to the station, singing us good bye from 
the platform. 

MEMENTOS OF THE DARKER PAST 

We reached Harwich the next morning, Sunday, May 
8th. To our pleasant surprise a committee of the London 
Church met us here and journeyed with us to the Metropolis, 
entertaining us at breakfast on the dining car, and 
on the journey pointed out items of interest. One of these 
was a place where about three centuries ago a lad of 19 
years was burned to death as a heretic because of his 
belief in the Bible and the ministry of its teaching, as opposed 
to the supposed orthodoxy of his time. At another 

R4630 : page 196 

point on the same road we passed the monument erected 
to the memory of seventeen martyrs to their loyalty to 



God's Word. And in London we noted the Memorial 
Church at Smithfield Corners which commemorates many 
martyrdoms for the Truth's sake. 

Our mental comment was that the land which had 
witnessed such loyalty to God's Word centuries ago must 
still have many inhabitants loyal to the Scriptures and 
quite unwilling to be satisfied with the "new theology" of 
our day, marked by Evolution doctrines and denial of the 
inspiration of the Scriptures by the "higher critics." 

Although we arrived at the London Station at quite 
an early hour for Sunday (eight o'clock) we found nearly 
a hundred of the dear friends of the Truth from the city 
and suburbs, awaiting with beaming eyes and cheering 
words. Amongst these was Brother Hemery, the Society's 
London representative; a number of London Elders, and 
Brothers Driscoll and Jones from America. According 
to a preconcerted arrangement the dear friends refrained 
from shaking hands at this time, lest we should be wearied, 
but when later we ascertained how eager they had all 
been, and how some of them had cycled almost thirty 
miles in order to be there to greet us, we felt sorry that 
we had not broken over the restrictions made in our 
defense— sorry that we had not shaken hands with each 
one of them individually as a token of our love and our 
great pleasure in meeting them. 

We purpose not to withhold ourselves on any future 
occasion of the kind, but to rely upon the grace and 
strength of the Lord for the occasion, and to give ourselves 
and the greeting friends the pleasure of such an occasion. 
However, we will take this opportunity to suggest to some 
of the friends that they must not attempt to demonstrate 
all their love by a handshake— that they must not squeeze 
too hard. The spirit is willing and the flesh is strong in 
many instances. The large gathering at the station to 
meet us seemed the more remarkable when we learned 
that the dear friends in the ten days previous had been 
most energetically engaged in advertising our meeting, 
which was held the night of our arrival. When we advise 
you that 750,000 copies of the PEOPLES PULPIT had been 
circulated in London by the friends in the Truth, it will 
be realized that some of them must of necessity have been 
wearied with their exertions. Hence the number at the 
station at that hour and the zeal manifested by their 
presence was the more remarkable. We may be sure 
that such love and loyalty to the Lord and to the Truth 
and to us as their servant, prepared these dear active 
friends for more of the Lord's blessings in connection 
with the meeting held. 

ROYAL ALBERT HALL 

Three public services were held in this, the greatest 
Auditorium in the world, on the three Sunday evenings of 
our stay in Great Britain. The first one was on the evening 
of our arrival, May 8th. It was a grand assemblage of 
very intelligent people, of whom the majority apparently 



were men. Brother Col. Sawyer served as Chairman. 
Our topic was "Hereafter." As the King had died the 
day previous, the subject seemed remarkably appropriate. 
We introduced our discourse with a few words referring 
to the King, as follows: 

"In Germany I learned of the death of your esteemed 
monarch, Edward VII. I realized that not only your 
nation, but all Christendom, had lost an unobtrusive but 
wise Counsellor, a power for peace and good-will amongst 
men. I take this opportunity to express to this great audience 
my sympathy, which, I assure you, is shared by the 
vast majority of my American countrymen. My first 
thought was, that out of respect for the illustrious dead, his 
family, and the nation this service should be postponed. 
But my second thought was to the contrary. Surely at 
no more fitting hour could we consider 'The Great Hereafter.' 
There is, thank God, a 'hereafter' for kings as 
well as for peasants— and Royal mourners and a mourning 
nation need the message from God's Word particularly 
now. And, since no more representative audience will 
probably assemble in this capital of the Empire, I have 
a suggestion to offer which I trust will meet with your 
approval. It is, that before offering prayer we show our 
sympathy for the Royal Family, in their bereavement, by 
standing. After a brief prayer, in which the Royal Family 
were remembered, the congregation joined in singing the 
hymn reputed to be the deceased King's favorite, 'Nearer, 
My God, to Thee.'" For a few moments before we led 
in prayer, the congregation, with bowed heads, prayed 
silently. The occasion was a very impressive one. 

In discussing the "Hereafter," we showed the generally 
accepted views of Catholics and Protestants, and then, 
in contrast with these, the Bible presentation, which we 
affirmed to be not only the true one, but the only logical 
one. We pointed out the hereafter of the Church in glory 
and the steps of patient perseverance leading thereto. 
We pointed out that while the Bible shows, and the creeds 
confess, that only a little flock will be joint-heirs in the 
Kingdom with Christ, nevertheless there is another salvation 
which is for the world. The world's earthly salvation 
we contrasted with the Church's heavenly one. We 
showed that it will be a restitution to mental, moral and 
physical perfection, to be attained during the thousand 
years of Messiah's reign in glory, for which we pray, 
"Thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is 
in heaven." We showed the Divine provision for an 
earthly Paradise for such restored sons of Adam as will 
accept the Divine arrangement on their behalf, and that all 
others will be destroyed in the Second Death. 

We pointed out that this was a very different outlook 
from the one ordinarily presented in the creeds of Christendom. 
While taking no more to heaven than the saintly 
and elect, as the Bible indicates, all the creeds consign 
the remainder of mankind either to centuries of torture 
in Purgatory, or to an eternity of torture in hell. We 
pointed out the unscripturalness and unreasonableness of 



this proposition, and showed in scriptural language that 
God's provision is a resurrection of the dead as the hope 
of both the Church and the world— the Church in the 
First Resurrection to glory, honor and immortality. 

We pointed out that the glorification of the elect on the 
spirit plane, as the spiritual "Seed of Abraham," is scrip turally 
declared for the very purpose of blessing all the 
families of earth— the non-elect— giving them fullest 
opportunity to come to the knowledge of the Lord, and of 
righteousness, and to avail themselves of a share of God's 
mercy and forgiveness for all the willing and obedient 
to life everlasting. We had a good hearing for nearly 
two hours. Custodians of the hall remarked that for an 
audience to sit for so long was practically unprecedented in 
their experience. We trust that some good was accomplished, 
that some were brought nearer to the Lord, some 
made to appreciate more fully God's love, justice, wisdom 
and power. The newspapers were so full of news pertaining 
to the deceased King, Edward VII, and the 
arrangements for his funeral, and to the royalty expected 
to attend it, that very meager remarks on the sermon 
appeared. 

BRISTOL, MANCHESTER, OTLEY, NOTTINGHAM 

We spent Monday looking about London for the Lord's 
answer to our prayer that we might be directed to more 

R4630 : page 197 

suitable quarters for the London Office, and to some 
suitable place centrally located for the regular church 
services. We learned much, but accomplished nothing. 
Places suitable seem difficult to find. 

Tuesday brought us to Bristol, where there is a very 
interesting class of Bible Students in fellowship with us. 
A goodly delegation met us at the railway station, attended 
to our refreshment, and took us to the meeting place. The 
afternoon session was for the interested and we were 
pleasantly surprised to note how many were so deeply 
interested as to make arrangements to be at liberty from 
their business and household cares to attend the meetings. 
Not all, of course, were their own masters and able 
to control their own time, yet the will of many to be 
present evidently guided to the way which the Lord opened 
up for them. About 135 were present at the afternoon 
service, and 650 at the evening service, which was for the 
public. 

At the afternoon service we endeavored to point out 
the importance of standing— not falling away from the 
Lord and the Truth. We showed what were the conditions 
upon which the Lord accepted us as his children, 
inducted us into his family and to a knowledge of the 
Truth. We showed the necessity for the spirit of love and 
loyalty to continue with us, in order that we might continue 
to have Divine guidance and blessing, and that love 



is the principal thing. Incidentally we pointed out the 
relationship of the ransom-price to the world's deliverance. 
We showed that it was necessary for Jesus to die, "The 

R4631 :page 197 

just for the unjust," in order that he might have the 
ransom-price with which to redeem the Church and the 
world later on. God raised him from the dead a spirit 
being, so he might have his earthly rights to give to 
mankind. 

We also called attention to the fact that our Lord's 
obtaining the ransom-price, by the sacrifice of himself, is a 
different matter entirely from his paying that ransom-price 
over to Divine Justice on behalf of sinners. He gave 
himself to be the ransom-price for the sins of the world 
nearly nineteen centuries ago. His giving of himself was 
acceptable to the Father, and what he sacrificed became 
the ransom-price for the whole world— quite sufficient for 
Adam and all his race whenever applied. We showed that 
he had not yet applied it for the world, and that hence the 
world is still "lying in the wicked one," still under Divine 
condemnation, still unreconciled— waiting for God's "due 
time," when the ransom and its privileges will be testified 
to all. 

We showed that the testimony respecting the value of 
our Lord's death as the ransom-price had already been 
given to us— believers, the household of faith, the Church. 
We have received the testimony, and with the testimony 
God sent us an invitation to become associates with his 
Son, our Lord and Redeemer, in all of his great work of 
blessing all the families of the earth in the coming age, 
when in his Millennial Kingdom glory he shall serve the 
world as its Mediator, standing between men and God. He 
will then satisfy Divine Justice by making application of 
his merit for the sins of all the people. In consequence of 
that satisfaction, they will all be turned over to him, and 
his Millennial Kingdom will begin. The Father will put 
all things under him, accepting the ransom-price as full 
satisfaction for the sins of all. During that thousand years 
the Mediator, Christ the Head and the Church his Body, 
Christ the Bridegroom and the Church the Bride, his 
joint-heir, will reign for the uplifting of mankind out 
of sin, degradation, death— up to perfection of mind, body 
and morals. 

During all the time of the Mediatorial Kingdom the 
world of mankind will not be subjected to the Father, but 
to the go-between, the Mediator, the great Prophet, Priest, 
King, Judge, of many members. At the conclusion of the 
Mediatorial reign, when all unwilling to make progress 
shall be destroyed in the Second Death, and all willing 
and obedient shall have been brought up out of sin and 
death conditions to perfection— then The Christ, Head and 
Body, will deliver up the Kingdom to the Father. Thenceforth 
there will be no more mediation, no further mediatorial 
work or Kingdom, because the necessity will be gone. 



Every man will be perfect and able to stand the test of 
Justice, and will be required to do so from the moment the 
Mediator steps aside and turns over the Kingdom to God, 
even the Father.— I Cor. 15:24. 

We exhorted the friends to faithfulness, to loving zeal, 
to patient endurance, to the development of the fruits and 
graces of the Spirit, that they might be accounted worthy 
of association with the Redeemer, in his Kingdom work 
as antitypical priests and kings unto God, as members of 
the antitypical Mediator between God and men. The 
service for the public attendance in the evening (about 
600) was excellent indeed, when the general commotion 
incidental to the King's death and funeral is remembered; 
also remembering the fact that the meeting was on a weeknight. 
Our subject was "Man's Past, Present and Future," 
and was dealt with after our usual manner. We remained 
over night, and when we took the train Wednesday morning 
a goodly company of the friends were on the platform. 
Some of them accompanied us to our next appointment. 
Those remaining on the platform waved their good bye, 
and we bade them adieu, expressing our appreciation of 
their loving zeal manifested in so many ways and our 
hopes that they might prove faithful to the end, and receive 
the crown of life. 

THE SECRET OF THE LORD 

At Manchester we were met at the station by a considerable 
delegation of the Church and taken to dinner. 
Subsequently we addressed a gathered company of about 
300 in their usual hall. Profound attention was given, and 
subsequently we were warmly greeted. We spoke from 
the text, "The secret of the Lord is with them that fear 
(reverence) him, and he will show them his Covenant." 
(Psa. 25:14). We considered how carefully the Lord 
has guarded the secrets of his plan, so that at no time 
have they been known except to the saints, the reverential. 
We considered the matter of his Covenant and that it must 
be shown or revealed even to his saints, otherwise it 
could not be understood. We noted Israel's covenant 
made at Sinai and the fact that it is still in force; that 
it did not cease at the cross, except as St. Paul declares— 
it ceased so far as those Jews were concerned who became 
dead to the Law and married to Christ. "Christ is the 
end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believeth," 
but he is not the end of the Law to others. 

The Law Covenant has dominated the Jews and 
will continue to do so until the great antitypical Mediator 
shall step forth and inaugurate for Israel the better 
arrangement, styled the New [Law] Covenant. It will not 
have a new Law, because the Law given to Israel was just, 
and holy, and perfect, but it will have a new Mediator more 
capable than Moses, and he will be able to show mercy to 
the people more effectively because his standing and 
authority as Mediator will be based upon "better sacrifices" 
than those which the typical Moses typically offered. But 



this great antitypical Mediator cannot undertake his great 
work until his own completion by the association of the 
Church with himself as his "members," and this will not 
be completed until the "better sacrifices" are completed. 

R4631 :page 198 

We saw that this work of offering the "better sacrifices" 
is still in progress and that the Gospel Age has been the 
antitypical "Day of Atonement." At its close the Mediator, 
Head and Body, will be completed and glorified, and 
will inaugurate the New Covenant with Israel in harmony 
with the promises. The New Covenant will take over the 
Old Covenant and all the people that were under it, and 
thus alone can the Law Covenant, instituted by Moses, 
find fulfillment in its antitype. 

Thus St. Peter declared, "For Moses verily said unto 
the fathers, a Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up 
unto you from amongst your brethren like unto me (I am 
his likeness or type, foreshadowing that great prophet 
in the small way), him shall ye hear in all things; and it 
shall come to pass that the soul that will not obey that 
Prophet shall be destroyed from amongst the people." 
(Acts 3:22,23.) All who will not come into line then 
with the great antitypical Mediator will perish in the 
Second Death, but first they must come to a knowledge 
of him. All the blind eyes must be opened, and all the 
deaf ears unstopped. The entire Gospel Age has been 
set apart in the Divine order for the raising up of this 
great Prophet like unto Moses— the great Mediator of the 
New Covenant. Jesus was raised up first, "Head over 
all things to the Church which is his Body." Subsequently 
the Apostles were raised up as members of his 
Body and since then selections have been made from people 
from every nation and clime. The great antitypical Mediator 
will soon be complete. 

TYPE AND ANTITYPE 

In proportion as the antitype came in the type ended, 
but only that proportion and no more. Thus the typical 
bullock of the atonement found its antitype in the "Man 
Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all," and the 
typical high-priest found an antitype in Jesus Christ, "The 
high-priest of our profession" or order, and the sacrifice 
of the bullock found its antitype in the consecration and 
death of Jesus. Thus also the under-priesthood finds its 
antitype in the consecrated Church, as St. Peter declares. 
Thus also the Lord's goat on the day of atonement finds 
its antitype in the flesh of those who are now consecrated 
to walk in the footsteps of Jesus. As that goat went 
to the bullock outside the camp to be burned, so the Apostle 
exhorts us, "Let us go to him outside the camp bearing 
his reproach"— outside of human favor and esteem and 
fellowship, for "If we suffer with him we shall also reign 
with him." This last mentioned feature of the type has 



not yet been fully completed, hence the other features of 

the type incidental to the Law Covenant and its day of 

atonement have not yet found a fulfillment, but "not one 

jot or tittle shall fail." All shall be fulfilled in due time. 

The great Prophet, the antitype of Moses, will shortly 

be completed and be raised up from amongst his brethren, 

and then the second application of his blood will be made, 

"On behalf of all the people." Then, in view of that redemptive 

work— that payment of the ransom-price for all 

—the whole world will be turned over to the great Mediator, 

Priest and King. He will take unto himself his 

great mediatorial power and begin his reign for the overthrow 

of Sin and Death and for the uplifting of the willing 

and obedient of Adam's race. 

The dear friends at Manchester had made a great 
distribution of Volunteer matter— about a hundred thousand 
copies of the PEOPLES PULPIT, besides other methods 
of advertising through the newspapers, etc., etc. A fine 
audience of very intelligent people listened with rapt attention 
to our presentation of the subject of "The Great 
Hereafter." The next day, Thursday the 12th, we bade 
adieu once more and went to Otley. 

THEY HAD NOT MUCH ROOT IN THEMSELVES 

Otley is a smaller place than we usually visit on such 
occasions, but the work there had a very interesting beginning. 
Some time ago a young man, a local Elder in the 
Primitive Methodist Church, purchased a copy of the Plan 
of the Ages at a second-hand book-stall. It deeply impressed 
him and he loaned it to five of his fellow-co-laborers, 
local preachers in the same Church. All six received 
the Truth with zeal. Violent opposition and misrepresentation 
came upon them in connection with their public 
avowal of the love of God and his Divine Plan of the 

R4632 : page 198 

Ages. Under the influence of that persecution one-half of 
them repudiated the Truth much after the manner 
described by our Lord in the parable, Because they had 
not much root in themselves; when the sun of persecution 
arose they withered away. We were glad to meet the 
three who remained staunch and were glad under their 
arrangements to address the public, taking for our text 
"The Thief in Paradise, The Rich Man in Hell, and Lazarus 
in Abraham's Bosom." We had the close attention 
of a very intelligent audience. In the afternoon preceding 
we addressed the interested ones to the number of about 
sixty, some of whom came from the regions near. We 
discussed with them the glorious invitation granted to "the 
Church of the Living God" and the call which has come 
to her— to be the Bride of his Son, and joint-heir in his 
Kingdom, setting before the minds of the class the glorious 
privilege thus afforded and the riches of grace providing 
the blessing. We exhorted all to faithfulness even unto 



death, to follow in the footsteps of Jesus; and we assured 
all such, in the Master's name, of the "crown of glory that 
fadeth not away." 

Our next stop was at Nottingham. Here again we had 
a pleasant and profitable time of fellowship with the 
household of faith to the number of about ninety. Again 
we concluded that the uppermost thought of interest to 
the friends must be along the lines of our recent studies 
respecting the Covenants and their Mediators. Following 
the matter much as we did at the other places we endeavored 
to make especially clear the proper distinction between 
the meaning of an "Advocate" and a "Mediator." A Mediator 
stands between two persons with a view of reconciling 
them and bringing them together. Thus the glorified 
Christ during his Millennial Kingdom will stand between 
God and men. After satisfying Justice by the application 
of the merit of his sacrifice finished at Calvary, the great 
Mediator will undertake to open the eyes of the blind 
world, to unstop the deaf ears, and to discipline and correct 
them so that they will appreciate God and his gracious 
arrangement on their behalf, and so come into harmony 
with his Millennial Kingdom. It, by chastisement and 
rewards, will lift men up, up, up out of sin and death conditions 
to absolute human perfection. Then the obedient, 
being perfect, will be able to stand before God, and the 
Mediator will turn over to the Father all those who have 
turned from sin and through the merit of his sacrifice 
have been brought back to human perfection. Then he 
will abdicate his office as Mediator between God and men, 
for there will be none who will longer need such a 
Mediator. 

But before beginning his work of Mediator between 
God and men, our great Redeemer does a work 
for the Church in accordance with the Father's arrangement. 
During this Gospel Age he proffers himself 
as Advocate to all who may have the hearing ears and 
appreciative hearts and who may turn from sin to serve 
the living God to the best of their ability, and who may 
exercise faith in the Redeemer, and approach the Father 
through him. Such as thus approach God are approaching 

R4632 : page 199 

justification by their faith and by their obedience. To 
such God declares, "Draw nigh to me and I will draw nigh 
to you." (Jas. 4:8.) Every step that these advance from 
sin toward righteousness is a step toward God, toward 
justification, based upon their faith in God; toward Covenant 
relationship. To such God draws nigh in the same 
proportion. At first they are justified to fellowship with 
God, as Abraham was justified by his faith and obedience. 
But the call of this present time is to sonship and joint-heirship 
with Christ in his Kingdom. 

Hence the Father points these who draw nigh to him 
to Jesus as "The way, the truth and the life," and his 
message is, "No man cometh unto the Father but by me." 



Those desiring fellowship with God to the full, to have 
his blessing of eternal life, may hope to attain it only 
through accepting the merit of Christ's sacrifice by faith 
and by making a consecration of themselves to be his 
disciples, and to walk in his steps. Faith such as Abraham 
had and exercised so beautifully could not bring him nearer 
to God than justification to fellowship and to receive a 
certain blessing promised, a "better resurrection." But 
those who come now to God, in view of the sacrifice of 
Christ, may accept him as their Advocate, and through 
him have full presentation to the Father, and may enter 
fully into covenant relationship with him as sons. There 
is no other invitation at the present time than that of the 
spirit of full devotion to the Father's will; these alone are 
now sought. 

THE IMPUTATION OF HIS MERIT 

To these the appointed Advocate declares his willingness 
to be their Advocate— to undertake to be their spokesman 
with the Father, and to make good in the Father's 
sight for all their blemishes of the flesh, so as to enable 
them to offer (Mai. 3:3) a righteous sacrifice which God 
could accept. We pointed out that all these called 
to be the followers of Jesus, had, unlike their Leader, 
weak, imperfect and blemished bodies. They "were 
children of wrath even as others," but they got out of that 
condition by turning their hearts to God and away from 
sin; and by accepting his appointed way in Christ. But 
although there are many steps by which God may be 
approached quickly or slowly, nevertheless there is the 
one standard which must be attained before any can be 
accepted of the Father as members of the Body of Christ. 
That step is full consecration even unto death. Then the 
Redeemer imputes such a portion of his merit to such as 
will make good the sinner's deficiency, and thus enable 
the Father to accept him as a sacrifice. This is in accord 
with the Apostle's words in Romans 12:1. Our sacrifices 
themselves are not holy and acceptable to God, but only 
because of our relationship to the great Advocate. Our 
Advocate imputes sufficient of his merit to make good 
our deficiency. If one is deficient 50 per cent, the Lord 
imputes to him that 50 per cent. If another is deficient 
25 per cent, that amount is imputed to him. If another 
be deficient 75 per cent, that amount is imputed to him— 
to each according to his needs from the abundant sufficiency 
of him who loved us and bought us with his own 
blood. 

Just as soon as our Redeemer makes this imputation 
of his merit on our behalf we are in the Father's sight 
justified fully and completely from all things— as much 
so as though we had never committed sin. It is in view 
of this justification that the Father accepts our sacrifice 
as holy and acceptable, and begets us of his holy Spirit. 
We exhorted the friends to remember that thus it was 
that they entered into covenant relationship with God, 



and that they could maintain that relationship only by 
continuing their sacrifice on the altar— laying down their 
lives for the brethren, and in the service of God generally, 
"doing good unto all men as they have opportunity, 
especially the household of faith." We reminded them 
that this covenant relationship into which the Church has 
come is not by the Covenant of the Law of Moses, nor by 
the New [Law] Covenant, which will take the place of 
the old Law Covenant with Israel, under the better Mediator, 
and which will operate during the Millennial Age, and 
bring them into harmony with God, and into full covenant 
relationship only at the close of the Millennium. 

Our covenant relationship, which we enter into at once 
through the assistance of our great Advocate, brings us 
immediately into fellowship, into sonship; and immediately 
makes us joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord to the 
heavenly inheritance. Wherefore we are no longer aliens 
but sons. Not only does no Mediator stand between us and 
God, but no Mediator brought us to God. The Father 
himself called us and drew us, as the Scriptures declare, 
and himself pointed us to Jesus our Advocate. We called 
attention to the fact that an Advocate stands alongside 
of as a spokesman, and does not come between, as does the 
Mediator. We also drew attention to the fact that Jesus 
was not spoken of as our Mediator, but we are told that 
he is our "Advocate with the Father." 

The evening session for the public was in Mechanics 
Hall, and was well attended; our topic was, "The Thief 
in Paradise, The Rich Man in Hell, and Lazarus in Abraham's 
Bosom." Bidding the Nottingham friends good-bye, 
with best wishes for their eternal welfare, and accepting 
their good wishes on our behalf, we went to London 
on Saturday, there to look further respecting the 
Lord's Providence for the future housing of his work. 



R4632 : page 199 

DOES OUR LORD NOW OWN THE HUMAN RACE? 

IF A MAN were purchasing a building, had 

entered into negotiations for it, had signed 

a contract and were making arrangements 

to secure the money to apply it in payment 

for the building, it would be very appropriate, 

as soon as he had signed the contract, 

to say, this is the owner of the building. 

In the strict sense of the word, however, he 

would not be the owner until he had paid 

the price and all the receipts were properly 

given, and, instead of the contract, he had the deed. A 

contract is an agreement for the carrying out of a project; 

the deed witnesses the transaction actually accomplished. 

As far as the contract was concerned, our Lord Jesus 
entered into it with the Father; and in view of his 



having given to the Father the ransom-price— "Even 

as the Son of Man came to give his life a ransom 

for many"— he already has a claim to being Lord 

of all, in a prospective sense, not in the actual sense, 

as there are millions of people on earth today of whom 

he is not Lord; their knees have not bowed; their tongues 

have not confessed. So he is not their Lord in the absolute 

sense, but his work is progressing, and, in view 

of the authority which will yet be exercised by him and of 

the work which he will yet do, the Father speaks of 

him prophetically as "Lord of all." 

R4633 : page 200 

THE WORLD ASLEEP IN JESUS 

We will here consider certain Scriptures as having a 
bearing upon the matter. We mention first the Scripture 
which says that the world "sleep in Jesus." (I Thess. 4:14.) 
How can they sleep in Jesus, unless Jesus owns 
the world, may be asked? We answer that they sleep 
in Jesus in exactly the same way that Abraham and all 
Israel sleep and all the kings and prophets are said to 
be asleep. Not that Jesus at the time of their death had 
paid a ransom-price for mankind, nor had come into 
the world to do so, but because, in the Divine Plan, God 
had made arrangements for the entire transaction and 
had guaranteed that a Redeemer would be found, that 
a ransom-price would be given, and that all mankind 
would be recovered from the tomb. Further, God himself 
spoke from that standpoint when he said that he was 
the God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob, speaking 
as though they were really not dead at all, but merely 
asleep, waiting for him. 

Similarly, all who believed God could speak of and 
think of all who were dead as merely asleep for the 
time and awaiting the resurrection, even though Jesus 
had not yet come. The same is true since Jesus came 
and died. It is now still more reasonable and proper for 
us to say that all "sleep in Jesus," because now he is 
identified as the one who has given himself a ransom-price 
for all. It is not that the price has been applied 
for all, but merely that he has placed in the Father's 
hands his sacrificed life, which is his to appropriate and 
which is sufficient "for the sins of the whole world." 
(John 3:16.) It has not as yet been appropriated for 
the world, but merely for the Church, for the price is 
first a satisfaction for our sins, the Church's sins, and 
afterwards for the sins of the whole world.— I John 2:2. 

THE CHURCH ALONE REDEEMED THUS FAR 

We will next consider the text, Ye were redeemed 
with the precious blood of Christ. (I Pet. 1:18,19.) 
The reference here is to us, the Church, and does not 
extend beyond the Church to the world. It does not 



imply that the world is redeemed as yet. Jesus' merit, 
of course, is all-sufficient for the whole world, but he 
has not yet appropriated it for all men. 

We will consider another text, "Ye are bought with a 
price." (I Cor. 6:20.) This text, similarly, speaks not 
of the world, but of the Church. It is the "Ye" class 
that were bought, and even they were not bought when 
Jesus died at Calvary. There, indeed, he committed to 
the Father's hands a price (Luke 23:46) sufficient for 
all; but it was not then appropriated for anybody— not 
even for us, not until his resurrection and ascension, 
when "he appeared in the presence of God for us." (Heb. 9:24.) 
Then we were bought. "Ye were bought with 
the precious blood of Christ." His blood was made the 
offset so far as believers are concerned. 

Another text: "He is the propitiation for our sins, 
and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole 
world." (I John 2:2.) We answer that he was a 
propitiation, satisfaction, for our sins, in one sense of 
the word, when he died, but the satisfaction had not then 
been applied for our sins. When he died the merit of 
his death was a satisfaction-price for the sins of the 
whole world, also, but it was not applied for the sins 
of the whole world. When he ascended up on high he 
appeared for us, the Church class, and made satisfaction 
for our sins. Therefore, as we believe and make consecration, 
our sins are remitted. His merit is additionally 
the satisfaction for the sins of the whole world; but he 
has not yet applied it for the world, hence the world 
is not free from the penalty of sin; it is still under 
condemnation. Concerning us, however, the Apostle 
says, "We have escaped the condemnation that is on the 
world." And again he says, "We were children of wrath 
even as others." The others, we see, are still children of 
wrath. Why? Because the satisfaction for their sins has 
not yet been made. The great Redeemer has the satisfaction 
price; it merely awaits the due time for application. 

Notice another passage, "Christ died and rose and 
revived that he might be Lord both of the dead and of 
the living." (Rom. 14:9.) This text very appropriately 
states the valuable transaction accomplished by our Lord. 
His death was a necessary feature of the redemptive 
work. His raising and revival were also necessary features. 
And further, he could not have been Lord in 
any other way than by the Father's proclaiming him 
"Lord of all," and "Let all the angels of God worship 
him." But while he is proclaimed to be Lord of all, it 
will take time to bring about the recognition of it. In 
harmony with this, the Apostle says, "In the fullness 
of time God will gather together under him (Jesus) all 
things in heaven and earth." But it will take the fullness 
of time, the fullness of the Millennial Age, to accomplish 
this gathering together under him and making him 
Lord of all. So we see that prophetically and by Divine 
appointment he already has that office, but now he waits 
until his enemies shall be brought under him or made 



his foot-stool, and all things shall be subjected to him. 
"A RANSOM FOR ALL" 

We next consider the text, "He gave himself a 
ransom for all, to be testified in due time." (I Tim. 2:6.) 
The giving of himself as the man Christ Jesus was 
when he presented himself at Jordan and surrendered all 
to the Father's will. This work of surrendering his 
earthly life and all his earthly rights was fully accomplished 
at Calvary when he cried, "It is finished." He 
had finished the work the Father had given him to do. 
He had given himself to be "a ransom for all," and his 
death-merit is sufficient to constitute a ransom for all, 
as soon as it shall be so appropriated. Thus far, we 
see, it has been applied only for us who believe, and 
the time for its application for the remainder of the 
world will be at the beginning of the Millennial Age; 
but it will not reach all of the human family at the 
beginning. 

While our Lord's merit is fully appropriated during 
the Gospel Age for all who come unto him, it will be 
fully set free when the last of the consecrated ones shall 
have passed beyond the vail. His merit has been imputed 
to them for the very purpose of enabling them 
to be sacrificers and when it shall have been released 
by the death of the last of the consecrated, it will be 
again at his disposal for appropriation. Then the great 
High Priest will make the second sprinkling of the blood 
—not on our behalf, because we shall have no further 
need of it, having by that time become perfect as New 
Creatures beyond the vail, members of his Body. The 
second sprinkling will be on behalf of "all the people" 
—all who will come under the New Covenant arrangement 
—"to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile"; all 
who will desire, when they come to sufficient knowledge, 
under that New Covenant, to come under the merit of 
our Lord's ransom-price; and those who will fail to 
thus come, will reject the ransom-price and hence the 
blessings of restitution. 

All these blessings will come gradually, not instantaneously, 
not by faith, but actually, by restitution processes. 
All through the Millennial Age The Christ will 

R4633 : page 201 

be giving men the benefit of our Lord's ransom or "corresponding 

price," and the full benefit of this price will 

not have been given until the work of the Millennial 

Age shall have been finished and shall have brought 

to perfection all who desire to be God's people, 

upon God's terms, as God never intended to give 

his blessings to any but those who desire to be in harmony 

with him on his terms. God never intended to do anything 

for those who are willingly and intentionally contrary, 

such as Satan. 



It may be asked how the foregoing will conform 
with the text, "That he [Jesus], by the grace of God, 
should taste death for every man." (Heb. 2:9.) We 
answer that this is God's great work which he purposed 
in himself before the foundation of the world— that the 
ransoming of Adam and all his race should be accomplished 
through the death of Christ. Thus he tasted death 
for every man, whether the benefit of it was received 
on the Day of Pentecost, or later, during the Age, or 
whether they will get it at the beginning of the Millennial 
Age. It is for every man that he "tasted death," 
that he might give them the blessings that will come to 
the world of mankind down to the completion of the 
Millennial Age, and, if obedient, to all eternity. 

"He ascended up on high and led captivity captive" 
—or, as another translation gives it, and we think more 
correctly, "He ascended up on high leading forth a 
multitude of captives." This passage shows that he was 
the leader of all the captive race. We, the Church, 
follow first; the "Great Company" follow next; the 
Ancient Worthies will follow soon afterward, and at 
the end of the Millennial Age he will bring in the remainder 
of the race. They will all be led forth, all 
delivered from the power of sin and death. 

THE PRICE ONE THING -THE APPLICATION OF IT 
ANOTHER THING 

"For when we were yet without strength, in due time 
Christ died for the ungodly." This passage does not 
state that Christ made an application of his merit for 
the ungodly; it merely states that God arranged his 
plan so that it was necessary for Christ to die for the 
ungodly. Why did God so arrange it? He arranged 
it on behalf of, or in the interest of, the ungodly— 
not merely the Jews and those who were, as some of 
us may have been, desirous of harmony with God, but 
for all the ungodly. The merit of his death was intended 
by the Father to be applicable to every member 
of the race, the ungodly race of Adam, all of them 
sinners and more or less depraved and degraded and out 
of the way. 

Now, then, the object for which the price was given 
is one thing and the application of it is another. The 
purpose of Christ's death was to redeem the world, 
to be the world's ransom-price, that he might be the 
restorer of all. But in this Plan there are time and 
order; the work progresses step by step. The first 

R4634: page 201 

step was for Christ himself to secure eternal glory by 
his own obedience to death and to have as an asset 
something that he could give away— his earthly life, 
which he had not forfeited. 
The next step was that he should ascend up on high 



and apply this price. He appeared as advocate for a 
special class of humanity. What special class? We 
answer, he appeared for all those from among men who 
should desire to come into harmony with God, who 
should desire to accept God's favor and to become members 
of the Body of Christ under an invitation or programme 
that God had arranged. When he appeared 
for these he imputed the merit of his sacrifice on their 
behalf, and thus all this merit is absorbed, so to speak, 
in this one work first undertaken, this work of justifying 
and assisting this special class who desire to walk in 
Jesus' steps, desire to suffer with him that they may 
also share with him the heavenly glory. He does this, 
not by first giving them earthly restitution, but by simply 
imputing his merit to them. 

This imputation of his merit, coming to those who 
have turned from sin, who are believing on the Lord 
Jesus Christ, and have consecrated themselves to God, 
covers their Adamic sin and makes up for all deficiencies 
of their flesh, so that they can "present their bodies 
living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to God, their reasonable 
service." (Rom. 12:1.) In other words, he 
becomes endorser for these. They are not sufficient of 
themselves, but he guarantees for them that if they will 
faithfully perform this laying down of their lives, his 
merit will continue to be applied for all their imperfections. 
These are the Royal Priests, whom he in one 
picture represents as his Bride, and in another as members 
of his Body. These are "more than conquerors." 

Then comes the secondary class, not up to this 
standard— a class that does not voluntarily, heartily and 
cheerfully lay down their lives in the desire to please 
the Father and do his will. These, nevertheless, are 
loyal at heart and are restrained from full sacrifice 
only through "fear of death," through fear of what it 
will cost them. They will be tested to the point that 
they will be obliged ultimately to lay down their lives, 
and to do so with a willing mind. They fail of coming 
off more than conquerors because of permitting experiences 
designed to test them to retard their progress 
in the matter of gaining the high position offered them, 
thus they become the Second Company. There is, also, 
a third class, those who die the "Second Death," who 
"draw back unto perdition." 

By the time that these three classes shall have finished 
their course, all the merit that Christ imputed will be 
available again as at first; all will be at his disposal 
afresh. Then it will be applied in the sealing of the 
New Covenant which will be made with Israel, but 
which will be broad enough to include every individual 
of all the nations of the earth who will be willing to 
come under the same terms and to become the children 
of Abraham through faith and obedience. 

"THE REDEMPTION OF THE PURCHASED 
POSSESSION" 



In this connection let us consider the text, "In whom 
ye also trusted after that ye heard the Word of Truth, 
the Gospel of your salvation, in whom also after that 
ye believed ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of 
promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance until 
the redemption of the purchased possession."— Eph. 1:14. 

The holy Spirit now granted to the Church is the 
earnest or foretaste of our inheritance. What are we 
to inherit? We are to "inherit all things." First of 
all we are to inherit the Divine nature, and secondly, 
we are to inherit the great Abrahamic promise that 
through us, in union with our Lord Jesus, as members 
of his Body, all the families of the earth shall be blessed. 
We speak of ourselves as being of the Lord's purchased 
possession, and when we are changed to receive his 
glory, this part of his possession will be complete and 
we shall be perfected with him and be under his direct 
control. 

After this another feature of the same possession, 
and linked in as part of this same promise, will become 

R4634 : page 202 

operative. The precious blood will then be applied to 
seal the New Covenant on behalf of the sins of all the 
people and the work of recovering the still larger possession 
will progress until the close of the Millennial Age, 
when the whole possession will have been brought into line 
and everything subjected to his rule and turned over to 
the Father. 

We will also consider the passage, "For if through 
the offence of one many be dead, much more the grace 
of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man, 
Christ Jesus, hath abounded unto many."— Rom. 5:15. 

In this text the Apostle evidently does not mean to 
be understood as saying that the full abundance of grace 
had then reached the many, because that would be an 
untruth. It is now 1,800 years since the Apostle's day, 
and the abundance of grace has not yet reached the 
majority of men. So we must understand him to mean 
that this abundance of grace that is in Christ according 
to the Father's plan and arrangement and purpose, is 
yet to reach the many. The world is yet in its sins, and 
Israel is yet in its sins and will not be recovered until 
after the Church shall have been glorified, as the Apostle 
says (Romans 1 1:27), "For this is my Covenant unto them, 
when I shall take away their sins." 

Since this grace has not yet gone to the Jews, nor 
to the Gentiles in general, the only way in which it 
has abounded is through the promise of God that the 
death of Christ will yet be made efficacious for all. 
Therefore, speaking from this prophetic standpoint, it is 
plain to be seen how Jesus is the Savior of the world, 
although he has not yet finished the work of saving 
the Church and will not do so until the end of this 



Age. Similarly he will not be the Savior of the world 
in the full sense until the end of the Millennial Age. 
Some he will never save, because they will refuse the 
grace of God; and yet he is, according to the Scriptures, 
the Savior of all men— the Savior of the world. 

He was the Savior of the world, according to the Scriptures, 
when he was born. The message of the angels 
was, "Unto you is born this day in the City of David 
a Savior, which is Christ the Lord." He was a Savior 
in the prospective sense— not because of what he was 
then, as a babe, and not merely because of what he 
has yet accomplished, but because, according to God's 
promise, of what he will effect up to the time when he 
shall deliver up the Kingdom to God, even the Father. 
"He is a Savior and a great one," "able to save unto 
the uttermost all that will come unto the Father through 
him." (Isa. 19:20; Heb. 7:25.) He is now saving 
us in a partial sense, by hope, because we have come 
unto the Father through him, according to the arrangement 
of this Gospel Age. He will yet save us in the 
fullest sense in the "First Resurrection." The saving 
of the world will then begin, when he shall awaken 
them from death; but they will not be fully saved, will 
not attain full restitution nor gain eternal life, except 
as they shall exercise faith and obedience. He opens 
the door. He makes the way. He provides all the 
arrangements by which they may know and obey. 

The whole earth is a part of the purchased possession 
and shall be filled with the glory of God. And if 
any knee will then refuse to bow and any tongue refuse 
to confess and any fail to accept of the favor of God, 
there will be nothing further for him. He will be 
doing "despite to the spirit of grace" and will die the 
"Second Death."-Heb. 10:29; Jude 12. 



R4634 : page 202 

GOOD SEED FOR GOOD GROUND 

-JUNE 19.-MATT. 13:l-9;18-23.~ 

Golden Text:— "Wherefore, putting away all filthiness and overflowing 
of wickedness receive with meekness the engrafted 
word which is able to save your souls."— James 1:21— R.V. 

FROM a boat our Lord taught a most wonderful 
lesson respecting the method used by 
the Almighty in the selection of the "little 
flock," whom he invites to be members with 
Christ Jesus in the administration of his 
Millennial Kingdom. The Kingdom message 
or invitation is the "seed" which is 
under consideration in the above parable, 
which, under favorable conditions, germinates 



and brings forth the required fruitage 
of character-development. Our Lord was the great Sower 
of this good seed of the Kingdom, and after him came the 
Apostles. Since then he has used all of his faithful people 
more or less in this seed-sowing. 

The fact that most of the "seed" of the Divine message 
seems wasted is no proof that the message is not 
good and desirable. This parable shows that the real 
fault lies in the soil— in the heart. If all hearts were right 
the message or seed would bring forth much fruit 
everywhere. 

WAYSIDE HEARERS. 

The parable states that not all of the soil is good or 
suitable, nevertheless, the intimation is that it is within 
the power of many to correct and offset the unfavorable 
conditions in themselves. We are not left to conjecture, 
for this is one of the few parables which our Lord himself 
interpreted— a fact which many seem not to have 
noticed. 

The "seed" is the message of the Kingdom. Many do 
not understand it. On such ears the message is lost, for 
the Adversary is on the alert to take it away, symbolized 
by the birds devouring the exposed "seed by the wayside." 

R4635 : page 202 

Such "wayside" hearers constitute the most numerous 
class in every congregation of the nominal church. They 
are merely formalists. 

STONY GROUND HEARERS. 

"Stony" ground represents another class of hearers 
of the Kingdom message. To them it sounds good; they 
are interested, but they lack depth of character. They 
make professions and for a time flourish extraordinarily, 
but they lack the depth necessary to a character development 
suitable for the Lord's use in the work of the Kingdom, 
and when the trials and testings come they stumble. 
They thought they might be carried to the Kingdom on 
"flowery beds of ease," while "others fight to win the prize 
and sail through bloody seas." There is no easy road to 
the Kingdom. The Master declares to all who would be 
of the elect "Bride," "Through much tribulation shall ye 
enter the Kingdom." 

GOOD SEED BUT THORNY GROUND. 

The ground which will produce thorns is rich and very 
suitable for the production of proper Christian character, 
but it is infested with thorn seed and the soil cannot 
successfully produce both wheat and thorns; hence, as 
the parable shows, the thorns choke out the wheat so that 



R4635 : page 203 

a sufficient crop is not produced. These thorns are not, 
as some have suggested, sensual vices and criminal appetites. 
Hearts in which sensuality dominates have no ear 
whatever for the Kingdom message, and are not mentioned 
in the parable, which refers only to those who are 
no longer willing sinners, but who are walking outwardly 
in the way of righteousness. The Master's word is, "He 
that receiveth the seed among thorns is he that heareth 
the word, and the cares of this world and the deceitfulness 
of riches choke the word and he becometh unfruitful." 
There are many noble people represented also by 
this portion of the parable. There are many who, if 
freed from the spirit of the world, from its ambitions and 
wealth and influence, its love of the good things of this 
life, would be very fruitful in righteousness. When we 
look about us and see the thrift and energy of many people 
of civilized lands, we say to ourselves, properly, if 
these lives were really turned into the way of the Lord 
and were rid of these earthly encumbrances, what grand, 
noble characters they would make. However, their 
strength, their energy, is absorbed by worldly affairs and 
cares, and they do not bring forth the fruitage demanded 
as the necessary qualification for the higher honors of a 
place with Christ in his Kingdom. The Master's message 
to such is, You cannot give your time and strength and 
influence to worldly matters and at the same time make 
your "calling and election sure" to a place with me in 
my Kingdom. Whoever would be my disciple, let him 
take up his cross and follow me. Where I am there shall 
my disciple be. 

"THAT YE BEAR MUCH FRUIT" 

"Herein is my Father glorified that ye bear much 
fruit," said our Master. In this parable the good ground 
varies in its productiveness— thirty, sixty and an hundred 
fold. The larger the returns, the greater will be the 
Father's pleasure and the Savior's glory. Nor is the statement 
an extreme one, as some might suppose. The new 
"miracle wheat" sometimes produces more than two hundred 
grains from one. This parable seems to imply that 
the responsibility for the fruitfulness of the heart and 
life and character depends very greatly upon the individual 
and how he receives the message of the Kingdom. 
Those in whom the fruits will be the most abundant will be 
such as grasp the invitation most intelligently and earnestly. 
"He that heareth the word and understandeth it" 
and whose heart is in a condition of loyalty to God and 
who frees himself from hindrances and worldly ambitions 
and aspirations and, like the Apostle Paul, can say, "This 
one thing I do," will surely gain the Kingdom. 

It is not sufficient that we hear the message of the 
Kingdom; it is not sufficient that we have good hearts or 
good intentions in respect to it; it is additionally necessary, 



as the Master says, that we should understand the 

Kingdom message; hence the need of Bible study. Intelligent 

people consider it very wise and proper that 

several years of study be devoted to preparation for the 

few years of earthly life. How much study, then, should 

be considered proper for our preparation for the eternal 

life and Kingdom blessings? The time and effort thus 

consumed in character development for the Kingdom are 

wisely spent, and the harvest of thirty, sixty or a hundred-fold 

illustrates the degree and intensity of our earnestness. 

The rewards in the Kingdom will also be proportionate. 

"As star differeth from star in glory, so 

shall it be in the resurrection of the dead." Varying degrees 

of glory in the Kingdom will be manifested, yet 

none will be acceptable to the Father who shall not have 

brought forth fruitage in good measure; the "well done" 

will never be pronounced if not merited. 



R4635 : page 203 

THE WHEAT AND THE TARES 

--JUNE 26.-MATT. 13:24-43.- 

Golden Text:— "Then shall the righteous shine forth 
as the sun in the Kingdom of their Father."— V. 43. 

HERE WE have introduced by another "Kingdom" 

parable a great prophecy. Our study 

of a week ago showed various classes of 

hearers of the truth. To-day's study ignores 

all except the "good ground" hearers, 

which shows that our Lord foreknew the 

history of the Gospel age. We are informed 

that he and his Apostles sowed none but 

good seed, but that after the Apostles had 

fallen asleep in death, the great Adversary, 

Satan, over-sowed the wheat field with tare seed, darnel. 

We are told that such spite-work is not uncommon in the 

Orient. The "darnel" seed is very different from the 

wheat, but the growing stalks look very much alike, and 

even when headed the resemblance is close, except to the 

expert, until the heads ripen; then the head of the wheat 

becomes heavy while the darnel, being light, stands upright. 

Only the expert can discern the wheat from the 

tares while growing. 

The Master gave this parable to illustrate how error 
would be brought into the Church by Satan, and that the 
children produced by the error would in many respects 
resemble or counterfeit those produced by the truth. It 
was impossible for the Adversary to corrupt the seed of 
truth which Jesus and the Apostles sowed; neither was 
he allowed to interfere with the sowing of it, but he was 
permitted to over-sow it in the field and, if possible, to 



choke the wheat, and in a general way to deceive the 
outside world respecting the true character of the wheat— 
the children of the Kingdom. 

We are to have in mind the Almighty power of God 
by which he could hinder Satan and prevent the accomplishment 
of his plans at any and all times. We are to 
remember that the Divine Plan of the Ages permits many 
things which God does not approve, but in his Word condemns. 
We are to remember that the Divine Plan spans 
several ages and that only the finished work will fully 
display the Divine Wisdom, Justice, Love and Power. 
We are to remember that, in the present time, God permits 
the wrath of demons and men to oppose his purposes, 
but only so far as he can and eventually will overrule 
these to his own glory and for the good of all in harmony 
with himself. 

"LET BOTH GROW TOGETHER" 

The parable represents the servants as asking whether 
or not the "tares" should be gathered out from the 
"wheat," and thus the enemy's work be destroyed. The 
answer is, No, because in so doing there would be such 
a commotion in the wheat field as to disturb all of the 
wheat— so intimately were the true and false associated— 
their roots intertwining in society, in the home, etc. Instead 
the Master declared that both should be allowed to 
grow together throughout the age until the harvest-time 

R4635 : page 204 

at the end of the age; then the "reapers" should be instructed 
concerning the gathering together and separating 
of the two classes. The wheat would then be gathered 
into the barn and the tares would be bundled for burning, 
to the end that none of the bad seed might affect the 
future crop. 

At the special request of the disciples the Master interpreted 
this parable also. Jesus himself was the sower 
of the good seed of the Kingdom message. Satan was the 
sower of the crop of seed of false doctrines and deception. 
The "harvest" time will be the end of this age, 
just before the inauguration of the new age of Christ's 
Millennial Kingdom. The wheat class will be those 
counted fit to be associated with Christ in the glory of 
his Millennial Kingdom, and the gathering into the "barn" 
or garner represents the resurrection change which this 
wheat will experience. The Apostle explains this, saying: 
"It is sown in corruption; it is raised in incorruption; it 
is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown an 
animal (earthly) body, it is raised a spiritual (heavenly) 
body." This is the resurrection of the dead— the first 
resurrection.— I Cor. 15:43,44; Rev. 20:6. 

The tare class is represented as being gathered out of 
the kingdom (vs. 41), in the sense that the Church at the 
present time is God's kingdom in embryo— in a state of 



progressive development or preparation for the glory and 

work of the future. All of the Kingdom class are fully 

consecrated to God and begotten of the Spirit with a 

view to their becoming Divine spirit beings in the resurrection. 

Others who are not thus spirit-begotten have 

no right to class themselves with the "wheat" nor to consider 

R4636 : page 204 

themselves heirs of the Kingdom. Their presence 
in the Church of Christ is out of order. They have been 
permitted to commingle with the wheat for centuries, but 
with the end of the age the dispensational change will 
come, incidental to the inauguration of the Millennium. 

It would be a mistake to suppose that there are to be 
thieves and murderers of the baser sort among these offenders, 
but they include some whom the Apostle describes 
as doing the works of the flesh and the devil, namely, 
anger, malice, hatred, envy, strife. However, many 
"tares" are fine people of generous disposition, but not 
"New Creatures" in Christ Jesus. They are blame-worthy, 
not because of not being spirit-begotten, but because 
they are in the nominal church and posing as Christians. 
They are offensive in this sense in the Master's 
sight. Nor are they entirely to be blamed for thinking 
themselves Christians. They have been encouraged so 
to think and act by preachers and teachers, many of 
whom, like themselves, have no knowledge of the Kingdom 
nor of the spirit-begetting power which initiates 
into membership in it. The gathering of these into 
"bundles"— into lodges, societies, churches, sects, parties 
—will especially be an evidence of the "harvest" work 
in progress. The true are exhorted to stand fast in the 
liberty wherewith Christ has made them free, and that 
they come not into bondage to sects and parties. They 
are to avoid membership in "bundles," but stand in the 
full fellowship of all who are of the true "wheat" class. 

The casting of these bundles into the furnace will 
mean their destruction, but we are in no sense to understand 
the furnace to be a literal one, nor the fire 
which will consume the tares to be a literal fire. The 
fire with which this age will end will be a great "time 
of trouble" foretold in the Scriptures as preceding and 
introducing the Millennial Kingdom— "A time of trouble 
such as never was since there was a nation." (Daniel 12:1). 
In that time of trouble the delusions which now 
make the tares think themselves to be the true "Church" 
will all be dissolved— they will all be reduced to their 
proper plane— the earthly plane— and recognize themselves 
as merely of the earth, earthy, and not in any sense 
members of the called-out, spirit-begotten, elect "Church 
of the living God." 

THE KINGDOM OF THEIR FATHER 

Hearken now to the Master's words respecting the 



consummation of the Church's hope in the end of this 
age. He says, "Then shall the righteous shine forth as 
the sun in the kingdom of their Father" ! "He that hath 
an ear to hear let him hear." Not every one has the 
hearing ear, but this is the Lord's message to those who 
have the proper attitude of heart— to all who have the 
ability to understand spiritual things. Let such understand 
that with the close of this age the Lord's saintly 
ones, irrespective of the earthly Church systems, will be 
associated with the Redeemer in the glory of his Millennial 
Kingdom and will shine forth as the sun for the 
blessing and enlightenment and uplifting of the human 
family. 



R4636 : page 204 

PICTURES OF THE KINGDOM 

-JULY 3.-MATT. 13:31-33;44-52.~ 

Golden Text:— "The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, 
but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost." 
-Rom. 14:17. 

LET us keep in memory that the Master's 

parables of the Kingdom of Heaven relate 

to the class of people whom he is calling 

out of the world of mankind to be associated 

with him in his Millennial Kingdom soon 

to be inaugurated. Let us remember that 

sometimes this class is spoken of as including, 

nominally, not merely the saintly, 

the wheat class, but also, to some extent, 

the tares, as shown in our study of last 

week. These different parable-pictures represent the 

same subject from different standpoints, just as we take 

a photograph of a building from the north, the south, the 

east and the west, internally and externally. 

LIKE A GRAIN OF MUSTARD SEED 

As a mustard seed is very small, yet produces a large 
bush, so that the fowls of the air may lodge in its 
branches, so this illustrates how the gospel of the Kingdom 
would, from a small beginning, attain to a considerable 
size. Its size would not be great among the 
trees, but great among bushes or herbage. Thus the 
message of Christ received at first only by the poor and 
the few of Israel, has finally grown to such important 
dimensions that the fowls like to gather in its branches. 
But let us remember that the fowls, according to our 
Lord's interpretation of a previous parable, represent the 
servants of the Wicked One. So then the teaching of 
this parable would lead us to conclude that the Church of 



Christ, at one time, was so unimportant in the world 
that it was a shame and a dishonor to belong to it, but 
that ultimately it would become honorable and great and 
the Adversary's servants would have pleasure in its shade. 
This development the Scriptures represent as being Babylon, 
declaring that, as a whole, with the various branches 
and denominations, the nominal Church of Christ is 

R4636 : page 205 

Babylonish. Hearken to the Lord's words; "She has 
become the hold of every foul spirit and the cage of 
every unclean and hateful bird." The intimation is that 
there is a large outward development of the Church 
which is not to her advantage and glory but contrariwise. 
Nevertheless, this is, nominally, the Church of Christ. 
However his spirit may have been misrepresented and 
there may have been an improper development, ultimately 
the great Head of the Church will bring order out of 
chaos and confusion and will glorify and use his "elect." 

"LEAVEN HIDDEN IN THE MEAL" 

The parable of the "leaven" (v. 33) illustrates the 
process by which, as was foretold, the Church would 
get into the wrong condition. As a woman would take 
her batch of flour for baking and put leaven (yeast) 
in it and the result would be that the mass would become 
leavened, so it would be with the Church of Christ; the 
food of the entire household would become leavened or 
corrupted. Every portion would become more or less 
vitiated with the leaven of false doctrines which would 
permeate the entire mass. Thus today nearly every 
doctrine inculcated by Jesus and his Apostles has become 
more or less perverted or twisted by the errors of the 
dark ages. 

TREASURE HID IN A FIELD 

The desirability of obtaining joint-heirship with Christ 
in his Millennial Kingdom, is pictured in the parable of 
"the treasure hidden in the field." The finder, realizing 
its value, desired it for himself and had such faith in it 
that he disposed of all of his property in order to buy 
that field, which he believed to contain the precious treasure. 
Only those who will appreciate the Gospel message 
will gain its glorious promises. If we love the present life 
with its joys and prospects, its hopes and ambitions, then 
we will labor for these, but if we intelligently hear and, 
by faith, believe the Gospel offer of this age of a share 
with Christ in his Millennial Kingdom, then in proportion 
to our faith and appreciation will be our self-sacrificing 
zeal to attain that prize. Whoever believes the message 
of the Kingdom will find his faith an inspiration, indeed 
a necessary inspiration, to the attainment of the prize, for 
it will cost all that he has of earthly blessings; and unless 



he has faith that he will find the prize, he will surely 

be unwilling to sacrifice all he has for it. The field belongs 

to God. He has put the treasure there. He offers 

it for sale to any willing to pay the price. The buyer is 

the Lord and those who accept his invitation to join with 

him in the sacrifice of their earthly interests that they 

may be sharers with him in his heavenly glories— in 

the work of the Millennial Age, to unearth all that treasure 

in the blessing of the world of mankind. The hiding 

of the treasure is necessary; as our Lord said, "Cast 

not your pearls before swine"; they will not understand 

you, they will think you foolish, and in their disappointment 

may do you injury. "Hast thou faith, have it to 

thyself before God." Make your sacrifice of earthly 

things to him and he who seeth in secret will reward you 

openly. 

THE PEARL OF GREAT VALUE 

Pearls were much more in vogue in ancient times 
than now. Pearl buyers traded in these gems and carried 
them to the market, where they were highly estimated. 
The parable represents one of these pearl merchants as 
coming across the finest pearl he had ever seen. He 
considered it so priceless that he was quite rejoiced to 
sell or trade all of his other pearls and property that 
he might become the owner of that pearl. 

This parable represents the Gospel offer of a share 
with Christ in his Kingdom as being superior to all other 
propositions of the world. The honor of the world, of 
name and fame, position and wealth, are indeed desirable; 
as the Scriptures say, "A good name is rather to be 
chosen than great riches"; but when our eyes behold 
"the pearl of great price," the Kingdom offer of joint-heirship 
with our Lord Jesus in his heavenly glory and 
the association with him in his work of blessing all the 
families of the earth, we realize that this is a priceless 
thing, worth more by far than all the honors and dignities 
and pleasures of the world. Those worthy to buy this 
pearl will gladly exchange all earthly things therefor- 
even their good name, and this will be necessary, as the 
Master forewarned them, saying, "they shall say all 
manner of evil against you falsely for my sake; rejoice 
and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven, 
for so persecuted they the prophets who were before you." 

R4637 : page 205 

(Matthew 5:11,12). He that is not willing to have 

the Kingdom at such a cost is not worthy of the Kingdom. 

The Apostle has said, "Through much tribulation 

must we enter the Kingdom" (Acts 14:22); and only 

those who willingly endure such tribulations for righteousness' 

sake— for the sake of the truth, in obedience to the 

Heavenly calling— are overcomers. And only to the 

"overcomers" has the Lord given "the exceeding great 



and precious promises." "To him that overcometh will 
I grant to sit with me in my throne."— Rev. 3:21. 

THE NET GATHERED OF EVERY KIND 

Another parable of the Kingdom represents the gospel 
message as a "net." Only one kind of fish is desired, 
but the net gathers every kind. Not every kind will inherit 
the Kingdom as joint-heirs with Christ Jesus, hence 
the end of this age will be a sifting, separating time, as 
represented in the parable. The desirable fish will be 
gathered into vessels, the remainder will be cast back into 
the sea as unfit for the Kingdom, but not necessarily 
unfit for any purpose. During Christ's Millennial reign 
that class unfit for the Kingdom will be dealt with and 
blessed and, if possible, made useful and fit for eternal 
life. 

Here, as in the parable of the wheat and the tares, 
the furnace of fire, and the weeping and gnashing of 
teeth in connection therewith, symbolizes the great time of 
trouble with which this age will end, giving place to the 
Millennial Kingdom, the Kingdom for the establishment of 
which upon the earth the Church has been praying so 
unceasingly for nineteen centuries, "Thy Kingdom come; 
thy will be done on earth, as it is done in heaven." What 
a Kingdom that will be! It will be a Kingdom entrusted 
to a "Little Flock"— "Fear not, little flock, it is your 
Father's good pleasure to give you the Kingdom"— and 
it will be fully empowered to establish the rule of heaven 
among mankind! 

Our study closes with the Lord's exhortation that all 
who are instructed respecting the things pertaining to the 
Kingdom should set their affairs in order. 

Lay down your rails, ye nations, near and far, 
Yoke your full trains to steam's triumphal car, 
Link town to town, unite in iron bands 
The long-estranged and oft-embattled lands. 
Peace, mild-eyed seraph; knowledge, light divine, 
Shall send their messengers by every line. 
Men joined in amity shall wonder long 
That hate had power to lead their fathers wrong; 
Or that false glory lured their hearts astray, 
And made it virtuous and sublime to slay. 
How grandly now these wonders of our day 
Are making preparation for Christ's royal way, 
And with what joyous hope our souls 
Do watch the ball of progress as it rolls, 
Knowing that all as yet completed or begun 
Is but the dawning that precedes the sun. 



R4637 : page 206 

JESUS DID NOT FORFEIT EARTHLY LIFE 



A FORFEITED life is not a sacrificed life. 

If our Lord had forfeited his life it would 

not have been a sacrifice. A life that is 

forfeited is a life that is taken away for 

some just cause or reason; but his was 

taken without a cause. He suffered. As 

to how he suffered and why he suffered the 

Scriptures are quite distinct in telling us 

—"he presented himself without blemish 

unto God." That is to say, he purposed to 

do God's will; he bowed to God's will; he consecrated 

his whole life to the doing of God's will. To test his 

loyalty and obedience to the full, God required that he 

should be obedient, submissive, "unto death, even the 

death of the cross." His life was not taken from him, 

either by God or by men; as he himself declared, he 

could have called for Divine aid, according to Divine arrangement, 

and more than twelve legions of angels would 

have protected his life: "No man taketh away my life; 

I lay it down of myself." So, then, in this matter of 

Jesus' sacrifice, it was neither that man took away his 

life, nor that God demanded it, but God gave him the opportunity 

of demonstrating his loyalty. This involved a 

sacrifice in that it put him into the place where to do 

what God desired to have done, meant a giving up of all 

his earthly rights and privileges. 

When he came to the time of his death he did not 
make application of his merit in advance, saying, "I do 
this for such a purpose and such a thing, and I apply 
whatever merit there is in my obedience to such a purpose." 
He did nothing of the kind. There was no such 
application made. When we speak of Christ's death as 
the Ransom-Price for the sins of the whole world; when 
we say that "he gave himself a Ransom for all," we are 
taking into consideration other features of the Divine arrangement 
by which it will be possible for the Lord Jesus 
to apply the merit of that sacrifice on behalf of the world 
of mankind as their Ransom-Price. This will be accomplished 
in its due time. (I Tim. 2:5,6.) It was not 
accomplished when he died, but was to be accomplished 
subsequently. 

After our Lord had manifested his obedience even 
unto death, the Father was well pleased to fulfil to him 
all and more than he had ever intimated or promised. 
Hence he raised him from the dead— not in the same condition 
in which he was previously— a man— but in the 
glorious condition of the divine nature, "far above angels, 
principalities and powers and every name that is named." 
It would have been possible for the Father to restore our 
Lord Jesus to the earthly nature; but that would not have 
been, as we understand it, in keeping with his promise 
that there would be a special reward for this special 
obedience— "the joy that was set before him." 

JESUS HAD THE RIGHT TO THE EARTHLY NATURE 



When our Lord Jesus, therefore, was raised from the 
dead by the Father on the third day, to this glorious 
nature which he now possesses— so much better than the 
earthly condition— he had a right also to the earthly 
nature. He would not, of course, have thought of exchanging 
the higher condition for the earthly condition; 
and especially since such a change would frustrate the 
entire plan of God. To explain: Suppose our Lord 
Jesus, having been raised from the dead to the glory of 
the Father, to the divine nature, had said, "Father, I 
greatly appreciate your kindness and favor towards me in 
thus highly exalting me; but now I prefer the human 
nature." If we could imagine his saying such a thing, 
we cannot see but that he would have had the right to it, 
as he had never forfeited his human life. He merely laid 
it down. He submitted himself in obedience to God; and 
if in his resurrection he had preferred the earthly nature, 
it would have been entirely proper that he have it back 
again. But to have taken it back would have been to 
undo all the work he had started out to do. He would 
thus have given away the heavenly nature, which was far 
more desirable, and respecting which he himself said, 
"Father, glorify me with the glory that I had with thee before 
the world was." He would in this way have ignored 
not only his own expressed preference in the matter, but 
also the Divine Plan, order and arrangement, as it was 
God's will that he should have this high nature and that 
he should also have the right to earthly life, the earthly 
nature, that he might bestow the earthly nature, with 
all of its rights and privileges, as the "Ransom," or Corresponding 
Price, for Adam's forfeited life and all of its 
earthly privileges. 

IMPUTING HIS MERIT NOW TO THOSE WHO 
COVENANT TO SACRIFICE IT 

Actually our Lord has not yet ransomed all, but he 
gave himself, in the sense of performing the sacrifice, 
more than 1800 years ago. But he has not yet applied the 
merit as the Ransom-Price for all the world. What is he 
doing with the Ransom-Price all this time? The Ransom-Price 
was placed into the hands of the Father. When Jesus 
died he said, "Into thy hands I commit my spirit." The 
Lord Jesus, therefore, as the Great Messiah, has the right 
to all those things which he intends to bestow upon the 
whole world of mankind— Adam and all his race. He 
will give them all the opportunity of becoming people of 
God. What is he doing with the merit in the meantime? 
He is imputing it to any individual from amongst Adam's 
race who desires to come into full relationship with the 
Father, on condition that such individual follow in his 
footsteps and lay down his earthly life as he laid his 
down. To each one of this kind, who comes to him, the 
Lord imputes his merit at the moment he makes his consecration 
to sacrifice, and this imputation of the Lord's 



merit makes him acceptable with the Father, who begets 
him as a New Creature. Thenceforth such are New 
Creatures, and their earthly life is given up as Jesus' life 
was given up— in sacrifice. All of these, therefore, who 
are now invited to come under this special arrangement 
through the use of the merit of Christ's death, come 
under the imputation of that merit, not the bestowment 
of it. 

There is a difference between imputing the merit and 
bestowing it. For instance, if we hand you $100 we bestow 
$100 upon you, passing it directly to you. But if we 
endorse your note for $100 we are imputing to you $100. 
In the case of the Church it is an imputation; there is 
actually no passing of the merit over. What our Lord 
has to give is the right to human life, the human privileges 
which were Adam's originally and which he lost 
—all that he had. That right to human life our Lord has 
to give away, but he is not giving it away now. He is 
keeping it to give to the world in due time. He is now 

R4638 : page 206 

merely imputing to us the merit, or that which corresponds 

to the endorsement of our contract with the 

heavenly Father, if we desire to enter into such a contract. 

THE WORLD WILL RETAIN THE EARTHLY LIFE-RIGHTS 
PURCHASED FOR THEM 

Coming back to the statement made foregoing, that 
this merit is to be given on behalf of the world, we 

R4638 : page 207 

should qualify it and say that the merit is not to be given 

for the whole world, but merely, as the Scriptures outline, 

"for all the people." "The people," however, are not 

the entire world, but all who will come into Covenant relationship 

with God during the period of the Great 

Mediatorial Kingdom. These are the only people for 

whom the merit will be applied. Whoever will reject this 

opportunity and refuse to become one of the people, rejects 

all the opportunities that are to be granted and does not, 

therefore, receive restitution to human life. Such are 

not made perfect. They do not get human rights at all. 

They will receive an awakening from death, but this will 

not be Restitution. This will be merely the first step 

from which they may, if they choose, take the further 

steps leading to the Restitution blessings. "It will come 

to pass that the soul that will not obey" that Great 

Mediator, that Great Prophet, Priest and King, the great 

"Prophet like unto Moses raised up from amongst your 

brethren"— of which Jesus is the Head and the Church of 

this Gospel Age are his Members— "the soul that will not 

obey that Prophet shall be destroyed from amongst the 

people. "-Acts 3:19-21. 



This is in harmony with the Scripture to the effect that 
"he that hath the Son hath life, and he that hath not the 
Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on 
him," continues on him; he never gets out from under 
the wrath of God. He had the opportunity; he was 
brought to a knowledge of the Truth; he was brought to 
the place where it was his privilege to come under the 
arrangement of the New Covenant blessings which will 
be extended to all through Israel. But if he fails to 
make use of that opportunity and to become one of God's 
people, then he does not get out from under the wrath at 
all. He dies under the original wrath of God and without 
going to the end of the Millennial Age— without becoming 
one of the restored ones. 



R4638 : page 207 

LETTERS RE VOLUNTEER WORK 

DEAR FRIENDS :- 

I happened to come across one of your tracts for 
April, 1909, and was intensely interested in the article, 
"Where Are the Dead?" It set me to thinking and 
to reading the Bible as I never did before. Finally I 
got my husband to read the tract and he said he would 
like to hear that man preach. That was a great deal 
for him to say, for he has no use for Churches and 
preachers in general. He is a good man indeed; as 
he often says, his life is superior to that of many 
Church members, some of whom go to Church just for 
style, and through habit and because their forefathers 
did. He says he would like to have you send your paper 
and he would read the sermon every Sunday, which he 
thinks would be better than going to Church. 

I am so thankful to God that my husband is at last 
interested in the things of the future. His dear, sainted 
sister once said to him that he was too good not to 
obtain heaven and that she would pray for him constantly. 
What he wants and I want is the Truth— 
not the varied opinions of men, and I know we can get 
it by searching the Scriptures. He is now even reading 
the Bible, which he says he never did before. As for 
me, I have always been a regular attendant at Church, 
being a member of the Presbyterian Church, as are all 
of my folks. As to having the holy Spirit really within 
me, I know I have not. I don't think I have ever 
grasped the fundamental Truth as yet. I have always 
believed that our beloved dead were in heaven, but as 
you say they are not judged yet, and how can they 
be there? Please send your paper to us. I understand 
it is twelve cents, but if it is more I will send it to you. 

Yours very truly for the truth, 

MRS. C. H. FULLER-Oregon. 



DEAR SIR:~ 

Please send me the PEOPLES PULPIT. I have just 
been handed a copy of "Where Are the Dead?" I have 
read it and have become very much interested in your 
good work. Please send me a copy of the "Thief in 
Paradise." Find enclosed 12 cents for a year's 
subscription. 

Yours truly, MRS. IDA ZIMMERMAN-Missouri. 



GENTLEMEN:- 

A copy of the PEOPLES PULPIT was handed to me 
last night. I cannot tell you in writing how I enjoyed 
reading it. Will you kindly forward me the sermons, 
"Where Are the Dead?" "Thieves in Paradise," and "The 
Rich Man in Hell." Would also like to receive the six 
series of "Studies in the Scriptures," as it has not been 
my good fortune to receive them. Will send 12 cents 
in the near future for PEOPLES PULPIT. May God prosper 
you. 

Very respectfully yours, C. LAWLER-N.Y. 



DEAR SIRS:- 

I found advertisement copy of PEOPLES PULPIT in our 
letter-box. I would like to have some of the books you 
speak of. I will subscribe for your paper later. I 
should like to know if you believe Calvinism to be true. 
Hoping to hear from you soon, I am, 

Truly yours, MRS. FRAYER--N.J. 



DEAR FRIENDS :- 

I was handed one of your papers, PEOPLES PULPIT, 
which I prize very much for its explanations of the 
Scripture. Please find enclosed 12 cents for one year's 
subscription. 

Yours very truly, THOS. H. HARRIS-Can. 



GENTLEMEN:- 

Your monthly paper, bearing the name PEOPLES 
PULPIT, came into my hands Sunday morning. I read 
it through carefully, as it treated of a subject that must 
greatly interest all thoughtful people. I should like very 
much to read the subjects enclosed. Please find enclosed 
12 cents to pay for subscription. 

Yours sincerely, MRS. DORCAS CURNOW-Cal. 



DOCTOR EDGAR PASSED BEYOND 

By cable we learn that Brother John Edgar underwent 
a surgical operation which has resulted in 
his death. We trust for him that he has passed beyond 
the Second Vail and is now with the Master in 
glory. He was a dear, humble, faithful brother, 
whom we greatly loved. His dear family have our 
sympathy, but we know that they sorrow not as 
others who have no such hopes as those which 
buoy us up. The cablegram says that he passed 
away peacefully, a grand witness to the Truth. He 
fought a good fight. He kept the faith. He surely 
finished his work. We hope for him a crown. 



page 210 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c (Is.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: In German, 
five vol.; in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, and 5; in Dano-Norwegian, 
three vols.; in Greek three vols.; in French, two vols.; 
in Hollandish, Spanish, Italian, Hungarian and Polish, one vol. 
each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, prices the 
same. 

Vol. 6, German and Swedish (WATCH TOWER form), $1.50 
each. 



page 209 



SEMI-MONTHLY 