A Free Bible Study
● One of Jehovah’s witnesses in Georgia writes:
“A few months ago an advertisement appeared in the classified ‘Help Wanted’ section of the newspaper which read: ‘Christian lady with failing eyesight desires someone to read the Bible and other inspirational literature one or two hours per week—call . . . ’
“Reflecting on the fact that Jehovah’s witnesses spend a great deal of time trying to find persons interested in the Bible, I was interested to see that someone was willing to pay to have the Bible read to her. I immediately went to the telephone and called her. When I told her I was calling in response to her advertisement, she expressed surprise that it was still in the paper. She said she had called several days before to have it cancelled since she had received only two calls. One was not interested when she learned what it was; the other was a lady from her church who offered to read to her for $4.00 per hour. She said to me: ‘I don’t feel that I can pay over $2.00 per hour, and you probably aren’t interested in coming for that either.’
“I assured her that I would be happy to come and read the Bible to her, not for $2.00 per hour, but absolutely free. She expressed surprise that anyone would volunteer her services without cost, and particularly to a stranger. I told her I was one of Jehovah’s witnesses and that we devote many hours of our time encouraging and promoting more thorough individual home Bible reading, and studying the Bible with the people free of charge. I arranged for a visit the following Friday.
“Since Awake! magazine on ‘World Conditions Explained by the Bible in Your Home,’ was the current issue at the time, it was an excellent topic to use. We discussed world conditions and looked up many scriptures. Then I read her one of the articles on that subject from Awake! Before either of us realized it, the hour was gone. As I got ready to leave she handed me $2.00 and apologized that it was not more. When I refused, she said, ‘Well, if you won’t use it for yourself, use it in your work.’ I told her if she would like to have Awake! and its companion magazine The Watchtower come to her home by mail she could contribute $2.00 for a year’s subscription to both. Then we would always have something from which to read when I came. She readily agreed to this, but still tried to pay me $2.00 in addition, which, of course, I declined.
“Since then we have considered many Bible subjects and have been through two booklets. She has often said that she has learned more about the Bible in these last few months than in all the years that she was able to read it herself. And she still asks me when I get ready to leave, ‘Can’t I pay you something for your time?’ Truly this is a unique Bible study!”

