Announcements
FIELD MINISTRY
Jehovah’s witnesses regularly attend meetings that are designed to train them to become mature ministers, able to aid others to understand the Bible. During August they will continue to share in that service, offering persons everywhere personal home Bible instruction free of charge. As an aid in such home study they will be glad to provide interested persons with the fine 416-page textbook “Things in Which It Is Impossible for God to Lie,” and a Scriptural booklet, for 50c.
REMINDER OF ANNUAL MEETING OF MEMBERS
The corporate publisher of this magazine, Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania, formed and used by Jehovah’s witnesses for the advancement of the Kingdom interests, has a yearly corporation business meeting. In 1966 this meeting will be held on Saturday, October 1, at the office of the Society located at 4100 Bigelow Boulevard, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, at 10 a.m.
Letters of notice will be sent to the members of the corporation. The members can ensure their receiving the notice and accompanying proxy by making certain that the secretary’s office has the present mail address of the member to which the notice is to be sent. 
While the purpose of here making mention of the annual meeting is to remind those who are members to provide the Society’s secretary with their present mailing address, mention is also made of the fact that any reader of The Watchtower is welcome to attend the annual meeting.
KNOW YOUR BIBLE
Do you know why there are two histories of the nation of Israel in the Bible, the two books of Kings and the two books of Chronicles? Do you know why the apostle Paul wrote his two letters to the Corinthians? Could you relate the chief events of Jesus’ ministry? The 352-page book “All Scripture Is Inspired of God and Beneficial” will give you a new view of the Bible. It will give you valuable background information about every book of the Bible as well as an epitome of its contents. Besides, it emphasizes the value of the Bible in our modern, everyday living. Send only $1.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
September 4: The Christians’ Possession of Peace. Page 485. Songs to be used: 67, 102.
September 11: Maintaining Our Possession of Peace. Page 491. Songs to be used: 94, 21.

