Questions From Readers
● According to Genesis 49:10, Jacob said prophetically: “The scepter will not turn aside from Judah, neither the commander’s staff from between his feet, until Shiloh comes.” Is there a difference between a scepter and a commander’s staff?—O. S., U.S.A.
Yes, the scepter and the commander’s staff Jacob mentioned in his deathbed blessing of Judah evidently refer to different things.
In poetic compositions or expressions it is not uncommon to find terms that parallel each other. However, though they are quite similar, often the one term, when compared with the other, conveys to the mind a subtle difference of thought, introducing a new element, as it were. This device frequently serves to heighten one’s appreciation or to enhance his comprehension of what has been written or spoken. It appears that Jacob employed such a method while blessing his sons. For instance, he said that Dan would “prove to be a serpent by the roadside, a horned snake at the wayside,” using such expressions in a good sense to show how Dan would be a danger to enemies of the Israelites. (Gen. 49:17) So, it would not be amiss to conclude that the terms “scepter” and “commander’s staff” also vary somewhat in meaning or significance.
The use of these terms with reference to Judah would, at least, indicate that significant authority and power would reside with that tribe. Yet, more than mere tribal authority and dominance were evidently involved, for Jacob indicated that Shiloh, to whom “the obedience of the people will belong,” would come from the tribe of Judah. That would betoken regal authority and power over others. Surely, when David of the tribe of Judah became Israel’s king at Jehovah’s direction, the scepter and the commander’s staff proved to be in the possession of the tribe of Judah. Such would not depart from Judah before the coming of the Permanent Ruler, Shiloh.—2 Sam. 7:8-16.
Scepters can be of varied lengths. In ancient times, just as in the present day, scepters held in the hands of rulers signify authority. Hence, the scepter in the hand of a king symbolizes royal sovereignty.—Ps. 45:6.
Jacob also indicated that Judah’s staff as a commander was between his feet. This would refer to a long staff. Often it rested upon the ground and would lie back against the fold of the robe of the one holding it, between his knees. In ancient sculptures, certain rulers of antiquity have been depicted with such a long staff in hand. Since Judah’s staff is a “commander’s staff,” it is a token of power to command.
So, then, the holding of the scepter would appear to denote the possession of sovereignty or prerogative as a royal ruler. Having the commander’s staff would tend to indicate that the possessor had the position of leadership and the power to command.
Shiloh to come, to whom Jacob referred, is Jesus Christ. As a descendant of Judah and the Son of David, he is the one upon whom Jehovah God has bestowed everlasting heavenly rulership. (Luke 3:23-33; Matt. 1:1-16) He holds royal sovereignty and possesses the power to command. (Dan. 7:13, 14) Therefore, it was not without good reason that Isaiah was inspired by God to write prophetically of Christ: “Look! As a witness to the national groups I have given him, as a leader and commander to the national groups.” (Isa. 55:4) A foreview of Jesus’ future exercise of power and dominance over the nations is also embodied in these words of Psalm 2:8, 9: “Ask of me [Jehovah God], that I may give nations as your inheritance and the ends of the earth as your own possession. You will break them with an iron scepter, as though a potter’s vessel you will dash them to pieces.”

