Venezuelans Learn to Trust in Jehovah
“YEARS of Plenty”​—that is how most Venezuelans remember the period following 1976. That year, the government nationalized all the foreign oil companies in Venezuela, and the country’s economy boomed. As an evidence of the newfound material abundance, numerous building projects began cropping up throughout the nation. The tallest buildings in the country, the Parque Central Towers, were erected in Caracas, the capital city. People seemed to have every reason to put their trust in the thriving prosperity.
Today, however, the outlook seems less promising. Although still a prosperous nation, Venezuela has had its share of economic problems. All here remember ‘Black Friday,’ as February 28, 1983, is commonly called, when the basic monetary unit, the bolivar, was devaluated. As a result, the currency lost strength, and foreign debts began to mount. Suddenly, “Years of Plenty” turned into “Years of Austerity.” Many have been sorely disappointed with their misplaced confidence and trust. In contrast, Jehovah’s Witnesses in Venezuela have learned to put their trust in the true God, Jehovah. They have enjoyed continued growth and expansion through the years.
Growth of Early Kingdom Seeds
It was in 1936 that seeds of the Kingdom good news were first brought to Venezuela by two pioneers, or full-time ministers, from Texas, U.S.A. (Matthew 24:14) Ten years later, two missionaries​—graduates of the fifth class of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead—​arrived. And in September that year, a branch office of the Watch Tower Society was opened in Venezuela. The report for that year showed a total of 19 Kingdom proclaimers in Venezuela.
In November 1953, N. H. Knorr, then president of the Society, and his secretary, M. G. Henschel, stopped in Venezuela on their South American tour. Nine hundred and forty-two came to an assembly held in Caracas. By 1977 the number of Kingdom publishers in Venezuela had grown to a peak of over 13,800. That made it necessary to build a new branch office in La Victoria, 53 miles [85 km] outside the capital. A new section was added and dedicated in 1985. Today, there are over 42,900 publishers in some 500 congregations and groups in Venezuela. And many more people in Venezuela are learning to put their trust in Jehovah, as indicated by the excellent attendance of 154,881 at the 1988 Memorial of Christ’s death.
A Diverse yet Fertile Field
Venezuela is a land of contrasts, and this is reflected in those who have learned to put their trust in Jehovah. First, this country is noted for its many immigrants. Thus, even among Jehovah’s Witnesses, there are many from Italy, Portugal, Germany, Spain, France, Haiti, Trinidad, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, and other places. Yet they are united with their fellow Venezuelans in trusting and serving the true God, Jehovah.
There are also many regional differences. An Oriental fisherman from the eastern regions is noticeably different from a cattle-raising llanero from the southern plains. A fast-paced Caraqueño from the capital, or an outgoing oil-company worker from Maracaibo, the nation’s second-largest city, are worlds apart from a slower-moving Andino farmer from the southwest, where the Andes Mountains begin. Each has his own customs and accent. So, together with the foreign flavor imparted by the immigrants, there is colorful variety among the people.
In spite of such diverse backgrounds, people from all walks of life have come to learn about Jehovah. María Luisa was one of them. Ever since she was seven years old, she had been involved in spiritism. As she grew up, she became addicted to alcohol and drugs, led an immoral life, and was steeped in the worship of the Venezuelan goddess María Lionza.a Becoming disgusted with her way of life, she took up work in a Catholic mission among the Indians in the western part of the country. She soon concluded that her work was helping neither the Indians nor her. Then she started dabbling in metaphysics and reincarnation but to no avail. At this point, María Luisa was visited by Jehovah’s Witnesses. The Bible knowledge that she gained gave her the strength she needed to fight against the wicked spirits. Now she is putting her trust in Jehovah and is an active proclaimer of the Kingdom good news.
Even handicapped persons are learning to put their trust in Jehovah, as is the case with Juan and Carlos, two fleshly brothers. When he was nine years old, Carlos contracted meningitis and lost his sight. Later, though involved with the Catholic charismatic movement, he started to study the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. He was baptized in 1982, and since December 1983 he has been a full-time minister. As a blind pioneer, he walks to every corner of his territory, by himself when necessary. His brother Juan, however, is quite a different story.
Juan is over six feet [1.8 m] tall and was quite a street brawler. One day he was shot in the back twice. Although he survived, he was left paralyzed from the chest down and became completely bedridden. When the Witnesses called on him, he reluctantly accepted their offer to study the Bible with him. The studies rekindled his respect for the Bible. The hope of perfect life in Paradise touched him. After he stopped smoking, drinking, and using foul language, all his former friends left him because, as they put it, Juan had become a “saint.” Still, he continued to trust in Jehovah, and eventually he was baptized.
“Being confined to bed has not stopped me from doing Jehovah’s will,” says Juan, “because at least my hands and brain still function well.” How does he serve Jehovah in his condition? “I use my tape recorder to fulfill my responsibilities, such as talks in the Theocratic Ministry School, parts on the Service Meeting, and reading at the weekly Watchtower Study. I have the privilege of conducting one of the local Congregation Book Studies, which is held at my home. I have also been able to serve as a regular pioneer.” How does he feel about all of this? “I am very grateful to my relatives and spiritual brothers and sisters, who are so helpful to me. I hope and pray that all of us persevere in placing our trust in Jehovah so that we can see the day when ‘the lame one will climb up just as a stag does.’”​—Isaiah 35:6.
Assemblies Bring Praise to Jehovah
To carry on the work that is helping so many to put their trust in Jehovah, the Witnesses in Venezuela have recently built two Assembly Halls. One of these is in Campo Elias, Yaracuy State, in the west-central part of the country. The other, located about 40 miles [60 km] south of Caracas, is fully equipped with baptismal pool, air-conditioning, kitchen, and dining-room facilities.
These halls have greatly impressed outsiders and interested people who have come to see them. One bus driver was hired by a group of Witnesses to take them to their circuit assembly. Upon arriving and seeing the spacious parking lot and beautiful surroundings, the driver thought he must also go inside to see this place. “What I saw inside that Assembly Hall was another world, another dimension,” he later said. He was so impressed by the order and unity that he listened intently to the whole program. Later he asked for a Bible study and is now a baptized brother.
At one point a circuit assembly was to be held in El Tigre, a city in the southeastern part of the country. Since there was no Assembly Hall in that area, a local site was rented. However, unknown to the brothers, a carnival was to be celebrated in that city on the same dates. When the local authorities came to install a bandstand right by the assembly site, the Witnesses pleaded with the carnival organizers to put the bandstand elsewhere but to no avail. As a last resort, a Witness told the ones in charge: “Please know that you are looking for trouble with Jehovah.” On hearing this, a man in charge responded: “Oh, no, I do not want trouble with Jehovah!” The carnival celebrations were moved to a site far away from where the circuit assembly was to be held.
At another assembly, a sister’s husband, a man with a political career, came to see if she was having an affair with someone there. He was surprised by the quality of the talks given. “If I could talk like that man, I would really move ahead in my political career,” he told his wife. After the program, he approached one of the elders and asked to be shown how he could improve his public speaking​—and only that. “Do not expect me to go from door to door with a briefcase,” he cautioned. A Bible study was started, and soon the man changed his mind​—he wanted to go from door to door with a briefcase and preach the good news! He resigned from politics and got baptized, and now he and his family put their trust in Jehovah.
Paving the Way for Further Expansion
During a visit by L. A. Swingle, a member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses, a crowd of 63,580 gathered in the Plaza Monumental bullring in Valencia. Many of them had traveled by bus all night. All present were very encouraged to hear Brother Swingle tell them: “You are no longer a small branch. Now you are a medium-size branch. And by the looks of it, some day soon you will be in the ‘100,000-publishers club’!”
Plans are being made to expand the branch office in La Victoria to care for the marvelous growth. Yes, by the thousands, people in Venezuela are learning to trust in Jehovah.
[Footnotes]
See Awake! of June 22, 1967, pages 21-3.
[Maps/​Picture on page 21]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
CARIBBEAN SEA
VENEZUELA
Maracaibo
ANDES MOUNTAINS
Campo Elias
Valencia
La Victoria
Caracas
El Tigre
COLOMBIA
BRAZIL
GUYANA
600 Km
400 mi
[Pictures on page 24]
Exterior and interior views of the Cúa Assembly Hall

