Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., JANUARY 15, 1917 


No. 2 


GOD'S SPECIAL GIFT TO HIS CHILDREN 


"If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give the 

holy Spirit to them that ask him?" — Luke 11:13. 
Comparatively few have realized the value of this heavenly 
gift of the holy Spirit, and few have possessed it. 


The begetting
 of the "holy Spirit, which first came on Pentecost to 
those who were to constitute the church, is necessary in order 
that we may become children of God. One cannot become 
a Christian by the mere study of the Bible. Indeed, we must 
be begotten of the holy Spirit before we shall be able to understand
 the Bible, to apprehend the deep things of God. The 
begetting of the holy Spirit is something that we cannot 
explain, something that nobody can explain. If God had 
wished us to understand this miracle of grace, doubtless he 
would have made it sufficiently plain in the Bible. 

But we know from the testimony of the Word, corroborated 
by our own experience, that there is a begetting of the Spirit, 
a supernatural start of a new life in those who consecrate 
themselves to God. In referring to this beginning of the new 
nature, the Lord uses a figure of speech, illustrating the matter
 by something that is well known to the human family. 
We know that it is not a mental power in man that begets 
a human life, but that it requires a direct importation of the 
spirit of life originally received from the Creator, before an 
individual life can begin. And so it is with the spiritual 
child of God. There must be a direct importation of the 
holy Spirit to start the new heavenly life. 

We are not to think of this start as being something great 
or large in amount; for as a matter of fact, the beginning 
of the new life is small. But it must be there. The Christian 
mar not be able to point back to anything like an electric 
charge as the beginning of his Christian life. A few people 
have tnade such claims, but we think this is a mere hallucination
 of the mind. God used a special outward manifestation 
at the begetting of the Lord Jesus with the holy Spirit, in 
order that Jolin the Baptist might make* a declaration of what 
he saw in the case of the first member of the church, and 
that we might know. There was also an outward demonstration
 at Pentecost, and in the case of Cornelius and his 
family, the first Gentiles to be received into the church. But 
these were for a very special purpose, as heretofore shown. 
As" TespectB all the ot&ers . of God's f amjjy; we are inducted 
into the body of Christ, which is the church, without any 
outward manifestation. But when we have met the conditions, 
we do not doubt our acceptance. We receive it all by faith 
in the Lord's Word. 

NECESSITY OF FEEDING UPON THE WORD 

This begetting of the holy Spirit, then, which iias a small 
beginning, shortly after manifests itself as the new creature 
feeds * r jfist as the germ of life in the human being must be 
fed, must gradually grow, develop and become stronger, and 
thus manifest its individual life. It the new creature does 
not feed upon the Word of the Lord, it will grow weak and 
sickly, and eventually will die. We have known some who 
have been for twenty years consecrated to the Lord, and who 
are still babes in Christ* because they have been stunted in 
their development through insufficient or improper feeding and 
exercise. 

God did not wait for us to come voluntarily into his 


family. Indeed, no man can come unless he Jias been invited 
by the Lord. Whoever has received the Word of truth intelligently
, and is 1 drawn by it, has an invitation. If he responds 
during his "acceptable time," if he accepts Jesus as his ransom 
and presents himself fully to God, he is begotten of the 
holy Spirit. Then he is to grow through "eating" the truth, 
through studying the truth, through applying it to his own 
life. We should store our minds with the Scriptures, so that 
in each of our experiences these Words of Life will be there 
to give U3 in increased measure the Spirit of the truth, that 
we may grow strong in the Lord as the various trials of life 
come to us, and thus we may be sustained by the Spirit of 
the truth. 

WHO MAT PRAY FOE THE HOLY fiPXBXT 

W T ith the thought of the primary work of the holy Spirit 
in mind — namely, the work of spirit-begetting — let us now 
consider our text. Our Lord had been suggesting to his disciples
 the thought that a good parent, if asked for a fish, would 
not give his child a serpent, or if asked for bread, would not 
give a stone. Jesus would have his disciples consider how 
they would act as parents, so that they might the better 
realize what God's attitude would be toward any whom he received
 into his family as his children. Then the words of 
our text followed: 'If ye, then, being evil, know how to give 
good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your 
heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him!" 
That is to say, if you who are imperfect, who have largely 
lost the likeness of God as a race, still so realize the responsibility
 of parents to their children that you would not 
do your children harm when they come to you for something 
good, much more would the heavenly Father not do harm to 
his children, but good, when they come to him for a blessing. 

Then our Lord Jesus specifies the particular blessing for 
which we should ask — God's holy Spirit—not using vain repetition
, as do the Gentiles, those who are not the Lord's true 
children, and who are not instructed to pray to Jehovah. With 
many, ihe prayers go up in a merely mechanical way, as by 
machinery — in some nations by literal machinery. The Chinese 
have a praying-wheel which they turn around and around, 
and thus repeat the prayers. They are shrewd enough to 
know that thus they can say the prayer more often than with 
the lips. Such is not the kind of prayer that the Lord will 
receive. 

God's children have instructions from his Word on this 
subject of prayer. They are to come'to the Father according to 
these instructions, not doubting his love, his wisdom, and his 
power. They are to come with full confidence in him as their 
Father, asking for the things for which he has bidden them to 
pray. Their <trust in him should be so absolute that they would 
know that he is ever seeking their very highest blessing, that 
all his instructions and leadings are "to this end, and that 
he withholds nothing that would be for their good. 

But before any one can come to God in the sense here referred
 to, he must take the definite step of becoming a child 
of God. The world are not children of God; for that relationship
 was lost when Adam became disobedient. By dis- 


[6031] 


l2if-21) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


obedience he was cut off from sonship, from fellowship with 
the heavenly Father. He lost the spirit of God — the mind, 
or disposition, of the Lord — which all beings created in the 
image of the heavenly Father possess by nature, so long as 
they retain that image unblemished. After his fall Adam 
became imperfect in all his powers; and this imperfection 
increased until death fully claimed him. 

Thus all of Adam's posterity, through hereditary imperfection
, have gone further and further from God, being alienated 
"by wicked works." But God has made provision by which 
eventually all who desire may come back into relationship 
bo him as children. His provision is our Lord Jesus Christ, and 
the work he will do for mankind. During the Gospel age 
our Lord has been doing one part of the work, that some may 
come immediately into relationship with God and enjoy all the 
favors of being his sons. Another part of his work our Lord 
will do during the age to follow this — the Millennial age — 
when all the world, every son and daughter of Adam, will be 
permitted and assisted to regain this lost sonship, if they will. 
It is for the benefit of mankind that the church class is 
being called out now, in advance of the world's blessing. God 
is fully content with the arrangement which he has made. He 
has no desire to urge anybody to come into the enjoyment of 
his present and special blessing. He desires, on the contrary, 
that none shall come except those who really have the heart 
desire for his favor and fellowship. 

OOD NOT PHONO OVER THE WOBU) 

So far as the Gospel age is concerned, God has purposely 
made the way an especially narrow one, in order that he might 
during this age make a selection of very earnest followers of 
Jesus, who would have his mind, his spirit, his disposition. 
During the next age he will do away with the narrowness of 
the way, and there will he a great highway cast up. However
, there will still be tests upon the people, conditions of 
attaining relationship to God. God does not purpose at any 
time to be in relationship with those who do not wish to be 
in relationship with him. 

We should by no means have the thought that God is 
grieving because all mankind are not praying and going to 
church. Nothing of the kind! God's happiness is not dependent
 upon man or man's doings. The Almighty has not a 
particle of anxious concern ahout those who are not now in 
relationship with him. He is not calling all the world at 
this time. He merely concerns himself for those who desire 
to avail themselves of his present arrangement, that they may 
be his children, with all their interests provided for. 

The child of the Lord is instructed to ask for the blessings 
which the Lord has for him. The Lord wishes His children to 
make a formal request for the blessings they need, in order 
that they may realize their need of the gift Whoever does not 
realize his need would be little blessed by receiving from the 
Lord. Our heavenly Father desires that we should fully feel, 
desire, crave, what he has to give, before it comes to us, that 
his gift may prove of real and lasting benefit. 

The Scriptures have limited us in regard to the things for 
which we may ask. We may ask for nothing contrary to 
God's will. To do so would show that we are not in accord 
with the heavenly Father. The very terms and conditions of 
our being received as his children were that our wills^should 
be fully submitted to his will. If, then, we ask for things 
for which he has not told us to ask, and which he does not 
wish to give us, our course proves that we have a will in 
opposition to his or that we have not studied to know what is 
his will. And if we have not studied to know his will, it 
shows carelessness and a lack of loyalty to the Lord. To ask 
favor at his hands when we are not seeking to know what he 
would have us do, and hence are not doing it, would be pre* 
sumption. So we should be very careful to note what our 
Father is pleased to give us, that we may ask the things pleasing
 in his sight. 

GOD'S PATTBKCE WITH "BABES" 

But the Lord is very merciful with "babes in Christ" — 
those who have partaken only of "the milk of the Word," and 
not of the "strong meat," and hence would not know the things 
to ask for. He is patient with them, sympathetic, and m 
such cases takes the will, the heart intention, instead of the 
words. "Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities; for 
we know not what we should pray for as we ought; but the 
spirit maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot 
be uttered. And he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what 
is the mind of the spirit, for he maketh intercession for the 
saints according to the will of God." (Romans 8:26, 27) 
That is, God accepts our minds, if we are wishing for right 
things in our hearts. If the holy Spirit, the holy mind to 
which we are begotten, longs for the Lord's spiritual blessings, 


God will give us those things, and not the things we may be 
asking for with our lips. 

We have known of some good Christian people, sincere in 
heart though poorly instructed, who would pray fervently that 
God would baptize them "with the Holy Ghost and with fire" 
— not appreciating the meaning of their words, not seeing that 
a baptism of fire would have a destructive influence and would 
be injurious to them. Those who thus pray do not understand 
John the Baptist's words, do not realize that it was the disobedient
 and unfaithful Israelites who were to receive the 
baptism of fire, while the faithful would receive the baptism 
of the holy Spirit, at Pentecost. But the Lord mercifully accepts
 the minds, the hearts, of these his children, and not what 
they say. 

The Lord indicates that his true children may always feel 
confident of receiving what is for their highest good. We are 
to realize that the Lord knows far better than we do what we 
need. The Master taught us to pray, "Give us this day our 
daily bread!" There is no intimation of what kind it would 
be, whether the food was to be little or much, very plain or 
not so plain, whether it would be what was pleasing to the 
palate or otherwise. We are merely to ask him to give us 
what is best in order to our greatest benefit as new creatures. 
If this means suffering in the flesh or the impoverishment of 
the human body, well and good, for this body is consecrated 
to death, and we are glad 'to lay it down according to the 
Lord's choice for us. 

But there is one thing for which we may pray and be sure 
that in so doing we are asking in harmony with God's will; 
and that is, the holy Spirit, But even here many do not really 
know what they ask; for there has been a great misconception 
as to what the holy Spirit is. Many of God's people are 
sadly confused. They think that the holy Spirit is a person, 
who will personally come into them, and into perhaps million* 
of others. This subject has been greatly beclouded. We are 
only beginning to get out of the fog. We need to study God's 
Word more and not be too confident as to our own conceptions. 

"HOLY SPIRIT" A BROAD TEEM 

In asking for more of the holy Spirit as Christians, we 
are asking for more of the mind of the Lord, the disposition 
of the Lord. The term "holy Spirit" has a broad significance. 
It means the power or influence or energy of God; it also 
means the mind or disposition of God. We know that God 
has an invisible power that he exercises. Holy men of old 
spoke and wrote as they were moved by the holy Spirit, the 
holy power of the Lord, God's energy or influence. God has 
given his sons an enlightenment of mind, a supernatural illumination
, which throws a light upon the Scriptures of the Old 
Testament and the New Testament. Thus we gain a good 
conception of the purposes and the mind of the Lord, that 
which the holy Spirit of God has placed in his Word. 

Now since the holy Spirit placed the light in the Word of 
God, it is there for a purpose. That purpose is that earnest 
hearts might know how to find the Lord and might feed upon 
the Word, and by feeding upon it might become partakers of 
the holy mind, disposition of God. Those Christians who 
neglect the Word of God do not receive from it this holy Spirit, 
this holy mind, and the heavenly light becomes dim. But 
those who feed upon the promises of God, the instructions of 
God, appropriating these to themselves, become strong in the 
Lord and in the power of his might. They receive more and 
more of this holy Spirit which God has put in his Word. 
It ia his Spirit, his truth, the divine power exercised thus by 
him. So the Christian receives God's Spirit in the sense of 
receiving the divine .begetting and illumination, in the sense 
of receiving holy power, energy, and in the sense of receiving 
the holy disposition of the Lord. 

MEASURE OF THE HOLT SPIRIT VARIOUSLY INCREASED 
This Spirit of God may be increased in us by other ways 
than by the direct reading of the Scriptures. For instance, 
some children of God, guided by his holy Spirit, the Spirit of 
the truth, may write some beautiful hymn, and into this hymn 
may incorporate so much of the truth of the Scriptures, so 
much of its spirit, that the mere singing of that hymn, or the 
reading of it, may give us an additional measure of the Spirit 
of God. It is none the less the Lord's Spirit, thouzh it is 
transferred from the printed page into the individual life. It 
is the coming of the truth and its spirit and power into the 
heart and life that constitutes the light. 

As the child of the Lord receives individually the Spirit of 
the truth, in that same proportion he becomes a burning and 
shining light. As the holy Spirit is from the Father and 
through the Son, so this holy Spirit is in the church, and shines 
from them upon the world. But the world comprehends not 
the light. Sometimes they think it is hypocrisy — sometimes 


[6032] 


January 15 t 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(21-22) 


one thing, sometimes another. But no matter. It is ours to 
show forth the praises of God, And some few will hear, and 
will take knowledge that we have been with Jesus and learned 
of him, Thus they may be led to God. 

While this holv Spirit proceeds from the Word of God and 
from the lives of God's children, it does not come to them 
without divine assistance in the matter. For instance, while 
studying the Word of God, we may be in touch with the 
spiritual channel of heavenly communion — namely, prayer; by 
which the child of God may tell the Father of his feelings, 
sentiments, etc., even as God through the Bible tells hia children
 hia sentiments. Thus we receive an increase of the holy 
Spirit through the act of prayer. In our appeals for forgiveness
, etc., we are reviving in our minds the Spirit of God; 
and this holy Spirit comes tq us more richly as a further 
comfort and assistance in the good way. We call to mind the 
divine assurance, "Like as a father pitieth hia children, so 
the Lord pitieth them that reverence him" ; and so we come to 
the throne of heavenly grace to obtain mercy and find grace 
to help in every time of need. As therefore the needy one 
comes, he receives more of the holy Spirit. 

There is still another means by which the heavenly Father 
gives his children of his holy Spirit, and that is through his 
providences. While we know not, of ourselves, the things we 
should ask for as we ought, we know from his Word that 
we may always ask for more of his holy Spirit and the fruits 
and graces thereof. But we may not at first realize how 
these can best be cultivated in our hearts. We have the instruction
 in the Bible that we are to put on meekness, selfcontrol
, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, brotherly kindness. 
Yet while we know this, there is something more that we need 


— ^experiences in life which will bring these things before our 
minds so that they may be better appreciated by us and we 
may get more of the holy Spirit out of these injunctions of 
Holy Writ. For instance, we shall have special trials, and 
thus learn what real patience ia, and why we should exercise 
patience. And so with meekness. The Lord may permit us to 
stumble into some trial by which we may be led to see our 
lack in this respect ; and we may come to study more carefully 
the quality of meekness, to see the holy Spirit of meekness 
as presented in the Bible. And thus with self-control, gentleness
 and love. 

So God is giving us more of his holy Spirit by bringing 
the instructions of the Bible forcefully to our attention 
through painful experiences. These experiences are supervised 
by the Lord, by his holy Spirit, or power, as a part of the 
means by which we are to attain the necessary heart and 
character development — that thus we may be rounded out and 
become rich in all the -heavenly fruits and graces. 
"0 holy Spirit, Messenger of God, 

Gome, fill our hearts and minds with rich intent! 
Illuminate, instruct, and guide our wills, 

That they may with thy mind be fully blent. 
"By words divine that point the heavenly way, 

By discipline's hard hammer, or by strain 
Of heavenly music winged with pleading prayer, 

By sunshine bright or dreary days of pain, 
"Lead thou us on! This narrow, rugged path 

We cannot keep alone ; but led by thee, 
The way grows luminous and sweet and fair, 
Each earthly bond is loosed, and we are free!" 


CONVENTION AT PITTSBURGH 


ELECTION OF OFFICERS 

The Convention of Bible Students at Pittsburgh, January 
6 and 7, was a season of blessed fellowship. When the Society 
began to make arrangements for the annual election of its 
officers, required by the charter to be held at Pittsburgh, on 
January 6, it was thought well to have a convention in connection
 therewith, and a two-days' convention was then arranged
. 

This was the first convention held by the Society since 
the death of Brother Russell. As was expected, the spirit 
manifested by tlie friends in attendance was excellent, giving 
evidence that all had been living very near to the Lord. The 
attendance on Saturday, the 6th, averaged about 600, and 
sessions were held in Carnegie Hall, North Side, Pittsburgh. 
The addresses by Brother Ritchie and Brother Hirsh were 
much enjoyed by the friends. 

The Sunday meetings were held at the Lyceum Theater, 
opening at 9:45 a. m,, with the Bethel service and followed 
by a praise and testimony meeting. At 11 o'clock there was 
an address by Brother Macmillan, Chairman of the convention ; 
about a thousand of the friends were in attendance at this 
time. In the afternoon Brother Rutherford delivered an address
 to about 1,500, about 500 of the public being present. 
Excellent attention was given, and a good proportion of cards 
received from those who had heard the truth for the first 
time. 

The evening address by Brother Van Amburgh was greatly 
appreciated and was followed by a love feast, participated in by 
about 500. 

THE SOCIETY'S OFFICERS 

Saturday was the day specially set apart for the election of 
officers to serve the Watch Toweb Bible akd Tbact Society 
for the ensuing year. Much interest was centered in this 
election by friends throughout the world* Brother Russell had 
held the office of President from the organization of the Society
, in 1884, to the time of his death. Approximately 
150,000 votes were represented in person and by proxy. The 
session was opened by Vice-President Brother A. I. Ritchie 
with devotional services. He stated that the first work would 
be the appointment of a Committee on rules and regulations. 
As it would take a little time for the Committee to complete 
its work, four o'clock in the afternoon was set to heaj its 
report. It was nearly five when the Chairman called the 
meeting to order. The report of the Committee was read and 
adopted by the convention. 

The next order of business was the nomination and election 
of a President. Brother Pierson, with very appropriate remarks
 and expressions of appreciation and love for Brother 
Russell, stated that he had received word as proxy-holder from 
friends all over the land to the effect that he cast their votes 
for Brother J. F. Rutherford for President, and he further 
stated that he was in full sympathy with this and therefore 


would place his name in nomination. This was seconded by 
various brethren from Pittsburgh, Boston, Cleveland, Washington
, Pa., New York, and other cities. There being no further 
nominations, a motion was made that the rule of balloting 
be suspended, and that the Secretary of the convention be 
directed to cast the entire vote for Brother J. F. Rutherford. 
Thereupon the Secretary cast the ballot as directed, and 
Brother Rutherford was declared the unanimous choice of the 
convention as President of the Society for the ensuing year. 

Nominations for Vice-President were then called for, and 
Brother A. N. Pierson and Brother A. I. Ritchie were nominated
, both nominations being seconded by various brethren. 
The counting of the ballots showed that Brother Pierson received
 the larger number of votes. A motion then made the 
election of Brother Pierson as Vice-President of the Society 
unanimous. 

There was but one nomination for Secretary-Treasurer, and 
the Chairman was requested to cast the vote of the convention 
for Brother W. E. Van Amburgh, who was declared elected. 

The friends everywhere had prayed earnestly for the Lord's 
guidance and direction in the matter of the election; and when 
it was concluded, everyone was content and happy, believing 
that the Lord had directed their deliberations and answered 
their prayers. Perfect harmony prevailed amongst all present. 
A resolution was passed to the effect that while the President
 is the Executive Officer and General Manager of the 
Society's work and affairs, both in America and all foreign 
countries where the Society has branches, he might appoint 
an Advisory Committee from time to time to advise and consult
 with him concerning the conduct of the affairs of the 
Society. It was understood that this resolution was passed 
at the suggestion of Brother Rutherford, to the end that the 
President might have certain ones upon whom he might call 
at any time for aid and advice in the weightier matters pertaining
 to the affairs of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract 
Society. 

Following the election Brother Rutherford, addressing the 
meeting, said in part: 

"Dear friends, I cannot let this occasion pass without 
saying a few words to you. My heart is full to overflowing
. You will bear me witness that I have not in any 
way sought the offitee of President of this Society. Up to 
this hour I have not discussed it with any one. I have 
purposely avoided doing so, believing that the Lord would 
accomplish his purpose. What has been done here today 
I feel that the Lord has directed, and I humbly bow to 
his will. To him alone is due all honor and glory. 

"The Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society is the 
greatest corporation in the world, because from the time 
of its organization until now the Lord has used it as 
his channel through which to make known the glad tidings 
to many thousands, which glad tidings the whole world 


[6033] 


(22-28) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


soon shall know. It 19 a great privilege to be one of its 
officers, I am mindful of the great responsibility resting 
upon the one who attempts to fill the office of President. 
I am especially mindful of my inability to measure up to 
the full requirements. 

"One who follows a great man in office always finds it 
a more difficult task to fill the office than it was for his 
predecessor, due largely to the fact that his acts are 
measured by the high standard set and maintained by the 
great man who preceded him. Brother Russell was truly 
a great man, because especially fitted for the use to which 
the Lord put him. No one can fill his place. While I 
am fully conscious of this fact, yet I realize that through 
Christ Jesus who strengthened me, I can do all things 
that it is his will I shall do. I will therefore attempt, 
hj his grace, to continue to make known the glad tidings 
of Messiah's kingdom, which Brother Russell did as no 
other man has done since the days of the Apostle Paul. 
The policies which Brother Russell inaugurated I will attempt
 to carry forward. Brother Russell was deeply convinced
 that there is a great work yet to be done; that the 
Jordan must be smitten; that the people must know of 
the kingdom message, and that the Lord will use his people
 to give much of this knowledge to the world before 


the kingdom is fully established. No doubt there is yet 
much work for you and for me to do, 

"In the performance of the duties of President I shall 
feel more keenly than ever that I am your servant. It 
is my desire to serve faithfully. I will need, and therefore 
ask, your united prayers, deep sympathy and unqualified 
co-operation. I believe that I shall have such. You will 
have my prayers and love and sympathy. 

'The year past has been a very eventful one. The year 
opening may be even more eventful. Let us feel therefore
 not in the least discouraged. He who has thus far 
led us will continue to lead us. Let us have brave hearts, 
ready minds and willing hands, trusting implicitly always 
in the Lord, looking to hirn for guidance. He will lead 
us to certain victory. Renewing our covenant with him 
today, united in the holy bonds of Christian love, may we 
go forth proclaiming to the world, 'The kingdom of heaven 
is at hand.' *He that reapeth receiveth wages.' Let us 
do our part in the reaping faithfully while the opportunity 
is here. Be strong, be brave, be loyal! May his blessings 
be upon you who are here and upon the Lord's children 
everywhere! Thanks be to God that h& has permitted us 
to be members of such a favored company!" 


FIRST DISCIPLES OF THE LORD JESUS 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "We Have Found the Messiah, " published in issue of January 1, 1905, which please 

see.] 


JOHN THE BAPTIST AND JESUS 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled " Witnessing for Jesus," published in issue of December 15, 1904, which please see.l 


DESTRUCTION OF THE TWIN MONARCHS 

'Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not 

serve sin." — Romans 6:6. 


The Apostle Paul in his epistles represents the world as 
being under an evil reign of Sin and Death. (Romans 5:12, 14, 
17, 21; 6:12; 1 Corinthians 15:26.) He presents the matter 
as though these were Twin Monarchs. Sin and Death have 
been reigning over the world for six thousand years. Sin 
binds and fetters mankind, and finally turns them over to 
Death. Under their blighting reign thousands of millions have 
gone down into the tomb, mentally, morally and physically 
degraded. 

It is not in our power to destroy these great monarchs. 
They can be destroyed only by the One who has been given 
all power. This great One can rescue all mankind from Sin 
and Death and* lift them out of their misery and degradation 
up to purity and life and happiness. Eventually he will fully 
destroy these great enemies. Then Sin and Death will be no 
more. 

CALLING- OUT THE VOLUNTEER OOBPS 

During this Gospel age God is calling for a volunteer corps 
of brave soldiers, who have his Spirit and will fight a good 
fight against sin — a good fight on the side of truth and righteousness
. These are called into this great warfare. Whoever 
is following Jesus, the great Captain, is a soldier in this special 
corps of volunteers. These are the chosen band of Gideon. We 
who have answered the call are expected to show our loyalty to 
our great Leader and Head. 

We must first make a full consecration of our lives to God, 
in order that we may be begotten of his holy Spirit and become
 new creatures. It is our love for God and for righteousness
 that leads us to hate iniquity and to walk in the 
footsteps of our Leader, Christ Jesus. After having been as 
aliens adopted into God's family, begotten as sons, as members
 of the body of Christ, we have a new relationship to him, 
and any sympathy for sin would be so much of disloyalty 
to our Captain. Hence we are bound, as true soldiers of 
the Lord Jesus Christ, our Gideon, to fight a good fight against 
sin. 

Our old man, our human nature, which otherwise would 
have been made just and perfect in the Millennium, we have 
surrendered voluntarily to a sacrificial death, just as Jesus 
surrendered his human nature. This old man of ours is 
covered by the imputed merit of Jesus Christ. Our Lord 
says, "Now ye are clean." The Apostle in enumerating the 
works of the flesh practised by the world, says, "And such 
were some of you, but ye are washed, ye are sanctified, ye 
are justified." The new creature is that which is begotten of 


the holy Spirit and is to develop to completion, andvthe creature
 that must be killed is the old man. Much of our battle 
with the giant sin is within. And not only so, but we must 
remember that our old man, justified, is our sacrifice. But 
while we are laying down this sacrifice, consuming it day 
by day, the merit of Christ's righteousness covers our flesh, 
so long as we are loyal to God. And we must keep this sacrifice
 on the altar until it is completely consumed. 
CRUCIFIED WITH C HEIST 

Our Lord was crucified in conjunction with the divine arrangement
. He did not die a sinner, but he died as the Redeemer
 of men. And so our human nature goes down into 
death, not as a sinner, but as a justified creature, by God's 
arrangement. The Word declares that we are to be dead with 
Christ, to suffer with him, to be crucified with him. This 
does not mean that our new mind3 are being crucified. It 
means that as our Lord as a man was crucified as a sinoffering
 for the world, so we as his members have died as 
men, sharing in this crucifixion of Christ. We are already 
reckoned dead; but the natural process is now going on, and 
will not be consummated until these bodies have been actually 
laid down in death. 

So the sufferings of Christ, the crucifixion of Christ, in this 
larger sense of the word, have been in process all through 
this Gospel age. The sufferings being completed, the glory and 
honor and the change to the divine nature promised to the 
"more than conquerors" will take place, and the purchase-price 
for the world will be applied. 

What is the end of this crucifixion of each member of the 
church with his Lord? The Apostle states it in our text. 
It is in order that the body of sin may be destroyed. Sin once 
ruled within us. But he has been dethroned. His power 
over us has been destroyed. Sin is the great giant that has 
been ruling the world for six thousand years, in conjunction 
with Death. These giants have made' a terrible reign of suffering
, but they are about to be vanquished. The church is now 
suffering with Christ. And if we faithfully suffer with him 
unto the end, we shall reign with him and bring about the 
destruction of sin and death, which will be accomplished in 
his Millennial reign. — Ramans 5:17; Revelation 3:21; 5:10; 
20:4-6; Daniel 7:22; Psalm 149:6-0. 

"That henceforth we should not serve sin." We as the 
Lord's people are delivered from this reign of sin. We are 
no longer under bondage to sin. God counts us as having 
passed from death unto life, from sin unto righteousness. We 


[60S4] 


January IS, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(29-30) 


are new creatures, and he does not hold us responsible for 
the unintentional weaknesses of our flesh. We are covered 
by the imputation of our Savior's merit. This merit was 
imputed to us for past sins, and also covers us now, as a 
robe, because of our imperfect bodies. It avails for us as we 
shall need and call for it for daily shortcomings. We do 
not serve sin any longer. We are now set free from the one 
who was our taskmaster. 

The Son has made us free. He has made U3 free by faith. 
We shall be made free in the absolute sense when we receive 
our resurrection "change." We read respecting the new age 
that the groaning creation shall then be delivered from the 
bondage of corruption [Sinl into the glorious liberty of the 
sons of God. ('Romans 8:19-22.) The world will be delivered 
from sin and death actually during the thousand years, by 
their flesh being restored to perfection and their minds restored 
to the image of God. But as the church of Ohrist do not 
receive this full deliverance now, except by faith, they must 
wage a constant warfare against entrenched foes within as well 
as foes without. This warfare calls for great courage and 
determination, in the strength of oUr great Captain. How 


many of us will be of the noble "Gideon's band"? 

" 'Count me the swords that have come.' 
'Lord, thousands on thousand-s are ready.' 

'Lo, those are too many! and with them are some 
Whose hearts and whose hands are not steady. 

He whose soul does not burn, 

Let him take up his tent and return.' 

" 'Count me the swords that remain.' 
'Lord, hundreds on hundreds are daring.' 

'Those yet are too many for me to attain 
To the victory I am preparing. 

Lead them down to the brink 

Of the waters of Marah to drink.' 

" 'Lord, those who remain are but few, 
And the hosts of the foe are appalling! 

And what can a handful such as we doV 
'When ye hear from beyond my voice calling, 

Sound the trump! Hold the light! 

Great Midian shall melt in your sight!'" 


SOME LETTERS OF INTEREST 


WHO WILL BE OTJB PASTOB? 

The following is a sample of inquiries received by Brother 
Rutherford since his election as President of the Society, and 
his reply thereto : 
Deab Brother Rutherford: — 

Greetings in the name of the Lord! Last night we as a 
church elected you as our Pastor. Let me inquire, dear 

brother, is this the correct procedure or not? 

Reply 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

Since my election aa President of the Watch Tower Bible 
and Tract Society, I am advised that your Eeclesia has 
elected me as its Pastor. I beg to assure you, dear brethren, 
that I very much appreciate this expression of confidence and 
loving-kindness, but I take this occasion to advise you of 
the policy we have adopted. 

All of us realize the peculiar relationship that our dear 
Brother Russell bore to the church as "that servant." It 
was therefore entirely appropriate that he should be elected 
as Pastor of the various Ecclesias. In view of this, and in 
deference to his memory, it is my opinion that no one should 
be elected, henceforth, Pastor of any Eeclesia. At a church 
meeting of the Brooklyn and New York congregations, a 
pastor was not ejected, but a resolution was adopted to the 
effect that the President of the Society, should at all times 
be Chairman of the congregation and of the Board of Elders. 

It is my opinion, dear brethren, that if we adheTe to the 
order of electing elders and deaeons alone, and avoid the 
election of pastors, we shall find it more profitable and in 
keeping with the Lord's will. The Lord has long used the 
Society to aid his people, and we believe he is still using 
it to forward the message of the kingdom. If, therefore, 
you should feel that because I am President of the Society 
my name should be connected with your Eeclesia, then permit 
me to suggest that you might, if you see fit, designate me as 
Counselor, and elect me as such. By this term we would 
understand that the church, at any and all times, would 
feel free to call upon me for counsel- and advice concerning 
any matters. I assure you it is my sincere desire to serve 
not only your Eeclesia, but the church everywhere, in the 
capacity of counselor, adviser and helper to the extent the 
Lord may see fit to use me. I hope this meets with your 
approval. 

Please feel at liberty to write me or call upon me at any 
time for aid, advice or counsel. As you know, I am assisted
 here by able brethren, who faithfully supported Brother 
Russell, and we shall be glad to aid the friends by answering
 questions along doctrinal and other lines. For several 
years I served as counselor to Brother Russell and other 
friends, and will be glad to continue in this capacity to the 
friends generally. 

Wishing you one and all increased opportunities for service 
in the Lord's vineyard, and with much love in the Lord, 
I remain 

Your brother and servant by his grace, 

J, F. RUTHERFORD. 
A VOICE FEOM GLASGOW 

Deab Brethren: — 

The Glasgow church desire to convey to the members of 
the Bethel Family at Brooklyn a message of sympathy and 
love in connection with the passing beyond the veil of our 
beloved Pastor, dear Brother Russejl. 


We held a Memorial Service on Sunday, November 12, 
when an appropriate witness was given to the Truth, as well 
as a tribute of respect paid to the memory of the one we all 
loved so dearly. We know that nothing would have pleased 
our dear Brother better than to take advantage of such an 
opportunity for such a purpose; and we trust that some 
amongst the crowded audience who listened to the discourse 
given by Brother Tait, the oldest Elder in the Glasgow 
church, may have had some seeds of truth lodged in their 
hearts that will bring forth fruit in due time to the praise 
and glory of God. 

The following evening, we arranged for a special Prayer, 
Praise and Testimony Meeting, so that an opportunity might 
be afforded for individual expressions of appreciation of the 
life and work of our dear Pastor and of gratitude to God 
for his faithful ministry. It was good to listen to the various 
testimonies. It reminded one of the incident recorded in 
Acts 9:36, 39, when, at the death of Dorcas, the widows stood 
by> the Apostle Peter, showing the coats and garments which 
Dorcas had made while she was with them. All felt more 
deeply than they could express how much they owed to Brother 
Russell as the channel of God's grace for the spiritual clothing, 
in the possession of which they were rejoicing that day. 
Some had but recently come into the light of present truth, 
never having seen the Pastor's face in the flesh. Others could 
look back to the time when he first addressed a meeting in 
Glasgow thirteen years ago. Grief and joy mingled together 
as we thought, on the one hand, that we should never see him 
again on this side of the veil, and on the other hand, of the 
abundant entrance into the kingdom which we believed he had 
obtained, and a participation in which we all hope to experience 
very soon. 

We all desire to express to you our heart-felt sympathy 
in our common loss, and to send you as a message the following
 Scriptures: "Grace be to you, and peace, from God 
our Father and from the Lord Jesus Christ. Blessed be 
God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of 
Mercies and the God of all comfort, who comforteth us in 
all our tribulation that we may be able to comfort them which 
are in any trouble by the comfort wherewith we ourselves 
are comforted of God." "For the Father himself loveth 
you." The latter text was one that Brother Russell used in the 
last meeting for the brethren that he addressed in Glasgow. 

Although our dear brother has been removed from us 
and we shall miss very much the influence of his noble example
 and the power of his effective ministry, we have no 
reason to think otherwise than that the work will go on. We 
would, therefore, at this time, assure you of our prayers on 
your behalf and of our hearty co-operation in connection with 
the arrangements which those left in charge might make from 
time to time, so that the grand work so nobly begun and 
carried on by our dear Pastor, under the guidance of our 
Lord and Head, might be continued, and in his own good 
time and way completed. 

Your brethren and fellow-servants, 

Glasgow Church. — Scotland. 

AS EXPRESSION OF CONTCDEHCE 
Beloved Brethren: — 

We at Cleveland desire to convey to you our Christian 
love and sympathy in this dark hour of bereavement at the 
loss of our beloved Pastor. Surely the death of such a noble 


[6035] 


(30-31) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


Christian character as our Brother was, one so faithful in 
laying down his life in the service of the Lord and the 
brethren, must cause us some -sorrow and pain; and yet a 
sense of joy comes to us as we picture him now in glory, 
clothed upon with immortality, in the presence of our heavenly 
Father and our Lord Jesus. 

We assure you, brethren, that the death of our dear 
Brother has not caused us to slacken our zeal in the least in 
the service of the Lord; but that, on the contrary, we have 
determined to be more faithful than ever before, so that we 
too may finish our course with joy and enter upon broader 
fields of service in ministering to the world the kingdom 
blessings and joys. 

We are pleased to note that Brother Russell had so arranged
 matters that in case of his death the work would be 
carried on without interruption. We assure vou of our confidence
 and trust in whatever arrangements brother Russell 
has made for furthering the harvest work, believing that our 
Lord Jesus, the Chief Reaper, had especially chosen our Pastor 
as his mouth-piece and servant. We will continue as in 
the past to look to the Lord for his guidance and direction in 
all our affairs. 

Wo hereby pledge the co-operation and support of the 
Cleveland brethren to whatever further arrangements for promulgating
 the glad tidings of the kingdom the Watch Tower 
Bible and Tract Society may deem to be the Lord's will. We 
who are of the Cleveland Ecclesia desire to assure you of 
our resolution to continue faithfully in the service of the Lord 
by his grace, even unto death, and of our resolution to be 
ready and willing to assist in any work which has been outlined
 by our dear Pastor, in which we have the privilege of 
assisting. 

Assuring you of our continued prayers that the Lord will 
grant you wisdom in connection with the harvest work, we are 

Yours in Christian love, Cleveland Ecclesia. — Ohio. 
LOVING SYMPATHY FROM SWXTZEBLAJTD 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

The news of the going home of our tenderly beloved 
Brother and Pastor C. T. Russell, reached us unexpectedly 
on the 14th of November. He had once advised us not to 
be surprised if one day we should hear of his having left 
this life. How we do sympathize with all the dear friends 
everywhere — and especially with the dear Bethel family nt 
Brooklyn! The French brethren especially the dear ones of 
La Chaux-de-Fonds and the Jura, send you their deep condolence
, praying that our Lord will give the spirit of love 
and wisdom to those upon whom the responsibility rests, that 
the harvest work may continue uninterruptedly, and the "meat 
in due season" never fail to come through the chosen channel 
of our Lord — The Watch Toweb. 

It is a deep loss to us who remain : yet as it was good for 
the early disciples that the Lord left them, so our Master 
found it for our good that dear Brother Russell pass before 
us beyond the veil. We may well believe Revelation 14:13 
fulfilled in him! 

The writer first knew him in 1890, being then immersed 
in Bible House Chapel, Allegheny. I wae also one of the 
first to read the Studies in the Scriptures ( then Millennial 
Dawn) in German, and to canvass for the same in Pennsylvania
 and adjoining states. 

Next to the Lord it was dear Brother Russell who made 
it possible for me to become the translator of the Studies 
and most of the other publications into the French, until 1913. 
He also permitted me to be one of the first to introduce 
present truth on this continent, especially into Switzerland 
and France, and to act as his interpreter on several occasions. 

May the Lord forever bless his memory! 

Adolphe Weber. — Stoitzerland. 

PLEDGE OF LOYALTY 

Whereas, it has pleased our heavenly Father to call home 
our dearly beloved Brother and Pastor, Charles T. Russell, 
from the scene of his earthly toil and labor to that of greater 
service in the great harvest work in which he was manifestly
 bo faithful; and 

Wihereas, we believe that the Lord will not scatter, but 
will "turn his hand [power] upon the little ones," in this 
dark hour of trial (Zech. 13:7) ; and 

Whereas, it would seem fitting at this time to express our 
words of encouragement to the brethren of the Bethel family 
and Brooklyn Tabernacle; therefore, be it 

Resolved, that we pledge our continued loyalty to and 
hearty co-operation with the dear co-laborers at Brooklyn, and 
also that we extend our deep Christian love to the brothers 
and sisters of the Bethel family and to all "the sanctified in 
Christ Jesus" everywhere. Be it further 

Resolved, that we wish to assure the dear brethren of our 


full confidence in them, and that we feel assured that the arrangements
 left by our beloved Pastor for the carrying on 
of the work, will be continued in perfect accord with his 
wishes, which, we believe, were directed by the "Chief Reaper," 
our Lord and Head. Be it further 

Resolved, that these resolutions be spread upon the minutes
 of our Ecclesia and that a copy be sent to the Watch 
Tower Bible and Tract Society. 

Quincy A. B. S. — Mass. 
A VOICE FROM COSTA EICA 
My Dear Brethren: — 

While on a trip visiting the classes in this country, news 
reached me of the passing away of dear Brother Russell; and 
you know what a mixed experience it is — sorrow and joy — 
joy that he has entered into his reward, and sorrow that we 
must do without him for awhile. Yet with tears I sing, 
"Blessed Lord, thy will be done!" 

I know what an experience it is for you; yet I only hope 
the sweet Spirit of the Lord, which our brother alway3 manifested
 among you may continue and that wisdom from above 
may be yours in the selection of a president for the W. T. 
B. A T. Society. 

I am making mention of you in my prayers, and have 
called upon the classes to this end, to join me in prayer for 
you, that you may continue in the same until we are called 
to join the church in glory and meet our dear Pastor again. 

Brother Browne, of the office at Kingston, Jamaica, was 
with us. W T e had a blessed time. He is now at Panama. 

Your Brother in the Lord's service, 

V. E. Samuels. — Costa Rica* 

A MESSAGE FBOM EDINBURGH 
Dear Brethren: — 

Greetings on behalf of the Edinburgh church! We desire
 to express to you our deepest sympathy in the great loss 
we have sustained through the passing beyond the veil of 
our beloved Pastor. We, however, rejoice in the confident 
assurance that his work here on earth has been completed, 
and that now he has gone to his eternal reward. He has, 
we believe, gone to be with and like our dear Redeemer, and 
is now in possession of the crown of life, the promised 
blessing of our heavenly Father. 

Our heart-felt praise and gratitude ascend to him from 
whom all blessings flow for our dear Brother's long life of 
self-sacrifieing labors in the service of the truth, for the 
glory of God, and for the spiritual interests of his people. 
We will ever cherish the charm of his great spiritual personality
. His wonderful example of life and work will also 
continue to inspire us all onward toward *the goal he has 
reached, that we also may make our calling and election sure. 

Our united prayer, dear Brethren, ascends on your behalf
 to our loving heavenly Father, that his holy Spirit will 
guide and support you in carrying on the work of the Society, 
for the comfort and upbuilding of the Lord's people in their 
most holy faith. 

With love in the Lord as always, 

Edinburgh Ecclesia. — Scotland. 

WEARINESS ENDED AND GtLOBY BEGUN 

My Dear Brethren: — 

Through the newspapers we have learned that our dear 
Brother Russell hae entered into the 'Courts of Glory, having 
finished his earthly career while traveling from San Diego, 
Cal., to Kansas City. The news could not be otherwise than 
& shock to us, but, as we contemplated upon the honor and 
glory into which our dear Brother has entered, our sorrow 
was turned into joy. Our Lord, the great Chief Reaper in 
the harvest work, could have kept our dear Brother with us 
longer had it been necessary; but the time had come for his 
weariness to end and his glory to begin. And what rejoicing 
there must be in heaven now at the passing over of one who 
has been truly great in serving all! There can be no doubt 
in the minds of the faithful left behind that our dear Brother 
Russell is now a "gem of purest ray serene," in the Lord's 
Royal Diadem. 

May grace sufficient be your portion, and in the wisdom 
that cometh from above guide you in the further work which 
remains to be done. With much Christian love, I am 

Yours in the Redeemer, E. J. Coward. — Barbados, B. W. 1. 

"A WOBD TO THE WISE" 

Dear Friends: — 

In a recent trip through the Southwest, covering about 
seven thousand miles and making twenty stops, we observed 
that in many of the stations there were neatly framed notices 
of religious meetings of the various denominations, also? 
Christian Science notices with boxes underneath containing 
literature. Only at one station did we see any of the I.B.S.A. 


[603*3 


January IS, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(31-35) 


literature, and then it was on a rack mixed up in a disorderlyway
 with Christian Science literature. At one station we 
saw an I. B. S. A. box with no literature. 

We know from The Watch Tower that many of the 
towns have I. B. S. A. classes, and we could not help thinking
 an opportunity for spreading the truth was being missed 
by not providing notices of meetings and literature with 
boxes to keep it, at every available station. If this suggestion 
were followed it would provide not only reading matter for 
the public, but also information regarding places of meeting 
for the benefit of traveling friends. 

Yours in the Lord's service, Mrs. Ellen Hunter. — III. 
CRT FOB LIGHT ANSWERED 
Dear Brethren: — 

We regret to hear of our beloved Pastor's passing away; 
for it was one of his sermons in the Winnipeg Free Press 
that started us in the truth. We were sick and tired of what 
the churches were giving us; so we left them. But we did 
not leave the Lord. We cried aloud unto him and he heard 
us by sending a little light in that sermon. Then a few 
months later, we got the Studifb in the Scriptures; and 
now we know that we read and understand the Scriptures: 
not through the wisdom of man, but through the wisdom 
which cometh down from above. 

We are glad to see that our dear Pastor, whom having 
not seen yet we loved, has left his house in order, that all 
things may continue the same. My wife and I are alone here 
in the truth, yet not alone, as he that is for us is more 
than all that are against us, We pray that God's richest 
blessing may continue to rest upon the Bethel home. 

Yours in his service, J. H. and A. M. Hoskin, — B. C. 
A VOICE FROM THE COLPOETEUB BANKS 
Dearly Beloved Brethren: — 

Would like to thank you for your good letter of encouragement
 in regard to the colporteur work and the advanced
 price of the books. Thank you for the trial credit 
also. I go on rejoicing, thankful for this further opportunity 
of telling out the glad tidings. 

In about four hours recently I took orders for three full 
sets at the new prices; also orders for three first volumes. 
(This, by the w T ay, was in the follow-up work and quite a 
little of the time was spent in explaining the chart to interested
 ones.) 

Thanking you so much for your labor of love to the 
Lord, and for the encouragement and help you extend to 
all the co-laborers in the vineyard, I am, "Strong in faith," 

Your sister by His grace, Adelaide Woolgab. — Oolp. 
Dear Brethren: — 

As announced in The Toweb regarding extra copies of 
the Memorial Number, I wish to advise that the Wneeling 
class desire one hundred and fifty. Enclosed please find 
$7.50 to cover price. 

Yours in the service, W. H. Scattebday. 

ONE WHO OAK CHASE A THOUSAND 
Dear Brethren: — 

Enclosed find Report ending Sept. 30, I am glad to say 
that of late I fiad more interest manifested in the truth than 
ever before. Another thing very noticeable is that some 
people are becoming less prejudiced and are investigating, 
and others are becoming so prejudiced that they will not 
investigate. One class is talking more favorably of the truth; 
the other is denouncing it more vehemently. 

I have met several of the latter class who would make 
things pretty lively for the I. B. S. A. if it were in their 
power. I was recently told that I was doing more harm 


putting out those books and explaining such "devil's doctrines
" than all the preachers put together could rectify; and 
that something ought to be done to stop those people calling 
themselves Bible Students going around and deceiving people! 

It occurred to me that if I, one of the least in the work, 
am doing so much damage to the devil's cause that all the 
preachers can't rectify it, what will the end be — soon ! 

Your fellow-servant in the Master's cause, 

Wm. R. Ernst.-— Colp. 
A PEXVlIiEOE TO UPHOLD THE WORK 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

We desire you to know that we have been greatly blessed 
through our late Pastor's faithfulness. We sympathize with 
you in our mutual loss; and yet we feel thankful that our 
Pastor's trials are over, and that he has entered into his 
reward. 

We wish to assure you that we will consider it our duty 
and privilege to uphold those who endeavor to carry on the 
work of serving the household of faith, which our Beloved 
Pastor strove so faithfully to do. We are praying for those 
upon whom thi3 responsibility will fall. 

Your fellow-servants, The Montreal Church. — Quebec. 
TRUSTING IN HIS BRACE AND WISDOM 
Dear Brethren: — 

The secretary is instructed to convey to you the assurance 
of our continued co-operation in the service of our Lord and 
Master, even unto death. 

While our hearts are torn with grief at the loss of our 
friend and Pastor, we nevertheless bow in humble submission 
to the will of the Lord, patiently waiting for whatever experience
 he may have in store for us in the future. Trusting 
in his grace and wisdom to accomplish in all of us his good 
pleasure even unto the end, we are praying ever to remain 
in the favor of our 'Lord and the light of his Word. 

Riverside Ecclesia. — Cal. 
WORE WILL PROCEED WHILE YET DAT 
Dear Brethren: — 

While we deeply feel the loss of our dear Pastor, we are 
glad to know he has made ample arrangements for the continuation
 of the work. Our faith and confidence is in the 
Lord, who has directed the harvest work thus far, that he 
will continue to direct it until finished. 

We are both glad and willing to continue to co-operate with 
the Society as the Lord sees best. We pray the Lord's blessing
 on the Bethel family and on our further efforts in his 
work, and assure you of out continued love and confidence. 

Auburn Church, — Ind. 

LONO-FELT REPUGNANCE TO DOCTRINE OF ENDLESS WOE 

Dear Friends:-— 

I thank you for your letter of Nov, 13 and have read The 
Tower of Dec. 1. I am glad to see the tributes to my old 
friend, and, wish to send them to some who did not know 
him so well as I. Please send me such number of copies of 
the issue as convenient for enclosure. Long before I first 
met Brother Russell I felt the same repugnance to the doetrine
 of endless human woe that formed the main spring of 
his study and work, so well outlined in your obituary of him. 

Cordially your friend, J. A. Stowe, — tf« J. 

Dear Friends: — 

Please find check enclosed for $5, for which send 100 of 
Memorial Number of The Watch Tower. 

Walter Kitchen. — Pa. 
Dear Brethren: — 

Please send 300 Memorial Numbers of The Tower to 
Your brother in the Lord, E. 0. Miller. — Ore. 

