





Questions From Readers



When Jesus instituted the Lord’s Evening Meal, where were the 70 disciples whom he had earlier sent out to preach? Had they abandoned him?

We need not think that just because they were not present when Jesus instituted the Lord’s Evening Meal, the 70 disciples were disapproved or had abandoned him. Jesus simply wanted to be with his apostles on that occasion.
He approved of both the 12 and the 70. Jesus first chose from his many disciples 12 men, whom he called apostles. (Luke 6:12-16) He was in Galilee when “he called the Twelve” and “sent them out to preach the Kingdom of God and to heal.” (Luke 9:1-6) Later, down in Judea, Jesus “designated 70 others and sent them out by twos.” (Luke 9:51; 10:1) Consequently, Jesus had followers in various areas in which his message was being preached.
Jews who became Jesus’ disciples would still hold the annual Passover, likely along with their families. (Ex. 12:6-11, 17-20) As the time for his death approached, Jesus and his apostles went to Jerusalem. But he did not call for a large Passover gathering of all his disciples​—from Judea, Galilee, and Perea. Clearly, Jesus wanted to be with the apostles on this occasion. He told them: “I have greatly desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer.”​—Luke 22:15.
There was good reason for that. Jesus was soon to die as “the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world.” (John 1:29) That was to happen in Jerusalem, where sacrifices to God had long been offered. Jesus’ death would provide a liberation grander than what became available through the lamb eaten by Israelite families on the night of the Exodus from Egypt. (1 Cor. 5:7, 8) What Jesus did would allow for the Twelve to become foundation members of the Christian congregation. (Eph. 2:20-22) Interestingly, the holy city Jerusalem has “12 foundation stones” that have written on them “the 12 names of the 12 apostles of the Lamb.” (Rev. 21:10-14) Yes, the faithful apostles were to have a major role in fulfilling God’s purpose. It is thus understandable that Jesus wanted to have them with him for that final Passover and for what immediately followed​—the Lord’s Evening Meal.
The 70 and the other disciples were not at that meal with Jesus. Still, all disciples who proved faithful would benefit from what Jesus instituted​—the Lord’s Evening Meal. All who in time became anointed Christians would enter into the covenant for a kingdom, which Jesus mentioned to the apostles that night.​—Luke 22:29, 30.



