From Our Readers
Learning Improvement
I want to thank you for publishing articles that are not only interesting but also instructive and useful. I am thinking particularly of “Does Your Child Have Learning Problems?” (May 8, 1983), “Is My Child Hyperactive?” (June 8, 1984), “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Improve My Study Habits?” (August 8, 1984), and “You Can Be a Better Reader!” (August 22, 1984). I am studying at the state university in Mexico to become a teacher. I had to study for exams, and there was too much material. But by applying your suggestions on study habits, I was first among 6 students who passed the exam, taken by 25 students. I would like to recommend to all young people who get Awake! not to overlook a single article. It will all help to improve your life-style.
J. B. G., Mexico
Watching TV
I am writing with reference to your article “Young People Ask . . . Is There Anything I Can Watch on TV?” (November 8, 1984) You quoted writer Vance Packard as saying: “Parents who put their TV sets in the attic are probably overreacting.” I would like to relate my family’s experience. Approximately two years ago we had pay TV with features so that you could find something to watch any hour of the day or night. We found that we were doing just that. Then in order to cut down expenses, we decided to have the cable shut off and we also put the TV away in storage. Now we are all avid readers. In fact, my daughter is the best reader in her class at school. Also, we have taken up musical instruments. My husband plays the piano and I play the banjo. Our youngest, now two, has his own style at the piano also. So not only are we saving money but we have got closer as a family and found many, many other worthwhile things to do with our time, and we are never bored.
J. A. U., California
Fraud in Science
I found your articles regarding famous scientists, such as Newton, Galileo, and so forth, unkind and ridiculous. (May 22, 1984) A person cannot hope for a good and just world if he criticizes those who, scientifically speaking, have given so much to everyone. I’m surprised that you, who always believe you are right, could print these articles that are defamatory toward those who gave all that they had for the good of humanity.
G. G., Italy
I wonder if Mendel was indeed guilty of data selection when he would initially try to explain the simplest case and ignore the more complicated examples.
A. J. P., England
We were not criticizing those scientists named for their accomplishments for the good of science. While the matter is still being debated, reputable scientific publications such as “Scientific American,” “Science,” “Science Digest,” and “Science News,” as well as the book “Betrayers of the Truth,” by William Broad and Nicholas Wade, provide much evidence to the effect that in order to support and promote their theories some well-known and respected scientists of the past used methods that fell short of objectivity, dedication, and complete honesty.​—ED.

