The Best Government​—Soon!
WHERE there is no government there is anarchy. This has been illustrated time and again when the forces of law and order have gone on strike or been unable to function. The result? A lawless minority has taken advantage of the situation to loot and pillage. This points up the fact that man cannot live in an orderly society unless there is government to regulate law and order for the benefit of all.
But others will answer that where there is government there is often a different kind of looting​—politicians and big business lining their pockets on the basis of their influence. Bribery, graft, and corruption are common practices in politics. Lucrative government contracts are farmed out to favored business “friends.” As a consequence, many people have become disillusioned by politics and politicians, and do not even bother to vote. Why? One reason is that often governments have not guaranteed justice and equity for all.
Why is it that often, in spite of high-sounding ideals and humanitarian manifestos, politics has been so divisive and destructive of human life?
Hidden Influence Behind Politics
To answer this question we must go back in history over 1,950 years to a mountain in Palestine. There an unusual conversation took place that is the key to understanding the question of human rulership. Jesus Christ was about to begin his public ministry. Satan, God’s archrival for universal rulership, took the opportunity to test Jesus in an effort to break his integrity. The account tells us that Satan “showed [Jesus] all the kingdoms of the world [in a vision] and their glory, and he said to him: ‘All these things I will give you if you fall down and do an act of worship to me.’”​—Matthew 4:8, 9.
To mankind’s everlasting blessing, Jesus rejected the offer. But what does this vital encounter tell us about Satan and the world system, “all the kingdoms of the world”? That Satan is the invisible “ruler of this world.” (John 12:31; 14:30; 16:11) Thus the apostle John could write: “We know that we are children of God and that all the rest of the world around us is under Satan’s power and control.”​—1 John 5:19, The Living Bible.
Therefore it is Satan’s perverse spirit that permeates the world’s political system. He is the true source of the principles that Machiavelli compiled. Satan is “the spirit now at work among God’s rebel subjects” for he is “the commander of the spiritual powers of the air.”​—Ephesians 2:2, The New English Bible.
Some may find it hard to accept that there is an evil, invisible spiritual power motivating the political rulers of the world. Yet this is a keystone to understanding the overall picture that the Bible presents of a clash over universal sovereignty. (Revelation 12:7-9) Satan has used politics to divide mankind and divert man’s attention away from the true hope for restored righteous rulership, namely, God’s Kingdom government by Christ.​—Matthew 4:23; 9:35.
How successful Satan has been! By his exploitation of divisive politics and nationalism he has used men who “exalted the state as divine . . . or identified it with the march of God in history.” For some, the “worship of the state as the personification of the spirit of the nation was essential for realization of the national destiny.” (Ideas in Conflict, Edward Burns) Nazi Germany was a classic example. “Nothing was sponsored so much as worship of Nazism and its Führer,” states Professor Palmer. Even now politicians are using this same tool to advance their ambitions, but to mankind’s detriment. Because of political self-interest, possible extinction stares us in the face.
What could pull man back from the brink of nuclear disaster? Is there any form of government that could unite mankind? What would be necessary to make all people loyal to one righteous government?
Peace and Unity​—How?
Historian Edward Burns wrote: “The control and abatement of nationalism, and the substitution for it of an effective world organization, is undoubtedly one of the most critical problems of modern times.” (Italics ours.) Other minds have groped to find an answer to man’s quest for unity. The Spanish-American philosopher George Santayana “saw no way of abolishing war except by the creation of a universal government capable of imposing its will upon all of the states of the earth. No League of Nations or United Nations would suffice.”​—Italics ours.
Why have the politicians not been able to achieve this ideal of one universal government? One reason is that parochial nationalism stands in the way. As one historian states: “To control or eliminate it by any means short of education in human brotherhood will be difficult so long as we have a world increasingly beset with hatreds and fears.” (Italics ours.) Author H. G. Wells reasoned: “It is necessary that the common mind of the race should be possessed of that idea of human unity, and that the idea of mankind as one family should be a matter of universal instruction and understanding.”​—Italics ours.
Is such an educational program feasible? Not only is it feasible; it is a reality! Where? Among several million Jehovah’s Witnesses in 203 nations and lands. These already have experienced a change in heart and mind. In turn, Jehovah’s Witnesses are also affecting over four million associates. What changes have they brought about? A supranational spirit has been engendered among them based on Christian love. They have abandoned the nationalism that is “associated with racism, parochialism, bigotry, intolerance, persecution, and fanaticism.”​—Ideas in Conflict, page 502.
The Bible gave foregleams of this great educational work for this generation. Jehovah gave assurance through his prophet Isaiah that “all your sons will be persons taught by Jehovah, and the peace of your sons will be abundant.” (Isaiah 54:13) This will be continued until the whole earth is “filled with the knowledge of Jehovah as the waters are covering the very sea.”​—Isaiah 11:9.
Jesus also stated as part of the sign of the last days for this political, commercial, religious system: “This good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations; and then the end will come.” (Matthew 24:14) This explains the intensive house-to-house educational campaign that Jehovah’s Witnesses are carrying out in this 20th century. They are announcing the Kingdom government that will soon take action from the heavens to “crush and put an end to all these [present political] kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.”​—Daniel 2:44.
What Does the Near Future Hold?
However, before that theocratic Kingdom government by Christ can take control of the whole earth, certain events must take place, in accordance with Bible prophecy. The book of Revelation sets the characters. These are:
“A woman . . . ‘Babylon the Great, the mother of the harlots.’” (Revelation 17:3-5) She represents the world empire of false religion that influences many “peoples and crowds and nations and tongues.”​—Revelation 17:15.
“A scarlet-colored wild beast” that carries the woman on its back. This beast, an image of the greater “wild beast” mentioned previously in the Revelation given to John, symbolizes the international organization that brings together into one arena representatives of nearly all the political systems of this world. Originally it was the League of Nations. Now it is the United Nations. In effect it is a conspiracy against God’s Kingdom. It aims to do what only God’s Kingdom can do​—establish permanent peace.​—Revelation 13:1, 2, 15; 17:3, 8; 20:4.
Now what events must take place shortly? Revelation assures us that the “scarlet-colored wild beast” and its wielders of political power “will hate the harlot and will make her devastated and . . . will completely burn her with fire.” (Revelation 17:16) What does this graphic language forebode? That political elements, represented in the United Nations, will turn against the world empire of false religion to destroy it. But this means they will also eventually turn against the true representatives of God’s Kingdom by Christ, namely, Jehovah’s Witnesses.a What will be the result?
That will provoke a reaction from the heavens, from ‘the one seated on a white horse who judges and carries on war in righteousness,’ that is, “The Word of God,” Christ Jesus. (Revelation 19:11-16) Thus the nations will find themselves facing God’s war of Armageddon. (Revelation 16:16) This righteous war against Satan and his “world” will mark the end of all political systems. It will be followed by the restoration of theocratic rule over all the earth. The earth will be transformed into a paradise state and populated by the meek who do God’s will. Destructive politics will have ceased from the earth.​—Psalm 2:2, 9; 37:29.
In view of the obvious failure of all political systems to satisfy mankind’s deepest needs, should you not look to the government that can satisfy all mankind? In view of the urgency of the times in which we live, we invite you to contact Jehovah’s Witnesses in your area in order to examine more carefully the evidence that indicates that God’s Kingdom government is near.​—Luke 21:25-33.
[Footnotes]
For a more detailed discussion of the significance of Revelation for our times, see “Babylon the Great Has Fallen!” God’s Kingdom Rules!, published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
[Blurb on page 12]
Because of political self-interest, possible extinction stares us in the face
[Blurb on page 13]
“The idea of mankind as one family should be a matter of universal instruction and understanding.”​—H. G. Wells

