Purifying Worship in Nigeria
Breaking Down the Idols
A NIGERIAN district servant writes as follows: “We traveled to our next assembly by bush trail, passing through many small villages. Not many villages in the Western world could boast of being so religious. At the entrance to every village hangs the juju, to keep evil away; but this is only the beginning. Do you see that pole with a chain round it? That is Awosi, the god of life. What’s that at the entrance to that hut? A mound of earth with a pot on top. That is Umumogo, the family juju. That clay bird is Ugo, the juju of prediction. The life-size image of a man and wife is Ovugure, and the little wood carving of a man from waist up is Obo, the god of prosperity. And there is no missing Oghene, a forty-foot pole with a piece of white cloth atop. And there are the small houses of sacrifice on stilts. Inside can be seen shells, bones, bananas, yams, coconuts, bottles, etc.
“After we had finished the assembly a young man ran up and said, ‘My father has just died and left me his compound. There are many jujus there. Will you come and destroy them?’ The work was efficiently carried out.”
Another district servant writes: “By 9 p.m. the public meeting had dispersed, and while false religion had been severely attacked by the sword of the spirit, soon it was to feel the literal ax and fire. A certain man formerly steeped in demon worship desired to be free. Fearing to destroy his idol gods, he came to the witnesses late in the evening, requesting them to do the job. An army of 100 witnesses set off in the night on a destructive mission. Death came to the idol gods at midnight! A mighty juju house was set on fire and into the crackling flames were thrown countless idols, charms, cowries, drums, vessels, pots, special garments, ‘holy’ feathers, and the like. Many of the neighbors joined the witnesses and cheered as the work went on. The demon gods succumbed to the fierce crackling flames and went up in smoke. As the fire roared the witnesses danced around singing Kingdom songs. The juju tree and its fence were hewed down and burned. Even the charms in the hair of the man’s wife were cut out and burned. These jujus through oracles were constantly forbidding them to eat this or that, to refrain from doing this or that, and were always making demands for the sacrifice of chickens and goats. The man had spent all his money satisfying his idol gods, with no benefit.”
An Assembly Among Thieves
Imo River is a well-known place, not for its good, honest qualities, but as a center for rogues. Here is the headquarters of the most noted robbers and thieves in the whole province. It was at this place that Jehovah’s witnesses began arriving for their circuit assembly. The chief of the robbers approached the circuit servant and offered his compound for some of the witnesses to stay in. Was he sincere or just seeking an opportunity to ply his trade? Noticing the hesitation on the part of the circuit servant he said, “I want Jehovah’s witnesses to stay in my home. It may help me to see the truth. I can assure you that not even one small pin will be missing from your people. I mean it. You know we have our union, and all must abide by the rules.” Seventeen witnesses stayed in his compound. In this town of notorious thieves, through which no one will ever dare to pass at night, not one conventioner lost even the smallest article. The people said they were happy to be with a clean people. Jesus said that publicans and harlots would enter the Kingdom before the self-righteous clergy. We are reminded of another thief that died alongside Jesus and secured the promise of a resurrection. It remains to be seen how many from this town of thieves will abandon the old world.
Mohammedan Impressed by Christian Conduct
At Oshogbo a new cinema was engaged for the circuit assembly. The owner, a Mohammedan, charged £2 ($5.60). After the assembly this man approached us and said that he thought we were like the general run of the people and would break a few chairs, deface the premises and continue into the small hours of the morning. But, oh, what a difference! Would we be offended if he returned the money? ‘Let me know any time you want the cinema again. I will fix it up for you specially. It will be an honor.’

