Vou XXXTX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., JULY 15, 1918 


No. 14 


THE NEW COMMANDMENT 

M new commandment I give unto you, That ye Jove one another; as I Jiave loved you, that ye also love 

one another" — John 13:34. 


The New Creation is not left without a law. It is a very 
oft repeated commandment: and the attainment of all the 
various things to which it is invited rests upon the keeping of 
it: "If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; 
even as I have kept my Father's commandments, and abide in 
liia love. This is my commandment, that ye love one another 
as I have loved you/' (John 15:10, 12) This new commandment
 of the Lord made a great impression upon the mind of 
the loving Apostle John. He mentions the injunction a number
 of times: "This commandment have we from him, That 
he who loveth God love his brother also." (1 John 4:21) 
"For this is the commandment [marginal reading] that ye 
heard from the beginning, that we should love one another." 
"And this is his commandment, that we should believe on the 
name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he 
gave us commandment."— 1 John 3:11, 23. 

A great deal that passes for love will not stand the test. 
Many people have had large numbers of friends while their 
conditions were prosperous, and have been greatly surprised 
in the hour of reversal to find that they could count their 
true friends upon the fingers of one hand and have fingers to 
spare. The Lord does not wish his people, however, to cultivate
 an outward love for the fellow-members of the New 
Creation, but a heart love; nor would he have them as new 
creatures love each other coldly and indifferently, but fervently
: "Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the 
truth through the spirit unto unfeigned love of the brethren. 
see that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently." — 1 
Peter 1:22. 

A first consideration to the keeping of the new commandment
 is that the one we are invited to love as a new creature 
should be one who, like ourselves, is a partaker of God's holy 
Spirit; for "if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is 
none of his." (Romans 8:9) This love for those who have our 
Father's likeness is as superior to any earthly love as the 
heavenly relationships are superior to the earthly relationships
. In the history of our Lord's life is an incident which 
brings this fact forward with great prominence. While he was 
engaged in seeking those who should ultimately become members
 of the heavenly family, messengers came to him informing
 him that his mother and brethren stood without, desiring 
to speak with him. It is probable that our Lord loved his 
mother more than any other earthly being. There was a special
 bond between them due to the circumstances of his birth, 
which apparently they alone could fully appreciate, (Luke 
2:19; John 8:41. 42} But although Jesus loved his mother so 
dearly that his last thought was to provide for her a home 
with the Apostle whom he specially loved (John 19:26, 27), 
yet to those who wished him to leave off his preaching of the 
Gospel he answered: "Who is my mother? and who are my 
brethren ? and he stretched forth his hands toward his disciples, 
and said, Behold my mother and my brethren! For whosoever
 shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the 
same is my brother, and sister, and mother," i. e., 'he stands 
to me in a relationship that is at once close and tender and 
vital.'— Matthew 12:48-50. 

Undoubtedly the reason for the Apostle Paul's advice to 
unmarried consecrated ones to the effect that they would 
probably do better to remain so, was not because there is anything
 displeasing to the heavenly Father in this nearest and 
dearest of all human relationships, which he himself instituted
 and for which the creatures of his handiwork are by 
nature adapted, but because many , new creatures are not 
strong enough in character to make sure always that the 
Lord occupies the first place in their hearts, and the earthly 
companion the second place. Every marriage in which this 
balance is never lost sight of is beautiful, lovely and acceptable 
in the Father's sight. But it requires great strength of character
 to keep the Lord always upon the throne of our affections
. Henoe the sad condition arises that if a new creature 
becomes soul-sick and withdraws from the altar of sacrifice, 
his or her companion is very frequently drawn away, too. 
TWO CLASSES THAT PROFESS DISCIPIJBSHIP 

The fact that one professes to be the Lord's follower does 


special love which we feel; and which we must feel, for every 
one who has covenanted to lay his all at the Lord's feet. Then* 
are some who apparently feel very free to call upon the Lord's 
name, but who do not have the spirit of consecration. '"Nut 
every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the 
kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father 
which is in heaven." — Matthew 7:21. 

But if we find one who is a. true believer in the Lord and 
who has accepted him as his Savior and Redeemer and who i-i 
trying to live an inoffensive life, we are to count him as a 
brother, even though he may not have seen the privileges of 
the priesthood which are ours. Such brethren were very dear 
to the Apostle Paul ; and^ it was among them that he sought 
for those who shall be worthy of being counted brethren on 
the higher plane. Thus he said: "I beseech you therefore, 
brethren, by the mercies of God [tentatively justified], that ye 
present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto 
God" — that thus you may become actually justified. (Romans 
12:1) Those who have taken neither of these steps are not 
our brethren as yet, but are "by nature the children of wrath, 
even as others." — Ephesians 2; 3. 

The privilege of being sons of the divine family and of 
being recognized as such by other members of the family and 
of enjoying the blessings of such fellowship is limited. It did 
not exist before our Lord's day; it was limited then to one 
nation and to the few in that nation who could and did meet 
the conditions imposed. The divine sonship could not be 
reestablished until Father Adam's ransom price was provided. 
The terms of the heavenly salvation are not stated in the Old 
Testament; and until Pentecost not one Jew could be transferred
 from the house of servants to the house of sons. At 
Pentecost, however, the new family relationship began; and 
"as many as received him, to them gave he power to become 
the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name." — 
John 1:12. 

Many who suppose that they are children of God, or at 
least calculation are very worthy and very acceptable servants, 
do not have the spirit of sonship at all, but have an opposite 
spirit derived from an opposite source, and for that reason are 
designated the children of the devil: "Ye are of your father 
the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do" (John 8:44}. 
Christ said to some in his day. From this we can plainly see 
that the expression, "the fatherhood of God," when applied to 
all men in the present time, is incorrect. The fatherhood of 
God now is limited £o those who have received the spirit of 
adoption. "But ye have received the spirit of adoption 
whereby we cry, Abba, Father" — dear Father. 

PRIVILEGE OF COMFORTING THE BRETHREN 

One of the blessed privileges which we enjoy towards the 
other members of our Father's family is the privilege of comforting
 them in the midst of the sorrows which are peculiarly 
the lot of the sacrificing priesthood. The Apostle Paul in 
writing to the Thessalonian brethren said: "Ye know how 
we exhorted and comforted and charged every one of you, as a 
father doth his children." (1 Thessalonians 2:11) In writing 
to the Corinthian brethren, his great heart of love was allowed 
to overflow with the following wonderful passage of consolation
 and comfort to his brothers and sisters of the divine 
family who for the time made their home in the city of 
Corinth: "May grace and peace be granted to you from God 
our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. I thank my God continually
 on your behalf for the grace of God bestowed on you 
in Christ Jesus — that you have been so richly blessed in him, 
with readiness of speech and fulness of knowledge. Thus my 
testimony as to the Christ has been confirmed in your experience
, so that there is no gift of God in which you consciously 
come short while patiently waiting for the reappearing of our 
Lord Jesus Christ." — 1 Corinthians 1:3-7, Weym. 

It is a mistake for new creatures to withhold from one 
another the words of comfort which mean so much in the 
midst of storm. If we do withhold these words of comfort, it 
shows that we are deficient in the holy Spirit; for the holy 
Spirit was given to us, not only to be a comfort to our own 
hearts, but to aid us in our efforts to be a comfort to others. 


not necessarily mean that we should bestow upon him theThe holy Spirit is like the truth — the more of it we give away 

[6289] (211 212) 


:.H2-21.1) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


flROOKtYN, N. Y. 


the more we have left. "I will pray the Father, and he Bhall 
give you another comforter, that he may abide with you forever
."--John 14:16; 2 Corinthians 1:3-7. 

If through faithfulness to Ma vow of consecration a brother 
has brought upon himself the reproaches and persecution which 
the Master promised should be his portion, the love of all who 
are in the new relationship to Jehovah will be specially in 
evidence. It will be "without dissimulation" (Romans 12 ;9), 
without the hypocritical professions which characterize ( *thc 
worldly"; and because it is without hypocrisy but is genuine, 
fervent and continuous, no matter how great the blot upon the 
good name of the one that loves, it 'will teach a lesson that 
will leave a lasting impression for good upon all who witness 
it: "By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if 
ye have love one to another." (John 13:35) And not only so, 
but this evidences to others that we are true Christians and 
have good grounds for hope of our ultimate acceptance with 
the Lord; and it will re-act favorably upon our own spirits, 
and we shall be conscious that we are pleasing to our heavenly 
Father. Like the Apostle, we shall be able to say, "We know 
that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the 
brethren." — 1 John 3:14. 

If we do not have this fervent love one for another, we can 
disabuse our minds of the thought, that we love God or that 
we are in his likeness, "He that loveth not, knoweth not God ; 
for God is love." (1 John 4:8} But if we do have that love, 
we can be certain that we are in close fellowship with him in 
whom all our hopes of life are centered. "If we love one 
another, God dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected in us." — 
1 John 4:12. 

If our hearts are filled with this heavenly love we cannot, 
while we have earthly good things, sit calmly by and watch 
others suffer. "But \( any one has this world's wealth and 
sees that his fellow man is in need, and yet hardens his heart 
against him — how can such a one continue to love God?" (1 
.John 3:17, VVeym.) There is another side to this question, 
too; and that is that if we can help ourselves and get along 
without being burdensome to others we should do so, our 
thought being as far as possible to help other people bear their 
burdens but not to expect them to help us bear our own. 
"Bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfil the law of 
Christ. . . . Every man shall bear his own burden." (Galatians
 6:2, 5) Love is an unselfish desire to do good to others. 
Therefore we should prefer to assist our brethren rather than 
have them bear our burdens. "It is more blessed to give than 
to receive." 

PROPER ATTITUDE TOWARD FLESHLY BLEMISHES 

The love for the New Creation is not to cease or to become 
cold when we discover.- as we may, that the new creature is 
for the time occupying an imperfect tabernacle. It is just 
possible that others may consider that our tabernacles are not 
perfect, so that there is opportunity for the exercise of the 
grace of Christian forbearance toward one another, as the 
Apostle admonishes: "I therefore, the prisoner of the Lord, 
beseech you that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye 
are called, with all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering. 
forbearing one another in love." (Ephesian3 4:1, 2) If all 
were perfect in the flesh, there would be no opportunity for 
the exercise of this grace. 

There may be times, however, when it will be necessary for 
us to state some plain truths to those who for a time permit 
the weaknesses of their fallen flesh to interfere with their 
welfare as new creatures or with the welfare of others. When 
the time comes for speaking such truths we should make sure 
that they are spoken in love, and thus we, "speaking the truth 
in love, may grow up into him in all things, which is the head, 
even Christ." — Ephesians 4:15. 

But there are many times when a quiet over-looking of 
unintentional faults is the greatest service we can render to 
an erring brother or to the church with which he is associated. 
Such patient waiting on the Lord for him to make the correction
 in his own time and way, rather than for U3 to disturb 
the peace of others, the Lord will count as endured for his 
body's sake. This no doubt was partly what the Apostle Paul 
had in mind when he said: "I now rejoice in my sufferings 
for you, and fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of 
Christ in my flesh for his body's sake, which is the church." — 
Colossians 1:24. 

When it becomes necessary to speak plainly to a brother 
who is out of the way we must not forget to deal with the 
brother in the way that our best judgment leads us to believe 
will be most to his advantage. The variations in temperament 
and disposition amongst the Lord's true saints are perhaps 
greater than in any other class in the world. If there are 
any two of them alike we hare never noticed it. Hence in 
dealing with them we must "on some have compassion, making 


a difference; and others save with fear, pulling them out 
of the fire; hating even the garment spotted by the flesh." — 
Jude 22, 23. 

LOVE PROPORTIONATE TO CHRIST -LIKENESS 

There is a reason why we cannot help loving some of 
the Lord's saints more than others. As new creatures we 
cannot avoid loving most those who have most of the spirit 
of Christ, and even Jesus himself specially loved and was 
specially loved in return by that one of his disciples who 
had in him the largest measure of the Master's own spirit. 
John was especially "that disciple whom Jesus loved." — John 
21:7. 

No matter how hard we try, it will always be true as 
long as we are in these earthly tabernacles that "in many 
things we all offend." (James 3:2) The world because of 
its wrong condition of heart will recognize in our consecration
 only the odor of death. But while we shall occasionally 
give some slight offense to some of the Lord's brethren, because
 of their better condition of heart these offenses will 
be either overlooked or quickly condoned; and. for the most 
part, if we are loyal, loving and zealous we shall be to all 
such a sweet perfume of comfort and refreshment. "To the 
one we are a savor of death unto death; and to the other 
a savor of life unto life." — 2 Corinthians 2:16. 

Honest differences of opinion will arise between ourselves 
and other brethren. But if filled with a large measure of 
the Lord's spirit we shall be sure to make every reasonable 
effort to, avoid expressing differences of opinion on nonessentials
, which our experience has shown us engender strife. 
Rather we shall seek to "be of one mind, live in peace." — 2 
Corinthians 13:11. 

THE TRUE SPIRIT OP CHRIST 

The whole spirit of the Christian religion is that of service 
rather than lordship over others. And what a blessing it 
would be to all those who are ministering to the temporal 
or spiritual needs of the Lord's paints if they could realize 
that what they do for the least of these little ones they do 
in order to "serve the Lord Christ"! (Colossians 3:24) 
Let ua not forget that our greatest honor here below is to 
render service to those who are the Lord's, and let us not 
be too choice about the nature of the service, but be as ready 
to serve in a lowly capacity as in a more conspicuous position, 
for which perhaps we may not be suited. Of the twelve 
apostles chosen by our Lord, every one of the twelve desired 
for himself some great position in the kingdom, as is proven 
by the fact that when Jame3 and John sought the two most 
desirable positions, the remaining ten "were moved with indignation
 against the two brethren." (Matthew 20:24) Commenting
 upon this matter the Lord explained that this was 
not his own attitude and should not be theirs. His own 
steadfast purpose of heart was to be their servant and the 
servant of all, "even as the Son of man came not to be served, 
but to serve, and to give his life a ransom for many." — 
Matthew 20:28, Diaglott. 

The purpose and the effect of our association with the 
Lord's brethren should not be that of mere entertainment, 
but rather to do what we can and all that we can to "build 
one another up on the most holy faith" and to "edify one 
another, even as also ye do" ( 1 Thessalonians 5:11)," thus 
"inciting one another to love and good works." (Hebrews 
10:24) Our love toward the Lord's brethren should be dignified
, simple, pure, and expressed with only such manifestations 
as would be proper between brethren. This love, when fully 
developed, will rejoice more in honors coming to another than 
in honors coming to self; and thus we shall, as the Apostle 
expresses the matter, "be kindly affect ioned one to another 
with brotherly love; in honor" preferring one another." — 
Romans 12:10. 

In this as in everything else it will be necessary for us 
to consider one another, making due allowances for individual 
peculiarities of temperament, and not forcing honors upon 
those who would be injured by them, nor failing to make 
every reasonable effort to see that the self -forgetful and 
lowly-minded receive the recognition which is their due. Loving
 the brethren in this way we shall "not love in word, 
neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth." (1 John 3:18) 
The desire to bless the Lord's brethren in every way in our 
power should become the all-absorbing purpose of life. We 
are aiming to be like Jesus, and this was his spirit: "He 
laid down his life for us; and we ought to lay down our 
lives for the brethren." — 1 John 3:16. 

As footstep followers of the Lord we shall be specially 
desirous to aid by precept and example the faint-hearted, the 
backward, the diffident, those lacking in combat iven ess and 
self-esteem. We shall wish to help the spiritually weak to 
gain strength by encouraging them to lay hold upon the Lord's 


[6290] 


July 15, 1918 


T H E IV A T C H T O W E R 


(213-214) 


promises and to trust in his providences on their behalf. Thus 
we shall be able to "comfort the feeble-minded, support the 
weak."— 1 Thess. 5:14. 

MODESTY A GRACE OF CHRISTIAN CHARACTER 

When the heavenly Father designed the mystical body of 
Christ, he did not design that all the members of that body 
should have the same office. He did not design that all should 
be "players' 1 (pilgrims, or elders, or deacons, or have other 
offices in the church) ; he designed that there should be many 
more of the "singers" (the less conspicuous members of the 
body who gladly join in the chorus of the new song). "And 
of Zion it shall be said this and that man was born in her: 
and the Highest himself shall establish her. The Lord shall 
count, when he writeth up the people, that this man was 
born there. Selah ['stop and think']. As well the singers 
as the players on instruments shall be there." (Psalm 87:5-7) 
"God hath tempered the body together, having given more 
abundant honor to that part which lacked." — 1 Corinthians 
12:24. 

With hearts filled with love for the brethren we are bound 
to bo very careful to spend so much time attending to our 
own business that we shall have no time to give to the busybodying
 to which many well-intentioned people give a considerable
 proportion of their time. Those who interest 
themselves in matters which do not particularly concern them 
soon neglect their own affairs, so that they are "not only 
idlers, but tattlers also and busy-bodies, speaking things which 
they ought not." (1 Timothy 5:13) Moreover, people who do 
this are likely to get into trouble and bring reproach upon 
the cause of Christ; and the Lord would not that any of us 
should suffer "as a busy-body in other men's matters." — 1 
Peter 4:15. 

Hence if we see where we think a brother could handle 
his own affairs much better than he is handling them, instead
 of going to him and telling him how we think that 
he should conduct matters which are only his private concern
 we are to remember the Apostle's advice: "Study to be 
quiet, and to do your own business." (1 Thessalonians 4:11) 
The Lord would have his people filled with a quiet ambition 
which would lead them to earnest perseverance and welldoing
, not a restless zeal for notoriety, for great exploits 
and for the direction of the affairs of others not specially entrusted
 to our charge. 

HOW TO DEAL WITH THE BRETHREN 

If we love our brethren as we ought, we shall make great 
efforts to control our tongue, though we shall not be able 
to do so perfectly; for "the tongue can no man tame" (James 
3:8) and "if any man offend not in word, the same is a 
perfect man, and able also to bridle the whole body" (James 
3:2) Knowing the weakness of our fallen flesh, the Lord 
knew we would have difficulty in controlling our tongues 
even as respects our brethren in Christ, and so he has provided
 a rule by which slander in the church may be avoided. 
The rule is well known to all truth people, but it will bear 
repetition: "If thy brother shall trespfass against thee, go 
and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: If he 
shall hear thee thou hast gained thy brother. But if he will 
not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that 
in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be 
established. And if he neglect to hear them, tell it unto the 
church : but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto 
thee as a heathen man and a publican." — Matthew 18:15-17; 
Luke 17:1-4. 

It k hard to realize that one brother in Christ would 
render evil to another, and harder still to realize that the 
injured one would violate his covenant with the Lord and 
render evil in return,; yet there have been instances of this 
kind in the Lord's church. But those who are charged with 
the responsibility of preserving order in the ecclesias are 
charged to "see that none render evil for evil unto any man; 
but ever follow that which is good." — 1 Thessalonians 5:15. 

If a brother should make a slip and work injury to himself
 as a new creature and to other new creatures with whom 
he comes in contact, our spirit toward him should always 
be one of brotherly love, to help him regain his balance and 
his standing with the Lord, having due regard for the fact 
that we ourselves, through our selfish nature, may at times 
violate some of the requirements of the perfect law of love. 
"Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are 
spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekneas; considering
 thyself, lest thou also be tempted." (Galatians 6:1) 
If we do have occasion to reprove or rebuke a brother, we 
should make sure that it is done only after we have exercised
 all reasonable patience. Even then we must be sure 
that it is done in love; and when the brother repents and 
makee some acknowledgment of his fault, we should be like 


the father of the prodigal: when we see the repentant one 
come in an attitude of humility, wo should go part way to 
meet him, and we should never be weary of thus granting 
forgiveness to the erring. 

Let us remember what Jesus said to Peter when he inquired
 if he should forgive his brother until seven times: 
"Jesus saith unto him, I say not unto thee, until seven times; 
but until seventy times seven." (Matthew 18:21, 22) Jesus 
knew that by the time Peter had reached the place where 
he was willing to forgive his brother four hundred and ninety 
times, it would have become a settled habit and he would 
forget to count. Surely the heavenly Father lias forgiven 
us many more than four hundred and ninety times; and it 
may be necessary for us to ask for that forgiveness a considerable
 number of additional times, before that which is 
perfect shall have come. 

GOD'S METHODS OF PROVING HIS PEOPLE 

The Lord seems to hold out the hope that toward the end 
of our earthly career we may expect a larger measure of 
unity of the spirit than ever before. "Finally, be ye all of 
one mind, having compassion one of another, love as brethren." 
(1 Peter 3:8) Despite our best efforts to maintain tbis 
unity of the spirit, however, it is inevitable that in the tests 
which God's wisdom shall from time to time apply, some will 
be found unworthy, and divisions take place. "For it is 
necessary that there should be factions among you, so that 
the approved may be apparent among you." — 1 Corinthians 
11:19, Diaglott. 

The way that the heavenly Father is using to prove who 
of all earth's millions love him most, is to place those who 
have been begotten of his spirit where they may have opportunities
 to meet with one another ; and by the interest 
which they show in each other and by the efforts which they 
make to have fellowship with each other, he judges how much 
of the spirit of Ioyo for himself they possess. "If a man 
say, I love God, and hateth his brother [does not love him 
enough to seek personal fellowship with him] he is a liar; 
for if he loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can 
he love God whom he hath not seen?" — 1 John 4:20. 
HOW TO MANIFEST BROTHERLY LOVE 

We can show our love for our brethren by not being too 
harsh with them, not expecting more of them than they could 
render. That was not a proper spirit that was shown toward 
his fellow-servant by the one who had just been forgiven a 
great debt which he was unable to pay. — Matthew 18:23-30. 

We can show our love for our brethren who occupy positions
 as elders by avoiding the doing of anything which would 
injure them as new creatures. A kindly word of commendation
 or encouragement is occasionally a help to almost any 
of the brethren who serve in a public way, but we should be 
sure that it does not go beyond and work injury. If inclined 
to hold such in undue reverence, to give to them the place 
that Christ alone should occupy — "see thou do it not." — Revelation
 19:10; 22:9; Colossians 2:18, 19. 

We can show our love for our brethren by providing for 
those who properly have a demand upon us. The new creature 
must learn that it cannot in all matters do as it would prefer, 
but must in certain matters be governed by the obligations 
of the flesh; and one of these obligations is the care of those 
whom the Lord has placed in our charge. "But if any provide
 not for his own, and specially for those of his own house, 
he hath denied the faith and is worse than an infidel." — 
1 Timothy 5:8; 2 Timothy 3:5. 

We can show our love for our brethren by the zeal which 
we manifest to meet with those of like precious" faith. We 
are more or less like coals of fire, which, if separated, will 
tend to cool rapidly, but which, if brought together, will 
tend to increase in fervency the whole mass. The Lord's 
people are not encouraged to meet in gatherings in which the 
world, the flesh and the devil commingle, but to assemble 
with those who are justified and consecrated and who love 
the Lord. Such meetings are greatly to the overcoming of 
the world and the securing of a place in the kingdom. There 
is good company in such meetings; for Jesus said, "There 
am I in the midst." (Matthew 18:20) There Jacob's ladder 
touches the earth and the place becomes, as Jacob said, "the 
gate of heaven." (Genesis 28:17) "Not forsaking the assembling
 of ourselves together, as the manner of some is; 
but exhorting one another: and so much the more, as ye see 
the day approaching." — Hebrew 10:25. 

A GUARANTEE OF SUCCESS IK THE RACE FOR THE PRIZE 

We can show our love for our brethren by living within 
our means. The Lord's people should not be paupers; but 
rather they should "owe no man anything, but to love one 
another; for he that loveth another hath fulfilled the law." 
— Romans 13:8. 


[6291] 


(215-216) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. V. 


Whatever we may uish to do for the members of the Lord's 
body who are still in the flesh should be done soon ; for they 
will not be here long. If Mary had waited a week later before 
she broke the precious alabaster box upon the Lord's head, 
she would never have used it on him. "Do not keep the 
alabaster box of your love and tenderness sealed up until 
your friends are dead. Flowers on the coffin cast no fragrance 
backward on the weary road. 53 It may be your privilege to 
do today the fast kind act or to say today the last helpful 
word to some member of Christ's body. 

One of the last things the Lord did was to wash the feet 
of his disciples. We may be sure that it was not done in 
the rudest and clumsiest" manner imaginable, but with that 
kindness, sympathy, love and appreciation such as Mary had 
but a few hours previous lavished upon him, when she wiped 
his feet with the hairs of her head. Since* the Lord thus 
demonstrated his willingness to serve us in even the humblest 
affairs of life, it follows that we "also ought to wash one 


another's feet." (John 13:14) We do not do this literally 
but with the "washing of water by the Word" (Ephesians 
5:26), helping to make the} feet members "meet to be partakers
 of the inheritance of the saints in light*" — Colossians 
1:12. 

There is no special occasion, so far as we know, for this 
lesson on brotherly love. The church everywhere seems to 
be rich in this grace 83 never before; and it is true now as 
in the days of the Apostle that "as touching brotherly love 
ye need not that I write unto you: for ye yourselves are 
taught of God to love one another." (1 Thessalonians 4:9) 
But would you have a prescription that will positively insure 
your winning the prize of the high calling? Would you have 
a single text that guarantees that you shall never fall? It 
is found in connection with this very subject: "He that 
loveth his brother, abideth in the light; and there is none 
occasion of stumbling in him." — 1 John 2:10. 


WHY EVERY FOOTSTEP FOLLOWER OF CHRIST MUST SUFFER 


"Beloved, tki 


nk it not strange concerning the fiery trial toMch is to try you, as though some strange thing happened 
you; but rejoice, inasmuch as ye are made partakers of Christ's sufferings." — 1 Peter 4:12, 13. 


unto 


Literally translated, this text would read "Beloved, think 
it not strange concerning the fiery trial among you that is to 
try you." This exhortation draws our thoughts back to the 
Lord's statement through the Prophet Malaohi, in which he 
announces that the Messenger of the Covenant would come 
suddenly — the One whose coming had been anticipated for 
centuries; and that it was a solemn question as to who would 
be able to abide the day of his coming, for he would sit as 
a refiner and purifier of gold and silver. (Malaohi 3:1-3) 
We apply this prophecy to the time of our Lord's first advent. 
We believe that he came then, as foretold; and that throughout
 this Gospel age his work has been that of a refiner of 
his people. 

In our text St. Peter seems to say, 'This is a fiery trial 
in which the entire church participates.' He did not necessarily
 mean that all the fiery trials will be among ourselves, 
but that the entire experience of the true ohurch throughout 
the Gospel age will be fiery. It is true, however, that our 
most severe trials usually come from our brethren in Christ, 
just as it was with our Lord, whose brethren, the Jews of 
his day, persecuted him. St. Peter's thought seems to be 
this: Whoever comes into the body of Christ must not expect 
that his way thereafter will be smooth; for, on the contrary, 
the church must endure fiery trials down to the very end 
of her course, in order that she may be prepared for the 
kingdom glory. 

It is true that the fiery trial through which the ohurch 
has passed has been more severe at some times than at 
others. It is also true that the Word of God indicates, that 
in the very close of this Gospel age there will be special 
testings which will try the faith of every member of the body 
of Christ in the flesh; and that these special testings will be 
permitted for the very purpose of demonstrating who have 
built their faith with the gold, silver and precious stones 
of God's Word, and who have built with the wood, hay and 
stubble of human tradition and "doctrines of devils." (1 
Timothy 4:1) During that "fire of the day of the Lord" 
the work of the first class will be preserved, but that of the 
latter class will be destroyed. — 1 Corinthians 3:12-15. 

We are not to suppose, however, that those who are 
living in the close of the Gospel age are being more particularly
 tried than were those who lived during the preceding
 centuries of that age. No one will be suffered to be 
tempted more than he is able to bear; for with every temptation
 the Lord will provide a way of escape. (1 Corinthians 
10:13) If God permits heavier trials and testings to come 
at any time, he puts something in the nature of encouragement
 upon the other side of the scale. And so the knowledge 
of the divine plan which the church now possesses should enable 
us to endure the trials of our day more easily than those 
who did not understand the Lord's purposes as thoroughly as 
we do. We should bear in mind the fact that while in some 
respects; our trial is more severe than was theirs, in other 
respects it is less severe. 

SUFFERING PERMITTED TOE A PURPOSE 

In our context the Apostle is discussing the various kinds 
of suffering which Christians must endure. From the worldly 
point of view — in fact, from almost any other viewpoint except 
that of knowledge of the truth — it seems very strange that 
Christians should be called upon to suffer; for when one becomes
 a son of God, an heir of God and joint-heir with Christ 
Jesus our Lord, it would seem only natural that divine favor 
should thereafter extend to all of his affairs. The worldly 


are inclined to say, 'Wlhat kind of God have you that will 
permit his devotees to suffer? Surely when one gives himself 
up to do the will of God he should thereafter be exempt 
from trials and difficulties. Surely God would take such care 
of his faithful worshipers that nothing could possibly hurt 
them.' 

Christian people are themselves often perplexed about their 
experiences — yea, ashamed; for they do not understand why 
a Christian should suffer. Yet St. Peter says, "If any man 
suffer as a christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him 
glorify God on this behalf." (1 Peter 4:16) This very suffering
 which causes perplexity is in harmony with the divine 
plan ; for God is dealing with the church individually in order 
to manifest their loyalty of heart. This loyalty to God and 
to the principles of righteousness will be demonstrated either 
by faith or by works. It will be out of accord with the present 
order of things, out of accord with the views of the world. 

The people of God well understand that long ago he could 
have restrained sin if he had chosen to do so. Since he has 
not done this, it is evident that he is making good use of 
present conditions in the world. If everything here w^re 
favorable to righteousness, loyalty to God would be a very 
easy matter. If those who are the people of God received the 
very best of everything, the wav to life would be both easy 
and popular. God explains in his Word, however, that everything
 shall work together for good to his people as new creatures
; that is, according to the spirit, not according to the 
flesh. Even what seems to be the very worst disaster he can 
make work out good to them who love him supremely. 

Only those, therefore, who see the divine plan can properly 
enter into this thought that a Christian has no cause to be 
ashamed of suffering, ignominy, persecution, endured for 
Christ's sake. Only those who can see the purpose in suffering
 can glorify God on this behalf, can glorify him when they 
are opposed, misrepresented, slandered. The character of 
these sufferings — the opposition of the world to God's people — 
is vefy much the same as to those which came upon our Lord 
Jesus. Ho was despised and rejected of men, even by some 
who called themselves holiness people. And so it has been 
all down the Gospel age. Those who have called themselves 
holiness people have despised and rejected those whom God 
has recognized as his saints. If we were of the world, the 
world would love its own; but because our Lord has chosen 
iir out of the world, therefore the world hates us, as the 
Master foretold.— John 15:18-25. 

PERSECUTION AN EVIDENCE OF LOYALTY TO GOD 

It was because our Lord would not enter into the arrangements
 of the Scribes and the Pharisees that he was 
despised and rejected by them. He did not refuse to eat 
and drink with sinners. On the contrary, he was willing 
to talk with them, even with the woman of Samaria and 
others of similar character. He was not proud, but humble. 
He did not deal with the world in the way that the Pharisees 
did. Therefore they rejected him. 

W r e read that the Scribes and the Pharisees were angry 
because our Lord taught the common people. Apparently 
they did not wish to have the people taught except in their 
way. When the average person is angry, he will say all 
manner of evil against whoever has aroused his ire. If, therefore
, any of God's people has had evil spoken against him 
because he has presented the truth to others, he is not to be 
ashamed of his sufferings; for they are just what the true 
Christian is to expect. Such sufferings become strong evidence 


[6292] 


h;iv 15, 1913 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(210 2)',') 


that he is on the side which God approves. Those Christians 
who complacently tell us that they are not receiving persecution
, that they are not suffering for Christ's sake, have good 
reason to doubt whether they are walking in the Master's 
footsteps. 

But we are not to consider persecution and suffering as 
evidences of loyalty to God unless they come as the result of 
Christian effort. If one were a consumptive before he became
 a Christian, his sufferings thereafter would be much 
the same as they were before. If one were to suffer as a busybody
 in other men's matters, he has good cause to be ashamed ; 
for on account of his greater knowledge, his responsibility 
is greater. Therefore he should not do what he knows to 
be wrong. It is a very easy matter to forget that justice 
is the great foundation principle which underlies the teachings
 of the Word of God. This principle is concisely expressed 
in the Golden Rule — "Do unto others as you would have 
them do unto you." No Christian should under any circumstances
 render less than justice to any one. Nothing is more 
necessary to the people of God than to have the Golden Rule 
always before their mind's eye and to measure by it every 
thought, every word, every act. 

WHAT IS INCLUDED IK BUST-BODYIKa 
Busy-bodying is the act of busying one's self about the 
affairs of other people. A large portion of the suffering 
which people in general undergo is the result of busy-bodying. 
We are not to meddle with other men's affairs; for we have 
all that we can do to keep our own matters straight. Many 
good people are unconscious offenders in this direction. They 
do not mean to be busy-bodies; indeed, often they do not 
realize that they are guilty along this line. God's people 
should keep so busy with their own affairs that they will 
have no time to criticise others. If circumstances are such 
that criticise we must, we should always do so in harmony 
with the Word of God. But we should be ever on the alert 
to help others, not to injure them. 

In the preceding chapter St. Peter says, "If ye suffer 
for righteousness' sake, happy are ye." (1 Peter 3:14) Elsewhere
 the Scriptures explain that the followers of Christ 
are called to suffer for right-doing; and that if they are 
properly exercised by such sufferings, they shall in due time 
reign with their Lord in his Messianic Kingdom; but that 
now they are called to suffer with him. This is not because 
God wishes to see his people suffer, but because their interest 
in his truth, their loyalty to him, will demonstrate the fact 
that they have developed the character which he approves. 

THE DIVINE STANDARD OP UVTNG 

During the Millennial age. suffering will indicate a failure 
to be in accord with the principles of righteousness ; but 
during this Gospel age the reverse is often true. This is 
because the conditions under which the church is called are 
peculiar, separate, distinct from any other arrangement. God's 
usual provision for his creatures is a blessing; for example, 
the angels are not suffering. But here on earth a peculiar 
condition exists. 

Six thousand years ago sin entered into the world. Ever 
since its entrance Satan has operated to deceive men, to 
make light appear to be darkness, and to put darkness for 
light. As a result of his efforts to oppose God and righteousness
, the world is bewildered. Mankind now have a natural 
tendency to do wrong. They are as prone to do evil as the 
sparks are to fly upward. 

While these conditions prevailed, God sent his Son into 
the world to die for the Adamic race. Throughout the Gospel 
age the Master's followers have been telling others that whoever
 is in accord w T ith God's righteous standards is in accord 
with God, but that whoever is in opposition to God's standard 
of righteousness is in opposition to God. That standard is, 
"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all 
thy mind, with all thy soul, with all thy strength; and 
thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." Mankind as a race 
are out of accord with this standard. Our Lord Jesus, on 
the contrary, » was in full harmony with this principle, and 
laid down his life on the side of righteousness. Finally he 
brought upon himself the hatred of those who had other plans 
than those of God. The doctors of the law, the Sadducees, 
the Pharisees, the priests and the politicians — all these had 
their own ideas and plans, based upon selfishness. Our Lord, 
who steadfastly followed the lines laid down in the divine 
Word, was necessarily in conflict with their personal ambitions. 

Ever since the darkness of sin has entered the world, fallen 


man has naturally come to shun the light of righteousness. 
Therefore humanity does not like to come too close to the 
light or to the light-bearers. Men do not like to have the 
light of publicity thrown upon their schemes. When, therefore
, our Lord Jesus showed that the doctors of divinity of 
his day had taken away the key of knowledge from the common
 people, those who were in sympathy with the darkness of 
this world became so incensed that finally they crucified him. 

The true followers of Christ find that in the same proportion
 as they take their stand for the truth they will have 
persecution leveled against them. Whoever will strive to 
live godly, righteously, will suffer persecution, as the Scriptures
 have foretold. If they were of the world, the world 
would not hate them, but would love them and fellowship with 
them. This persecution which has come to our Lord and 
his followers does not emanate from any desire on the part of 
the world to oppose the divine plan, however. It is the 
result of blindness. (2 Corinthians 4:4-0) If the Jewish 
rulers had fully understood the situation, they would not 
have crucified the Lord of Glory. — Acts 3:14-18; 1 Corinthians 
2:8. 

Take, for instance, the case of St. Stephen. Saul of Tarsus 
verily thought that he was doing God service when he persecuted
 the first martyr. He had a zeal for God, but it was 
so misdirected that he became a persecutor of God's people. 
He tells us himself that he did this ignorantly, supposing 
that thereby he was serving God. Eventually it may be found 
that much of the persecution which the people of God have 
undergone has resulted not so much from bad motives as 
from ignorance or superstition. But whether the persecution 
cornea from those who do it ignorantly or from those who 
do it intelligently need not matter to those who are persecuted
; for if they realize that they are suffering for righteousness
' sake, they will have that satisfaction of mind which 
will make them happy. Blessedly happy are all who have 
suffered for righteousness' sake. Whoever is thus suffering is 
on God's side. As for the poor world, they are bewildered 
and know not what to do. 

ANOTHER SOURCE OF SUFFERING 

Suffering for righteousness' sake may come not only 
through persecution, but in another way.' If, for instance, 
one engaged in some part of the Lord's service has striven 
to be wise and reasonable, and yet finds that his service 
has brought upon him certain disabilities of a physical nature, 
he may rejoice in the fact that such suffering is for righteousness
' sake; for he has been trying to do right, trying to 
do the Lord's will. We are to recognize, however, that it is 
possible to suffer for foolishness' sake, also. We recall the 
record that Satan tried to induce our Lord to jump from the 
pinnacle of the Temple, declaring that the heavenly Father 
would not permit him to be injured. Had our Lord jumped 
from the Temple and broken a limb, he would have suffered 
for foolishness' sake; for such an undertaking would have 
been presumption. Yet, on the other hand, one might do something
 for foolishness' sake and receive a blessing; for God 
might perceive that he was ignorant of the unwisdom of 
his act. 

It is the duty of every Christian to study the Lord's 
will, to consider carefully the conditions around him, and 
to seek to follow so moderate a course in life that he would 
not only have the divine approval, but would cause as little 
inconvenience and trouble to others as possible. When he 
has done this to the best of his ability, he is to go forward. 
confidently relying upon the Lord's supervising wisdom and 
providence; for God will surely protect all those who put 
their trust in him. 

Whenever the fiery trouble is the hottest, we may be sure 
that the Lord's care is over us; and therefore we may rejoice, 
in that we are partakers of the suffering of Christ. If it 
was necessary that the great Head of the church should 
have such an experience with suffering to prepare him for the 
glory to follow, Ave may be sure that the members of the 
church will also need to suffer in order to be prepared to 
share with him in his glory, honor and immortality. In whatever
 way the suffering may come — whether it is from our own 
flesh or from others — if it results from our endeavor to serve 
the Lord we may be sure that is it for Christ's sake. If, 
therefore, we remain faithful to the end of our course, we shall 
have a share in the glory of Christ at the conclusion of this 
Gospel age, at the manifestation of the sons of God. — Romans 
8:19; Colossians 3:4. 


"Dare what conscience says is right; 
Do what reason savs is best; 


Do with all your rnind and might; 
Do vour dutv and be blest." 


[6293] 


THE NEW WILL THE BASIS OF CHRISTIAN CHARACTER 


% 'For ye are dead, and your life is h%d, 

We understand that there are only two great moral forces 
in the universe—good and evil, righteousness and sin; and 
that whatever is not right is wrong. By nature man was 
originally in full harmony with God. But by the disobedience 
of the perfect man whom God had made, sin entered into 
the world, with its resultant penalty of death. This original 
sin has been transmitted from parent to child until, as the 
Apostle says, all arc sinners, all are in this fallen state. 

After Father Adam had disobeyed God, he had the mind 
of Satan, who had the wrong mind — out of harmony with 
the divine arrangement. Because of Adam's deflection his 
posterity are all born wrong-headed and more or less wrongwilled
. We do not mean that the mind and the will of 
fallen man are wholly Satanic, but that mankind are born 
with depraved minds, 1 ' and are in more or less bondage to 
Satan. The onlv rectification is that we may have a new 
will, a new mina*. 

Here the Lord's message reaches us, offering forgiveness, 
reconciliation to himself, on certain conditions. When we 
inquire what these conditions are, we find them to be (1) 
a full surrender of the will to God and (2) an' acceptance of 
the divine will instead. A full response of the body is not 
expected; for this is impossible in our fallen condition; but 
a full surrender of the will is demanded. 

To those who during the Gospel age fully surrender their 
wills to God, a new nature is given. Instead of being servants 
of sin, we may now become servants of righteousness. This 
we do by stepping from the side of sin to the side of truth, 
the side of God — away from the side of Satan; for there 
are only the two sides. Whoever thereafter abandons the 
new will has gone back to the wrong side. When we became 
new creatures under the divine arrangement, we ceased to be 
old creatures. But if we should cease to be new creatures, 
what are we but old creatures again ? The new will has died ; 
the old will lias revived — come to life again. 

The Master said, "Ye cannot serve God and Mammon/' 
(Matthew 6:24) We cannot be servants of righteousness and 
of sin, of truth and of error. "His servants ye are to whom 
ye render service.'* (Romans 6:16) So long as the new 
creature maintains his relationship to God he is the servant 
of righteousness. But as soon as hi3 will is turned away 
from God, it is turned away from righteousness and is turned 
back to sin once more. It assumes, therefore, the Satanic 
attitude. 

TRUE MEANING OF CONSECRATION 

Many professed Christians do not understand at all what 
is concluded in consecration to sonship. Many do not understand
 that it means the renouncing of all earthly rights, 
earthly hopes, earthly ambitions. They think that consecration 
to God signifies a willingness to live moral, upright lives — 
nothing more. They have hot seen the depth of the Apostle's 
statement, "Ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in 
God." St. Paul here means, Your wills are dead, and you 
have been begotten again as new creatures in Christ. Those 
who have not understood this have not become dead as human 
beings — have not taken the step of full consecration to God. 

A righteous will is the beginning of a righteous character
; for the will represents the intention, the ideal. If 
this righteous will is maintained and put into action, the 
result will be the development of a righteous character. 
But if this righteous will is lost, the character will deteriorate
. This would not mean, however, that the intelligence
 or the personality would be lost, but that the righteous 
character would be shipwrecked. (Ezekiel 13:24) The Scriptures
 liken such as lose their new will for righteousness to 
the dog returning to his vomit, and to the sow wallowing in 
the mire after having been cleansed. — 2 Peter 2:22. 

A new will is one's own making. The will of the fallen 
nature "is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed 
can be." the Apostle Paul assures us. (Romans 8:7) A man 
may take time for deliberation, may have a period in which 
he "is gradually determining what he shall do, during which 
the different organs of his mind are balancing the question 
of consecration. But the act of consecrating is the result 
of his final decision in favor of the Lord. His natural will , 
must be changed from its wayward bent, or at least from 
its irresolution, to a fixed determination in the right direction, 
to a determination to renounce the world with all its hopes 
and ambitions and to accept Christ as his Redeemer, together 
with all the heavenly promises centered in our Lord. Thus 
consecration is the first positive act of the new will. After 
consecration and acceptance by the Father, this new will forms? 
the basin of the new creature. The individual is received 
**f God through Christ for the high calling of the Gospel 
fliuivh. 


idth Christ in Qod? — Oolossians 3:3. 

THE IMPORTANCE OF THE WILL 

After one has fully consecrated himself and has been 
begotten of the holy Spirit, the old will is actually dead. 
So when our text declares, "Ye are dead, and your life is 
hid with Christ in God," it is not the body that is dead, nor 
is it the mind, the intellect; it is the old will that has been 
surrendered. The old will is not reckonedly dead, but really 
dead; for one could not have two wills at the same time 
any more that he could walk in two directions at the same 
time, or be in two different countries at the same time, or 
be two different persons at the same time. Therefore, to 
those who are in Christ Jesus, "old things have passed away ; 
behold, all things are become new." 

In one's mental make-up the will occupies the position of 
king, ruler, despot, autocrat. It rules the entire body — that 
is, it has the eight to rule; and it should rule. When the 
old will was rejected, the will of the Lord was accepted 
as the ruler of the human body of the person who consecrated 
himself. The right to rule was actually transferred from the 
old will, to the will of God in Christ. Thenceforth the person 
is freed from the domination of his old will, and subject to 
the new will, which is in harmony with the divine will. 

This new will, however, has difficulty in establishing its 
rule over the human body ; for its entire empire — the members 
of the body — is out of harmony with the new sovereign. The 
mind is more or less twisted and warped by reason of sin. 
Many of the faculties of the mind rather prefer the old master, 
and feel restraint under the regulations of the new will. They 
desire to be rebellious and to have their own way. Sometimes
 the new ruler, the new will, is too lenient with its 
subjects. The new creature must remember, however, that 
there is no alternative — that he must rule with an iron hand ; 
for if the will of the flesh should win the day, should again 
become master, it would mean that the new will was lost. 
that the new creature had died. This would mean eternal 
destruction — the second death. 

Whoever has once turned his will to God, and has been 
accepted by the Lord and begotten by the holy Spirit, is 
on trial for life or death. If he were to turn to sin, to 
practise sin wilfully, there would be no future hope for him. 
Therefore it behooves the new creature to rule his body, 
his mind, his passions, and to bear in mind the precious 
promises to which he has become heir in Christ. To do this 
he is granted the Word of God, Through the guidance of 
this Word he is to keep guard over his mind, to watch his 
thoughts, to scrutinize his conduct. No matter how rebellious 
his flesh may be, it is the part of the new will to oppose 
any disloyalty, to conquer and control his mortal body, to 
the full extent of his ability. Whatever he may lack in 
ability the Lord purposes to cover and excuse, under certain 
conditions. 

The new will feeds on the knowledge of the Word of 
God. As the child of God considers and admires the grandeur 
of the divine character — the wisdom, the justice, the love 
of God — he begins to copy these attributes; and thus he 
becomes God-like. By degrees he becomes a copy of God's 
dear Son. By his providences God so shapes our affairs as 
his children that things 'which would be too difficult for us 
will be taken out of our way. If our will remains fully submissive
 to him, all things will be made to work together 
for our good. — Romans 8:28. 

Such children of God will not be tempted above what they 
are able to bear; for the Lord permitting temptation will 
also provide a way of escape. (1 Corinthians 10:13) Noting 
all their deliverances, their succor in times of need, they 
will be strengthened and Mill become established in faith. 
Thus the Christian, as the new Avill grows stronger and 
stronger, is not apt to be turned this way and that by false 
doctrines. The new will cannot expect, however, to gain an 
easy control of the flesh. It must be continually at warfare 
with the tendencies of the old body. But through our Lord 
Jesus Christ the new creature's best endeavors will be ac 
counted as the fulfillment of the divine law. — Romans 8:1-4, 

SUGGESTIONS FROM OUR LORD'S EXPERIENCES 

In scanning the experience of our Lord Jesu3 for light 
on this subject, we perceive that at the time of hi a consecration
 at Jordan he gave up his own will as a man, and 
adopted the Father's will as his own. Thenceforth his human 
will was dead. W T hen in the Garden of Gethsemane he prayed 
to the Father, "Not my will, but thine, be done/* he had 
made no change of purpose. He did not mean that he had 
a contrary will in the matter. His mind was still the same 
as at consecration. But a condition had arisen in his life 
which perplexed him. He was not certain as to the Father's 


(21? _M8) 


[6294] 


July 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(J19 JJU) 


desire. So far as his own knowledge went he could see 
nothing to be gained by his suffering such great ignominy 
and shame as confronted him in connection with his death 
as the antitypical Passover Lamb. Perhaps he might he 
spared death as a malefactor, charged with being a blasphemer, 
an enemy of the Almighty. He was not sure whether this 
might not be merely an incidental that could be turned aside. 
If it could be turned aside, he wished that it might be so. 
But he desired to have the Father's will done, whatever that 
will might be. He left himself wholly in the Father's hands. 
This was his sentiment. , He expressed himself here in utter 
disregard of his human sentiments. 

Our Lord still had his human body with its preferences. 
His human preference would be to be spared experiences of 
shame. His preference as a new T creature would be that he 
bo not put to death as a blasphemer against the Father 
whom he loved and revered. He had no thought, we may be 
sure, of any other than a sacrificial death; for he had told 
his disciples that he Would be crucified. But as the consummation
 of his sacrifice drew near, he saw what he was 
facing — the mock trial and all that it involved, the false 
charges, the humiliation, the deep shame — and the matter 
became all the more serious in his mind. He was not sure 
whether it was necessary for him to endure this shame and 
to be regarded as an enemy of God. If this was necessary, 
he had not a word to say. We do not understand his words 
to indicate that he had a will in any wise contrary to that 
of the Father. 

DIVINE OVBEBULIKQ IN DAILY AFFAIBS 

The question might arise here, If our Lord was not certain 
that the heavenly Father was planning every detail of his 
experience, should we have the thought that our Father plans 
and arranges every little incident of our experiences? 

There are probably extremes of thought upon both sides 
of this question. Our brains differ. Our experiences are 
varied. Apparently different ones of us are naturally inclined 
to view matters from different standpoints. We believe that 
naturally many of us are not likely enough to look for the 
lx>rd's providences in the details of life. For our own part, 
we are rather of the opinion that many would have still 
greater blessings if they would watch more carefully along 
this line. Some, however, carry the thought of the^ Lord's 
overruling providences to an extreme. Such would be inclined 
to think that if they were to step into a puddle of water 
the Lord would have to do with it. 


But we are assured that "the angel of the Lord encampeth 
around about them that fear him, and delivereth them." 
(Psalm 34:7) Personally, we are striving more and more 
to see the providences of the Lord in all our affairs. We are 
also assured that "the steps of a good man are ordered of 
the Lord." (Psalm 37:23) This does not mean that we are 
to think that everything we do, every step we take, is necessarily
 ordered of the Lord, even, when it proves to be a 
misstep; but that the general course of a righteous man is 
under the Lord's supervision. God gives his angels, his 
messengers, charge over his people. (Psalm 91:11, 12; Hebrews
 1:14) We are merely instruments in his hands, if 
we are guided by him. As respects the work in our own 
hearts, however, we are more than this; and we are to use 
our reason in respect to our course, in respect to how we 
shall employ our talents for the Lord — how 1 we shall do 
volunteer work, how we shall present a book or a tract, etc. 
We are to use our brains, seeking to have them guided by 
the Lord. 

We have great respect for those who go to God each 
morning and ask him so to guide their affairs for the day 
that they may have some opportunity of witnessing to the 
truth. It seems to us that the Lord would be pleased with 
such an attitude, and would feel thus: "Here is a willing 
servant, and I will give to this one an opportunity of 
service." We greatly admire that implicit reliance on God 
which realizes that we are nothing of ourselves, that our 
sufficiency is of the Lord, that he is using us as instruments, 
and that we are to be on the lookout for opportunities to 
serve him and his. We notice that all of our dear Redeemer's 
steps were ordered of Jehovah God. While at first he was 
not able to see clearly that his final humiliation was ordered 
of God, yet a little later he saw that it was so ordered, 
and that it was a part of the dregs of the cup which he was 
to drink. His experiences were designed of God. 

Probably this is true of many of our experiences. Things 
that we think are the fault of others or may have come our 
way by chance are quite probably more or less, perhaps 
fully, under divine supervision. God would not, we know, 
interfere with the conscience of any one; but co-laboring with 
the circumstances of life, many things are surely ordered 
for the carrying out of the divine purposes concerning us. 
and he will turn aside whatever would be to our injury. 


HOW WILL IDENTITY BE CARRIED INTO THE SPIRIT LIFE? 

much pleased also to know that there is a special 


We have been asked, "How will the new creature, the new 
soul, in the future be identified with the old creature, the old 
soul? In other words, How shall we know ourselves?" We 
reply, There is of course, nothing in nature which would 
explain this matter; for it is something that is entirely outride
 of anything belonging to nature. In this new creation God 
has given" us something entirely distinct, new. The new creature
 is not an earthly creature, and nothing that is of the 
earthly being will ever have a part, to our understanding, in 
that new creation, either now or at any time. Nothing will 
carry over from the human to the divine, from the human to 
the spiritual. 

Rehearsing some of the things we have said: The human 
being here is more or less depraved. He hears something 
about God, about the divine nature, a-bout what sin is, about 
why it is undesirable, about the reconciliation which God has 
provided through Christ and the invitation given to some to 
become joint-heirs with Christ in his heavenly kingdom. He 
becomes conscious of all this through his ears, through his 
natural perceptions— or through human powers; for he has 
no other powers. He must have the hearing ear, else he 
would not heed the message from God at the present time. 

Some have more of the hearing ear, some have less. The 
one who has more of the hearing ear would be more attentive, 
more pleased, when he would learn that God has some program
 for the salvation of sinners. The more depraved would 
have less of the hearing ear. The depraved person would be 
living on a low plane, therefore he would have less inclination
 to come to God, less of a disposition to listen to anything 
that God would have to communicate. Even as respects the 
class who do hear with greater or less distinctness, the 
adversary has dulled their ears to some extent with false 
"doctrines of devils." 

But what we hear of God's gracious invitation to become 
associates with Christ Je'sus rejoices our hearts. To us who 
have the hearing ear this is indeed good tidings. We say, 'I 
nm glad that God has invited me to come back into his family, 
that he has provided for the covering of my imperfections. I 


am very ~~ r - . - , 

invitation now to those who have the mind of Christ and 
desire to walk in his steps, and I gladly avail myself of God's 
loving arrangement. In harmony with this invitation I offer 
myself a living sacrifice.' 

VAEIO0S STEPS IN BECOMING A NEW CEEATUBB 
Now I have been converted. How? I have turned around. 
From what? From the way of sin and of my own will to go 
the way of righteousness and the way of God's will. 'Was- this 
conversion? Yes. This consecration of myself to God includes 
everything that belongs to me, all that I am and have— the 
human ego, the personality, with all its hopes, aim3, possessions
, in every -shape and form. 

Did this make me a new creature? No. It put me into 
the way that made me eligible to that position. The next 
step was the imputation of the merit of Jesus, to cover all my 
sins, all my imperfections. Did this make me a new creature? 
No. Of what use, then, was the imputation ? It 
made me acceptable to God as a living sacrifice. The next 
thing in order was for God to accept the offering and to indicate
 'his acceptance by the begetting of the holy Spirit. What 
this means we do not know. We nre not wise enough to 
know. God foreknew our Lord as the Head of the Christ body, 
and he foreknew the class which is to form that body. And 
now, by coming in under the conditions which he has laid 
down, we are accepted of him as members of this anointed 
company, and become new creatures in Christ. The merit of 
Jesus still operates on our -behalf, because of the imperfections
 of our mortal flesh. It is now our wedding garment, our 
bridal robe. 

When we have become new creatures is the matter determined
? Oh, no! It is only begun. I am to prove my devotion
 and loyalty, to show that the surrender of my will was a 
genuine thing. How can I do this? By contact with the 
truth I am exercised by it. If I have been in error in any 


way, and the error is clearly pointed out by the truth, my 
lovalty will be determined by 'the diligence with which I weigh 


__. ___ t lgence 1 

and decide the matter. If I* decide slowly, it means that I am 


[6295] 


1220-221) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


a little obtuse, somewhat dull of hearing, or that I am 3low 
to respond to the will of God. If I decide quickly between the 
truth and the error, decide for God, it will mean that I am 
loyal to God's will, his truth, that I am quick to hear his 
voice and prompt to obey ; and I shall be all the more pleasing 
to him aa a loyal, faithful child. If I should decide the matter 
slowly, would the Lord cut me off? No. Perhaps lie would 
give me some chastisements in the school of Christ. "A 
bruised reed will he not break, and smoking flax will he not 
quench."— Isaiah 42:3; Matthew 12:20. 

In one Bible picture the newly, begotten ones are represented
 as embryos, not yet born. In another picture they are 
shown as children, not having attained the stature of manhood
, but as growing in grace, knowledge and character. 
Either picture is a very beautiful one, but we cannot mix the 
two. We cannot imagine the unborn child growing in knowledge
, etc. ; and we cannot imagine a prenatal embryo as developing
 toward manhood. We perceive in the embryo picture 
that every unborn child must grow, and that it is dependent 
for growth on nourishment. If some accident should happen, 
if there should be some miscarriage, the embryo would never 
he born. 

So we see that from the time we are begotten of the Spirit 
the embryo new creature must develop. The new creature 
there began its life. It then drew its sustenance from provisions
 already present. The human mother was the same 
woman before the embryo life began that she is after the child 
is begotten. So the Lord's provision and arrangement had 
supplied all the nourishment and sustenance for the new 
creature before the new life had its start. 

From another viewpoint, tliia new creature in Christ is 
now the governing power in the individual life. It is the 
only existence that God recognizes and that we recognize; it 
is the only one that is to have any control over this mortal 
body. How does the new creature have the control? We 
answer, By the transfer of the will from human interests and 
domination to the doing of the Lord's will. God*s will is now 
our will. We have no other, no contrary will. The clamorings
 of the flesh are to be ignored by this new will. As 
beings of a new nature we have superior rights in the human 
body, indeed — the only rights; f r all the earthly rights 
imputed to us through the merit of Jesus are relinquished aa 
a sacrifice, that we may gain the heavenly rights, the spiritual 
blessings. Having accepted our sacrifice God does not give us 
a new body in which to operate. We have still to make use of 
the same mortal body with its weaknesses and blemishes. 
THE HUMAN BODY OTJR SERVANT 

What are we to do with this mortal body? We are to see 
that it is kept under; we are to browbeat it and compel its 
submission to the new ruling power in our lives. 
Moreover, we are determined to make this body an active 
servant to the new creature, to render material assistance in 
ministering to its growth and in serving the brethren, who are 
running in this same narrow way. Some might say that we 
are treating our body unkindly ; but from the divine standpoint 
we are treating it as wisely as possible, in order to get from it 
the best service for God. If it is God's will that we undertake
 some great work for him, we will certainly put the body 
through a course of training to this end. 

We say to our body, 'You are my body only for the time 
being. I, the new creature, purpose to use you. in the service 
of my Lord/ The old creature, the mortal flesh may demur, 
and may say, *I have some rights. 5 W"e answer, 'You have no 
rights. They are all relinquished; that is, what rights you 
may have thought you had; for in reality you were under the 
condemnation of death and never had any rights. The rights 
imputed to you when you were offered to God, were granted 
only that they' might be sacrificed with Christ. You are 
legally dead now, and have nothing to say in the matter. I 
shall use my judgment as to what you shall or shall not do. 1 

If T should yield to the desires of the old creature, it 
would prosper in its aims and projects, and the new creature 
would be puny and weak in courage, in strength and in every 
way. The new creature must control all the interests of the 
body, granting it only what is best for the development and 
the interests of the new life. The old self-life, reckoned dead, 
must be daily crucified until the end of the narrow way. It 
must die of neglect. The new will must admit of no compromise
. Thus we shall grow spiritually and become built up 
into Christ our living Head; and the stronger we become 
spiritually, the sooner shall we be ready for our change. 
This change \3 the birth of the new creature in the first resurrection
. It is the receiving of our new spiritual bodies. Not 
one atom of this mortal body will ever get into the new condition
 beyond the vail. 

This new creature that now lives in a mortal body feeds 


not upon natural bread, but upon "every word that proceeded
 out of the mouth of God." (Matthew 4:4) But as 
God has a work for the new creature to do while in this 
mortal body, this earthen vessel, I am to take reasonable care 
of miy body; for it is the only instrument of operation which 
the new creature now possesses. If I so misuse my body as 
to unfit it for eervice, I would not be exercising the spirit of 
a sound mind and would not be in harmony with the will of 
God. But the new creature is to have the control, to dominate 
the servant and not permit the servant to dominate him. 
OUR IHDIVIDTJAUTY, OB IDENTITY, PERMANENT 

If we continue faithful to our contract with the Lord we 
shall soon have new spiritual .bodies, and then we shall be 
new souls. But our ego, our personality, our individuality, 
our identity, will form a distinctive part of the new soul. It 
is really the ego, the personality, that makes the soul. The 
body alone would not make a soul, whether a natural body or 
a spiritual body. The elements of which the natural body is 
composed might be disintegrated into their original condition, 
and would then form no part of the soul. — Genesis 2:7. 

Soul is that which comes down from father to child. 
Adam gave soul, being, to his children. At birth each of 
these became a soul, a being. This spark of life has come on 
down through the ages, from father to child. In the resurrection
 of the new creature, the soul, the being, composed of the 
new will and the character which has been developed, is transferred
 to new conditions and becomes a new soul. It has an 
altogether different body, with new powers and greatly enlarged
 capacity. This will be a body through which the 
developed new creature may fully express all the desires and 
aspirations of its nature. Nevermore will there be discord 
between the mind and the body. All will be perfect harmony 
and concord. All our longings will be fulfilled to the highest 
degree, 

"Can you explain to us," it may be asked, "how this new 
life will be transferred to the new body?" We cannot. In 
the case of our Lord Jesus we have the statement that the 
spirit-being left the heavenly condition, came to earthly conditions
 and became a man, subject to human limitations; and 
we have the assurance that this same One who came into the 
world, who died, arose from the dead and who ascended into 
heaven, was to come again in the glory of the Father. (Matthew
 16:27) It is the same ego that came at the second 
advent. It has changed its status, in that it now has vastly 
enlarged powers, in that the ego is now operating in a 
glorious spirit body of the highest nature — the divine. This 
ego had a spiritual body at first; it had a human body afterward
. It has now a new divine body, superior to all. But 
the ego, the individuality, has persisted under both these 
changes. So our ego, our personality, is to pass from this 
earthly body and be given a new body. 

The power by which all this can be accomplished is divine 
power. If anybody can explain to us what were the component
 elements of the first soul, if he can show what composes 
the spark of life or what it is, perhaps we could explain the 
process of the creation of new creatures in Christ. Or if any 
one can explain what makes the germ of wheat grow, how it 
gets life, perhaps wo could explain how the new creature is a 
new life-germ, how it grows, and how the identity, the individuality
, is preserved and carried into ^he heavenly condition. 
We must trust in divine power for this whole matter, as 
respects both the resurrection of the church and the resurrection
 of the world. Whoever doubts divine power cannot believe 
in the resurrection. 

PHILOSOPHY OF RESURRECTION INEXPLICABLE 

Wo cannot imagine, for instance, just how it will be that 
Moses or Abraham or anyone else of the remote past could 
ever be resurrected so that he could know himself, could read 
the story of his life in the Bible and remember that it was 
all true. How that can be only God knows. You do not 
know; I do not. We believe it because God says it. It is just 
as difficult to understand about the resurrection of a man and 
the bringing of him back to life in a fresh, new body as it is 
to understand how the new creature, the new soul, can be 
brought into its new body, and can still have its identity and 
know himself and all that he has experienced in the earthlife
. 

We are hoping soon to get one of these spirit bodies. 
When we get it we shall know all about it; for the Scriptures 
declare that then we shall know even as we are known. { 1 
Corinthians 13:12) We might find illustrations to help us in 
this matter — as when a record is taken on tne phonograph. 
Something, a certain vibration of air,* went out of the mouth. 
This force made little indentations upon the cylinder of wax. 
Now. then, if we know how to reproduce the human voice 
thus, it gives us a hint how God with his unlimited powers 


[6296] 


July 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(221-222) 


could preserve everything recorded by the convolutions of our 
brains, all that we call memory, how it could be preserved 
absolutely — everything -by which we could know ourselves in 
the future. We do not know ourselves now by the number of 
pounds weight we register or by the cut of our beard or by our 
clothing. We know ourselves by something in our mind. But 
if our reason were gone, if our memory were gone, then we 
would not know ourselves. 

Cod, who has made us new creatures, is the all-powerful 
One who knows how to preserve our identity, to reproduce our 
memory in our new bodies. And the more we come to know 


about him and the length and breadth and height and depth 
of his wisdom, power and love, the more we are able to 
appreciate all he has toid us, and the stronger is our confidence
 in him. It is to the wise a glorious tiling that God 
should promise a resurrection. The world cannot understand 
it; to them it is foolishness. They cannot believe in a resurrection
 from the dead. Therefore they cannot have the joy 
that we have through the exercise of faith. Soon will our 
faith be swallowed up in sight. Then all the mysteries that 
puzzle us now will be made clear; they will flee away as mist 
before the morning sun. 


If he, the holy, harmless, sinless One, 
Must needs be perfected through suffering, 
Wouldst thou then seek to tread a path less steep 
To reach heaven's goal and win thy Father's smile? 
Ah, no! My soul, when pain and "sorrow cross 
Thy threshold, be thou swift to welcome them, 
Then whisper low within thy heart of hearts, 
"Another opportunity to show 
My King how much I love, what I can bear 
For him!" And as the weary days go by, 


PERFECT THROUGH SUFFERING 


Cling closer to the hand that wounds thee so, 

Lean harder on the breast of him who loves 

Thee, even as he loved his only Son; 

And pray, "Lord, spare me not, burn out all dross, 

Let nothing but the piirest gold remain, 

And help me ir the hottest fire hold still! 

Do thou, great Lapidist, grind on, that I 

May perfectly reflect the glorious light 

Of love divine! Oh, fit me for some place 

Within thy royal diadem to shine!" 


N. Y. PRESS COMMENTS ON THE RECENT TRIAL 


The following articles from the press will be of interest to 
the dear friends who have learned through the July 1st 
Watch Tower what verdict was returned by the jury in the 
trial of our brethren here. We accept this verdict as of the 
Lord's permission, realizing it to be one of the "all things'' 
which work together for good to them that put their trust in 
God. "Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be 
afraid." 

Commenting upon the outcome of the case, the Editor of the 
Xew York "Evening Post" said on June 22: 

w 'In the opinion of the court the religious propaganda 
which these defendants have vigorously advocated and spread 
throughout the nation, as well aa among our allies, is a 
prreater danger than a division of the German army. ... A 
person preaching religion usually has much influence and if 
he is sincere he is all the more effective. This aggravates 
rather than mitigates the wrong they have done.' 

"After uttering these word3 Judge H. B. Howe, of the 
United States District Court in Brooklyn, sentenced the religious
 persons before him to twenty years each in prison, 
with one exception. It was necessary, he said, to make an 
example of those who sincerely taught this religion, which, 
like that of the Mennonites and the Quakers, and many another 
sect, forbids the taking up of arms. They were guilty' plainly 
of having urged men to follow what they considered the teachings
 of the Lord and to apply literally the commandment, 
'Thou shalt not kill.' So the jury could do nothing less than 
find them guilty of having violated the statutes of the country
, whatever may be the correctness or incorrectness of their 
attitude toward the moral and religious law. We trust that 
teachers of religion everywhere will take notice of this judge's 
opinion that teaching any religion save that which is abso-* 
Uitely in accord with statute laws «is a grave crime which is 
intensified if, being a minister of the Gospel, you should still 
happen to be sincere. There is no doubt that Judge Howe 
made his sentences severe enough; they are about double those 
imposed by the Kaiser upon the Socialists who have been trying
 to upset his wicked regime, and three times longer than 
many sentences imposed upon would-be regicides." 

The New York "Tribune" of June 22, said: 

"Joseph F. Rutherford and six of the other seven Russellites
 convicted of violation of the Espionage Act were sentenced
 to twenty years each in the Atlanta penitentiary 
yesterday by Judge Howe, in the United States District Court, 
in Brooklyn. Sentence of the eighth defendant, Giovanni de 
Oecca, was deferred. His companions, each with a pink carnation
 in has lapel, marched out of court to start their sentence. 

"This is the happiest day of my life,' said Mr. Rutherford
, on his way from the court to the jail. 'To serve earthly 


punishment for the sake of one's religious belief ia one of the 
greatest privileges a man could have.* 

"In imposing sentence the judge declared that in his opin* 
ion the religious propaganda advocated and spread throughout 
the nation as well as among our allies was 'a greater danger 
than a division of the German army.' 

" 'If they had taken guns and swords/ he said, and joined 
the German army the harm they could have done would have 
been insignificant compared with the results of their propaganda
. A person preaching religion usually has much influence
, and if he is sincere he is all the more effective. This 
aggravates rather than mitigates the wrong they have done. 

" 'Therefore, as the only prudent thing to do with such 
persons, the court has concluded that the punishment should 
be severe. The sentence is that the defendants, Joseph F. 
Rutherford, William E. Van Amburgh, Robert J. Martin, Fred 
H. Robison, George H. Fisher, Clayton J. Woodworth and 
A. Hugh Macmdllan, serve a term of "twenty years in the Federal
 Penitentiary at Atlanta, Ga,, on each of the four counts 
of the indictment, but that the sentences commence and run 
concurrently.' 

"The defendants retained self-possession that has characterized
 their ' conduct throughout the entire trial. As the 
judge's words fell on their ears not a shade of emotion crossed 
their faces. 

"One of the strangest demonstrations that the marshal's 
office in the Brooklyn Federal Court has ever seen was held 
by the families and intimate friends of the convicted men soon 
after the prisoners had been taken to the grand jury room. 
Messengers were sent out for fruit, candy and sandwiches, and 
after a short prayer meeting a gala feast was spread. Following
 this the whole company made the old building ring with 
the strains of 'Blest Be the* Tie That Binds/ 

" 'It is all God's will,' they told each other with faces 
almost radiant. '-Some day the world will know what all this 
means. Meanwhile let us be thankful for the grace of God 
that has sustained the dear brothers and sisters during their 
trial and look forward to the great day that is to come.' 

"Counsel for the defence announced that they would take 
immediate steps to appeal the case to the United States Circuit
 Court of Appeals. Jesse Fuller, one of the defence's 
attorneys, made every legal effort yesterday morning before 
the sentence was imposed to have the verdict set aside. Every 
motion was denied by Judge Howe, and one of the motions 
made on the ground that the 'ascendency of the mdnd of the 
court had affected the freedom of the witnesses, the defendants 
and the counsel for the defence/ evoked from the court a 
severe reprimand." 


LETTERS FROM 

PREPARATION FOR PTJTURB SERVICE 

Dearly beloved Brother Rutherford : — 

We heard this morning of the result of the trial, and 
hasten to assure you. and all the other dear brethren concerned
, of our love and sympathy with you and them. We 
know that you nor they have the" least bit of sympathy with 
Germany and her devil-possessed ruler, and no jury can make 
yon a traitor. We were not at all surprised at the result, as 


THE BRETHREN 

the report of the proceedings from day to day showed that 
your conviction was a foregone conclusion. Not only so, but 
for forty years our dear departed Pastor pointed out to us 
from the Scriptures just the condition of things which has 
come to pass, including the prediction (based upon the Word 
of God) that at the end of this age, the Lord's people would 
be persecuted and treated as traitors, anarchists, etc. If we 
had nothing more to prove that we correctly understand the 


[6297] 


(222 223) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


Bible and that we have the tbuth, the coming about of matters
 exactly as Brother Russell pointed out from the Scriptures
 would he sufficient to convince us. We know that we 
are in the hands of our heavenly Father; and that while he 
does not approve of injustice, "he nevertheless permits it, 
because he sees that we need these experiences to chisel, polish 
and prepare us to become the judges of the world in the next 
age. Men may sneer at us for holding what seems to them 
such a fantastic idea, but they will in due time find out that 
we knew what we were saving. Then we shall render to them 
just judgment along the lines of mercy and love. 

Again assuring you and the other dear brethren of our 
continued love and prayers, we beg to subscribe ourselves, 

Your brother and sister in the Lord, 

W. W. M., and R. B. U.—Vla,. 

RESOLUTIONS OF SYMPATHY AND 1.0VB 

Dear Brethren: — 

I have the honor to inclose herewith a resolution by the 
Washington Ecclesia; also another resolution addressed to 
Messrs. Sparks and Fuller, Attorneys-at-Law, Brooklyn, N. Y., 
with the request that you cause the same to be delivered to 
them. These resolutions were passed by unanimous vote. 

Yours in the sufferings of the Lord Jesus, 

J. A. D., 8ecy. 
A RESOLUTION 

RESOLVED by the Brethren in Christ at Washington, 
D. C, in meeting assembled, Sunday evening, June 23, 1918, 
that we do tender to our brethren in the Bethel Home and 
Brooklyn Tabernacle, bereaved of seven of their foremost 
fellow-members Uy permission of our heavenly Father, our 
loving sympathy in their sorrow T and their loss; and that 
we do assure them of our continual prayers on thedr behalf 
and of our continued loyalty and support, and of our desire 
for a continued service by the pilgrim brethren as long as the 
Lord permits, 

A LETTER TO THE BETHEL FAMILY 

Dearly Beloved wf Christ: — 

The peace of God be multiplied unto you, and his blessings
 abundantly be your portion! I think of you often and 
pray for you much; and 1 am sure that our Father is blessing
 you. 

Prison life seems strange; and yet every experience is attended
 with joy, since we look at all such from the heavenly 
viewpoint. Trjily now we can sing: 

"Fade, fade, each earthly joy, 
Jesus is mine!" 

In fact, there are now no earthly joys; but we are looking 
with joyful anticipation to our gathering home. Seven days 
in jail changed our appearance somewhat and reminded us 
that the process of death is working in our flesh. On the 
eighth day we were removed to a prison with more light and 
freedom. We now have seven cabins (cells) on a corridor 
shut out from other prisoners, and we can have fellowship 
together all the day. At night, when the great iron doors 
close and each one is locked securely in his cell, we call out 
to each other and discuss God's precious^ Word. Then we 
silently talk with the Lord; and we talk to him about you 
and all the dear sheep, and beg him to protect you. 

If the Lord so wills we would be glad to come to you 
once more and try to aid you in some manner; and to this 
end we have hoped that bail may be granted to us. Our 
Father's will be done! We often feel in a strait betwixt 
two — whether we would prefer to depart or to come and 
M»rve you a season before we go homo. His will be done! 
1 feel sure that all these experiences are ripening the church 
preparatory to the final ingathering. Your letters and letters 
from the dear ones elsewhere show how sweetly they are 
yielding to the fire that is consuming the sacrifice. This 
brings joy to my heart. I count it all joy to be privileged to 
have some part in filling up "that which is behind of the 
sufferings of Christ for his body's sake, which is the church." 
I thank our dear Father for being so good as to send six. 
brethren with me, that we may have these privileges together. 

Several years ago it was my pleasure to travel over some 
of the land which St. Paul traversed while ministering to the 
saints. I also visited the prison where he \va=* confined at 
Rome. Now we are having some like experiences in prison; 
and our Father has permitted it. and will overrule it all to 
our good. As we now read the experiences of St. Paul they 
have a keener interest for us. Only if now we can faithfully 


finish our course, we shall join the Apostle and Brother Russell
, and then see the Lord! Weep not for us, beloved; 
indeed, I am sure that you do not, but that you rejoice with 
us. If I could come down once a day and look over the place 
and see that you are all safe and happy, I think I should 
feel better. But then I wonder if the Lord does not permit 
Brother RusseLl to look about Bethel daily. I know the Lord 
has made all necessary provision. 

Let not your dear hearts be troubled, neither fear what 
man may do unto you* I hardly think the Government 
powers will attempt to disturb you in the home or in the 
office. Stay by the ship, trusting in the Lord. Only permit 
me to suggest that you be calm and do as little talking about 
the trouble as is possible. Go quietly about your work, but 
keep at it until the Lord says: "It is enough!" From what 
I hear I judge that these trials are drawing all of the Lord's 
dear ones closer together; and such should be the case. We 
therefore expect that every one at the Bethel will "in love 
serve one another/' Remember the admonition of St. Paul to 
avoid thotse who cause divisions, and who have sought to 
destroy the flock of the Lord. The time is now here for each 
one to set his house in order. The King is at the door. 

Do all you can to encourage the dear sheep of the flock. 
Comfort them with the sweet promises of an early and glorious 
home-coming. Never have I loved you so much as now. I 
miss you — and that is putting it lightly. How sweet it will 
be to gather around our Father's throne and rejoice with joy 
unspeakable forever morel 

While it is true that we know not what awaits us, I think 
there may be ft short season of freedom and some more service 
for his dear people. That is all according to his will. His 
will be done ! Your messages to the brethren have been 
greatly appreciated. May the Lord reward you richly! Know 
of a certainty that we greatly love you. The grace of our 
Lord Jesus Christ be with you one and all. 

Your brother and servant by his grace. 

J. F. Rutherford. 

[The above letter was written on June 28, in L. I. City 
Prison,] 

PLEDGE HEARTY SUPPORT AND LOYAL CO-OPERATION 

Dearly beloved Bethel Family: — 

At a special meeting of the Boston Ecclesia held on Monday
, June 24, when about four hundred were in attendance, it 
was unanimously voted that a committee be appointed to 
express the sentiment and sympathy of the Ecclesia to you in 
this your hour of sorrow. While we fully realize your greatest 
source of comfort comes from the Great Comforter, we also 
know that the sympathy of kindred minds of the 3ame 
mystical body is, by the grace of God, a help and consolation 
in times of affliction. 

As it has seemed to be the good pleasure of our heavenly 
Father in recently removing from active executive service the 
officers of our Society who have so faithfully served us in the 
past, the Ecclesia at Boston very heartily, as well as unanimously
, indorse the selection of the brethren in whose hands 
tfhe matter of continuing the harvest work has been intrusted. 
We believe the Watch Tower Bible and Tragi 1 Society and 
kindred organizations to be the Father's only channel for dispensing
 the meat in due season for the household of faith, and 
we pledge our loyal support and hearty co-operation. 

Yours in the name of our dear Redeemer, 

The Church at Boston. 

LOVING SYMPATHY FOR THE BRETHREN 

Dear Brethren prisoners of Jesus Christ: — 

Greetings in our glorious Bridegroom's mime. T cannot 
refrain from writing to you and sending abundance of Christian
 love to you all in bonds. How gladly would I share your 
position if it were my opportunity, but I can share and do 
share part of your sufferings mentally! My heart has been 
sick when I think of the dear saintly heads that will have the 
prison pillows to lie upon; but it will soon be exchanged for the 
Master's breast. What can I say, dear brethren, that could 
comfort you but assure you of my prayers hourly on your 
behalf, and to promise I will strive more faithfully to fight 
on and meet you all in the kingdom of God, 

My heart goes out in sympathy to the dear help-mates. 
May God who alone can comfort and sustain these dear sisters, 
yea, and the Bible House brethren, too! 

Again assuring you of our love and prayers on your 
behalf, I remain 

Your sister in Christ Jesus, MRS. W, T. H. — Ont. 


[6298] 

