Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Humbly Conforming to Jehovah’s Way
“SEEK Jehovah, all you meek ones of the earth.” This invitation, proclaimed by the Hebrew prophet Zephaniah over 26 centuries ago, is still being extended to people throughout the earth today. (Zephaniah 2:3) What does it mean to seek Jehovah? Doing this starts with taking in knowledge of the only true and living God, Jehovah.—Jeremiah 10:10; John 17:3.
Taking in knowledge, however, does not in itself lead to an approved standing before God. To gain God’s favor, a person must also apply this knowledge. How? By humbly conforming his thinking and conduct to God’s standards, as illustrated by the following experience from Suriname.—Ephesians 4:22-24.
Eddy, a schoolteacher in his mid-30’s, longed for satisfying answers to such questions as: ‘What role does religion play in today’s society?’ and ‘Does the Bible, an ancient book, agree with modern science?’ When Jehovah’s Witnesses called and offered Bible-based answers to these questions, Eddy listened carefully. He even took notes in order to check the Witnesses’ explanations.
Previously, Eddy had associated with a religion that taught him that humans were the end result of God’s modification of apes. So when the Witnesses offered him the publication Life—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? he readily accepted it. The book’s clear explanation of the Bible’s creation account impressed him. Through his study of the Bible, he became convinced that he had found the truth!
But now he faced a test. Eddy lived in a house in which thievery and dishonesty were a way of life. Thus, he was presented with a choice: either follow his roommates’ corrupt way of life or reject such conduct in favor of a life-style that glorifies God. Wisely, Eddy chose the latter. He cut off all bad association and moved out of the house.—1 Corinthians 15:33, 34.
Eddy made rapid progress after he began to attend meetings at the Kingdom Hall. He also made improvements in his dress and grooming and started to speak to his friends and relatives about what he was learning. Later, his joy was increased when he was approved to share in preaching the “good news” publicly. (Matthew 24:14; Acts 20:20) In December 1996 the long-awaited day came when he symbolized his dedication to Jehovah by means of water baptism.
Every year, hundreds of thousands of honesthearted people respond to the invitation to “seek Jehovah.” In so doing, they experience the truthfulness of Proverbs 22:4, which says: “The result of humility and the fear of Jehovah is riches and glory and life.” Yes, by humbly conforming to Jehovah’s way, lovers of truth enjoy such blessings now, and confidently look forward to eternal blessings right here on earth.—Psalm 37:29.
[Maps on page 18]
(For fully formatted text, see publication.)
Caribbean Sea
GUYANA
SURINAME
FRENCH GUIANA
BRAZIL
[Credit Line]
Globe: Mountain High Maps® Copyright © 1997 Digital Wisdom, Inc.

