Are You Applying What You Learned at the “Teachers of God’s Word” District Convention?
1 Anyone who attended this year’s district convention could see that Jehovah’s people are intent on fulfilling their commission to be teachers of God’s Word. (Matt. 28:19, 20) As you returned home, what specific points of instruction were you determined to apply in your own life and in the field ministry?
2 Inspired Scriptures Beneficial for Teaching: The first day’s theme highlighted 2 Timothy 3:16. The keynote address showed that to be “Completely Equipped as Teachers of God’s Word,” we must highly esteem God’s Word, respect it above any human opinion or tradition, and use it faithfully. We must also pray daily for holy spirit to help us in our ministry and work to cultivate its foremost fruitage​—love. And we must allow Jehovah’s earthly organization to train us as ministers through all the congregation meetings.
3 Friday’s symposium, “Teaching Ourselves While Teaching Others,” explained that we must be exemplary in (1) adhering to God’s laws in all facets of Christian morality, (2) maintaining diligent study habits, and (3) eradicating attitudes and conditions of the heart and mind that the Devil can exploit. Next, we learned practical ways to protect our families from the worldly plague of pornography. Parents were urged to set the example in avoiding even a momentary look at a sexual scene and to monitor their children’s Internet use and television viewing. Which points from Friday’s program have you begun to apply?
4 The last talk of the day enhanced our resolve to cherish Jehovah’s light, to stay close to God’s faithful anointed class, and to contribute toward the peace of Jehovah’s people. Have you read the new release Isaiah’s Prophecy​—Light for All Mankind II?
5 Adequately Qualified to Teach Others: The theme text for the second day was 2 Timothy 2:2. As you listened to the Saturday morning symposium, did you take note of suggestions on how to (1) search out deserving ones, (2) cultivate their interest, and (3) teach them to observe all that Christ commanded? Are you applying what you learned​—to show householders at least one point from the Scriptures and to lay the groundwork for a future visit?
6 The afternoon program stressed the importance of imitating the Great Teacher, Jesus. In what ways are you endeavoring to be more like him? From what you learned in the second symposium of the day, how do you feel you can “Benefit More Fully From Theocratic Education”? What suggestions have you applied to increase your attention span during personal study and congregation meetings?
7 Without a doubt, the forthcoming provision Benefit From Theocratic Ministry School Education will help us to grow in our abilities as speakers and as teachers of God’s Word. Greater attention will be given to the speech qualities that characterized faithful servants of God in Bible times. Each lesson in the new textbook has boxes that concisely show what we need to do, why it is important, and how to do it. Practical exercises are included. Sisters will have 29 settings from which to choose when delivering their assignments. In time, the announced changes will be made in the format of the school. Do you have a good routine of study and preparation so as to benefit fully from the Theocratic Ministry School each week?
8 Be Teachers in View of the Time: Hebrews 5:12 set the tone for Sunday. The morning symposium, “Malachi’s Prophecy Prepares Us for Jehovah’s Day,” urged us to give God our very best and to hate all forms of treachery so that we may survive the great and fear-inspiring day of Jehovah. The drama, “Respect Jehovah’s Authority,” forcefully showed how the pride, ambition, jealousy, and misplaced loyalty of ancient Korah and his associates led to acts of outright rebellion against Jehovah himself. The follow-up talk focused on the modern-day need to submit to godly authority within the family and the congregation. The public discourse, “Who Are Teaching All Nations the Truth?,” supplied proof that Jehovah’s Witnesses are doing so, in contrast with Christendom, which merely professes to teach Bible truth.
9 Clearly, Jehovah is training us to be better teachers of his Word. Let us apply what we learned, ‘paying constant attention to ourselves and to our teaching, that we may save both ourselves and those who listen to us.’​—1 Tim. 4:16.

