Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting October 8
Song 109
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage everyone to view the video United by Divine Teaching in preparation for the discussion at the Service Meeting the week of October 22. Using suggestions on page 8, demonstrate two brief magazine presentations, one using the October 15 Watchtower and the other using the October 22 Awake!
35 min: “Are You Applying What You Learned at the ‘Teachers of God’s Word’ District Convention?” Audience discussion of the convention program, to be handled by the Watchtower Study conductor. After a one-minute introduction, allot 10-12 minutes for each day’s program. Briefly present the main points under each subheading, and then invite comments from the audience on (1) how they have endeavored to apply the instruction, (2) how they have benefited from doing so, and (3) what more they feel they need to do. Use thought-provoking questions to encourage a lively discussion. Help all to appreciate the need to use what they have learned.
Song 151 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 15
Song 113
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
15 min: Do You Have “an Obedient Heart”? (1 Ki. 3:9) Talk by an elder, based on the July 15, 1998, Watchtower, pages 29-31. Discuss ways in which we can demonstrate obedience in working with the congregation.
20 min: Make Good Use of Our Magazines. The service overseer and the magazine servant discuss their concerns about local magazine distribution. They mention how many copies the congregation receives each month compared with the number reported as placed. Evidently, quite a few copies are being stored or thrown away. How can the publishers make better use of our magazines? The brothers discuss the seven points in the Service Meeting part “Be Magazine Conscious!” for the week of October 4, 1999. They review the experience in the February 15, 1998, Watchtower, pages 28-9, and consider some ways that the suggestions might be applied locally. Everyone is encouraged to try the sample presentations featured each month in Our Kingdom Ministry.
Song 156 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 22
Song 120
10 min: Local announcements. Using the suggestions on page 8, demonstrate two brief magazine presentations, one using the November 1 Watchtower and the other using the November 8 Awake!
10 min: How Would You Respond? Briefly point out pages 204-5 in the Reasoning book, where a clear answer is given to the question, “How do Jehovah’s Witnesses arrive at their explanation of the Bible?” Present a well-prepared demonstration of how to respond to this question on a return visit, followed by a warm invitation to attend the congregation meetings.
25 min: “United by Divine Teaching​—A View of Real Brotherly Unity.” Audience discussion. Use the first and last paragraphs to introduce and conclude the part. To prompt a lively discussion of the video, ask each of the questions that are provided. If any in the congregation have attended conventions in other countries, have them share their feelings about seeing firsthand the international scope and unity of our organization. Otherwise, have some heartfelt experiences related from the 1994 Yearbook, pages 7-9, and the 1995 Yearbook, pages 8-11. In December we will review the video To the Ends of the Earth.
Song 47 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 29
Song 164
12 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for October. The literature offer for November is the Require brochure or the Knowledge book. Demonstrate this brief presentation: “In these economically challenging times, many people are finding it hard to make ends meet. Do you think human governments will solve this problem in a way that will be fair to everyone? [Allow for response.] I have found this promise in the Bible to be most encouraging.” Read Psalm 72:12-14. Then offer the Require brochure or the Knowledge book, tying in an appropriate comment from the publication.
15 min: Local needs.
18 min: “How Well Do You Eat Spiritually?”a Invite additional comments from the audience on the April 15, 1997, Watchtower, pages 28-31, to explain why and how we must exert ourselves to maintain good spiritual eating habits.
Song 181 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 5
Song 167
10 min: Local announcements.
18 min: Family Preparation for Meetings. Father discusses with his family how all can prepare to have a good share in the meetings. Using the guidelines in the July 1, 1999, Watchtower, pages 19-20, paragraph 9, they prepare comments to give during this week’s Watchtower Study. (1) Each family member selects a question or two on which to comment. (2) After reviewing the respective paragraphs, they formulate their comments in their own words. (3) They pick out the key cited scriptures, discuss how each relates to the subject, and plan what to say to apply them to the lesson. All are eager to participate in the meeting.
17 min: “What Is the Objective?”b Emphasize the importance of helping students to see the value of attending congregation meetings. Include a well-prepared demonstration of how to do this, using chapter 17, paragraphs 6-8, in the Knowledge book.
Song 186 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

