Be “Zealous for Fine Works” During April!
1 Last spring an unprecedented witness was given when millions of copies of Kingdom News No. 34 were distributed worldwide. Congregation publishers and pioneers alike zealously shared in this stimulating work. Were you among them? If you were, no doubt you thoroughly enjoyed having a part in that remarkable campaign. Now you may be wondering, What ‘fine work’ is in store for us this year?—Titus 2:14.
2 During April and early May, we will have the pleasure of distributing a special edition of the Awake! magazine, the April 22, 1996, issue, featuring “When Wars Will Be No More.” Since this subject will appeal to a great many householders, we will endeavor to give the magazine the widest possible distribution. In view of the importance of the information it contains, this issue of Awake! should be featured during April and into May, until supplies are exhausted.
3 Our Goal—Participation by All Publishers: It would truly be encouraging if every publisher in this country could have a share in the preaching work during April. With the Memorial of Christ’s death fresh in mind, we will surely want to show our appreciation for God’s goodness by offering a direct “sacrifice of praise” in the field ministry.—Heb. 13:15.
4 A diligent effort should be made to discern the needs of every member of the congregation so that all can have a zealous share in the ministry during April. (Rom. 15:1) Book study conductors should be fully aware of the circumstances of those in their groups and offer practical help when necessary. Does anyone need transportation? Who can provide it? Are some timid or self-conscious? Can more experienced publishers work along with them? What about shut-ins or those who are ill? Could they engage in telephone witnessing, in letter writing, or in some other productive activity?
5 Some who have become inactive have been receiving regular spiritual encouragement, and they may be motivated to engage in the preaching work once again. The campaign with the special Awake! will provide them with an excellent opportunity to become reactivated.
6 Train Young Ones to Take Part: Many children of Jehovah’s Witnesses have accompanied their parents from house to house for years, although they are not yet serving as unbaptized publishers. Is now the time for them to get started? Are they moved from the heart and ready to have a meaningful share in the house-to-house work? Family heads should use time during the family Bible study to help their qualified children prepare a presentation tailored to each one’s age and ability. Older ones can choose a thought-provoking question with which to arouse the interest of the householder and then point out the answer in the magazine. Younger children can give an effective witness in just a few words. For example, they can encourage the householder to “read a special magazine that is being offered worldwide this month.” As part of your family’s preparation, be sure to include suggestions for overcoming common objections. You will find a number of good ideas in the Reasoning book. At mealtimes and on other appropriate occasions, encourage family members to relate the experiences they have had in field service.
7 Qualified Bible Students Take Up the Work Jesus Did: Jesus did not confine his teaching to giving instruction on doctrinal matters. He accompanied his students in the ministry and taught them how to preach. (Luke 8:1; 10:1-11) What is the situation today? More than half a million Bible studies are being conducted in the United States. No doubt, with appropriate encouragement many of these students could take the next step in their training and qualify to serve as unbaptized publishers in April.
8 If you are conducting a Bible study, consider these questions: Is the student making progress, consistent with his age and ability? Has he begun to share his faith informally with others? Is he putting on “the new personality”? (Col. 3:10) Does he meet the qualifications for unbaptized publishers, outlined on pages 97 through 99 of the Our Ministry book? If you believe he is qualified, why not discuss the matter with him? Some students need little more than a direct invitation to share in the work. Of course, if the student is willing, it will first be necessary for the presiding overseer to arrange in the usual way for a discussion with two of the elders. On the other hand, something may be holding the student back. Perhaps one of the elders could accompany you on the Bible study and draw the student out as to his feelings toward the truth. After listening to what the student has to say, the elder may be able to provide practical suggestions, along with Scriptural help.
9 ‘Buy Out the Time’ to Auxiliary Pioneer: Each year during the Memorial season, gratitude for the ransom moves thousands to ‘buy out’ the time to be auxiliary pioneers. (Eph. 5:15-17) Although some sacrifices are needed, the rewards are great. A commendable number of youths take advantage of a break from school to auxiliary pioneer. Adults who work full-time use evenings and weekends to full advantage in this same activity. Thus, entire families have been known to auxiliary pioneer together! In some congregations most of the elders and ministerial servants and their wives have enrolled as auxiliary pioneers. Stimulated by their zealous example, others have followed suit, so that a large percentage of the congregation serve as auxiliary pioneers in April.
10 Whether you are able to auxiliary pioneer or not, look for ways to increase your service in the field during April. Set a personal goal for yourself, one that will require some effort to reach but that is attainable. Your desire to “spend and be completely spent” in Jehovah’s service, according to your personal circumstances, will have his blessing.—2 Cor. 12:15.
11 Meetings for Field Service: Meetings for field service should be arranged every day of the Awake! campaign, at a time that will allow for an early start in the ministry. Provision should also be made for evening witnessing. Most publishers will be engaging in field service on weekends, so congregations should schedule meetings for field service on Saturdays, both morning and afternoon, for the duration of the special Awake! distribution.
12 Those who conduct meetings for field service should see to it that there is plenty of territory on hand. Territory that has not been worked recently should be covered first. However, unassigned territory that is cared for by the Society should not be worked without the Society’s permission. Are you holding one or more personal territories that have not been covered recently? If you will need help in working them during the campaign, speak to the service overseer or to the brother caring for the territory and they will be happy to arrange for you to have some assistance.
13 How Many Magazines Will You Place? That question is for each individual to answer. In determining how many magazines you can place during the campaign, consider the type of territory you will be working, your age, your health, the time you can devote to the work, and other factors. Note, however, the reminder that was given in the January 1, 1994, issue of The Watchtower: “As a suggestion, publishers may have a goal of, say, 10 magazines per month, depending on their circumstances; pioneers might strive for 90.” Would a similar goal be realistic in your case?
14 Elders—Careful Planning Is Needed: Insure that, if possible, all of the congregation’s territory will be worked with the special issue of Awake! Careful attention should be given to working any business territory assigned to the congregation. Those who work it should be well prepared and neatly dressed. An elaborate presentation is not necessary. When approaching a businessman, you can say that you do not often meet businesspeople at home, so you are calling at his place of business to present an article that will surely be of interest to him. Then you can briefly share a specific point in the magazine. Street witnessing with magazines should also be properly organized within the congregation’s territory. The most effective way to engage in street work is to take the initiative and approach passersby, rather than to wait for them to approach you. Since you will be in the public eye, you should be conscious of having a dignified appearance. There may be other places in your territory that could be worked during the campaign, such as airports, hospitals, parking lots, parks, and rest homes. The body of elders should determine what appropriate arrangements can be made for witnessing in these areas of your congregation’s territory.
15 Jehovah is a tireless worker. (John 5:17) He created the heavens and the earth as well as the plants and the animals; but he continued to work until he had created his crowning achievement on earth—man. The fact that we have life is a direct result of God’s willingness to work. As “imitators of God,” we should be moved by our love for him to be “zealous for fine works.” (Eph. 5:1; Titus 2:14) Since Jehovah is worthy of receiving our very best effort and since the desire to obtain results is characteristic of one who is zealous, we should be interested in performing quality work in the ministry. Of course, Jehovah appreciates any sacrifice we make for him, and our work is never in vain. (1 Cor. 15:58) So, with grateful hearts, let us apply ourselves to zealous activity during April, confident of Jehovah’s approval and blessing and of rich success!

