Render Sacred Service Day and Night
1 An extraordinary privilege has been extended to us. It is that of being witnesses of Jehovah. We are part of the worldwide organization of evangelizers being used by Jehovah to accomplish the greatest Kingdom-proclamation work ever undertaken! (Mark 13:10) In view of the urgency of our times, are we sharing in this work to the fullest extent possible?
2 We do not know how many will eventually respond to our preaching. Jehovah assures us that it will be “a great crowd,” all of whom are identified by their “rendering him sacred service day and night.” (Rev. 7:9, 15) The over five million Witnesses who are already busy in God’s service are not simply interested listeners, nor are they just meeting attenders. They are workers who proclaim the good news worldwide!
3 Every day, there are opportunities to praise Jehovah, either in field service or informally. Think of the grand witness that could be given if each one of us took the initiative to share the truth with just one person each day. Our appreciation for Jehovah should move us to speak about him with enthusiasm.—Ps. 92:1, 2.
4 Help Others to Render Sacred Service: Jehovah continues to bless us with increase. (Hag. 2:7) During the past service year in the United States, an average of 568,480 home Bible studies were conducted each month. Our goal in studying with these people is to help them become Jesus’ disciples. (Matt. 28:19, 20) Many of them have already made fine progress by regularly attending the meetings. They have started speaking to their acquaintances “about the magnificent things of God” that they have learned. (Acts 2:11) Can they now be invited to participate in the public ministry?
5 During April we should make a special effort to invite new ones who qualify, to join us in the field service. Has your student expressed a desire to do this? If so, does he meet the Scriptural requirements? (See Our Ministry book, pages 97-9.) When the student desires to share in the field service, discuss his prospects with the presiding overseer, who will arrange for two elders to examine the matter. If the student qualifies to be accepted as an unbaptized publisher, invite him to join you in the field. Service overseers and book study conductors should especially be aware of assisting those who might qualify to begin publishing in April.
6 Parents might consider whether their children qualify to become unbaptized publishers. (Ps. 148:12, 13) If your child desires to express himself in Kingdom service and he is of good conduct, you may approach one of the elders on the service committee to discuss the situation. After meeting with you and the child, two elders will determine whether he is qualified to be counted as a publisher. There is special cause for rejoicing when children join us in praising God!
7 Only Jehovah is worthy of our sacred service. (Luke 4:8) May each of us use our wonderful privilege to praise him “very much.”—Ps. 109:30; 113:3.

