Service Meetings for April
Week Starting April 1
Song 132
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. If applicable to the congregation, consider “Will You Be Working Unassigned Territory?” Mention any outstanding reports about your Memorial observance.
20 min: “Be ‘Zealous for Fine Works’ During April!” Question-and-answer coverage of paragraphs 1-10 by the service overseer. Explain (1) what is planned locally for expanded field service activity during April, (2) how all can be assisted to participate, and (3) how new and younger ones can be included.
15 min: “Search Out Those Who Are Rightly Disposed.” Review suggested presentations, and then have two demonstrations showing how they can be used. As time permits, relate some of the suggestions for offering magazines, found in the September 1995 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 5. Include a reminder to mention that we accept contributions to advance the worldwide work.
Song 20 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 8
Song 72
15 min: Local announcements. Accounts report; mention donation acknowledgments received from the Society. Discuss practical ways we can help new ones who attended the Memorial to make further spiritual progress. Review April 1, 1991, Watchtower, pages 9-12.
15 min: “Render Sacred Service Day and Night.” Questions and answers. Read paragraphs 5 and 6.
15 min: “Be ‘Zealous for Fine Works’ During April!” Question-and-answer coverage of paragraphs 11-15. Encourage all to analyze their personal circumstances and search out ways to increase their support for the field ministry.
Song 113 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 15
Song 133
10 min: Local announcements. Remind audience about the special public talk on April 21, entitled “Remaining Blameless Amid a Crooked Generation.” Encourage putting forth an extra effort to assist everyone to attend.
15 min: “Times Have Changed.” Questions and answers. Emphasize presenting the Kingdom message in a way that meets the most pressing needs of the people. Suggest some family and social issues that are on the minds of many people, as noted in the January 1, 1994, Watchtower, pages 22-3.
20 min: “Faith Follows the Thing Heard.” Discuss how magazine placements can be used to cultivate interest that can lead to Bible studies in the Knowledge book. Have two or three presentations demonstrated.
Song 204 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 22
Song 6
15 min: Local announcements. Review highlights of special talk given this past weekend. Discuss how this admonition should motivate interested ones to take a firm stand for true worship. Also, call attention to “Go On Increasing in Accurate Knowledge,” and emphasize importance of attending Congregation Book Study regularly.
12 min: Question Box. A talk by an elder. Explain why brothers conducting the meetings should avoid undue familiarity by calling on individuals, using only their first names.
18 min: Discussion between elder and ministerial servant of article entitled “Godly Families of the Past—A Pattern for Our Day,” found on pages 20-3 of the September 15, 1995, issue of The Watchtower. Make practical application to benefit families locally.
Song 143 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 29
Song 144
12 min: Local announcements. Some describe Jehovah’s Witnesses as a “sect” or “cult,” misleading others about our activities and objectives. Using the Reasoning book, page 202, briefly explain how to refute this charge.
15 min: Giving Even Coverage to Our Territory. Talk by service overseer. Scattered or distant areas may rarely be worked. Some may purposely avoid working in localities where people are affluent or strongly religious. Business territories may be neglected. Some publishers may regularly request territories they personally prefer rather than those currently needing coverage. Encourage all to cooperate with efforts to cover unworked territories. The summer months usually provide a good opportunity to work distant rural areas; perhaps car groups can be organized. Make sure the territory is thoroughly covered, including not-at-homes, before it is returned. Offer other practical suggestions showing how all can assist in giving the best coverage to your territory.
18 min: Offer The Watchtower and Awake! During May. Feature individual copies. In territory that is covered frequently, offer any appropriate brochure. Keep a record of all placements, with the goal of establishing a magazine route. Where there is sustained interest, subscriptions may be offered. Emphasize the far-reaching benefits of magazine distribution as one of the most effective means of getting the Kingdom message to the public. Make sure we have a supply when we go in service; offer them at every opportunity. Personal arrangements for a weekly Magazine Day are a good way to increase placements. Store-to-store work and street witnessing with magazines are also productive. Follow up interest with return visits that are designed to start studies, using the Knowledge book. Have one or two brief demonstrations offering the current issues, perhaps using presentations found in the September 1995 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 3, paragraphs 3-5; read paragraph 6.
Song 195 and concluding prayer.

