Times Have Changed
1 The Bible tells us that “the scene of this world is changing.” (1 Cor. 7:31) How true that is today! Even in our lifetime, we have seen drastic changes in the thinking and conduct of people on every level of human society. If we are to be successful in reaching them with the Kingdom message, our approach must keep up with the changing times. We want to present the good news in such a way that it interests people and reaches their hearts.
2 Years ago, in many lands the witness work was different because, for the most part, people lived more tranquil lives, and they felt secure. Religion held a sacred place in their lives. The Bible was highly regarded. In those days witnessing often involved refuting arguments on doctrinal issues. Today, people’s lives are in turmoil. Religion is ridiculed. Few have faith in the Bible. And for many, the theory of evolution has destroyed faith in God.
3 One traveling overseer observed: “Now, it seems, there are so many problems and difficulties in people’s lives that we have to teach them how to live.” The immediate concerns of people naturally revolve around themselves, their families, and their anxieties. These are the things that they talk about most when they get together. We need to keep that in mind in our witnessing work. 
4 God’s Kingdom Is the Only Sure Hope for the Future: Most people have little confidence in human government. They feel that there is no prospect for seeing a better world in their lifetime. False religion has failed to give them any basis for hope. That is why the greatest need of mankind is to hear the good news about God’s Kingdom. Show how it will ultimately provide the solutions to all of the problems confronting mankind.
5 The Bible Is the Only Reliable Source of Guidance: Today’s masses have been misguided by leaders who rely upon human wisdom and worldly philosophies. People have yet to realize that “it does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step.” (Jer. 10:23) The most valuable lesson they can learn is that they must ‘trust in Jehovah with all their heart and not lean upon their own understanding.’ (Prov. 3:5) While the times have changed, the Bible has not. Hence, in our ministry we should always feature God’s Word, teaching others to appreciate its inspired, divine guidance. (2 Tim. 3:16, 17) To fulfill that purpose, we must keep the importance of the Bible before the people by referring to it in our presentations, using it to answer their questions, and advocating the need to study it and apply its practical wisdom.
6 Even with today’s changing times, our objectives in the ministry remain the same. We are to preach the good news of the Kingdom, build confidence in God’s Word, and help others see the need to study the Bible with us. What we say must be relevant to the current needs of those to whom we witness. By doing this, we may become sharers of the good news with others and thus gain the most persons.—1 Cor. 9:19, 23.

