A Unique Bridge That Changed an Island
By Awake! writer in Canada
NESTLED in the Gulf of St. Lawrence on Canada’s Atlantic Coast is verdant, crescent-shaped Prince Edward Island, Canada’s smallest province. Jacques Cartier, a 16th-century French explorer, described it as “the fairest land that may possibly be seen.” Affectionately called the Island by its more than 130,000 inhabitants, Prince Edward Island is noted for pristine beaches, potatoes grown in rich, red soil, and lobsters harvested off its shores. More than a century after the island joined the Dominion of Canada in 1873, it established a fixed link to the mainland—the unique Confederation Bridge. What impact has this bridge had on the island and its people?
Separating Prince Edward Island from the mainland is a comparatively small stretch of water, only about nine miles [13 km] wide at its narrowest and shallowest point. Yet, the 180-mile-long [300 km] Northumberland Strait has contributed to a strong sense of distinctiveness for the islanders, who cherish their history, agricultural heritage, and the tranquillity of their gardenlike island.
In November 1996 this state of isolation ceased when the last span of the Confederation Bridge was fitted into place. The bridge officially opened May 31, 1997. Since then, island residents and visitors have been able to cross the strait by car in about 12 minutes, thus enjoying continuous year-round access.
But what attracts people to this isolated island? The answer for many is one book title—Anne of Green Gables! Yes, the author of that famous book, Lucy Maud Montgomery (1874-1942), was from Cavendish, where her home still stands. Each summer, more than 200,000 tourists flock there.
Why a Unique Bridge?
Around the world there are numerous great bridges that are architectural wonders of our modern age. So, what makes this one worthy of special mention? It is by no means the longest bridge in the world, but it does lay claim to being in winter “the longest bridge over ice-covered waters.”
Invariably, the Northumberland Strait fills with ice during the five winter months, so this bridge is designed to stand up to such harsh conditions. Its mainland approach is at Jourimain Island, New Brunswick. From there it spans the strait and terminates at the sandstone-rimmed southwest shore of Prince Edward Island, near the tiny hamlet of Borden. Are you eager to experience the drive across this 36-foot-wide [11-m], two-lane ribbon of highway? Walking and cycling are not allowed on the bridge, so a provision was made to shuttle pedestrians and cyclists across. At its navigational span, you will be some 195 feet [60 m] above the water, about as high as a 20-story building. Why so high? This allows oceangoing ships to pass through at the center of the channel.
Building With the Environment in Mind
A project of this magnitude involves complicated comprehensive insurance coverage as well as much environmental planning to protect the surrounding ecosystem. Of major concern was the effect the bridge would have on the flow of ice through the strait in springtime. Any ice buildup could have an impact on local land and marine habitats as well as on the fishing industry. Even dredged material from the ocean bottom was relocated to select sites with hopes of creating new lobster habitats.
The copper cone-shaped ice shields placed at water level on each of the pier shafts are significant. (See diagram, page 18.) What purpose do they serve? As drifting ice pushes against the cone, the ice slides upward until it breaks under its own weight. It then falls back into the current and slides by either side of the pier. To minimize a buildup of the ice drifting through the strait, the piers are anchored on bedrock some 800 feet [250 m] apart.
The Challenge of Assembling the Bridge
The sheer size of the pieces of the bridge is awesome. The four main building blocks are (1) a pier base, which sits on the bottom of the strait on a prepared foundation and extends up to the water’s surface, (2) a pier shaft, which is attached to the pier base, (3) a main girder, which rests on top of the pier shaft, and (4) drop-in spans to connect the main girders. (See diagram above.) The construction involved more than 6,000 workers, and over 80 percent of the work was done on shore at “a massive 150-acre [60 ha] staging facility.” Individual pieces were then transported from the land base to the marine location and assembled at sea.
A finished girder measures up to 630 feet [192 m] from end to end. ‘How can anything that big be moved?’ you may ask. By using a transporter. Looking at one in action reminds you of an ant carrying an object many times its size on its back. Carrying 7,500 tons per girder, that is quite a weight! Pushing its way ever so slowly along a steel track at a speed of three meters per minute, the transporter did not win any races. No wonder the two transporters used were nicknamed the Turtle and the Lobster!
Since these “ants” were not amphibious, a 335-foot-tall [102-m] twin-hulled floating crane was utilized. One reporter described it as “quite an ugly thing, with a too-long neck and monstrously huge feet” but having “the grace of a swan.” Originally built in 1990 for work on the bridge between the Danish islands of Funen and Zealand, this vessel was refitted and brought over from Dunkerque, France. Amazingly, this heavy lift vessel “can pick up the equivalent of 30 Boeing 737 airplanes and can manoeuvre on open seas with a surgeon’s precision.” Guided by a satellite-based global positioning system, it positioned the main girders and all other pieces to an accuracy of within less than an inch [2 cm].—See picture, page 18.
What Has Been the Impact on the Island?
The new bridge stands as a symbol of progress. For some, however, it leaves unanswered questions about the future. Even now, seven years after its inauguration, it is too early to predict what the overall impact of the bridge will be, especially on the environment. In 2002 a lobster scientist reported that the bridge did not seem to have affected the lobster population. He also said: “The last five years have been the best for rock crab.” How has tourism been affected?
During a recent period, tourism increased by “a whopping 61 per cent,” says one report. Of course, most tourists come during the summer season. In addition, between 1996 and 2001, exports almost doubled. Employment also improved. On the negative side, many of those who were employed by the former ferry service are earning far less. Another complaint made by some is the high toll price. But then, as some might say, progress has its price.
Has easier access to the mainland changed the charm of the island? Some who come “from away” to enjoy the tranquillity of the island may wonder if they can still find an escape from the hectic pace of the mainland in the unspoiled landscape and sand dunes of Abegweit, the “cradle in the waves,” as the native Micmac people called it.
Truly, the Confederation Bridge is a most impressive achievement. Do drivers tend to fall asleep at the wheel during their short drive? Hardly. The elongated S design helps them stay alert to enjoy the experience. Perhaps this bridge will give you added incentive to come visit this “Garden of the Gulf” and taste its still peaceful way of life, whether you appreciate Anne of Green Gables or not.
[Box/Picture on page 19]
Challenges of Winter Travel
  Early European settlers on Prince Edward Island soon discovered that the fields of moving ice cut them off from the mainland for five months every year. Crossing the ever-changing ice floes, often piled up by gale-force winds, was a formidable task. Certainly, it was not an experience for the fainthearted. The first attempt these settlers made at a winter crossing of the strait was in 1775 in small canoes fitted with wooden runners, in imitation of the Micmac natives. From then on, mail and passengers crossed the strait throughout the winter with some regularity, although “there was rarely a line-up of passengers eager to take their chances on the iceboats,” says the book Lifeline—The Story of the Atlantic Ferries and Coastal Boats. F. H. MacArthur states in the Maritime Advocate and Busy East: “Ladies were taken across for double fare as they were not supposed to do any physical labor. Male passengers were fastened to the boat by leather straps, which served the double purpose of hauling traces and to prevent [the men] from drowning should they accidentally fall into the water. The boats were about 17 feet [5m] long, 4 feet [1m] wide, [with] the bow turned up like the runner of a sled. The exterior of the boat was sheathed with heavy tin.” The last crossing of these iceboats is thought to have been on April 28, 1917, after which the government obtained an icebreaker that could navigate the ice as regularly as and more safely than the iceboats.
[Picture]
Iceboats crossed the Northumberland Strait until 1917
[Credit Line]
Public Archives and Records Office of Prince Edward Island, Accession No. 2301-273
[Diagram on page 18]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
  3 Main girder      4  Drop in span

  2 Pier shaft

    Ice shield

  1 Pier base
[Map on page 16]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
Prince Edward Island
[Pictures on page 17]
Prince Edward Island attracts hundreds of thousands of tourists each year
[Picture on page 18]
The HLV Svanen placing a main girder on a pier shaft
[Credit Line]
Photo courtesy of Public Works & Government Services Canada and Boily Photo of Summerside
[Pictures on page 18, 19]
The center of the bridge is about 195 feet [60 m] above the water, to allow ships to pass through
[Picture Credit Line on page 17]
Tourism Prince Edward Island/John Sylvester

