Special Gifts That Make Us Unique
‘The scientist studies nature because he delights in it, and he delights in it because it is beautiful.’—JULES-HENRI POINCARÉ, FRENCH SCIENTIST AND MATHEMATICIAN (1854-1912).
POINCARÉ deeply admired the beauty of the natural world, particularly “that profounder beauty” of harmony and order that appeals to the scientific mind. However, one need not be a scientist to appreciate the beauty and order around us. Some 3,000 years ago, the psalmist David was greatly moved by the design manifest in creation—especially the design of the human body. Hence, he prayed: “I shall laud you because in a fear-inspiring way I am wonderfully made. Your works are wonderful, as my soul is very well aware.”—Psalm 139:14.
Such feelings of wonder and reverence are uniquely human, beyond the capacity of even the most intelligent animal. Yet, our interest in the natural world goes deeper still. Thoughtful people of all ages have asked: What is the source of the amazing design of living things? Indeed, why do living things exist to begin with? And what is our place in the scheme of things? Science and introspective reasoning cannot answer these questions. But the Bible, which is inspired by God, does provide truly satisfying answers.—2 Peter 1:20, 21.
This ancient sacred book explains that our unique human traits are the result of our being created “in God’s image”—meaning that we are capable of reflecting (albeit to a lesser degree) our Creator’s personality traits. (Genesis 1:27) So although we do not have the eyes of an eagle, we can display farsighted wisdom. Our hearing may pale in comparison with that of a bat, but we delight in conversation, music, and the pleasant sounds of nature. And while we lack an internal compass, by turning to God’s Word, the Holy Bible, we get the very best guidance for life.—Proverbs 3:5, 6.
Our being created in God’s image also explains why we alone have a spiritual need. “Man must live, not on bread alone,” Jesus said, “but on every utterance coming forth through Jehovah’s mouth.” (Matthew 4:4) Do you regularly take in those refreshing utterances by reading the Bible?
When properly nurtured by God’s Word, our spirituality can expand our perceptions beyond the limits imposed by our physical senses. How so? By building up our faith. Genuine Bible-based faith enables us to “see” the invisible God—as did Moses—and also to discern His purpose for the future.—Hebrews 11:1, 27.
A Glorious Future for Those Who “See” God
The Bible teaches that the Creator, Jehovah God, loves the earth and all its living creatures, especially God-fearing humans. Hence, he promises to bring an end to all the wicked, including those who are greedily “ruining the earth.” (Revelation 11:18; Psalm 37:10, 11; 2 Thessalonians 1:8) Thereafter, he will grant eternal life to people who love and obey him. What is more, they will help turn the entire planet into a paradise bursting with life. What a wonderful prospect!—Luke 23:43.
Imagine what you will be able to do and discover when life and good health are unlimited! “Nature,” wrote one scientist, “will always have novelty, richness, and beauty that can never be exhausted.” The Bible puts it this way: “Everything [God] has made pretty in its time. Even time indefinite he has put in their heart, that mankind may never find out the work that the true God has made from the start to the finish.”—Ecclesiastes 3:11.
How can you be part of the Paradise described in the Bible? By learning about God’s purpose now and by acting on what you learn. “This means everlasting life,” Jesus said, “their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.”—John 17:3.
[Picture on page 10]
Use your senses to build appreciation for the Creator
[Picture on page 11]
Reading the Bible is the best way to get to know your Creator

