They Did Jehovah’s Will
An Example of Self-Sacrifice and Loyalty
FOR a young farmer named Elisha, what began as a routine day of plowing turned out to be the most significant day in his life. While he was working in the field, Elisha received an unexpected visit from Elijah, Israel’s foremost prophet. ‘What could he want with me?’ Elisha may have wondered. He did not have to wait long for an answer. Elijah threw his official garment upon Elisha, indicating that one day Elisha would be his successor. Elisha did not treat this calling lightly. At once, he left his field to become Elijah’s attendant.—1 Kings 19:19-21.
Some six years later, it came time for Elijah to leave. The account of his departure has been called “one of the most impressive narratives” in the Hebrew Scriptures.
Elijah Prepares to Depart
Elijah desired to pay a final visit to Bethel, Jericho, and the Jordan. This would involve many miles of walking, some of it over rough mountain areas. At each stage of the journey, Elijah encouraged Elisha to stay behind. But Elisha insisted on remaining with his master right to the end.—2 Kings 2:1, 2, 4, 6.
While in Bethel and in Jericho, “the sons of the prophets” approached Elisha.a “Do you really know that today Jehovah is taking your master from headship over you?” they asked him. “I too well know it,” he replied. “Be silent.”—2 Kings 2:3, 5.
Elijah and Elisha next set out for the Jordan River. When they reached the Jordan, Elijah performed a miracle while some 50 sons of the prophets watched from a distance. “Elijah took his official garment and wrapped it up and struck the waters, and gradually they were divided this way and that way, so that both of them went across on the dry ground.”—2 Kings 2:8.
Once they had crossed, Elijah said to Elisha: “Ask what I should do for you before I am taken from you.” Elisha asked for “two parts” of Elijah’s spirit—that is, the double portion that would normally be due a firstborn son. Indeed, Elisha had honored Elijah just as a firstborn son would honor his father. Furthermore, he was anointed to become Elijah’s successor as Jehovah’s prophet in Israel. So his request was neither selfish nor inappropriate. Nevertheless, knowing that only Jehovah could grant this request, Elijah modestly replied: “You have asked a difficult thing.” Then he added: “If you see me when taken from you, it will happen to you that way; but if you do not, it will not happen.”—2 Kings 2:9, 10; Deuteronomy 21:17.
Elisha was no doubt more determined than ever to stick close to his master. Then, “a fiery war chariot and fiery horses” appeared. Right before Elisha’s startled eyes, Elijah was swept up in a windstorm—miraculously transferred to another place.b Elisha picked up Elijah’s official garment and walked back to the shore of the Jordan River. He struck the waters, saying: “Where is Jehovah the God of Elijah, even He?” The waters parted, giving clear evidence that Elisha had divine backing as Elijah’s successor.—2 Kings 2:11-14.
Lessons for Us
When extended the invitation to special service with Elijah, Elisha immediately left his field to minister to Israel’s foremost prophet. Evidently, some of his duties were menial, for he became known as the one who “poured out water upon the hands of Elijah.”c (2 Kings 3:11) Nevertheless, Elisha viewed his work as a privilege, and he stuck loyally by Elijah’s side.
Many of God’s servants today display a similar spirit of self-sacrifice. Some have left their “fields,” their livelihoods, to preach the good news in distant territories or to serve as members of a Bethel family. Others have traveled to foreign lands to work on the Society’s construction projects. Many have accepted what might be called lowly tasks. Yet, no one who slaves for Jehovah is performing an insignificant service. Jehovah appreciates all who serve him willingly, and he will bless their spirit of self-sacrifice.—Mark 10:29, 30.
Elisha stuck by Elijah to the end. He refused to abandon the older prophet even when offered the opportunity. Undoubtedly, the close relationship he had cultivated with Elijah made such loyal love a pleasure. Today, God’s servants strive to strengthen their relationship with God and draw closer to their fellow believers. A close bond of unity will be blessed, for the Bible says of Jehovah: “With someone loyal you will act in loyalty.”—2 Samuel 22:26.
[Footnotes]
The term “sons of the prophets” may denote a school of instruction for those called to this vocation or simply a cooperative association of prophets.
Elijah’s message to King Jehoram of Judah was written some years later.—2 Chronicles 21:12-15.
It was customary for a servant to pour water over the hands of his master for washing, particularly after meals. This practice was similar to the washing of feet, which was an act of hospitality, respect, and in certain relationships, humility.—Genesis 24:31, 32; John 13:5.

