World Unity—Will It Ever Be a Reality?
“IF WE should succeed over the next few generations in transforming the world of independent states in which we live into some sort of genuine international community, . . . then we shall effectively have abolished the ancient institution of warfare as well . . . If we should fail, however, there probably will be . . . no civilization.” So says military historian Gwynne Dyer in his book entitled War.
History’s pages, says Dyer, are littered with accounts of nations and other powerful groups who resorted to war to settle their differences. Their disunity devastated the lives of millions of victims. King Solomon’s description of how this affected people in his day is still apt today. He wrote: “I myself returned that I might see all the acts of oppression that are being done under the sun, and, look! the tears of those being oppressed, but they had no comforter; and on the side of their oppressors there was power, so that they had no comforter.”—Ecclesiastes 4:1.
Nowadays, as the above historian points out, besides compassion for “the tears of those being oppressed,” there is an added reason for finding some way to transform the world of independent states into some sort of genuine international community: The very survival of civilization is at stake! Modern warfare promises to destroy every nation that resorts to it and will leave no victors.
World Unity in Sight?
What are the prospects for world unity? Can human society overcome the divisive forces that threaten earth’s survival? Some think so. Defense editor of Britain’s Daily Telegraph, John Keegan, writes: “Despite confusion and uncertainty, it seems just possible to glimpse the emerging outline of a world without war.”
What gives him this optimistic outlook? Why do many seem hopeful despite mankind’s long history of warfare and man’s seeming inability to govern himself successfully? (Jeremiah 10:23) ‘Mankind is moving forward. History shows a pattern of continuing progress,’ some at one time argued. Even today, many believe that somehow man’s innate goodness will triumph over evil. Is that a realistic hope? Or is it simply a delusion that will lead to more disappointment? In his book Shorter History of the World, historian J. M. Roberts realistically wrote: “The world’s future could hardly be said to look assured. Nor is any end to human suffering now in sight, or any ground for believing it should be.”
Are there genuine reasons for believing that peoples and nations really will overcome their mutual distrust and divisive differences? Or is something more than human endeavors required? The next article will consider these questions.
[Picture Credit Line on page 2]
Background globe on the cover: Mountain High Maps® Copyright © 1995 Digital Wisdom, Inc.

