A Marvelous Instrument to Aid All
1 “Just what we need,” said an elder to the congregation. “They are going like ‘hot cakes,’” said another brother. An interested woman wrote to the Society, “Please find enclosed a check for $120 for the initial purchase of 60 books. Please forward to me as quickly as possible.” Yes, comments like these can be repeated many times over. They illustrate the point that we do have a marvelous instrument to aid all. What is this instrument? It is My Book of Bible Stories! Since its release at the “Victorious Faith” International Convention in 1978, over 9,000,000 copies have been printed in 19 languages, with plates being readied for printing in 12 more languages during the first part of 1980.
2 How can we make good use of this publication? There are many fine features that are appealing to the eye and heart: its chronological order, large print, many pictures, self-teaching style, and its short stories. We can use these to aid all.
ALL ARE AIDED
3 The teaching value of the book’s pictures is indeed great, giving truth to the saying, “A picture is worth a thousand words.” “The pictures hold our son’s attention while we read to him,” writes a parent. “We are amazed at the way the pictures vividly recall the stories to his mind.”
4 “I know that this book was especially made for the younger children,” writes a 16-year-old from Iowa, “and I don’t consider myself a young child. But from the bottom of my heart I can say that next to the Bible, this is the finest book I’ve ever read.”
5 Since the Bible accounts are presented in the order that they occurred, they are appreciated by veteran Bible students. One sister said, “I have such a problem placing people and things in their right place in history. So this book is a real help to me. In our preaching work, we find many older people who are interested in having a book in chronological order. This book fills that need.” Because of failing eyesight, a sister said that the large print is easier to read at night. And she adds, “The basic message of the book—‘If Jehovah says “No!” don’t do it; if he says do something, do it!’—comes through loud enough even for old ladies to hear.” Older ones appreciate it, too.
HOW TO PRESENT IT
6 How can the Bible Stories book be presented effectively? Much depends on you and how you feel about the book. Why do you feel it is of value? With conviction and enthusiasm tell others how you feel about it. It was prepared primarily with young people in mind, but with a choice of language that also appeals to many adults. So we should not hesitate to present it to all age groups.
7 Since summer vacations are approaching, it may be that young publishers can take the book to school and offer it to schoolmates for reading during their vacation. In normal conversation with another student you might say: “What will you be doing during the summer vacation?” (Allow time for answer.) Depending on the answer, you could say: “We are going to a convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses in [name the city] for four days. [Allow for response.] At one of the conventions a couple of years ago we got a book that was really interesting to me.” Show it to the student. Suggest he might like to get a copy and read it during vacation time. Perhaps you will present it a different way. But remember, if you can show a person what you like in the book, the same point may interest him too.
8 Or when talking to householders, after introducing yourself, you could say: “We are sharing something that many people truly appreciate. It is this beautiful publication, My Book of Bible Stories. Probably you have wondered about the answers to questions such as these.” Then turn to Part 1 and read the first paragraph under the heading “Creation to the Flood.” Thereafter, draw attention to the pictures in Stories 1 and 2 on the following pages and make appropriate comments on them.
9 Another presentation which has been successfully used is similar to the one found in the August 1979 issue of Our Kingdom Service. You might say: “Good day. As a neighbor of yours it is a pleasure to bring you good news. Most of us have experienced the loss of a close friend or relative in death. Perhaps you have wondered what has happened to such ones and also if there is any hope for them.” (Allow for response.) Turn to Story 92, pointing out the picture that shows what Jesus was doing. Then read the last paragraph in the story. Conclude by saying: “This publication is designed for young and old alike, to help us all better appreciate the love and concern that God has for us. We are offering it on a contribution of $2.00.”
10 While we will be featuring the Bible Stories book in our field service during the month of May, it may be good for us to carry other publications that we can offer to householders if they decline the current offer.
11 Many parents have found My Book of Bible Stories helpful in teaching and discussing the truth with their children. Have you been reading it with your children? We encourage you to do so.
12 Truly our thanks go to Jehovah for providing us with such a marvelous instrument that we can use in aiding all kinds of people.—Matt. 9:36-38.

