Announcements
● Literature offer:
May: My Book of Bible Stories for $2.00.
June: Choosing the Best Way of Life for 50c.
July: Watchtower subscription for $2.50 with three free, 32-page booklets to new subscribers.
August: Any two 50-cent books for $1.00. This does not include Choosing, Commentary on James, Family Life, Truth or School Guidebook. If your congregation has any of the 384-page books in stock, make a special effort to place them during August.
● If there are any brothers in the congregation who are interested in Bethel service, it would be appreciated if one of the elders would sit down with them and review the information on Bethel Service. (See page 6.)
● New Publications Available:
Commentary on the Letter of James—Dutch, Portuguese
Did Man Get Here by Evolution or by Creation?—Vietnamese
Life Does Have a Purpose—Papiamento, Romanian
Making Your Family Life Happy—Danish, Norwegian
My Book of Bible Stories—Cebuano, Cibemba, Greek, Iloko, Korean, Papiamento
1980 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses—Finnish
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life—Maltese
True Peace and Security—From What Source?—Arabic
Study Questions for the book Is This Life All There Is?—Chinese, Ukrainian
Unseen Spirits—Do They Help Us? Or Do They Harm Us?—Twi, Yoruba
The Good News According to John (Cassette recordings)—Portuguese
● As announced in the February 1978, Our Kingdom Service, slips to leave at the doors of householders not at home are available. From time to time the theme of these slips is changed. When congregations order, the Society will send what is currently available. Please order the Not Home Slip on the regular Literature Order Blank in the space where it is currently described as Not-at-Home Folder.
● The Society has made arrangements to begin producing a monthly edition of The Watchtower in Vietnamese beginning with the July 1, 1980, issue. Congregations desiring copies of this edition should promptly submit a Distributors’ Order blank to: Watchtower, Wallkill, N.Y. 12589. Subscriptions may also be submitted for this new, monthly edition.
● The Society now has available in grade-two English Braille the books Choosing the Best Way of Life and Commentary on the Letter of James. These publications may be obtained on a free loan basis or purchased and kept permanently. The Choosing book is in four volumes and costs $5.00, and the Commentary on James is in five volumes and costs $6.25. The proper remittance should accompany orders to purchase these Braille publications. All orders for Braille publications should be directed to the Society’s Braille Desk. They should not be included on congregation literature orders, nor should Braille publications be stocked by the congregation.

