Bethel Service
The same zeal that motivates Jehovah’s people to increase their share in the activity of preaching and conducting Bible studies also stirs those whose circumstances allow them to volunteer for service at Bethel, the world headquarters of Jehovah’s Witnesses. It is here that the production of the printed page, used in the spreading of God’s message earth wide, originates. That the printing and production of printed material has been closely linked with the spirit of evangelism from very early times in Christian history is borne out by one statement made by the Supreme Court of the United States: “The hand distribution of religious tracts is an age-old form of missionary evangelism—as old as the history of printing presses.” (Murdock v. Pennsylvania, 319 U.S. p. 105)
The Bible also places special emphasis on the use of printed material in getting the preaching work done for those of us alive in “the last days.” The book of Revelation, the 9th chapter, verses 16 through 19, describes 200,000,000 colorful horses with heads of lions and tails of serpents. Out of their mouths fire and smoke and sulphur issue forth and their tails are like serpents. What do these two hundred million horses symbolize? They picture the Bibles, Bible-study-aid books, booklets, magazines and tracts that tell of the destruction to come upon Christendom in God’s day of vengeance. (fm p. 244) This publication of Bible literature is under the direction of the anointed remnant. What a tremendous privilege to have a share in the production of these “horses” and to work alongside the brothers of Christ in fulfilling their commission.—Matt. 25:37-40.
Another prophecy undergoing fulfillment in our time is that of Ezekiel 34:11-14. “For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah has said: ‘Here I am, I myself, and I will search for my sheep and care for them. According to the care of one feeding his drove . . . And I will bring them out from the peoples and collect them together from the lands and bring them in onto their soil and feed them on the mountains of Israel, by the stream beds and by all the dwelling places of the land. In a good pasturage I shall feed them.’” How true it is that Jehovah is providing an abundance of spiritual food for his people through the various publications. We are indeed enjoying “good pasturage”! In addition to that, how evident it is that many of us as well as our friends, neighbors and family members have been directed to Jehovah by this same means.
What can you do to have a share in this grand work of supplying the spiritual food to your brothers around the earth under the direction of the “faithful and discreet slave”? If you are a baptized male between the ages of 19 and 35, spiritually and physically strong, and able to serve at Bethel, have you given thought to availing yourself of this facet of full-time service? Occasionally there are openings for single or married brothers even though they are over 35 years of age. Such ones are encouraged to apply if they have a trade, specialized skill or professional training.
If you are not yet of age what can you do? Since it is the same interest in getting the good news preached that moves some to engage in the pioneer work, it would be a fine step for you to be an auxiliary or regular pioneer in preparing yourself spiritually for Bethel service. Those who serve at Bethel do so not because they have less love for God’s work in the field. Rather, it is a love of God and man that motivates them to take up and continue in Bethel service. They, too, engage in actively preaching and conducting home Bible studies. Pioneering will also help you to learn to lead a more disciplined and organized life that is vital for successful and happy service at Bethel.
As parents and elders we can do much to encourage younger brothers to make Bethel service a goal. In the world today financial security is of chief concern to most people. As a result, much stress is placed on higher learning and job opportunities to accumulate material things and make for a comfortable life in this old system of things. However, one elder wrote this to a young man after telling of some who put emphasis on gaining of a lot of material things: “However, you, O man of God, flee from these things. But pursue righteousness, godly devotion, faith, love, endurance, mildness of temper. Fight the fine fight of the faith, get a firm hold on the everlasting life for which you were called and you offered the fine public declaration in front of many witnesses.” (1 Tim. 6:11, 12) Really, it comes down to a matter of faith in Jehovah’s ability to see that his servants would not be lacking if they put his interests first in their lives. In fact, he wants his servants to put him to the test in this regard and to look to him as one who rewards those who seek to please him.—Mal. 3:10; Heb. 11:6.
For those who are in a position to serve at Bethel now, what a wonderful opportunity to express your love for Jehovah and to be of service to your brothers world wide. Jesus showed that those involved in this spirit of giving would gain true happiness. (Acts 20:35) If you desire to apply, write to Watchtower Society, 124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, New York 11201, Attention: Personnel Committee, asking for an application. You, too, will find the joy that comes from expending yourself in Jehovah’s service.

