Enjoy Summer Opportunities and Use Them Well
1 As we anticipate summertime with its milder weather, we are glad we can enjoy a variety of activities and the refreshment it brings. While we may plan for a change of pace during our vacation period, the big event this summer will be the district convention.
2 Because there are many things that can occupy our time, we need to be careful to maintain a good routine of spiritual activity. Do not let spiritual things take a secondary place. Endeavor to use your summertime opportunities well. Your doing so will contribute to greater joy.—Phil. 3:16; Matt. 5:3.
3 The apostle Peter was a busy person; he lived a full life. Although he felt pressures of life and experienced problems caused by opposers, he knew ‘that seasons of refreshing come from the person of Jehovah.’ (Acts 3:19) He agreed with other Bible writers who showed that our drinking in God’s Word and associating with our brothers bring refreshment. (Rom. 15:32; Ps. 23:2, 3) And it is ‘doers of the will of God who will be happy.’ (Jas. 1:25; John 13:17) These verses emphasize the importance of keeping Jehovah first, keeping well fed spiritually, associating with our brothers and being active in Jehovah’s service if we want to enjoy the greatest refreshment.
4 With this in mind, make it a practice to share in field service with your brothers on the first Sunday of each month. Endeavor to hold to this good pattern during the spring and summer months. Some families have arranged their affairs to spend some time together in the service at least one day each week. If your family does this, we encourage you to hold to such a good routine. Will you or another member of your family, with your encouragement, be able to spend some time in auxiliary pioneer work this summer? How fine it is when members of a family can do this together. On such occasions, many young persons have tasted of full-time service and have been greatly benefited spiritually. Encourage and help one another to have a full share in the field service.
5 During June we will be featuring the book Choosing the Best Way of Life. Offer it from house to house, as you travel, to friends, to relatives and others you meet. Point out timely and interesting features in the book including, perhaps, the chapter you enjoyed most. Tell them why it meant so much to you. It may be that your comments will move them to want to read the book as well.
6 Summer may provide an opportunity to catch up on reading. With so many distractions during this season, we need to be careful that other activities do not crowd out our personal and family study. Some who enjoy doing things out-of-doors have also enjoyed doing their studying there. If you are away from home, have you ever invited those you are with to join you in your personal or family study? Doing so can be both enjoyable and beneficial.
7 Yes, this summer should prove to be a busy yet happy time. Whatever you do, maintain good balance and do not let other activities crowd out the more important spiritual ones. Make it your goal to enjoy your summer opportunities and use them well.

