Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING MAY 4
 8 min: Song 51, local announcements and “Unsolicited Correspondence.”
15 min: “Two Are Better than One.” Elder discusses article from March 15, 1980, issue of The Watchtower with congregation. Include appropriate local experiences.
22 min: “A Marvelous Instrument to Aid All.” Questions and answers. Demonstrate paragraphs 7 and 8; ask audience for comments on what they felt was effective in the presentations. Entertain additional suggestions from publishers on how they have been presenting the book effectively.
15 min: Ask audience what they enjoyed from the meeting, what they learned from it, and what they feel they can use in field service or other theocratic activities during the coming weeks.
Remind elders and ministerial servants to contact publishers regarding interested people who attended the Memorial. If these persons are not attending meetings or do not yet have a weekly Bible study, elders and ministerial servants are encouraged to call on them in an effort to help and encourage them spiritually. If it is desirable, these calls can be made with the publishers who originally invited them. Song 66 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 11
 8 min: Song 29, welcome, local announcements and accounts report.
15 min: “Happy Full-Time Servants.” Question-and-answer consideration of this portion of the insert.
 7 min: Interview any auxiliary, regular or special pioneers in the congregation or persons who may be in other branches of full-time service. Those who have shared in such privileges in times past and who still have the pioneer spirit may also be interviewed. Get brief encouraging expressions of appreciation from these individuals, why they like the full-time service, how they have benefited from it. Ask about the pleasures and blessings they have enjoyed. If some have been through the Pioneer Service School, ask them how it helped them in the field service.
Encourage all interested in missionary work to attend the Gilead Meeting at 1 p.m., Thursday at the “Divine Love” District Convention. Even if some are not qualified for missionary work now, their attendance can help them to know the steps to take so that they may qualify in the future.
Those interested in Bethel service are also encouraged to attend the Bethel Meeting at the district convention at 1 p.m., on Saturday.
10 min: “Jephthah’s Promise.” A father or capable brother should handle this part drawing children out on Story 53 from My Book of Bible Stories. The children should be encouraged to make their own comments, spontaneously. Feature points showing Jephthah did not go back on his vow that one member of his household should serve Jehovah at the tabernacle the rest of her days, even though it was his daughter. Jephthah’s daughter was willing to cooperate. She was willing to make great sacrifices to do so. Others rejoiced in the fine example she set as a good servant of Jehovah.
20 min: Elders can use this time as needed locally or the time may be used to briefly review the main points of the articles “Have You Ever Wondered . . . ?” in the May 8 and/or May 22 issues of Awake! Then demonstrate a presentation of either or both articles. (See Our Kingdom Service, January 1980, page 4, for suggestions on these presentations.)
Include a few minutes at the end of the meeting to allow the congregation to comment on what they enjoyed from the meeting, what they learned from it and points they feel they can use in encouraging others. Song 103 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 18
10 min: Song 62, welcome and local announcements. Include appropriate items from Announcements.
12 min: “They Need Their Friends.” Elder gives practical talk on the article in January 1, 1980, issue of The Watchtower.
18 min: “Use Your Gifts Well.”
(10 min.) Question-and-answer consideration by service overseer.
(8 min.) Interview publishers who do well in certain features of service as outlined in paragraph 4. Commend.
20 min: Invite publishers to tell of pleasures and interesting experiences they have enjoyed in offering My Book of Bible Stories; also, any interesting experiences they have had in using this book to study with their children. Song 58 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 25
 8 min: Song 24, opening remarks and local announcements.
12 min: “Enjoy Summer Opportunities and Use Them Well.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. Ask for other local suggestions on how individuals or family groups plan to use their summer opportunities well.
Last year, a family of nine, the parents and seven children, spent their vacation in a small, isolated town that seldom receives a witness. They wanted to have a share in spreading the good news there. The family spent part of each day in the witness work and the other part swimming and enjoying the beautiful surroundings. They commented on the joy they had, ‘the privilege of being bearers of the good news’ in this seldom-worked territory. They said, “It was the most delightful vacation we have ever had!”
15 min: “Presenting the Good News—With the Choosing Book.” Assign publishers ahead of time to look up and comment on specific references in the article outlining how they can be used. Demonstrate presentation most appropriate for territory. Use a regular or auxiliary pioneer if available.
Encourage all to share in field service activity arranged for first Sunday of the month. Announce when and where publishers are to meet.
25 min: “1980 ‘Divine Love’ District Conventions.” Also, “District Convention Reminders.” Question-and-answer consideration. Encourage all to have a share in the special field service activity arranged for Friday afternoon. If the congregation has made arrangements as to where they will meet so they can work together, this should be announced also. Encourage those interested in missionary service and Bethel service to attend these meetings on Thursday and/or Saturday at the district convention.
Ask the brothers what they enjoyed from the meeting, what they learned and feel they can use in the days and weeks to come. Song 49 and prayer.

