Presenting the Good News—With the Choosing Book
1 Many sincere persons would like to find the way to happy life with peace, contentment and assurance of a secure future. Of course, many question if this is possible. And even if it is, they feel that to choose the course that would lead to such a life is almost impossible because there are so many different views.
2 Can we help these people? Thanks to Jehovah and his organization, we can. The direction needed by all people living today is in the Scriptures and much of it is pointed to in the book Choosing the Best Way of Life, which we will be offering during the month of June.
3 What points in the book could you direct an interested person to? Are there certain paragraphs or whole chapters that were particularly impressive to you? Show them to those you speak with in the witness work. It may be that the same points will appeal to them and your heartfelt expressions will be encouraging and motivating.
4 Since so many desire a happier life, you might say, “Many persons who are interested in improving their way of life have turned to religion. But many of these are still unhappy. Have you observed this? Why do you think this is so? [Allow for comment.] I found this comment very interesting. [Read page 8, paragraph 8 up to Matthew 7:23.] That puts quite a challenge before sincere people who want to identify Christ’s disciples, doesn’t it? Notice this portion of paragraph 9. [Read first three sentences.] Doesn’t that sound appealing? This is what Jesus promised at Mark 10:29, 30. [Read.] Such a time of international brotherhood will be earth wide. This new book, Choosing the Best Way of Life, will help you learn more about God’s promises. I encourage you to accept a copy. It can be yours for 50c.”
5 You may want to read 2 Peter 3:13, then refer to the Choosing book and read page 148, paragraph 1 or a portion of it before offering the book.
6 If a person questions God’s waiting so long before doing something to better man’s situation, you may wish to follow up your reading of 2 Peter 3:13 with a reference to page 186, paragraph 22. There you will note that divine patience is stressed and encouragement is given for us to likewise show patience. You could ask the householder, “Is it not true that patience is a quality that most of us need to develop? Such patience can be developed with the help of God’s Word and this publication.”
7 There are many fine points in the Choosing book. Feel free to use whatever portions touch your heart. There is fine information on respect for authority, the payment of taxes, employer-employee relationships, wifely subjection, the balanced view of adornment, the benefits of showing a Christlike spirit and reasons for not retaliating. May Jehovah bless your zealous and wholehearted use of this publication as you endeavor to help others in ‘choosing the best way of life.’

