Meaningful Meetings for Field Service
1 At Luke 10:1-11, we have a record of a meeting Jesus held with the 70 newly assigned disciples to help them prepare for field service. He provided specific directions to help them get organized, prepare what they would say, and deal with difficult situations. We can learn by examining this account.
2 Evidently all 70 disciples were present for the meeting with Jesus. Much time is wasted at meetings for service if some individuals habitually come late. Their tardy arrival usually makes it necessary to reorganize car groups as well as territory assignments. This often causes the entire group to be delayed. All of us can do our part by arriving on time and being ready to proceed promptly to the territory.
3 Jesus gave the group a specific topic for conversation to use, namely, “the kingdom of God.” (Luke 10:9) We are assigned to preach the same message, and we usually appreciate some helpful suggestions on what we should say. The conductor may refer to the Reasoning book, which offers more than 40 different introductions and appropriate Scripture texts that can be used in a wide variety of situations. A brief review of one or two presentations can help us get something in mind to say, enabling us to speak with more confidence at the doors.
4 Not only did Jesus tell his disciples what to say but he told them how to say it. (Luke 10:5, 6) Demonstrations featured on the Service Meeting program show us how we can express ourselves effectively. The conductor might review what was presented at the last meeting and give suggestions on how it can be used in service that day. A brief prepared demonstration of a simple Scriptural presentation can help us collect our thoughts and put them into words.
5 Jesus also instructed his disciples about their personal conduct. (Luke 10:7, 8) The conductor may likewise give us pointed direction to help us avoid anything that might detract from our work. He may caution us about congregating on street corners or wasting time disputing with opposers. He may remind us of the need to keep an accurate house-to-house record or to make the householder aware that contributions are accepted for the worldwide work. Parents may need a reminder about carefully supervising their children.
6 The 70 disciples cooperated with Jesus’ instructions and afterward “returned with joy.” (Luke 10:17) If we respond to direction we receive at meetings for service, we too can anticipate increased joy in preaching the Kingdom message.​—Acts 13:48, 49, 52.

