Good Health for All—Soon!
“THE idea of never being sick again . . . is currently in vogue,” reports the German newsmagazine Focus. Yet this idea is not new. When human life began, the Creator never intended that mankind be sick at all. His purpose for mankind was not simply “an acceptable level of health for all the people of the world.” (Italics ours.) Our Creator purposed perfect health for everyone!
So why do we all suffer from sickness and disease? The Bible tells us that Jehovah God made the parents of all humankind, Adam and Eve, perfect. Once he completed his creation, “God saw everything he had made and, look! it was very good.” Our loving Creator never intended that human life be plagued with disease and death. But when Adam and Eve chose to abandon the way of life laid down for them, they fell into sin. The result of Adamic sin was death, which was passed on to all humans.—Genesis 1:31; Romans 5:12.
Jehovah did not simply cast mankind off. Nor did he abandon his original purpose for them and the earth. Throughout the Bible, he makes known his purpose to restore obedient humans to their original state of good health. While Jesus Christ, the Son of God, was on earth, he demonstrated God’s power to heal disorders. For instance, Jesus cured blindness, leprosy, deafness, dropsy, epilepsy, and paralysis.—Matthew 4:23, 24; Luke 5:12, 13; 7:22; 14:1-4; John 9:1-7.
God will soon instruct his Messianic King, Jesus Christ, to take over the affairs of the world of mankind. Under his administration, the prophecy of Isaiah will come true: “No resident will say: ‘I am sick.’ The people that are dwelling in the land will be those pardoned for their error.” (Isaiah 33:24) How is this to take place?
We notice that the prophet writes of people being “pardoned for their error.” Hence, the original cause of sickness—mankind’s inherited sin—will be taken away. How? The value of the ransom sacrifice of Jesus will be applied to obedient mankind, thus removing the basis for sickness and death. Paradisaic conditions will be experienced in every corner of the earth. The Christian apostle John wrote: “[God] will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.” That is soon to be!—Revelation 21:3, 4; Matthew, chapter 24; 2 Timothy 3:1-5.
Maintaining a Balance
In the meantime, sickness and disease are the lot of millions of people. It is only natural, then, for individuals to be concerned about their health and about the health of their loved ones.
Christians today greatly appreciate the efforts of the medical profession. They take reasonable steps to become or remain healthy. However, the Bible’s promise of a future free of sickness helps us to maintain our balance in this regard. Until the Messianic King takes over the affairs of humankind, perfect health simply is not possible. As we have seen, even the most breathtaking discoveries have not enabled medicine to grasp the juiciest apple at the top of the tree—good health for everyone.
The goal of “an acceptable level of health for all the people of the world” will soon be achieved. But not by the UN or the World Health Organization or environmental planners or social reformers or physicians. That accomplishment is reserved for Jesus Christ. What a joy it will be when mankind will finally be “set free from enslavement to corruption and have the glorious freedom of the children of God”!—Romans 8:21.
[Pictures on page 10]
There will be sound health for all in God’s new world

