Bible Knowledge Test Answers
See the Bible quiz, page 32.
● ‘A CALM HEART’—
The expression ‘I was so mad I could have died’ has a serious literal meaning, in the view of a psychiatrist who thinks ‘anger’ might well often be the cause of death. Heart attacks and strokes have frequently been preceded by an episode of severe emotional stress.—“Awake!,” 9/8/78, p. 4.
● ‘YOU MUST BE PERFECT’—
This is not a command to become physically and morally flawless, for at present that is impossible due to inherited sin. (Rom. 3:23; 5:12) Rather, these words encourage people to imitate the ‘heavenly Father,’ Jehovah, by perfecting their love, bringing it to full measure and making it complete by including their enemies in its embrace.—“Watchtower,” 7/1/78, p. 6.
● THE HUMAN BRAIN—
All wrong. Four thousand brain experts observe that comparisons with a telephone system, a radio station or even a computer have not, as a New York “Times” report says, “lasted very long because the brain proved to be so much more complex than the latest man-made machine. The new view is that nothing in technology can match the brain even metaphorically.”—“Watchtower,” 5/1/78, p. 15.
● WHAT IS SPOKEN WITH THE LIPS—
Rather than proclaiming God’s truth, the “false prophets” of ancient Israel spoke what people wanted to hear, and the people loved it that way. It would mean “woe” for us if people spoke well of us, as they did of those false prophets. But the approval of Jehovah rests only upon persons who speak and act in accord with his Word.—“Watchtower,” 3/1/78, p. 6.
● YOUR RIGHT HAND—
If the right hand (meaning what one does, as with one’s hands) were to cause a person to “stumble,” that is, to fall from the path of obedience, he must take action similar to cutting off one’s hand. He must “deaden” his body members to avoid such behavior as fornication, uncleanness, hurtful desire, and covetousness.—“Watchtower,” 5/15/78, pp. 28, 29.
● WHAT THE EYE HAS NOT SEEN—
The apostle Paul was not here referring to the glorious things of the New Order that our eyes and ears might someday perceive. Rather, he was calling attention to the treasures of spiritual wisdom relating to the ‘sacred secret of the seed’ that were beyond the comprehension of the eyes and ears of unenlightened worldlings.—“Awake!,” 7/8/78, p. 28.

