Announcements
BEING CONGREGATED FOR WORKS WORTHWHILE
Christ Jesus is the greatest congregator of all time, serving in this capacity as the anointed and chosen instrument of his heavenly Father, Jehovah God. He congregates willing people to the worship and service of his Father and ‘being wise he teaches people knowledge continually.’ (Eccl. 12:9) Under his leadership and invisible direction his faithful footstep followers serve as witnesses of the true God, Jehovah, and spread abroad the good news of his established kingdom. In response to this worthwhile work, more and more people of good will toward God and Christ are being congregated to join in these same works. During June they are offering the people Bible instruction in the form of two bound Bible-study aid books and two booklets on the small contribution of $1. To share in this worthwhile work go to the nearby Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s witnesses.
NEW LOW RATE FOR “NEW WORLD TRANSLATION”
Do you have each published volume of the New World Translation? Now is the time to obtain those other copies you have been wanting. Four volumes are now available, the Christian Greek Scriptures (New Testament) in one volume and the Hebrew Scriptures (Old Testament) from Genesis to The Song of Solomon in three volumes (Volume I, Genesis to Ruth; Volume II, 1 Samuel to Esther; Volume III, Job to The Song of Solomon). Each one of these editions is printed on Bible paper and bound in beautiful green leatherette with a hard cover embossed in gold. All have large clear type, copious cross references, helpful footnotes, maps and drawings. Each volume can now be had for the nominal contribution of only $1. Or, if you have been wanting the de luxe edition in each volume, you will be glad to know that it can now be had for only $3 a volume. This edition is bound in a flexible cover of green morocco leather. Its leaves of thin Bible paper are gold-edged. This accurate, literal translation in modern English is free flowing in language and has been rapidly gaining in popularity ever since the first volume appeared in 1950. Order your copies today.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
June 22: Does Superstition or Knowledge Govern You? Page 305.
June 29: Increased Knowledge Brings Lasting Benefits. Page 311.

