Right Conduct Also a Witness
JESUS once said: “For this purpose I have been born and for this purpose I have come into the world, that I should bear witness to the truth.” (John 18:37) Right conduct is one way of witnessing to the truth, as the following experiences from the 1958 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses show:
Once a “Bad Actor”
The principal of a certain school in Hawaii stopped a witness of Jehovah on the street and said to him: “R———— [a young man with whom the witness was holding a weekly Bible study] has really improved in school and has made a remarkable change. He used to be a bad actor, but now he constantly talks to his fellow students about God and Christ. In fact, he also talked to me about his new religion. I know that you had something to do with it and so I am thanking you.” The witness of Jehovah assured the principal that it was not he himself but the truth contained in God’s Word, the Bible, that had made the change. As they separated the principal stated that he wished that all the boys in school would study with Jehovah’s witnesses.—Pages 177, 178.
Truth Makes Exemplary Students
One of Jehovah’s witnesses in the Belgian Congo is a schoolteacher. He makes good use of the recreation breaks or recesses by telling his students about Jehovah and his purposes. One day the school director called at this teacher’s classroom during this time and, noting that he was discussing religion with his pupils, the director left without interrupting. Later he said to the witness schoolteacher: “I am very glad about you, P————. Your students are exemplary. They are in subjection, respectful and obedient.”—Page 226.
Truth Transforms Africans
Many European employers in South Africa greatly appreciate the difference that the truth about Jehovah makes in the lives of their African workers. Thus one of them gave three large halls free for a witness assembly, supplied free firewood and vegetables and even furnished free transportation to bring people to see the Society’s film on Saturday evening. Another European farmer said that he used to dread the weekends, as so many of his African workers got drunk then. But the arrival of just one of Jehovah’s witnesses made a great change. His teaching began to reform many, there was far less drunkenness on weekends and the majority were now attending Bible study meetings. But what impressed this farmer the most was the clean life of this witness, his dependability and his regularity in preaching the good news.—Pages 250, 251.
Typical Witness-Conduct Surprises
The witnesses of Jehovah in Trinidad had leased a newly renovated Hindu college building for their assembly. The owners, not having rented to the witnesses before, were apprehensive as to how their beautiful building would be treated by the witnesses and so they rented only on the condition that the witnesses make good any damage done to the building. But after the assembly was over the owners were so surprised and delighted at the way the witnesses had taken care of the property that they refused to accept any money not only for the rent but also for the electricity used!
The Narrow Way Is the Right Way
A young wife in a certain town in Finland was impressed by the Christian family life led by a neighbor who was one of Jehovah’s witnesses. She had attended a religious school and had been strictly forbidden to study the teachings of Jehovah’s witnesses. However, the example of this neighbor caused her to ask herself: Did not Jesus say that the way to life was narrow and few would find it, and do not those words apply more to Jehovah’s witnesses than to any others? Besides, who else is so ridiculed and persecuted and who else live according to Bible principles as do they? She became interested in learning about them and so sent her daughter to inquire when the witnesses held their meetings. She came to the next meeting and obtained two Bible-study aids, “Let God Be True” and “This Means Everlasting Life”. Two weeks later she came back for more literature, and a Bible study was started in her home. Some months afterward she took her stand for Jehovah, symbolizing her dedication by water immersion. Yes, right conduct also is a witness to the truth about Jehovah and his kingdom.—Page 157.

