Announcements
“LIVING UP TO THE NAME” TESTIMONY PERIOD
Do you profess or would you like to be one of Jehovah’s witnesses? Then you sincerely want to walk worthy of the name. You will appreciate, too, the intent of the June Testimony Period, entitled “Living Up to the Name”. We are sure you will be with us in carrying out the program of activity for that month. Toward delivering the witness in harmony with our God-given name, we shall be offering the three bound books “Let God Be True”, “The Kingdom Is at Hand” and “The Truth Shall Make You Free”, on the nominal contribution of one dollar for all three books. It is mutually strengthening to have your cooperation in this testimony, and our joined efforts work together to give a more impressive witness and to prove that the Most High God has a people on earth who uphold the honor of his name. He knows all the efforts you put forth, not for praise from man but from him. Nevertheless, we should appreciate your making out a report of the month’s work and results, on our form therefor, that we may compile a combined report.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of June 18: “Living Up to the Name,” ¶1-27 inclusive, The Watchtower May 15, 1950.
Week of June 25: “Living Up to the Name,” ¶28-35 inclusive, also “Organized for United Testimony”, ¶1-16 inclusive, The Watchtower May 15, 1950.
“AWAKE!”
This magazine stepped into the field of public service at the Glad Nations Theocratic Assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses in August of 1946, and is published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society, Inc. It answers the rousing call for fearless information, not because we have entered the atomic age, but because the world is fast asleep near the brink of that universal war Scripturally called “Armageddon” and lovers of life in security need to be awakened to the real sense of the news and the pressing issues upon which to decide. Awake! is aimed to help them make a right decision that leads to life unending in the now-close New World of righteousness. It is a magazine of 32 pages devoted to news and information of world import, gained from world-wide sources. Its make-up is of fine appearance. Its leading articles, without compromise toward commercialism, politics and religion, present the straight facts, without fear to publish the plain truth. Much variety of interest is also provided in shorter articles of educational and instructive value. Under the heading “Thy Word Is Truth”, each number of Awake! offers a moderate-length discussion of Bible teachings of importance. A final section, headed “Watching the World”, makes note of the latest world news before going to press and gives the pith of all news items, uncolored, undistorted, concise. Awake! is published on the 8th and 22d of each month? A year’s subscription of 24 issues is $1, American money; individual copy, 5c; mailed anywhere.

