Moderation in the Enjoyment of Good Things
“HOW many are thy works, O [Jehovah]! In wisdom hast thou made them all; the earth is full of thy creations. They all wait upon thee, to give them their food in due season. . . . When thou openest thy hand, they are satisfied with good things. Praise ye Jehovah!” So exclaims the psalmist at Psalm 104:24, 27, 28, 35 (An Amer. Trans.; A.S.V.) Yes, on every hand he saw the evidences of Jehovah’s goodness and loving care for his creatures.
And in providing for man’s sustenance God did not content himself with bestowing upon his earthly creation just the barest necessities, but showered blessings upon him in great profusion. He provided many varieties of cereals, of fruits, of vegetables and of meats. And not only many varieties, but many different kinds of each variety; so that man can enjoy many different kinds of apples, pears, grapes, etc., and that in various forms, fresh, preserved, dried, such as raisins, pressed as grape juice or fermented as wine.
But some will object to the inclusion of wines and other alcoholic beverages in the good things that the Creator has provided for man. Water, milk, fruit juices and “soft” drinks, yes; but wine, beer, brandy and other alcoholic drinks—No! They ask us to consider an imposing array of statistics and facts showing how much harm alcohol has done to the human mind, the body and to family life. They point to the picture all too familiar to our cities, of the drunkard staggering along the streets or lying in the gutter; they call attention to the many accidents due to alcoholism, not to mention the delinquency, both adult and juvenile. Surely, they argue, no one can have a good word for alcoholic drinks; every Christian not only should be a total abstainer but should support the temperance movement.
What should be the attitude of God’s servants, the consecrated Christian ministers, regarding wine, etc.? First of all note that Jesus clearly stated that his followers were not of the world (John 17:16) and indicated that it would be folly for them to spend their time, energy and means in trying to mend this worn-out old world with the new patches of Christian principles. Let the world try to reform itself by social legislation, by temperance movements and suchlike; the Christian has only one obligation, ‘this one thing he does,’ “Preach the word.” (2 Tim. 4:2) He will not try to impose his views on others, but will endeavor to bring his life in accord with the principles as set forth in the Bible. It alone contains satisfactory and authoritative information as to what is right or wrong in all matters of personal conduct.
As noted in a previous issue of this journal, the Bible does not countenance the use of tobacco by the Christian minister, even though tobacco is not mentioned by name in it (for the very obvious reason that it was unknown outside of the Western Hemisphere until fifteen centuries after the Bible was written). Tobacco is a narcotic that enslaves its users, its indulgence is unclean, injurious to both mind and body as well as harmful to others who are compelled to inhale smoke-laden air. Tobacco certainly is not one of the good things to be enjoyed by man.
On the other hand, there are some things that are lawful or unlawful depending upon the purpose. Hunting and fishing, when done solely for sport, are condemned by the Scriptures. It is selfish and wicked to deprive a creature of life merely for the thrill of pitting one’s powers against it or to satisfy the lust to kill. But game and fish are among the good things that God has provided for man, and therefore it is entirely right and proper to hunt and fish for clothing and food.
Then, again, some things are lawful but not expedient (1 Cor. 10:23), and one course may be good but another be better. (1 Cor. 7:38) Connubial joys are among the blessings that are lawful for man to enjoy, but those engaging in immorality will receive destruction at God’s hands. “He who finds a wife finds good fortune” (Prov. 18:22, An Amer. Trans.), and marriage is honorable in all. (Heb. 13:4) Here, too, the Scriptures give admonition as to the proper course; mates are to be content with each other (Prov. 5:19) and are to deal with each other fairly and with consideration.—1 Pet. 3:7; 1 Cor. 7:3, 4.
And so we find that the Scriptures give wise counsel as to what is right and what is wrong as regards the use of wine and strong drink. Nowhere are they forbidden in toto. Melchizedek, priest and king, served Abram bread and wine. (Gen. 14:18) The Israelites were given instructions regarding the use of wine for drink offerings to Jehovah. (Lev. 23:13) The psalmist tells us that God provided wine to “cheer up the heart of man”. (Ps. 104:15, Moffatt) And, further, the Scriptures advise, “Drink thy wine with a merry heart,” and that “wine maketh glad the life”. (Eccl. 9:7; 10:19, margin) And time and again wine is used to picture the good spiritual things that God gives to man: “Ah come, all ye that thirst, come to the waters, . . . buy food for nothing, wine and milk without money! . . . Listen to me, oh listen, and you shall feed on good, and thrill over the finest fare.” (Isa. 55:1, 2, Moffatt) And, again: “Wisdom has built her house, . . . she has mingled her wine . . . Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine I have mingled; forsake your folly, and live.”—Prov. 9:1-6, An Amer. Trans.
Coming to the Greek Scriptures, we find that the very first miracle that Jesus performed was that of turning water into wine; and both the Greek word used and the account itself make clear that it was not just grape juice, but was fermented wine. (John 2:3-10) On another occasion he spoke of not putting new wine into old bottles (wine skins), lest they should burst, and that old wine was to be preferred to the new (Luke 5:37-39); again clearly indicating that wine was referred to, and not unfermented grape juice. He himself indulged in wine, causing the self-righteous hypocritical Pharisees to accuse him (falsely) of being a drunkard.—Matt. 11:19, Moffatt.
Further, we find Paul counseling Timothy: “Stop drinking nothing but water; take a little wine for the good of your digestion and for your frequent attacks of illness.” (1 Tim. 5:23, An Amer. Trans.) From this Scriptural array it is quite apparent that wine is among the good things that the Creator provided for man’s enjoyment.
It would be a serious mistake, however, to jump to the conclusion that because wine in itself was not prohibited one could indulge in it to excess or to the inflaming of the baser passions. Excess is wrong and harmful, regardless of what it may be, and the Scriptures condemn excess in food (gluttony) as severely as they do excess in drinking; a fact which total abstainers are prone to overlook.—Deut. 21:20; Prov. 23:20, 21.
The Christian is admonished to supplement “knowledge with self-control”, and is advised that ‘the spirit that God has given us is not a spirit of timidity, but of love, and of power and of self-discipline’. (2 Pet. 1:6; 2 Tim 1:7, An Amer. Trans.) It will also be noted that Paul counseled Timothy to take a “little” wine for the sake of his health, and that he made it very definite that those given to “much” wine were not to be appointed as overseers or assistants in the Christian congregation. (1 Tim. 3:3, 8; Tit. 1:7; 2:3) And, since these are to be examples, it follows that the rest of the congregation should likewise not be given to much wine. Rather than be “filled” with wine, wherein there is excess and riot, all are to be filled with the holy spirit, God’s active force.—Eph. 5:15-18.
That overindulgence in wine and strong drink is both foolish and wrong is further borne out by the following scriptures: “Who have woe? who have pain? who have strifes? who have complaints? who have wounds without cause? who have redness of eyes? Those who stay long over wine.” “Wine is a mocker, strong drink a brawler; none who reels under it is wise.” (Prov. 23:29, 30; 20:1, An Amer. Trans.) “Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink [and weak to execute justice]: which justify the wicked for reward.” (Isa. 5:22, 23) “Wine and liquor take away the understanding.”—Hos. 4:11, An Amer. Trans.
A TIME TO REFRAIN FROM WINE
Not only do the Scriptures indicate that there should be moderation in the use of wine, but that, as with every purpose under the sun, there is a time to drink and a time to refrain from drinking. When should one refrain from drinking? The Levite priests were commanded not to drink wine when serving before Jehovah in the tabernacle. (Lev. 10:9) They were not to be under the influence of wine nor to depend upon its stimulation when performing their priestly duties. Their minds and consciences were to be sensitively attuned to the law of Jehovah, and such would hardly be the case if they were influenced by alcoholic drinks. This strongly recommends that, while engaged in their ministerial service, those serving Jehovah today likewise refrain from drinking wine, etc. Thereby not only will they keep in the best mental and spiritual condition and have the greatest self-control, but they will also avoid giving needless offense to those to whom an alcoholic breath is repulsive. That indulging in wine is likely to interfere with one’s using the best judgment is likewise indicated at Proverbs 31:4, 5 (Moffatt): “It is not for kings to be quaffing wine, nor for princes to be swilling liquor; lest in their cups they forget their law and misjudge a case of misery.”
Respect for the principles and consciences of others may indicate that we refrain from wine. We may feel strong and able to control ourselves by indulging in moderation, but we should not coax or cajole our brother to indulge if he feels that it is best and safest for him to abstain. (See Habakkuk 2:15, 16.) In fact, we should not even indulge when in the company of such weaker ones, but rather deny ourselves the enjoyment of indulgence for the sake of the spiritual welfare of our brother. As the apostle Paul well puts it: “It is true, everything is clean, but it is wrong for a man to hurt the consciences of others by what he eats. The right thing to do is to eat no meat at all and to drink no wine or do anything else if it hurts your brother’s conscience.”—Rom. 14:20, 21, An Amer. Trans.
For those who have difficulty in exercising self-control it would at all times be best to refrain from drinking intoxicating beverages. Better deny oneself the brief temporary enjoyment of indulging in wine than to bring reproach upon the truth and perhaps cause others to stumble. And denying oneself such should not be a great hardship. The Jews did without wine for forty years (Deut. 29:6), and seemingly did not miss it too much; as we read of their longing for the flesh, the leeks, onions and garlic of Egypt (Num. 11:5), but not of their missing their wine. The Rechabites were willing to do without wine because of having been commanded thus by their forefather Jonadab, and they were commended by Jehovah for obeying that commandment. (Jer. 35:1-19) Daniel and his three companions were blessed for refusing the king’s dainties, which included wine.—Dan. 1:8-21.
INDULGING IN PARTIES
Today there is a tendency on the part of some of the Lord’s servants to “throw” or attend parties where there is an opening for much’ drinking. It is advisable to be on guard. Excess drinking can be accompanied by conversation that is far from edifying and with actions that will not stand the light. Such parties, when ignoring the spiritual welfare, are dangerous to all of God’s servants that would have his approval. Married people can find themselves trifling with others and straining their faithfulness to each other for the thrill of “skating on thin ice”; while young and single folks, who by properly cultivating the gift of singleness have so much to look forward to in the pioneer, foreign-missionary or Bethel service, find themselves becoming inflamed and, as a result, come into marital situations where to keep their integrity they must shoulder the added burdens of domestic obligations with the corresponding diminishment of Kingdom privileges, and that with a bad start.
All too frequently such parties savor of the attitude of the Godless world: “Let us eat and drink; for to morrow we shall die.” (Isa. 22:13) They have more in common with Belshazzar’s feast, where, inflamed with wine, he willfully reproached Jehovah’s name, than with the fellowship and eating of bread that Jesus enjoyed with his apostles and disciples after his resurrection.
True, there is nothing wrong in itself with brethren’s coming together occasionally and enjoying in a little more abundant way than usual the good things that the Lord has provided for man in the way of food and drink. In fact, such occasions can even aid in helping the good-will interest to appreciate the fact that Jehovah’s witnesses are not fanatical extremists. But at such times let us not forget that we are Jehovah’s servants, let the indulgence in food and drink be in moderation, so as not to bring any reproach nor to have ill aftereffects, and above all, let the conversation be clean and on things that edify. The singing and playing of Kingdom songs, the playing of Scriptural quiz games, the relating of field-service experiences, etc., can all combine to make such an evening one not only of relaxation and enjoyment but also one of profit.
Let each Christian minister be on guard, therefore, remembering that Satan is out to debauch the human race so as to cause all to be destroyed at Armageddon, that to sow to the flesh is to reap destruction, and that “[we] have spent time enough in the past in doing as the heathen like to do, indulging in sensuality, passion, drunkenness, carousing, dissipation”. (1 Pet. 4:3, An Amer. Trans.) Let us make honest, wise and considerate use of our Christian liberty. Be moderate in the enjoyment of the good things that God has provided, “so whether you are eating or drinking or doing anything else, do it all to the honor of God”; ever appreciating that “the Kingdom of God is not a matter of what we eat or drink, but of uprightness, peace, and happiness through the possession of the holy spirit”.—1 Cor. 10:31; Rom. 14:17, An Amer. Trans.

