Share the Comfort from the Scriptures
How have mature Christians comforted themselves when depressed?
By not dwelling on matters causing grief, fear or depression, but heeding the apostolic command to “continue considering” upbuilding things. (Phil. 4:8) In fact, this was one of the main reasons why Jehovah God caused his Word to be recorded: “For all the things that were written aforetime were written for our instruction, that through our endurance and through the comfort from the Scriptures we might have hope.”—Rom. 15:4.a
Are Christians to be content with being comforted themselves?
By no means! They will want to share that comfort with others, even as indicated by the apostle Paul: “Blessed be . . . the God of all comfort, who comforts us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort those in any sort of tribulation through the comfort with which we ourselves are being comforted by God.”—2 Cor. 1:3, 4.
How can one mourning the death of a loved one be comforted?
Such a one can be comforted by calling to mind the wonderful promises of a resurrection from the dead, such as the one Jesus gave: “Do not marvel at this, because the hour is coming in which all those in the memorial tombs will hear [Jesus’] voice and come out.” Because of such promises Christians, while grieving over the loss of a loved one, do “not sorrow just as the rest also do who have no hope.”—John 5:28, 29; 1 Thess. 4:13.
How can a Christian sister who is depressed because of having domestic problems be comforted?
She can be comforted by pointing out to her the wisdom of considering her problems one at a time in the light of the Scriptures. For example, if her problem relates to her unbelieving marriage mate, she can be encouraged to follow the advice found at 1 Peter 3:1-6.
How can comfort be shared with one suffering depression due to fatigue?
Such a person can be comforted by showing him the need to use the spirit of a sound mind in all his affairs and properly scheduling his activities. In particular would such a person need to be on guard against depriving himself of needed rest and sleep because of watching television or indulging in other forms of recreation when he should be in bed sleeping.—Eph. 5:15, 16; 2 Tim. 1:7.
How can those prone to fear man or demon attacks be comforted?
By pointing them to Jesus’ wise counsel at Matthew 10:28: “Do not become fearful of those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul; but rather be in fear of him that can destroy both soul and body in Gehenna.” As for the attacks by wicked spirits or demons, these cannot harm them so long as they take full advantage of Jehovah’s provisions by studying the Bible and Christian publications, applying their counsel, attending Christian meetings, engaging faithfully in the Christian ministry and being regular in prayer.—Eph. 6:11-18.
What will the Christian do who is desirous of sharing the comfort of the Scriptures with others?
He will not wait until those needing comfort come to him but will be alert to note those in his own family or congregation who are in need of comfort. Additionally, he will make opportunities for sharing the comfort from the Scriptures with others by going from house to house with the good news of God’s kingdom and, in particular, by making return visits upon those who appreciate their need of comfort.—Matt. 5:3, 4, 6; 24:14.
How can those groaning over the detestable things taking place in Christendom be comforted?
By assuring them of the existence of a loving, all-wise, just and almighty God, whose name is Jehovah; that he is fully aware of what is taking place and will shortly make an end of all detestable things at Armageddon. Also by inviting these lovers of truth and righteousness to associate with the people who practice the worship that is pure and undefiled from God’s standpoint.—Ezek. 9:4; Jas. 1:27; Rev. 16:14, 16.
What blessings result from sharing the comfort from the Scriptures with others.?
Jehovah’s approval, present increased happiness and the hope of everlasting life in God’s new order.—Prov. 27:11; Acts 20:35.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, July 15, 1968.

