When God’s Kingdom Comes to Power
FOR thousands of years men of faith have lived in eager expectation of the day when God’s kingdom would begin its rule. They have felt keenly the need for God to take a direct hand in earth’s affairs. Does this mean that God has not been King during the centuries past?
No, for Jehovah God has always been the Supreme Ruler of the universe. “He is the living God and the King to time indefinite,” the Bible says. (Jer. 10:10) But here at the earth his rulership has been challenged. Yet, for sound reasons and with a loving purpose in view, God has allowed human governments under the influence of Satan to rule for a fixed period of time.a
Jehovah promised, however, that at the end of that time he would take direct action against all rebels and opposers of his rule. And he would bring the earth and its inhabitants completely under his rule again. How?
It would be by means of the Kingdom, a new heavenly government under his Son Christ Jesus. So the coming of that kingdom to power means that great changes are near at hand. It means that Jehovah God has given to his Son “rulership and dignity and kingdom, that the peoples, national groups and languages should all serve even him.”—Dan. 7:13, 14.
That event has already taken place in heaven. Kingdom authority has already been given to Jehovah’s Son. Does that sound strange to you? It might, especially in view of the terrible conditions afflicting mankind. But, really, it is because of these very conditions that we can be certain that this is true. Why is this?
This is so because the coming to power of Jehovah’s kingdom is not welcomed by all creatures. Not everyone wants to live under a government that insists on righteousness. (Luke 19:11-14) For this reason, Jehovah long ago recorded in his Word that when he ‘begins ruling as king’ toward the earth the ‘nations would become wrathful.’ (Rev. 11:17, 18) He foretold that, at the time of empowering his Son to act, it would be necessary for him to say: “Go subduing in the midst of your enemies.”—Ps. 110:2.
Christ Jesus would then oust Satan from heaven, the seat of government, hurling him down to the vicinity of the earth, in preparation for putting him completely out of action. In the heavens the grand announcement would then be made: “Now have come to pass the salvation and the power and the kingdom of our God and the authority of his Christ.” (Rev. 12:5, 7-10) But for the earth, what?
The Bible goes on to give the answer: “Woe for the earth and for the sea, because the Devil has come down to you, having great anger, knowing he has a short period of time.” (Rev. 12:12) Yes, the start of the rule by God’s kingdom does not mean immediate peace and righteousness on earth. To the contrary, it triggers a period of unprecedented trouble for earth’s inhabitants.
Are we really living in that period of woe right now? What is the meaning of the terrible troubles now existing earth wide? Let us see.
[Footnotes]
Why God has allowed wickedness until our time was discussed in the January 15, 1969, issue of The Watchtower.

