From Our Readers
Apartheid
If your organisation loves people so much, why do you not condemn apartheid for what it is? (June 22, 1988) Cruel! It is up to every Christian who openly says they have God in their heart to condemn apartheid. I suggest that your organisation openly and publicly condemns apartheid and all other oppression in the world!
S. C., England
Most of our readers perceived, correctly, that we abhor racial oppression, but we expressed it with the dignity that is in keeping with the standards of “Awake!”​—ED.
I find no fault with [the article on apartheid], but I feel that you infer that the Jehovah’s Witnesses Church is the only one to encourage this mixing of the races. One photo is captioned “The racial harmony among Jehovah’s Witnesses in South Africa attracts many to the Kingdom message.” I do not argue with this statement, only pointing out that so does the harmony among the Methodist Churches that try to meet the Black and make him welcome.
D. H. K., England
Certainly we agree that there are some individual local churches that may have improved race relations, but apparently that is not typical of the overall situation, as admitted by the Methodist and Congregationalist clergymen quoted on page 6 of the article. Over the years Jehovah’s Witnesses throughout South Africa and worldwide have consistently and quietly established an unequaled record on race relations without rancorous political debate or illegal confrontations with government.​—ED.
Time
As a business executive, I have long been interested in time management. Your article “Time​—Are You Its Master or Its Slave?” (December 8, 1987) succeeded in presenting within the space of four pages better, more practical, and easily understood advice than I have ever received at seminars or from textbooks.
W. K., Federal Republic of Germany
That article fit like a glove on my needs. When I saw the picture on page 26, I identified perfectly with the image of a disorganized person trying to do several jobs at once. I read the article several times, marking the main points that applied to me. I put the suggestions into practice and was happy to see that at the end of Monday, I had handled six of the ten jobs I had listed. What I liked was the open manner of handling the subject​—no fixed rules but just suggestions full of empathy, such as: ‘Be flexible, try them, adapt them, see which ones work for you.’
D. C., Brazil
Twins
Your article on twins (April 22, 1988) really helped me to understand the differences between my daughters. They are delightful little girls of such total unalikeness it was staggering (one fair-skinned and blue-eyed, one dark-skinned and brown-eyed). They are being raised as separate persons, yet they have a bond that is unbelievable. One would cry for a bottle and refuse it, yet quit her “ba-ba” as soon as her twin received a bottle. I’ve heard of these things with identical twins but never with fraternal. Thank you.
R. L. R., United States

