Who Really Has the Solution to Mankind’s Problems?
“MOTHER of mankind”​—this is how John Paul II has defined Mary in his recent encyclical letter, echoing the words of the Second Vatican Council. Many Catholics believe that Mary follows and assists every believer, helping them in every moment of their lives. For this reason, many of them earnestly invoke her protection. They are convinced that on many occasions the “Madonna” has directly intervened to change the course of human affairs.
According to the book Un anno di grazia con Maria (A Year of Grace With Mary), prayers are offered to Mary with the words: “Remember, O merciful Virgin Mary, that it has never been said in the world that those seeking your protection, imploring your help, and asking for your patronage, have ever been abandoned by you.” It is noteworthy that at least two of the Marian festivities on the “liturgical calendar”​—those of the “Name of Mary” and of “Mary of the Rosary”—​commemorate military victories that have been obtained, thanks to Mary’s supposed intervention. Are we to assume, then, that Mary is nationalistic?
It is quite normal and understandable to seek the help and protection of someone able to assist us in solving our problems. But is it in harmony with God’s will and the Bible to place one’s trust in Mary, invoking her aid?
Who Has the Solution?
The anxieties and the fears of our generation are, as has been said, among the reasons for the pope’s proclamation of a Marian Year. The Catholic Church hopes that with people’s minds turned toward Mary, peace and harmony will return to mankind and that, a Catholic theologian writes, “in this way the real drama of this world will be solved.”
Even Jesus in one of his well-known prophecies spoke of a time when men would be “dying of fear as they await what menaces the world.” (Luke 21:25, 26, The Jerusalem Bible) Historical proof indicates that Jesus was referring to our times. We are now living in “the last days.” (2 Timothy 3:1-5, JB; Matthew, chapter 24; Luke, chapter 21) Is there a way out of this critical situation? In whom should we trust so as to find a solution to humanity’s distressing problems? Should we place our trust in Mary?
The True Solution
God has been very clear on the matter. In his Word, the Bible, he says that we should not trust in man or woman. (Psalm 49:6-9; 146:3) His exhortation to suffering ones is: “Trust in Jehovah, you people, for all times, for in Jah Jehovah is the Rock of times indefinite.”​—Isaiah 26:4.
But how will Jehovah God solve humanity’s problems? By means of his government, his Kingdom in the hands of Christ Jesus. This is the Kingdom for which Jesus taught people to pray in the “Our Father” prayer. (Matthew 6:9, 10) Jesus had the Kingdom in mind when, speaking of the terrible conditions in “the last days,” he said: “But as these things start to occur, raise yourselves erect and lift your heads up, because your deliverance is getting near.”​—Luke 21:28-32.
What will this Kingdom accomplish? Will there be a universal conversion of all peoples, as is hoped by some Catholic movements? No, the Bible is very clear on this point. Jesus indicated that not all will be saved, neither will there be a general conversion of people. He spoke of only one “road leading off into life” and said that “few” would find it.​—Matthew 7:13, 14.
God’s Kingdom will intervene to radically eliminate mankind’s problems, such as wars, food shortages, sickness, crime, misrule, and pollution. (Psalm 46:9; 67:6; Proverbs 2:22; Isaiah 33:24; Daniel 2:44) Under that Kingdom rule, there will be an “abundance of peace.” (Psalm 72:7) This is the divine solution for mankind’s problems, and as the Bible says: “Blessed is the able-bodied man who puts his trust in Jehovah, and whose confidence Jehovah has become.”​—Jeremiah 17:7.
Not by placing our trust in a human creature such as Mary, no matter how faithful she might have been, can we hope to see the solution to our world’s dramatic problems. It is essential that we place our trust in Jehovah, through Christ Jesus, and accept His way of putting things right. Happiness will only come about through God’s Kingdom.
But what exactly is this Kingdom? How does it function? What tangible results has it already produced? You can find out by asking those who have brought you this magazine.
[Picture on page 10]
The Kingdom of God by Christ Jesus is the solution to mankind’s problems

