A Privilege Available to Younger Ones
1 Many who are now parents fondly recall a privilege they enjoyed as children growing up in the truth​—Magazine Day activity. That work was instituted in all congregations in 1949. One day a week, everyone was to concentrate on distributing The Watchtower and Awake! on the streets, from house to house, from store to store, and in other ways. Younger publishers especially looked forward to participating in this work because it gave them an opportunity to share in the same activity as the adults in the congregation. Was this true of you when you were a child?
2 Involve Your Children: Very young children who are not ready to initiate a Scriptural discussion at the door can still offer magazines. It requires learning only a simple presentation of a few short sentences. A brief comment, perhaps on the cover illustration, may be sufficient. Many householders readily accept the journals from our youngsters, often commenting favorably about the sincerity and good conduct of these youths. With a little help, this service is something children can do very well, making a valuable contribution in spreading the Kingdom message. Of course, as children grow older, their parents will want to help them continue to make progress in developing their witnessing skills.
3 Manuel began preaching from door to door when he was three years old. His parents taught him to memorize a brief presentation. He zealously preaches alongside them, placing many magazines, brochures, and tracts. He also witnesses informally. On one occasion when his parents took him to a park for recreation, he took the initiative to place some tracts with other people who were there. Although he is still very young, Manuel’s enthusiasm for the ministry is a source of real encouragement to his parents and to the entire congregation.​—Prov. 22:6.
4 Every Saturday is designated as “Magazine Day” on the 2000 Calendar of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Parents, we recommend that you take a renewed interest in this work, helping your children to share as regularly as possible in this privilege of service.

