Do You Appreciate Sacred Things?
1 When asked whether we appreciate sacred things, likely we would quickly answer yes! What are some of God’s sacred provisions that we appreciate?
2 How dearly we cherish the personal relationship we are allowed to have with our heavenly Father! He assures us that if we ‘draw close to him, he will draw close to us.’ (Jas. 4:8) Without the ransom sacrifice of Jesus Christ, no man could receive everlasting life. (John 3:16) Out of sincere gratefulness, we daily express in prayer our deep appreciation for this precious gift of God.
3 God’s inspired Word, the Holy Bible, is also sacred to us, as is Jehovah’s earthly organization. We show due appreciation for these provisions from Jehovah when we live by Bible principles, strengthen the bonds of brotherly love, carefully observe theocratic order, and cooperate with those taking the lead.​—1 Pet. 1:22.
4 Through the faithful and discreet slave, we receive an abundance of spiritual food. That will be true this year at the “Doers of God’s Word” District Convention. There we will receive vital instruction and enjoy warm fellowship that we urgently need. How can we show heartfelt appreciation for this sacred provision?
5 Do Not Neglect Jehovah’s House: Nehemiah admonished those who had worked hard to rebuild Jerusalem’s walls ‘not to neglect the house of their God.’ (Neh. 10:39) Today, Jehovah’s “house” is his arrangement for worship. Our district conventions are part of that arrangement. Not to neglect this arrangement, we must be there in attendance and pay keen attention, showing Jehovah that we highly value his provisions. (Heb. 10:24, 25) What plans should we make now to show that we fully appreciate this sacred event?
6 Attend All Three Days: Every one of us should arrange to be in attendance for all three days of the convention. Are you planning to arrive early each day and to stay through the final prayer on Sunday? If so, rich blessings will be yours. Attending a convention may not always be easy. Adjusting your secular employment may require that you take a firm stand. Transportation may not always be convenient. But do not let these factors discourage you from attending the convention.
7 Consider This Excellent Example: On their way to a district convention last year, a group of brothers in an African country where there is civil unrest met up with a military group. The brothers were asked: “Who are you, and where are you going?” They answered: “We are Jehovah’s Witnesses, and we are on our way to attend the district convention.” One of the soldiers commented: “You Jehovah’s Witnesses do not fear anything. Just go, and you will be able to hold your convention without any problem. However, be aware that you will meet many soldiers. Always walk in the middle of the road! If you see many people gathered, continue walking in the middle of the road!” They did so and arrived safely at the convention. These brothers were rewarded because they demonstrated their appreciation for sacred things.
8 Like our brothers in Africa, we also face challenges. But undoubtedly we can imitate their faith and be resolved to attend all sessions of our district convention. If adjustments are needed, look to Jehovah for guidance, knowing that he will bless our efforts to attend the entire program.
9 Reap the Blessings: We long for the Word of God, knowing that through it we may grow to salvation. (1 Pet. 2:2) Our attending the district convention and listening to the program will help each of us build stronger faith in that Word and thus be better able to withstand Satan’s onslaughts. In doing so, we will show Jehovah and all onlookers that we fully appreciate sacred things and “are not the sort that shrink back . . . but the sort that have faith to the preserving alive of the soul.”​—Heb. 10:39; 12:16; Prov. 27:11.
10 We can look forward to Jehovah God’s opening the floodgates of heaven and pouring out upon us copious showers of spiritual blessings. (Mal. 3:10) Make it your goal to be at the “Doers of God’s Word” District Convention from the very opening of the program Friday morning to the closing prayer and “Amen!” Sunday afternoon. You will be glad you did!

