Maintain Fine Conduct That Glorifies God
1 Wherever we are, our conduct, dress, and grooming bear witness about us and the God we worship. This becomes especially noticeable at large gatherings of God’s people, where many people observe us. When we are exemplary, Jehovah’s name is glorified. (1 Pet. 2:12) However, poor behavior or thoughtless actions on the part of just a few can bring reproach on God’s name and on his people. (Eccl. 9:18b) Keeping in mind that by our conduct outsiders judge our organization and the God we worship should make us conscientious about ‘doing all things for God’s glory.’​—1 Cor. 10:31.
2 Exemplary Conduct at Hotels: In most cases, hotel personnel are very impressed with the orderliness, good manners, and cleanliness of Jehovah’s Witnesses. One manager, when speaking about Witness families who stayed at his hotel, said: “The children of Jehovah’s Witnesses are the best children I’ve ever seen! They are dressed like ladies and gentlemen; they are polite, courteous, and well-mannered; and they have not caused any problem whatever. You are really to be complimented on your youngsters. We have enjoyed having your children here.” Comments like these are readily forthcoming because those dealing with us can see the love and respect that exist among Jehovah’s people.
3 On the other hand, remarks by other hotel personnel indicate that there is still a problem with some who are careless in their conduct or who abuse hotel facilities. This causes problems and creates criticism that should not exist. Some managers complain that children and teenagers are noisy and unruly, being unsupervised by their parents while using the swimming pool or other recreational facilities.
4 Most hotels have rules that guests are expected to follow. Some brothers have broken these rules in regard to noise levels or cooking in their rooms. Hotel managers tell us that cooking, where not allowed, is a common abuse of their property. Not only have rooms been physically damaged but lingering odors have also made it impossible to rent the rooms for days or weeks afterward. Unless the cooking of food is specifically permitted in the room, it must not be done.
5 A real effort should be made to cooperate fully with the management. Certainly, we do not want to leave an unfavorable impression of Jehovah’s people. As Christians we must conduct ourselves honestly at all times. We should not take linen or other “souvenirs” from hotels, as that is stealing; nor should we be untruthful in reporting how many people we plan to have in a room when making reservations or when checking in.
6 Proper Decorum at the Convention: Regardless of the type of facility used, it is to be viewed as a large Kingdom Hall during the convention. Appropriate dress and grooming should be just as evident as when we attend the meetings of our local congregation. Both during and following convention sessions, brothers and sisters should avoid wearing immodest or faddish outfits, which reflect the spirit of the world and make us hard to recognize as being wholesomely different. Sisters should be careful that the style and length of their skirts and dresses are suitably modest. (1 Tim. 2:9, 10) Whether attending the convention, staying at a hotel, eating in a restaurant, or shopping in a store, we should at all times reflect that we are God’s ministers, giving no cause for stumbling.​—2 Cor. 6:3.
7 The baptism will be held on Saturday morning at the convention. The April 1, 1995, Watchtower, page 30, describes the attitude we should display on that occasion. It states that we “ought to treat baptism with appropriate seriousness. It is not a time for outbursts, for partying, or for hilarity. But neither is it a somber or grim time.” It would be most inappropriate for those getting baptized to wear very skimpy or revealing bathing apparel, whether men or women. Hence, all should reflect both the seriousness and the joy of Christian baptism.
8 Peter reminds us of ‘what sort of persons we ought to be in holy acts of conduct and deeds of godly devotion.’ (2 Pet. 3:11) May our words and actions at the “Doers of God’s Word” District Convention help honesthearted observers to know and worship our great God, who is worthy of all honor and glory.​—1 Cor. 14:24, 25.

