Question Box
▪ How can attendants assist parents in helping their children maintain proper decorum at meetings?
Children are naturally energetic, unaccustomed to sitting for long periods of time. After a meeting, children have pent-up energy that may incline them to run and chase other children in the Kingdom Hall or at other meeting places, in the parking lot, or on the sidewalk. However, true is the proverb: ‘A child let on the loose will cause his parent shame.’​—Prov. 29:15.
Sad to say, some of our older brothers and sisters have been seriously injured because children ran into them and knocked them down. This has caused undue suffering as well as unnecessary expense for the parents and the congregation. For their own security and the safety of others, children should not be allowed to run and play inside or outside the Kingdom Hall.
Parents have the Scriptural responsibility to train their children to treat our places of worship with proper respect. (Eccl. 5:1a) At our Christian meetings, assemblies, and conventions, attendants are assigned to see that “all things take place decently” and that there is “good order.” (1 Cor. 14:40; Col. 2:5) They must remain alert before, during, and after the program, both indoors and outdoors. If a child is running or becoming unruly, the attendant can gently stop the child, and he can explain to the child why such actions are not acceptable. The child’s parent also should kindly be told of the problem and of the need to supervise the child. The parent should respond appropriately.
It is understood that at times infants and small children may cry or become disruptive during meetings. Attendants, arriving at least 20 minutes before the start of the program, can reserve the last couple of rows in the auditorium for parents who would like to sit there with their young children. The rest of us should cooperate by leaving those seats available to them.
If a child is causing a disruption, the parent should take some action. If the parent does not and the disturbance becomes distracting, an attendant should kindly ask if the parent would like to take the child out of the auditorium. When we invite new ones with young children to the meetings, we should sit with them and offer to help with the children if they cry or disrupt in other ways.
It brings us joy to see children of all ages at the Kingdom Hall and to observe their good conduct within God’s household. (1 Tim. 3:15) By their respecting Jehovah’s arrangement for worship, they bring him honor and are appreciated by all in the congregation.

