“Keep Awake”
1 After describing the momentous events that would mark the last days of this system of things, Jesus urged his disciples to “keep awake.” (Mark 13:33) Why must Christians keep awake? Because we are living in the most perilous time in human history. We cannot afford to become spiritually drowsy. That would result in our failing to appreciate the work that Jehovah has given us to do in this time of the end. What work is that?
2 Jehovah is having his people proclaim throughout the earth the good news about his Kingdom​—the only hope for mankind. Our working closely with God’s organization identifies us as true Christians, who are mindful of the times and of the need to help others hear the “sayings of everlasting life.” (John 6:68) By zealously sharing in this all-important work, we give evidence of being spiritually awake.
3 Moved to Preach: As Witnesses of Jehovah, we should be positive about our ministry. Love for God and neighbor moves us personally to share in the preaching work. (1 Cor. 9:16, 17) Doing so, we will save ourselves as well as those who listen to us. (1 Tim. 4:16) Let it be our determination to share as regularly as possible and as long as necessary in preaching about the best government that mankind could ever have​—God’s Kingdom!
4 The urgency of our ministry is impressed upon us by an important fact​—the outbreak of the great tribulation will come while we are still engaged in this work. Our not knowing the day and hour requires that we keep awake and ready all the time, prayerfully relying on Jehovah. (Eph. 6:18) The scope of the preaching activity continues to expand. But one day soon, the greatest witness work in human history will reach a climax.
5 Faithfully follow the command of Jesus to “keep awake.” This is more critical now than ever before. May we respond with a sense of urgency. Today and every day, let us remain spiritually sober, alert, and active in Jehovah’s service. Yes, may we “stay awake and keep our senses.”​—1 Thess. 5:6.

