“Tested as to Fitness”​—How?
1 With the continued growth in Jehovah’s organization, there is an ongoing need for qualified brothers to serve as ministerial servants. Most brothers not yet appointed, including teenagers, have a desire to serve in the congregation. When they are assigned extra work, they feel useful and have a sense of accomplishment. Their further advancement depends on their being “tested as to fitness.” (1 Tim. 3:10) How is this accomplished?
2 The Role of the Elders: As part of measuring a brother by the Scriptural qualifications for ministerial servants found at 1 Timothy 3:8-13, the elders will test a brother’s fitness to shoulder responsibility. They may assign him to perform helpful services connected with dispensing magazines and literature, handling microphones, maintaining the Kingdom Hall, and so forth. The elders will observe how he responds to and cares for his assignments. They will look for the qualities of dependability, punctuality, diligence, modesty, a willing spirit, and an ability to get along well with others. (Phil. 2:20) Is he exemplary in his dress and grooming? Does he have a sense of responsibility? They want to see in “his fine conduct his works with a mildness that belongs to wisdom.” (Jas. 3:13) Is he truly reaching out to be of assistance in the congregation? Is he carrying out Jesus’ command to “make disciples of people” by zealously sharing in the field ministry?​—Matt. 28:19; see the September 1, 1990, Watchtower, pages 18-28.
3 While the Bible sets no minimum age for one to be appointed a ministerial servant, it refers to such brothers as “men who minister.” We would hardly expect them to be in their early or middle teens, especially since the possibility of having a wife and children is mentioned. (1 Tim. 3:12, 13) Such men should not be yielding to “the desires incidental to youth” but should be conducting themselves in a serious manner, having a fine standing and a clean conscience before God and men.​—2 Tim. 2:22.
4 While natural ability is useful, one’s attitude and spirit are what really count. Does a brother humbly desire to praise God and to be of service to his brothers? If so, Jehovah will bless his efforts to make progress in the congregation.

