Practical Lessons From the Promised Land
THE Promised Land of Bible record was certainly unique. In this relatively small area, we find a great variety of geographic features. In the north, there are snowcapped mountains; in the south, hot regions. There are productive lowlands, desolate wilderness areas, and hill country for orchards and for grazing flocks.
The diversity in altitude, climate, and soil allows for a wide variety of trees, shrubs, and other plants—including some that thrive in the cold alpine regions, others that grow in the torrid desert, and still others that flourish on the alluvial plain or the rocky plateau. One botanist estimates that some 2,600 plant varieties can be found in the area! The first Israelites who explored the land saw ready evidence of its potential. They brought back from one torrent valley a cluster of grapes so large that it had to be carried on a bar between two men! The valley was appropriately named Eshcol, meaning “Cluster [of Grapes].”a—Numbers 13:21-24.
But let us now take a closer look at some of the geographic features of this unique strip of land, particularly of the southern section.
The Shephelah
The western shore of the Promised Land is its coast with the Mediterranean Sea. About 25 miles [40 km] inland is the Shephelah. The word “Shephelah” means “Lowland,” but in reality this is a hilly area and can only be called low when compared with the mountains of Judah to the east.
Look at the accompanying cross-section map and note the relationship of the Shephelah to its surrounding territories. To the east are the mountains of Judah; to the west, the coastal plain of Philistia. Thus, the Shephelah served as a buffer zone, a barrier that in Bible times separated God’s people from their ancient enemies. Any army invading from the west would have to get through the Shephelah before it could move against Jerusalem, the capital city of Israel.
Such an incident occurred during the ninth century B.C.E. King Hazael of Syria, the Bible reports, “proceeded to go up and fight against Gath [likely at the border of the Shephelah] and capture it, after which Hazael set his face to go up against Jerusalem.” King Jehoash managed to stop Hazael, buying him off with an assortment of valuables from the temple and palace. Nevertheless, this account illustrates that the Shephelah was of crucial importance to the security of Jerusalem.—2 Kings 12:17, 18.
We might draw a practical lesson from this. Hazael wanted to conquer Jerusalem, but first he had to get through the Shephelah. Similarly, Satan the Devil is “seeking to devour” God’s servants, but often he must first penetrate a strong buffer zone—their adherence to Bible principles, such as those regarding bad associations and materialism. (1 Peter 5:8; 1 Corinthians 15:33; 1 Timothy 6:10) Compromise of Bible principles is often the first step toward committing serious sins. So keep that buffer zone secure. Follow Bible principles today, and you will not break God’s laws tomorrow.
The Hill Country of Judah
Further inland from the Shephelah lies the hill country of Judah. This is a mountainous area that produced good grain, olive oil, and wine. Because of its high elevation, Judah was also an excellent refuge. Thus, King Jotham built “fortified places and towers” there. In times of trouble, people could flee to these for safety.—2 Chronicles 27:4.
Jerusalem, also called Zion, was a prominent part of the hill country of Judah. Jerusalem seemed secure since it was surrounded on three sides by steep valleys, and the north side, according to first-century historian Josephus, was protected by a triple wall. But a refuge needs more than walls and weapons to maintain its security. It must also have water. This is essential during a siege, for without water, entrapped citizens would quickly be forced to surrender.
Jerusalem drew a supply of water from the Pool of Siloam. However, during the eighth century B.C.E., in anticipation of a siege by the Assyrians, King Hezekiah built an outer wall to protect the Pool of Siloam, enclosing it within the city. He also stopped up the springs outside the city, so that the besieging Assyrians would be hard-pressed to find water for themselves. (2 Chronicles 32:2-5; Isaiah 22:11) That is not all. Hezekiah found a way to divert an extra supply of water right into Jerusalem!
In what has been called one of the great engineering feats of antiquity, Hezekiah dug a tunnel from the spring of Gihon all the way to the Pool of Siloam.b Averaging 6 feet [1.8 m] in height, this tunnel was 1,749 feet [533 m] long. Just imagine it—a tunnel almost a third of a mile [half a kilometer] long, cut through rock! Today, some 2,700 years later, visitors to Jerusalem can wade through this masterpiece of engineering, commonly known as Hezekiah’s tunnel.—2 Kings 20:20; 2 Chronicles 32:30.
Hezekiah’s efforts to protect and increase Jerusalem’s water supply can teach us a practical lesson. Jehovah is “the source of living water.” (Jeremiah 2:13) His thoughts, contained in the Bible, are life-sustaining. That is why personal Bible study is essential. But opportunity for study, and the resulting knowledge, will not simply flow to you. You may have to ‘dig tunnels,’ such as through your hard-packed daily routine, to make room for it. (Proverbs 2:1-5; Ephesians 5:15, 16) Once you have begun, stick to your schedule, giving high priority to your personal study. Be careful not to let anyone or anything rob you of this precious water supply.—Philippians 1:9, 10.
The Wilderness Areas
To the east of the mountains of Judah is the Wilderness of Judah, also called Jeshimon, meaning “Desert.” (1 Samuel 23:19, footnote) At the Salt Sea, this barren region features rocky gorges and jagged cliffs. Dropping some 3,900 feet [1,200 m] in just 15 miles [24 km], the Wilderness of Judah is shielded against the rain-bearing winds from the west, and thus it receives only a limited amount of rainfall. This is no doubt the wilderness into which the goat for Azazel was sent on the annual Atonement Day. It is also where David fled from Saul. Here Jesus fasted for 40 days and was thereafter tempted by the Devil.—Leviticus 16:21, 22; Psalm 63, superscription; Matthew 4:1-11.
Approximately 100 miles [160 km] southwest of the Wilderness of Judah is the Wilderness of Paran. Many of Israel’s campsites during their 40-year trek from Egypt to the Promised Land were located here. (Numbers 33:1-49) Moses wrote of “the great and fear-inspiring wilderness, with poisonous serpents and scorpions and with thirsty ground that has no water.” (Deuteronomy 8:15) It is a wonder that millions of Israelites could survive! Yet, Jehovah sustained them.
May this serve as a reminder that Jehovah can sustain us too, even in this spiritually barren world. Yes, we too walk about among serpents and scorpions, even if not literal ones. We may have to have daily contact with people who have no qualms about spewing out poisonous speech that could easily infect our thinking. (Ephesians 5:3, 4; 1 Timothy 6:20) Those who strive to serve God despite these obstacles are to be commended. Their faithfulness is strong evidence that Jehovah is indeed sustaining them.
The Hills of Carmel
The name Carmel means “Orchard.” This fertile region to the north, some 30 miles [50 km] in length, is bedecked with vineyards, olive groves, and fruit trees. The headland of this hilly range is unforgettable in its grace and beauty. Isaiah 35:2 speaks of “the splendor of Carmel” as a symbol of the fruitful glory of the restored land of Israel.
Several notable events occurred in Carmel. It was here that Elijah challenged the prophets of Baal and that “the fire of Jehovah came falling” in proof of His supremacy. Also, it was from the top of Carmel that Elijah called attention to the small cloud that became a great downpour, thus miraculously ending the drought on Israel. (1 Kings 18:17-46) Elijah’s successor, Elisha, was at Mount Carmel when the woman of Shunem came seeking his help for her dead child, whom Elisha thereafter resurrected.—2 Kings 4:8, 20, 25-37.
The slopes of Carmel still contain orchards, olive groves, and vines. During the spring, these slopes are carpeted with a magnificent display of flowers. “Your head upon you is like Carmel,” said Solomon to the Shulammite maiden, perhaps alluding to the luxuriousness of her hair or to the way in which her shapely head rose majestically from her neck.—Song of Solomon 7:5.
The splendor that was characteristic of the hills of Carmel reminds us of the spiritual beauty Jehovah has bestowed upon his modern-day organization of worshipers. (Isaiah 35:1, 2) Jehovah’s Witnesses truly live in a spiritual paradise, and they agree with the sentiments of King David, who wrote: “The measuring lines themselves have fallen for me in pleasant places. Really, my own possession has proved agreeable to me.”—Psalm 16:6.
True, there are difficult challenges that God’s spiritual nation today must face, even as the ancient Israelites met with continual opposition from God’s enemies. Yet, true Christians never lose sight of the blessings that Jehovah has provided—including the ever-increasing light of Bible truth, a worldwide brotherhood, and the opportunity to gain everlasting life on a paradise earth.—Proverbs 4:18; John 3:16; 13:35.
“Like the Garden of Jehovah”
The ancient Promised Land was inviting to the eye. It has well been described as “flowing with milk and honey.” (Genesis 13:10; Exodus 3:8) Moses called it “a good land, a land of torrent valleys of water, springs and watery deeps issuing forth in the valley plain and in the mountainous region, a land of wheat and barley and vines and figs and pomegranates, a land of oil olives and honey, a land in which you will not eat bread with scarcity, in which you will lack nothing, a land the stones of which are iron and out of the mountains of which you will mine copper.”—Deuteronomy 8:7-9.
If Jehovah could provide such a rich, beautiful homeland for his ancient people, surely he can give to his modern-day faithful servants a glorious paradise extending earth wide—with mountains, valleys, rivers, and lakes. Yes, the ancient Promised Land with all its diversity was just a foretaste of the spiritual paradise that his Witnesses enjoy today and of the future Paradise of the new world. There the promise recorded at Psalm 37:29 will be fulfilled: “The righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it.” When Jehovah gives that Paradise home to obedient mankind, how happy they will be to inspect all its “rooms” and to have forever to do so!
[Footnotes]
One grape cluster from this region was recorded as weighing 26 pounds [12 kg], and another, more than 44 pounds [20 kg].
The spring of Gihon was located just outside the eastern boundary of Jerusalem. It was hidden in a cave; hence, the Assyrians likely did not know of its existence.
[Map on page 4]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
GALILEE
Mt. Carmel
Sea of Galilee
SAMARIA
SHEPHELAH
Mountains of Judah
Salt Sea
[Credit Line]
NASA photo
[Map on page 4]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
The Shephelah was a barrier between God’s people and their enemies
MI 0   5   10
KM 0   8   16
Plain of Philistia
Shephelah
Hill Country of Judah
Wilderness of Judah
Rift Valley
Salt Sea
Land of Ammon and Moab
[Map/Picture on page 5]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
Hezekiah’s tunnel: 1,749 feet [533 m] long, cut through solid rock
Tyropoeon Valley
Siloam
CITY OF DAVID
Kidron Valley
Gihon
[Pictures on page 6]
In the Wilderness of Judah, David sought refuge from Saul. Later Jesus was here tempted by the Devil
[Credit Line]
Pictorial Archive (Near Eastern History) Est.
[Pictures on page 7]
Mount Carmel, where Elijah humiliated the prophets of Baal
[Credit Line]
Pictorial Archive (Near Eastern History) Est.
[Pictures on page 8]
“Jehovah your God is bringing you into a good land, a land of torrent valleys of water, springs and watery deeps issuing forth in the valley plain and in the mountainous region.”—Deuteronomy 8:7

