From Our Readers
Cruelty to Animals  I am writing to tell you what an absolutely wonderful job you did on your article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: Cruelty to Animals—Is It Wrong?” (November 8, 1998) I think it is great that you showed that God does not approve of cruelty to animals, especially by those claiming to be Christian.
J. L. C., United States
Youths Without Parents  I am deeply grateful for the article “Young People Ask . . . Why Must I Live Without My Parents?” (November 22, 1998) I am now 39 years old. But when I was 11, my mother died and my father left home. Until now I have never been able to get people to understand the miserable lives my brothers and I lived. But now I feel that others understand us. Thank you.
K. Y., Japan
My father died when I was just nine months old, and my mother, before I was 12 years old. Your article was very comforting and showed how orphans really feel. How good it is to know that Jehovah will bring our dead loved ones back to life!
M. S. S., Brazil
I am 40 years old and have read and reread the article. I had tears in my eyes from beginning to end, since I was orphaned when I was two. Until now, I could not look at a picture of Mom and Dad without crying. Thank you for writing such articles!
J. C. V., France
My parents are alive, but I’m manic-depressive (bipolar) and interested in any article that discusses how to get through hard times. I just want to tell you that I love the real-life experiences and Bible-based counsel found in “Young People Ask . . .”
S. H., Canada 
Woodworking  I have been reading this journal for decades, and it seems that it is constantly improving in content, writing style, and selection of subject material. I do wish to comment, however, on the article “Exploring the Age-Old Beauty of Wood.” (November 8, 1998) Please warn readers who may be tempted to try this work that the adz is an extremely dangerous tool. When I was growing up in the 1920’s, it was still in use and was commonly known as a foot adz. As shown in your picture, the wood is held between the feet, and the tool is razor sharp. However, it was also called a foot evil because of the many times users injured their feet. I feel it is too dangerous for an untrained person to use.
W. G., United States
We appreciate this cautionary reminder.—ED.
Tactful Queen  Your fascinating article about Catherine Parr (“A Tactful Queen Who Defeated a Scheming Bishop,” November 8, 1998) reminded me of the Bible account of Queen Esther. What wisdom these women showed! Although I am not one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, I never miss an issue of Awake! I often wonder why others do not appreciate your literature as I do.
M. D. S. F., Brazil
I found the historical account about Henry VIII and his wife Catherine Parr to be very interesting. My compliments. The article was well-researched, concise, and clear.
C. G., Italy
The way the article was narrated made us feel as if we were experiencing each moment with Queen Catherine. Thank you for printing articles like this so that those of us who live on this side of the world can get to know about faraway cultures.
L. G. and L. G., Venezuela

