How to Use Sample Presentations
 1. How should we view sample presentations that are provided?
1 Sample presentations for offering our magazines and other publications appear regularly in Our Kingdom Ministry. When sharing in the ministry, we need not repeat these suggested presentations exactly as written. They are provided to give us an outline of what we might say. We will usually be more effective if we put the presentations in our own words. Expressing ourselves in a natural manner helps to put the householder at ease and reflects sincerity and conviction.​—2 Cor. 2:17; 1 Thess. 1:5.
 2. Why do we need to consider local customs when preparing presentations?
2 Tailor Your Presentation: Our presentation of the good news is greatly affected by local customs. Can you exchange greetings with the householder and then weave your presentation into the conversation, or do people in your territory expect you to get right to the point? That varies from place to place and sometimes even from person to person. Discernment is also required in the use of questions. Questions that are appropriate in some places may make people feel uncomfortable in others. Hence, we must use good judgment and adapt our presentations according to what is acceptable locally.
 3. Why consider the background and thinking of those we speak to?
3 In addition, we need to take into account the background and thinking of the people in our territory when preparing for field service. For example, you would likely discuss Matthew 6:9, 10 with a devout Catholic differently from the way you would with a person who was unfamiliar with the “Our Father” prayer. With a little forethought, we can often tailor our presentations to make them more appealing to the people we meet in the ministry.​—1 Cor. 9:20-23.
 4. Why is good preparation essential?
4 Even when we plan to use a sample presentation more or less as written, there is still no substitute for good preparation. We should carefully read the article or chapter that we plan to feature and look for points that may stir interest. Then incorporate these into our presentation. Only by being familiar with the fine information in our publications can we offer them with enthusiasm.
 5. Why might we prepare a different presentation, and how can we do so?
5 Other Approaches: Are we limited to using only the approaches outlined in the sample presentations? No. If you are more comfortable with another approach or a different scripture, use it. Especially with the magazines, be alert to opportunities to feature secondary articles that may be of special interest in your territory. When field service presentations are to be demonstrated at the Service Meeting, arrangements may be made to demonstrate whatever approach works in the local territory. In this way all may be helped to present the good news effectively.

