Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting January 10
Song 223
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Use the suggestions on page 8 (if appropriate for your territory) to demonstrate how to present the January 15 Watchtower and the January 22 Awake! Other realistic presentations may be used. In one presentation demonstrate how to offer the magazines to a non-Witness relative.
15 min: “Nourished With the Words of the Faith.”a Read and discuss the cited scriptures as time permits.
20 min: “Try a Flexible Approach.” Audience discussion of page 6 of the insert. Demonstrate two examples of how this approach could be used with the literature offer for the month. In each demonstration, have the publisher read one scripture that addresses a concern mentioned by the householder.
Song 143 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 17
Song 34
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Youths​—Are You Making Spiritual Advancement? A talk by an elder based on the April 1, 2003, Watchtower, pages 8-10. Mention some realistic, attainable goals, and encourage youths to set specific spiritual goals for themselves.
20 min: “Conducting Progressive Bible Studies​—Part 5.”b Include a demonstration of an experienced teacher discussing with a newer publisher how to avoid the pitfalls mentioned in paragraphs 4-5.
Song 78 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 24
Song 163
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Briefly review the box “Video Programs on DVD.”
10 min: Question Box. A talk.
25 min: “How to Use Sample Presentations.”c Use the questions that are provided. Mention that pages 3-5 of this month’s insert contain presentations for publications that we will be featuring. Save the insert for use throughout the year. Following the consideration of the article, discuss how we can offer Draw Close to Jehovah during February. Demonstrate two presentations. They may be based on the sample presentations on page 3 or on other presentations that would be effective in the local territory.
Song 200 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 31
Song 157
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for January. Using the suggestions on page 8 (if appropriate for your territory), demonstrate how to present either the February 1 Watchtower or the February 8 Awake! Other realistic presentations may be used.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: Are You Examining the Scriptures Daily? Talk and audience discussion based on the foreword of Examining the Scriptures Daily​—2005. Discuss the need for all to take a few minutes each day to consider the scripture text and comments. Arrange in advance for one or two to comment on their routine for considering the text and how they have benefited. Conclude with a brief discussion of the yeartext for 2005.
Song 184 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 7
Song 97
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Help New Ones Learn to Love God and Neighbor. A talk based on the July 1, 2004, Watchtower, page 16, paragraphs 7-9. Highlight how each member of the congregation has a part in helping new ones become disciples of Christ.
20 min: Jehovah Does Not Hold Back Anything Good. (Ps. 84:11) Interview a few brothers and sisters who have remained faithful through trials. What difficulties have they faced? What has helped them to cope? What joys and blessings have they experienced?
Song 104 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

