Save
Suggested Field Service Presentations
Use the following suggestions to help you prepare presentations that feature the literature offer for the month.
Draw Close to Jehovah
“Many people who believe in God would like to feel closer to him. Did you know that God invites us to draw close to him? [Read James 4:8.] This publication is designed to help people use their own Bible to draw close to God.” Read paragraph 1 on page 16.
“Today injustice abounds. It is just as described here. [Read Ecclesiastes 8:9b.] Many wonder if God even cares. [Read the first two sentences of paragraph 4 on page 119.] This chapter explains why God has permitted injustice for a time.”
Is There a Creator Who Cares About You?
“Where can we find the best advice on how to solve our most perplexing problems? [Allow for response. Then read Matthew 7:28, 29.] That describes how people responded to Jesus’ Sermon on the Mount. Note what others have said. [Feature comments on page 152.] This chapter discusses the life and teachings of Jesus.”
“Have you ever wondered: ‘If there is a God, will he ever act to remove suffering and injustice in the world?’ [Allow for response. Then read Revelation 21:3, 4.] This book explains what God will do to eliminate suffering and remove its source.” Show chapter 10.
Keep on the Watch!
“Many people are concerned about the serious problems and shocking events that are common today. [Cite an example known locally.] Did you know that such things are part of a global sign that shows that God’s government is soon to take control of earth’s affairs? [Allow for response. Then read an appropriate scripture text, such as Matthew 24:3, 7, 8; Luke 21:7, 10, 11; or 2 Timothy 3:1-5.] This brochure discusses why it is especially urgent to be alert to the significance of these events now.”
“Many today are distressed by shocking events or by severe personal loss. Some wonder why God does not intervene to prevent such things. The Bible assures us that God will soon act to relieve mankind’s suffering. [Read Revelation 14:6, 7.] Notice what God’s judgment will mean for mankind. [Read 2 Peter 3:10, 13.] This brochure provides more information on this important subject.”
Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life
“If you were invited to live in beautiful surroundings like these, would you accept the invitation? [Show the picture on pages 4-5, and allow for response.] Notice what God’s Word says is the key to enjoying this kind of life forever. [Read John 17:3.] This book will help you gain the knowledge that leads to everlasting life.” Arrange to discuss the first five paragraphs of chapter 1 on the next visit.
Open to the picture on pages 188-9, and using the words in the caption, ask the householder: “Do you hope to live in Paradise, when the knowledge of God fills the earth? [Allow for response. Then read Isaiah 11:9.] This book will help you to learn what the Bible says about Paradise and how we can be a part of it.” Arrange to discuss paragraphs 11-16 of chapter 1 on the next visit.
Learn From the Great Teacher
“Do you think that the world would be a better place if people lived by this saying? [Read Matthew 7:12a. Then allow for response.] This book contains many lessons from the greatest teacher who ever lived.” Highlight the pictures and captions in chapter 17.
“Most parents today try to instill wholesome values in their children. Do you feel that this is important? [Allow for response. Then read Proverbs 22:6.] Notice that parents are encouraged to start training their children from an early age. This book is designed to help them to do that.” Highlight the pictures and captions in chapter 15 or 18.
“Often parents are amazed at the questions their children ask. Some of those questions can be hard to answer, isn’t that so? [Allow for response. Then read Ephesians 6:4.] This book can help parents answer questions for their children today.” Highlight a few of the pictures and captions in chapters 11 and 12 or 34 to 36.
Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation?
“All of us are concerned with the crime and violence in our area. Do you feel that anyone has a real solution to the problem? [Allow for response.] God has a solution.” Turn to page 196; read and comment on Proverbs 2:21, 22 in paragraph 19. Show the title of chapter 16, and offer the book.
Open to page 6, and say: “Many people think that our beautiful earth and life upon it resulted from an accident. What do you consider to be a reasonable explanation as to how all of this came about? [Allow for response.] Mountains of evidence confirm the Bible’s account of a Creator who is very powerful and who loves us very much. He is the true God, and his name is Jehovah.” Read Psalm 83:18, and briefly explain how it is his purpose to transform the entire earth into a paradise.
Mankind’s Search for God
“With so many different religions today, have you ever wondered how we can determine which one is approved by God?” After a response, open to page 377. Highlight point number 7, and ask if the householder agrees that the true religion should unite all races of mankind. Look up one of the cited scriptures, and as time permits, discuss some of the other points on the list. If there is genuine interest, offer the book. When leaving, you could ask, “How should true religion affect a person’s conduct?” Arrange for a return visit to answer the question.
If a person identifies himself as a member of a major religious group, you might say: “It is interesting to meet people of various religions. Mankind’s search for God has taken many different directions. [If appropriate, read Acts 17:26, 27.] Often, people follow the religion of their parents. [Read paragraph 12 on page 8.] Learning more about other religions is enlightening and educational. This book explains the origin, practices, and teachings of the major religions of the world.” Show an example of what the book contains about the person’s religion, as found on the following pages: Sikhism (100-101); Hinduism (116-17); Buddhism (141); Taoism (164-6); Confucianism (177); Shintoism (190-5); Judaism (220-1); and Islam (289).
Revelation​—Its Grand Climax At Hand!
“You may have heard about [mention a news item]. When lives are tragically cut short, many wonder what comfort can be offered to the families of the victims. What do you think?” Allow for response. Then open to page 299, and show the resurrection scene that is illustrated. Continue by saying: “Many are surprised to learn that both righteous and unrighteous people will be brought back to life in Paradise on earth. [Read Acts 24:15 as quoted in paragraph 9 on page 297, and then give the explanation found in paragraph 10.] This book discusses many other interesting details about God’s purpose for the future.”
The Bible​—God’s Word or Man’s?
“We live at a time when almost everyone is faced with serious problems. Many turn to all sorts of counselors for guidance. Some look to psychics for help. Where do you think we can find sound counsel that will really work for us? [Allow for response.] The Bible states an important fact that all of us need to appreciate. [Read 2 Timothy 3:16. Then open to page 187, and read paragraph 9.] This book will help you to appreciate how following what the Bible says always works out for the best.”
The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived
“During this season many people are thinking about Jesus. However, because so many bad things are happening all over the world, some may wonder if Jesus really cares about us. How do you feel about that?” Allow for a reply. Turn to chapter 24, and discuss briefly why Jesus came to earth. Then read John 15:13, emphasizing Jesus’ heartfelt love for others.
“When someone mentions Jesus Christ, many people think of him either as a baby or as a suffering man about to die. Their concept of Jesus involves only his birth and his death. The marvelous things he said and did during his lifetime often go unnoticed. What he accomplished affects every person who has ever lived on this earth. That’s why it’s vital that we learn as much as we can about the wonderful things he did in our behalf.” Read John 17:3. Turn to the first page of the introduction, and read the fourth paragraph.
What Does God Require of Us?
“Do you think that God meant for us to live surrounded by troubles such as those we are faced with today? [Allow for response. Then read Matthew 6:10.] Have you given thought to just what the Kingdom of God really is?” Turn to lesson 6, and read the questions that are posed at the beginning of the lesson. Begin a discussion of the lesson, or arrange to do so on the next visit.
“Despite the advances of modern society, sickness and death continue to cause much suffering and sorrow for mankind. Do you know what Jesus will do for the sick, the elderly, and even the dead?” Allow for response. If the person wants to know the answer, open to lesson 5, and read the questions for paragraphs 5-6. Discuss the paragraphs, or arrange to do so on the next visit.
Worship the Only True God
“Where do you think we can turn for help to deal with the pressures of life? [Allow for response. Then read Romans 15:4.] Notice that the inspired Scriptures provide us with instruction, comfort, and hope, which can strengthen us to endure difficulties. This book offers helpful suggestions on how we can get the most benefit from reading the Bible.” Highlight the four points outlined on page 30.
“Since the days when Jesus walked the earth, many people have been praying for God’s Kingdom to come. Have you ever wondered what the coming of that Kingdom will mean for mankind? [Allow for response. Then read Daniel 2:44.] This book explains what God’s Kingdom is, what it will accomplish, and how we can benefit from its righteous rule.” Feature the illustration on pages 92-3.

