R851 :page 1 

VOL. VII. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., MAY, 1886. 

NO. 9. 



page 1 

Zion's Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 
BUSINESS OFFICE: No. 40 Federal Street, Allegheny, Pa. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS: --Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 
we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat~yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it-- "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 



diligently~and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."-- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



page 1 

SEND names for samples of any you have reason to think might 
have a hearing ear for the truth. 



WRITE addresses very plainly, please, in every letter. When you 
change address say where from, as well as where to. You can thus 
save us much inconvenience. 



AN INDEX to Young's Concordance. We have obtained a lot of 
these cloth bound, which we can furnish at 25 cents each by mail. 
They are very useful to those who have learned to appreciate the 
Concordance. 



COLLECT YOUR PACKETS. 

Some few got the wrong idea and gave away the "Packets" instead 
of loaning them to be read, and then collecting them for further use. 
Read again carefully the suggestions of the "View" in TOWER of 
last February. They are more apt to be read when loaned than if 
given. 



R853 : page 1 

YOUR ASSISTANCE NEEDED. 

We desire to place the truth before our religious German 
neighbors. Our plan is to have sample copies of our German 
TOWER distributed at the door of every Protestant German church 
in cities and towns where our English readers reside. 

We want your assistance in this work; the more sacrifice it costs 
you, the greater it will prove your love of the truth to be, and the 
greater will be your blessing and joy in the service. We want those 
who will, to superintend the distribution, either doing it themselves 
or engaging and superintending others whom they may see fit to 
employ to assist them. 

Those glad to thus spend and be spent in the service of the truth, 
will please send us a Postal Card at once, stating the name and the 
probable number attending the morning service of each German 
church. Then wait until you receive the sample papers which will 
be supplied FREE, and which must be printed after we learn the 
quantity required. Let the work be thorough. 



R851 :page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

Among the deeply interesting events of the present life, to some at 
least, was the gathering at this place last month to remember our 
Redeemer, to celebrate our ransom, and look forward to our 
deliverance and that of the whole creation from the bondage of 
death, and to remember our covenant to share Christ's sufferings. 
The celebration of the Lord's Supper on its anniversary, the night of 
the 18th of April, was followed by three days of continued 
conference on precious things of God. 

Quite a number of brethren and sisters were present from various 
parts of this state, as well as some from adjoining states-Ohio, 
New York, West Virginia, Iowa, Tennessee, Missouri and Canada 
being represented. The meeting in the morning, Sunday, April 18, 
was of a social character, and after opening with praise and 
worship, was devoted mainly to short accounts from some of those 
laboring abroad in a more or less public way, relating how they 
each found the work to progress in their hands, and the methods 
they found most successful in their efforts to "preach the Gospel to 
the meek." (Isa. 61:1.) Among others who thus interested and 
profited us, were Brothers Bryan, Blundin, Brookman, Myers, 
Adamson, Mann, Chilcoate and Tavender. The meeting adjourned 
with prayer by Brother Clowes, after singing with the spirit and 
with the understanding also, that grand old hymn, 

Blest be the tie that binds 
Our hearts in Christian love. 

Lunch was served in a room adjoining our public hall by the sisters, 
who thus "washed the saints' feet" (1 Tim. 5:10. See last Tower, 
page 3). Thus opportunity for private intercourse was abundant and 
well improved; for these lunches were thus supplied between all the 
meetings, which were thus continuous. 

In the afternoon Bro. Zech's German meeting and our usual Bible 
Class were set aside and the time given to Bro. Adamson, who from 
a chart, such as that in "Food," gave a discourse on The Plan of the 
Ages, illustrating his method of treating this topic in his public 
discourses. All felt the sentiment of the hymn with which we closed 
the meeting. 

I love to tell the story, 
'Tis pleasant to repeat 
What seems each time I tell it, 
More wonderfully sweet. 

We adjourned this meeting to a Baptism service, at which the 
ordinance was explained, and five persons immersed-- four of them 
thus symbolizing their covenant of consecration unto death with 
Christ, and their faith that they will be in his likeness in the 



resurrection; and one symbolized, as in "John's baptism," his 
repentance of sin and reformation of life. 

The eight o'clock Sunday evening meeting was the solemn season 
of commemoration of the Lord's Supper, and a larger number were 
present than on any such previous occasion. It was good to be 
there! We had communion and fellowship one with another, and 
with our Father, and with our Head. We realized afresh that the 
blood of Jesus Christ our Lord cleanseth us from all sin; and that all 
our hopes of future life and glory, as well as our present blessings 
of communion with the King of kings, were secured to us by him 
whose ransom for all, took away the sin of the world, and justified 
us freely from all things. 

Gratefully we thought of and acknowledged this, as we handled and 
partook of the unleavened bread, and the wine, which emblemized 
the holy, harmless, undefiled one~"the man Christ Jesus who gave 
himself a ransom for all." In accepting in our hearts of his purity, 
and rights freely sacrificed for us, and appropriating to ourselves 
those rights and that purity, we were eating him~his flesh and 
blood. We thus ate in our hearts while we at the same time literally 
partook of the emblems, and thus symbolized the same, according 
to the Master's wish, "Do this in remembrance of me." It was a 
solemn and impressive hour, and we endeavored to make clear the 
fact that our Father's love and mercy were manifested and extended 
to us in and by this sacrifice for our sins which he provided, and not 
in any other way. We saw that the serving of Jesus' ministry and the 
example of obedience and self-denial which he displayed, though 
blessed to those of his day, and to others since, was not all by any 
means; for all this would have been of no practical avail to the 
condemned, groaning, dying creation, unless he had also given his 
life [being, existence] a ransom, [a price] for ours condemned and 
forfeited. The Son of Man came to serve "and to give his life 
[psuche, being] a ransom for many." --Mark 10:45, Matt. 20:28. 

Meditating upon his night of sorrow in the garden, intensified by 
his perfectness and purity, as well as by the shame of being put to 
death as a felon, and by the absence of appreciation and sympathy 

R852 : page 1 

from his beloved disciples—considering him who endured such 
opposition of sinners, lest we should be weary or faint as we should 
continue to follow his footsteps, we sang a hymn and went to our 
homes. 

Monday following, all day was spent in an examination of the 
prophetic time proofs, which show that we are living in the Day of 
the Lord's presence since 1874- that there, the times of restitution, 
the Millennial Age, began— that the forepart of that age is the "day 
of vengeance" or "day of trouble," a period of forty years from 
1874 to 1914, and that the grand blessings of restitution are really 
begun in this trouble, which is a blessing in disguise, breaking in 
pieces and removing the present governments and systems 



represented in Nebuchadnezzar's image (Dan. 2:31-33), as 
incidental to the establishment of the Kingdom of God for which 
we have long prayed, "Thy kingdom come, thy will be done on 
earth, as it is in heaven." The matter was illustrated by charts, and 
will be given in full in Millennial Day Dawn (not yet ready; but of 
which notice will be given in the TOWER). 

Tuesday. --In the morning we were interested and edified by a 
discourse from Brother Brookman on the Ransom. He dealt 
particularly with the Greek words which our word for is used to 
translate; showing conclusively, and by many Scriptural references, 
that "FOR" in many instances signifies instead of, and repeatedly 
teaches that our Lord Jesus became man's substitute in death, in 
order that there might be a resurrection of the dead. The afternoon 
session was also full of interest, a number of points relative to the 
Ransom being examined, including the statement made by Peter (2 
Peter 2:1) that false teachers would privily bring in damnable 
heresies, even denying that the Lord bought them. This was shown 
to be the correct rendering of the Greek text. 

Wednesday. —Both forenoon and afternoon sessions were spent in 
considering How are the dead raised up? and with what body do 
they come? As this subject is treated on pages 3 and onward, we 
need not refer to it here particularly. 

The subject of the evening meeting was Joel 2:28,29. We saw that 
God had hidden in this a blessed promise of future blessing to the 
world, which has been covered until the last few years, by the 
construction of the statement. We saw that the real intent and 
meaning of the passage was apparent when once its statement was 
transposed; thus, "Upon the servants and upon the handmaids in 
those days [the Christian age] will I pour out my spirit." "And it 
shall come to pass afterward [during the Millennium] that I will 
pour out my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters 
shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams and your young 
men shall see visions." 

Here we noted the great difference between the "narrow way" of the 
present time and the "highway" of the future age. The narrow way, 
has its stumbling stones, snares and devouring lions, preventing any 
but the "little flock," the "overcomers," from reaching the prize at 
its farther end, the "crown of life;" while the highway of the next 
age shall be made one of easy travel, in which "those unacquainted 
therewith shall not go astray. "~Isa. 35:8. Leeser. 

We saw that now, the Holy Spirit could be received only by the few 
servants and handmaids of Jehovah willingly following their Leader 
in the "narrow way," but that when this select company --the body 
of Christ, has been completed and glorified, then afterward God 
will pour out of the spirit of truth upon all flesh. We saw that, wide 
as 

R852 : page 2 



the difference will be between the abundant and favorable 
opportunity of the next age, as contrasted with the present time, 
when error abounds and Satan is permitted to blind many, and to 
oppose the truth, yet the rewards at the close of the two ways, are 
just as different as the ways themselves. Both paths lead to honor 
and life everlasting, but the "little flock," who overcome the severe 
besetments of the present time, are to be the bride and joint-heir of 
the King of glory, and to share his nature and to be with him and 
like him, while those under the less severe trials of the "highway" 
shall ultimately receive the Kingdom [of earth] prepared for them 
from the foundation of the world. (Matt. 25). All will be divinely 
blessed, but the one class—the Christ, head and body, will be blest 
as "new creatures" with the express image of the Father's person; 
the other class blessed by being restored to the earthly likeness lost 
by Adam-- the image of God in clay~"very good" and very grand.— 
Gen. 1:31. Psa. 8:5,6. 

We saw that the pouring of the Holy Spirit of truth upon all flesh 
would by no means insure the same result to them as to the little 
flock of the Gospel Age; and that the spirit of truth in the age to 
come will not point to the narrow way of sacrifice of human rights 
and privileges, but on the contrary to their opportunity of laying 
hold of those earthly rights and privileges more fully. The time of 
sacrifice will then be past, and the spirit will no longer witness that 
whosoever will live Godly, shall suffer persecution. When all 
things are favorable -Satan bound and truth triumphant -how 
could any suffer for the truth's sake as now? The spirit of truth will 
not then invite any to aspire to or strive for the divine nature, as the 
Bride of Christ; but on the contrary the spirit of truth then poured 
upon all flesh will witness to them that the marriage of the Lamb is 
accomplished, his wife having made herself ready under severe 
trial, during the Gospel Age. It will witness that the "elect" "little 
flock," chosen during the acceptable time, through sanctification of 
the spirit [mind] and obedience to the truth, has been enthroned in 
power. 

The spirit will then witness that these were thus highly honored for 
trusting and obeying God in the dark, along the rugged narrow way, 
and that though that high heavenly class so much better than angels 
(Heb. 1:4) is complete, other precious blessings are for "all flesh," 
and that whosoever will, may come to the water of life; and 
accepting of God's favor through Christ, and walking the easy 
highway of holiness, may be everlastingly blessed of God. 

In a word,— the holy spirit of truth which testifies to the "little 
flock" called with the "high calling" that except we forsake all and 
suffer with Christ, we cannot reign with him and partake of the 
divine nature, will then testify or witness to "all flesh" very 
differently, viz., that only sins must be put away, that the righteous 
shall flourish, and only the evil doer shall suffer and be finally cut 
off from life. 



Thus the word of his grace comforted us and strengthened us to 
endure hardness as good soldiers, for we heard the voice of our 
Captain and Forerunner on the narrow way saying to us~Fear not, I 
have overcome the world—my grace is sufficient for you— to him 
that overcometh I will grant to sit with me in my throne and I will 
give him to eat of the hidden manna. 

Our meeting closed with prayer and the sentiment expressed by the 

hymn- 
Truth how sacred is the treasure 
Teach us Lord its worth to know." 

Our meeting will long be remembered and we hope that at the 
anniversary next year, even more of the laborers will be able to 
arrange their affairs even at this busy season of the year, to thus 
turn aside to celebrate this solemn occasion, and thus build each 
other up. 

We have received many interesting letters from the scattered saints 
showing how, singly and in little groups they remembered and 
complied with the Lord's last request, Do this in remembrance of 
me. Below we give a few brief 

page 2 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

A Brother in New Jersey writes:— Dear Bro. Russell: You may be 
sure that in spirit your kind invitation to meet with the saints at your 
place on next Lord's day is fully accepted. I should be delighted to 
meet with you and the dear ones who may visit you on that 
occasion, but at this time it is not in our Lord's order that I should 
go. We have arranged to celebrate the Supper in unison with you in 
the evening at eight, and no doubt we shall all partake of the "one 
Spirit," while with solemn reverence, yet with gladness of heart, we 
eat the bread and drink the cup which symbolizes at once the living 
bread, which was given for "the life of the world," and the precious 
blood, by which only is the remission and washing away of sin. It 
cleanseth! tell it to the people, "the blood of Jesus Christ, His Son, 
cleanseth from all unrighteousness." How loving and kind is our 
heavenly Father; and in this surely, the Father and Son are one, for 
the Son loved us, and gave himself for us, that he might redeem us 
from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous 
of good works. Even in Jehovah's sight we are accepted in the 
Beloved. Thanks be to God for his unspeakable gift. 

The Lord seems to have opened the way for holding a meeting here 
on Sunday morning, and perhaps one evening in the week, in a 
public hall. 

I was led to send cards of invitation to a meeting of those who love 
our Lord's appearing, and are desirous of mutual edification in our 
most holy faith; and in response a goodly company gathered on 



Sunday morning. This was Sunday before last. I explained to them 
the reason why I invited them, that the object I had in view was the 
building up of the Church in the things of the Spirit. A number 
spoke, there was a general feeling of the need of such a meeting, 
and at a second one, held last Sunday morning, it was agreed to 
hold the meetings permanently. We have kept up our regular 

meetings at Bro. house Sunday afternoons, where we 

try to get down into the very depths of the deep things of God, and 
our adorable Lord honors us with his presence and blessing. In our 
public meetings we shall need grace and wisdom from on high to 
rightly divide the word of truth, that "meat in due season" may be 
given to all. Pray for us. Love to all the saints, and especially to 
yourself, dear Brother, and dear Sister Russell, beloved in the Lord. 
Yours in Him. 



A Brother in Michigan writes~"Grace be unto you, and peace 
from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ." Our desire to be 
present with you in Allegheny, at the General Assembly, on the day 
of remembrance, could not be gratified. Yet our uniting together 
here on that day, was most richly blessed by our common Master; 
and as we partook of the blessed symbols of his precious body and 
blood, we had a realizing sense of the presence of our Redeemer, all 
being filled with the hope of participating in that glorious triumph 
of "the General Assembly and Church of the First-born, whose 
names are written in heaven." Thirteen of us united in celebrating 
the anniversary of the slaying of our Passover Lamb, a few not yet 
free from denominational shackles partaking with us, and the 
occasion will, I trust, be remembered by all, as one of the most 
blessed in their Christian experience. I believe the truth is finding 
its way to the hearts of several who are closely reading the 
TOWER, which will, I trust, bring forth fruit in its season. 

The Church here send love and greeting to yourself and Sister 
Russell, also all of the faith and hope we enjoy in your city. 



Brother Adamson, who attended the anniversary meeting here, left 
here for Bethel, Pa., from which he writes as follows:-- Dear Bro. 
R.: I stayed overnight at Wilmington and walked here (6 miles) 
Sunday morning. In the afternoon I had conferences with brethren 
who are slowly but surely coming to full favor and knowledge. I 
preached to a full house at the hall, and have an appointment to- 
night about a mile distant. Great hopes of a good house and hearing 
ears, for the brethren here have loaned "Towers" and "Food" until a 
spirit of inquiry is manifest among the thinking class. Nothing 
could be kinder than the treatment of the brethren. How they love 
you and sister Russell. Grace and peace. In Christ. 



A sister in Palmyra, 111., writes: --My husband and I send Christian 
greeting to all them of like precious faith who, in one hope of their 
calling, shall gather with you around the table of our Lord to 
remember his love for us, and to glorify God for his great love 
wherewith he hath loved us. Would that I could shake hands with 
all the loved brethren and sisters, and join with you in singing-- 

"Praise God from whom all blessings flow." 

Hoping that some time I may meet some of you, and trusting that 
you will remember the lone ones, I am 

Your sister in Christ. 



A Brother in Florida writes:~Six of us remembered the Lord by 
celebrating the Supper, and we found it a precious time. The Lord 
was with us. The conflict is sharp but it will not last long. May we 
be able to endure unto the end. 



Another Brother in Michigan writes: ~I have been a reader of the 
TOWER for about four months through the instrumentality of your 
colporteur in this place, and it has been indeed meat in due season 
to me. I am rejoicing in the increasing light from the Gospel. The 
more I see of the harmony and glory of God's plan of salvation, the 
more anxious I am that others should be lead out of bondage into 
the liberty of Christ. I will do the best I can towards scattering the 
good seed judiciously. I expect soon to go to Mayville and Lapeer, 
and if you can spare me about fifty samples I will make good use of 
them. Seven or eight of us here intend to meet together and 
celebrate the death of Christ our passover. 



A Brother in Guildford, England, writes:~I shall remember the 
Lord's death this year, perhaps with one more, in fellowship with 
you all at the same time. We shall all be together when we drink the 
wine new with Christ in our Father's kingdom. 



A Brother in Dayton, Ohio, writes:-- On the evening of the 
anniversary of our Lord's last supper, I partook of the blessed 
emblems alone. God was with me and I had a refreshing time. I 
would like to have been with you brethren and sisters, but I could 
not make it suit. May God bless you and all the household of faith. 



A Sister in Elk Creek, Mo., writes:-- We did not receive the April 
TOWER until after the 18th but observed the remembrance. Your 
desire was that all study well the meaning of what they were about 
to do. This we did. How important the lesson and how much 
needed. 



We joyfully anticipate the hour when the sacrifice of the Christ 
being ended the glory shall follow. We long for the time when all 
God's creatures shall be perfected, each on his own plane, rank or 
order, under the King of Peace, who bought the right to restore, 
teach, rule and bless all with his own life. 



A sister in Lawrence, Kansas, writes: ~I celebrated the Passover 
Supper alone with the Lord, as I have done two years before. I 
meditated upon the suffering and death of Him, and our privilege of 
sharing the same. 



A Brother in Kentucky writes: —A few of us met on last Lord's day 
evening and celebrated the Lord's Supper. 



A brother in New Orleans writes:-- 1 rejoice to tell you that the 
Lord is giving me much encouragement by the way, and that when 
I most needed it. I wrote some days ago that I would try to reach the 
ministers with these truths. I have been busy doing so, and the Lord 
has been with me in the work. Yesterday from many pulpits 
sounded forth things out of harmony with old orthodox preaching. 
Last Saturday three Methodist ministers had a meeting discussing 
the contents of the book "Food." The same day a Presbyterian 
pastor up town sent me a note to come and see him. I went. He had 
heard of and seen a little of the book "Food," where I had left a 
"packet," at the house of one of his congregation. I found the truth 
had taken firm hold. We had a nice talk together. At his request I 
left a packet containing "Food," with back numbers. He is now at 
work to see if these things are so. I was at another pastor's house 
this evening and was much edified, finding one, in earnest, as well 
as trusting entirely the teaching of God's Word and dissatisfied with 
other standards. He told me that yesterday he preached from Isaiah. 
"I will send my messenger before thy face," &c, comparing the 
work of John the Baptist with a similar work now, preparing the 
way before him. I believe this man has a great deal of light. He is 
reading "Food." 

I have now only about four copies of "Food" left, which are out 
being read. Please send some more. 

Your brother in the service. 



A sister wrote from Ellisville, Mo.-- Through God's loving 
providence five of us were permitted to assemble on the 18th 
ultimo to commemorate the Lord's Supper. All present seemed to 
fully appreciate their privilege. We also remembered our covenant 
to sacrifice and be broken for others in the cause of truth, to 
patiently and cheerfully bear persecutions and reproaches for 



Christ's sake, knowing that if we suffer with him, we shall also 
share in his glory. 



Bristol, England, April 22, '86. 

MY DEAR BROTHER.-Just a line of greeting to tell you that nine 
of the readers of the TOWER, all believers in the "Ransom," met at 
my brother's house on Sunday the 18th and partook of the emblems 
of our Lord's death, and we all found it a season of much blessing. 
Those who have had ears to hear have received the good news with 
gladness of heart in the face of much opposition. In the name of the 
brethren and sisters here I send you our affectionate greeting. 



Joyfield, Mich., May 2, 1886. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL.--I am waiting anxiously for the May 
number of the TOWER so that I may get the account of the 
meetings. The Lord knows how I desired to be present at the 
celebration of our Lord's Supper and the other meetings, but 
circumstances prevented me from coming. On the night of the 18th 
I read carefully the account of the Lord's Supper and agony in the 
garden, and his crucifixion; and also Paul's account in 1 Cor. 11th 
chapter, and I had a feast all to myself. And it did me good, 
although I should very much like to have been present at Allegheny 
to have met with the dear brothers and sisters. I have no doubt that 
you had a glorious and blessed time. May God bless his church and 
fit her for her high position. I will do what I can to spread the 
blessed truth in this community. I desire to be a worker together 
with Christ. I am almost alone, and I long for Christian fellowship. 
God's word is very dear to me; it is my chief study, and I pray God 
to fill me with his truth that I may be able to declare it to others. 

With love. 

Yours in Christ. 



R853 : page 3 



IN HIS LIKENESS. 



If I in thy likeness, O Lord, may awake, 
And shine a pure image of thee, 
Then I shall be satisfied when I can break 
The fetters of flesh and be free. 

I know this stained tablet must first be washed 

white, 

To let thy bright features be drawn; 



I know I must suffer the darkness of night, 
To welcome the coming of dawn. 

And O! the blest morning already is here; 
The shadows of nature do fade; 
And soon in thy likeness I'll with thee appear, 
In glory and beauty arrayed. 

When on thine own image in me thou hast smiled, 
Within thy blest mansion, and when 
The arms of my Father encircle his child, 
O! I shall be satisfied then." 



page 3 

The following seven articles are connected. 

R853 : page 3 

BLESSED DYING--FROM HENCEFORTH. 

During our general meeting following the anniversary celebration, 
Brother Brookman received the following letter from one of the 
Toronto brethren; and we now answer it through the TOWER, 
thinking it may be of interest and profit to others of our readers. It 
was answered at our public meeting when received, and as we were 
then engaged somewhat in the examination of the Prophetic Time 
Proofs which show that we are in "the harvest" of this age, and that 
the chief reaper, the Lord Jesus, is now present, it came with special 
force, and we trust was seen very clearly by all present. The letter 
runs thus: 

PASTOR BROOKMAN: 

Dear Sir and Brother.~Now that you are on a visit to Brother 
Russell, I take this opportunity of sending you the enclosed extracts 
from an article by Mrs. R. in last TOWER, entitled, "We Shall Not 
All Sleep." Already I know the TOWER'S views concerning the 
Lord's presence, and it appears that now they have accepted the 
"orthodox" view of going to heaven when you die~at least this 
article seems to so teach. 

Can one instance be given of the body of any one now dying in the 
Lord, disappearing at death? After the resurrection of our Lord his 
body was not found in the tomb. Should we not therefore, look for 
the same proofs to-day of a resurrection? Then too, according to 
this view, the living saints are left behind instead of being caught 
away together. 

The extracts I refer to are as follows: 



"WE SHALL NOT ALL SLEEP/' 

"Those [saints] who die in this day of the Lord's presence do not 
sleep, but the instant that the human body sinks into death, the new 
spiritual body is received, and according to Paul's words, not an 
instant of unconsciousness intervenes. Because the spiritual body is 
invisible to humanity, none can know of the change except by faith 
in the promise of God. The work of the new Kingdom is now in 
progress, and the body of Christ whether in the flesh or in the spirit 
(resurrected) are actively engaged as co-workers together with our 
Lord and head. What a blessed privilege to realize that such is the 
case. 

Let us appreciate our privilege of service, considering that we are 
workers together with the Lord and the risen saints, present with us, 
though invisible except to the eye of faith." 

Trusting your mission will be blessed, I am, 

Yours in Christ, G. H. H. 

The Brother errs in supposing this to be a new departure; and if he 
will examine some back numbers of the Tower, he will see that we 
have so taught for several years-since 1878, at which time we 
believe it became true as expressed in Revelation 14: 13. --"Blessed 
are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth; yea saith the 
spirit that they may rest from their labors [from the toil and 
weariness] and their works follow with them. "--without interruption 
or hindrance. See particularly the articles "Who can hear it?" in the 
Tower of October, 1881, and "Ye are Gods" in December, 1881, 
and "The Blessed Dying" in the same issue. 

The fact that so called "orthodoxy" teaches something resembling 
what the Scriptures teach, should not be considered an argument 
against the view referred to. On the contrary, it is more reasonable 
to suppose that the more pleasing part of what the early church 
believed on this subject, had been held to, to the neglect and 
ignoring of the less palatable truths. For instance, the hope of each 
generation of the church in early times, was, that they would be of 
those mentioned by Paul (1 Cor. 15:51,52), of those who would be 
alive when the Lord the life-giver would return; and hence they 
hoped that they might not be obliged to sleep in death. 

That the coming of the Lord, and the resurrection of the saints, and 
the bestowment of the crown of life at that time, were continually 
before their mind, is manifest from the various epistles of the 
Apostles which direct the faith and hope of all thither. 

Of all the religions of the world, Christianity and Judaism are the 
only ones which teach that a man is really dead when he expires, 
and that a resurrection is the only hope of a future life. But when 
the church began to covet influence and power, when Papacy was 
"set up" in power, and the chief aim came to be, to make 
Christianity popular with the heathen, when thousands of heathen 
claimed to be converted, Papacy to bring these pagans into her 



bosom and to gain the support and strength of their influence, 
paganized Christianity, introducing gaudy ceremonies, incense 
burning, and the images of the apostles and saints to take the place 
in their hearts and superstitions of their idols and heathen customs. 
Can we wonder that then the cold and rather repulsive doctrine of 
the sleep of the dead, came to be generally ignored? and that the 
other thought should be made prominent and, even distorted to 
make it more palatable, until "We which are alive and remain shall 
not sleep, but shall be changed in a moment," came to be applied to 
all Christians without reference to the Lord's coming? During the 
darkness of the ages following that degrading of the doctrines of 
Christianity, and that great influx of tares among the wheat, the 
Bible was almost abandoned and its teachings on the subject were 
lost sight of. 

One thing sure, is that the same Apostle who teaches that the dead 
all sleep until the Life-giver comes, and that they will then be 
awakened, teaches also that those living in that time will not sleep. 

To some already instructed on this subject of the change of the 
living in the Day of the Lord's presence, Paul wrote, "Yourselves 
know perfectly that the DAY OF THE LORD so cometh as a thief 
in the night.". .."Ye brethren are not in darkness that that DAY 
should overtake you as a thief. "..."For God hath not appointed us to 
wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ." (1 Thess. 
5:2,4,9; see also chap. 2:19,20 and 3:13 and 4:17.) From this the 
Thessalonian brethren seem to have drawn a wrong conclusion, 
supposing the Apostle to intimate that the day of the Lord would 
surely come in their day. And certain teachers of that day, led by 
their own imaginations, began to proclaim that the Day of the Lord 
had commenced; that the Lord was then present, and that the dead 
had been resurrected. (See 2 Tim. 2:17,18.) And the Thessalonian 
church knowing that Paul's teachings were not out of harmony with 
this proclamation, were much exercised and troubled to know 
whether it was true that the Day of the Lord had come. 

To meet their difficulty, Paul wrote them the second epistle in 
which the main thought is the correcting of this error. And 
inasmuch as we are now making very similar claims to those which 
the Apostle guarded them against, it is well that we note carefully 
his words and see whether they disprove our teachings on the 
subject. If they do, we must abandon the view, no matter how 
pleasing it may seem; but if it is in harmony, it will be an additional 
confirmation of our position. 

The Apostle wrote: (2 Thes. 2.) "But we entreat you brethren, 
concerning the coming [presence-Greek parousia] of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, and our assembling to him, that you be not quickly 
agitated, in mind, nor alarmed; neither by spirit, nor by word, nor 
by letter, as from us-- as though the Day of the Lord was present. 
Let no man delude you by any means." Had the Apostle stopped 
here, it would not only have proved our teachings as erroneous as 
those he was refuting, but it would have done more; it would have 



proved his own teachings in the first epistle to the Thessalonians, as 
well as those to the Corinthians, to be erroneous also. It would be 
saying, The day of the Lord never will be present; whereas he had 
taught them plainly that "The day of the Lord so cometh [and that 
too unawares, secretly] as a thief in the night. "--1 Thes. 5:2. 

But the Apostle is not controverting his previous teachings that 
such a day of the Lord's presence would come, and secretly; he was 
merely showing that it had not yet come; for he continues— "Let no 
man delude you by any means, BECAUSE the apostasy must come 
first, and must be revealed, that MAN OF SIN, that SON OF 
DESTRUCTION, the OPPONENT; who indeed lifts himself above 
everything called a god or that is reverenced-so as to seat himself 
in the TEMPLE of God exhibiting himself that he is a god. Do you 
not remember that while I was with you I said these things to you?" 
And now you know, what withholdeth [prevents, hinders, comes 
between] that he [Christ Jesus] should be revealed in his own 
season. [Now you know why I so positively declare that we are not 
yet in the Day of the Lord.] 

Paul knew of the Man of Sin, from the prophecies of Daniel, as 
well no doubt as from visions and revelations given him specially; 
(Dan. 7:24,25. 2 Cor. 12:1-7), and hence said with assurance that 
the Day of the Lord had not yet come. But it must strike many as 
peculiar that he used this argument alone. As they suppose it, he 
might have said, O foolish Thessalonians do you not know that 
when the Lord comes you will see him in the sky in great splendor? 
Do you not know that you would see the tomb- stones shake and 
fall, and the graves opening, and the risen saints about you, if the 
Lord, and the Day of the Lord had come? If this would be a true 
argument, it certainly would have been one of the most convincing 
to the troubled Thessalonians. And the fact that Paul used none of 
those arguments is strong evidence that they are not true. On the 
contrary the fact that they had received the doctrine of the Lord's 
presence, etc., proves that the Apostle's previous teaching had in no 
way led them to suppose that the Lord would be visible in the sky 
in his day, but that it would be "as a thief in the night," stealthily 
and quietly; and that to discern it would require them to watch and 
not be overcharged and asleep with the world. And even in 
controverting this error, Paul offers no objection to the theory that 
the Day of the Lord had commenced, except that above noticed- 
that another event, the development and revealing of Anti-Christ 
must come FIRST. 

It is then, proper to say that Paul's statement here, favors OUR 
VIEW entirely, if it can be clearly seen that the apostasy he 
mentions did since take place, and that the "Man of Sin," or 
mystery of iniquity, has been revealed. This we have time and again 
shown to be the case, and pointed to the unquestionable fulfilment 
in Papacy of every item mentioned by Daniel and Paul— hence so 
far as Paul knew, or as we know, nothing now hinders. 



Since then, nothing now prevents, the question is, What proofs are 
there to show that we are now in the day of the Lord's presence? 
We cannot here give the prophetic proofs, but hope to soon lay 
before you these Scriptural demonstrations that we are in the day of 
the Lord since 1874, and that his taking of his great power as King 
to judge and break in pieces present unrighteous systems, as well as 
to exalt to honor and glory the faithful members of his "body" —the 
true church-dates from 1878; at which time we understand that the 
sleeping members of his body were due to awake to immortality. 
And since that date those of this class alive, need not sleep even a 
moment; but in the instant of dying are changed to spiritual beings - 
-swallowed up of life. 

Even to those who had strong hopes of resurrection to spiritual 
being, the Adamic death or sleep, was not a desirable thing, hence 
the Apostle says that he desired not to be unclothed, but rather to be 
clothed upon with the heavenly spiritual house or body. But only to 
those alive in this day of the Lord, has it been possible to have this 
instant transfer of existence or being, from the earthly to the 
heavenly body, without sleep-without being unclothed for a 
moment. 

We do not here cite you proof from the daily history of our times, 
that the judgment and overthrow of all imperfect civil and religious 
systems is in progress, as a proof that we are in the Day of the 
Lord's presence and power, as we have noticed this before. 



R853 : page 3 

HIS FLESH SAW NOT CORRUPTION. 

We now come directly to the consideration of the question asked 
above, viz.: Has the body of any saint dying now [for we claim this 
only of the body of Christ-"in the Lord"] disappeared at death, as 
our Lord's did? No, we answer; nor have we any reason so to 
expect. 

In the case of our Lord's resurrection, we must remember that the 
circumstances were peculiar and different from those of our 
resurrection. First, he wanted his disciples to realize that he was no 
longer dead; secondly, that he was changed, and no longer the 
human Jesus, but a spirit being; thirdly, that he had paid our ransom 
price and had not taken it back, yet, was alive and able to bestow 
upon all the blessings purchased with His own blood. Added to this 
comprehensive 

R853 : page 4 

object of proving his resurrection, was the difficulty that those to 
whom he must prove all this, were still only natural men, not yet 
begotten of the spirit; for "the Holy Spirit was not yet given 
because that Jesus was not yet glorified" (John 7:39), and "The 



natural man receiveth not the things of the spirit of God, neither can 
he know them, because they are spiritually discerned." Hence in 
giving natural men a first lesson relating to spiritual things, it was 
needful to make the lesson so plain that the least of them might be 
fully convinced. 

Accordingly it was necessary, not only that Jesus should show 
himself alive by many infallible proofs after his resurrection (Acts 
1:3), but that this should be shown in such a way as to convince 
them that he had been "changed," and was of a higher nature than 
before; and it was also needful to remove his body from Joseph's 
tomb, as its presence there, would to them as natural men, have 
been a serious obstacle to implicit faith. It was for this reason that 
the body of Jesus was removed from the tomb, and not because the 
atoms of matter contained in it were needed or used in the 
organization of his spirit body. And the fact that the body would 
vanish, be dissipated or dissolved without corrupting or decaying, 
was mentioned by the prophet~"His flesh saw not corruption." 

A very common mistake in reference to the resurrection as 
expressed in the words of the various creeds is, "I believe in the 
resurrection of the body." This is a serious mistake; the Scriptures 
never teach the resurrection of the body, but of the individual~the 
being. A body is necessary to existence or being, but the body and 
atoms once used in that capacity are not essential. Science tells us 
on seemingly good authority that the matter composing our bodies 
is constantly changing, and that a complete change of every part is 
effected in seven years. Consequently a man of seventy years 
would have ten bodies if all the atoms which ever composed his 
flesh were restored. 

But not so, one atom is no better than another; and so even in the 
case of the world who will be restored to existence as human flesh- 
beings, we must not expect that necessarily the same atoms will be 
used again in restoring them to being. Consequently though God 
could and might make some outward demonstration, such as 
opening of tombs for the purpose of showing to the world his 
power, yet we must not conclude that such a demonstration is 
necessary, nor that the old and scattered and transformed dust, is 
needful to God as a basis on which to work in restoring or 
resurrecting mankind. It requires equally creative power to resurrect 
or recreate a man from one heap of dust as from another. 

And if the same dust is not needful in the case of restoring 
humanity, how much less needful for the "new creatures," the 
church, no longer human, no longer flesh, but spirit~a new nature, 
not of the dust, not of the earth earthly, but heavenly. And 
consequently we need neither expect an opening of tombs for those 
that sleep, nor a transforming of present fleshly bodies for the living 
in their "change." 

Consequently the non-disappearance of bodies is not a valid 
objection, if the Scriptures prove and events corroborate the fact 



that we are now in the day of the Lord, and in consequence that 
those members of the body of Christ who slept are now due to be 
awakened, and that those members yet alive should not sleep, but 
be blessed in the instant of dying by being "changed." Rather, it is 
in harmony, as we shall show, with Paul's statements regarding this 
subject, as stated below. 



R853 : page 4 

'THAT BODY WHICH SHALL BE." 

"Thou sowest not that body which shall be, but bare grain, it may 
chance of wheat or some other grain: but God giveth it a body as it 
hath pleased him; and to every seed his own [kind of] body." 1 Cor. 

15:37,38. 

The Apostle uses this illustration from nature to teach the church 
regarding-- what? Not regarding the living, but those dead. He is 
answering the question (verse 35), "How are the dead raised up, and 
with what [kind of] body do they come" [forth] in the resurrection. 
We must keep this in memory to get the force of the Apostle's 
argument. 

He shows that there are varieties of earthly nature-men, fish, fowl, 
beasts, etc., and also variety in the heavens, sun, moon and stars; 
and he adds these two illustrations of variety and differences, to his 
first illustration of grain. As the dying and living again of the grain 
best illustrated THE FACT of the dead coming forth to life, so the 
varieties and differences of fish, fowl, etc., and of sun, moon and 
stars illustrate the DIFFERENCES which should be expected in the 
resurrection. Some (the body or bride of Christ) will be like him 
and will come forth spirit beings—celestial, while the mass of 
mankind will come forth human beings— terrestrial. There will be 
glory to both classes, though differing as the glory and beauty of 
fish, fowl, etc., differ from the glory of sun and stars in KIND. 

And that there will be grades or degrees of glory on each plane, is 
also shown, even as the moon is beautiful but less majestic than the 
sun, so some of those who come forth spiritual will, though 
glorious and perfect, be less grand than others; and on the earthly 
plane there will be variety in perfection and glory also. 

After stating thus the general principles, the Apostle proceeds to 
explain particularly "THE" chief resurrection, in which as 
prospective members of the body of Christ, the Corinthian Church 
and all saints would have special interest. And keeping in mind the 
original question, "How are the DEAD raised up and with what 
body do they come" forth, he applies his answer now to the class 
DEAD in Christ-dead "members" of Christ's body, and says:- 

"So also is THE [chief] resurrection OF THE DEAD." [Remember 
that he is not talking about the living as some have erroneously 



supposed, but of those who were already dead.] "It is sown in 
corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it is sown in dishonor, it is 
raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power; it is 
sown a natural [animal] body, it is raised a spiritual body."-- Verses 
42-44. 

What is sown thus and raised thus? The being~the individuality 
sown in death thus, is raised from it thus. The Apostle is holding to 
his original illustration. The germ of life in the grain of wheat 
which will produce the new stalk, is not the entire grain planted, for 
all decays and dies except this germ. So with the being entering 
death, or sown in death. Being cannot be considered apart from a 
body, and hence being is reckoned as still associated with the body 
which is sown in the corruption of death. It is not the corrupted 
body but the being, which God will raise up in a new appropriate 
body, even as in the grain, it is not the old grain but the germ or 
vitality from it which comes forth in a new grain. 

But says some one a grain of wheat has a germ which lives while 
the grain decomposes, which germ may be seen in some seeds; but 
man has no such germ. No, we answer; the germ of life in man and 
in grain differs, and so does also the process of resurrection; man 
does not sprout forth as a shoot of grain, nor does the Apostle use 
the illustration for such purpose. Nevertheless man has a germ of 
being, though unlike the grain, it is not in himself, but in another. 
The germ of life through which man shall be restored to being 
[whether of earthly or heavenly nature] is "hid with Christ in God." 
(Col. 3:3.) It is in God, in the sense that it is decreed in God's plan 
and possible through God's power. It is with Christ in the sense that 
God's plan is being accomplished through Christ who ransomed and 
justifies all. It is thus that "all live unto him." (Luke 20:38.) 

God seeing the end from the beginning thus considers things and 
men that are not, as though they were. (Rom. 4:17.) Thus death is 
really extinction, but because of God's plan to ransom and restore 
all from it through Christ Jesus, he gave his "friends" in all ages to 
know that Adamic death is merely a sleep, in view of the 
resurrection waking he had abundantly provided for in his plan; 
which before the foundation of the world foresaw and provided the 
Lamb slain, to take away the sins of the world by paying the 
penalty of Adamic sin for all. 



R853 : page 4 

SOUL, LIFE, BEING. 

The Greek word psuche is translated soul in some places, and 
sometimes life in the various translations. For instance, it is 
translated life in John 12:25, "He that loveth his life shall lose it" 
and it is translated soul in Acts 2:27 "Thou wilt not leave my soul 
in hell," [hades— the state of death, or the grave]. 



This word psuche has rather puzzled scholars for a definition, and 
the learned translators of the common revision of the New 
Testament, have translated it four different ways, viz.: heart, mind, 
life, soul; the last two generally. Prof. Young author of Young's 
Concordance, defines psuche and the corresponding Hebrew word 
nephesh to mean "animal soul," thus limiting the word to earthly 
existence; but we cannot agree to this definition, nor to any 
definition which would limit these words to earthly existence 
exclusively, for the word is applied to God who is not an animal or 
earthly being, but a spirit being. Hence in defining these words we 
have sought such a definition as could be applied to these words in 
every instance of their use in the Bible, and that definition we 
conceive to be being, or existence, without regard to whether 
heavenly or earthly, animal or spiritual being is meant. 

Being, or existence, is not life though there could be no existence 
without life; neither is it body or organism, though there can be no 
existence without a body. Heat is an illustration of this principle; 
coal is not heat, nor is oxygen heat; but when coal and oxygen are 
properly and favorably united heat is produced; when they are 
separated heat ceases. So it is with being; when life principle and 
organism are properly favorably united, being or existence is 
produced; when they are separated existence or being ceases. 

Those who recognize being, as the correct definition of psuche will 
see that the existence, the being, terminated by Adamic death, may 
be restored or resurrected either as it was, or in connection with any 
form or organism God may choose. In resurrecting it God giveth it 
a body as it hath pleased him --to every kind of seed his own 
appropriate body. 

The original seed was human, "of the earth earthy," and "very 
good," an image of God in clay. But during the Christian Age under 
the "high calling," the "heavenly calling" to "become partakers of 
the divine nature," a little flock has already changed nature and 
become "new creatures "--new beings. In the resurrection, therefore, 
God will give to these two classes bodies according to their nature. 
The human seed will be restored to perfect manhood; and the new 
seed, the "new beings," will be raised in appropriate bodies~"as it 
hath pleased him" to give to each seed his own appropriate form or 
organism. It doth appear to a great degree what form, etc., the 
earthly race will have, though it is difficult to appreciate the 
grandeur of the perfect man Adam now. As was the earthy head, so 
will they be also that are earthy, when fully resurrected. 

On the contrary, the change for the others, we cannot so fully grasp; 
for "It doth not yet appear what we shall be, but... we shall be like 
him"-- Christ Jesus, the head of the new creation. As the heavenly 
one, such shall they also be that are of the heavenly seed, or new 
nature. We have borne the earthly image, but by reason of "change" 
shall bear the heavenly image in our resurrection. See 1 Cor. 
15:38,48,49. 



R853 : page 4 

PSUCHE LAID DOWN BY JESUS. 

This same thought of continuance of being, or individuality, 
through death and change of nature expressed above is illustrated in 
the person of our Lord Jesus. He said:- 

"I lay down my life [psuche] that I might take [literally, receive] it 
again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have 
power [privilege, authority] to lay it down, and I have power 
[privilege] to take [receive] it again. This commandment [word, 
precept] have I received of my Father." --John 10:17,18. 

Here Jesus declares that he laid down his "psuche," or being, for the 
sheep, and received it back again in his resurrection. When he laid 
down his being, "poured out his soul [being] unto death," (Isa. 
53:12) made "his soul [being] an offering for sin" (Isa. 53:10), it 
was a human soul, or human being; he having changed from a spirit 
being to a human being, for the purpose of thus laying down his 
being (psuche) in death for our sins, as our ransom price.* But 
when, after his being had been fully laid down in death for three 
days, he was made alive from the dead, being or existence returned, 
it was no longer human being; he was made a life-giving spirit ~a 
being psuche of a higher order, of the divine nature. 



R853 : page 5 

To use the words nephesh and psuche otherwise, to suppose that 
they merely refer to present earthly existence, would be not only to 
prove that God is an earthly or animal being, but that Jesus, after 
his resurrection, was of the earth earthy, whereas the statement is 
clear that "God is a spirit," and that the "second Adam was made a 
quickening spirit." 

The Greek word for life is not psuche, but zoe; and so it is 
uniformly translated throughout the New Testament; and it was a 
serious mistake on the part of the translators of the Bible to ever 
render psuche life, as in the text above. In consequence of the 
translation, some have supposed that our Lord Jesus took back the 
price he paid as our ransom. This could never be; for if the price 
paid were taken back, we are not redeemed, and have no ground for 
hope of coming blessings. 

But when the real significance of psuche is noticed, how clear it all 
becomes. The man Christ Jesus laid down his psuche—being, 
existence, as a ransom for ours—for all. That existence he can never 
take again-he can never again be a human being. He surrendered 
all those earthly and human rights as a ransom for mankind, and 
thereby secures to mankind all those blessings and rights lost by 
their first representative's failure. Then being, existence, [psuche] 



was bestowed upon Jesus as a gift of God's favor, a reward of 
obedience; and while it could not be the same order of being, it 
could be a higher one. And so it was; and thus it is written, 
"Wherefore [as a reward, because of obedience even unto death- 
verse 8.] God hath highly exalted him, and given him a name which 
is above every name," --next to the Father; of the divine nature; 
"that all men should honor the Son even as they honor the Father 
also."- Phil. 2:9,10. 

The Lord applies this principle to us, as well as to himself. Of those 
who covenant to be dead with him that they may also live with him 
and share his divine nature and glory, he declares, "He that loveth 
[supremely] his life [psuche -being] in this world shall keep it unto 
life [zoe] eternal."— John 12:25,26. 

Those who would be the followers of, and sharers with, Jesus, must 
during this world willingly lay down existence, in his service. Thus 
only can these preserve their [psuche] existence unto eternal [zoe] 
life. But with them as with him, it will not be the same kind of 
existence, for whereas they lay down being or existence as human 
beings, they, like their head, shall receive it [psuche, existence] 
again as new creatures; "partakers of the divine nature." It is of 
these that Paul said, "It [the being] is sown a natural body, in 
weakness and corruption and dishonor; it is raised a spiritual body 
in power, glory, and incorruption. 1 Cor. 15:42-44. 

If you could change the nature of a grain of wheat to that of barley, 
it would come up barley. So these having become (through 
obedience to the special high calling of this Gospel Age) changed 
from the human to the divine nature (2 Pet. 1:4) will, in the 
resurrection, come forth like Jesus, "the express image of the 
Father's person" --psuche of the divine form and nature. 



*When our Lord was changed from spirit being to human being, 
when he was "made flesh," that change was truly a laying aside of 
glory, power, etc., but it was not at all a laying aside of being or 
existence; for his existence or being did not cease for a moment, but 
merely changed in kind. Instead of a spirit being, he became human 
being -"flesh." But at Calvary, being or existence was laid down 
completely; he died, or ceased to exist, —gave his being, his 
existence, his psuche "a ransom."— Mark 10:45. 



R680 : page 4 

"How many people there are who would like to be good without 
taking trouble about it!" 



R853 : page 5 



"CAUGHT UP TOGETHER." 

In view of the Apostle's statement of the order of events in the day 
of the Lord's presence; namely that "The dead in Christ shall rise 
first, then we which are alive and remain shall be caught away 
together with them in clouds to a meeting of the Lord in the air," it 
may be asked, Does not the view presented above, namely, that 
since 1878 the dead in Christ have been raised spiritual beings, and 
that since then those who are alive are "changed," each at the 
moment of his death-does not this view conflict with the apostle's 
statement? 

We answer no; though at first glance it may appear to do so. We 
should remember that the apostles were not only expounders of the 
prophetic utterances of holy men of old whom God moved upon by 
his Spirit to declare things to come in figures and dark sayings, but 
they were themselves prophets also, and in foretelling events not 
then due, they also used figures, symbols, and dark sayings, to be 
understood by the Church when they would become meat in due 
season. This was true also of Jesus' teaching. He not only 
expounded the prophets, but he opened his mouth in parables, 
prophecies and dark sayings. --Matt. 13:34,35; Psa. 78:2; Matt. 24. 

Among the prophecies by the apostles clothed in figurative or 
symbolic language, is that of James 5 relating to the present time, 
verses 2 and 3 are highly figurative. Peter's prophecy covering the 
same period is even more strikingly figurative. (2 Pet. 3:7,10,13.) 
John's prophecy, the book of Revelations, is full of symbols. And in 
considering the apostle Paul's writings, we should expect that 
prophetic references to this notable "Day of the Lord" would be 
more or less symbolic also. Peter assures us that it is so; and that 
Paul's writings are liable to be misunderstood by some.— See 2 Pet. 
3:16. 

As a matter of fact in this very portion of Paul's prophecy touching 
the events of the Day of the Lord (1 Thes. 4:16,17), we find the 
same symbols used by the others. Paul introduces these symbols but 
does not interpret them, leaving that for the Spirit of truth to do for 
those of the Church who may be watching and searching at the due 
time. 

Paul's "shout" and "trumpet" of verse 16 corresponds in every way 
with those used by John (Rev. 11:15), and the same even in 
Daniel's prophecy (12:1) is called the standing up of the arch-angel 
Michael; for the same results are described as following, viz., the 
angry nations and time of trouble which Peter and Zephaniah and 
Paul call the melting of the earth [the social fabric] and flaming 
fire.-Compare 2 Pet. 3:10; Psa. 97:5; Zeph. 3:8; Rev. 11:17; and 2 
Thes. 1:8. 

Paul's "clouds" (verse 17) in which the living are to be caught 
away, coincide exactly with the "clouds and thick darkness" of 
trouble, by which all the prophets so often represent the troubles of 
this Day of the Lord. And the "air" into which they are caught, and 



in which they are to ever be with the Lord, we apprehend to be no 
less a symbol than the others. A symbol of what?~Of power and 
dominion. And if we are to be "changed" and are to enter into and 
share this dominion, how appropriate to say in symbol that we will 
be caught into the "air" power, and be forever in it, with the Lord. 

Thus the same word is used elsewhere by the same apostle. In Eph. 
2:2, he speaks of the "power of the air," and declares that Satan now 
holds that "power" which the "air" symbolizes. And when we 
remember that "sea" in symbol represents the lawless and unruly 
classes of men, that "earth" represents organized society, and that 
"mountains" represent earthly governments, what is more 
reasonable than that the "air" or "heavens" should be used to 
symbolize the invisible yet all-pervading power and influence of 
spirit beings. 

And if "air" is thus used to represent the present evil spiritual 
control, how appropriate that the same symbol should be used in 
describing the new spiritual empire of the Prince of light who 
becomes the new Prince of the air, and deposes and binds the 
present usurper. 

As to the word "caught away in clouds together"; we should 
remember that all prophecies looking down to this little period 
called the "Day of the Lord" and the "Day of Trouble," state the 
many great events of this time as though they would all take place 
together; and so they do, for nothing intervenes to break the chain 
of events; link follows link, and they go all together, clouds of 
trouble follow one another closely, the one fading away where the 
next is beginning. Like the cars in a train, they all go together, and 
yet one is first and another is last. So likewise the living will be 
caught away in these clouds to the new power of the air, together- 
just as when a school is dismissed the pupils leave it together, yet 
they do not all pass through the doorway at once. 

Paul explaining the same matter to the church at Corinth (1 Cor. 
15:51,52), calls it a mystery-a matter not yet made fully plain and 
clear of which he could only give them a glimpse. And he declares 
of the living, "We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed in 
a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, AT [Greek en, during, or in] 
the last trump." Here the symbolic trumpet is again introduced, 
which covers the period of forty years called The Day of the Lord; 
and it is during, or in this time, that the dead saints shall be raised 
and the living members "changed." For the trumpet shall sound and 
the dead shall be raised incorruptible and we shall be changed. 
While, therefore, all must be changed, and the change of each will 
be "in a moment," all will not be raised and changed in the same 
moment-the dead in Christ shall rise first; then we-continuously, 
without interruption or anything to prevent, together will be caught 
with them into the power of the air. 



R853 : page 5 



OTHER SIMULTANEOUS EVENTS. 

While during the sounding of the Great or Seventh Trumpet, the 
Day of the Lord, the gathering and rewarding of his faithful 
followers will be accomplished, other great events will occur 
simultaneously. The earth is to melt [society is to disintegrate], the 
sea and waves are to roar [the lawless element will become 
furious], and mountains will be removed and carried into the midst 
of the sea— [governments will be swallowed up by the lawless 
element] --the heavens [present ruling powers] are to pass away 
with great commotion. These all shall pass away, that the "new 
heavens," "air," or ruling powers of which Christ is the Prince, may 
gradually assume control and reorganize society on better 
principles. All these things will be in progress simultaneously, 
during the seventh trump~the day of vengeance~the day of binding 
the strong man and spoiling and overturning his arrangements in 
order to establish a better. -Matt. 12:29. 

Or take another view of the same period given by other prophets: 
the gathering of the dead and living members of the body of Christ 
will proceed during the time when the rich men will weep and howl 
for the miseries upon them (Jas. 5:1-3; Zeph. 1:18); during the time 
when the nations are angry and the wrath comes upon them (Rev. 
11:18, and Dan. 12:1); during the time that the fiery stream of 
trouble issues forth, and the Son of man is invested with authority 
and dominion (Dan. 7:10); during the time that the stone is smiting 
the feet of the image—present earthly governments (Dan. 2:34); 
during the time that earthly empires become as chaff and are swept 
away completely (verse 35); during the time mentioned by the 
Revelator (19:11-21), in which the kings of the earth and their 
armies will be making war with the Lamb and his army 
unconsciously—not recognizing him. 

When these various events of "that day" are put together, it must be 
evident to the most slow of heart to believe all that the prophets 
have written, that during that entire period, not only the Lord will 
be invisible to men, but that the resurrection of his saints, and the 
change of those living, will make no outward demonstration. Surely 
if the world saw Jesus and the saints in glory in the sky, with the 
natural eyes, can any one suppose that they would openly war with 
the Lamb and his army? Nay, verily; the day of the Lord so cometh 
as a thief in the night, and the fact of the Lord's presence, etc., will 
only be revealed or made known to the world in the "flaming fire" 
of judgments, though those of his close followers whom he calls 
"friends" are not to be in darkness as others, for they have a sure 
word of prophecy to which they take heed. 



R853 : page 5 



FEAR NOT, LITTLE FLOCK. 

Though the Church of Christ is a little flock, it is of priceless 
value. It has been purchased with blood. It is the flock of God, 
however divided and distracted; and though scattered in the dark 
and cloudy day, yet it will be gathered together at last by "our Lord 
Jesus Christ, that Great Shepherd of the sheep." 

But even now it is under his care, his supervision, his control, and 
no grievous wolves can devour those who listen to God and to the 
word of his grace. No one can pluck even the feeblest lamb in all 
that flock from the hands of the Heavenly Father. The Great 
Shepherd cares for his little ones; and as there are flowers that 
bloom in desert wastes and in lonely valleys, which are seen by no 
human eye and watered by no human hand, but are as fair and as 
fragrant as those which share the most costly culture, so the Good 
Shepherd feeds his own flock in the wilderness, in green pastures, 
and by the side of still waters, restores, and guides, and comforts, 
and protects them, even to the end. 

"He shall feed his flock like a shepherd," and while he feeds them, 
how blessed to know that "He that keepeth Israel shall never 
slumber nor sleep." 

The Lord is our shepherd, our guardian and guide, 
Whatever we need, he will kindly provide; 
To the sheep of his pasture his mercies abound, 
His care and protection his flock will surround." 



—Christian. 



R853 : page 6 



SCRIPTURAL GIVING. 



That little English book, "Mister Horn," contains some interesting 
things, showing how a very plain and simple man looked at the 
system of weekly giving. One evening he sat with his Bible open 
before him, at the 16th chapter of the first epistle to the Corinthians. 
His finger passed slowly over the second verse, as he whispered the 
words to himself: "Now upon the first day of the week let every one 
of you lay by him in store, as God has prospered him." Then he sat 
and looked into the fire, turning it over in his mind for some time, 
as his thoughts slowly shaped themselves into principles of giving. 
Then he broke the silence with these quaint utterances: "It seems to 
me there's one thing as plain as can be, for all I am no scholar~a 
man ought to manage about giving. He is to lay by for it just as he 
does for his house-rent, and for half a score of things besides, for 
everything almost except for giving. Very many folks can't give 
anything upon the spur of the moment; and they think that it is all 
right if they don't. But it seems to me it is all wrong. They could not 
pay their rent upon the spur of the moment either; but for all that 



the landlord expects to get his money. A man is to lay by and 
arrange for it; whether folks hold with doing on the first day of the 
week or the last, they are in a bad way who don't do it at all." 

This plain man nodded his head with considerable satisfaction, and 
then resumed his discourse. "Now, the next thing is how much to 
lay by." (He took up his paper and bit the end of his pencil, as he 
turned over the question.) "I can make thirty shillings a week (about 
$7.50), taking one week with another," said he slowly. "Well, 
suppose I say three shilling a week." (And he figured a large three 
at the top of the paper. Holding it out at arm's length, he looked at 
the figure with an air of satisfaction.) "I don't see how it can, 
anyhow, be less than that, as Mr. Horn says that the Jews gave a 
tenth, and I'm not going to be behind a Jew. No, no. They don't 
know anything about what Paul said," and he turned over three or 
four pages of his Bible and read, "Ye know the grace of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became 
poor, that ye, through his poverty, might be rich." "No," said he, "I 
can't give less than a tenth, and I'm almost thinking that I ought to 
give more." Wetting his pencil, he went over the large three again, 
and broke out, "Why religion saved me more than the whole of it. 
Three shillings! that was not half enough sometimes to pay for the 
week's beer. And then religion made me sober and steady, and that 
brought me in three times as much. Besides, what else is there that's 
so well worth paying for? House rent and doctor's bill should not be 
mentioned in the same breath with it. And butcher's meat and bread 
are not such good cheer as I get out of religion. And for a Master 
like mine— bless His holy name!~how can I ever do enough?" Here 
his whole soul burst forth in the song:— 

See from His head, His hands, His feet, 
Sorrow and love flow mingled down; 
Did e'er such love and sorrow meet, 
Or thorns compose so rich a crown? 

Nor could he pause there- 
Were the whole realm of nature mine, 
That were a present far too small; 
Love so amazing, so divine, 
Demands my soul, my life, my all." 

He put up his pencil and paper, and exclaimed, "I'll never believe 
anybody again as long as I live, when they say they can't afford to 
give. They can afford sixpence a day in beer and tobacco very 
often; and they can foolishly spend their money in a score of ways. 
There's only one reason why folks can't afford to give, and that is 
because they afford so much for everything else. Why, if a man 
would put by sixpence a week, he'd very likely be able to give six 
times as much as he does, and he'd be able to do it as the Book 
says; not grudgingly or of necessity, but as a cheerful giver such as 
the Lord loves."-- Selected. 



R853 : page 6 



BE STRONG. 



"Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong. "--1 
Cor. 16:13. 

A babe could never engage in the active duties of mature 
manhood. It must first develop far beyond the stage of infancy. A 
babe is a bud of promise, and in due time it must fulfill its 
promises, else it will be justly despised and dishonored, and will 
never enjoy the privileges, the respect, and honor of manhood. 

So it is in the spiritual family. A babe in Christ is a child of interest, 
a bud of wonderful promise, beloved of God and of his maturer 
children, and tended with special loving care. Think what promises 
of future glory and grandeur center in a babe in Christ. In time, if he 
continues to grow in grace, knowledge and love, he will be received 
into the everlasting kingdom, and will be engaged with Jesus Christ 
in the great work of restoring all things. You of maturer growth in 
Christ, neglect not therefore to feed the babes with the sincere milk 
of the word; but not the strong meat until they are able to bear it. 
Neither offer to them milk which is not pure; nor afterward, meat 
which is not meat indeed, expecting them to discriminate between 
the true and the false before their senses have been sufficiently 
exercised to discern clearly. We should not expect those who have 
grown but little beyond the infant stage, to be able to grapple 
successfully with all the arts and wiles of the adversary. Hence we 
should always be on the alert to find times and ways and means for 
helping a weaker or younger brother in Christ, and never by any 
means place mixtures of error or other stumbling blocks in his way. 

The privilege of building one another up in the faith, is not 
appreciated and improved among the children of God as it should 
be, many excusing themselves on the ground of inability. But in 
this none are altogether excusable. As soon as we find the 
storehouse of truth we should begin in earnest to feed on it that we 
may grow thereby. And as we grow and develop strength in the use 
of God's appointed means, we should begin to use what strength we 
have for the benefit of others; and the result to our spiritual nature 
will be precisely the same as a similar process would result to our 
human nature. Exercise gives an appetite for food, and food gives 
strength for exercise. Thus the human being comes to the full 
stature of a man, and thus we grow as new creatures. 

When God supplies the food so bountifully and invites us to feast at 
his table, and then clearly indicates the manner in which he would 
have us use the strength thereby gained, we are not excusable in 
remaining either babes or children. We should be constantly 
growing in knowledge, in grace, and in usefulness in the Master's 
service. Recognizing our privilege and duty in this matter, Paul 
exhorts us saying, "Quit you like men, be strong." 



As to whether we grow up into Christ, or become dwarfs and 
useless in his service, depends upon ourselves; for God who has 
called us out of darkness into his marvelous light, is able and 
willing to carry on the good work in us, and he will do it if we 
follow his leading. 

In writing to the Hebrew Christians, the Apostle reprovingly says to 
them, "We have many things to say, and hard to be uttered, seeing 
ye are dull of hearing. For when for the time ye ought to be 
teachers, ye have need that one teach you again which be the first 
principles of the oracles of God; and are such as have need of milk, 
and not of strong meat."-- Heb. 5:11,12. 

Such a condition is a dangerous one, especially in this evil day 
when the sophistries and snares of the adversary are more subtile 
than ever before. There are many deep truths of God's plan difficult 
to express; and impossible to be understood by those who have not 
a clear understanding of and implicit faith in the foundation 
principles of the doctrines of Christ. 

The first principles of the doctrine— Redemption through the 
precious blood of Christ, and remission of sins through faith in his 
blood, is the only solid foundation on which our faith can rest; and 
until that foundation is firmly settled in our minds, it is impossible 
to go on unto perfection of knowledge. But if we spend all our time 
examining the foundation, we will never be able to rear a 
superstructure upon it. If a man has laid the foundation for his 
house with care and with proper material, it is not necessary to dig 
it up and relay it over and over. With full confidence in the 
foundation, he should go on with his building. 

In the science of divine revelation as in other sciences, advanced 
truths cannot be received until other truths upon which they are 
based have first been received and understood. Imagine a student 
making progress in mathematics who never learned the 
multiplication table, or who has no faith in it, even after he has 
proved it true. Such a one could never make progress in 
mathematics; neither could the builder make progress with his 
building who spends all his time examining the foundation, and 
who never arrives at sufficient confidence in it, to build upon it. So 
a babe in Christ who never progresses beyond first principles, or is 
never settled upon them, can never reach maturity, and moreover he 
is in great danger of having his faith overthrown; for a babe is 
unskillful in the word of righteousness, not having his senses 
exercised to discern both good and evil. Therefore, Paul urges our 
leaving the elementary principles of the doctrine of Christ—not in 
the sense of abandoning them, but of allowing them to stand as 
tried and proved foundation stones-and going on unto perfection, 
going on to complete the building of our faith, not halting to tear up 
and lay again the foundation or to try a different one.— Heb. 6:1. 

Wherefore let us be no more children tossed to and fro and carried 
about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men and 



cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive; but speaking 
the truth in love, growing up into him in all things, which is the 
head, even Christ.~Eph. 4:14,15. 

The promise of the Lord is sure to all who claim it— "I will instruct 
thee and teach thee in the way which thou shalt go; I will counsel 
thee; mine eye shall be upon thee." But "be ye not as the horse, or 
as the mule [stubborn], which have no understanding, whose mouth 
must be held in with bit and bridle." (Psa. 32:8,9) God would lead 
us, not by force or constraint, nor in a blind or superstitious way, 
but as intelligent reasoning beings, ready to use our reason so far as 
it will avail, and accepting in faith such statements of his Word as 
our reason cannot grasp, and refusing all teaching of men contrary 
to that Word. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R852 : page 6 



EVERY-DAY LIFE. 



It is said that Beethoven when he had completed one of his grand 
musical compositions, was accustomed to test it on an old 
harpsichord, lest a more perfect instrument might flatter it or hide 
its defects. Many are unwilling to put the results of their labors to 
any such test as this, preferring to be deceived and to deceive others 
with outward appearances. With reference to human character it 
may be observed that those traits that most entitle us to the love and 
esteem of men, and which honor us most in the sight of God, are 
not always revealed on notable occasions and by extraordinary 
events, but manifest themselves in the quiet course of every-day 
life. This is the old harpsichord that tries the character on its real 
merits. It is one thing to appear in the midst of popular favor and 
worldly success, and another to carry a noble, generous and 
magnanimous spirit amid the worries and anxieties and trials that 
spring up along the path hour by hour and day by day. Ruskin has 
truly said that "greatness is the aggregation of minuteness." It is the 
sum of little things well done that constitutes, as a whole, a really 
useful and noble life. It is not those who wait in idleness for some 
chance opportunity to distinguish themselves and do the world a 
great service who are likely to be the benefactors of the race, but 
rather those who proceed earnestly about their daily duties "doing 
with their might what their hands find to do." There are but few to 
whom it is given to discover new continents, to do an act that frees 
a race from bondage, to utter thoughts that stir the heart of 
mankind, but it is given to each and to all to pass each day of life so 
well, so nobly, so truly, so faithfully, so near to God, that all life is 
lifted up, and all the world made better by such living and doing. ~ 
N.Y. Observer. 



R853 : page 6 



UNDER A SHADOW. 



There are very few who are not at some time brought under the 
shadow of a false accusation. The natural way to meet it is by 
denial and self-defense. But that is not the New Testament way. 
There is a better, surer, higher way. It is to give the false accusation 
a plain, simple, square denial, and then leave the life and the truth 
to do the rest. It is not my business to take care of my reputation; it 
is all I can do to take care of my character. If that is clean and pure 
and luminous, the light that is in me will shine on and out, and by 
and by will pierce the clouds and dispel them. 

Do not run after accusers; do not trouble yourself about false 
accusations. Only be sure to make them false; then leave the 
falsehood to die. Go on with your life work; and accept the position 
in which false accusation, and consequent scandal and reproach, 
place you, only as a new opportunity to bear witness to the truth 
and the life by your own manifest and glorious possession of them.- 
-Lyman Abbott. 



R853 : page 7 



THE WORLD'S CRISIS. 



"Now is the krisis of this world: now shall the prince of this world 
be cast out."~John 12:31. 

The Greek word rendered judgment, in this text, is the word krisis 
from which our English word crisis is derived, and to which the 
same exact meaning is given, viz., The point of time when any 
course of action must terminate or take a new course, the decisive 
moment, the turning point; as the crisis of a disease, when the 
turning point for life or death is reached. Compare Liddell and 
Scott's Greek Lexicon and Webster's Dictionary. The word 
judgment, does not improperly translate the word; for there is a 
crisis, a sharply defined decisive turning point in every trial or 
judgment. The crisis, the decisive point of judgment was that to 
which Jesus referred in the above quotation. 

It was just a few days before his crucifixion that he uttered these 
words, in full view of the terrible experiences which must shortly 
follow. Not long before this he had raised to life Lazarus, the 
brother of Martha and Mary, who were then living in Bethany about 
two miles from Jerusalem, whither the Jews from all parts 
assembled to keep the Passover. The sisters had arranged for the 
entertainment of Jesus and the disciples on this occasion. The 
wonderful miracle had been noised abroad among the Jews, and as 
they came up to Jerusalem multitudes made it a point to see 
Lazarus, and Jesus who had raised him from the dead. And when 



they had seen, the people were convinced that this must be the 
Messiah, the king long foretold by the prophets; and upon the spur 
of their convictions they determined to acknowledge him publicly 
as their king. And "when they heard that Jesus was coming to 
Jerusalem, they took branches of palm trees, and went forth to meet 
him, and cried, Hosanna, Blessed is the king of Israel, that cometh 
in the name of the Lord."~John 12:12,13. 

But while the hearts of his disciples bounded high with glowing 
anticipations as they saw these evidences of public favor, Jesus was 
sorrowful, knowing that his hour was come. He knew that the 
prophecy of Isaiah was about to be fulfilled --that he was about to 
be wounded for our transgressions and bruised for our iniquities; 
that the chastisement of our peace was about to be upon him; that it 
would please the Lord to bruise him, to put him to grief, to make 
his soul an offering for sin, to permit him to pour out his soul unto 
death, and be numbered with the transgressors. —Isa. 53. 

Knowing the bitter disappointment that must soon overtake the 
hopes of his disciples, Jesus sought to prepare them in a measure to 
receive it. He talked to them of the necessity of entire consecration 
to the will of God, even if he should require them to lay down life 
itself in his cause; and then he assured them that the Father would 
assuredly honor and reward such service. 

As he approached the last dreadful conflict, in full view of it, and 
with a fixed determination to submit his will fully to the will of 
God, even unto death, he said: "Now is my soul troubled, and what 
shall I say? Father, save me from this hour? But [no], for this cause 
came I unto this hour: Father, glorify thy name." (vs. 27,28.) Yes, 
he had come to this dread hour for the very purpose of suffering 
death, that thereby he might redeem the world from the 
condemnation of death. 

It was in reference to this fact that Jesus said, "Now is the crisis of 
this world." Yet the world was entirely unaware of its critical 
situation at that moment. The world's salvation was in the balance 
then. All depended upon the faithfulness of him who was about to 
redeem them with his own precious blood. No wonder that when in 
Gethsemane's garden, realizing the awful responsibility upon him, 
and the agony of bearing it, Jesus sweat great drops of blood; no 
wonder that weary and faint and longing for human sympathy, he 
came time and again to his disciples who could not realize the 
situation, longing for their sympathy and saying, Can ye not watch 
with me one hour? (Mark 14:34,37.) Little did they realize that at 
that critical hour their own and the whole world's salvation hung 
upon the shoulders of their trembling, suffering Lord. Yes, it was 
the dark hour of the world's crisis. 

The world was being judged again, in its second representative, the 
man Christ Jesus, who then took upon himself the penalty which 
had fallen upon Adam and the race represented in him, thereby 



substituting his human being, psuche, for that of the man Adam and 
those represented in him. 

From the moment that Jesus said, "It is finished," and died, the 
crisis was past. That was the great turning point, the decisive act 
which legally released man from the bondage of death and secured 
for him the right to live again. (Rom. 3:25,26.) That was the 
decisive act which made Christ the rightful Lord of the human race 
which he thus purchased by his death. (Rom. 14:9.) And in that it 
gave to Christ the right to rule, it fixed the doom of Satan the 
usurper. "Now," from that moment it was a settled thing that the 
present "prince of this world," Satan, who has the power of death 
and reigns only to deceive, oppress and destroy mankind, shall be 
cast out. Thus through death Jesus spoiled the principalities and 
powers of darkness, and openly showed it in his resurrection, thus 
triumphing over them through death.~Col. 2:14,15. Satan's present 
sway is only permitted until the time appointed of the Father. His 
sentence of ejectment was sealed at Calvary. 

That the decisive act which determined this change of rulership, 
and turned the condemnation from the world, was the death of 
Christ, is clearly seen from the following verses (32,33). "And I, if I 
be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me." "This he 
said, signifying what death he should die." Jesus had spoken before 
of his being lifted up, referring to his crucifixion (John 3:14,15 and 
8:28), and the people whom he now addressed rightly understood 
him to refer to his death. But ignoring the prophecies which 
foretold the death of Christ, they reasoned, If this be the Christ, 
how can this be; for the Scripture saith, Christ abideth forever. 
Blinded by prejudice, they overlooked or ignored the prophecies 
which foretold the sufferings, and saw only the glory that should 
follow.-- 1 Pet. 1:11. 

The only reply which Jesus made was to not deceive themselves 
thus. (Vs. 35,36.) 

The world's crisis came and passed, yet the world was totally 
unaware of it. As in the crisis of a disease, the patient may be 
entirely unaware of the change which takes place at the critical 
moment, yet it may be clearly discerned by the skilled physician, so 
the world was unconscious of the change which the death of Christ 
secured for all—the privilege of restitution to perfection, to harmony 
with God, and consequently thorough obedience to everlasting life. 

And although nearly two thousand years have elapsed since the 
crisis was passed, the mass of mankind are still unaware of the 
good tidings of great joy which shall in due time be to all people. 
Those however who have been students of the divine Word, know 
that the time now draws very near when the world shall all see and 
experience the blessed results which must flow from that decisive 
act of our Lord at the moment of the world's crisis. 

The world has passed through two crises in its two representatives 
Adam and Jesus, though unaware of both. The decisive instant, the 



crisis, came in each case which determined certain results to the 
world. In the first instance the crisis was followed by the "krima" or 
sentence; sentence came by the one man Adam upon all his race 
unto condemnation to death. In the second instance also the crisis 
was followed by "krima" or sentence which came by the one man 
Christ Jesus, unto justification to life (Rom. 5:17-19) giving all the 
right to live again because "redeemed," "bought," "purchased by the 
precious blood of Christ," who gave himself a ransom for all, to be 
testified to all in due time. 

While the right to live again which was purchased for all mankind 
by the death of Christ, is an everlasting right which never can nor 
will be disputed nor ignored by God, it yet remains for man to 
individually claim the everlasting continuance of that right, by 
compliance with the conditions upon which it is offered; for this 
right, thus purchased at so great a cost may be again forfeited by 
men. But it can never again be forfeited by a representative, as in 
the first instance. Each individual redeemed in the second 
representative crisis, must stand trial for himself, and prove his own 
claim to an everlasting continuance of life by obedience, or else by 
disobedience forfeit life for himself —but not for another. 

There is then, a coming individual trial or judgment and there will 
therefore be a crisis, a turning point, a decisive moment and act to 
each individual, upon which will hinge the issues of the everlasting 
future for life or death, in his individual case. If he gratefully 
accepts of life and its privileges and future possibilities as the 
purchase of the precious blood of Christ, and if he fully and from 
the heart complies with the conditions of its everlasting 
continuance, viz., obedience to God, then the crisis is past, and the 
"krima" or sentence, is in his favor— to life everlasting: otherwise it 
is against him— to the second death. Nor will the life once 
redeemed, and then again individually forfeited, ever be redeemed 
again— "Christ dieth no more;" "there remaineth no more a sacrifice 
for sins." Such ungrateful, willful, deliberate sinners justly merit 
and shall die the second death. 

But while the church with all the world has passed through the first 
two crises as represented in Adam and Jesus, the church shall not 
come into judgment with the world— John 5:24. Krisis is here 
translated condemnation. 

The church will be receiving her reward, when the world's 
individual crisis or judgment is in process. But the church is not 
exempt from individual judgment; her crisis takes place before the 
Millennial Age, during the Gospel Age now closing. Each member 
of the church therefore in the present life is standing on trial for 
himself, and at some time during the judgment there comes a 
critical decisive point to each individual of the church— a time 
which proves to be the crisis of our course, where a standstill is not 
possible, but where we must go forward either in the right or the 
wrong direction, either to the fulfilling of our covenant or the 
ignoring of it. 



In fact, every test that is applied to us, places us in a critical 
situation, so that we need to watch and pray that we may have 
strength to overcome. And to each there will come a final test, as in 
our Lord's case. While the world's representative crisis was reached 
at the time appointed for Jesus to lay down his life in sacrifice, it 
was also a crisis to him as an individual. As an individual he was 
being tested, and proved worthy of the glory to be revealed in him. 

The final test in our individual cases may not always be at death. If 
we have been faithful in the preceding tests, or if we have been 
rightly exercised by the discipline of the Lord, the closing scene of 
life will be the last test. It is possible, however, for a consecrated 
one to ignore and despise his covenant and to refuse further 
compliance with it and to ignore and despise the discipline of the 
Lord, or to despise the means by which God brought this salvation 
to men-even the precious blood of Christ. Such reach the crisis and 
turn it unfavorably before death. But to those who continue faithful 
and obedient, the final moment of crisis is at death, even as with the 
Master --"faithful unto death." 

With thankfulness for the grace which carried us through the crisis 
of our redemption through the death of Christ, may each individual 
of those now on trial, watch and pray that he may successfully pass 
through the crisis of his own individual trial. 



R853 : page 7 

CHRIST'S SECOND PERSONAL ADVENT. 

It is probable that at no time since the early centuries of the 
Church has this subject been lifted into such prominence as during 
our own generation; so that the remark made some years ago by the 
eminent German theologian, John Frederick Meyer, is clearly 
verified. He says: "With the Lord's second advent will begin the 
real reign of God upon earth. A kingdom of righteousness, holiness 
and peace. ...It is called the reign of a thousand years. Modern times 
have again paid attention to this doctrine of the millennium, thus 
coinciding with the ancient fathers. It is resounding, as it were, a 
new call: The Lord cometh!' Among believers, this doctrine, far 
removed from carnal conceptions, should no more be considered an 
error." 

But the impatient question will be raised, "What practical value has 
this doctrine? True, it has been very dear to martyrs and confessors 
in the times of the Church's suffering and trial. But in these days, 
when the heavens are all ablaze with evangelical light, and all 
nations are illumined with its brightness, it seems an impertinence 
for you to begin to trim the wicks and relight the lamps of 
prophecy." So I thought, as on one cloudless day I was journeying 
toward the hills which form the western boundary of our State, and 
a porter came in and began to light the lamps in the car. "What is 



the need of lamps," I thought, "in such a cloudless and sunlit day as 
this?" But the next moment there was a shrill alarm from the 
whistle, and we instantly plunged into the dark and sulphurous 
darkness of the Hoosac Tunnel. It was clear enough now why the 
lamps had been lighted. And does not Scripture say something 
about "a 

R853 : page 8 

more sure word of prophecy unto which we do well to give heed, as 
unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn and the 
day-star arise in our hearts"? The dark places may be just before 
us;~who knows? The black hand of Socialism, armed with the most 
fatal weapons, and throwing its ominous shadow over almost every 
civilized nation; --the smoke of the pit ascending up in the form of 
modern Spiritualism —ten millions of adherents gathered within less 
than fifty years-making such an outbreak of demoniacal agency as 
the world has not seen since the days just preceding the floods- 
even thoughtful men of the world are beginning to be afraid at these 
tokens, and to question what they portend. But they who have 
lighted the lamp of prophecy think that they read the meaning of 
these things by its clear shining; and they surmise that this may be 
the reason why they have been called to light their candles at 
midday. God never makes half a providence, any more than man 
makes half a pair of shears. If he moves some in the Church to see 
clearly, and assert strongly a seemingly unpractical doctrine, it may 
be because he intends to match that doctrine to a certain exigency 
of error yet to arise. 

"Fossil sunlight" is what Herschel named anthracite coal. The vast 
stores of sunlight poured out upon the globe during the old 
geological ages were consolidated and packed away in the bowels 
of the earth because this busy nineteenth century, with its myriads 
of railways and ocean steamers and manufactories, would need it. 
And have you thought how large a proportion of the Old Testament 
is prediction? And is it, therefore, of no use to the practical working 
Church of to-day? Nay. This vast profusion of prophetic light 
falling upon the minds of Isaiah and Ezekiel and Jeremiah and 
David, and the minor prophets, and treasured up in their inspired 
pages, may soon be needed. And they who are delving in these 
mines of eschatology, instead of being engaged in an aimless and 
profitless toil, may be providing the Church with the needed 
warmth for that predicted time when "iniquity shall abound, and the 
love of many wax cold," and light for the day foretold by the 
watchman of Idumea, "The morning cometh, and also the night." 

And now we come to ask the question whether there is any faulty 
tendency in our current eschatology which this powerful reassertion 
of the primitive doctrine of our Lord's second coming is likely to 
correct? Here I speak with the utmost caution and with the sincerest 
deference to the views of others. But I am strongly persuaded that 
such a tendency does exist. 



By a ghastly anachronism, death has been substituted for the 
coming of Christ in the common teaching; and thus a false centre 
has been set up in our eschatology, by which the doctrines 
pertaining to the last things have been thrown into eccentric 
relation. Ask the question, "When does sanctification end?" and the 
common answer is, "At death." Ask the question, "When do the 
rewards of the righteous accrue?" and still the answer generally 
comes, from evangelical theology, "At death." Ask the question, 
"When does the resurrection take place?" and the answer comes 
from Liberals and New Departurists, and from a considerable 
company of the orthodox, "At death." Thus death has been erected 
into such importance as to constitute the terminus ad quern of the 
life which now is, and the terminus a quo of that which is to come. 
Joseph Cook in his valiant defence of orthodoxy is thundering out 
the question, "Does death end all?" and often piling up such post- 
mortem conclusions as to compel us in defence of the Scriptures to 
ask, "Does death begin all?" To us it seems incontestably clear that 
the Bible makes the Advent, and not the grave, the supreme goal of 
the Church's hope. And lest you should accuse me of speaking 
presumptuously, I wish you would search the Bible for yourselves, 
and note how constantly the soul's progress towards perfection is 
inspired and bounded by that one divine event, the coming of our 
Lord. You can collate scores of texts to this effect, all finding a 
fitting climax and summary in that grand utterance of Paul as it 
stands in the Revised Version: "And may your spirit and soul and 
body be preserved entire, without blame, at the coming of our Lord 
Jesus Christ." The same may be said of the divine rewards; the 
promise of them is almost without exception timed by this great 
event.~A. J. Gordon. 



R853 : page 8 

EVERLASTING, HELL, AND DAMNATION. 

J. G. Townsend, well known as a former talented Methodist 
minister, recently severed his connection with the M.E. Church, and 
has since been preaching to an Independent Congregation at 
Jamestown, N. Y. In one of his sermons he gave the following 
picture of hell: ~ 

"Suppose a tube, so long that it would take a drop of water a million 
years to get to the bottom of it. Pass all the water in Chautauqua 
lake, drop by drop through that tube, and that would be a 
computable period. By and by the water would all pass through the 
tube. Pour all the waters of the Atlantic ocean and the Pacific 
ocean, drop by drop through that tube, and eternity would only have 
begun. Turn the great suns yonder into oceans of water and put 
them all through the tube, a drop in a million years, and yet the 
eternal punishment would only have begun. Do you think the 
Heavenly Father would put that punishment on any of his children 



for the sins of this transient life? It is atrocious to think of it. I 
believe that this doctrine of eternal hell is a lie against man--is a lie 
against God, and sooner than preach it, I would let my tongue rot in 
my mouth. I deny that the Bible teaches it. Suppose you were to 
take out of the Bible the word damnation, the word hell, the word 
everlasting as applied to punishment; would you not think that it 
would mitigate the idea of punishment, soften it, ameliorate it? 
Certainly it would. Now I want to state upon the authority of 
eminent scholars, and upon my own authority, after a careful 
examination of the words of the original, that not one of these 
words, neither damnation, nor hell, nor everlasting, has any right 
whatever within the lids of the Bible. All of them are imported 
words, mistranslations. They have no critical, or just, or moral right 
to remain in the Bible." 

We can agree in part with the above statement of facts, and fully 
with the speaker's spirit. Those who claim that God will 
everlastingly torture his children for the sin of Adam with their own 
sins of a few short years, full of trouble and weakness inherited and 
encountered from the moment of birth, are often possessed of more 
tender affection than their theology would seem to indicate. In a 
word, they though fallen and imperfect, are nobler, more just and 
more loving, than their narrow theological views permit them to 
think the God of love and justice to be. 

They excuse this and attempt to give it the appearance of justice, by 
saying that a sin committed against an infinite being is an infinite 
sin, and therefore in justice must receive an infinite (unlimited) 
punishment. While it is true that in judging of the enormity of sin 
the standpoint of God and of perfect manhood should be 
recognized, and not our standpoint as fallen and depraved beings, 
yet to make the penalty depend upon the infinity of God is so 
manifestly unjust, that naught but dire necessity to give an 
appearance of justice to their theological dogma can have invented 
such a theory. On the contrary, the degree of heinousness of a sin 
depends upon the state and capacity of the transgressor. If an 
infinite being were to commit sin, it might be termed an "infinite 
sin," but for a finite being to sin could only be a finite sin. 

The full penalty of sin is death-destruction --extinction; and if each 
individual of the world were to be individually tried under this 
penalty, each would of necessity have to be perfect, possessing full 
ability and under favorable circumstances to resist sin. But such 
opportunity none but Adam has yet enjoyed, all being tried 
representatively in him, and thus condemned to the full penalty 
righteously, though they had no individual trial. For it cannot be 
gainsaid that the Creator had a perfect right, if he had so chosen, to 
have withheld his power and not created us at all, or having created 
us, he could righteously have blotted us out of existence even if 
obedient, had he not graciously purposed and promised life 
everlasting upon condition of obedience. 



And now while he has exhibited to us all, and to angels as well, his 
thorough and relentless determination that sin shall not be 
permitted, and that its wages is death, he exhibits also his love by 
providing in Jesus a ransom price for all; arranging that through this 
Savior all shall ultimately be released from Adamic sin (and all sins 
growing out of the fallen disposition inherited, and the evil 
surroundings incident to and resulting from Adam's fall and from 
the penalty of sin,) in order that in an appointed season the whole 
world should be judged or tried again by the Christ of God (1 Cor. 
6:2; Matt. 19:28); not again representatively but individually. 

This trial as yet has reached and developed only two small elect 
classes~the overcomers of this age and those preceding --tried 
beforehand in the midst of evil surroundings for special purposes 
and positions. But ultimately each individual of the race will have 
as full and fair an opportunity as had their representative Adam in 
the first trial, and in addition to this will have the benefit of present 
experience in sin and its penalty. Thus each shall decide his own 
case by his own conduct. Those obedient shall live forever; those 
who will not conform to God's will are condemned as unworthy of 
life and shall be cut off from it—shall die for their own 
disobedience, as before they were under death for Adam's 
disobedience. Hence it is called the second death. It will be 
everlasting. No ransom will be given for it and there will be no 
resurrection from it. Justice, Mercy and Love unite with one will, in 
this everlasting penalty for willful sin. It is here, that we agree only 
in part with the above statement of brother Townsend. 

The Greek language seems to lack a word corresponding exactly to 
our word everlasting. The Greek word aionios translated 
"everlasting" signifies literally unlimited, i.e., a period upon which 
no limit is expressed. Hence when it is used with reference to the 
disposition of the sheep and goats of Matt. 25:46 it is evidently not 
improper to translate it everlasting as applying to the penalty as 
well as the reward; everlasting or unlimited death to one class, and 
everlasting or unlimited life to the other. The words everlasting and 
eternal in this verse are from the same Greek word aionion. The 
reward to obedience is life, and of sin the punishment is not torture, 
nor life in any condition, but death, (Rom. 6:23); and this verse (46) 
declares that the results of the trial described and illustrated in this 
parable, are not transient, but lasting-- unlimited. 

The word damnation as generally understood to mean endless woe, 
is, we agree with brother T., totally without a Scripture basis. Its 
strongest significance is condemnation or rejection. Jesus applies 
the same word krima in John 9:39, where it is translated 
"judgment." "For judgment am I come into the world;" yet that he 
did not there use the word in its usual signification is clear from his 
other statement that he came not to condemn [krino sentence] the 
world, but that the world through him might be saved.— John 3:17. 

Again, we agree with brother T. that the word hell (with the 
meaning at present attached to the word) is an improper translation 



of either sheol, hades or and it is unauthorized by the meaning or 
use of these gehenna words. The first two simply refer to the 
condition or state of death, as the penalty of Adam's sin, which 
would have been everlasting had God not mercifully provided "a 
ransom for all," in Christ our Lord, by reason of which it may be 
considered merely a long sleep. 

Gehenna (the name of a valley outside of Jerusalem where fires 
were kept burning to destroy the offal of the city, and never used as 
a place of torture,) is used in Scripture to represent in a symbolic 
manner the utter and hopeless destruction (not torment) of the 
second death, from which there is no hope of recovery. 


