Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Angelic Direction of Our Ministry
EXPERIENCES often show that the Christian ministry has angelic direction. (Revelation 14:6, 7) Did not an angel direct Philip to the sincere Ethiopian eunuch who wanted to understand the Bible? (Acts 8:26, 27) And when the right-hearted Gentile Cornelius earnestly prayed to God for help, was not an angel sent to help him? (Acts 10:3-33) The following experience from Denver, Colorado, U.S.A., helps us appreciate that our ministry today has angelic direction as we search for those sincere of heart.
□ In their house-to-house ministry, two of Jehovah’s Witnesses were told by the lady of the house that she was very busy. One Witness asked her if she ever wondered if one could speak to the dead? The Witnesses were invited in and scriptures were read about the cause of death, the condition of the dead, and the hope of the resurrection. (Ecclesiastes 9:5, 10; John 5:28, 29) The woman was interested and a Bible study was arranged. After three months of study she asked if the Witnesses in the future could come at 4:30 p.m. for the study. This they agreed to.
The next week the woman and her husband were waiting for the Witnesses, as the husband wanted to know what his wife was learning. He asked many questions, one of which was: “Who is the antichrist and the man of lawlessness?” This question was answered satisfactorily from the Bible by the Witnesses, and he then asked for six copies of the book The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
The following week the man and his wife, with their six children, were present for the study. The children were well mannered and obedient. Soon all of them began to attend the meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses at the Kingdom Hall.
The man asked the Witnesses to call on his married daughter and her husband and also on his aunt and her daughter. This was done and Bible studies were arranged with both families.
After a year of Bible study, this man, his wife, and two teenage daughters asked to get baptized in symbol of their dedication to Jehovah. It was then learned that this man had been a Methodist minister. But after two months of Bible study with the Witnesses, he and his family had left the church. It was also learned that at the time of the initial call, the wife had planned to take her life and had prayed to God to take care of her family thereafter.
From that initial call, ten persons have accepted the truth. The man is now an elder, one of his daughters is a pioneer, and his son-in-law is a ministerial servant.
It is evident that angelic direction was on the ministry of those two Witnesses. Now these ten persons who were helped to a knowledge of the truth are all happily serving Jehovah, free from the bonds of false religion.

