Happiness Through a Precious Relationship
“A LIVE dog is better off than a dead lion.” (Ecclesiastes 9:4) In those few words, King Solomon of old stated the fundamental truth that life is more important than any material possessions or any ambitious goals we may hope to achieve. Without life, we cannot benefit from any of these things. Yes, life is essential in our pursuit of happiness.
Something “Better Than Life”
As precious as life is, however, there is something that is even better. ‘Is that possible?’ you might wonder. ‘What could be more precious than life itself?’
King David of ancient Israel supplied us with the answer. Addressing the Creator, Jehovah God, he said with deep appreciation: “Because your loving-kindness is better than life, my own lips will commend you.” (Psalm 63:3) David’s heartfelt words show that to be the recipient of God’s loving-kindness, which is based on having a fine relationship with him, is even more precious than life itself. Why is this so?
What Makes Life Possible
Suppose you were given a gift, something that you really liked. Of course you would be very happy to receive the gift and perhaps get a great deal of enjoyment from using it. But you would be ungrateful, indeed, if your thoughts did not go beyond the gift to the giver. Was it not the personal relationship between you and the giver that prompted the gift? If that relationship did not exist, there would have been no gift and no enjoyment of it.
The same is true with life. Precious as it is, we must bear in mind where our life came from and how it has been sustained. Certainly we did not create it ourselves, nor can we sustain it independent of all the marvelous provisions Jehovah has made on earth. (Psalm 100:3; Acts 14:17) The very fact that we have life, and undoubtedly we are enjoying it in some measure, is an expression of loving-kindness on the part of the Grand Creator, Jehovah God. Can we not see why King David wholeheartedly felt that God’s “loving-kindness is better than life”?
There is another reason why having an approved relationship with the Creator is more important than having life itself​—our future depends on it. Let us see how this is so.
Do you not agree that life is transitory and full of uncertainties? A person may work very hard for many years in order to achieve some materialistic goal he considers worth while. Yet, death soon robs him of everything he has attained. It is just as wise King Solomon said: “What does a man come to have for all his hard work and for the striving of his heart with which he is working hard under the sun? For all his days his occupation means pains and vexation, also during the night his heart just does not lie down. This too is mere vanity.”​—Ecclesiastes 2:22, 23; compare 2:3-11.
In spite of this, it is the purpose of our loving Creator that all those who love and obey him will be liberated from the frustration and futility that is our lot today. Jehovah assures us with this wonderful promise: “They will not build and someone else have occupancy; they will not plant and someone else do the eating. For like the days of a tree will the days of my people be; and the work of their own hands my chosen ones will use to the full.”​—Isaiah 65:22.
Is this expression of God’s loving-kindness not better than our present limited and uncertain life? To be the recipient of his loving-kindness, yes, to live in that New Order and to enjoy life filled with purpose and meaning would certainly be a most worthwhile goal. To realize that happy prospect, one must gain Jehovah’s approval now and maintain a close relationship with him and his people.
Short-Term Interest Versus Long-Term Benefit
In view of the foregoing points, it certainly would be shortsighted and unwise for us to occupy ourselves solely with the pursuit of self-interest, be it fame, fortune, career, academic achievement, personal fulfillment, or anything else considered worth while in this system of things. While these goals may not be wrong in themselves, pursuing any one of them as the most important thing may very well cause us to neglect our responsibilities before our Creator. Ultimately, we may lose his approval and fail to gain “the real life.”​—1 Timothy 6:19; Luke 9:24.
To take such a course can be likened to a youngster who drops out of school and goes to work as an unskilled laborer just to get some spending money. He may feel that he is finally freed from the restrictions of school and is having a good time. But is he not sacrificing his long-term welfare for the sake of some doubtful short-term interest? Similarly, then, is a person not short-sighted when he neglects his relationship with the Creator because he is too busy pursuing some personal goal?
Busy as all of us are, we usually manage to find the time and energy to do the things we really consider important, do we not? Thus, with an unerring understanding of human nature, Jesus succinctly points out: “For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.”​—Matthew 6:21.
So on what sort of “treasure” have you set your heart? The glitter and tinsel of the world may seem very attractive. But ask yourself: How lasting are the supposed benefits gained from such things? Do they bring true happiness or just temporary pleasures, like a drug, leaving an undesirable or even painful aftermath?
Make a Wise Choice
There is a valuable lesson to be learned from the people of Lot’s day. “They were eating, they were drinking, they were buying, they were selling, they were planting, they were building,” said Jesus. In other words, they were busy pursuing what they considered important, without paying any attention to God’s will. The result? “On the day that Lot came out of Sodom it rained fire and sulphur from heaven and destroyed them all.” Then, for our benefit, Jesus added: “The same way it will be on that day when the Son of man is to be revealed.”​—Luke 17:28-30.
All indications are that “that day” is upon us. Out of concern for our eternal welfare, Jehovah God has been issuing repeated calls through his Word and his organized people in all the nations. The invitation is to turn back from selfish pursuits and become reconciled to him. It would be truly unwise for us to let our personal interests occupy all our time and energy, so that we fail to respond to this loving call. Rather, as the apostle Paul put it, we should recognize the urgency of the times: “Look! Now is the especially acceptable time. Look! Now is the day of salvation.”​—2 Corinthians 5:20; 6:2.
Will you be among those who are blessed with the happy prospect of surviving the end of the present wicked system of things into the righteous New Order of God’s promise? That depends on what you consider most important in your life now and what you do about gaining an approved relationship with God. The choice is yours!
[Pictures on page 5]
If you are grateful to the giver . . .
. . . what about the greatest giver, Jehovah God?

