Turkish Court Sends Jehovah’s Witnesses to Prison
ON DECEMBER 12, 1984, a shocking decision was rendered by the State Security Court in Ankara, Turkey. It sentenced five of Jehovah’s Witnesses to prison, each for six years and eight months, with an additional two years and two months in exile! Eighteen other Witnesses were sentenced to four years and two months in prison, with another year and four months in exile. Other Witnesses are to have a separate trial before a criminal court.
What was their “crime”? They were found guilty of violating article 163 of the Turkish Penal Code. According to this, it is a crime ‘to make religious propaganda with the aim of changing the social, economic, political, or legal order of the state.’ So it was claimed that a very small number​—a mere handful—​of Jehovah’s Witnesses were trying to change the existing governmental order in Turkey. But how could this tiny group of people who are peaceful, unarmed, and totally untrained in political subversion be a threat to overthrow the entire established system of the nation?
Law-Abiding People
Jehovah’s Witnesses are well known throughout the world as a law-abiding people. For example, a governor-general of Nigeria said of them: “They have added greatly to the spiritual upbuilding of our people in Nigeria.” He also said: “If all the religious denominations were like Jehovah’s Witnesses, we would have no murders, burglaries, delinquencies, prisoners and atomic bombs. Doors would not be locked day in and day out.”
Also, Jehovah’s Witnesses never have mixed in politics. Their neutrality in such affairs is well known. The Italian publication Il Corriere di Trieste said that “Jehovah’s Witnesses should be admired.” Why, among other reasons? Because, it said, their religion teaches them ‘not to mix politics with religion and not to serve the interests of political parties.’
Thus, during their more than a hundred years of history, they never have tried to change any political order of any state. Rather, they do what the Bible tells them to do​—accept the existing governments as “superior authorities” to which they must give respect. (Romans 13:1) Therefore it is against their religious convictions to engage in any subversive activity. That is why nations that are not dictatorial recognize that Jehovah’s Witnesses are certainly a religion and have given them the freedoms of other citizens, including the freedom of worship.
The sentences are also completely unwarranted for another reason. On March 24, 1980, the Supreme Court of Appeals in Turkey ruled that Jehovah’s Witnesses cannot be punished, as their religion does not violate the law. The court had acquitted them of charges of subversion.
Events Leading to Trial
So the question arises: What information did the court use to reach its decision? Have Jehovah’s Witnesses changed their activity or beliefs since 1980? Let us briefly consider the circumstances that led up to the trial, as well as the court records.
On November 20, 1974, a district court in Istanbul gave legal approval to Jehovah’s Witnesses as a religion. Accordingly, the Witnesses could legally register their religion on their identification cards, which they did. And from December 1974, Jehovah’s Witnesses began to meet freely for worship in various cities of the country. The military government that came to power in September of 1980 also permitted their public meetings in their “Halls of Worship.”
However, in March of 1984, three families in Eskişehir applied to the court to have their religion registered as Jehovah’s Witnesses. That event made headlines in the local newspaper. Being former Muslims, their application aroused the animosity of fanatical Muslims, who began to attack and defame Jehovah’s Witnesses in various newspapers.
Among the opposers was the “High Council of Religion in the Directorate of Religious Affairs,” a Muslim governmental office. This council stated: “This movement [Jehovah’s Witnesses], which in no country is being accepted as a religion . . . is a Christian order under Jewish influence.” It further stated that “if this movement will be permitted [in Turkey] it will be a danger for the State as well as for Islam.”
After the malicious newspaper campaign, suddenly two Witnesses were arrested in Ankara for offering their publications to another person. Yet, those publications were being printed legally in Turkey.
During the following days, the police in Ankara arrested the five elders of a congregation, as well as others who were known as Jehovah’s Witnesses. Altogether 31 were arrested. Some were arrested at their homes, others at their place of work, and some after their meeting at their “Hall of Worship.” Of the 31 originally arrested, 23 were held and the others released.
False Charges
As the court hearing proceeded, it became more and more evident that it was not actually a case of violating the law. Rather, it was a religious issue that the court was deciding.
For example, as supposed evidence of guilt, the prosecution used a statement from the Directorate of Religious Affairs. In this statement, Jehovah’s Witnesses are labeled as “a crazy Christian movement” that has “no prophets and no special holy book.” On the contrary, Jehovah’s Witnesses are known as a very sane, law-abiding, peaceful society of people. And they most assuredly have a prophet​—Jesus Christ—​who, incidentally, even Muslims acknowledge as a prophet. And they need no other “special holy book,” for they already have one​—the Holy Bible, which is “inspired of God.”​—2 Timothy 3:16.
It was also claimed that Jehovah’s Witnesses do not accept “the existent nations and states and their national boundaries.” This, too, is totally false. Their religion specifically requires them to “be in subjection to the superior [governmental] authorities” and all the laws that do not conflict with God’s laws. That is what the Bible says to do.​—Romans 13:1; Acts 5:29.
In addition, the Directorate of Religious Affairs claimed that Jehovah’s Witnesses engage in an activity “to establish a Bible-based religious order over the entire world,” and that God’s Kingdom would be established between the “Euphrates and Nile” rivers. This statement tries to prove that Jehovah’s Witnesses would change the established political order in Turkey, since the Euphrates River passes through Eastern Turkey.
That is another totally false charge. Jehovah’s Witnesses have never believed that the Kingdom of God will be on earth. Instead, they have always taught that it will be a heavenly rule. So it could not possibly be located in any part of Turkey.​—Matthew 4:17; 6:9, 10.
False Religious Testimony
The court also appointed three “experts” to examine the publications and beliefs of Jehovah’s Witnesses. One was a member of the Directorate of Religious Affairs. The second was an assistant professor of an Islamic faculty. The third was an assistant professor of the legal faculty of the University of Ankara.
The defense counsel objected to the appointment of two of the religious “experts.” These had already expressed their opinion against Jehovah’s Witnesses in a book. Therefore, it could not be expected that they would give an unbiased opinion to the court. However, the court refused the request of the defense and allowed these prejudiced religious persons to participate.
When these three handed in their report, it was as expected. The religious examiners found Jehovah’s Witnesses guilty. However, the law expert did not find any guilt. He stated: “They are expecting the coming change in the world by God after the war of Armageddon,” and not by any human intervention.
The religionists claimed that Jehovah’s Witnesses are not a religion. That is obviously another false charge. They also claimed that the belief of Jehovah’s Witnesses in God and in Jesus Christ “serves only as a religious cover in order to hide the real purpose.” And what would that “real purpose” supposedly be? The religious advisers said: “Under the appearance of the Kingdom of God they lay a foundation for some political developments in an unknown future.” Quoting unrelated passages from the publications of Jehovah’s Witnesses, they concluded that they were ‘a secret organization under Zionistic influence that is using religious meetings as a cover.’
However, these two religious persons did not produce a single piece of evidence that Jehovah’s Witnesses have ever tried to subvert the Turkish state. They could not produce such evidence because the Witnesses do not subvert existing governments. It is God himself who holds governments accountable. He is the Judge, not any human. And anyone who is familiar with the Witnesses knows that they have no connection whatsoever with Zionism.
Defense Provides Evidence
On the other hand, the defense provided much evidence that Jehovah’s Witnesses were not guilty of violating any law. In addition to the decision of the Supreme Court of Appeals on March 24, 1980, the defense presented three other decisions of the Supreme Court. These also had previously acquitted Jehovah’s Witnesses from the same charges.
The defense also presented a second opinion from another professor of law who had examined the publications of Jehovah’s Witnesses. He did not find any violation of law in them.
The court was also referred to about 20 other court decisions rendered during the past 30 years in Turkey. All those courts had acquitted the Witnesses from the same charges.
Last, but not least, even the police officer who had been appointed to control the meetings of the Witnesses testified before the court. He declared that he had “not observed any violation of the law during the entire year” that he had controlled the meetings.
Court Rejects the Evidence
Nevertheless, the court rejected all the evidence of the defense! It accepted only the slanderous and totally unfounded writings that the prosecutor presented. These were the statements from the Directorate of Religious Affairs and also the report from the two prejudiced religious commentators.
The sentences raise serious questions. Were the judges of the court also prejudiced by their Muslim beliefs? Was the court put under religious pressure to sentence Jehovah’s Witnesses?
Of course, the decision is being appealed. So the Supreme Court will have the opportunity to review the matter. It is hoped that this court will render a judgment in full harmony with the facts. Unfortunately, until that time the 23 Witnesses​—15 men and 8 women—​remain in prison.
Certainly, fair-minded and freedom-loving people throughout the world ask: How could such a thing happen in a country that claims to be a democratic state? How could Turkish courts do such a thing when the Turkish government also has signed the Declaration of Human Rights, which guarantees freedom of religion?
If you feel indignant at peaceful, innocent persons being so unjustly sentenced to prison, you have the opportunity to express your opinion. You can write to any or all of the officials below and let them know how you feel about this matter:
President of the Republic:
His Excellency Kenan EVREN, Bakanliklar, Ankara, Turkey
Prime Minister:
Mr. Turgut ÖZAL, Bakanliklar, Ankara, Turkey
Minister of Interior:
Mr. Yildirim AKBULUT, Bakanliklar, Ankara, Turkey
Minister of Justice:
Mr. M. Necat ELDEM, Bakanliklar, Ankara, Turkey
Also, you may write to the Turkish Ambassador in your area.
[Blurb on page 30]
Jehovah’s Witnesses do not subvert any government
[Blurb on page 31]
How could such a thing happen in a country that claims to be democratic?

