“God’s Sons of Liberty” District Assemblies
ARE you planning to attend at least one of the district assemblies of Jehovah’s witnesses this year? Rich blessings are in store for those who do. Commencing June 22 at Toronto, Canada, the “God’s Sons of Liberty” District Assemblies will sweep across Canada, southward into the United States, and, later in the year and early in 1967, into Mexico and a goodly number of Central and South American countries. In Britain and other parts of the world the same assembly program will also be presented.
Many residents in the northern states are already anticipating a visit to one of the Canadian assembly points, which include Corner Brook in Newfoundland, Halifax, Montreal, Winnipeg and Vancouver. Conveniently for those in the middle and southern states, “God’s Sons of Liberty” District Assemblies are organized for Dallas, San Francisco, Baltimore, Miami Beach and Mobile. In the far north, the same program will be presented at Anchorage, Alaska. Spanish-language assemblies will be arranged at Newark, Dallas, San Francisco and Miami Beach.
In the United States and Canada great interest in the Central and South American assemblies has been evinced, and it is expected that many from these countries will assemble with fellow Christians in Mexico, Argentina and Brazil, as well as other adjacent lands. Consult your map and note some of the places where assemblies are being prepared: Guatemala City, Managua, La Paz, Barranquilla, Buenos Aires, São Paulo, Caracas and San Juan, to name but a few. Perhaps you too can go south.
At each of these assemblies the identical public address will be given by a special representative of the Watch Tower Society. It will answer the very timely question, “What Has God’s Kingdom Been Doing Since 1914?”
If you are interested in keeping up-to-date in understanding of God’s revealed purposes and his will for men on earth today, you are welcome to attend any one of the “God’s Sons of Liberty” District Assemblies. Future issues of this magazine will be publishing additional details. Why not arrange to combine your vacation trip with attendance at one or more of these five-day gatherings? You will gain spiritual refreshment and enjoy happy fellowship with a multitude of others who share your keen interest in God’s purposes and in his kingdom under Christ.

