I Fly on the Concorde
As told to “Awake!” correspondent in the British Isles
ALMOST two years ago I was transferred to work as a cabin crew member on the Concorde. First, each crew member received special training for the job. This meant going back to “school,” where the new meal-service routines, equipment handling, crew duties and safety procedures had to be learned in a training center close to London’s Heathrow Airport.
At this training center there is a “mock-up” or exact replica of the forward galley (kitchen) and part of the cabin of the aircraft. Even the angle of the floor is slightly tilted to simulate the true flying attitude. Here the crew can serve a group of “passengers” without leaving the ground. Thus, before actually flying, the crew will have served meals, become familiar with the oven timings and learned to work in the space available on the real aircraft.
Then came the time to see the Concorde while it was in the hangar. One is impressed by its streamlined shape. It conveys the idea of speed even when standing still. Because of its drooped nose, so clearly seen during takeoffs and landings, the aircraft reminded me of a fast bird of prey​—an eagle. The plane certainly has an outstanding and distinctive design.
First Flight
The Concorde’s cruising speed is around 23 miles (37 kilometers) a minute, twice the speed of sound. Its cruising altitude is between 50,000 and 60,000 feet (15,240 and 18,250 meters). Yet, the cabin is pressurized to correspond to the comfortable air pressure encountered at an elevation of 5,550 feet (1,700 meters).
Compared to more conventional aircraft, the Concorde’s takeoff and climb is extremely rapid. Soon one is up above “the weather” in brilliant sunshine. But when looking out of the windows, a person may be surprised to see that the sky is a very dark blue. This may well bring to mind the phenomenon of the “black” sky reported by the first astronauts on their trips farther into space. The changes in color take place because the higher the altitude the less dense the atmosphere. Hence, the marked scattering of the blue elements in the sun’s light, so evident at ground level, is greatly reduced the higher one goes. Too, at our flying altitude, the curvature, or “circle,” of the earth becomes very noticeable, even as the Bible accurately observes.​—Isa. 40:22.
On account of the high speed of the Concorde, the temperature on the nose of the aircraft reaches 127 degrees Celsius (261 degrees Fahrenheit), when the outside air temperature is −52 degrees Celsius (−65 degrees Fahrenheit). The outside skin of the plane gets almost as hot as the nose. This is due to the great friction when the plane flies faster than the speed of sound. But the high temperature has no adverse effect on the aircraft’s special structure.
A Machmeter, showing the craft’s air speed relative to the speed of sound, is in the cabin so that we can tell how fast we are flying. There is no sensation at all of rapid travel while cruising. But, when accelerating through the sound barrier, the feeling is rather similar to a slight nudge in the back, comparable to an automatic gear change in a car.
Food on Board
Because of the short flight, the type of meals served had to be planned carefully by chefs and a staff having many years of experience with flying. Also, because of the limited space available, the catering equipment was an important detail to be considered. The high-quality food served​—not on plastic but on china—​is complemented by excellent French wines in specially designed glassware used exclusively on the Concorde. Five courses ensure that passengers are well satisfied during each flight. Champagne can also add to one’s enjoyment of the meal, giving a distinctive French flavor to this Anglo-French undertaking.
I have enjoyed working on this first supersonic passenger aircraft, for it is an advancement over other forms of air travel. But I am also grateful because by being on the Concorde I am able to attend meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses more regularly than would be possible if I had been working on other aircraft. Bible studies at home can also be held on a more regular basis, as Concorde trips are more standard in length and in time away from my family. So, my association with the Concorde is beneficial and rewarding.​—Contributed.
[Box on page 19]
Why is the Concorde’s nose different on pages 13 and 18?
  To ensure maximum pilot visibility the nose is lowered on takeoff and landing. But when flying it is raised to streamline the aircraft for supersonic speed

