‘No End to the Making of Books’
EVERY year billions of copies of books roll off the presses, eventually finding their way into homes, offices and libraries throughout the world. In the United States alone, each year sees the introduction of over 20,000 new books, not including textbooks and reference works. Add to this more than 8,000 reprints and revisions.
Clearly, no one person could ever hope to read all the books that have been published. In view of today’s fast printing methods, the following words written about 3,000 years ago are even more appropriate than when they were first recorded: “To the making of many books there is no end, and much devotion to them is wearisome to the flesh.”​—Eccl. 12:12.
One “wearisome” factor is that publications dealing with the various fields of knowledge may present conflicting views. So, the person who centers his whole life around books can tire himself out reading, comparing and trying to resolve contradictions. Particularly when it comes to philosophical studies, often it is just a matter of one opinion versus another opinion.
Since a person obviously cannot survey the whole field of human knowledge and theory, he must be selective. Just what writings are most beneficial and can safely be used as a guide for life? Wise King Solomon, the one who wrote about the making of many books, provides the answer: “The words of the wise ones are like oxgoads, and just like nails driven in are those indulging in collections of sentences; they have been given from one shepherd.”​—Eccl. 12:11.
According to this, the most valuable writings are those that originate or are in agreement with the “one shepherd.” Who is this “one shepherd”? King Solomon’s writings are a part of the Holy Scriptures and, therefore, the “shepherd” must be the one referred to in those Scriptures. At Psalm 23:1, for example, we read: “Jehovah is my Shepherd.”
In view of Solomon’s words, the greatest benefit comes from a careful study of the Scriptures that are inspired of God. This will not tire one out, as can vain efforts to resolve the conflicting theories of men. By putting the Bible’s guidelines into application, millions of men and women have come to appreciate the truth of what we read at 2 Timothy 3:16, 17: “All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness, that the man of God may be fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.”
The wisdom that is Biblically oriented can indeed affect us like the oxgoad mentioned by Solomon. This implement, the oxgoad, with its sharp metal point, is designed to prick a draft animal, prompting it to continue moving in a certain direction. Similarly, the words of those having godly wisdom can prick the listeners or readers to advance in harmony with the wisdom expressed, to their benefit. Also, persons who occupy themselves with “collections of sentences,” that is, truly beneficial wise sayings or proverbs, are like nails. How so? This is because nails can provide support for something or can stabilize it. Likewise, by their sound words of wisdom, “those indulging in collections of sentences,” can have a stabilizing and supportive effect on others.
Hence, do not permit yourself to be distracted by the multitude of books that are continually being printed. Take time to consider the most valuable book of all, the Bible, and publications that are in harmony with it. Then, concerning the Bible, you will not feel as did the American patriot Patrick Henry who, shortly before his death, said to a friend: “This is a book worth more than all the others that were ever printed. It is my misfortune not to have found time to read it with the proper attention and feeling till lately.”

