R175 : page 1 

VOL. II. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., JANUARY, 1881. 

NO. 7. 



pagel 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 

REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H. PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 

L. ALLEN, HONEOYE, N.Y. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN, . FT. EDWARD, N.Y. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance-includes 
postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



PITTSBURGH CHURCH MEETING. 

Services held in "Curry Institute Hall," corner Penn avenue and 
Sixth street, Pittsburgh, at 2.30 o'clock, P.M. Every Wednesday 
evening, at No. 80 Cedar avenue, Allegheny, at 7:30 o'clock, 
P.M. All are cordially invited. 



R175 : page 1 

"A STONE OF STUMBLING." 

"He (Jesus) shall be... for a stone of stumbling and for a rock of 
offence to both the houses of Israel." Isa. 8:14. 

The Bible speaks of the several tribes of Israel as houses-viz.: 
House of Judah, Levi, Benjamin, etc., but the expression, House 
of Israel, was used as belonging to the twelve tribes collectively. 
(Jacob, after his wrestle with the angel, was called Israel, which 
signifies "a Prince with God," and all of his descendants are 
called the children or House of Israel.) And the nominal Gospel 
church, entire, containing both wheat and tares (Matt. 13) is 
recognized as the House of Christ who is the true Israel-a 
Prince with God. 

It is these two houses that we understand as referred to in the 
scripture above cited-the fleshly house of servants and the 
spiritual house of sons—as we read: "Moses verily was faithful 
in all his house [of servants-fleshly Israel], but Christ as a Son 
over his own house [of sons-spiritual Israel] whose house are 
we [to be] if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of our 
hope firm unto the end. [Heb. 3:5,6.] We see then that none are 
of the Gospel House of Sons, except those who "hold fast to the 
end." But during this age of trial and development, all professors 
are reckoned as part of the nominal house of sons, and the 
distinction between the true and false are not to be manifested 
until the end of this age- "The harvest" -when wheat and tares 
are separated. 

This fact, that both of the nominal houses— fleshly and spiritual 
Israel-stumble over Christ, may have escaped the notice of 
many, and the bare suggestion that the Gospel Church is to 
stumble will doubtless be repelled by many with alarm. But, 
beloved, be not alarmed; remember that "the Lord knoweth them 
that are his," and not one grain of wheat will be mistaken for a 
tare; nor will one tare be gathered into the barn of safety with 
the wheat. Were we to do the separating, very many tares who 
have been our neighbors and church members might be classed 
as wheat that will be known in their true character by the angels 
who are the reapers. 

The Jewish church claimed that they were servants of God, and 
so they had been reckoned a house of servants for eighteen 



hundred years, up to the time when Jesus came in the end of 
their age as the reaper, and the work of separating between true 
grain and empty chaff commenced. The work of reaping was 
done by Jesus' personal preaching, and also through his 
disciples, as John had declared. "His" winnowing fan is in his 
hand, and he will thoroughly purge [cleanse] his floor, and 
gather his wheat into the garner [the gospel age,] but burn up the 
chaff with unquenchable fire," [Matt. 3:12] the fire of tribulation 
and national destruction on fleshly Israel, ending with 
Jerusalem's destruction~A.D. 70. 

The work of Jesus in the end or harvest of the Jewish age, was, 
not to make Israelites of the Gentiles, but to prove who were 
really servants of God. The results prove that few of the nominal 
fleshly Israel were "Israelites indeed, in whom was no guile." 
"He came to [nominally] His own, and as a people or house they 
received him not." The nominal house stumbled over him, and 
did not recognize him. "But to as many as received him, to them 
gave he power [liberty] to become sons of God" -but the rest 
were blinded. 

We have heretofore seen that the Jewish or servant house was in 
many respects a pattern or shadow of the higher gospel house. 
Especially in the closing work of the two ages is this parallelism 
striking. Their age ended with a harvest, in which Jesus in the 
flesh was the reaper and winnower and gatherer into the barn, 
the disciples being the assistant reapers, working under his 
directions. [Luke 10:1.] Our age is also to end with the harvest 
of the spiritual or gospel house -a separating of wheat and tares, 
in which again, Jesus a spiritual body ["We know him no more 
after the flesh"] is the reaper, [Rev. 14:14-16, Matt. 13:41] while 
the angels, also invisible spiritual bodies, are the assistants. 

We see too that not only are the harvests of Jewish and gospel 
ages parallel in point of beginning, but also in length of 
duration; theirs being in all 40 years from the time of Jesus 
anointing [at beginning of their harvest, A.D. 30,] to destruction 
of Jerusalem, A.D. 70. So, ours, beginning in 1874 closes with 
the end of the "day of wrath" and end of the "times of the 
Gentiles," 1914~a similar and parallel period of 40 years. The 
first seven years of the Jewish harvest was especially devoted to 
the gathering of ripe wheat from that church; three and one-half 
of it was while he was present as the Bridegroom and three and 
a half of it after he had come to them as king and had entered 
into glory, but it was all under his supervision and direction. 

As John had said, he purged his floor, gathered his wheat and 
burned the chaff. So here the parallel is being fulfilled: We find, 
[as heretofore shown-see "Day Dawn"] the law and the 
prophets declaring him present at the culmination of the "Jubilee 
cycles" in 1874. And the parallels show us that then the harvest 
began, and that the gathering of the Bride into the place of 
safety, will occupy a parallel seven years of time, ending in 



1881. But how, when, and why did the "house of servants" 
stumble over Christ? If we can ascertain this it should give us a 
clue to how, when, and why, the Gospel house stumbles, 
especially in view of the fact that in so many particulars the 
closing work of that age is the exact pattern of this. 

We suggest that the fleshly house could not stumble over Christ 
until he had come and was present among them. They stumbled 
because of the manner of Christ's coming. They had expected 
Him to manifest himself in such a manner as would be 
convincing to their natural eye and senses, and not require the 
exercise of faith. He came in such an obscure and humble 
manner as to appeal only to the eye of faith, and taught in such a 
manner that only those who had the hearing of faith received his 
witness. "Who hath ears to hear let him hear." Matt. 13:9. 

The object of his so appealing to the eye and ear of faith was, 
that none but such as had these should receive Him, and that the 
others "who sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of 
the law," (professedly Israelites, but not Israelites indeed) should 
stumble, not recognize him as the Son of God, but fulfill what 
had been prophesied of them, and crucify him. We thus see how, 
when and why the fleshly house stumbled. (Rom. 9:32-33.) 

R176 : page 1 

Now, let us look with even deeper interest to the stumbling of 
the nominal Gospel house-spiritual Israel. We suggest that as 
the fleshly house could not stumble over Him until he came at 
the first advent, so the spiritual house cannot stumble over 
Christ until His second advent. The causes of stumbling too are 
the same; those of the Gospel church who expect the second 
coming of Christ and establishment of his kingdom are 
expecting (just as the fleshly house did) an outward display, 
which will appeal to the natural eye, ear, and human senses 
generally. 

Some know not, and others who ought to know experimentally, 
seem to forget, that if we are in Christ Jesus we are new 
creatures. "Ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit (condition) if 
so be that the spirit of Christ dwell in you." (Rom. 8:9.) All of 
this class of persons have given up-reckoned dead, (and are 
daily dying to) the fleshly human nature, and are daily partaking 
more and more of the spiritual or divine nature, into the 
perfection of which we are expecting soon to be changed, when 
the separating of "the harvest" is complete. These should all 
remember the rule which we apply to other things, viz. "We 
look not at the things which are seen (of the natural eye), but at 
the things which are not seen, for the things which are seen are 
temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal." (2 Cor. 
4:18.) Which of the things which we as new creatures prize so 
highly are visible to the natural eye? None; it was by the eye of 
faith that we realized our heavenly Father's smile, saw Jesus as 



our Leader, saw the "crown of life," and "prize of our high 
calling." Our spiritual eye of faith has seen, and our circumcised 
ears heard of the glorious things "God hath in reservation for 
them that love Him," which the natural man cannot see and hear, 
because they are spiritually discerned." (1 Cor. 2:14.) We see 
and hear, because led by the Spirit (through the word.) "We 
walk by faith, and not by [natural] sight." 

Would that all could realize that this class described [dead to the 
natural, but alive spiritually] are the only ones who will 
constitute the body or bride of Christ. These have fulfilled their 
covenant by sacrificing the human nature. "They shall be 
mine.. .in that day when I make up my jewels." [Mai. 3:17.] It is 
to this class only that Jesus comes as Head and Bridegroom, and 
only they are to 

R176:page2 

recognize His presence during the harvest of this age, as only 
those with the eye and ear of faith recognized Jesus in the 
harvest of the fleshly house. [True, there will be in due time 
outward manifestations of "Power and great glory," which will 
convince all mankind of the reality of the new kingdom; but this 
comes after the bride has recognized his presence, been 
separated from the tares, and "made like unto Christ's glorious 
body," for "when he shall appear [to the world] we also shall 
appear with him in glory." We will not be revealed in flesh, but 
in glory. "We shall be revealed [made known] in flaming fire," 
[judgments] inflicting righteous punishment upon wrong doers, 
and lifting up the poor and oppressed. 

We believe that Christ is now present, in the sense of having 
commenced the work of taking to himself His great power and 
reigning. The work begins with the separating of tares from 
wheat in the living church and the association of the wheat of all 
ages with Himself in the authority of His kingdom. "To him that 
overcometh will I grant to sit with Me in My throne, " and "to 
him will I give power over the nations," to continue until all 
things are subdued under Him. It seems proper, too, that the 
work should begin thus, by taking his bride and the twain 
becoming one. 

It must be painfully evident to all true Christians that the 
nominal church which calls herself the spouse of Christ, is far 
from being the "little flock" who walk the narrow way~"the way 
their Leader trod." Many are Christians in name and form only, 
"having a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof," by 
living contrary to their professions. Many are moralists only, 
who recognize and use the church only as a social and moral 
club. Many are hypocrites, who use the church as a stepping- 
stone to wealth and social standing. Some are true children of 
God and feel that the church is too empty and formal and 
worldly, yet are carried on with the others by the thought that 



they may be too timid. Mr. A. and Mrs. C. are very intelligent 
and wealthy and moral people and they approve of such things, 
and who am I that I should object? They would think me weak 
and fanatical--! will continue with them; certainly much good is 
being done. 

A few— a little flock— while still using their influence and 
example as "living epistles" for their Master, feel themselves 
almost, or entirely, separated from the nominal church. The 
church's union with the world in worldly plans, ways, customs 
and dress are out of harmony with their new nature, and their 
seeking to be "not conformed to the world, but transformed by 
the renewing of their minds" to harmony with the will of God; 
they cannot feel at home with the carnally minded. Their eye 
delights not so much in beauty of form, as in the perfection of 
the new nature, begotten of God through the word of truth; not 
so much in the beauty of dress as in the beauty of character and 
its Christ-like-ness; not so much in the grandeur of the house as 
in the greatness and loveliness of Him whom they "worship in 
spirit and in truth;" not so much at the language and eloquence 
of the preacher as in the understanding of the word of God. 

These go sometimes to meet with the nominal church, but are 
always separate in spirit and usually seek and enjoy more the 
society of others like-minded. These are obliged to study the 
word privately, for if they do attend preaching they hear a 
sermon on some topic of morality directed to the world of 
unbelievers. Nor can the pastor be blamed entirely for so doing, 
the policy of the church having supplied him a congregation, 
nine-tenths of which are worldly and cannot understand spiritual 
things, he feels it to be his duty to preach to the majority; 
consequently the sheep of the flock receive little or none of the 
"strong meat" of the word. Will these starve, think you? I tell 
you, nay; the great Shepherd will provide "meat in due season" 
to all who really hunger and thirst after it, He will lead them to 
green pastures. 

This last class is to be the bride. Careless of the opinions, smiles 
or frowns of the world, she cares only to be in favor with her 
beloved— the heavenly bridegroom. And these are to recognize 
him now, the others are to stumble and not recognize Him until 
these have all gone in to the marriage and the door to that high 
position is closed. Our understanding is that the Bridegroom 
came in 1874; and this little company is being brought to a 
knowledge of his presence, and in that sense, being separated 
from other true Christians who either are overcharged with the 
affairs of this world or bound by chains of denominationalism, 
are making void the word of God through their traditions, etc., 
and still others, who, not being in condition of heart to receive 
Him on the evidence of His word, but who turn to seek light on 
His presence in other directions and find it not until the door to 
that high calling is shut. Matt. 25:10. 



We trust, then, that all readers may see that the reason why the 
Church in general stumbles here, (as the fleshly house did,) is 
because only a "little flock" in it is the bride. The two houses of 
Israel each in turn were called to be Christ's bride. Both fail to 
attain the position, but as God had foreseen and arranged, a little 
company from each do receive Him, and "As many as receive 
Him" are acceptable. The election hath obtained it, and the rest 
were blinded" (by their own condition). Rom. 11:7. 

The pathway in which the little flock walk, though rugged and 
difficult, is filled with light- "Thy word is a lamp to my feet and 
a lantern to my footsteps." And it is this light which prevents us 
from stumbling over this stone of stumbling. The prophetic 
word shows us that we are in "the day of the Lord, " and enables 
us to receive Him, not by the sight of the natural eye, but by the 
eye of faith, for "we walk by faith, not by sight." This is just as 
Peter advised us: We have a sure word of prophecy, unto which 
ye do well to take heed as unto a light shining in a dark place. [2 
Pet. 1:19.] The day of the Lord is called a day of darkness, and 
we, unless enlightened by the word of prophecy, would stumble 
as the others of the Church are doing over the stone of stumbling 
in this dark place. But enlightened by our lamp, how our hearts 
have been rejoiced since we found him present, and though a 
stone of stumbling to others, "To you, who believe, He is 
precious." 1 Pet. 2:7. 

THE DA Y OF VISIT A TION. 

When Jesus had finished His ministry He rode to Jerusalem on 
the ass, assuming [typically] to the fleshly house the office of 
king, and in the exercise of that office he declared: "Your house 
is left unto you desolate "--here giving up the fleshly house. We 
repeat that they were given up because, not being Israelites 
indeed, they did not receive Him-stumbled— and so we read that 
when He had told them of their overthrow and destruction He 
assigns as the cause~"Because thou knewest not the time of thy 
visitation." [Luke 19:41-44.] Their time of visitation was, in a 
sense, the whole forty years to the destruction of the nation; but 
there had been the time of trial first; if during that first three and 
a-half years they had been in a condition to receive Jesus, the 
visitation following would have been of blessing, but unready 
and rejecting him, it became a visitation of wrath. 

R177 : page 2 

So also here, during the first three and a-half years, from 1874 
to 1878, the opportunity was given to the general Gospel Church 
to receive Christ the present one, but they stumbled similarly to 
the fleshly house. Because they knew not the time of their 
visitation-being unready-and are similarly cast off -given over 
to destruction (as an institution)-a visitation of wrath. 



After the giving up of the fleshly house, especially during the 
three and a half years following, or the last half of their covenant 
week [the 70th, Dan. 9:24], favor was still shown to all who left 
it and accepted of the fact that Jesus Christ had come, etc. ; so 
here there will be special favor shown to all who separate in 
heart from the cast-off Church, and receive the presence of the 
Lord during the three and a half years from 1878 to 1881, and 
after that to those who become part of "the great company," for 
some shall glorify God in this "day of visitation and wrath." [1 
Pet. 2:12.] 

The number of Scriptures which speak of the Gospel Church 
after being cast off from God's favor, and of her rapid decline 
and fall are somewhat wonderful. In Rev. 3:14 to 21, the whole 
picture is vividly presented. The Lord is addressing the last 
phase of the Church, the seventh. [We in common, with nearly 
all expositors of the Apocalypse, understand the seven Churches 
here addressed to represent seven phases or conditions of the 
entire nominal Church, from the days of the apostles to the end 
of the Gospel age, in the order mentioned.] To this seventh 
Church, Jesus says: "I know thy works," [the works are greater 
far than the faith] "that thou art neither cold nor hot; so, then, 
because thou art lukewarm I will spew thee out of My mouth." 
What a description this is of the present condition of her, whom 
God calls "Babylon" -confusion-mixture- lukewarm. 

Babylon says she is "rich, increased in goods and has need of 
nothing;" that she is in a more prosperous condition than ever 
before, and she boasts of fine churches, high steeples, eloquent 
preachers, wealthy members, splendid music, large salaries and 
worldly popularity, and knows not that she is "poor and 
miserable and blind, " (stumbling over present truths) and 
remembers not that her worldly popularity is an evidence of her 
disfavor with the Bridegroom. "For the friendship of the world 
is enmity against God." She is therefore given up, as was the 
fleshly house— she is "spewed out of His mouth." She has been 
His mouthpiece, and through her He has spoken to the world, 
but it shall be so no longer. "The voice of the Bridegroom and 
the Bride shall be heard no more at all in thee." Rev. 18:23. 

To our understanding this "spewing" and "falling" dates from 
1878, the exact parallel of time to the giving and "leaving 
desolate" of the fleshly house. And now the call is "Come out of 
her, my people! that ye be not partakers of her sins and receive 
not of her plagues," and while we expect that most of the second 
company will not be freed from her bondage until afterward, we 
do expect that all who constitute part of the bride will be 
separated before the Autumn of 1881, then "the voice of the 
Bride will no more be heard in her." 

The fall of Babylon is not only the subject of a large portion of 
the book of Revelation, but also of many of the prophecies. As 
fleshly Israel went into captivity to literal Babylon, so did the 



Gospel house go into captivity to "Babylon, the great mother of 
harlots," and is still bound by many of her chains of darkness 
and error. In prophecy when depicting the desolations, etc., 
coming upon Babylon, we understand it to refer to both the type 
and the antitype, and especially to the latter, and they harmonize 
wonderfully with the account given of the same event in Rev. 
12:13,16-19. 

While there are many such prophecies, we merely refer to one; 
Jer. 50 and 51. "How is the hammer of the whole earth cut 
asunder and broken? How is Babylon become a desolation 
among the nations?... Woe unto them, for their day is come and 
the time of their visitation. The voice of them that flee and 
escape out of the land of Babylon to declare in Zion the 
vengeance of the Lord our God, the vengeance of His 
temple... and the most proud shall stumble and fall and none 
shall raise Him up.... At the noise of the taking of Babylon the 
earth is moved and the cry is heard among the nations.... Flee out 
of the midst of Babylon and deliver every man his soul (life); be 
not cut off in her iniquity, for this is the time of the Lord's 
vengeance; He will render unto her a recompense. Babylon hath 
been a golden cup in the Lord's hand that made all the earth 
drunken.... We would have healed Babylon, but she is not 
healed; forsake her and let us go, every man, into his own 
country.... The Lord hath brought forth our righteousness; come, 
let us declare in Zion the work of the Lord our God." (51:10.) 
"In those days and at that time," saith the Lord, "the iniquity of 
Israel shall be sought for and there shall be none, and the sins of 
Judah, and they shall not be found." (50:20.) This last text shows 
us that the time really meant by the prophesy was not at the 
deliverance of Israel from literal Babylon (though type and 
antitype are closely interwoven), but at the end of this age, 
when, says Paul: God shall "take away their sins." (Read Rom. 
11:25-27.) 

After telling the nominal church that she is no longer his 
mouthpiece, Jesus says: "Be zealous therefore and repent." This 
is his message to the nominal church as a whole; but now he 
recognizes some who are in, but not of Babylon- 



(Continued on Seventh page.) 

R177 : page 7 

(Continued from Second page.) 

individuals, and to these he says: "Behold, I stand at the door 
and knock; if any man hear my voice and open the door I will 
come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me." It is not 
at the door of the sinner's heart the Lord stands thus knocking, 
as some have supposed, but at the hearts of the true Israelites, in 
this seventh or closing stage of the Gospel church. And what a 



wonderfully clear picture this affords us~the two things occur at 
the same time, i.e., while the one party is "stumbling" and being 
"spewed out," the other party, the "little flock," "the 
overcomers," are being made aware of his presence. These hear 
his knock—the prophecies which announce him as present, not 
as coming in the future, but present now. 

When any one knocks at your door, it is an indication, not that 
they will come, but that they have come. So the Lord has given 
us a striking picture, illustrative of His presence at the time 
Babylon is given up. Since we each individually heard the knock 
of the Prophecies, opened our heart and realized his presence, 
how fully his promise has been fulfilled, "I will come in... and 
sup with him, and he with me. " What a blessed feasting on the 
truth we have enjoyed. Ah, yes, when our Lord girds Himself 
and comes forth to serve us, as he has done during these years, 
we get food indeed. We have meat to eat that the world knoweth 
not of, a parallel again to those true Israelites who received him 
at his first advent. "The disciples came unto him privately, 
saying, explain unto us," and Jesus answers: "To you it is given 
to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to all them 
that are without (unbelievers) all these things are done in 
parables" (figures of speech which they cannot understand.) 
"Blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they 
hear; for verily I say unto you, that many prophets and righteous 
men have desired to see the things which ye see, and have not 
seen them." (Matt. 13:17.) And the same is true of those who see 
him 

R177 : page 8 

present now by the eye of faith-by the light of the sure word of 
prophecy- "blessed are your eyes." 

While all overcomers-the Bride -are to get the victory, etc., 
and not fall with Babylon, yet from other scriptures we find that 
some who are really children of God, will fall with her. "Many 
among them shall stumble and fall, and be broken." (Isa. 8:15.) 
But (Psa. 37:24) "though he fall yet shall he 

NOT BE UTTERL Y CAST DOWN. " 

The stumbling and fall of both the houses of Israel should be 
regarded rather as a blessing than otherwise, as the prophet has 
said: "This child (Jesus) is set for the fall and rising again of 
many in Israel" —both houses. The rejection of the nominal 
house was necessary before the call could go "to the Gentiles to 
take out a people (Bride) for his name." For, "through their fall 
salvation is come to the Gentiles." (Rom. 11:11.) And though 
the fleshly house fell, they are to rise again to all that was 
promised them as a fleshly seed of Abraham, (in the Millennial 
age.) Then, why should any complain? "If the fall of them be the 
riches of the world," or resulted in throwing open to the world in 



general the opportunity of running the race for "the prize of high 
calling" -to be the "Bride, the Lamb's wife?" And "what shall 
the receiving of them [back to favor as God's people] be but life 
from the dead" —resurrection.-- [Rom. 11:12.] 

So with the stumbling and fall of the second house. It is 
necessary that the nominal church should fall in order that the 
true might be manifested-separated and "enter into the joys of 
her Lord." But while the fleshly house shall be restored, the 
Babylon church will never be restored. As a great millstone cast 
into the sea, so shall Babylon fall, and be found no more. [Rev. 
18:21.] While this is true especially of the mother of harlots; it is 
true also of all her daughters who partake of her nature, and only 
individuals out of Babylon shall arise from among her ashes, 
saying: "True and righteous are His judgments for he hath 
judged the great harlot." "Alleluia, for the Lord God omnipotent 
reigneth." And they will thus "glorify God in the day of 
visitation." [1 Pet. 12:12.] 

But let us "walk in his footsteps" --"the path of the just" 
[righteous] and, enlightened and illumined by the word, 
realizing the presence of 

R178 : page 8 

our Lord, glorify God without having to go into the wrath. 
"Watch ye that ye may be accounted worthy," [clothed with his 
righteousness, "unspotted from the world"] to escape all those 
things coming upon the world, and stand before the Son of 
Man." Let us remember that the 'little flock' have always been- 
the church "whose names are written in heaven," though during 
the gospel age the number has seemed much larger, by reason of 
tares. And though you may have little of earthly communion 
with saints, remember to keep up your relationship and union 
with the head of the church— Christ. 

As at the first advent some of the people would have believed if 
the Pharisees had received Him, and it was asked, "Have any of 
the Scribes or Pharisees believed on him?" So now many say if 
the Lord is present why do not the leading preachers of the 
churches believe it? We cannot risk our judgment as to the 
meaning of the word as against theirs. Of the leaders of that 
church Jesus said: "Can the blind lead the blind; shall they not 
both fall?" (Luke 6:39.) They did; both leaders and masses 
stumbled and fell. So too Jesus says of the nominal church here, 
Thou knowest not that thou art poor and blind. And again, for 
the same reasons, many stumble and fall. 

Let us remember, dear friends, that the great Teacher and Leader 
of the flock is Christ. The guide unto truth is the Spirit of truth 
through the word, and if any man teach, you are required to 
square and measure his teachings, by going "to the law and to 
the testimony, If they speak not according to these it is because 
there is no light in them." (Isa. 8:20.) As children of the light, let 



us walk in the light, and be sanctified and separated from both 
the world and a worldly church. 



R178:page3 



CONSECRATION PRAYER. 

Take my life, and let it be 
Consecrated, Lord, to Thee. 
Take my hands, and let them move 
At the impulse of thy love. 

Take my feet, and let them be 
Swift and beautiful for Thee. 
Take my voice, and let me sing 
Always, only, for my King. 

Take my lips, and let them be 
Filled with messages from Thee. 
Take my silver and my gold, 
Not a mite will I withhold. 

Take my moments and my days, 
Let them flow in ceaseless praise. 
Take my intellect, and use 
Every power as Thou shalt choose. 

Take my will, and make it thine; 
It shall be no longer mine. 
Take my heart, it is thine own! 
Fit it for Thy royal throne. 

Take my love; my Lord, I pour 
At Thy feet its treasure store! 
Take myself, and I will be, 
Ever, only, all, for Thee! 



R178:page3 



-Selected. 



HOLY PLACE. 



It will be admitted by all Bible students, that a correct 
understanding of terms used, is necessary, in order to a clear 
comprehension of any subject. Now that the tabernacle of the 
wilderness is unfolding so grandly, as a type, or shadow of the 
true tabernacle, and giving us a better knowledge of God and 
Christ, and the way to God, it becomes important to understand 
the terms used in connection with it. 

For various reasons, it seems especially important to know the 
scripture names of the three places in the tabernacle. It is evident 



that in some passages, the term holy is used for most holy, or 
referring to both, so that it is necessary to determine the place 
referred to by the connections; but we think it can be clearly 
shown that the names are not all used interchangeably. 

It seems that there has been a general misunderstanding in 
regard to the term holy place. It needs only to be stated that 
words in italics in the scriptures, have been supplied by the 
translators, and were not in the original. If that is invariably the 
case, then we think that it can be shown that wherever place is 
not in italics, the term "holy place" has reference to the court of 
the tabernacle; and consequently the other two places are called 
the holy and most holy, or holiest of all; place being in italics, in 
both old and new testament. So we have "the holy place;" (the 
court) "the holy," (beyond the first vail) and "the most holy," or 
holiest of all (beyond the second vail). Notice in Exodus, Lev. 
and Heb. As has been shown, the alter of burnt offering; and the 
laver for washing, were in the court or holy place. The animals 
for sacrifice were killed there. And he shall slay the lamb in the 
place where he shall kill the sin offering in the holy place. Lev. 
14:13. And the remainder thereof shall Aaron and his sons eat; 
with unleavened bread shall it be eaten in the holy place; in the 
court of the tabernacle of the congregation they shall eat it. Lev. 
6:16-26. 

It will be noticed that place is in the original in these passages, 
not being in italics; and that the holy place and court are 
identical. And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying: Thou shalt 
make a laver of brass, and his foot of brass to wash; and thou 
shalt put it between the tabernacle of the congregation and the 
alter, and thou shalt put water therein, for Aaron and his sons 
shall wash their hands and their feet thereat; when they go into 
the tabernacle of the congregation, they shall wash, that they die 
not; or when they come near to the alter to minister, to burn 
offering made by fire unto the Lord. Ex. 30:17-20. Whatsoever 
shall touch the flesh thereof shall be holy; and when there is 
sprinkled of the blood thereof upon any garment thou shalt wash 
that whereon it was sprinkled, in the holy place (the court). Lev. 
6:27. 

These passages make it certain that whoever or whatever was 
washed in connection with the tabernacle, was washed at the 
laver, in the holy place; and we have seen that the holy place is 
the court of the tabernacle; and we found also, in Ex. 30:20, that 
whoever would enter the holy, must first wash at the laver, that 
he die not. Now coming to Lev. 16 which gives us a picture of 
the day of atonement, we find that if the high priest would enter 
holy or most holy, he must first wash his flesh in water and put 
on the holy linen garments; then kill the bullock to make 
atonement for himself and his house; and take his blood in and 
sprinkle upon and before the mercy seat; then come out and kill 
the goat, which was to make atonement for the people, and do 



with his blood as he did with the blood of the bullock; then after 
making atonement for the holy, and the tabernacle, and the alter; 
and sending away the scapegoat; Aaron shall come into the 
tabernacle of the congregation, (evidently in this passage as in 
some others~the court) and shall put off the linen garments, 
which he put on when he went into the holy, and leave them 
there, and shall wash his flesh with water in the holy place (the 
court). Lev. 16:23-24. 

In the face of all these facts, it is persistently claimed by some 
that Aaron killed the bullock, then stopped on his way to the 
most holy, and washed his flesh in the holy, and put on the holy 
garments, and also stopped on his way out to wash etc., in the 
holy; claiming that the beauty of the type consisted in the 
washing where no place was provided for that purpose; and 
notwithstanding it was death to enter the holy before washing. 
We think the beauty of any explanation of God's word should 
consist in adhering to the general teaching of the word. 

B. W. K. 



R179:page3 

HID TREASURES. 

"If thou seekest her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid 
treasures, then shalt thou understand the fear of the Lord and 
find the knowledge of God." Prov. 2:4,5. 

If we go back to the second verse we shall find the thing spoken 
of is wisdom. 

Webster says that, "in Scripture, theology wisdom is true 
religion." What does religion mean? The word is taken from 
Religo, to bind anew, or to rebind. It is used in a general sense to 
signify "any system of faith and worship." Notice it is a system. 
This brings us to the conclusion (if we take Webster for the 
standard of words, and we have no reason to differ) that wisdom 
is the true system of faith and worship. Then it follows that we 
are to seek for the true system of faith and worship as men seek 
for silver. But, says one, silver is out of sight in the earth, and is 
hard to be found, but what is necessary to be known of the true 
system of religion is revealed so plainly that the wayfaring man, 
though a fool, need not err therein. I know the Prophet speaks of 
a good time coming, when it shall be so revealed that "the 
wayfaring man, though a fool, (like the rich man who had to pull 
down his barns and build larger) shall not err therein. " Now, we 
think there is a strong analogy between seeking for a knowledge 
of the true system of faith and seeking for silver. Paul says, Heb. 
5:11, there are many things... hard (difficult) to be uttered," and 
Peter, 2 Peter 3:16, speaks of "things hard to be understood, 



which they that are unlearned (in the word) and unstable, wrest, 
as they do also the other Scripture, to their own destruction." 

Experience, as well as the word, teaches us that as there is much 
and persistent search and pains-taking required to find the "vein" 
or "lead" of precious metal concealed in the earth, so there is to 
find the vein or lead of precious truth hidden away in the mine 
of God's word. 

We think it a duty to find out all we possibly can of God's 
"system of faith," and what we cannot find out will be only that 
which he has so completely hidden. But some one may ask, why 
has He hidden it? If it is right for us to know it? We answer, that 
it may not be found until it is needed. God's wisdom has hidden 
it just far enough away to be found by our finite minds, after 
diligent search, just at the right time, or, as the Spirit says, due 
time; and it is those who are interested and earnest enough to 
search and find the jewels, who are to be vested with regal 
authority. 

One might just as well say that the silver and gold, the coal and 
the oil were hidden away in the earth because it was not right for 
us to have them, as that it is not right to search for the true 
system of faith. 

But, says one, we have had the true system of faith all along 
through the past-what more can we have? Did not our fathers 
understand it? Yes, they understood (those who searched) what 
was necessary for them to know, but that was not enough for us 
to know, any more than the supply of silver and gold which was 
in the world at the time of the discovery of America was 
sufficient for the world without any addition up to the present 
time. Our fathers worked the same mine, but did not exhaust it, 
thank God. There are nuggets of gold coming to the light all the 
time. 

But let us see what Scripture evidence we have that these things 
are so. Jesus said, when weeping over Jerusalem, "if thou hadst 
known at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy 
peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes;" but were they to 
remain hidden? No! Isaiah, looking down through the ages (the 
remainder of the Jewish age, and through the Gospel age to the 
coming age~in the restitution age), says, then the eyes of the 
blind shall see. Jesus before had called them blind, and that was 
how these things were "hid from their eyes." 

Paul, in Col. 1 :26, says, "the mystery" of the word of God "hath 
been hid from ages and from generations, but now (in this good- 
news age) is made manifest to his saints. 

Again, in Eph. 3:4,5,6, he says "the mystery of Christ... in other 
ages was not made known unto the sons of men, as it is now 
revealed unto the Holy Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit, that 
the Gentiles should be fellow heirs and of the same body," and 



he tells us that he was made a minister to make all men see what 
is the fellowship of the mystery which, from the beginning of 
the world, hath been hid in God." 

O, how glorious are these things to those who search for them as 
for hid treasure. Truly, here is the knowledge of (about) God. 

Men in mining have lights fixed upon their heads, and they bend 
low, sometimes prostrate in search. We need to be humble and 
have our minds illuminated with the Spirit. When men have 
found silver in the mine it has to be separated from materials 
which are useful in themselves, but detract from the value of the 
precious metal unless separated. So the child of God, like 
Timothy, needs to "rightly divide the word of truth." Let us, dear 
brethren, continue our search after wisdom, which shall result in 
finding "the knowledge of God," for "it cannot be valued with 
the gold of Ophir, with the precious Onyx or the Sapphire." 

The gold and the crystal cannot equal it, and the exchange of it 
shall not be for jewels of fine gold. And when we have found it 
let us not waste nor hoard it, but "put it to the exchangers, that at 
His coming He may receive His own with usury." 

J. C. S. 



R179:page3 



'OUR HOUSE." 



"For we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were 
dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not made with 
hands eternal in the heavens," 2 Cor. 5:1-2. 

From a not hasty but careful perusal of the Scriptures, we are 
satisfied that the view generally taken of this passage, (with the 
context) by the nominal church, hitherto, is erroneous. 

This may seem somewhat immodest; we do not so intend. If we 
have any light it is received, not inherent in us, "that is in our 
flesh dwelleth no good thing. " If we have apprehended the truth, 
it is because "He, the spirit of truth," leads us, for "the natural 
man receiveth not the things of the spirit, for they are 
foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they 
are spiritually discerned." 1 Cor. 2:14. The Church is not to 
blame for not seeing before; how can one be expected to see in 
the night anything more than the outlines of the landscape; but 
now the day dawns, "let us not sleep, as do others," 1 Thes. 5:6. 

The prophets uttered some things which they did not fully 
understand and which it was not necessary they should fully 
understand, because they were for us; 1 Peter 1:10-12. 

But about this matter, Paul says (as mouth-piece for the 
Church), "we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle 



were dissolved we have a (singular number) building of God, a 
house not made with hands, etc. 

Paul was writing to the Corinthians here, but he was also writing 
"to all that in every place call on the name of Jesus Christ our 
Lord, both theirs and ours." 1 Cor. 1:2. The word "theirs" refers 
evidently to Jews. Paul was a Jew, Acts 21:39, but he styles 
himself "the Apostle of the Gentiles," Rom. 11:13; so in 
harmony with the latter he could in this dedication of his epistle 
say, "both theirs and ours" to the new Church, which was made 
up of both Jews and Gentiles. They (the Jews) stood aloof from 
the Gospel and were enemies of the cross of Christ; thus 
standing at a distance, the term "theirs," although Paul was a 
Jew, was appropriate to them, and converts 

R179 : page 4 

from both could be very appropriately called "theirs and ours." 
Now, to such he says, "We know that if our earthly house of this 
tabernacle (to which so many precious promises have been 
made) were dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not 
made with hands." It may seem strange to us that the old house 
of Israel should not be able to see the typical nature of their 
ceremonies, and that "whatever is to be on the higher or spiritual 
plane, is brought to view first on the plane of the flesh," but 
though God had been speaking "by the mouth of all the holy 
prophets since the world began," of a restitution, they did not 
see that there was to be, in its application to them, a time of 
dissolution, before the time of restitution; and it seems that the 
Gospel Church in Paul's time, needed to be admonished of the 
danger of looking at that which is seen, forgetting that "that 
which is seen (by mortal eye) is temporal." 

He had to combat that tendency, as in Galations 3:3. "Are ye so 
foolish? having began in the spirit, are ye now made perfect by 
the flesh?" "If our earthly house of this tabernacle were 
dissolved, we have a building of God. " 

The "tabernacle of David is fallen down," but God in his good 
time will rebuild it; but those who are "begotten again unto a 
lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead," 
have the power or privilege of becoming sons of God, and 
together will constitute the house of God; not the house of 
Moses nor the house of David (after the flesh) nor any other 
house but the house of God eternal. 

"Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, 
consider 

R180:page4 

the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus, who 
was faithful to Him that appointed Him, as also Moses was 
faithful in all His house, for this Man was counted worthy of 



more glory than Moses, inasmuch as He who hath builded the 
house, hath more honor than the house."... 

And Moses verily was faithful in all his house, as a servant; 
what for? "for a testimony of those things which were to come 
after. "But Christ as a son over his own house, whose house are 
we, if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope 
firm unto the end." Heb. 3:1-6. 

Now, no matter if the earthly house of our tabernacle, "whether 
of David or the Gospel, be dissolved, we have a building of 
God, a house not made with hands eternal in the heavens. 

We have here a thought suggested by the word dissolve, which 
is in harmony with the prophecy of Malachi 3:3. "And He shall 
sit as a refiner and purifier of silver; and He shall purify the sons 
of Levi and purge them as gold and silver." We have often heard 
this referred to and the manner of the refiner watching the 
melting of the precious metal until he can see his own image 
reflected, as an illustration of God's dealing with each of His 
children, all of which is very beautiful and truthful, but there is 
in this expression "dissolved," and yet existing after a still 
deeper thought that impresses us. 

The refiner of silver often finds impurities clinging to his silver 
after it has passed through the hottest fire; then he dissolves it: 
after the application of certain chemicals, silver and gold will 
dissolve in water. A person unacquainted with the process 
would say there was no silver in the water, though the water 
were full of it; the water appears as before~a little discolored if 
the silver was impure— otherwise as clear as if it were not there, 
and the refiner can cause a restitution of that silver to a pure and 
permanent form and more beautiful than before; he puts into that 
water an agent, (an influence) that causes the water to let go of 
it, and the silver in fine particles goes together by itself, no 
longer "dissolved" or "suspended." Then the refiner, to complete 
the work of restitution, puts it in the fire again; thus it "receives 
from his hand double" for all its impurity. 

Now, in prophetic language, waters represent sometimes people 
and sometimes afflictions. Has not the earthly house, "both 
theirs and ours," passed, and are they not passing through such 
waters? Have "they" not been dissolved and "ours" (the nominal 
Church) being dissolved? No matter; "we know that if our 
earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a 
building of God." So Paul could say to the Corinthians and the 
Galations, who were fearing lest they should not be connected in 
some way with the earthly house, that it was a matter of minor 
importance— all it was for was a type and stepping-stone to 
something higher and better. 

Some may say, this is "far fetched," but we have fetched it only 
from the prophet Malachi, and made what seems to us the only 
true application, and it seems to make perfect harmony with all 



other Scripture. We have been held entranced hour after hour as 
we have compared Scripture with Scripture and found beautiful 
harmony with this view all through the word, and thank the Lord 
for it. 

We would not be understood as saying that the word, body and 
house, are never applied to our physical bodies, for it not 
unfrequently is, and we think it is so used in the 10th verse of 
this chapter, though we do not feel over-positive about it lest it 
might refer to the different organizations, that shall finally be 
"gathered together in one," for we hope that the Methodist body, 
the Baptist body and the Presbyterian body (all of which are 
called bodies by their own authorities) will form, if not the body 
of Christ, yet the "household of God;" and we know that "we 
must all (all these different bodies) stand before the judgment 
seat of Christ (when and where?); that every one may "give an 
account of the things done in his body" -no, "that every one may 
receive the things done in his body." [His, is in italics in our 
Bibles.] 

Perhaps some one is ready to ask, "How do you harmonize it 
with the 8th verse?" We would say, that the apostle (Col. 3:3), 
though speaking of our death to sin, tells us where our life is 
(whether our physical bodies are dead or alive, makes no 
difference,) from the time of begetting onward, our "life is hid 
with Christ in God" until "He, who is our Life, shall appear," 
then the earnest expectation of the creature [who is the creature 
but the one who has no spiritual life, the outside world], 
"waiting for the manifestation of the sons of God" will be 
realized and the "sons of God" will be recognized. Till then we 
shall not be able to find out what God has hidden. 

Then, when we are born again, 

"BORN BY A NEW CELESTIAL BIRTH," 

we shall have life in ourselves and together constitute the 
"building of God," the "house not made with hands." Dear 
brethren, how near and dear the relation we sustain to each 
other-"Builded together for the habitation of God." J. C. S. 



R180:page4 

"HOW LONG, O LORD?" 

This is a question doubtless that many ask themselves, viz: 
"How soon will our change come?" This change many of us 
have looked forward to for years, and we yet with much 
pleasure, think of the time when we shall be gathered unto Jesus 
and see Him as he is. In the article concerning our change, in 
December paper, we expressed the opinion that it was nearer 
than many supposed, and while we would not attempt to prove 



our change at any particular time, yet we propose looking at 
some of the evidences which seem to show the translation or 
change from the natural to the spiritual condition, due this side 
or by the fall of our year 1881. The evidence that our change 
will be by that time, increases since we have seen that the 
change to spiritual bodies is not the marriage. While we thought 
the marriage to be the change, and knowing there was three and 
a half years of special favor to the Nominal Church (now left 
desolate) from 1878, we could not expect any translation this 
side of 1881, or during this three and a half years. But since we 
recognize that going into the marriage is not only being made 
ready (by recognizing His presence) for the change, but also, 
that going in includes the change itself, then the evidences that 
we go in (or will be changed) inside of the time mentioned are 
strong, and commend themselves to all interested as worthy of 
investigation. Aside from any direct proof that our change is 
near, the fact that the manner of the change can now be 
understood, is evidence that we are near the time of the change, 
for truth is "meat in due season," and understood only as due. It 
will be remembered that after the spring of 1878, (when we 
understand Jesus was due as King) that the subject of holiness or 
the wedding garment, was very much agitated. And aside from 
the parallel to the end of the Jewish age, and favor at that time 
being shown to the Jewish nation, which implied the presence of 
the King, the consideration of the wedding garment, was also 
proof of the correctness of the application, for "the King had 
come in to see the guests," [Matt. 22:11] and hence all were 
interested in knowing how they stood before Him. Now as the 
inspection of guests is the last thing prior to our change, which 
precedes the marriage and we are all now considering the 
change. It would seem that the time for it, is nigh. 

We shall now present what we adduce from the types and 
prophetic points as seeming to indicate the translation of the 
saints and closing of the door to the high calling by 1881. We 
first notice the building of the Temple, by Solomon which seems 
to be a type of the spiritual as indicated in Acts 7:4-7. The time 
occupied in building is found by comparing 1 Kings 6:1,37 and 
38, which was seven years and six months, yet called seven 
years. Verse 38. "The house when it was in building, was built 
of stone made ready before it was brought thither: so that there 
was neither hammer, nor ax, nor any tool of iron heard in the 
house while it was in building." Verse 7. The quiet manner of 
building suggests to our mind the noiseless resurrection of the 
dead in Christ and change of the living, and if so the resurrection 
and change would cover a period of seven years, thus bringing 
to our mind, order. First the foundation laid and so on until 
completion, and this would be in harmony with statement in 
Rev. 1 1:18, viz: "Give reward unto thy servants, the prophets, 
and to the saints," that is, "Every man in his own order." In 1 
Kings 5:17, we read, "The king commanded and they brought 



great stones, costly stones, and hewed stones to lay the 
foundation of the house." Those we would understand to 
represent the "Apostles and Prophets, which are the foundation, 
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner-stone, in whom all 
the building fitly framed together," groweth unto an holy temple 
in the Lord (Eph. 2:20-21). 

The laying of the foundation-stone, we think, would fitly 
represent the resurrection of the prophets, which resurrection 
would seem to be indicated by God's statement to Daniel, viz: 
"Go thou thy way till the end be, for thou shalt rest, and stand in 
thy lot at the end of the days." (Dan. 12:13.) The days here 
referred to are mentioned in the 12th verse as "The thousand, 
three hundred 

R181 : page 4 

and five and thirty days," and from 538 when the abomination 
was set up, (so mentioned in verse 11,) 1335 years, if prolonged 
to their utmost, would reach to the year 1 874. [For argument, 
see "Day Dawn."] This is one of the arguments which prove the 
presence of Christ at that time for Daniel could not stand in his 
lot or be resurrected, until Christ came. Besides it is also a 
parallel to the baptism of Jesus in the Jewish age, at which time 
the harvest of that age begun and he was recognized as Lord of 
the harvest and bridegroom. So we understand the bridegroom 
came at a parallel point in this age and those that were ready 
went in. (Matt. 25:10.) Since we find that going in includes the 
change to spiritual bodies, it is significant that the days of 
Daniel and the presence of the bridegroom occur at the same 
time, viz: autumn of 1874, and if Daniel stood in his lot at that 
time, he was raised a spiritual body, and as he represents the 
order of prophets and their resurrection is shown by the laying 
of the foundation-stones of the temple, then it would seem that 
the temple began to be built at that time. If this be a correct 
application (and it seems harmonious) and the time of building 
is seven years, then we would expect our change by or before 
the fall of 1881, as from 1874 to then would be the time given 
for building. It is true that the parable of Matt. 25 is only in 
reference to the living phase of the Church. Yet we believe that 
while those living "virgins" go into the wedding by coming into 
a knowledge of the Bridegroom's presence, etc., during the 
seven years harvest [from 1874 to 1881] yet the parable is 
having as it were a fulfillment on a still higher plane during the 
same seven years, viz.: The going into the condition of readiness 
for marriage 

R181 : page 5 

of all the chaste virgins, the dead (by resurrection) and living 
(by translation or change.) In going into the spiritual condition 
"We cannot precede them." (E. Diaglott, 1 Thess. 4:15.) As 
Daniel's time was up in 1874 it is reasonable to suppose that the 



order he represented went in at that time, since which the "dead 
in Christ" are being raised; and as the seven years are about 
complete, that we will soon follow by being changed. Matt. 25 
and the parallelism of the Jewish and Gospel ages, seem to teach 
that the wise of the virgins "who are alive and remain" must all 
come in, to a knowledge of the bridegroom's presence, by the 
fall of 1881, when the door-opportunity to become a member of 
the bride-will close. 

But it is possible that the change to the spiritual condition-the 
"going in to the marriage on the higher plane-may not occur at 
the same moment to each individual. We suggest as quite 
possible, that the change may come to some prepared before that 
time. 

If the dead are to be raised before we are changed it can as well 
take place some time before as a moment, and if the temple is 
any type it is evident that some will be raised at least seven 
years before the last are changed. The fact that the body or mass 
of the saints are assembled together when we are gathered, is 
intimated by Luke 17:34-37, and Paul in Heb. 12:22-23, says: 
"Ye are come [coming] unto Mount Zion, the heavenly 
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels. To the 
general assembly and church of the first born, and to the spirits 
of just men made perfect." We come to these. 

The next point we will consider is that of Noah entering the Ark. 
It seems that the flood of forty days in the destruction of the old 
world is a type of the forty years' trouble here at the end of this 
world, (age) and as Noah entered there and escaped, so some 
shall enter here and escape. 

"The Lord said unto Noah, Come thou, and all thy house, into 
the Ark. For yet seven days, and I will cause it to rain upon the 
earth forty days and forty nights." And Noah did according unto 
all that the Lord commanded him; and it came to pass after 
seven days, that the waters of the flood were upon the earth. 
(Gen. 7:1-10.) The language in connection with this 
circumstance seems to suggest the idea that Noah and those with 
him were seven days going in, and if so, then, this would 
harmonize with the seven years [a day for a year] building of the 
temple or time of going in, commencing with 1874. There is one 
point, however, we will notice, viz: It rained forty days after 
Noah entered, which would represent forty years' trouble after 
we enter. From 1881 to 1914 inclusive, is only about thirty-three 
years, hence in this respect the time differs. This is not when 
considered an objection to the position, for though the time of 
harvest and end of this age commenced Chronologically in 
1874, yet the trouble cannot break, in the full sense, until the 
saints have been taken. "Yet seven days [years] and I will cause 
it to rain upon the earth," should be significant, because we have 
expected trouble, in a special sense, about 1881, and, according 
to the type, we must enter in by that time. Not only has that time 



been looked forward to by many as a point when there would be 
some great change, but the parallel to the end of the Jewish age 
demands that there be a change for the worse, in reference to the 
nominal Christian Church, it being a parallel to when favor 
ended with the Jews in a marked manner, shown by the seventy 
weeks of years mentioned by Daniel 9:24, which time ended 
three and a-half years after they were left desolate. Just as 1881 
is three and a-half years from the point when the Jews began to 
receive favor. While this trouble is due, in the actual sense, from 
1881 on, and is due chronologically to end in 1914, leaving only 
a space of thirty-three years; yet the trouble cannot end actually 
at that time, for there would be a gradual decrease "while the 
nations were beating their swords into plowshares and their 
spears into pruning hooks." (Isa. 2:4.) Hence there could be 
forty years of trouble even after 1881 and not interfere with our 
general position, for this would only carry us seven years 
beyond 1914, as this now does seven years beyond 1874. We 
used to think it would be in the midst of a great trouble that we 
would be changed, but now we do not. Noah went in before it 
rained, and "the Lord shut him in." (Gen. 7:16.) So now, while 
all things remain as in "the days of Noah," we will be changed 
and then the flood—trouble will break on those who know not 
and are in darkness. [1 Thess. 5:1-5.] 

This is shown also in the type of Moses and Aaron, for not one 
of the ten plagues came until after they met in the Mount. And 
as that meeting shows our change, then in order here, there 
would be none of the plagues come till after we are gathered 
unto Jesus, by which we would "escape all these things that shall 
come to pass and stand before the Son of man." [Luke 21 :36.] It 
is in connection with this last type that we find additional proof 
of our speedy change. 

Stephen says: "When he [Moses] was full forty years old it came 
into his heart to visit his brethren, the children of Israel." Moses 
at this time came to deliver his brethren, but they rejected him, 
saying: "Who made thee a ruler and judge over us?" After his 
rejection, "he fled and was a stranger in the land of Midian," 
when he took the daughter of Jethro, priest of Midian, to wife. 
(Exo. 3:1.) And when forty years were expired there appeared to 
him "an angel of the Lord," at which time he was informed of 
God's intention to "send him into Egypt," and "this Moses, 
whom they refused did God send to be a ruler and deliverer." 
(Acts 7:23-36.) Moses seems clearly in this case to be a type of 
Christ. Jesus came to deliver his brethren (according to the 
flesh) and was rejected, after which he takes a Gentile wife and 
returns, showing favor to natural Israel. (Acts 15:14-16.) As 
Moses, in the first instance, Jesus came as a man, but the second 
time as a God, at which time He effects their deliverance. While 
there is a similarity in these general features, it is the time we 
would look at, more particularly now. The two periods in the life 
of Moses, at the end of which he came each time, seem to 



foreshadow the Jewish and Gospel ages, (each represented by 
forty years of Moses' life) at the end of which Jesus comes, first 
at the end of the Jewish as a man; now, in the end of the Gospel 
as a God. 

This being true, one forty would end in A.D. 33, when he was 
rejected as king and left their house desolate. (Luke 19:30-44.) 
Then the parallel to the end of the second forty would be 1878, 
when he came as king and the work of restoring them to favor 
began. Now, with this thought, let us turn to Ex. 7:7. "And 
Moses was fourscore years old and Aaron fourscore and three 
years old when they spake unto Pharaoh." The fourscore, or 
twice forty, would bring us to 1878, in the antitype when Christ 
spake to Pharaoh (the world) by an act, in restoring Israel to 
favor. But it says: "Aaron was fourscore and three years old." As 
Aaron represents us, the living saints, it would seem to indicate 
that we come into a position of power three years after the time, 
represented by the fourscore of Moses. Aaron did not speak until 
after he met Moses, so we would not in the sense here referred 
to until after our change. If the three years mentioned in 
connection with Aaron has any bearing, then it would teach our 
change as coming this side of 1881, as three years from 1878 
would bring us inside of that time. We do not think it well to 
base too much on types or allegories, but when we find them in 
harmony with prophetic points they add additional evidence, and 
while we would not present any of these things as absolute, yet 
there is a harmony which commends them to an intelligent 
mind. They call for the exercise of faith on our part, especially 
when we remember that in reference to the coming of Jesus and 
our change, the apostles, "Say some things hard to be 
understood." (2 Pet. 3:14-16.) We now have taken prophetic 
measurements and allegories together, 

R182:page5 

five different points seeming to teach the resurrection of the 
dead in Christ and change of the living between the fall of 1 874 
and 1881. Two or more witnesses are enough to prove any case, 
as a rule, and certainly God has given us abundant evidence. We 
are also glad to notice that all these things only corroborate 
previous truths, thus proving to a certainty each application as 
correct and causing the old jewels to shine brighter. The five 
lines of argument briefly stated are these: 

1st. The days of Daniel ending in 1874, at which time the 
resurrection commenced, and since which, the dead have been 
going in to the marriage. 

2d. The end of the seven years from that time, as marked by the 
parallel, of the end of the "seventy weeks" in the Jewish age 
ending in our year 1881, at which time we all should be in and 
the door closed, being the end of time of special favor to the 



nominal church before commencement of trouble which follows 
our change. 

3d. The building of temple, covering seven years time, and 
hence in harmony with the above arguments. 

4th. Entering of Ark by Noah and his house, occupying seven 
days (typical of years.) 

5th. The last mentioned allegory in the life of Moses and Aaron. 

Thus we find the types of days and years are in harmony. In 
view of these things let us watch and be sober, for "It is good 
that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the salvation of 
the Lord." Lam. 3:26. 

A. D. J. 



R182:page5 

Baptism of the Holy Ghost. 

This subject is so little understood that some have confounded it 
with the baptism of death, referred to in first article of 
September number. And some of our readers have expressed 
themselves as being pleased with the article on Baptism of the 
Spirit. This is quite a mistake, as the two baptisms are entirely 
different. Notice that while all are exhorted to be baptized into 
Christ's death, (willingly submitting to death) none are ever told 
to be baptized with the Holy Ghost. 

Some will inquire, should we not assemble ourselves as Bro. 
Moody and others of our dear brethren and sisters have recently 
done in Massachusetts, and earnestly pray to our Father for the 
baptism of the Holy Ghost? We answer, no, because there is 
only one baptism of the Spirit promised or necessary to the 
church. This one baptism was at Pentecost. We are told that it 
came as a rushing, mighty wind and "filled all the house where 
they were sitting. " 

Now, notice the idea of immersion. The house being filled, they 
were completely surrounded by, or immersed in Holy Spirit. We 
are members of the same church and family, and that was our 
baptism— one for all, and no other baptism of the Spirit is ever 
taught anywhere in the Bible. Remember, that up to the time of 
Jesus' baptism by John, when coming up out of the water, the 
Holy Ghost descended upon him, the Holy Ghost had not yet 
been given to any one in the way now imparted to the church, 
viz.: as a comforter, guide and leader into the understanding of 
truth, etc. 

True, the Spirit had been in the world, and was exercised upon 
and in certain prophets, but it was given for special occasions, 
and was not an abiding presence. It gave them miraculous 



utterance, but did not guide into the understanding of God's 
word; for, "not unto themselves, but unto us they did minister 
the things which are now reported unto you by them that have 
preached the Gospel unto you, with the Holy Spirit sent down 
from Heaven. 1 Pet. 1:12. 

The Spirit given to Jesus without measure, (John 3:34,) and 
given by measure to all his disciples and members, (John 1:16) 
is the spirit of adoption (into the divine family and nature), 
whereby we cry, "Father, Father," i.e., we recognize God as our 
Father in two senses- first, as our creator as natural men, even 
as Adam was called the Son of God, (Luke 3:38), and now by 
our adoption into the divine family he becomes our Father in 
that divine sense. Until Jesus, no man could enter into the 
relation to God of adopted sons, partakers of the divine nature, 
because all were sinners, and God could not receive sinners as 
sons. When "the man Christ Jesus presented himself as a being, 
holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, in whom was 
no sin," he was acceptable with the Father, and when he offered 
his perfect natural life for ours, according to the will of God, it 
was acceptable. The Father accepted of his sacrifice-the natural, 
and as a gift, gave to him the spiritual, divine nature- life and 
body, which he had laid aside when he took the human nature- 
life and body. Now, when Jesus made the covenant 

R182:page6 

to lay down his humanity as our ransom, he received the divine 
adoption and the spirit without measure, and the witness of his 
relationship came at once, (Luke 3:22), for a voice from heaven 
said: "Thou art my beloved Son; in Thee I am well pleased." 
(Luke 3:22.) 

Thus was our head anointed with the oil of gladness. Now, were 
the disciples also so anointed and given the comfort and 
guidance of the Spirit? No; not while Jesus lived. Why? We 
answer, for the same reason that the prophets could not receive 
it thus. They were sinners in God's sight, part of the fallen 
human family, and the ransom for their forfeited life was not 
paid until "Jesus Christ by the grace of God tasted death (on the 
cross) for every man." 

Were the disciples, believers, then received as justified, pure, 
sinless in God's sight the moment Jesus died? We answer that 
the price of our ransom was then paid, but that in God's plan, 
Jesus must first present in the Father's presence the evidence of 
His death-our redemption. "Him therefore hath God highly 
exalted and given a name above every name, " that the gift of the 
divine nature should come through him to his body (the church), 
for God hath committed all judgment unto the Son," and "hath 
given him power over all flesh that He should give eternal life to 
as many as thou hast given him." He must first receive again 
from the Father, the fullness of the divine nature before He 



could bestow the spirit, the seal of sonship. Remember, the head 
only, had so far, received the comforter, or evidence of 
adoption, for the Holy Spirit was not yet given, because that 
Jesus was not yet glorified. (John 7:39.) 

Thus the church, as instructed, were waiting to be imbued with 
the spirit which should guide them in understanding the 
scriptures (Old Testament) and the words of Jesus. When the 
spirit did come, it immersed them all by filling the house. This 
spiritual baptism came to the church directly from her head, as 
Peter testified. "Jesus, therefore, being by the right hand of God 
exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of the 
Holy Ghost, (having come fully into possession of spiritual 
power, as promised.) He hath shed forth this which ye now see 
and hear." Acts 2:33. 

The Holy Spirit- "Spirit of truth" -thus given as the church's 
teacher, begins the work by distributing certain gifts to certain 
members of the church. All (the church) received of the spirit of 
adoption, but some received of the gifts of the spirit. These gifts 
varied, according to the character and natural ability, etc., of the 
person; the object of the Lord in bestowing these gifts being, 
that every one who received them should profit withal (use them 
profitably for the good of the church and the advancement of 
truth.) 1 Cor. 12:7. 

Paul explains the matter, saying, "Wherefore it is said, having 
ascended on high, He led a multitude of captives, and gave gifts 
to men." "He gave indeed the apostles, and the prophets, and the 
evangelists, and shepherds, and teachers." Why did Jesus give 
these gifts? For the complete qualification of the saints for the 
work of service, in order to the building up of the body of the 
anointed one." Eph. 4:12. Diaglott. 

Here only the chief gifts are mentioned, but in 1 Cor. 12 we 
have these and other graded "diversities of gifts." And those 
whom God hath placed in the congregation are: first, apostles; 
second, prophets; third, teachers; next, powers; then gifts of 
cures, assistants, directors, different languages. All are not 
apostles; all are not prophets; all are not teachers, etc... .But you 
earnestly desire the more eminent gifts, and yet a more excellent 
way I point out unto you. "--Love: "If I have prophecy, and know 
all secrets and all knowledge, and if I have all faith so as to 
remove mountains and have not LOVE, I am nothing." (Diag.) 

Now, we inquire, has this spirit ever been withdrawn from the 
church? If through the various gifts and channels then arranged 
of God it was sufficient in quantity and quality to do the work 
assigned, viz.: to guide the church into truth, then has it lost any 
of its power and efficiency now, that we should ask for a 
baptism again? No beloved, the comforter abides with us in full 
measure; Jesus, our head, poured it out abundantly and 
sufficiently once, and it remains for us. 



True, some of the gifts are departed, but the chief ones remain. 
We still have the apostles and prophets. These being dead, yet 
speak to us, and that more clearly and forcibly than to our 
brethren who saw them face to face. The word declares that 
"there are differences of administration, but the same Lord." Our 
Lord has, to some extent, changed His administration, but he, as 
head, is still ruling over his body. The same spirit continues, but 
with diversities of operations. It does not now operate (usually) 
by the lower gifts of 

R183 : page 6 

tongues, cures, etc., probably because the ignorance which made 
it expedient then, has now given place to knowledge, so that 
instead of coming together and speaking or praying ignorantly, 
in an unknown tongue, we can now, when we assemble 
ourselves, speak to one another of the teachings of the Lord and 
His apostles. God still continues, to some extent, the gifts of 
teachers (called prophets 1 Cor. 14:3-5) evangelists, shepherds. 
The manner of imparting the Holy Ghost used to be by the 
laying on of hands of the apostles, or sometimes, of others 
designated. (Acts 9:1-17.) Here again we see a "difference of 
administration," [but the same Lord and same spirit] for now, 
without laying on of hands [even as Cornelius] we, when we 
consecrate ourselves, fully receive the spirit of adoption, 
whereby we can recognize God as our Divine Father as well as 
creator. We find ourselves "Led of the Spirit" and guided into 
the truth day by day, and we know that "as many as are led by 
the spirit of God, these are the sons of God." And wherever we 
find the fruits of the spirit we may be sure that the spirit dwells 
there, else the fruits could not exist. We should be more anxious 
to possess the fruits, than the gifts, of the spirit. Paul exalts one 
of the fruits, LOVE, as being more desirable than any or all the 
gifts without it. 

Let us for a moment look at the type which seems given to 
illustrate our anointing of the spirit, viz.: The anointing of 
Aaron. (Lev. 8.) The holy oil type of the spirit was poured upon 
his head in profusion. So the spirit was given to our head, Jesus, 
without measure. As the oil ran down all over Aaron, "even to 
the skirts of his garments," so in due time- Pentecost~the (oil) 
spirit descended from our exalted head upon us, his body, and 
all through this age, it has flowed down, down, touching every 
child of God. Now, to ask God for a fresh baptism would be to 
ask amiss, for if His word abide in us, we should remember that 
he said: "The Father shall give you another comforter, that he 
may abide with you forever (aion the age), even the spirit of 
truth." John 14:16. 

Now, while it would be no more proper for us to pray for 
another baptism of the spirit than it would have been for Moses 
to have anointed Aaron twice, still as individuals, you and I may 
not have our hearts as full of the spirit of truth as it is our 



privilege to be. As God's children, we are entitled to "be filled 
with the spirit," and we cannot ask for this filling too earnestly, 
nor too frequently go to the fountain of truth-the word of God, 
at which we may copiously drink into His spirit. The more of the 
spirit we receive the more we will have room for. The new spirit 
of the new nature displaces and removes the old, carnal or 
fleshly spirit, and gives us room for more. And we repeat, there 
is abundant measure to fill full as they will hold, all of our 
"earthly vessels." 



R183 : page 6 



ZION'S TRAVAIL. 



Zion is a general name for the entire nominal church. At present 
in the mortal, flesh and blood condition, she cannot enter into 
the kingdom of God; the spiritual condition must first be 
reached. At present God holds out to her "exceeding great and 
precious promises" by which (promises) some children are 
begotten in her to spiritual life. 

We have already noticed that under various figures, as Babylon's 
fall—Israel's stumbling— coming through great tribulation-saved 
so as by fire, etc., the word of God pictures severe anguish and 
trials coming upon the church during "the harvest" or end of the 
Gospel age; and the text to which our subject refers describes it 
as travail. Travail is deathly anguish, and like the other figures 
used, is powerfully illustrative of the severity of Zion's trouble. 
The illustration shows too, the necessity of the trouble; without 
the travail Zion's children cannot all be born— delivered. 

We have seen that the trouble upon the world begins by the 
overthrow of the nominal church, and indeed every day since 
1878 where we believe the nominal church was given up to her 
travail [It, however, will not fully commence until the "first 
born"-"little flock" are born, an event expected during 1881.] 
seems to witness the uprising of new elements for her 
overthrow. Spiritualism is misleading thousands and infidelity 
tens of thousands. Col. Ingersol alone is doing a wonderful work 
in the way of sowing seeds of contempt for Zion, which already 
are taking root and must soon bud and blossom into open 
opposition to her. We believe that there is not a single person 
who hears his anti-religious lectures with candid and unbiased 
mind, who has not had his faith in the teachings of the (so 
called) orthodox churches unsettled forever. Those only who 
have seen to some extent the inconsistencies of the churches, the 
errors of their teachings, and have caught a glimpse (at least) of 
the great loving plan of God relative to the blessing of the world 
in the ages to come, can come away unshaken. 



The nominal church of the third century began to leave the word 
of God for the traditions of men, and abandoned the narrow way 
for the easier road of harmony with the world. This resulted in 
Papacy's exaltation to power, and the substituting of the 
churches fiat instead of the Bible as the only law of Christians, 
and the destruction of all Bibles known to exist~it being 
claimed that they were no longer necessary, but actually 
pernicious, as the voice of the church was the law of God. 

We would not be understood as intimating that all the children 
of Zion have been engulfed in Papacy. No, we believe that all 
through those dark ages there were members of the little flock 
who maintained their walk in the narrow way. Some of them 
were known as Waldenses, Huguenots, etc. This reign of Papacy 
led to a sad condition of ignorance, superstition and blindness to 
truth, which was only partially relieved by the great work known 
as the Reformation. We would not be misunderstood as 
intimating that the work of the Reformers was little or valueless; 
on the contrary, we believe theirs was a grand work. Taking the 
Bible, neglected and prohibited for years, they boldly preached 
the necessity of taking it as the only rule of faith and practice, 
and not the creeds of the church, and the result of their 
preaching was evidently, the development of many noble 
Christians as well as a general arousing of nominal Zion. And 
had the work there begun, been continued, Zion would not now 
be in her present deplorable condition, saying: I am rich and 
increased in goods, knowing not that she is really wretched, and 
miserable, and poor, and blind. [Rev. 3:17.] But, elated with the 
victories over some of the Romish darkness and error, the 
Church of the Reformation soon sat down self-complacently and 
at ease, evidently forgetting that though then in the light, she 
should walk (advance) in the light, and that if she sat down at 
ease the "light which shines more and more" would go far 
beyond her, and she would soon "sit in darkness." 

Again, Zion follows Papacy's rule of putting her creeds instead 
of the word of God, so that all offenders at her bar are tried by 
the "authorities" or "standards" of the church; by which is 
meant, not God's word -the Bible, but the word of the founders 
and lights of their church; forgetting that the one church or body 
of Christ which admits of no seism, has but one authority or 
head—the Lord Jesus— by whose written word every member's 
faith and practice must be judged- "To the law and to the 
testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is because 
there is no light in them. " Nominal Zion recognizes no increase 
of light shining more and more (Prov. 4:18.) No, she is perfectly 
satisfied with the light of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. 
But there are some who cannot 

R183 : page 7 

be bound to the dim light of by-gone days, understanding that 
the same Bible which accomplished the Reformation work is 



necessary to the Christian's growth in grace and knowledge to- 
day. 

Because the Protestant Churches have adopted methods like that 
of Papacy, avoiding many of the grosser sins, but, nevertheless, 
like her being joined to the world and seeking its favor, 
establishing church authorities instead of God's word, etc. ; 
because of this likeness to her they are Scripturally reckoned as 
her daughters, and she is called the "Mother of harlots." These 
all, Protestant daughters and Papal mother, as well as the few 
who walk in the light, and recognize the authority and control of 
neither, but of God's word only-called "they that have not 
worshiped the beast (Papacy) nor its image" (Protestantism) -all 
of these are Zion, in the general sense, and include both wheat 
and tares. (Matt. 13.) Because she loves this present world and 
will not walk in the narrow way, in which the light shines, she 
has never been fully freed from Papal error and darkness, and 
the truth she holds is so mixed with error that she is unable to 
defend it against the attacks of infidelity and other devices of the 
enemy, to accomplish her final overthrow. 

We have already seen that the trouble upon the world is spoken 
of as the seven last plagues, which intimates that some preceded 
these last. We saw by looking at the types -the plagues upon 
Egypt, that there were three first and seven last, which first three 
we understand to be the trouble or travail of Zion, during which 
three plagues or travail, all of the wheat will be separated from 
the tares-all of God's real children will be separated from the 
nominal Church in obedience to 

R184:page7 

the call. "Come out of her, my people, etc.;" and consequently 
these will be protected during the seven last plagues. 

We have learned that two classes of Children of God are to be 
born of Zion. We understand that our present condition is that of 
begotten, embryo children, and that our resurrection or change 
to spiritual conditions will be the birth into the perfection of our 
new nature, to which we are now begotten. The first-born of 
Zion's children is, the Christ- Jesus and "the church (ecclesia- 
body) of the first-born"— these, with Him, constituting the "little 
flock," to whom "it is the Father's good pleasure to give the 
kingdom." The after-born children of Zion constitute the "great 
multitude that no man can number," who "wash their robes" and 
"come up out of great tribulation," who with palms stand "before 
the throne," in which the first-born, overcomers sit crowned. 
Christ (head and body), the first fruits, (first-born,) afterwards 
they that are Christ's at His [parousia] presence (1 Cor. 15:23)— 
the day of wrath. Those gathered during that day are the "many 
brethren" of the "household of faith. " 

If, now, we have Zion, her children and her travail before our 
minds, let us notice some scriptures which bear directly on the 



birth of Zion's children. Isaiah, (66:7-8,) referring to the matter, 
says: "Before she travailed she brought forth; before her pain 
came she was delivered of a man child. Who hath heard such a 
thing? Who hath seen such things?" 

Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day? Shall a nation 
be born at once? For, as soon as Zion travailed, she brought 
forth her children. 

What a clear picture is this: The "great multitude" of Zion's 
children will be born after her travail- come up to glory through 
great tribulation. But her first born is an exception to this rule; 
it-Christ Jesus the head, and the members of the body- will be 
born, come into the perfect spiritual condition "like unto Christ's 
glorious body" before the travail. Yes, before she travailed she 
brought forth, before her pain came she was delivered of a man 
child. How much this is in harmony with Jesus' instructions; 
while intimating that the time of trouble would come upon 
nearly all, he says: "Watch ye that ye may be accounted worthy 
to escape all those things coming upon the world." The 
overcomers escape all the travail of Zion and the wrath on the 
world, share the kingdom with their Lord, and as members of 
His body, are "joint heirs" with him and "inherit all things." This 
is the seed of the woman that shall crush the serpent's head. This 
is "the seed of Abraham" (Gal. 3:29) that shall bless all the 
families of the earth. 

This is the one body whose head Jesus was "The first born from 
the dead" eighteen centuries ago, whose body will also be born 
before Zion's travail. These are the "Kings and priests unto 
God," who, during the present age have at the same time been, 
both the household of Priests typified by Aaron's sons, and also 
the members of the High Priest's body. These during the 
millennial age will be, with their head "a priest upon his 
throne."— Thou "hast made us (the body) unto our God kings and 
priests, and we shall reign on the earth." (Rev. 5:10.) -their 
reign in the exercise of this double office, being typified by 
Melchisadec -"King of Salem (peace) and priest of the most 
high God." This is the company that follow the Lamb here, and 
will do so hereafter, to whom he said, "Fear not little flock, it is 
your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom. " 

These two companies, the few before, and the many after travail, 
are the only children ever born to Zion. (The type shows that she 
dies in travail) i.e., the gospel age here ending, the gospel church 
will no longer exist as an earthly institution, and thereafter exist 
only as the glorified, spiritual city or church. These two 
companies, as heretofore shown, are the only ones to whom the 
high calling of becoming sons of God on the spiritual plane is 
offered; the only ones begotten of the Spirit, consequently, the 
only ones who could be born of the Spirit. 



The blessing which comes to the world is never called a 
begetting to newness of life-or a new kind of life, but a 
restitution (restoring) of the old life, which is forfeited by reason 
of disobedience and sin. For there shall be a restitution of all 
things which God hath spoken by the mouth of all the holy 
prophets since the world began. (Acts 3:21.) The church, on the 
contrary, are begotten to a new nature, which implies new 
powers, and a new form, for "as we have borne the image of the 
earthly (natural) we shall also bear the image heavenly" 
(spiritual.) 

The grandeur of our high calling, is but imperfectly seen until 
we realize that it shall be our pleasurable work during the 
Millennial age when joined with our head to restore the human 
family to all the perfections of mind and body, lost through 
Adam, brought back by Christ's death. Beloved, let us more 
highly appreciate "our high calling, which is of God, in Christ 
Jesus." 



R184:page7 

Rachel a Type of Zion. 

Many types are furnished us illustrative of the two houses of 
Israel (natural and spiritual), and their relationship to each other; 
yet no two of these illustrate exactly the same features. Among 
the more prominent we might mention Ishmael and Isaac, who 
represented the natural and spiritual seeds of Abraham, both of 
whom were blessed, but not to the same degree. Their mothers, 
Hagar and Sarah, we have seen to be types of the Law and 
Gospel covenants, under which the two seeds are developed. 
Isaac and Rebecca, another beautiful type, shows us the 
relationship to which the "little flock" shall come as the Bride of 
Christ, when she becomes joint heir with Him. Jacob and Esau 
typically show how the natural seed, though first developed, 
failed to receive the choicest blessing. As "Esau sold his 
birthright for a mess of pottage," so natural Israel, when they 
might have inherited the (spiritual) promises, chose instead 
natural things. The Gospel church, represented by Jacob- 
though developed later, gets the choicest blessing-the spiritual. 
"What shall we say then? That the Gentiles, which followed not 
after righteousness, have attained to righteousness, even the 
righteousness which is of faith; but Israel, which followed after 
the law of righteous, hath not attained." [Rom. 9:1 1,30.] 

But now another type not before noticed by us, presents itself, 
and is fully as clear, when seen, as the others, and illustrates 
particular features of truth not pictured in the others. Rachel, 
seems to be a type of the Gospel church in many particulars; and 
her sister Leah would correspondingly represent the fleshly 
Israel. Jacob served seven years for each of these, which might 



be understood as typifying the equality of the two ages- Jewish 
and Gospel-which we have already found to be of equal 
measure. 

Again, as Rachel was the one chiefly loved and first promised, 
so the Gospel covenant, the most desirable, was made before 
"the Law" covenant [Gal. 3:8,17] though the latter was first 
recognized, and the children of the flesh born first, (Rom. 9:8) 
called "Israel after the flesh." (1 Cor. 10:18.) 

But our chief interest centers in Rachel. Her first born was 
Joseph, who seems to be a type of "the Christ." He was exalted 
next to Pharaoh (type of God.)-- "Only in the throne shall I be 
greater than thou." So it is true now of our head (Jesus) and will 
soon be true of the whole body. "Him hath God highly exalted, 
and given him a name that is above every name. " We understand 
then that Rachel's first born typified the little flock, to whom it 
is the Father's good pleasure to give the kingdom— whose head 
is Jesus. 

Her second child, in the travail of whose birth she died, was 
Benjamin, who we believe typifies the "great company" who are 
born after the "great tribulation." 

How this type harmonizes with the foregoing article. How 
perfectly does Rachel typify Zion, having two offsprings -the 
first to rule; the second also beloved born after travail-death 
anguish. How the death of Rachel shows the end of Zion's career 
as an earthly church when the "great company" are born after 
the trouble. 

Joseph, when in power, blessed his brethren, and ultimately 
made himself known to them. So we expect that when the 
kingdom is given to the "little flock" in the very beginning of 
the reign, the time of trouble will be so ordered as to bring our 
brethren (the second company still in the flesh and "Israel after 
the flesh"— Benjamin and the brethren) into such a position as 
will result in their blessing. The distinction made between 
Benjamin and the other brethren is shown in Joseph's blessing 
him with five times as much as they received, (Gen. 43:34; 
45:22) which shows the greater blessing of the spiritual brethren 
typified by Benjamin over that of the natural brethren- fleshly 
Israel, typified by the sons of Leah. 



R202 : page 8 



TWIG TO BRANCHES. 



Brother Sunderlin, in closing a letter, recently received, said: 
"This twig sends love to all the branches of the vine." We take 
this opportunity of sending it to such branches as are readers of 
the WATCH TOWER. It expresses a very beautiful sentiment, 



and shows the modesty of the "twig." This, as has previously 
been shown in the WATCH TOWER, is the right understanding 
of the word "branch," as used by our Lord. It is common to hear 
people speak of belonging to the Methodist branch of the 
church, or the Baptist, or other branches, thus recognizing the 
fact that THE CHURCH is not a branch, but a vine, composed 
of all truly united to Christ. A careful reading will convince 
anyone that Jesus recognizes no denomination as a branch. Jesus 
deals with us as individuals; each Christian who consecrates 
himself to Christ is a branch of the vine. "I am the vine, ye are 
the branches." 

If all could know and appreciate this, it would make them less 
particular about having their names enrolled on earth, and more 
particular about having their "names written in heaven;" less 
careful about the "voice" and "authorities" of an earthly 
institution, and more careful about the authority and voice of the 
Master and Head, Christ. --"The head of every man (believer) is 
Christ, and the head of Christ is God." [1 Cor. 1 1:3.] 

Well, we thought that most of the branches would appreciate 
Bro. S.'s sentiment, for Love is the essence of the branch as well 
as of the vine, and in answering him, we suggested that he write 
some for our paper, which would be one means by which he 
might add to the spiritual health, comfort and fruitfulness of 
some of the "branches." He has concluded to do so, and we have 
added his name to the list of contributors on first page. This 
number contains two articles from his pen. 



page 8 



QUESTION. 



Do you, Brother Russell, fully agree with the articles from Bro. 
Jones' pen in last number? 

Ans.— In the main, yes. Perhaps no two writers would express 
the same thoughts in exactly the same words, but the sentiments, 
etc., I endorse, as being in my judgment in harmony with the 
teachings of the Word. Let me guard you, however, against 
supposing that the change from natural to spiritual bodies will 
be either a gradual one, or one of which you might be in doubt. 
We shall be "changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye," 
and it will be a radical change. No longer, natural, earthly, weak 
and corruptible, but powerful, spiritual, incorruptible, immortal- 
- "like unto Christ's glorious body;" though appearing (as seems 
to be taught in the types) for awhile to mankind in general, as 
though we had not been changed. When thus changed, we can 
see all others on the spiritual plane, the Lord, the prophets and 
resurrected saints and those similarly changed. The vail will be 
only to those on the natural plane. Therefore be not deceived 



into supposing either yourself or others changed until you can 
do as Jesus said everyone born of the Spirit can do, and as he did 
when he was born from the dead, viz.: Go and come like the 
wind, and no man know whence you came or whither you went. 
"So is every one that is born of the Spirit." John 3:6. 

How beautifully clear it is that our change from natural to 
spiritual conditions is not the marriage but a preparation for it. 
The Bridegroom is since His resurrection a spiritual body, and 
how fittingly proper it would seem that the bride should be 
changed to the same image and nature before sharing the glory 
of power with him—the marriage. 



Other questions and articles crowded out this month. 
R202 : page 8 

DEAD AND BURIED. 

In the fourth century a young earnest disciple sought an 
interview with the great and good Macarius, and asked him what 
was meant by being dead to sin. He said, "You remember our 
brother who died and was buried a short time since. Go to his 
grave and tell him all the unkind things you ever heard of him. 
Go, my son, and hear what he will answer." The young man 
doubted whether he understood; but Macarius only said, "Do as 
I tell you, my son; and come and tell me what he says." He 
went, and came back, saying, "I can get no reply; he is dead." 
"Go again and try him with flattering words-tell him what a 
great saint he was, what noble work he did, and how we miss 
him; and come again, and tell me what he says." He did so, but 
on his return said, "He answers nothing, father; he is dead and 
buried." "You know now, my son," said the old father, "what it 
is to be dead to sin, dead and buried with Christ. Praise and 
blame are nothing to him who is really dead and buried with 
Christ." (Rom. 6:3.)-Selected. 



page 8 



NO WESTERN TRIP YET. 



Some of the tracts seem to require much more time for 
preparation than we had expected, especially the one on the 
"Tabernacle." Our Western trip we therefore indefinitely 
postpone. You will, however, be duly advised of the time 
through our paper or by mail. 

R204 : page 8 



A GOOD man incarnates goodness. The flower and its 
fragrance are one. 



R178 : page 8 

Tract Supplement No. 1. 

With this number we send Tract No. 1. We have arranged for 
quite a number of them, and you may expect one or two a month 
for several months. They will all be free, on condition that you 
order no more than you will wisely use. 

We will not send more than 25 at one time. You can re-order 
when they are gone. This is a way in which all can "both labor 
and suffer reproach," as well as give the "glad tidings" to some 
who have ears to hear and hearts to appreciate; "The love of 
God, which passeth all understanding," revealed to us in His 
word. 

We suggest that each tract be carefully read by you before you 
give it to others. 

page 8 



"DAY DAWN" ERRATA. 

On page 55, seventh line from bottom, should read: "A person 
must be begotten," &c. 

On page 235, third line from bottom, should read: "It is raised in 
incorruption." 

On page 330, fourth line from top, read 1874 instead of 1844. 

If each one having a book will mark these changes in his book, 
it may help whoever reads it. We discover quite a number of 
typographical errors, and words misspelled, which we trust the 
reader to correct. The three mentioned above are perhaps the 
most important mistakes; the second and third very important. 

J. H. P. 

[Any of our readers who have not yet read this valuable book 
should do so at once. It will renew your strength. -ED.] 



THE PITTSBURGH MEETINGS. 

We have received, during the last month, quite a number of 
letters, inquiring whether we have regular meetings, and where 
held; the writers expressing themselves as desirous of meeting 
with us when in the city. 

R204 : page 8 



We have meetings every Sunday from 2:30 to 4 P.M., and a 
Wednesday evening meeting at 7:30 o'clock. We shall make any 
who can meet with us very welcome. It was quite a neglect, that 
a regular standing notice of these meetings has not been kept in 
the paper from the first; It will, however, be found this month 
and hereafter, in first column of first page. 

R204 : page 8 

IT seems to me the trials and the temptations of this life are all 
making us fit for the life to come-building up a character for 
eternity. You have been in a piano manufactory; did you ever go 
there for the sake of music? Go into the tuning room and you 
will say, "My dear sir, this is a dreadful place to be in; I cannot 
bear it; I thought you made music here." They say, "No we do 
not produce music here; we make the instruments and tune them 
here, and in the process much discord is forthcoming." Such is 
the church of God on earth. The Lord makes the instruments 
down here, and tunes them, and a great deal of discord is 
perceptible, but it is all necessary to prepare us for the 
everlasting harmonies up yonder. -Spurgeon. 

R204 : page 8 

—Subscribers write us saying that they are 'very poor and will 
send money for the paper as soon as they can get it.' To answer 
all such at once let us say, that if you are very poor we do not 
want you to send us any money. Let us know that you want it 
and you can have it free. 



R185 :pagel 

VOL. II. 

PITTSBURGH, FEBRUARY, 1881. 

NO. 8. 



pagel 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 

REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H. PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 

L. ALLEN, HONEOYE, N.Y. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN, . FT. EDWARD, N.Y. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance-includes 
postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 

TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 

payable to the Editor. 



R185 : pagel 



LAY UP FOR YOURSELVES TREASURES. 

Every person you know and every person you don't know, is a 
treasure seeker. 

A is seeking wealth; he rises early, labors hard and retires late, 
plans, studies, contrives, bends every energy of his being to get 
his prize. He would tell you that he does not care for money- 
does not worship it— yet poor man he is evidently deceiving 
himself; his actions speak louder than words. He would labor so 
for no person or thing he does not love. 

B is seeking honor and respect; he bends his energy to that end; 
money nor ease nor any other thing would purchase his honor. 
He says "A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches. I 
will leave to my family a legacy of honor." He loves honor and 
shows it by his actions. 

C is seeking pleasure: give him pleasure, jollity and mirth and 
he will give you his purse, his time, and sometimes his honor; 
this is a pleasure seeker. 

D seeks for fame, and art or war, or science, or the pulpit, or 
stage are merely stepping-stones to the attainment of the treasure 
which he seeks; the applause of men-fame. 

E loves office and power; he becomes a politician and seeks it as 
his prize. He drops business, family, pleasure, friends, ease; all 
go; all are sacrificed if need be to gain the prize of his ambition- 
-this treasure he loves and seeks. 

F has no ambition beyond the comfort of family and friends, and 
the social pleasures of home. Thought and muscle are taxed to 
this end. 

G seeks approbation of others, and dress of person, or of 
children, and by act, word and look she studies to obtain this 
aim of her life. No labor is too great, no method too low, no time 
too valuable if she can excite admiration. 

H loves self and seeks personal ease. He likes money because it 
will give him ease. He likes civilization and improvements 
because they will be of use to him; thinks favorably of wife, 
children, friends and servants, because they are useful, 
convenient and can assist him. He worships ease and loves it. 

Dear brother and sister, here we have the pictures of the 
treasures of all our neighbors and friends. Are your treasures 
among them? Say not that your aim is a blending of these with 
others. The experience of the wisest men is, that success in life 
is attainable only by the concentration of aim and powers upon 
one attainment; that man's life is too short and his powers too 
feeble to reach several goals or prizes; to obtain more than one 
treasure. 



Do I hear you say that the prize for which you are running is a 
heavenly one and that you are laying up your treasure in 
heaven? I am glad that when you hold these treasures up before 
your mind you recognize them all as earthly, which the moth 
and rust of time will soon destroy. I am glad if your hearts have 
not become so fond of these things, that you worship them and 
think them beautiful. But let me put it plainly: Would your 
neighbor judging from your daily acts not suppose that you are 
bending all of your energies for some of these prizes? Is he 
deceived, or are you, with reference to your real aim? Do not 
your actions, as well as his, speak louder than words-What is 
your real treasure- the thing which you really love? 

The prize set before us in the gospel is far greater, far grander, 
far more pleasurable, far more honorable and far more rich than 
all of earth's prizes combined: and in addition it fadeth not away. 
If we obtain our prize we will have "a far more exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory." If we reach the goal of our race, we 
shall be the bride of the Lamb-heirs of God, joint heirs with 
Jesus Christ our Lord. "They (the world) seek a corruptible 
crown, but we an incorruptible" one— "a crown of life 
[immortality] which fadeth not away." 

Do you say that you expect to gain both this heavenly prize and 
also some earthly ones? Not so, not only does human experience 
teach that life is too brief, but God's word assures us that we 
"cannot serve God and mammon," (the world). 

If these earthly prizes are obtained by so much effort, self-denial 
and perseverance, how about our great prize, should it not have 
yet more demand for our sacrifice of comfort, etc., in its 
acquirement? Yet, now look at it- your life labor; what is it for? 
You are a farmer, let me ask you, for what is your labor spent? I 
plow, sow, reap, raise stock, provide for myself and family, give 
to the support of religion, and lay up some each year by which I 
add farm to farm. What treasure did you lay up in heaven? 

You are a merchant; let me ask you, for what is your life and 
labor spent? I attend to my business diligently early and late: I 
allow nothing to hinder it. By careful management and by giving 
it all of my time and ability, I am able not only to provide the 
comforts, but some of the luxuries of life for my family. I give a 
tenth of all my profits to the Lord in benevolent and religious 
ways, and besides I have accumulated considerable property. 
What treasure have you accumulated in heaven? 

You are a tradesman or mechanic; how are you spending your 
life and labor? I give my time, labor and talent to my trade. I get 
as many of the comforts and luxuries of life as possible, and if I 
could would lay up some earthly treasure. I give my time and 
energy as fully or more so, than some who have better success. 
What time and talent have you expended seeking the heavenly 
treasures? 



You are a housewife; how are you spending the life and labor 
consecrated to God's service? I spend it all in my household 
duties, and when I make home very comfortable, and do all the 
little things I can to make it elegant and tasteful, and to keep my 
children looking the picture of neatness, and receive and make 
some calls among my worldly friends, that together with my 
own personal adornment takes up all of my time. What treasure, 
what little things have you made ready for your heavenly 
mansion? 

You are a widow-what are you doing with your life and talent 
consecrated to God's service? My life is an humble one, and my 
opportunity for doing good is on a small scale, but when I 
learned from God's word that I was redeemed from sin by my 
Lord and then heard of the high calling to be of the Bride of 
Christ, a joint-heir to an inheritance incorruptible ...that fadeth 
not away, I asked upon what conditions, I might be one. The 
word informed me that I was to make a complete consecration 
of myself, mind and body, talents, reputation, influence, to the 
Lord to be used thereafter as his and I was to be as one dead, so 
that with Paul I could say: "I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in 
me." So then, the will and talents, and all, would be his, and 
used by him. I had so little to give him; I have little talent, no 
money, and almost no influence, and almost feared I need not 
come, but the word assured me that what our Father wanted was 
my heart and my consecrated service, that he had plenty of 
money and reputation. So then I came: I gave myself all to him. 

All for Jesus ! All for Jesus ! 

All my beings ransomed powers; 

All my thoughts and words and doings, 

All my days and all my hours. 

When I had fully consecrated all, I realized that it must not be in 
word only, but also in deed. I therefore sought direction from the 
word and prayed for understanding of it. I asked myself, does 
the Lord want me to go out into the streets and preach and 
expect food and clothing to come miraculously for myself and 
child? I found that God's will was, that I should spend some 
time and labor earning a living-that he that provideth not for his 
own household is worse than an infidel. I found too, that Paul 
labored, working with his hands, that he might not be chargeable 
to any. Sol went to work as usual, knowing that if I was acting 
as God's agent, he wanted me to eat, and dress to his glory. Then 
came the query: shall I labor and save money, so that in a few 
years I can stop all kinds of labor, and give all my time to God's 
service? And again the word answered: "Lay not up for 
yourselves treasures upon the earth"~and again: "Having food 
and clothing therewith be content." 

Next I inquired, how comfortably shall I live; how much time 
shall I spend in the support of the old "earthen vessel," and how 
much could be devoted more directly to God's work. I ordered 



and regulated my time so that none of it might be wasted- 
eating, working and sleeping were all arranged with a view to 
the glory of God, and I found that I had three hours for my 
consecrated work. As already stated, my ability is not great and I 
wondered how I could make use of so much time. I said to 
myself it is of utmost importance that if I am God's 
representative and child, and going forth as his servant, that I 
should know as much as possible of Father's will. I must 
therefore, spend some of my consecrated time in feeding my 
new nature and embroidering my wedding garment. Father tells 
me to "search the scriptures," so with my Bible and my 
"WATCH TOWER," I daily spend one hour- not in reading, 
but in earnest study. I searched and found daily spiritual 

R186:pagel 

food and my "daily bread" sometimes took two instead of one 
hour. 

How should I use my other hours? I sought the WORD again. It 
said we were to spend our lives "doing good unto all men as we 
have opportunity, especially to the household of faith," and I 
looked at Paul, Peter and Jesus 

R186:page2 

who said, "ye have us for examples," and "He hath set us an 
example that we should walk in his footsteps." 

Yes this made my way clear; my chief object should be to give 
spiritual help, or secondly, any temporal aid or comfort to those 
needing it. If there were two needing, one a saint, the other a 
sinner and I could help only one, the preference was to be shown 
for the saint. 

I first visited my next-door neighbor, who has sickness and 
trouble, helped her to straighten her home and spoke a word of 
comfort and cheer and pointed her to a shadow of a great rock in 
this weary land where she might find solace and protection from 
the fierce rays of affliction. I felt grateful to Father for thus 
permitting me to comfort a cast down one. 

I next called on a lady of whose deep piety and Christian 
character I had heard much, which led me to suppose that she 
lived very close to God. I wondered if she knew anything of 
God's great loving plan— of the Bride, the second company and 
the restitution of mankind in general to their former perfection, 
as the result of Christ's ransom. I found her zealous and earnest 
in the Lord's service but her zeal was not according to 
knowledge, for she loved mankind and seemed to fear that God 
did not; she was carrying burdens, etc., and I thought how much 
good it would do this dear sister of the household of faith, if she 
knew as we do, God's loving plan of salvation. 



The thought occurred to me, you asked God to use you in his 
service, may be he is about to use poor you as his mouthpiece to 
tell this other dear child of his plan. The thought made me feel 
humble, for I realized my own littleness and I feared lest I 
should not so present the subject to her, as to avoid arousing her 
prejudices. Secretly I asked for wisdom. I introduced myself as a 
child of God and heir of glory come to spend a half hour in 
Christian intercourse. We talked of personal experiences and of 
the love of God manifested toward each of us, and I found no 
opportunity then of introducing much of the plan to her 
attention, merely suggesting that it would be blessed when the 
millennial reign would subdue evil and the "knowledge of the 
Lord fill the whole earth," and on leaving I gave her one of our 
new tracts-No. l.~"Why will there be a second advent?" She 
thanked me, promised to read it, and invited me to come again, 
which I did, taking other tracts and our paper. That sister is now 
rejoicing with us in our grand hopes and says her Bible has 
become a new book to her. 

Thus my time was spent from day to day, until the three hours 
were not enough and became four, and I doubt not if Father sees 
best he can so provide for our temporal wants that I can give all 
my days and hours in this blessed work. It sometimes brings 
reproaches and scoffs from those who misinterpret my motives, 
but "In his service pain is pleasure," and I rejoice that I am 
counted worthy to suffer reproach for the cause of the Master. It 
seems to bring me more close to him who set us the example, 
and I consider Him who endured such contradiction (opposition) 
of sinners lest I should be weary or faint in my journey in "the 
narrow way." 

These five pictures represent persons who have consecrated all 
to God, who have covenanted to become dead to earthly aims, 
and ambitions and prizes, and have entered the list of those who 
will strive for "The prize of our high calling" and "seek for 
glory, honor and immortality "--the honor, the glory and the life 
promised only to the Bride-the overcomers, who keep their 
covenant. 

Let us not deceive ourselves, brethren, into thinking that the 
Scriptures mean the opposite of what they say, when the 
message of the Master reads~"Lay not up for yourselves 
treasures upon earth" -nor conclude that it has no meaning, 
when it says: "Lay up for yourselves treasure in heaven." Think 
not when you are spending all your energies for self and money 
making, that you are following the instructions of Jesus, denying 
self and walking in His footsteps. He spent his time and energy 
in teaching and doing good to others. 

Why, brother Russell, what strange views you hold on this 
subject. I fear you are erratic. Do you forget that the Apostle 
enjoins that we be not slothful in business, fervent in spirit, 
serving the Lord? Do you forget, too, that Jesus in the parable 



condemns the servant who hid his money in the earth, and 
commends those who traded with their talents and increased 
them? Would you have us stop business? Would you have us 
sell our property and give or throw it away? Are we not to be 
God's bankers, subject to his check or order? 

No, dear friends, but I am convinced that in this particular all 
Christians have been led from the scriptural rule and instruction 
by the customs of the world, ably supported by the selfish 
principles of the old, fallen, human nature. When the Lord 
engaged with us and sent us into His vineyard, we said, I go, sir; 
and then supposed we were living up to our contract when we 
had done some labor one day in the week, spending six times as 
much of our time, and amazingly more energy, in the 
accumulation of our earthly treasure than in his service for 
heavenly treasure. And if this is so the sooner we look at the 
matter fully and honestly, the better. 

I will answer your queries. I am aware we are not to be slothful 
in business, but is there not quite a difference between doing 
with your might what your hand finds to do, both in the Lord's 
service and in the proper care of these bodies, etc., on the one 
hand, and giving all your might and power. 

"All your days and all your hours" in laying up earthly treasure 
(or trying to do so) and giving the hand no opportunity or time 
to do for the Lord. Should we not pay some heed to the portions 
of that text which require us to "serve the Lord and be fervent in 
spirit"? Should we so exaggerate the statement "not slothful in 
business," as to cause it to sap all the forces of our being, 
prevent our serving the Lord as we have covenanted to do, and 
cool off and starve out the fervency of our spiritual nature which 
we have no time to cherish or feed with God's word? Is this your 
understanding of "not slothful in business," my brother, my 
sister? No, I am sure it is not. 

To your second question I answer: Yes, I remember the parable 
of the Talents given to the servants, etc. These talents represent 
our abilities. When you came into covenant with God you gave 
him yourself. If you were an orator, count that five talents; if 
you were wealthy, count that two; if you had some power to 
make plain to people in a private way, God's love, count that 
three; if you could do none of these things, but could speak a 
word of kindness and sympathy and pave the way for others to 
declare the riches of God's grace, count that one. These talents 
were yours and you presented them to God and He in turn 
handed them to you again, telling you to use them and increase 
them in his service. Thus he departed saying to us, as his church, 
"occupy till I come." At his coming he reckons with the servants 
and rewards them as they had made use of their abilities in his 
service. 



Paul's talents we will suppose to have been oratory. If Paul had 
gone to tent making as a business, to make and lay up earthly 
treasure, or if he had used his oratory for the applause of men, or 
worldly wealth, it would have been the hiding of his talents in 
the earth. In a word the parable of the "Talents" shows that you 
and I are responsible for the best use in God's service of all 
talents we may possess. 

Would I have you sell your goods and give or throw your money 
away? The money and goods you possess should be reckoned as 
the Lord's, and you should use it as his word directs -neither 
wastefully, nor carelessly, nor grudgingly; but "whatsoever ye 
do, do all to the glory of God." But it is one of the mistakes we 
have made, to suppose that, "we are God's bankers, possessing 
either little or much of his money. He does not give it to us as 
bankers, but as stewards, and the difference is this: the banker 
keeps money and merely pays out when he receives an order 
from the owner. The steward is entrusted with the money to 
spend in the owner's service. So God makes all his children 
"stewards of the manifold grace (numerous gifts) of God." Some 
possess many, others few. According as they possess these gifts, 
they have a stewardship to fulfill in disposing of them. If wealth 
be one of these, it is your duty as a faithful steward to find ways 
and means of using it to God's glory. He has given us many 
ways and opportunities of doing this. It may be spent in 
spreading the truth, or in ministering to the necessities of the 
saints, or for the poor in general, or in any of a hundred ways 
that may be presented to your attention, and commend 
themselves to your judgment- "doing good unto all men as you 
have opportunity, especially to the household of faith." 

Money is useless except as it can do some good to somebody, 
therefore, if you have it, use it. God is the great giver of all 
good, and wants his children to partake of this feature of his 
divine nature— love— benevolence. 

Would I have you quit your business, quit your farm, quit your 
trade? That depends on circumstances: If you are devoting more 
time to your business than is needful for your necessities and the 
proper support of those who are dependent upon you, and the 
various avenues you may have for money in the Lord's service, 
then I should say stop some of your business 

R187 : page 2 

and use the talent which would go to laying up treasure on earth 
in some branch of the Lord's service. 

Are you wealthy? If so, I would suggest that you stop at once 
the work of money gathering and "heaping treasure for the last 
days," and go into the Lord's service with the same talents used 
in the service of self, and see if you can spend it as freely and as 
rapidly as you could make it. Make it your business to serve the 
Lord and then be— "not slothful in business." If you had lived in 



harmony with the commands of the Lord, it is altogether 
probable you would not now have so much. Make amends for 
past neglects-go into the vineyard and though it be the 
"eleventh hour," you may yet receive the "penny" (immortality). 

But I am well aware that few of our readers are rich in earthly 
treasure. "Not many rich... hath God chosen, but the poor of this 
world, rich in faith, heirs of the kingdom." What would I say to 
those not rich? I would say that probably you are not to blame 
for not being rich; perhaps you worked as hard, and planned as 
much, to get riches as some who did get them: perhaps you are 
not poor because you spent your time and talent and money in 
God's service, diligent in his business: How is that- ask 
yourself? If that has been your failing, begin anew, put forth 
your principle energies in laying up treasures in heaven. Let the 
principal work of life be, to render to God the things that are 
God's—the things which you covenanted to spend in his service- 
your all. If you thus "seek first the kingdom of God and its 
righteousness, all these (earthly things) shall be added unto 
you." Probably not many of the luxuries of life, but all 
necessities will be sure. 

To the mothers and housewives let me say: Do not forget all 
other duties and privileges while attending to one. If we 
consecrate all to God and then in every act seek to know and do 
his will, I understand that every such act is accepted of him as 
done in his service. He has placed you in a responsible position; 
your first duty is to see to the comfort and good of husband and 
children, and with such things God is well pleased. But do not 
forget that all is to be done as pleasing the Lord. Therefore 
remember the words of Paul regarding the dress, the hair, etc., 
both of yourself and your children, and so order your time that 
you will have some of it for partaking of spiritual food and some 
for ministering to others. 

If you have means and can employ servants and thereby have 
your own time to spend in the work of the Lord, we would 
suggest that as a wise use of time and money to God's glory. 

Finally, to all we would say: We recommend to your careful 
study and imitation example No. 5-the widow —as being a 
practical illustration of the teachings and acts of Jesus and the 
apostles, and warn you to lay aside earthly treasure seeking, as 
calculated to weigh you down to earth and result in your losing 
the prize for which we are running and which we believe is so 
soon to be realized. Use earthly things— money, talents, 
reputation, all, as means to help you to make your calling and 
election sure, just as a man seeking earthly wealth uses every 
ability for the accomplishment of his ends. Let us lay aside 
every weight and run with patience the race set before us, 
looking unto Jesus. 



Does some one object that so living and not laying up treasure 
on earth would lead to want when sickness comes? I answer, it 
would bring you into a position where your trust in God's 
promises would have opportunity for exercise. But living thus 
closely to God you could claim all of the promises. "No good 
thing will He withhold from them that walk uprightly." "For we 
know that all things shall work together for good to them that 
love God (and show it by obedience to his word) to the called 
according to his purpose." Besides I suggest that sickness is 
spoken of in scripture as being largely the result of sin, and the 
work of "Him that has the power of death; that is, the devil. " 
The whole world 



[Continued on seventh page.] 

R187 : page 7 

[Continued from second page.] 

through sin has come under his control, but when any become 
disciples of Christ they are transferred out of the kingdom of 
darkness into the kingdom of God's dear Son. These, it would 
appear, are no longer subject to Satan except as his power may 
be permitted of Jesus and overruled for our good. 

While our Lord may sometimes permit Satan to afflict his sheep 
for their development and perfection, sometimes, as in Paul's 
case, permitting "a thorn in the flesh as a messenger of Satan to 
buffet" them, yet we believe that as a rule if we were using our 
powers entirely and conscientiously in God's service we would 
not be so subject to sickness. "If we would judge ourselves, (see 
that we live in obedience to God's will) then we should not be 
judged of the Lord, but when judged we are chastened of the 
Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world." (1 Cor. 
11:31-32). 

James intimates the same thing when he says: "Are any sick 
among you... the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and if he 
have committed sins they shall be forgiven. " Jesus implied the 
same thing when, before healing, he usually said, "Thy sins be 
forgiven thee. " It is for us, however to follow the voice of our 
Shepherd and to trust him while we follow him. 



R187:page3 

OUR TEACHER. 

"What man is he that feareth the Lord? Him shall He teach in 
the way that He shall choose." Ps. 25:12. 

Let Him teach thee, weary soul; 



Isa. 1:4. Let His hands now make thee whole; Job 5:18. 
Let His peace thy heart control,-- Col. 3:15. 



Let Him teach thee. 



Into paths of righteousness Ps. 23:3. 
Let Him lead and let Him bless; Ps. 67:7. 
Let Him save thee from distress,-- Ps. 107:18. 



Let Him teach thee. 



Let Him guide thee with His eye; Ps. 32:8. 
Let His hand thy need supply; Phil. 4:19. 
Let His goodness satisfy,-- Ps. 65:4. 



Let Him teach thee. 



Let His good word sanctify: John 17:17. 

Let the furnace purify; 1 Peter 1:7. 

Let Him say "Fear not; 'tis I," Mark 6:50. 



Let Him teach thee. 



Let Him probe thy heart within; Ps. 66:10. 
Let Him search out every sin: Ps. 139:23. 
Let the glorious light shine in,-- 2 Cor. 4:6. 



Let Him teach thee. 



Let the Shepherd kindly feed; 

Let Him gently, gently lead; Isa. 40:11. 

(He'll not break the bruised reed), Isa. 42:3. 



Let Him teach thee. 



Let Him give thee songs at night; Job 35:10. 
Let Him make the darkness light; Isa. 42:16. 
Let Him set thy spirit right,-- Ps. 51:10. 



Let Him teach thee. 



In the tumult let Him hide, Ps. 37:5. Ps. 31:20. 
Let Him keep thee at His side; Ex. 33:21. 
Let His name be glorified, -Is a. 41:3. 



Let Him teach thee. 



R187:page3 

"CAST NOT AWAY THEREFORE 
YOUR CONFIDENCE." 

To the words of Paul, Heb. 10:35-38 (Diaglott) your attention is 
requested. The reading of verse 37— "For yet a very little while 
indeed, the coming one will come (be present) and will not 
delay "--indicates that these words of the apostle, although 
applicable in a certain sense previously, are mainly so in the 



presence of the Son of Man. And we understand the words here 
penned by Paul, to have been given by the Spirit especially to 
us, who are living in the days of Christ's presence-the harvest, 
or end of this age. And you will remember that much of Paul's 
writing is especially to us who are living in the close of the 
Gospel Age-for instance: "In the last days perilous times shall 
come &c.;" again: "Take unto you the whole armor of God, that 
ye may be able to stand in that evil day" "the day of the Lord;" 
again: "For the fire (trials) of that day shall try every man's work 
of what sort it is." The same is true of many, if not all the 
writings of the old and new testaments; in fact the great burden 
of the Prophet's and Apostle's writings seems to be with 
reference to the end of the Jewish and also of the Gospel Age, 
especially the latter. 

Since then, we see that these words of the Spirit, were given 
especially to us who are living "In the days of the Son of Man"~ 
"the evil day"~we should give them the more earnest heed. As 
in every other case in which we are instructed concerning the 
evil 

R188:page3 

day, there is the intimation that it will be a time of special trial, 
and admonitions to hold fast, &c, are given as in this 38th 
verse. During the last six or seven years, the Lord has been 
leading us, his people, in a very remarkable manner: As we look 
backward we can see that our pathway has been as "a shining 
light... shining more and more." It has been progressive, bringing 
us strength with "meat in due season." It has caused us to grow 
both in grace and knowledge and this growth, taken in 
connection with the fact that we are not obliged to look back and 
now call darkness what was then called by some of the brethren, 
"a great flood of light," is the very strongest grounds for 
confidence that the same Lord who then supplied us light from 
the word, is still providing of the same kind. We say then, "cast 
not away your confidence" in our Leader, "the great shepherd of 
the sheep." 

If we were following a man undoubtedly it would be different 
with us; undoubtedly one human idea would contradict another 
and that which was light one or two or six years ago would be 
regarded as darkness now: But with God there is no 
variableness, neither shadow of turning, and so it is with truth; 
any knowledge or light coming from God must be like its 
author. A new view of truth never can contradict a former truth. 
"New light" never extinguishes older "light," but adds to it. If 
you were lighting up a building containing seven gas jets you 
would not extinguish one every time you lighted another, but 
would add one light to another and they would be in harmony 
and thus give increase of light: So is it with the light of truth; the 
true increase is by adding to, not by substituting one for another. 



Therefore, in mentioning grounds of our confidence that we are 
in the shining path under the leading of the Spirit, we mention 
first that the tendency of present truth is to produce the proper 
fruit of the spirit, of which love is the chief. The tendency of our 
growth in knowledge is to growth in grace. "He that hath this 
hope in him purifieth himself even as he (Jesus) is pure." Our 
pathway has been one of increase of light in harmony with 
former light. Thus we have been led to increased confidence in 
our leader. Let us take 

A GLANCE BACKWARD 

at the steps of progress, and let all notice that the progress is not 
only forward but upward; i.e., the tendency is from the natural to 
the spiritual. We will look, not at any one person's experience, 
but at what serves to show the advance of the knowledge of 
truth for ten years past. Looking back to 1871, we see that many 
of our company were what are known as Second Adventists, and 
the light they held briefly stated, was that there would be a 
second advent of Jesus- that he would come to bless and 
immortalize the saints, to judge the world and to burn up the 
world and all the wicked. This, they claimed would occur in 
1873, because the 6,000 years from the creation of Adam were 
complete then. 

Well 1873 came, the end of 6,000 years, and yet no burning of 
the world, &c. ; but prophecies were found which pointed 
positively to 1874 as the time when Jesus was due to be present, 
and the resurrection of Daniel was also due as proved by the 
ending of jubilee cycles and the 1335 days of Dan. 12. The 
autumn of 1874 anxiously expected, finally came, but the earth 
rolled on as ever; "all things continued as they were from the 
beginning of creation." All their hearts were sad; they said, 
surely we have been in error —but where? Surely it is clearly 
taught that Jesus will come again; perhaps our calculation of 
time is at fault. Carefully they examined the chronology but it 
seemed faultless and positively declared that the 6,000 years 
ended in 1873. Then the prophetic arguments were carefully re- 
examined: Was an error found? No, they stood the test of all 
investigation and the jubilee argument and "1335 days" of 
Daniel could not possibly be prolonged beyond the fall of 74 or 
spring of 1875 and these periods were both past. 

Dark indeed seemed the outlook; all were discouraged. It had 
seemed as though the Lord had been leading in the past, and yet 
now all these things which had been thought light seemed to be 
proved darkness. 

Just at this time Bro. Keith, (one of our contributors) was used 
of the Lord to throw another beam of light on the subject which 
brought order out of confusion, and caused all of the former 
"light" to shine with tenfold brightness. Brother K. had been 
reading carefully Matt. 24 chapter, using the "Emphatic 



Diaglott," a new and very exact word for word translation of the 
New Testament; when he came to the 37th and 39th verses he 
was much surprised to find that it read as follows, viz: "For as 
the days of Noah, thus will be the presence of the Son of Man. 
For as in those days, those before the deluge they were eating 
and drinking, marrying and pledging in marriage till the day that 
Noah entered the Ark, and understood not till the Deluge came 
and swept them all away; thus will be the presence of the Son of 
Man." 

His surprise was, at finding that the Greek word parousia which 
signifies presence, had in our common version been improperly 
rendered coming, but the new rendering showed, that it was not 
the act of coming that resembled the days of Noah, but that as in 
Noah's days the masses of the people "knew not" so it would be 
in the time of Jesus' presence at the second advent. Humanity 
will go on eating, drinking, marrying, etc., as usual and "know 
not" that he is present. The next step was, to see whether the 
account of the same discourse as recorded by Luke, would 
harmonize with this new idea of a presence unseen, except by 
the eye of faith, until the "little flock" typified by Noah had gone 
from among men into the condition of safety (from the coming 
storm) represented by the Ark- "one taken and another left." 

Luke's account was in perfect accord with Matthew's, though in 
different words--" As it was in the days of Noah so shall it be 
also in the days of the Son of Man." (Luke 17:26.) 

This was communicated to others of the disappointed ones, and 
with the remembrance that the time arguments above referred to 
had been found faultless and unalterable and proved that Jesus 
was due here in the fall of 1 874, came the thought- can it be 
possible that Jesus does not come in a fleshly body at His 
second advent? Can it be possible that His presence began at the 
time indicated in those prophecies and yet we went on eating 
and drinking, etc., and "knew not" of His presence? 

A careful examination of the word was begun by all deeply 
interested, to see whether it, as a whole, would be in harmony 
with this new thought. It was found to be in perfect harmony and 
opened up and made clear many scriptures hitherto dark: For 
instance the differences between natural, earthly bodies and 
spiritual, heavenly bodies; how that the things which are seen 
are temporal, natural, but the things that are not seen are eternal, 
spiritual; that spiritual beings could not be seen by mortals, 
(without a miracle) and that the object and scope of the Gospel 
age was, the taking out of the world of mankind a "little flock" 
to be associated with Jesus in the work of the future-destroying 
evil and blessing all the families of the earth; that God's plan 
was not, to destroy all mankind after the gathering of the Gospel 
church but to "restore all things" and destroy only the evil which 
now rules in the world; that the fire supposed to be literal, was 
really symbolic and signified a great time of trouble which 



would be the close of the Gospel age and dawn of the Millennial 
in which all evil principles of governments and society would be 
manifested and destroyed, as a necessary preparation for the 
coming blessing. 

So says the Prophet: "Wait ye upon me saith the Lord, until the 
day that I rise up to the prey, for my determination is to gather 
the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms and pour upon 
them mine indignation even all my fierce anger for all the earth, 
shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy: For then will I 
turn to the people a pure language and they shall all call upon 
the name of the Lord to serve him with one consent." (Zeph. 
3:8-9.) 

As to the manner of Christ's coming other scriptures were found 
to be in perfect accord with the accounts of Matt, and Luke, of 
its being an unseen presence: For instance, the angel's message- 
Acts 1:11. 

"THIS SAME JESUS SHALL SO COME IN LIKE 
MANNER 

as ye have seen him go into heaven. " This had generally been 
supposed to teach that Jesus would come in the flesh, and be 
seen of men, as he was there seen of the disciples: but when 
carefully examined the text does not say that any one will see 
him, but that he will so come as he went away. He went away 
not with "flaming fire" and rolling thunder and great outward 
demonstration, but silently, unknown to the world. And if he "so 
comes in like manner," how much in harmony with Matthew's 
and Luke's record-they will eat and drink and know not of his 
presence. 

But the angels' language seemed peculiar-this same Jesus as 
though there had been another Jesus: Examination revealed the 
fact, that Jesus since His resurrection is a totally different being 
from the Jesus who died; that a great change had taken place. 
While before his death he had been the "man Christ Jesus" 
having the form of a servant and perfect human powers, etc., 
and yet none but human powers, except as the Father's power 
was operated and manifested through him: (John 14:10.) Yet 
now, since his resurrection he claims divine powers not as the 
Father in him, but as His own, saying— "All power in heaven and 
in earth is given unto me" and he is no longer a natural, but a 
spiritual body- "It was sown a natural body, raised a spiritual 
body- sown mortal raised immortal and exercising 

R189:page3 

powers peculiar to his new conditions, he would appear and 
disappear and they could not tell whence he came nor whither he 
went; thus personally illustrating his own teachings to 
Nicodemus: "That which is born of the Spirit is Spirit. (Jesus 
was the first born from the dead to the spiritual plane- "by the 



Spirit.") The wind bloweth where it listeth and thou hearest the 
sound thereof but can'st not tell whence it cometh nor whither it 
goeth; so is every one that is born of the Spirit." (John 3:8). 

It was clear too that while desiring the disciples to realize that he 
was risen, Jesus wished them also to realize the change that had 
taken place and that he was no longer bound by human 
conditions, etc., therefore, he appeared to them under 
supernatural circumstances and in various forms, or bodies, 
none of which bodies were his spiritual person, but merely a 
garb by which he made himself known to their human senses. 

When it was understood that "this same Jesus" was a spiritual 
body, unseen 

R189:page4 

except by the performance of a miracle, the saying of the angels 
was perfectly clear. Then, one after another, various scriptures 
gradually took their places and all began to see how "The 
Kingdom of God cometh not with observation" (margin, 
outward show neither shall men say, lo here, or lo there, for the 
kingdom of God will be among them (an invisible power.) 
(Luke 17:20.) 

When it was discovered that "As the lightning which shineth...so 
shall the Son of Man be in his day;" meant, not that he would be 
like the shining but "as the lightning" (the invisible electric 
fluid) which produces the shining, it was manifest why the 
warning was given: If any man say unto you, lo here is Christ, or 
lo there! believe it not. Go not after them nor follow them, for I 
will not be visible to the natural eye, but as the lightning is 
discernable only by its shining and power, so will I be in my day 
recognizable to my waiting bride by the light of truth, and 
afterward to the world, in the light of events and "the flaming 
fire" of the day of trouble. 

Many other little points were noticed, too numerous to relate, all 
in full accord with this; such as, that the literal rendering of 
verses 46 and 50 of Matt. 24 teach that when the Lord has come 
some of his servants will be giving to the household of faith 
"meat in due season" [which of course would be the declaring of 
His presence] while other servants would say, "My Lord 
delayeth His coming" [has not come] and smite their fellow 
servants who present the "meat in due season." 

Meantime the grandest "time argument" we have, viz: The two 
dispensation parallels began to take its place supported by both 
the law and the prophets, it showed the Jewish age to be the 
exact pattern or picture on the fleshly plane of the Gospel Age 
on the higher, spiritual plane, and that the two ages were to be of 
the same length. The parallels in the close of the two ages were 
seen to be especially beautiful and striking, the closing work of 
their age being called a "harvest" lasted forty years from A.D. 



30 to A.D. 70, from the beginning of Jesus' ministry to the 
destruction of their city and nation. We saw that the work of that 
harvest, reaping, separating of wheat and chaff, the gathering of 
the wheat into the Gospel garner and burning the chaff of that 
age, while done on the natural plane, was not apprehended by 
any but the wheat: As a people, "they knew not the time of their 
visitation" --"it was hid from their eyes" because they sought it 
not by faith." We saw too, that Jesus taught that there would be 
such a harvest in the end of this age. Matt. 13:39. "So shall it be 
in the end of this world (age). The character of the work to be 
done in this harvest, viz: separating wheat from tares, before the 
wheat should "shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their 
Father or the tares go into the fire of trouble, when coupled with 
the fact that the wheat, when gathered, would be taken from the 
ordinary duties of life-the field, bed and mill, showed clearly 
that the harvest work would be one, invisible to the natural eye, 
for the separating spiritually must take place before the wheat is 
gathered. The next point was to notice that in the separating, or 
harvesting of the Jewish age 

TRUTH WAS THE SICKLE 

and Jesus in the flesh, the chief reaper or Lord of the harvest, the 
Apostles and "the seventy" under-reapers. The message of each 
of them and of Jesus himself was the sickle which did the 
dividing work, viz: that Jesus was "the Christ, the Son of the 
living God," and that, as represented in him "the Kingdom of 
God was come nigh unto (them)--repent and believe the good 
news." 

Thus "He came to his own, but his own received him not" 
excepting the few. The parallels of these two ages showed that 
the time of harvest had come for this Gospel Age, that it was 
due to begin in 1 874, just the place the Prophets and the Law 
had already shown Jesus as due to be present. And when it was 
remembered that this age is higher than the fleshly Jewish Age, 
it seemed perfectly proper that the harvesting in the end of this 
age, should be an unseen work. And so we are taught that it is an 
invisible work, by invisible, because spiritual beings— Jesus, the 
chief reaper (Rev. 14:14-15) and angels, the under-reapers 
(Matt. 13:39) quietly, and invisible, separating wheat from tares, 
etc. 

As then the sickle was the truth that Jesus, the Son of God was 
present, so now the same truth seems to be used as a separater- 
the presence of Jesus, the Bridegroom, Reaper and King. As 
then only the few who "had ears to hear" recognized the truth, so 
now, only the wheat are expected to know, "the wise (with 
heavenly wisdom) shall understand." "Ye brethren are not in 
darkness, that that day (the day of the Lord's presence) should 
overtake you as a thief." So one point after another added 
harmonious light and evidence that we were not following 



cunningly devised fables, but walking in the light and we 
rejoiced. 

Coming to the spring of 1878, the time parallel to the giving up 
of the Jewish church and ending of the Gospel church by the 
Spirit, we naturally and not unreasonably expected some change 
of our condition, and all were more or less disappointed when 
nothing supernatural occurred. But our disappointment was 
brief, for we noticed that the Jewish church (and not the Gospel 
church) was the pattern of ours, and therefore we should not 
expect parallels to Pentecost or to anything which happened in 
the beginning of this church. 

We looked again at the Jewish church as the pattern and saw 
that though Jesus gave them up as a fleshly house at the close of 
his three and a half years ministry, yet he continued special 
favor to them afterward saying to the disciples after resurrection, 
"that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his 
name among all nations,... beginning at Jerusalem." (Luke 
24:47.) Acts 10:15-34 and 45, showed that the gospel was not 
preached to any gentile for some time after Pentecost, Cornelius 
being the first convert. Why was this favor shown to the Jews 
after the Gospel Age began, we inquired. We found the answer 
when we referred to the prophecy of Daniel, (9:24,) viz: That 
seventy weeks of time (seven years to each week) was set apart 
by God as time during which his special favor would be 
extended to fleshly Israel as a people, during which, at the end 
of sixty-nine weeks, (7 & 62, Vs. 25) Messiah should come. 
(Fulfilled when Jesus was baptised in Jordan, and received the 
anointing of the Spirit which constituted him "the Lord's 
anointed, "--"The Christ.") 

Then the seventieth week of the covenant still remained—seven 
years of God's favor, during which God said he would make an 
end of sins, anoint the most holy, etc., (Vs. 24). And during the 
seventieth week "Messiah shall be cut off (die) but not for 
himself," thus causing all typical "sacrifices and oblations to 
cease in the midst of the seventieth week. " We saw clearly, 
therefore, that the gospel was preached among them as a people, 
as a part of the favor of those seventy weeks of years, and we 
therefore believe that Cornelius was converted three and a half 
years after the cross, and that while Jesus left them desolate as a 
nation and declared that "the kingdom was taken from them, yet 
the people of that Jewish church were shown favor individually, 
by having the invitation to the gospel, spiritual kingdom offered 
to them." 

We then looked for the parallel to this in the Gospel Age and 
found that the nominal Gospel church, the parallel of the Jewish 
church, was "cast off" or "left desolate," "spewed out" at the 
parallel point of time, 1878, but was due to have favor as 
individuals for three and a half years, or until the autumn of 
1881, during which they were to separate themselves from the 



"Babylon" church. As Peter called those out of the given-up 
Jewish church, "saying save yourselves from this perverse 
generation," (Acts 2:40,) so, now the wheat of the gospel church 
is addressed by the Spirit- "Come out of her, my people, that ye 
be not partakers of her sins and receive not of her plagues "--(the 
seven last,) Rev. 18. 

Just at this time we met with a sad and very severe trial: A 
brother of influence and ability among us, departed from the 
very foundation of all faith, claiming that he did not need any 
one to pay the penalty for his sins, as he and all others did that 
for themselves when they died-in a word, that the act of dying 
was the payment of sin, and that having died they all forthwith 
had a right to life, and in consequence of that right all would be 
resurrected. [The argument was specious and led astray many 
who had not recognized that the race was deprived of life 
because all were sinners, and that all must continue dead forever 
unless a ransom for sin had been given, and that 

R190 : page 4 

"Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures," and that 
his right to restore to life by a resurrection was by virtue of 
having paid the price- or penalty "in his own body on the tree," 
when as Daniel had said "in the midst of the week" he made an 
end of sin" -"made reconciliation for iniquity."] 

But this was only the beginning of our trials from this source: 
Having denied that the Lord bought them- (2 Peter 2:1,)— he 
speedily went into further error, denying one after another of the 
above mentioned points of evidence, until finally he has denied 
that Christ is present and seems to have gone completely out of 
the light which we as a people hold. This we say was a severe 
and unlooked for trial and troubled us much, until we noticed 
that it was the exact fulfillment of one of our Lord's parables, 
where he tells how, when the King came in just prior to the 
marriage, he found among those who were expecting to be 
united to him "a man not having on a wedding garment," a 
person trusting in his own righteousness, believing that he did 
not need to have his sins forgiven, that he could die for himself 
and pay for his own sins. In the parable this one was "cast into 
outer darkness"- the condition of ignorance in which the whole 
world is, concerning "The day of the Lord" and the fact which 
we see, so clearly, that we are now "In the days of the Son of 
Man." With this parable fulfilled in harmony with all the others 
and with our position in general, while bitterly lamenting our 
brother's course, we were strengthened by the harmony of the 
truth. 

The result to our little company was a sifting and shaking which 
showed us another scripture. Paul had said to us "take unto you 
the whole 



ARMOR OF GOD 

that ye may be able to withstand IN THE EVIL DAY"-the day 
of the Lord. Eph. 6:13. Some were unable to stand the severity 
of this trial and like the above mentioned brother, have drawn 
back from the light. 

The first three and a-half years from 74 to 78 seem as we look 
back at them, to have been devoted almost entirely to 
ascertaining and proving the fact of Christ's presence and the 
harvest work of separating as now going on. The latter half of 
this harvest has however, been spent very differently; very little 
time is spent in proving the presence and very much time is 
spent in applying that truth, in urging holiness of heart and 
purity of life and consecration to his will and work, of all who 
would "be like Him and see Him as he is." 

The light upon our pathway still shines and is more and more 
glorious: True the time arguments etc., proving Christ's presence 
were very essential and enjoyable, and we got all that was 
needful to us of that kind of light, enough to satisfy all of the 
correctness of our position. Since 1878 the light has been of a 
still more glorious spiritual and elevating character pointing out 
clearly the footprints of him in whose steps we are to follow. Let 
us refresh your memory on some of these points "though ye 
know them and be established in the present truth." For instance, 

"THE WEDDING GARMENT" 

subject brought us to the consideration of our standing as new 
creatures in Christ and all saw more fully than ever before, how 
"He who knew no sin, " took our place and suffered death as 
though he had been the sinner, while we though actually sinners 
and imperfect are on that account accepted as perfect; how he 
bore our sins, and we bear and wear his righteousness as our 
wedding garment. " Our sins imputed to him, his righteousness 
imputed to us. 

The consideration of the same general topic: What is the ransom 
price? led us to examine The Law which Paul says is a shadow, 
we examined as to how the blood of bulls and of goats took 
away sin typically, to learn how the guilt of the world is 
removed really. This proved indeed a mine of wealth in which 
much digging may be done. [Tract No. 7 will be devoted to this 
subject]. The type of the day of atonement or making at one with 
God by sacrifices for sin, Lev. 16, was some of the sweetest 
food we had tasted and seemed to be "meat in due season," for it 
showed us more clearly the intimate relationship between us and 
our head, not only in the glory to follow, but in the sufferings of 
the present age, "The day of atonement." 

We saw that all who ever become members of the divine family 
on the spiritual plane must lose the fleshly being and nature first: 
that as the bullock was a type of Jesus' earthly-human nature 



laid down as a ransom, so the two goats represented the church 
which "fills up the measure of the afflictions of Christ which are 
behind." We saw that the overcomers, "the little flock" of the 
church was 

R190 : page 5 

typified by the Lord's goat which in every particular followed in 
the footsteps of the bullock as we are to walk in the footsteps of 
Christ, our example. And we saw how the second company, 
alas, the "great company of Christians, fail to thus crucify and 
offer themselves, and must be "sent away" (as was the 
scapegoat) into great tribulation "for the destruction of the flesh 
that the spirit may be saved." This led to searching inquiry: Am 
I a sharer in Christ's sufferings, being made conformable unto 
his death? Am I a living sacrifice ?~resulting, we hope, in "a 
closer walk with God" on the part of some. 

Next came the subject of 

"RESTITUTION FOR WHOM?" 

In this we saw the hope of believers of this age to be that of 
becoming new creatures, of the divine, instead of the human 
nature, to which new spiritual conditions we are now begotten 
and hope soon to be born, and for which we pray. 

"Finish, then, thy new creation." 

This we hope soon to realize, by being made like unto Christ's 
glorious body. We saw these hopes of the church strongly 
contrasted with the hopes of the world, as held out in the 
scripture, when we saw for the first time, that Restitution was all 
that God had promised the world in general -Restitution of all 
that sin had destroyed through Adam's disobedience, so that they 
would again be perfect men whose safeguard from future 
disobedience and sin would be their knowledge of, and 
experience with it, in the present life. 

We saw that the basis of all restitution was the payment of the 
debt of sin, and that to this end "Jesus Christ by the grace of 
God tasted death for every man. " We next inquired, if his death 
brought restitution to us and found that it does, not actually 
restoring us to the condition of perfect men, but by God's 
reckoning all believers perfect (though none are so actually). We 
saw that we (who believe in the ransom) are so reckoned in 
order that we might have something to offer on God's altar, so 
that "The righteousness of the law is fulfilled in us." If we had 
not been thus justified and reckoned righteous we could not 
present ourselves as "living sacrifices" for sinful creatures 
would not be acceptable sacrifices. But we are justified ones, 
redeemed from all sin perfect and restored in God's sight, 
through Christ "by whom we have received the AT-ONE- 
MENT." (Rom. 5:11.) "In whom we have redemption through 



His blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of His 
grace." (Eph. 1:7.) 

And now our mission as new creatures, divine, is to yield up our 
human life, body and talents to God "Doing good unto all men 
as we have opportunity, especially to the household of faith." 

Next 

"THE NARROW WA Y TO LIFE" 

opened up before us and we saw that the life here referred to, is 
immortal life~or the perfection of life; and this brought to our 
attention the fact that God has many different orders of beings, 
all of whom, when in harmony with Him are perfect, though 
each is perfect on his own plane of being, as for instance, perfect 
angels are one order and perfect men (when restored to 
perfection) are another order. These orders, one on the human 
plane and the other on the spiritual, would each be supplied with 
life forever from the great fountain— God-and thus supplied 
enjoy ever-lasting life. But this showed us that the great prize 
for which we are running, is not merely continued existence, but 
if we are over-comers the promise is immortal life (or life in 
ourselves) a quality or perfection of life, said to be possessed 
only by Father and Son and promised only to "the little flock" 
who walk the narrow way— 

"The way our Leader trod." "And few there be that find it." As 
scripture began to narrow down to the overcomers, as those 
upon whom the prize, for which we are running should be 
bestowed it had the effect on many of stirring up to greater 
activity that "no man take our crown" —a feeling akin to that of 
Paul when he said: "If by any means I might attain unto THE 
resurrection," (the first resurrection which includes Jesus our 
head and all the members of His body who "live and reign with 
Him a thousand years "-only over-comers are to reign). 
Therefore we seek to walk separate from the world. 

Fresh light was shed upon the subject of 

BAPTISM 

and we found the watery grave to be a very beautiful type, or 
illustration of our dying to the fleshly or human nature, yet that 
it is not the reality; and though we shall still use the water 
symbol as we think the Lord desires, and with still deeper 
pleasure since we see its perfect meaning, yet we now see and 
appreciate the baptism referred to by Paul as the essential one; in 
which a man being planted would surely be in Christ's likeness 
in THE (first) resurrection— "For if we have been planted 
together in the likeness of His death we 

R191 : page 5 



shall be also in the likeness of His resurrection." (Rom. 6:5.) 
This taken in connection with the other statements of the same 
apostle-that we are to be made conformable unto His death if 
we would be in His likeness in the (first) resurrection— must be 
dead with Him if we would live with Him—must suffer with 
Him if we would reign with Him— shows us plainly that Paul 
referred to the same baptism into death of which Jesus spoke, 
when He said to His disciples who asked to sit in His throne of 
glory: "Are ye indeed able (willing -the ability comes of God) 
to drink of the cup that I shall drink of and to be baptized with 
the baptism that I am baptized with"— death. This is our 
incentive to "both labor and suffer reproach;" that we may honor 
Him and bless others, and receive the crown of life and glory. 

And now we come nearer to the time when 

OUR CHANGE SEEMS DUE 

(We know not the day or hour, but expect it during 1881, 
possibly near the autumn where the parallels show the favor to 
Zion complete and due to end, the door to the marriage to shut, 
and the high calling to be the bride of Christ, to cease.) and light 
on that subject is becoming clearer; we see that as the voices and 
trumpets of 1 Thes. 4:16, are symbolic, so also, the clouds are 
symbolic of the trouble gathering, in or during which, we shall 
be caught away to meet the Lord in the air, which we find is 
another symbol and used to represent the spiritual-supernatural- 
- control of earth's affairs now possessed by Satan the prince of 
the powers of the air who is soon to be bound and give place to 
Jesus and His bride— the new powers of the air-(spiritual 
powers). 

And further we have learned that the change and marriage, while 
intimately associated, are not the same, that we shall be changed 
to be on the same spiritual plane as our Lord- "be like Him"- 
like unto Christ's glorious body— the perfection of our new 
nature before being joined or united with Him in the glory of 
power or office. 

We have noted how this was typified by Rebecca's meeting 
Isaac, which we believe to be a type of the church meeting her 
Lord. When the servant had made known to Rebecca the 
presence of Isaac, she put on a vail and went to him and he took 
her and she became his wife. So we are under the lead of the 
Spirit, which as God's servant is bringing the bride to the 
Bridegroom. Our Lord is present and the spirit is now (through 
the word) making known this fact, and when all who constitute 
members of that little flock have come to realize His presence, 
they all will as Rebecca did, pass beyond the vail and be with 
Him and be united to Him. Other features appeared relative to 
our condition 



AFTER CHANGE BEFORE GLORY, 

and the work we shall do, after our change, under the vail of the 
flesh, for the "great company"~instructing them, separating 
them from the world, etc., under a series of judgments 
represented by the first three plagues upon the Egyptians and 
Israelites. 

The first three plagues were visited upon the typical people by 
the hand of Aaron, who was a type of the translated church. As 
Aaron was the mouthpiece of Moses, so we expect that, when 
changed, we shall, under the vail, be the mouthpiece of the 
kingdom of God for a time. This same general truth we found 
illustrated in the building of the temple -the temple built 
representing the church in its changed or completed condition- 
yet unglorified until the Levites and Priests had come into full 
harmony in God's praise. 

And now, dearly beloved, as you look back and see how the 
light of truth has shone upon our path-way more and more, and 
especially as we see its richness in spiritual teaching, during the 
last two years have we not reason to do as one of old— "thank 
God and take courage." Do not brother Paul's words, "cast not 
away your confidence," come to us with great force? In view of 
God's past leading and blessing, have we any reason to cast 
away our confidence in his presence? Do not these precious 
truths so freely given to us, themselves evidence his presence, 
when we remember that he said, concerning this time: "Behold, 
I stand at the door and knock; if any man hear my voice and 
open the door I will come in and sup with him and he with me. " 
"Blessed are those servants whom the Lord when he cometh 
(has come) shall find watching; verily, I say unto you, that he 
shall gird himself and make them to sit down to meat, and will 
come forth and serve them." (Rev. 3:20, Luke 12:37). 

What wonder if we have meat to eat that the world knoweth not 
of. The master is come and himself is serving us with the meat 
in due season. But let us look more closely at the words of Paul: 
He says our confidence has 

A GREAT REWARD. 

We have seen that it will have. Next he adds: "For you have 
need of patience so that having done the will of God, you may 
receive the promise (things promised); for yet a very little while 
indeed, the coming one will come (be present) and will not 
delay." 

This has now been accomplished; he has come and no longer 
delays. What now must we expect? That we soon shall walk by 
sight of the natural eye and not by faith, as all through the 
Gospel Age since Pentecost? Is this what we may expect? O no, 
though the way is very clear and the light strong, yet we must 
still "walk by faith and not by sight." So says the next verse, 



(38). "But my just one by faith shall live, and if he should shrink 
back my soul does not delight in him. " The just one referred to, 
is first of all, Jesus, and secondly all those who constitute 
members of the body of Christ. The conditions of all are the 
same; none of them are children of God on the human plane, but 
on the divine, and when the evidences of the word are presented, 
they are expected to walk by faith, and must do so if they would 
be acceptable with the Lord. "If any man draw back (to walk by 
sight) my soul shall have no pleasure in him. " 

There must be something at this time to which the apostle refers 
calculated to make some draw back from the aforementioned 
light. Brethren, "cast not away your confidence which hath great 
recompense of reward." We surely have every reason for greater 
confidence than ever in the correctness of our position as we call 
to mind our leading in the past. "We are not of them that draw 
back." 



R191 : page 5 

A SORE HEEL VERSUS A SORE HEAD. 

"I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between 
thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head and thou shalt 
bruise his heel." Gen. 3:15. 

This prophecy was made at a time when all seemed to be lost, at 
the door of life, at the door of death. With a life of pure 
unsullied enjoyment in prospect, the new pair had taken 
possession of the new earth. They had a richer dowry than had 
ever fallen to the lot of morally intelligent beings. (The power of 
transmission, and this power in the lower order of animals was 
for man's benefit.) They were not the first children of their 
father, i.e., not the first created, but the first of their class. 

In their complex structure the animal and the intellectual were 
wonderfully united, and they were made capable of receiving 
(through faith) a divine nature, (1 Peter 1:4,) which from an 
embryo condition (1 Peter 1:3-5,) shall finally (in the 
resurrection) come forth a spiritual, immortal body, (1 Cor. 
15:44,) the gift of God through Jesus Christ. Some have taught 
and do teach that man had and still has a spiritual nature, but 
Paul speaking of the first and second Adam, (1 Cor. 15:45-46,) 
says, "the first man Adam was made a living soul"; (literally 
animal soul, or living being,) the last Adam was made a 
quickening spirit." How be it that was not first which is spiritual, 
but that which is natural, and afterward that which is spiritual. 

There are several scriptures, which, taken alone, would seem to 
some to indicate a combination of the natural and spiritual, such 
as 2 Cor. 4:16. "Though our outward man perish, yet the inward 
man is renewed day by day. That the inward man here is the 



renewed mind, we learn from Rom. 7:22-23: "For I delight in 
the law of God after the inward man, but I see another law in my 
members, warring against the law of my mind and bringing me 
into captivity 

R191 : page 6 

to the law of sin which is in my members-(the natural man, the 
sore heel). 

Again, that the inward man is the renewed mind, or the begotten 
life, we infer from Col. 3:10, where Paul says: they "have put on 
the new man which is renewed in knowledge after the image of 
him that created him. " And this harmonizes with what John said 
to those who came to him (Matt. 3:2) saying: "repent ye (change 
or have another mind) for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." 
The royal heir was then present though unknown. 

We wish to bring before the minds of those who read this, the 
thought that through the infinite wisdom and love of the ever 
blessed God, only the animal nature of man (called the heel) will 
be overcome and fall into the hands of the enemy for a time; that 
the superior part, the life, the seed, (hid with Christ in God) shall 
escape, and even for a sore heel there is an 

R192 : page 6 

excellent preparation. Doubtless the splendid dowry of this 
wonderful pair excited the cupidity of the enemy, and he 
thought, that if this marvel of creation, with the power of 
transmitting its life and qualities, could be smuggled into his 
kingdom, a powerful ally would be gained. 

That Satan knew that man would die, is, to our mind extremely 
doubtful; he had God's word for it, the same as they had, but 
disbelieved God's word, just as all Satan's children do. He had 
never seen one die and disbelieved in death altogether and 
accordingly said: "ye shall not surely die, for God doth know 
that in the day ye eat thereof, your eyes shall be opened and ye 
shall be as gods, knowing good and evil." Though the latter was 
true (Gen. 3:22,) yet they all soon knew that the former was 
false. And yet the enemy still constrains people to believe and 
teach that they are immortal, and that he will yet get the most of 
them and hold dominion of the most cruel sort over them 
eternally. But "thanks be to God who giveth us the victory 
through our Lord Jesus Christ," Satan was foiled and man was to 
die. What! thank God that man was to die? Yes, "the 
ministration of death written and engraven in stones was 
glorious." 2 Cor. 3:7. 

The condemnation was glorious because through its execution 
infinite wisdom and love were seen providing a penalty, from 
which eternal life could be extracted; that out from the dying 
race the one should come, who would destroy the deceiver. 
Then and there the mandate went forth, and instead of man 



becoming an immortal ally of the deceivers, the truth of the 
words "dust thou art and unto dust shalt thou return," and "I will 
put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed 
and her seed," took immediate effect, and the first death soon 
after, showed that the enemy only had hold of the heel-the 
natural man. 

A warfare of six thousand years has not lessened the enmity, but 
yet the malice and art of the enemy have not been able to reach 
higher than the heel of "the seed." Thank God! What he 
evidently expected to gain (and what orthodoxy teaches that he 
did gain, viz.: an immortal race,) dissolved in his grasp. 

Lift your glad voices in triumph on high; 
The plan was complete and man was to die. 
But~"Through death he shall escape from death, 
And life eternal gain." 

Let us notice here a marked difference in humanity; a class with 
a sore head, and a class with a sore heel. (We speak soberly). 
We say a marked difference in humanity; the latter class are not 
reckoned in the flesh, because they have crucified the flesh, and 
the renewed mind, inner man, wars with it, and says with Paul, 
(Gal. 2:20,) "I (the natural man) am crucified with Christ, 
nevertheless I (the inner man) live, yet not I but Christ (the 
divine nature) liveth in me," (in the renewed mind). 

We understand the sore or bruised heel to represent the physical 
condition of Christ and his church, both as individuals, and a 
collective body. He humbled himself unto death, even the death 
of the cross, that he might open a new and living way whereby 
these captives could be set at liberty." And those who have 
made, and will make a covenant with him by sacrifice, i.e. who 
are willing to suffer with him, and "fill up that which is behind 
of the afflictions of Christ in their flesh (heel) for his body's 
sake, which is the church," shall also be glorified together with 
him and have the exalted privilege of helping to lift up a fallen 
world in the "ages to come," and thus show the "exceeding 
riches of his grace in his kindness toward us." 

The sore or bruised head we understand to represent the superior 
or thinking part, the mind, and by metonymy, the whole being. 
Satan is the corruptor of the human race, and those whom he 
corrupts are called his children (John 8:44,) and are injured in 
the head, (Ver. 43). "Why do ye not understand my speech? 
Even because ye cannot hear my word." These are the ones 
spoken of (Ver. 15) as "thy seed" and who are to be at enmity 
with the seed of the woman, (Christ and those who are his,) who 
are said (1 Peter 1:23,) to be "born (begotten) not of corruptible 
seed but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which liveth and 
abidethfor ever." 

This bruise upon the head is corrupt and smells of mortality, and 
such a head (mind) is liable to sin "against the holy ghost, (reject 



light when they see it?) and is in "danger of eternal damnation" 
(age-lasting condemnation) whether he lives in "this world or 
the world (age) to come." (Mark 3:29). But this injury to "the 
seed of the woman" is not corrupt above the heel (the physical 
nature) and it, (head and body) when complete, will have put off 
mortality and will have life in itself; for (Rom. 2:7,) to them 
"who by patient continuance in well-doing seek for glory and 
honor and immortality, eternal life" shall be given. But this 
injury to the heel is an affliction to the renewed mind, and such, 
like Paul, "find a law in their members warring against the law 
of their mind, and bringing them into captivity to the law of sin 
which is in their members," and cry out with him, (Rom. 7:24- 
25,) "Who shall deliver me from this body of death?" Answer— 
"Jesus Christ our Lord," thank God. So then, with the mind, I 
myself serve the law of God; but with the flesh (sore heel) the 
law of sin." (Chap. 8:1.) "There is, therefore, now, no 
condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus;" ("renewed in 
the spirit of their mind, (Eph. 4:2-3,) who walk not after (down 
toward) the flesh, but after (according to) the spirit." 

Great as the annoyance and distress is to have a sore heel, it is 
infinitely better than to have a sore head; and the thought that 
we are so soon to be made perfect should inspire us with 
patience to bear with fortitude the pain and vexation attending it, 
(2 Cor. 4:11,16,17,18.) For we which live are always delivered 
unto death for Jesus' sake, that the life also of Jesus might be 
made manifest in our mortal flesh... for which cause we faint 
not; but though our outward man perish, (individual and 
collective physical) yet the inward man (mind-Eph. 4:23,) is 
renewed day by day. For our light affliction, which is but for a 
moment, worketh out for us a far more exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory, while we look not at the things which are seen, 
for the things which are seen are temporal; but the things which 
are not seen are eternal. 

We would here recommend the remedy to which we have 
already referred, which is excellent; we have never known it to 
fail to relieve a limping disciple; it is referred to in Eph. 6:15, 
and is called "the preparation of the gospel of peace." We have 
tried it and can "speak that we do know and testify that we have 
seen. " We can remember the time when our heel was so 
sensitive that certain sights and sounds sensibly affected it; we 
have known instances where the sight of money caused some to 
limp badly; we call to mind one notable case where the sight or 
mention of "thirty pieces of silver" caused one to stumble and 
fall "headlong." This is one of the worst cases of bruised heel we 
ever knew, and should think it was the head (for as we said that 
involves the whole being) if it were not for the statement made 
in Matt. 1 :8; from this we infer that it was a desperate case of 
sore heel. Another one, at sight of danger, falsified and swore, 
and afterward at the sound of cock-crowing "wept bitterly." 



We have seen some stumble at sight of show-bills and at sound 
of music; and we have known some to stumble at sight of others 
stumbling; this is not unfrequently the case. We have known 
some to stumble and fall at the sight and smell of whisky; and 
strange as it may seem, we have known many who limped so 
badly that they would stumble over a cigar or a small bit of 
tobacco; and we have known cases quite numerous where even a 
feather or a little shining object like a pearl or a diamond were 
hard to step over. 

But this preparation if faithfully used will cure all this and 
enable one to walk firmly and upright, though there may be a 
slight twinge in the heel occasionally. But the bruise upon the 
head is terrible, much worse than that upon the heel, though 
some of its manifestations are similar, for instance: We have 
been credibly informed of cases which were excited to the 
highest pitch at the sound of the word office, who were totally 
deaf to the words "Christ crucified," and very many who could 
distinctly hear the little word self at any time, but if you were to 
add the word denial to it they could not distinguish the sound. 

One of the terrible phases of bruised head, is, that those thus 
afflicted will believe that nothing ails them, and consequently 
will have nothing done for them, while the sore heel class know 
full well what the trouble is and continually try to get better, and 
look forward hopefully to the time when they shall be well. 

Light and heat, are the first requisites for a sore head, but it is 
very difficult to get such to come to the light. John 3:19-20. 
There are many dark places now into which they can get away 
from the light, but the light-bearer is at hand, and though they 
shall call for the rocks and mountains to cover them that they 
may remain in the dark, yet the light will shine (Isaiah 40:5) 
"and the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall 
see it together, for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it." 

One word more to our dear brethren of the bruised heel; (we all 
limp at times) this preparation is not only a protection, like a 
shoe, but it is an emollient if rightly used; we find that 

R193 : page 6 

pouring (or having poured) into it the "spirit of truth" is a great 
improvement, we have known of its being used without the 
spirit of truth and it became dry and hard. For the benefit of 
those who would like to get it, we would say that they will find 
explicit directions in Luke 11:13. It has an invigorating 
influence upon one, see John 6:63. 

We need, dear brethren to be well shod, and have on the whole 
armor of God, for there is something worse than flesh and blood 
to contend with. Eph. 6:12. May the Lord enable us, "having 
done all to stand," for the restored and perfected body of which 
Christ is the head, shall soon rest its crushing weight upon the 



head of the monster and triumphantly exclaim, "thanks be to 
God who giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ." 

T. C. S. 



R216:page6 

KNOWING AFTER THE FLESH. 

"Wherefore henceforth know we no man after the flesh; yea, 
though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth 
know we him no more. " "Therefore if any man be in Christ he is 
a new creature; old things are passed away." 2 Cor. 5:16. 

Would that all God's children could look at this matter as Bro. 
Paul here expresses it: Once you and I were alive after the flesh. 
Then we knew and criticised each other from a fleshly 
standpoint- "after the flesh," but now the conditions are 
changed, we have become New Creatures in Christ. This new 
creation, new will, new mind, is still connected with the fleshly 
body and is thereby in continual danger of being overruled and 
controlled by the fleshly desires, hence there is a continual 
warfare between the old and the new natures, and the work of 
the new is, to conquer and put to death the old nature -to 
"crucify the flesh." 

It will at best be a slow and toilsome work to root up and 
destroy every vestige of our former selves, but from the time the 
work begins we should "reckon ourselves dead indeed... but alive 
toward God." And not only so but we should reckon each other 
in Christ as dead to the flesh. If we were to carry this out fully 
we should "henceforth know no man (in Christ) after the flesh," 
and how much sympathy and love this would develop one 
toward another. If I should see you, a brother in Christ, 
"overtaken in a fault," would I harshly condemn you? No; I 
should say to myself: Ah, that dear brother's enemy-his old 
nature—has overcome him, and instead of harsh condemnation, I 
would seek to restore such an one, remembering that it is not my 
brother of the new creation which has thus sinned, but that his 
enemy, the flesh, has for the time being, gained the victory over 
him. And I should seek to "restore such an one," in loving 
sympathy, remembering myself lest "I also be tempted" and 
overcome of my enemy-my fleshly nature. 

Would that we thus knew each other after the new nature and 
not after the flesh. It is thus our Father recognizes us-as new 
creatures in Christ and looks upon us as pure and spotless, 
covered by Christ's righteousness, "not imputing our iniquities 
unto 

R216:page7 



us." He does not know us after the flesh, and oh how blessed it 
is for us that he does not. Let us thus look at each other and it 
will help us to "bear one another's burdens." And "ye that are 
strong (spiritually) can bear the infirmities of the weak." You 
can remember that your brother's spiritual nature may be weaker 
than yours and that he may have a stronger enemy to fight in the 
person of his fleshly nature than you have. 

Let us recognize each other in all things as "members of the 
body of Christ," sons of God without rebuke, for "He that 
dwelleth in God sinneth not for his seed remaineth in him." 1 
John 3:9. The only thing that would be counted as sin in such a 
one would be willful sin, and if your will consents to a sin, be 
sure you have not the mind of Christ and that you are not in him; 
you are yet in your sins. Remember then that, "If any man be in 
Christ, he is a new creature," and let us so regard one another. 



R216:page7 



FAITH AND WORKS. 



The relationship existing between faith and works is seemingly 
much confused in the minds of God's children. We would 
suggest that works without faith would not count, as then it 
would be a sinner's works, which of necessity are imperfect: 
"Without faith it is impossible to please God." Faith might exist 
alone for a time, for not by works are we justified, but by faith 
only. 

First, then, while sinners we learned of our ransom by the Lord, 
from sin, death, and all of the Adamic curse; "that Christ died 
for our sins" --"the just for the unjust;" that we "were bought 
with a price, even the precious blood of Christ." We believed 
this, and then God told us that though we do not actually 
become free from the Adamic penalties, we are to reckon 
ourselves as though we had none of the imperfections and 
ailments of the fallen nature—as though perfect. God tells us that 
he has received full satisfaction for our sins in the ransom and 
henceforth looks upon all who come unto him by Jesus, as 
sinless beings --"justified freely from all things." This is the 
meaning of justified— reckoned righteous, sinless. And thus we 
see how we come to this condition by faith without any regard 
to works. "Being justified by faith we have peace with God." 

From that moment you are a saved person and will surely be 
recovered from the effects of sin, and from that moment forward 
you should never think nor speak of yourself as "a poor sinner." 
Such we were, but have been redeemed and justified. But you 
are not yet an "heir of glory." Only believers, justified ones, are 
called to be "heirs of God, joint heirs with Jesus Christ our 
Lord." And now that you are a saved man or woman God calls 



you to be something more than human. He calls you to become a 
"partaker of the divine nature," and mentions as the conditions 
upon which you can make your calling and election sure, that 
you shall resign your will to his, and thus take his will as the law 
of your being. He tells you that his will is that you thus crucify, 
or put to death and ignore the human nature which you are 
finally to lose entirely. Thus your new divine nature grows up 
within the old or human, using this earthen vessel to the service 
of the Lord and not in its own service. 

And here works join faith. We believe God's call and the 
exceeding great and precious promises of "Glory, Honor and 
Immortality," and begin to seek for it. And now comes God's 
instruction to you: "Work out your (higher spiritual) salvation 
with fear and trembling," and let God "work in you to will and 
to do of his good pleasure." Phil. 2:12. 

This salvation to the divine nature cannot be obtained by faith 
only- cannot be obtained without works, because there is no 
other way of complying with the conditions of our call and 
making our election sure. We were called to suffer, if we would 
reign with Christ. But if you have faith in all these promises, and 
keep that faith locked in your bosom and live as an earthly 
being, working for earthly things, your faith without works is 
valueless, and the works of earth will swallow up and destroy 
the faith, and you will not suffer and consequently not reign. 

If you know the conditions of this "high calling" to be: "Take up 
your cross and follow Jesus' example of self-denial, do you 
think that faith in the promise, without following the example, 
will insure you the prize?" Not so; faith alone justifies us, but 
works of obedience, as well as faith, are necessary if we would 
attain to that whereunto we are called. It is the overcomer that 
inherits all things promised. May the Lord help us to work not 
our own will, but to "work the works of God," and may he give 
grace and increase our faith so that the promises may be so real 
to us that works will be easy. 



R193 : page 7 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

BRO. RUSSELL--I have read carefully your articles in recent 
papers, touching the distinction between our human nature to 
which we become dead, and the Divine nature to which we are 
begotten, and hope soon to be born into its perfection. But I 
inquire: Is there not to some extent a vein of truth in the claim 
made by some, that before we reach the Divine nature and 
image we must be perfected on the natural plane, as human 
beings? In other words, while we see that to the gospel church 
alone, of all human beings, is given the "high calling," or 



promise of the spiritual nature, and the balance of mankind are 
to be merely restored to perfection as men-natural, earthly 
beings, is there not a sense in which the church share this 
restitution as well as the inheritance of spiritual things? And 
does it not seem that we must first come to the condition in 
which we can keep perfectly God's perfect law, which cannot be 
kept except by perfect beings? 

ANS. To your first question we reply: Yes, we think there is a 
vein of truth in the claim that all mankind must be restored to 
perfection of the human nature before the Divine nature is 
attainable. But as there is a difference between the final 
attainment of believers-the Divine nature-and the final 
attainment of the world in general-restitution to the perfection, 
etc., of humanity, so there is a difference too in the way in 
which the church and world partake of restitution. "Jesus Christ 
by the grace of God tasted death for every man"— thus 
redeeming every man from sin and its consequences; and 
because of this purchase or ransom, all men must go free from 
sin and all its results; and it is for this reason, there is to be a 
restitution. 

The restoring of mankind in general will be of the most literal 
kind; they will during the millennial age, come again to 
perfection of body and mind, so that no longer will they be 
"prone to sin as the sparks to fly upward" but again at one with 
God. Having come to know good in contrast with evil, their 
restored powers will lead them to take pleasure in doing good 
and living in harmony with God. This will be to them the full 
completion of the great work of at-one-ment. Bringing into full 
harmony God and His creature, man, who has been out of 
harmony ever since sin entered the world. Thus we see that the 
effect of restitution to the world, will be the bringing of them 
again to a condition, where they will have full fellowship and 
communion with God, and be able to do those things which are 
well pleasing in his sight. 

But now notice, that all these blessings of restoration to God's 
favor, etc., which are to come to the world in the next age are 
possessed by believers now-in the Gospel Age. Restitution to 
God's favor, etc., comes to believers by faith now. It comes to 
us, not actually as it will to the world. Instead of having a mental 
and physical restitution, we are justified or reckoned of God as 
though we were actually perfect, and instead of exacting of us 
perfection of thought, word and act, our best efforts in these 
directions are accepted of God as being perfect. In a word, as 
our sins were laid upon Jesus, so His righteousness is laid upon 
us. As he who knew no sin was reckoned and dealt with as a 
sinner, bearing the penalty of our sins— death- "in his own body 
on the tree," so we who were sinners are reckoned righteous and 
dealt with as such. He bore our sins; we bear his righteousness. 
As when he took our place and was treated as the sinner, the 



Father's face was withdrawn, and in his dying anguish he cried, 
"My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me;" so we who are 
justified, come into the light of God's countenance and are no 
more reckoned sinners, but saints; no more aliens, but sons; "and 
because we are sons, he hath sent forth his Spirit into our hearts, 
whereby we cry, Abba, Father." Jesus cried as a sinner; we cry 
as sons. 

But this condition of reckoned righteousness -justification-is 
only of believers, and is entered into only by faith, and cannot 
be obtained by works "to him that believeth on Him that 
justifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness.... 
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven and whose sins 
are covered." Rom. 4:5-9. This righteousness or justification 
comes "upon all them that believe," "therefore we conclude that 
a man is justified by faith." (Rom. 3:19-28.) This is our 
restitution, thus we who were aliens and afar off are made nigh 
to God by the blood of the cross-restored to his favor, as Adam 
was before sin. And it is our high joy that our standing in God's 
sight is no longer as sinners, but as sons in Christ "not having on 
our own righteousness... but that which is through the faith of 
Christ." (Phil. 3:9.) And if God reckons us justified and sinless, 
we should so reckon ourselves. 

Our harmony with God comes because of justification- "Being 
justified (by faith) we have peace with God." This same result 
will be reached in the next age by mankind in general: Being 
restored fully, they will have "peace with God." We are apt, 
however to under- value our justification— our righteousness 
(ours because given to us by our head Jesus) God however puts 
a high value on it, reckons us-" whiter than snow," pure as Him 
whose righteousness we bear— if we abide in Him. Paul valued it 
properly when he said: "Who is he that condemneth [us]? It is 
Christ that died.... Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's 
elect? It is God that justifieth." Rom. 8:33. There is no appeal 
from this: The Judge of the Supreme Court of heaven says, "we 
are justified freely from all things" through the death of Jesus 
Christ His Son, who died the just for the unjust, that he might 
bring us to this justified condition. 

Free from the Law, oh happy condition, 
Jesus hath died and there is remission. 

Now how much more restitution do you want— how much more 
could you ask? Is not everything that the world will have in the 
future, now yours by faith? 

How firm a foundation ye saints of the Lord; 
Is laid for your faith in his excellent word. 
What more can he say than to you he hath said, 
You who unto Jesus for refuge have fled. 

He says- "There is therefore now no condemnation to them 
which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after 



the spirit." Rom. 8:1. It seems to us that the only thing which we 
could further ask is-why has our Father seen best to deal with 
us by imputing righteousness through faith, and with the masses 
of mankind by restoring actually? 

We have already given our views of why, and now repeat: that 
Restitution to perfection of the human nature (which is 
something grand and glorious, and inferior only when compared 
with the high exaltation of the church to the divine plane of 
spiritual perfection) is the full fruition of all promises held out 
for the world in the Bible; but "God (has) provided some better 
thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfect," 
(restored~Heb. 11:40). Therefore because God has a "better 
thing" for us~our high calling to joint-heirship with Jesus Christ 
our Lord, He has found it necessary to give us a schooling and 
discipline in the school of faith, and calls us out from the world 
while evil is allowed to triumph in order that, as his sons, we 
may be trained to overcome evil. He calls us out from the world 
that we should "walk by faith and not by sight." 

These lives are justified then given 

R193 : page 8 

to us that we may have something to offer. As our Leader 
(Jesus) was the just one and gave his life a sacrifice, so when we 
come to realize that we are justified we esteem it a privilege to 
"present our bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, 
our reasonable service." It is acceptable because it is holy; it is 
holy because it is justified; it is justified because Christ died. 

To your second question I reply: It certainly is true, as you say, 
that none but perfect beings can keep God's perfect law, and I 
will go further and add that none but perfect beings are 
acceptable with God. And when God's plans are all 
accomplished there will be nothing imperfect-all things will 
either be brought to perfection or destroyed. 

But as we have just proved we are perfect beings, being justified 
by Christ Jesus and therefore are acceptable with God by Jesus 
Christ. And though "by the deeds of the Law shall no flesh be 
justified in his sight, we being justified not by the deeds of the 
law but by faith, can "do those things which are well pleasing in 
his sight." (1 John 3:21). And the righteousness of the law (love) 
is fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit. 
(Rom. 8:4,) i.e.: We are reckoned as having kept the Law 
perfectly while we walk after the Spirit—use our endeavors to 
follow the leadings of our new nature. 

In conclusion let me say: If we receive our share of restitution 
now, and present our justified lives a sacrifice acceptable to 
God, we need look for no second restitution, nor can I think that 
any Christian who realizes his perfect standing in Christ, and the 
begetting of the Spirit to newness of life (the perfect spiritual) 



has any desire for the restoration of the old (human) nature 
which he has crucified, but rather for the new-divine nature - 
into which we so soon hope to come, when we shall be like him 
and see him as he is. 

If only perfect beings can keep the law of God perfectly does it 
not prove that Jesus was more perfect than his human nature was 
spotless from the imperfections of the race whose likeness he 
took? We think so. How then, say some, Jesus was as imperfect 
physically, etc., as any member of the fallen human race- "on 
the lowest round of the ladder"— yet all admit that Jesus 

R194 : page 8 

kept the whole law. 

QUES. Dear Editor, please explain 1 Cor. 14:34. Let the women 
keep silence in the churches, for it is not permitted unto them to 
speak; but let them be under obedience as also saith the law. 
(Gen. 3:16). 

ANS. It is not for us to say why, when God gives no reasons. 
Neither can we tell why Jesus sent none of the noble and good 
women who believed on him to preach, when he sent first the 
twelve and then the seventy before his face. However, much 
may be said of good accomplished by women in the temperance 
cause, etc., we nevertheless believe that this scripture has never 
been disregarded with impunity. We believe woman to be a type 
of the church, and man the type of Christ the head of the church, 
and we might draw the lesson that we, the spouse of Christ, are 
not to dispute or instruct in the church, but listen to the voice of 
our Head— give ear to his word. 

QUES. Bro. Russell, please give us your views of Job 7:9, and 
14:12. Does Job mean that man will not have a resurrection? 

ANS. In considering these and other scriptures, we should 
remember that different statements are true from different 
standpoints; for instance, Isaiah said "Unto us a child is born." 
This is true, and in the past; he also said: "The government shall 
be upon his shoulders." This will be true in due time. David 
said, personating Jesus-They gave me gall, etc., and parted my 
raiment among them. This has been fulfilled but some other 
matters are still future, as for instance: "The Lord reigneth; let 
the earth keep silence," etc. This last will not be fulfilled until 
He shall take his great power and reign, when we shall reign 
with him a thousand years. So in the sayings of Job. He saw 
mankind going down into death, and that being sinners they had 
no hope of saving themselves, and says, "He that goeth down to 
the grave shall come up no more." This was properly the human 
standpoint, for remember that as yet Jesus had not died-the 
ransom price had not been paid, and the resurrection was little 
understood until Jesus "abolished (vanquished) death and 



brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel. " (2 
Tim. 1:10). 

The necessity of pardon for sins is recognized in Ver. 21 . Job 
well knew that he could not "climb up and win life for himself;" 
that sin would cause him to sleep in the dust; and yet he seems 
to realize that God intended furnishing a ransom for sin-to take 
away the sin of the world-and he looks forward to the 
millennial or Restitution morn, for though he should be gone to 
dust, yet he says: "Thou shalt seek me in the morning." In 14:12, 
the same general hope is expressed: "So man lieth down and 
riseth not." A tree might be cut off and sprout again, but not so 
man, he cannot sprout, he cannot help himself; he must await the 
great deliverer, who says: "I, (the Redeemer of the race-Jesus,) 
have the keys of death and hades" (the grave) "Til the heavens 
be no more, (symbol of present rule of evil or Satan" -the prince 
of the powers of the air"— heavens) they shall not awake nor be 
raised out of their sleep." 

We have heretofore noticed, that Job was used as a 
representative of the world in general-the great restitution 
masses, (whether he personally will have anything more than 
restitution we are not prepared to say,) but in his life he is used 
as a great illustration of the race. Possessing much at first he 
loses almost all, and then a time of restitution comes and he has 
as many sons and daughters, comforts, friends, etc., as at first. 
So our race was at first possessed of wonderful blessings of life, 
health, etc., almost all of which is now gone; but like Job their 
type they are soon to have a "restitution of all things which God 
hath spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the 
world began." (Acts 3:21.) 

And not only does Job represent the world in his experience, but 
he speaks for them when he says- "Oh that thou wouldest hide 
me in the grave; that thou wouldest keep me secret (hid) until 
thy wrath be past; that thou wouldest appoint me a set time and 
remember me.... Thou shalt call and I will answer thee; thou wilt 
have a desire to the work of thy hands." (Vs. 13-15.) The saints 
are to be raised before the day of wrath for "This honor hath all 
his saints to execute the judgments written." (Psa. 149:9.) But 
the class for whom Job speaks do not arise until the time of 
trouble is over-the present heavens (Satan's control) be no more 
and the new heavens (spiritual government of Christ and his 
bride over earth) be fully established. 

QUES. Please explain Rev. 10:6: The angel sware "that there 
should be time no longer." 

ANS. Many are the "times and seasons which God hath put in 
his own power," and no doubt each of these will end as its work 
is accomplished; many have so ended already, for instance, the 
time of God's favor to fleshly Israel— the Jewish age- ended; 
and the time of favor to the gentiles-the gospel age-during 



which God is taking out of the gentiles a people for His name 
(His bride) is also to end, and it is this Gospel time or age which 
we understand to be referred to as the "time to be no longer." 
Verse 7 shows this: "But in the days of the voice of the seventh 
angel~"The seventh trump"~"The last trump"~"The trump of 
God," (1 Cor. 15:52, 1 Thes. 4:16, and Rev. 11, 15, 18, 19,) 
[during which the first resurrection and change of living saints 
occurs] the mystery of God should be finished." 

Both God's plan and His church are called a "mystery." Neither 
are comprehended by the world. When, however, the Gospel age 
or time ends, the church is exalted; and after the time of trouble 
the great work of blessing all the families of earth begins, the 
mystery both of the church and God's plan will be finished, and 
both will shine forth to the praise of Him who loved us and 
bought us with His own precious blood. God will no longer veil 
His plans and be thought vengeful and merciless, but the bud 
that had the bitter taste will bloom to a beautiful and fragrant 
flower. His goodness in full glory shine declaring: "God is 
LOVE." 

QUES. Bro. Russell, please explain the command concerning 
feet washing. John 13? It seems to be so plain a command I 
wonder why it is so little observed. 

ANS. To our understanding, the lesson here taught the disciples 
by our Lord is humility, and that they should love one another to 
such an extent that they would consider no service too great nor 
too degrading which would minister to each other's comfort. 
"Let him that would be chief among you become servant of all." 
"If I, your Lord and Master, have washed your feet, you ought 
also to wash one another's feet." And if you and I lived in the 
same warm country and wore the same kind of shoe or sandal 
which permitted the feet to be soiled and sored by the dirt and 
sand, it would no doubt be a great comfort and privilege for us 
to wash one another's feet. But while we live as we do, under 
totally different circumstances, climate, etc., it would be 
anything but a service to me if you were to insist upon washing 
my feet as frequently as they do in Palestine-several times a 
day. 

But there are hundreds of opportunities of showing the meek, 
lowly and loving spirit of our Master. Would that Christians 
could realize that, as God's stewards and servants, it is not self 
we are to minister to and serve and pamper, but it is our mission 
to "do good unto all men as we have opportunity, especially to 
the household of faith," remembering that we are to walk in His 
footsteps who "came not to be ministered unto (served), but to 
minister (serve) and to give his life a ransom for many." 

QUES. Please explain Rev. 20:5. The rest of the dead lived not 
again until the 1,000 years were finished. 



ANS. We understand that the resurrection is of two general 
divisions: One of which is the resurrection to the immortal 
condition. ["Neither can they die any more." (Luke 20:36,) "on 
such, the second death hath NO POWER." (Rev. 20:6,)] and is 
composed exclusively of "overcomers." This is scripturally 
called "The resurrection," "The first resurrection," etc. This first 
resurrection (to immortality) commenced 1,800 years ago in the 
person of Jesus our Lord "who is head over the church (of 
overcomers) which is His body" and it will be complete when 
the "overcomers" of this age are made like Him— the 
Bridegroom and Bride- head and body united. This will 
complete the resurrection to "Immortal life." (See article "The 
narrow way to life," October No. 1880, "Z.W.T.") 

All the balance of mankind are to be raised, but "every man in 
his own order." The second company of the Gospel church-the 
great company who "come up out of great tribulation" will be 
second in order. These come to the spiritual condition but never 
reach Immortality, the prize for which all Christians now are 
running and of which Paul says: "So run that you may obtain," 
&c. 

After these comes the resurrection of Jews and Gentiles of all 
ages, (in what order we know not except that it will be God's 
order.) Their resurrection includes not only raising to partial life 
but also the bringing to perfect life, hence it is the restitution and 
takes place during the Millennial age. "The times (years) of 
Restitution." 

The words found in Rev. 20:5 of the common version of the 
Bible, viz.: "But the rest of the dead lived not again until the 
thousand years were finished," are not found in the old and 
authentic copies of Revelation. 

Read the chapter, omitting these words, and you will find it 

more and better connected, and in harmony with the balance of 

the Bible. [See Z.W.T., vol. I, No. 6, page 8.] 



R214 : page 8 



SUPPLEMENT No. 2. 



Tract Supplement No. 2 goes forward this month. Let us again 
suggest that you read it carefully before handing to others. They 
are for free distribution. Order as many as you can use. They are 
specially designed for thinking Christians, and would be, to the 
natural man, foolishness. For "the natural man receiveth not the 
things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him; 
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually 
discerned." 1 Cor. 2:14. 



R217 : page 8 

OUR NEW DRESS. 

Our paper appears this month in new type, which we hope will 
please all readers. 



R215 : page 8 

"DAY DAWN; OR, THE GOSPEL IN TYPE AND 
PROPHECY." By J. H. Paton. 334 pp. Paper, 50 cts.; cloth 
binding, 75 cts. Free to the poor. You should read this valuable 
work. Address the author, at Almont, Mich. 



R217 : page 8 

"SONGS OF THE BRIDE," 144 Scriptural hymns, suitable for 
public and private worship. Price, 15 cts. each; $1.30 per dozen. 
Free to the poor. Send orders to this office. 



R195 : page 1 

VOL. II. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., MARCH, 1881. 

NO. 9. 



pagel 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 

REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H. PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 

L. ALLEN, HONEOYE, N.Y. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN, . FT. EDWARD, N.Y. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance-includes 
postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R196 : page 1 



SPIRITUALISM. 



Wherever we find a counterfeit we may rest assured there exists 
a genuine. If there were no genuine gold dollars, there could be 
no base imitations, or counterfeits. Then too, the base or 
spurious article must appear very much like the genuine or it 
would not be a counterfeit. 

This is what we claim relative to what is at the present time 
called "Spiritualism": That it is a counterfeit of the true, as 
taught in the Bible. 

Whoever has carefully searched the scriptures cannot have 
failed to see that while God throughout all past ages has 
condemned evil and sin in their various forms, and warned his 
children both "Israel after the flesh" and also the spiritual 
children (the Gospel Age Church) of the danger and bad results 
of evil, yet He has nevertheless permitted evil and good to stand 
side by side before the people, for their choice. If we take heed 
to his Word we may discern which is evil and by obedience to 
that Word, shun the evil and choose the good. 

God is the head and fountain of goodness and truth and the 
Scriptures teach that Satan is the head and fountain of all evil 
and error~"The father of lies" (deceptions). Both of these are 
spiritual beings. "God is a spirit," and Satan, as we have 
heretofore shown, was once an angel of God- The chief or 
Prince of "Those angels which kept not their first (sinless) 
estate." These though cast out from God's presence, are not yet 
destroyed -they still preserve their nature as "angels," though 
through sin they have become evil angels; consequently they 
still are spiritual beings (not human) and have the same powers 
as they ever had, and as good angels have, except that God has 
put them under certain limitations and restraints which we shall 
more fully discuss farther along. 

If we trace them through the Scriptures we shall find that these 
fallen spiritual beings have continually made use of their 
spiritual-super-natural powers, to lead mankind astray into 
disobedience of God and injury to themselves. 

Spiritual beings, as we have heretofore shown, possess powers 
greater and higher than humanity. We have seen from the 
statements relative to good angels that they can be present in our 
midst without our being conscious of their presence. (The angel 
of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him. Psa. 
34:7.) (Are they not all ministering spirits sent forth to minister 
to those who shall be heirs of salvation? Heb. 1:14.) 

These we have seen, have power to appear as a flame of fire 
(The Angel of the Lord so appeared to Moses in the bush. Gen. 



3:2) or they can and have appeared as men. Of this power there 
are numbers of instances in the Bible. 

Some other powers of angels can be discovered by examining 
the record, for instance, the angels who delivered Lot and his 
family from Sodom, had power to smite the rioters of Sodom 
with blindness. (Gen. 19:11.) An angel "did wondrously before 
Manoah;" another performed a miracle before Gideon. (Judges 
6:21 and 13-19.) The Angel of the Lord delivered the Apostles 
from prison, and yet left the prison doors unmolested; again, an 
angel delivered Peter from prison, the doors opening of their 
own accord. Acts 5:19-23 and 12:8. On many occasions they 
made known to men things which were about to come to pass, 
etc. 

Now, the evil angels, "the devil and his angels," have by nature 
the very same powers, but are restrained. So much of evil as can 
be overruled for good, and tend to the development of 
experience and the education and discipline of the "heirs of God, 
joint heirs with Jesus Christ, "--is permitted and the remainder 
restrained. As God through his Spirit and influence works in and 
through men who give themselves up to His control, so does 
Satan operate in and through those who "yield themselves as 
instruments of unrighteousness unto sin." "His servants ye are to 
whom you render service." As Jesus said to some, "Ye are of 
your father the devil for his works ye do." 

As "God in times past spake unto the fathers through the 
prophets," who were His mouthpieces, so Satan spake through 
his agents and agencies. His first agent was the serpent which 
became his agent in beguiling Eve into disobedience. He 
manifested his powers through the magicians and soothsayers of 
Babylon and remarkably in those of Egypt, where God's powers 
were manifested through Moses and Aaron before Pharaoh, 
while Satan's powers, of a similar kind, were used to oppose the 
truth for a time. Here these two spiritual powers were strikingly 
manifested; both did miracles -things which men alone could 
not do-but which men possessed of evil and good powers, did 
do. (Exod. 7:11-22 and 8:7-18.) "There were false prophets also 
among the people, " who evidently spoke by an inspiration, or 
power in them almost like the real prophets of God; these were 
the counterfeits. (See 2 Pet. 2:1 Jer. 23:21.) 

We are aware that to the worldly mind it seems superstitious to 
believe that men and women may be so given up of themselves 
to Satan, and so controlled by him as to be wizards and witches; 
but they are recognized as such in the Scriptures, and we believe 
it. Israel was commanded to put such to death. (Exod. 22:18; 
Lev. 20:27, etc.) Manasseh, King of Judah made Judah to err, 
&c. ; he "used enchantments and used witchcraft and dealt with a 
familiar spirit and with wizards." (2 Chron. 33:6.) 



Take a concordance and see how much God says against 
wizards, witches, and "they that have familiar spirits "--mediums 
of the devil for communicating with mankind. It was the claim 
of these mediums of "familiar spirits" that they held 
communication with the dead and received their information 
from them. In this claim they contradicted the plain statements 
of God's word, which assure us that the dead could not furnish 
any information. (See Job 14:10-21; Eccl. 9:10.) 

But this was merely another way in which Satan sought to 
continue the lie imposed upon Eve in Eden. ["He is a liar from 
the beginning" said Jesus.] God had said that if disobedient they 
should die; Satan contradicted this statement; claimed that man 
had naturally, immortality and could not die, and that God was a 
liar. Ever since, he seeks to uphold the statement, "Ye shall not 
surely die. " Full well does he know that if people realized that it 
was the "spirits of demons" who spoke to them through the 
mediums they would shun them; hence, the claim that it is dead 
people (not dead, but more alive than ever) who communicate 
the information. 

An illustration of this sort, is given in 1 Sam. 28. Saul, King of 
Israel, had become wicked, and God would no longer 
communicate with him through the Prophets. He was engaged in 
a war with the Philistines, and a great battle was about to be 
fought. He wanted council and desired to know what would be 
the outcome. Since the Lord would not answer him, he sought 
out one of the condemned and forbidden class, a medium, a 
woman who had a familiar spirit—the witch at Endor. 

All are familiar with the story: (1 Sam. 28:3-20) how that the 
medium pretends ignorance as to her visitor, knows what Saul 
desires, gives a description of Samuel, etc. Then follows an 
account of the coming defeat of Saul's army and the death of 
himself and his sons. The fact that these things occurred just as 
foretold by the medium, has been thought by some, to be a proof 
that Samuel really furnished the information. But, Satan could 
foretell those things as well as Samuel could were he alive. Not 
that Satan is a prophet, nor that God reveals coming things to 
him, but he is a student of God's word and a believer of it. 
"Devils also believe and tremble." (Jas. 2:19.) The defeat of Saul 
and accession of David to the throne had been foretold by the 
Prophet and both Saul and Satan knew it, and Satan had learned 
that every word of God's is sure. 

Besides we should not forget the words of the apostle that "He 
that hath the power of death is the devil." (Heb. 2:14.) Since he 
is the executor of the death penalty, and must have the 
permission to execute from God, (Job 1:12) is it strange that he 
knew that he was to have power over the lives of Saul, his sons 
and many others on the next day? No, it is the reasonable 
inference. Certainly we should not for a moment suppose that 
God (or Samuel if he could) would recognize, or use any means 



of communication which He had prohibited on pain of death and 
condemned as wicked. Read 1 Chron. 10:13. 

Coming further down the stream of time, we learn that the same 
wicked spirits continued to operate in the same manner. The 
Lord, while still permitting them, warns the people against such, 
saying: "They shall say unto you, 'Seek unto them that have 
familiar spirits (spirit mediums) and unto wizards that peep and 
mutter.' (But) should not a people seek unto their God? For [why 
should] the living [go] to the dead? To the law and to the 
testimony, [the Bible], if they speak not according to this Word 
it is because there is no light in them." (Isa. 8:19.) God warns 
people not to believe any one whose 

R196 : page 2 

teachings are contrary to the Word, no matter what powers they 
may exercise. 

Coming down to the days of Jesus and the apostles we find that 
Satan still operated in much the same manner, as well as a 
variety of other ways. Among the more notable instances [not to 
mention the numerous cases of casting out of devils, etc., by 
both Jesus and the disciples] we might remind you of the 
experience of Philip and Peter with Simon the sorcerer (Acts 
8:7-9-24.) "Unclean spirits crying with loud voice came out of 
many that were possessed;... but there was a certain man named 
Simon which... used sorcery and bewitched the people... to whom 
they all gave heed... saying, This man is the great power 
(medium) of God." Thus did Satan use his power to delude the 
people. 

Paul and Barnabas had an experience with another of these 
mediums of the devil named Elymas, who withstood them. Paul 
addressing him said: "O full of all subtilty and all mischief, thou 
child of the devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, wilt thou not 
cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord?" (Acts 13:10.) And 
he was blinded immediately. Again Paul and Silas met a female 
medium at Phillippi. "A certain damsel possessed with a spirit of 
divination... which brought her masters much gain by 
soothsaying." But Paul "turned and said to the spirit [Satan] I 
command thee in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her. 
And he came out the same hour." Acts 16:16. 

And so ever since, Satan has kept up his practices with various 
changes of method to suit the circumstances; sometimes with 
characteristic devilishness, at other times in the garb of religion, 
"For Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light, 
therefore it is no great thing if his ministers [mediums] also be 
transformed as ministers of righteousness"... (2 Cor. 11:14.) In 
our day when knowledge is so great, and morality (called 
Christianity) so popular, Satan must if he would continue to 
oppose truth, take the religious cloak; and so he does. To-day 



Spiritualism ranks itself among the religious sects. ["The 
synagogue [church] of Satan," truly.] 

Spiritualism though refined and modernized is yet the same that 
it ever was, in ages past. Its object is not the inculcation of truth, 
nor of love for God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ. They 
claim that Jesus was a fine medium and taught and used 
spiritualism in His day as well as He understood it. They do not 
outwardly profess to oppose the Bible and its teachings, but they 
do so really, both teaching and practicing the very things therein 
condemned and still seeking to prove by their enchantments that 
men are not dead, thus endeavoring to uphold Satan's first 
falsehood. Gen. 3:4. 

They still possess supernatural powers, too, just as in the days of 
Saul and Paul and Moses, etc. While we do not question that 
some of the things claimed to be done by them are mere 
deceptions, yet we know of many things done by them where no 
deception was possible. Among those who believe "in this way" 
we know of several who once were mediums of the devil and 
did "those things whereof they are now ashamed." These, when 
coming to a knowledge of the truth, are thankful for their escape 
from that "snare of the devil." Spiritualism hates the light and 
their wonders are done under cover of their favorite principle- 
darkness. Their work of proselyting, too, is dark, covered - 
secret. Jesus gives us a word of wisdom on this subject. "Every 
one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh to the light 
lest his deeds should be reproved." John 3:20. 

Though working stealthily, their numbers are large and embrace 
many of the influential of earth- Judges, Senators, etc. The 
queen of what is known as the greatest Christian kingdom of 
earth, on whose possessions the light of day is said never to set, 
called the "Christian Queen," is known by many to be a 
"Spiritualist." It is coming before people in a way that 
commands attention, and those who do not realize it to be the 
work of Satan are almost sure to regard it as a power of God. 
The Rev. Joseph Cook, justly celebrated for his able defense of 
the Bible and its author, God, against the attacks of Atheists and 
Infidels, such as Huxley, Darwin, Arnold, et. al., has lately had 
his attention aroused to the recognition of the growing influence 
of "Spiritualism," and having investigated the subject to some 
extent he recently delivered a lecture on the subject, in which he 
expressed his belief that many of their tricks and performances, 
are performed by no human power and are actually super- 
natural. He does not pretend to say how, or by what power, but 
claims that not only himself but some of the profoundest 
scientific minds of Germany have reached the conclusion that 
Spiritualism cannot be condemned as false by any scientific tests 
yet applied to it. 

Nor is this power of Spiritualism difficult to account for if we 
take the Bible as our authority and recognize it as the work of 



Satan, whom Jesus designates "The prince of this world." (John 
14:30.) "The prince of the power of the air (spiritual power) the 
spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience." (Eph. 
2:2.) And the same book is our authority for saying that 
"Spiritualism" has not yet reached the climax of its power; its 
powers are to increase wonderfully. Paul says, (1 Tim. 4:1), 
"Now the Spirit [of God] speaketh expressly that in the latter 
times some shall depart from the faith giving heed to seducing 
[deceiving] spirits and doctrines of devils." Jesus says, "They 
are the spirits of devils working miracles, which go forth unto 
the kings of the whole world to gather them to the battle of that 
great day of God Almighty." Rev. 16:14. 

Peter (2:4) and Jude (6) tell us, that when cast out of God's 
presence as evil angels, they were bound by "chains of 
darkness" "unto the judgment of the great day." Many scriptures 
have shown us that the closing part of the Gospel age is to be 
upon the living a time of trial and trouble preparing them for the 
coming Millennial reign of Christ, and is called "the day of the 
Lord"~"the great day"~"the great day of His wrath," etc. We 
understand, then, that Satan and his angels have been limited: 
might not appear except through human beings who willingly 
gave themselves up to be "possessed of devils" or became his 
"mediums." He has thus been confined or chained. But we claim 
that this "day of the Lord"~day of the "presence of the Son of 
man"-- has already commenced, that the Scriptures prove it to 
be so; and if the chains of darkness restrain Satan until "the great 
day," we should expect that very soon those chains will be 
loosed and no longer restrain. (Any who expect soon the loosing 
of those powers should, to be consistent, recognize both "The 
day of the Lord" and the trial as commenced.) 

The facts correspond to this exactly. "Spiritualism" claims that 
they are having more power to show their wonders daily, and 
they claim now (one case very recently) that the Spirits can 
materialize in broad day light: and they promise wonderful 
revelations and manifestations very soon. Now, materialization 
of a spiritual being, just as they claim, has been possible all 
along to the angels of God, of which we have many records - 
angels on many occasions appearing as men. Jesus, as we have 
seen, when born of the Spirit at his resurrection, a spiritual body, 
("That which is born of the Spirit is spirit.") was, as all other 
spiritual beings, (good and evil) invisible to human sight, and in 
making known his resurrection to his disciples he appeared in 
various fleshly "forms." (Mark 16:12.) These are the powers 
which Satan has desired, but could not heretofore use, because 
bound or limited, but which he will have when the judgment 
(trial) of "the day of the Lord" begins. (Which we believe is 
now.) 

The trial of this day is not only a day of trouble and distress 
among nations, but it includes a trouble or fire upon the living 



phase of the church. This church trouble comes first, and we 
believe began in the spring of 1878, and is to result in the 
purifying of faith and bringing of those who will continue to 
bear the name of Christian to the firm foundations of the 
teachings of the Word of God. For all the errors of human 
traditions shall be consumed as dross, wood, hay, stubble, in the 
fire (trial) of this day. The apostle says, "Think it not strange 
concerning the fiery trial which shall try you (the church) as 
though some strange [unforetold] thing happened unto you." (1 
Pet. 4:12.) For the fire of that day shall try every man's work of 
what sort it is: "He that hath built [his faith] with gold, silver and 
precious stones [the truths of God's word] the same shall remain. 
(His faith will not be destroyed.) But if any man build with 
wood, hay, stubble, (the teachings and creeds of man) the same 
shall suffer loss, &c. (1 Cor. 3:12-15.) 

This trial is "the trial of your faith" and in this "day of the Lord" 
not only does the light of truth shine strongly and beautifully, 
showing us the great prize of our high calling as we never saw it 
before; revealing to us the present king, who causes us to sup 
with Him and feeds us with His truth which is, "meat in due 
season," giving strength needed in this day; but it is also a day 
for the increase of the powers of evil, that the separation 
between the wheat and tares (the children of the kingdom and 
the children of the wicked one. Matt. 13:38) may be complete. 

Because of this struggle between truth and error, the real and the 
false spiritualism, etc., Paul says, "My brethren, be strong in the 
Lord and the power of His might. Put on the whole armor of 
God that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. 
For we wrestle not against the flesh and blood [not against 
human beings, but against evil spiritual beings] but against 
principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness, 
of this world, (Satan -the prince of this world. John 12:31) 
against spiritual wickedness in high (controlling) places. 
Wherefore, [on this account] take unto you the whole armor of 
God, that ye may be able to withstand [the spiritual wickedness- 
-the devil's wiles] in the evil day [this day of the Lord's presence 
-day of trial.]... Stand, therefore, having your loins girt about 
with truth and having on the breastplate of righteousness, etc. 
Eph. 6:11. 

This same day of trial is referred to in Psalm 91, where only 
those who have made God's "Truth their shield and buckler 
[support] are able to withstand the snares of the devil, the arrows 
of infidelity and the moral pestilence of Spiritualism. While 
thousands shall fall at their side." 

In God I have found a retreat, 
Where I can securely abide, 
No refuge, nor rest so complete, 
And here I intend to reside. 



The pestilence walking about, 
When darkness has settled abroad, 
Can never compel me to doubt 
The presence and power of our Lord. 

A thousand may fall at my side, 
Ten thousand at my right hand, 
Above me His wings are spread wide, 
Beneath them in safety I stand. 

His truth is my buckler and shield; 
His love He hath set upon me, 
His name in my heart He hath sealed; 
E'en now His salvation I see. 

-Songs of the Bride. 

There are portions of Scripture which seem to teach that during 
this "Day of the Lord" there will be manifestations of the saints 
as men in fleshly bodies of those who have been changed to 
spiritual bodies like unto Christ's glorious body-and that they 
will appear as He "appeared" after His resurrection, and do a 
work of teaching as He taught the Disciples, opening men's 
understandings that they might understand the Scriptures. 

We have seen that the coming of Moses the first and second 
times to deliver Israel from Egypt, was a type of the two 
comings of the Lord. The second time he came with power, and 
"Aaron, the saint," was his mouthpiece before Pharaoh, and 
during the signs, &c. So we expect that the living 
representatives of the church will sometime be used as the 
mouthpiece of their Lord before the world [Egypt in type]. As 
there in type Jannes and Jambres, and the other magicians under 
Satanic power, opposed and hindered for a time the effect of the 
wonderful powers wrought through Aaron, so we anticipate that 
in the antitype, when the living church is used as the Lord's 
mouthpiece, they will be withstood and their teachings 
controverted by the same spiritual wickedness~"Spiritualism" - 
which will seek to do the same things and partly be able. Paul 
seems to refer directly to this in 2 Tim. 3:1-8, when, after 
saying: "In the last days [of the age] perilous times shall come," 
&c, he adds: "Now, as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so 
do these also resist the truth... but they shall proceed no further; 
for their folly shall be manifest unto all men as theirs also was." 

We suggest again, then, that every counterfeit is a proof of a 
genuine; second, that none but valuable things are counterfeited, 
and third, that a counterfeit must resemble the genuine very 
closely, or it would not deceive. Already, Spiritualists, are 
talking much as we do, of "the good time coming," the "glorious 
day," and even declare that Jesus is present, &c. This is an old 
practice with our opponent. At the first advent, the devils knew 
Jesus and crying out said: "Thou art Christ the Son of God," and 
He rebuking them, suffered them not to speak, "for they knew 



that he was Christ." (Luke 4:41.) (See also Paul's experience, 
Acts 16:17.) Yes, "The devils also believe and tremble." (James 
2:19.) And 



[Continued on Eighth Page.] 

R196 : page 8 

[Continued from Second Page.] 

no doubt they would fain call some of us, Spiritualists, both for 
the purpose of bringing to their credit our knowledge of God's 
word and plan, and to seek to offset the value and effect of our 
Bible teaching, by claiming us as one with themselves. 

But, beloved, "believe not every Spirit, but try the spirits 
whether they be of God" or of Satan. "By their fruits ye shall 
know them. " That system, by whatsoever name it calls itself, 
whose time and talent is spent in doing useless and foolish 
things, and making use of supernatural power to obtain money; 
which appeals merely to the human credulity, and neither seeks 
nor develops an increase of faith and love toward God and men; 
ignores Jesus and the plan of salvation; repudiates the Bible; 
whose tendency is toward things earthly, sensual, devilish- 
"Free-loveism," &c, is not of God, but bears unmistakable signs 
of Satan being its author. 

On the contrary, a system based not on forbidden and pretended 
communications with the dead, but upon the word of God only; 
whose teachings tend to the glory of both the Father and His 
Son, our Lord; which seeks to unfold to those who have "ears to 
hear" and "eyes to see" the glorious beauty and grandeur of 
God's plan of salvation, of which Jesus is the recognized 
foundation; which tends not to the ignoring of any part of the 
Word, but to a searching of the Scriptures daily; which tends 
toward and teaches that the prize of our high calling is 
obtainable only by patient perseverance in well-doing -the 
death of the old nature and newness of life as a new creature in 
Christ Jesus, bears unmistakably the stamp of God and is of 
God- for it speaks according to His word. 



R204 : page 8 

Truth itself, severed from the love of the truth, may be an idol.— 
Pascal. 



R204 : page 3 



GOD'S LOVE TO ME. 

I love to sit, and think, 
How Jesus came to me; 
And brought his box of Jewels 
Which Angels longed to see. 

He opened wide the lid, 
And took them, one by one; 
He showed them unto me~ 
Their light was like the sun. 

He said, my chosen one 
Put on these Jewels bright; 
And follow where I lead you, 
To lands of pure delight. 

I soon will take you hence 
My home to share, with me; 
There you shall ever be my Bride, 
Throughout eternity. 



-MRS. A. M. B.-Newark, N.J. 



R196:page3 

THE UNPARDONABLE SIN. 

"Whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of Man it shall be 
forgiven him; but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost it 
shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the 
world to come. (Matt. 12:32.) [The word here rendered world, as 
in many other places should be rendered age and is so rendered 
in all translations.] 

This text teaches first that there is such a thing as forgiveness of 
sins both in the present gospel age and in the coming- 
millennial-age. The basis of all forgiveness of sins, is in the fact 
that "Christ died for our sins." 

Secondly it teaches that some sins are possible, which God will 
not reckon as a part of the Adamic sin which passed upon all 
men and which is to be forgiven all men. If men looked at Jesus 
and ignorantly supposed him an imposter and blasphemed him, 
it would be excusable and forgivable as a result of the fallen 
nature. Even should they blaspheme the name of God, and say 
they believed in no such being, &c, this too might be forgiven 
for the same reasons: But when God's power (the Holy Ghost) 
was manifested in doing them good as it was manifested through 
Jesus, there certainly was no excuse for even the most depraved 
of men ascribing those good works to an evil power-Satan. And 
this is just what Jesus tells them, that such conduct cannot be 



classed as a part of the general human depravity and it therefore 
cannot be forgiven. 

The light was shining so clearly, that though their eyes were 
nearly blinded by sin, they could not help realizing some of the 
light as Jesus manifested some of "the powers of the world (age) 
to come." As he said to them on another occasion their "stripes" 
(punishment) in the next age will be in proportion as they have 
been able to comprehend and do justly and have not so done. 
They whose moral sight and hearing have been totally destroyed 
by Adam's sin and its results (if any such there be~the Lord 
knoweth) will have no stripes in the future, will be forgiven 
fully. They who see a little and could obey a little and do not so 
do, shall be forgiven the things they did not see and could not 
do, but will be beaten (punished) with a few stripes for the few 
things they saw and could but did not do. They who saw more 
and whose ability to perform was less impaired by the fallen 
nature, and who fail to do according to their ability, are to be 
beaten with many stripes. 

Now notice that all who receive "stripes" receive them for 
unpardoned sins, for if the sins were pardoned they would not be 
punished for them. In our earthly courts if a man had trespassed 
against the law in two ways, and the penalty of the first crime 
was imprisonment for five years, and for the second six months; 
if it could be shown that he was not really to blame for the first 
crime, but was forced into it by circumstances over which he 
had no control, but the second crime was measurably under his 
control, the decision of the court would be "guilty" on both 
charges: but he would be pardoned on the first charge and not on 
the second; the result would be that he would serve the six 
months punishment. 

Here are two earthly crimes, one pardonable and one 
unpardonable: So it is with God's law; all are sinners and 
condemned~guilty~on account of Adam's sin, but the full 
ransom from that sin has been paid and so though condemned 
before the court of heaven, it is announced that all of our 
imperfections traceable to that cause are freely and fully 
forgiven. But neither more nor less is pardonable. All sins 
against light and ability are unpardonable, cannot be forgiven at 
any time, and hence must be punished. The world will have 
many such sins to be punished in the age to come, and they 
receive in some instances much punishment in the present life 
and age. In a word all punishment indicates unpardoned sin, for 
if it were pardoned it would not be punished as well. 

Paul tells us of extreme cases of this sort of unpardonable sin. 
Men of the world who have a little light we have seen can 
commit it, but when a man becomes a Christian and has the eyes 
of his understanding opened -when he is brought from the 
condition of darkness and ignorance, into the light of the 
knowledge of the Lord, to then sin willfully is terrible indeed. 



Due and full allowance is made for all our weaknesses and 
imperfections which come to us through our fallen nature, and 
which clog and hinder our doing as we should wish to do— our 
Father's will but no more. If we cease to desire to do God's will, 
we cut loose from our Lord and begin to walk according to our 
own will as natural and no longer spiritual beings. This is the 
thing pictured by the proverb: "The dog is returned to his vomit, 
and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire." 2 
Pet. 2:22. 

In Heb. 6:4-6, Paul assures us that any Christian who has 
reached a full and mature development in the spiritual life, 
having "been enlightened," "tasted of the heavenly gift," "been 
made partaker of the Holy Ghost," "tasted of the good word of 
God"~if such shall fall away, it is impossible to renew them 
again unto repentance. Why? Because this is an unpardonable 
sin. But can they be punished for this sin and thus go free from it 
in time? No, with the above description of the Apostle, we 
understand that these had enjoyed all the blessings due them on 
account of Christ's ransom: i.e. They were reckoned of God 
justified from all sin, as new creatures had been brought to a 
condition of enlightenment and knowledge of the Lord's will, 
and then, had deliberately and willfully acted contrary to it. We 
do not refer to a child of God stumbling or being overcome of 
the old nature for a time, but as expressed in Heb. 10:26--If we 
sin willfully after that we have received the knowledge of the 
truth, there remaineth no more (a) sacrifice for sins, but a certain 
fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation which shall 
devour (destroy) the adversaries." 

In a word we understand Paul to teach that the class here 
described have received all the benefits due them through 
Christ's ransom, and that their willful sinning against 
knowledge, &c, places them in the same position as Adam 
occupied when he sinned; the penalty of all such willful sin is 
death. In Adam's case it was the first death. In the case of these 
it is the second death. They had been reckoned dead as 
Christians and then reckoned of God alive as new creatures and 
now they die for their own willful sin— the second death. There 
is neither forgiveness nor excuse for such sin; they must have 
the full penalty and die. They have lightly esteemed the ransom 
after they knew of it and thus have "trodden under foot the Son 
of God and counted the blood of the covenant wherewith they 
were sanctified (set apart as new creatures) an unholy (ordinary- 
-common) thing and done despite (disrespect) unto the spirit of 
(favor) grace." 

These have no hope; they could not be recovered from the 
second death in any other way than as Adam and his children 
were redeemed from the first death i.e. by some one dying for 
their sin as Jesus died for Adam's sin. Will Jesus die again for 
them? No, "Christ being risen dieth no more; death hath no more 



dominion over him." Nor could there be any object in bringing 
such to life again; having had full redemption and having come 
to know both good and evil, if they love evil rather than good 
and willfully do it, let them be deprived of life. All will say it is 
love on the part of our Father to deprive them of life, which, if 
continued, would be only of injury and evil both to themselves 
and others. 

It will readily be seen, that this sin to this last mentioned extent- 
punishable with the second death-could not possibly have been 
committed prior to the gospel age, since not until Pentecost did 
the Holy Ghost come as a teacher to guide the church into the 
truth. (John 16:13.) It had in past time been active through holy 
men of old as they "spoke and wrote as they were moved by the 
Holy Ghost," but it moved them to write but not to understand. 
It came upon the Prophets as servants to communicate; it comes 
to us as a seal of sonship and to enable us as sons to understand 
our Father's will, (Rom. 8:14.) consequently in previous ages 
none ever "tasted of the good word of God," or "became 
partakers of the Holy Ghost, etc., and consequently none who 
lived in past ages could sin away forever all hope of a future 
life. 

The millions of past ages never have been recovered from the 
first death (Adamic) in any sense and must be so recovered 
before it will be possible for them to commit the "sin unto 
death." (Heb. 6:4-6). That Israelites, Sodomites, Egyptians and 
others have not fully lived up to the knowledge they possessed 
we doubt not, and they will doubtless therefore have "stripes" in 
the coming age for sins not pardoned by Jesus' ransom. 

here's a wideness in God's mercy, 
Like the wideness of the sea; 
There's a kindness in His justice 
Which is more than liberty." 



R195 : page 3 

THE SHEEP AND GOATS. 

(MATT. 25:31-46.) 

The scene of this parable is laid after the time of trouble, and 
after the exaltation of the "little flock" to the throne, when the 
nations have been subdued, Satan bound and the authority of 
Christ's kingdom established. So we read: "When the Son of 
Man shall come in his glory... then shall he sit upon the throne of 
his glory, and before him shall be gathered all nations." The 
Bride of Christ before this time, has been seated with him in his 
throne, and has taken part in executing the judgments of the 
great day of wrath. Now, "the Son of Man appears" (is made 
manifest) to the world, "in his glory"— The glory of the husband 



is the wife (1 Cor. 11:7) and together Jesus and his Bride "shine 
forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father." 

Here is the "New Jerusalem" as John saw it (Rev. 21)~"that 
holy city... coming down from God out of heaven." During all 
the time of trouble it was coming down, and now it has touched 
the earth. This is the stone cut out of the mountains (kingdoms 
of earth) without hands, (but by the power of God) and it has 
become a great mountain (kingdom) and has filled the whole 
earth. (Dan. 2:35.) Its coming has broken to pieces (Dan. 2:34- 
35) the evil kingdoms of the Prince of darkness. Here is that 
glorious city (government) prepared as a bride adorned for her 
husband, (Rev. 21:2) and the nations of them which are saved 
(restored -brought back from the Adamic death) are walking in 
the light of it. (Vs. 24.) These may "bring their glory and honor 
into it, but there shall in no wise enter into it anything that 
defileth, etc." (Vs. 27.) Here from the midst of the throne, 
proceeds a pure river of water of life, (truth, unmixed with error) 
and the Spirit and the Bride say come and take it freely. (Rev. 
22:17.) Here begins the world's probation-the world's great 
judgment day-a thousand years. 

But even in this glorious time of blessing and healing of the 
nations, when Satan is bound, evil restrained, mankind released 
from the grasp of death, and when the knowledge of the Lord 
fills the earth, two classes will be developed, which Jesus in this 
parable calls sheep and goats. These he tells us he will separate. 
Gradually throughout the age he gathers his sheep (those who 
know and obey his voice) to his right hand (place of favor) but 
the goats (the disobedient) to the left. 

In the end of the Millennial age, at the final adjustment of 
human affairs, Jesus thus addresses his sheep: "Come ye 
blessed... inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the 
foundation of the world." What kingdom? Is not the kingdom 
under the whole heavens given to the people of the saints of the 
Most High God to possess it forever? Yes, as we have already 
learned, a "little flock," "the saints," the "sheep" of the gospel 
age, having followed the Lamb (Jesus) whithersoever he went, 
through evil and through good report, even to the sacrificing of 
the human life, with him have been exalted to the divine nature 
and to the throne of the spiritual unseen kingdom, to possess it 
forever (for the age)— "He (the Christ, head and body) must 
reign, till he has put all enemies under his feet." (1 Cor. 15:25.) - 
-The saints shall reign with Christ a thousand years. Rev. 20:6. 

Jesus calls believers of the gospel age, who know and obey his 
voice, his sheep. But he says- "Other sheep I have which are not 
of this fold (referring to those who should follow him in the 
millennial age) them also I must lead (into truth and 
righteousness during that age) and there shall be one fold and 
one shepherd." Jesus and the "little flock"-the bride— made one 



will be the good shepherd who will lead mankind into the one 
fold of safety-harmony with God. 

This work of separating sheep and goats is a gradual one, 
requiring all 

R195 : page 4 

of the millennial age for its accomplishment. During that age 
each individual as he comes to a knowledge of God and his will, 
takes his place at the right hand of favor, or the left hand of 
disfavor according as he improves or misimproves the 
opportunities of that golden age. And by the end of that age, all 
the world of mankind (not the church of the gospel age) will 
have arranged themselves as shown in the parable, into two 
classes. In nature sheep are far more numerous than goats, and 
we do not doubt that with the perfect knowledge then possessed, 
the sheep company will far outnumber the goats. With the end 
of that age (1,000 years) is the end of the world's trial, or 
judgement, and final disposition is made of the two classes. The 
goats who have not developed the element of love- the law of 
God's being and kingdom -are not counted worthy of life and 
must be destroyed, while the sheep who have developed and by 
deeds exhibited Godlikeness (love) are to be installed as the 
rulers of earth for future ages. 

The work of restitution will not be quite complete until the great 
mass of mankind, having been restored to the perfect condition, 
is again restored to the dominion of earth as given originally to 
Adam before sin entered. For God said: "After our likeness, let 
man have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of 
the air, over the cattle and over all the earth... and over every 
living thing that moveth upon the earth"— a ruler over earth, like 
as God is ruler over all things. And the Psalmist expresses the 
same idea saying: "Thou hast made man a little lower than the 
Angels and hast crowned him with glory and honor; thou madest 
him to have dominion over the works of thy hands." Not over 
each other; when the law of love controls human hearts, there 
will be no necessity for dominion over one another, though by 
mutual consent, prompted by mutual love, regulations may be 
made among themselves for the common good and blessing of 
all. 

This then, is the kingdom that has been preparing for mankind 
from the foundation of the world. It was necessary that they 
should suffer 6,000 years under the dominion of evil, hatred and 
strife, to learn their certain results, misery and death, and in 
order by contrast to prove the justice, wisdom and goodness of 
God's law-love. Then it requires the seventh thousand years 
under the reign of Christ to restore him from ruin and death to 
the perfect condition, thereby fitting him wisely to exercise 
dominion over earth. 



But why is man thus crowned with glory and honor, a king in all 
the earth? The Lord makes them answer -because "I was 
hungry and you fed me, thirsty and you gave me drink, I was a 
stranger and you took me in, naked and you clothed me, I was 
sick and you visited me, in prison and you came unto me." But, 
they answer, when saw we thee hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, 
or naked, or sick, or in prison, and ministered unto thee? Hear 
the reply- Ye have done it to each other; ye are all my Father's 
children; I also am his Son, though on a higher plane, and all we 
are brethren: (Christ and the saints of the gospel age-children of 
God on the spiritual plane; mankind in general will be sons of 
God on the restored, or fleshly plane as Adam was before sin.) 
The love you have shown to the least of my brethren, I count as 
shown to me. No great deeds are assigned as the ground for this 
honor and favor-they have simply come into harmony with 
God's law, love, and proved it by their works. "Love is the 
fulfilling of the law," (Rom. 13:10.) and "God is love," so when 
man is restored again to the image of God -"very good"-man 
also will be love. 

Then the message to those on the left- "Depart from me ye 
cursed, (condemned as unfit vessels for the glory and honor of 
life, who would not yield to the moulding hand of the potter-the 
moulding and shaping influences of divine love). When these 

R196 : page 4 

my brethren were hungry and thirsty, naked, sick and in prison, 
ye ministered not to their necessities, thus continually proving to 
be out of harmony with the law of the heavenly city (kingdom) 
and "there shall in no case enter into it anything that defileth." 
"Depart from me into everlasting fire (symbol of destruction) 
prepared for the Devil and his Angels." Satan is to be destroyed, 
as we read- "That old serpent which is the devil and Satan was 
cast into the lake of fire; this is the second death." Christ will 
"destroy... him that has the power of death, that is the Devil." 
"And these (the goats) go away into everlasting cutting-off 
(destruction) but the righteous into life eternal." (Never ending.) 
Diaglott. 

Of the "sheep" it is said: "inherit the kingdom prepared for you 
from the foundation of the world." But because God gave it to 
man at first and designs restoring it to him again, when he has 
prepared and repaired him for the great trust, we are not to 
suppose that God intends man to rule it except as under, or in 
harmony with His heavenly laws. "Thy will be done on earth as 
it is done in heaven" will be the rule. 

There could scarcely be a better illustration of Man's dominion 
under God, than that afforded in the government of this country. 
Each state is permitted to have dominion over its own territory, 
but all must be subject to the general government of the United 
States. And no one state may make a law which will conflict 



with any law of the United States. When in the late rebellion 
some of the states attempted so to do, the general government 
was obliged to reduce to subjection the refractory states, and 
when they were restored to harmony, they were again permitted 
to occupy their former position. 

So we learn that God's government is a general government over 
all his works; that he rules in justice equity and love; that His 
kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall 
serve and obey Him; that the Most High ruleth in the kingdom 
of men and giveth it to whomsoever he will"~but the kingdom 
of earth is sure to man after that he has learned that the heavens 
do rule. (Dan. 4:17-26.) 

When the perfect man to whom it was first given, through sin 
lost his ability and right to reign, the dominion was taken away 
and given to his adversary whose reign of terror and death lasted 
6,000 years. But a limit was set by the Almighty to his time and 
power to hurt mankind and while used for man's discipline and 
final good, the remainder of his wrath was restrained. When the 
powers of darkness have accomplished their part in God's 
purpose, the Son of God is sent to restore all things and to bring 
order and harmony out of confusion. When his work is finished 
he "gives up the kingdom to the Father that God may be all and 
in all." (1 Cor. 15:28.) 

Man henceforth rules his dominion in harmony with the law of 
heaven- delighting continually to do his will, in whose favor is 
life, and at whose right hand (place of favor) there is fullness of 
joy and pleasure forevermore. O who would not say "Haste thee 
along ages of glory," and give glory and honor to him whose 
loving plans blossom out into such fullness of blessing. 

This parable as we now understand it, is in complete harmony 
with the ideas advanced in article headed "The restored 
dominion." See WATCH TOWER, Dec. 1880. 



R196:page4 

LOOKING UNTO JESUS. 

There are two principles involved in the word look, two 
mediums by which we are enabled to discern objects, light and 
the eye. Without these mediums there may be ever so many or 
interesting objects to be seen, but they will not be seen; there 
must be both light and the instrument of seeing (the eye). These 
are the requisites in nature; these are the necessary things for 
material sight, and the basis of our understanding of spiritual 
things, the things of God. Light in nature is the means of 
knowing (or seeing) natural things; so in spiritual things means 
of knowing are called light- "By using such lights as we have 
we arrive at probability, if not certainty. " 



Explanation and illustration are other means of knowing or 
understanding and are also called light: "one part of scripture 
throws light on another part." Point of view-situation to be 
seen, is called light- this is a use of the word taken from 
painting; "let every thought be presented in the strongest light." 
Looking in the natural is to direct the eye-in the spiritual to 
direct the mind of the understanding; "the eyes of your 
understanding being enlightened." 

With these terms in mind let us consider the subject before us, 
"Looking unto Jesus." Let us bring in the lights and turn the eyes 
of our understanding toward the desire of all nations," the hope 
of the world. How, "we see Jesus who was made a little lower 
than the angels for the suffering of death"— Heb. 2:9. O earth! 
bow down, hide thy face in the dust, the Lord of life dies for 
thee. The mystery of God is among men. Did we see rightly? 
How was he made? A little lower than the angels? Let us look 
closely. Does Paul mean just that? Yes, it seems so. But man is a 
great deal lower than the angels. Did he not take upon him the 
nature of man? Yes, he took the "seed of Abraham." Heb. 2:16: 
Well, if he took on him the seed of Abraham did he not take a 
nature much lower than angels, even the fallen nature, and work 
his way up to this position a little lower than the angels? We 
think not— let us see. Hold the light this way a little, brother; 
there, now. What said the scriptures? ABRAHAM believed God 
and it was counted unto him for righteousness.... How was it then 
reckoned? When he was in circumcision or in uncircumcision? 
Not in circumcision but in uncircumcision... for the promise that 
he should be the heir of the world, was not to Abraham or to his 
seed, through the law, but through the righteousness of faith." 
Romans 4:10-13. If then, Abraham was justified by faith- 
reckoned in God's sight a perfect and righteous man, who will 
say that Jesus must have taken the fallen nature-imperfect, 
because it says: He partook of the "seed of Abraham." But was 
he not made of the seed of Abraham according to the flesh? 
Well, yes; he was "made of the seed of David according to the 
flesh." Rom. 1 :3. "When the fullness of the time was come God 
sent forth his son, made of a woman, made under the law, to 
redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the 
adoption of sons." Gal. 4:4-5. But he was "made not after (down 
towards) the law of a carnal (fleshly) commandment but after 
the power of an endless life, for there is verily a disannulling of 
the commandment going before for the weakness and 
unprofitableness thereof; for the law made nothing perfect but 
the bringing in of a better hope did, (viz: Jesus, the perfect one, 
in whom was no sin,) by the which, we draw nigh to God. Heb. 
7:16,18-19. But was he not made in all things like unto his 
brethren? And does not this plainly show that he took the fallen 
nature of man, the lowest step that could be taken? "In all things 
it behooved him to be made like unto his brethren that he might 
be a merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God, 



to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. Heb. 2:17. But 
was he not made like other men, was he not in his fleshly nature 
just as low in the scale of being as any other man, only that he 
did not actually sin? No; if he had been, he could not have 
resisted actual sin; the fallen human nature is "prone to sin as the 
sparks to fly upward," and as long as we are of the fallen human 
nature we cannot avoid sin. Of such "there is none righteous; no, 
not one." [It is only when justified, new creatures, that we can 
realize ourselves as no longer sinners and enemies, but sons of 
God.] 

Again, if on the depraved plane of being he could not be said to 
have been "made a little lower." He as a perfect one was to 
mediate and bring about a reconciliation between God and his 
fallen carnal creatures who by sin had become His "enemies;" 
hence Jesus was made a little lower than the angels, "for the 
suffering of death," that he might raise us up to a point but a 
little lower than the angels, (as perfect beings—justified or 
reckoned perfect,) thus becoming our mediator "for if when we 
were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his 
Son, much more being reconciled we shall be saved by his life." 
Rom. 5:10. But in what sense was he higher or superior to 
Adam? In this, that Adam was created of God, but Christ was 
begotten of God; now do we see how he was made like unto his 
brethren? Not like unto fallen man, they are not begotten of the 
spirit Christ and his brethren are. Now we, brethren, as Isaac 
was, (and Jesus) are children of promise. But as then he that was 
born after the flesh persecuted him that was born after the spirit, 
even so it is now. Nevertheless what saith the scripture? "Cast 
out the bond woman and her son: for the son of the bond woman 
shall not be heir with the son of the free woman." So then, 
brethren, we (nor Christ) are not children of the bond woman, 
but of the free. Gal. 4:28-31. But was he not for our sakes made 
poor that we through his poverty might be 

R197 : page 4 

made rich? Yes, he became poor for our sakes; when he died 
upon the cross he consummated his poverty, giving up all, even 
life itself, and thus reconciled us to God; for, as by Adam's death 
in or because of sin all die, so by Christ's death in or because of 
righteousness all are made alive; but we who are reckoned in the 
Adamic nature by the death of 

R197 : page 5 

Christ are much more"... "saved by his life;" we begin to be new 
creatures in Christ Jesus, and so we are not (reckoned) in the 
fallen condition, as the world, but in that which he recognizes as 
brethren. "For both he that sanctifieth and they who are 
sanctified are all of one for which cause he is not ashamed to 
call them brethren." Heb. 2:1 1 . He came low enough to reach us 
and taste death for every man, but a little lower than the angels 



was low enough for that, for from that intermediate position God 
can reach us through Christ and "raise us (from our fallen 
condition where we were with the world) up together and make 
us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, that in the ages 
to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace in his 
kindness toward us through Christ Jesus. Eph. 2:6-7. Now, if we 
can see clearly that his being made a little lower than the angels 
was for no other reason than that he might suffer death (to which 
he was not legally subject) and destroy him who had the power 
of death for us, do we not see that there is no reason for his 
being made a little lower, or even as low as the angels again for 
us whom (in our brotherhood condition) he was made like unto? 
He was as we are (reckoned) and we shall be as he is now. 

Beloved, now are we (reckoned) the sons of God, and it doth not 
yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when he shall 
appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. And 
every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself even as 
he is pure. 1 John 3:2-3. 

Now let us look close, (hold the light steady and keep an humble 
position,) there, now, if it behooved him to be made like unto his 
brethren, if we can get a good view of him we can get a good 
idea of what his brethren are, for they will be somewhat as he 
was, "wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly 
calling, consider the apostle and high priest of our profession, 
Christ Jesus, who was faithful to him that appointed him. " He 
was "appointed heir of all things." "And ye are complete in him" 
"In whom ye are builded together for an habitation of God 
through the spirit." Now, dear brethren, is it not clearly God's 
design to glorify his Son and his church (bride) by what he shall 
accomplish through them? Think you they are to be exalted and 
honored merely for the honor? Ah, no! Honor and glory and 
happiness are in store for those "who are the called according to 
his purpose," and that purpose is the bringing of "many sons 
unto glory," and to accomplish that purpose it was necessary 
that the captain of our salvation should pass through suffering, 
"leaving us an example, that ye should follow in his steps." Dear 
brethren, are we willing to do that? Is the lesson so often set 
before us in the "Watch Tower" (drawn from the word) 
forgotten and overlooked in our eager gaze at the coming glory? 
Wherefore let us suffer "according to the will of God and 
commit the keeping of our souls to him in well-doing as unto a 
faithful Creator. 



R197 : page 5 



NUMBER THREE. 

PART I. 

We have found in the past that the number seven is a fruitful 
and interesting topic; and that on this sacred number many 
things in God's plan are based. The investigation of the 
Tabernacle with its three apartments has suggested that number 
three is also a sacred and important number. We are convinced 
that three is fundamental in Heaven and Earth, as to God and 
man, in the structure of the universe, in the plan of the ages, and 
in the process of Christian development or of coming to God. 
For these reasons and in harmony with the Spirit and method of 
prophecy, we think a glimpse of God's plan was the basis of the 
pattern which the Lord showed Moses in the mount, from which 
pattern the tabernacle and all its arrangements were made. No 
part can fail. 

In seeing these underlying principles in the construction of the 
word, we have additional evidence that the Bible reveals a 
science, and is God's truth. As men can be made to see these 
things, it will be like taking the vail of unbelief from their 
minds, which will let in a flood of God's light and love. One 
motive in our writing is the desire to guard some against the 
overspreading wave of unbelief. 

The number three is surprisingly prominent, as the subject opens 
before us. We may not, in every case, see its significance- 
sometimes little, perhaps, but often much. Others may enlarge 
on thoughts suggested. Our hope is that all who read may love 
the word more and more, as the rich treasure house of its great 
Author. 

We would first call attention to the Divine Three-Father, Son 
and Holy Spirit-often mentioned in the Bible. This is 
fundamental, as shown by the commission of Christ, (Matt. 
28:19) and is related to our faith in the Creator, Redeemer and 
Regenerator, and suggests the three steps in bringing men into 
the Divine image. 

Man, in his composition, is spoken of by Paul as having three 
elements -"spirit and soul and body," which he prays may be 
sanctified wholly, and preserved blameless unto the coming 
(presence) of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Thess. 5:23. 

The Divine Spirit is the Sanctifier, and the word of truth is the 
instrument. 2 Thess. 2:13 and John 17:17. 

Man's spirit, in the above passage, which needs sanctifying, 
should not be confounded with the indwelling Spirit of God, by 
which we are sanctified. The distinction is observed by the 
apostle when he says: "The Spirit itself beareth witness with our 
spirit, that we are the children of God." Rom. 8:16. 



We would now call attention to 

THE THREE WITNESSES. 

There are three that bear witness in earth, the Spirit and the 
water and the blood: "and these three agree in one." 1 John 5:8. 
The three witnesses agree in one testimony. What is their 
testimony? It is God's testimony concerning His Son. It must be 
important. "If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God 
is greater." vs. 9. As the Son is the great expression or revelation 
of the Father, we should expect this important testimony of the 
three witnesses to have reference to the revelation of God's love 
for the world. "God is Love," and He wants us to believe it. Let 
Paul speak: "Because the love of God is shed abroad [made 
known] in our hearts by the Holy Spirit, which is given unto us." 
Rom. 5:5. Here is one of the three witnesses telling us of God's 
love for us while we were yet sinners. How are we to know that 
love? What is the Spirit's testimony -the record that God gives 
concerning His Son? Listen— "For when we were yet without 
strength in due time CHRIST DIED FOR THE UNGODLY." 
Verse 6. The death of Christ must, then, be an important event in 
God's plan. 

By reference to Daniel 9:26 the "due time" -the time appointed- 
will be seen. "After the threescore and two weeks, Messiah shall 
be cut off, but not for himself"— it was for sinners. This shows 
that the death could not have been from His birth, nor all the 
period of His earthly life as some maintain. The weeks mark the 
time of His baptism, after which He should pour out His soul 
(life) unto death. He came to His death by the way of water and 
blood. His baptism in water was a symbol of His baptism into 
death, and because it was a symbol it became a pledge that He 
would die, in obedience to the Father's will. It was His 
consecration to the cross. For this reason if for no other, it could 
truly be said: "This is He that came by water and blood-even 
the anointed Saviour; not by water only, but by water and 
blood." 1 John 5:6. The coming, or manifestation of the 
Messiah, taken as a whole, was to make known the love of God 
to the world, and the manifestation included the death. 

But is the death of Christ, after the weeks, an expression of 
God's love? Listen to Paul again: "For scarcely for a righteous 
man will one die: [that would be a great stretch of love] yet 
possibly for a good man some would even dare to die. But 
[wondrous beyond measure] God commendeth His love toward 
us in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us." Rom. 
5:7-8. The death of Christ, according to verse 10 and onward, 
secures reconciliation in the sense that it reverses the curse that 
came on all by the first Adam; and because of this removal of 
the encumbrance, it opens the way for the impartation of the 
Spirit to the obedient, and so for the gift of eternal life. Hence it 
is written that "If when we were enemies we were reconciled to 



God by the death of His Son; much more being reconciled, we 
shall be saved [the higher and spiritual form of salvation] by His 
life." Christ is thus shown to be both the Restorer of the old, and 
Giver of the higher life-the second Adam. 

No one who can appreciate the Spirit's testimony can ignore or 
belittle the death of Christ. He not only came to His death by the 
way of water and blood, as the Spirit hath borne witness, but the 
water and blood that flowed from His side when He was 

R198:page5 

pierced add their testimony to that of the Spirit that He was 
dead, and also that it was a voluntary death. He poured out His 
soul unto death. 

The statement of John concerning the testimony of the three 
witnesses, finds its foundation in the gospel written by him: 
"But one of the soldiers with a spear pierced His side, and 
forthwith there came out blood and water. And he that saw it 
bear record, and his record is true: and he knoweth that he saith 
true, that ye might believe." John 19:34-35. The Spirit says, 
"Christ died for our sins" and that "He gave his life a ransom." 
The separation of the watery portion of the blood, gave proof 
that He was already dead, and had been dead for some time; for 
had He not been dead, the flow would have been red blood. 

We offer this as evidence that His death was not the direct result 
of crucifixion. The record is that He lived only six hours on the 
cross, from the third hour until the ninth hour of their day, 
(Mark 15:25-34) while men who were crucified usually lived 
much longer, even for days. The case of Jesus was so 
exceptional that when Joseph, the counsellor, asked Pilate for 
the body of Jesus, "Pilate marvelled if he were already dead, and 
would not believe it until he had called the centurion and knew 
it from him. Mark 15:43-45. 

The Jews had no thought of the possibility of His being dead so 
soon, when they "besought Pilate that their legs might be 
broken." The soldiers on account of finding Him dead, made an 
exception of His case, and so "brake not his legs: But one of the 
soldiers pierced His side." Thus a prophecy was fulfilled: "A 
bone of him shall not be broken." A type too was fulfilled, no 
bone of the passover lamb was to be broken. Num. 9:12. And in 
the piercing of His side, the foundation was laid for the 
fulfillment of another scripture in reference to the nation of 
Israel, when at His second coming He appears for their 
deliverance, viz: "They shall look on him whom they pierced." 
Zech. 12:9-10. It was therefore, for all these reasons, necessary 
that He should die sooner than crucifixion by men would secure. 

We are led to believe that Christ's death was a voluntary act in 
the Divine administration. This is in harmony with the idea 
which was shown sometime since, in our paper, that Christ was 



both human and Divine, and thus became the antitype of both 
priest and sacrifice— Aaron and the beast. Not the life of the 
Priest, but the lower nature, as represented by the beast, was 
required as a sacrifice. The Divine is the priest power both in 
Jesus and all His true followers. A body was prepared for Him 
and He offered it. Heb. 10:5-10. We are to sacrifice our bodies. 
Rom. 12:1. The power by which we do this is the indwelling 
Divine Spirit. Rom. 8:13. Christ said He had received power or 
authority of His Father to lay down His life." "Therefore doth 
my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take 
it again. No man taketh it from me [this could have no force if it 
referred to His pre-existent life. No one thought of taking that. 
The force of the statement is sure in that while men might seem 
to take His life by crucifying Him, yet they were mistaken;] in 
reality "No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself." 
I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. 
This commandment [authority or power] have I received of my 
Father." John 10:15-18. And when speaking of the temple of His 
body, (which is equally true of His own person and of His body, 
the church, for it is Christ that raises all the dead, i.e. God in 
Christ, or Christ as a Divine Person) He said: "Destroy this 
temple and in three days I will raise it up." John 2:19-22. "I will 
raise them up at the last day;" Which when applied to the 
church, is the seventh thousand from the first Adam and the 
third thousand from the second Adam. 

Now we can see that the real crucifying power is also the saving 
power, and therefore that the only way of salvation is by 
following Christ. As the Divine is the Priest power, so when the 
Humanity of Christ was forsaken of that Divinity which held the 
human in His hands, it was (the writer thinks) the antitype of 
Aaron killing the beast; so Jesus immediately bowed His head 
and died. 

It seems certain that the sacrifice was a special preparation of 
God and in the act of sacrifice was a voluntary offering. In this 
fact as well as in the ransom thus provided, we may well see the 
Father's love commended, "in that while we were yet sinners 
Christ died for us." And as God has given us the combined 
testimony of three witnesses to the truth, let us believe in the 
truth, and thanking Him for it, 

R198 : page 6 

may we be able to see also the value of Christ's example, and so 
follow the Lord in sacrifice. If we are made conformable to His 
death we shall share in His glory. 

J. H. P. 



R198:page6 



NUMBER THREE. 

PART II. 

There are three baptisms spoken of as related to God's dealings 
with men, that of water, of Spirit, and of fire. All are mentioned 
by John, "I indeed, baptize you with water... but He shall baptize 
you with the Holy Spirit, and with fire." Matt. 3:11. 

This statement doubtless had reference, primarily, to the 
disposition made of the Jewish nation, at the end of their age, 
and is intimately related to the harvest work of Christ, 
mentioned in the next verse, which also has three elements, 
separation of wheat and chaff, gathering of wheat, and burning 
of chaff. This work covered a space of forty years, not being 
complete until the destruction of Jerusalem in A.D. 70. Jesus 
was clearly the Lord of the harvest, and Himself the chief 
Reaper, though He had assistants under His control. 

John baptized and addressed a mixed multitude, of which, when 
passed over to Christ, some were baptized with the Spirit and 
some with fire. It seems clear that the baptism of the Spirit 
agrees to the gathering of the wheat into the Gospel barn, and 
the baptism of fire to the burning of the chaff, or judgments on 
the rejected nation. Those who bore the fruit Christ was seeking, 
were counted worthy, and were filled with the Spirit as the sons 
of God; and those not bearing good fruit, were cut down, and 
cast into, or baptized with fire. Read the context and see if the 
"wrath to come," the baptism of fire, and the "unquenchable 
fire" are not identical. 

It may be observed here, as has often been shown, that the 
harvest of the Gospel age, as mentioned by the Saviour, in the 
parable of tares and wheat, (Matt. 13) is parallel to the Jewish 
harvest, and also has its three elements, separation, gathering 
and burning. Then, it was the Jewish nominal church, wheat and 
chaff, that was disposed of; now, it is the nominal Gospel 
church, wheat and tares, that is to be disposed of. The harvest 
here, according to the prophetic periods, [see "Day Dawn"] also 
covers a period of forty years, reaching to and including the year 
1914. 

The Saviour says: "The harvest is the end of the age," (verse 39) 
and in the next verse includes the burning of the tares in the 
closing work of the age; so let us not overlook the fact that in 
some sense the age, and therefore the harvest reaches to 1914. 
The tares are not to be burned after the end of the age, but in the 
end of the age. 

According to the order of events, as the Saviour explains them, 
the shining forth as the sun is not due until after the tares are 
burned. We believe it must be "Day Dawn" until 1914. Of 
course the exaltation to glory precedes the shining forth in that 
glory. 



The extension or prolonging of the Jewish age after A.D. 33, 
and of the Gospel age after A.D. 1878, is an expression of the 
long suffering of God to His defiled people; He is not willing 
that any [of them] should perish, but that they should come to 
repentance." 2 Pet. 3:9. His encouragement to the lukewarm 
church, is, "As many as I love I rebuke and chasten; be zealous, 
therefore, and repent." Rev. 3:19. And it seems from the 
Saviour's parable of the lost sheep, that he will not be content 
until He finds and brings in the lost one [of the sheep, not of the 
world.] 

There is nothing in what is said above, on the extension of the 
harvest, to militate against the idea of the exaltation of the king 
and priest company immediately, if the Lord so wills; in fact, it 
has often been shown that the little flock are to share in the 
administration of the coming judgments, which will purify the 
defiled, or ripen the unripe wheat. 

Returning from the seeming digression, we would say, that 
while the three baptisms had primary application to the Jewish 
nation, there seems to be a sense in which they are applicable to 
each Christian. Water baptism is of course external, and has to 
do with external relationships; but it is important as an act of 
obedience, or expression of loyalty to the Savior, and may 
appropriately be regarded, on account of the place given it by 
the Savior in His commission, and by the apostles in their 
practices, as an incipient step in a life of loyalty. And we know 
that it is the obedient who can claim the promises attached. And 
as a symbol, we may safely say it represents all there is of 
Christianity, -its faith or foundation, in the death and 
resurrection of Christ; its life, in dying to sin and rising to walk 
in newness of life; its hope, in the death and resurrection of the 
saint. 

The baptism of the Spirit, we understand is necessary, to enable 
the Christian to carry out what was symbolized in the water 
baptism; in other words to enable him to keep his covenant. That 
to be baptized with the Spirit, is to be filled with the Spirit, 
seems clear by comparing the promise of Christ, (Acts 1:5,) and 
the fulfillment. Acts 2:4. He said, "Ye 

R199 : page 6 

shall be baptized with the Holy Spirit not many days hence;" 
and when the day of Pentecost was fully come, "They were all 
filled with the Holy Spirit." Speaking of the same thing Jesus 
said, "After the Holy Spirit has come upon you." Acts 1:8. 

While, as has been clearly shown by another, the company who 
received the Holy Spirit, on the day of Pentecost, represented 
the whole church; and it has remained with the church ever 
since; yet, there is of course, a time when each individual, 
passing from death unto life by faith, receives that same Spirit. 
So at the conversion of Cornelius and his family, "The Holy 



Spirit fell on all them who heard the word." Acts 10:44. And all 
with Peter were "astonished" ..."because that on the Gentiles 
also was poured out the gift of the Holy Spirit," ver. 45. Peter 
said they "have received the Holy Spirit as well as we." ver. 47. 
And he afterward said, "And as I began to speak the Holy Spirit 
fell on them as on us at the beginning &c. Acts 11:15-17. 

"The gift of the Holy Spirit is to all that obey the gospel," even 
as many as the Lord our God shall call. Acts 2:38-39. "And the 
disciples were filled with joy, and with the Holy Spirit." Acts 
13:52. Paul exhorts the church at Ephesus to "be not drunk with 
wine... but [to] be filled with the Spirit." Eph. 5:18. 

We understand the baptism of fire, in the individual is 
equivalent to the trials, chastisements, afflictions, and 
tribulations, through which we must pass in order to overcome 
and so reign with Christ. The baptism into death which the 
Saviour endured, and with which He said His disciples must also 
be baptized, is the very thing pledged in water baptism, but it 
has often been shown that it can only be carried out by the 
power of the indwelling Spirit of Christ. Rom. 8:13. The 
baptism of fire and of death seem to be identical, or rather 
different parts of the same thing, the former being the process 
and the latter the completion of the work. To be baptized into 
the Savior's death means far more than to be baptized into water, 
though the former is represented by the latter. 

It is doubtless true that much of our chastisement and affliction 
comes by our own natural conditions, and the Apostle tells us 
that, "Whom the Lord loveth He chastiseth... that we might be 
partakers of His holiness." Heb. 12:6-10. 

As judgments and troubles are represented by fire in the 
Scriptures, so the Christian's trials are called "fiery trials." 1 Pet. 
4:12. Some of these trials come from the enemies without, but 
the Christian's greatest enemy is his old self, or carnal nature, 
against which the Spirit within, or new nature wars. Rom. 7:15- 
25. 

It is one of the great mistakes of the nominal church that it is 
considered so easy to be a Christian; as if we might sail to 
Paradise by balmy breezes, and rest on flowery beds. The road 
the Master went, was a thorny road, and He said, "Follow me." 
The way of the cross is the way to the crown. The cross is a 
symbol of death by crucifixion. The word teaches that through 
much tribulation (fire) we must enter the kingdom of God. Acts 
14:22. 

The Lord is represented as a refiner of silver, watching His 
children in the fire, and thus He will purify the sons of Levi. 
Mai. 3:3. These trials are often severe, but they have their 
attending joys. Jesus said to His disciples, "In the world ye shall 
have tribulation; but in me ye shall have peace." John 16:23. 
Paul says, "We glory in tribulations also," because of the good 



effects on character. Rom. 5:3-6. None of these things can 
separate us from the love of God in Christ. Rom. 8:35-39. 

It seems that the fiery baptism whether it be of a nation, church 
or an individual is permitted in mercy, as a purifying process, 
without which the final good is not attainable. 

We understand the baptism of fire is for the destruction of the 
flesh— the old nature; that as a means to that end we need the 
baptism of the Spirit; but the Spirit has the double work of 
killing, and of making alive with a new and immortal life; and 
we believe that both are represented by the baptism of water- 
which is a symbolic death and resurrection. 

J. H. P. 



R199:page6 

JUSTIFICATION, SANCTIFICATION, 
REDEMPTION. 

These are the three steps by which we are to reach "the prize of 
our high calling "--glory, honor and immortality. Not one of 
these steps can be omitted by those who win the great prize, nor 
can they be taken in any way but their order as directed in the 
Scriptures. 

Justification comes first as a necessity, because, all the human 
race being sinners, as such God could not either sanctify or 
glorify them; therefore, by some means, they must be "made 
free from sin" (brought to a condition of sin-less-ness) in order 
that they might "have their fruit unto holiness" (sanctification), 
and eventually receive "the end thereof— eternal life" 
(redemption). Rom. 6:22. 

As sinners, men "are not subject to the law of God, neither 
indeed can they be." (Rom. 8:7). We are "made free from sin" 
by faith; that is, we are told of God that a ransom has been given 
for our sin, and that if we by faith accept the ransom, he no 
longer regards or treats us as sinners, but as perfect and sinless 
beings. This cleansing from sin is a complete work. You are 
justified— reckoned of God just and perfect, but it cannot be seen 
with the natural eye. You cannot realize that physically you are 
any more perfect than before you believed yourself justified. It 
is entirely by the eye of faith that you know yourself now as a 
being, justified freely from all things. God's word declares it and 
you believe Him. 

We need not fear that our justification is incomplete, for 
Jehovah Himself is the justifier, as we read, God is "just and the 
justifier of him which believeth in Jesus" (Rom. 3:26), and 
again, "Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect? It is 
God that justified!." 



Upon what grounds does God reckon human sinners as justified 
or righteous persons? Because the ransom for our sins has been 
paid by Jesus, who "Himself bare our sins in His own body on 
the tree." (1 Pet. 2:24). For "Christ suffered, the just for the 
unjust (sinners), that He might bring us to God" (1 Pet. 3:18) as 
justified beings. Jesus was treated as a sinner on our behalf, and 
we are now treated as just persons on His behalf. As we read 
again, "Ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus." (1 Cor. 
6:11). And again, "Being now justified by His blood, we shall be 
saved from wrath through Him." (Rom. 5:9). But 

ONL Y BELIEVERS ARE JUSTIFIED 

during this Gospel age. They who do not believe that Christ died 
for our sins according to the Scriptures, and that "He rose again 
the third day," for our justification (1 Cor. 15:14; Rom. 4:25), 
are not justified: "Ye are yet in your sins." So we read, God "is 
the justifier of him which believeth in Jesus." Again, "All that 
believe are justified from all things" (Acts 13:39), and "A man is 
justified by faith." (Gal. 2:16 and 3:24). 

When we believe the "good news" of our justification, it causes 
us joy and peace to realize that we may now come to God; and 
we no longer dread but now love God, because we see His 
goodness and love, for "herein is the love of God manifested." 
(1 John 4:9). 

We are thus brought into fellowship with God as justified 
human beings --"Being justified by faith, we have peace with 
God." (Rom. 5:1). Few, very few, lay hold upon justification 
fully; few believe God that they "are justified from all things" 
and are in God's sight clothed in the spotlessness of Jesus, in 
whom was no sin; consequently very few have the joy and peace 
which spring from believing. And it is no uncommon thing to 
hear, in church meetings of all denominations, men and women 
tell God that they know themselves to be "miserable sinners." 
Poor creatures, no wonder they agonize and daily ask the 
forgiveness of those sins which God's word declares are 
forgiven. 2 Pet. 1:9. They know not that they partake of the 
justification by believing. If they would only believe God, they 
would have the realization of forgiveness, and consequently joy 
and peace. "For without faith it is impossible to please God." 
Beyond this point of rejoicing in a consciousness of forgiveness 
of sins, and acceptableness in God's sight, few Christians go. 

Did you ever think why God has 

R199 : page 7 

made known to us our justification now, but keeps it hidden 
from the great mass of the race until the millennial age, though 
the ransom price is eventually to release all mankind from sin 
and its penalty, and bring them to the same condition of 
acceptance —sinlessness— perfection which we now enjoy by 



faith? It is because God has a plan which He is working out 
according to the counsel of His own will, and a part of that plan 
is that He will select from among mankind a number who will 
eventually be transferred from the earthly conditions and human 
nature to spiritual conditions and the "divine nature"~to be 
"heirs of God, joint heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord." 

God's object in the development of this "little flock" is two-fold: 
first, He will make them everlasting monuments of His 
goodness, to be known and read of angels and men. As Paul 
expresses it (Eph. 2:7), God's plan in the development of the 
Gospel church of overcomers, is, "That in the ages to come, He 
might show the exceeding riches of His grace, in His kindness 
toward us through Christ Jesus." The second part of God's 

R200 : page 7 

plan, in which we are directly associated, is, that He purposes to 
use us during the next~millennial~age as kings (rulers) and 
priests (teachers), when we shall reign with Christ a thousand 
years. (Rev. 5:10, 20:6). Thus shall the "seed," of which Jesus is 
the head, bless all the families of the earth. (Gal. 3:29). 

No sinners are called to have part in this "high calling, which is 
of God in Christ Jesus." True, Jesus called "sinners to 
repentance"~so does the word of God, and all his children seek 
to bring men to repentance and faith in Christ and consequent 
justification. But only the justified ones are called to be "kings 
and priests unto God, and to reign on the earth." It is worse than 
useless to present the grand prize for which we run to the 
attention of sinners-the unjustified. For the natural man 
receiveth not the things of the spirit of God, neither can he know 
them, for they are spiritually discerned—they are foolishness 
unto him. Therefore, "cast not your pearls before swine, lest 
they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend 
you." 

This being true, that none are called to the high calling except 
the justified ones, the fact that you know of your justification 
may be the proof to you that you are one of those whom God 
has "called" to spiritual life and joint-heirship with Jesus. What 
a blessed privilege to be called with such a high calling. Now do 
you realize that you are called to be a member of the Bride of 
Christ? Then remember who called you- God; and that 
"Faithful is He that calleth you, who also will do it." (1 Thess. 
5:24). Our Father mocks none with a call which they cannot 
attain to. His grace is sufficient for us. 

All who are called may take the second step- 

SANCTIFICATION 

To sanctify is to set apart or separate to a special thing or use. 
God's will is that all justified ones should be sanctified or set 



apart to his service as we read: "This is the will of God even 
your (believers) sanctification." (1 Thes. 4:3.) There are two 
parts to sanctification-first ours, secondly God's part. As we 
have seen, God provides for our justification as men and then 
calls us to set apart-sanctify -or consecrate to him, that 
justified humanity. When we do, thus consecrate or give up our 
will, our time, talent, life and all we have and are to God, and 
ask him to take our little all and use it as seemeth to him good, 
and agree to let the will of God dwell in us richly-when we 
have done this we have done all that we can do; and here God 
who accepts of every such sacrifice, begins His part of the 
sanctification work. He begins to use this will resigned to his 
care and "to work in you both to will and to do" in harmony 
with his will. From that moment it is no longer you (the human) 
but "Christ in you. " Even the earthly (human) body, under the 
new controlling will (God's) is used in God's service and is 
thereby made holy. 

From this moment when we give consecrate— ourselves— we are 
reckoned dead, as human beings for the human will, should be 
buried from that moment forward; and when the will of God- 
the mind of Christ-the Holy Spirit takes possession of us so that 
it becomes our will and our mind, we are called "new 
creatures"— we are thus begotten to newness of life. This new 
creature is only an embryo being: It is not complete; but it grows 
and develops and "we all with open face, beholding as in a glass 
the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from 
glory to glory even as by the Spirit of the Lord." (2 Cor. 3:18.) 
Thus as new spiritual creatures we grow in his likeness during 
the time we abide in this earthly condition. As the spiritual 
nature grows stronger the human nature grows weaker and is the 
easier to keep dead, for I must not only give up my will to God, 
but keep it in a surrendered condition, "keep my body under" - 
under God's will. 

As the new spiritual nature grows it longs for its perfection 
when it will no longer be trammeled and fettered by human 
conditions, but be "like unto Christ's glorious body." This is 
promised us-we have been begotten, and by and by shall be 
born of the Spirit-spiritual bodies, for "that which is born of the 
Spirit is Spirit," just as truly as "that which was born of the flesh 
was flesh." Our begetting we have and our spiritual life is 
begun. It is to be completed, perfected, when this corruptible, 
and mortal condition shall give place to the incorruptible, 
immortal conditions of the Spiritual body. This will be at the 
moment of resurrection to those who sleep in Jesus-raised 
spiritual bodies; and it will be the moment of change to the 
living (from the fleshly body to their own spiritual bodies- 
theirs as new creatures.) Thus, "we which are alive and remain 
shall be changed in a moment." 1 Cor. 15:52. 



If I in Thy likeness, O Lord, may awake, 
And shine a pure image of Thee, 
Then I shall be satisfied when I can break 
The fetters of flesh and be free. 

When on Thine own image in me Thou hast smiled, 
Within Thy blest mansion, and when 
The arms of my Father encircle His child, 
O ! I shall be satisfied then. 

And O ! the blest morning already is here; 
The shadows of nature do fade; 
And soon in Thy likeness I'll with Thee appear, 
In glory and beauty arrayed. 

This change of residence or condition, from the earthly body to 
the spiritual body is the third step of our development, viz: 

REDEMPTION. 

This redemption from the present earthly conditions, finishes 
and completes our salvation and the glory of power will follow. 

Toward this the end of the race we are looking with longing 
eyes, "Ourselves, that have the first fruits (begetting) of the 
Spirit, even we groan within ourselves waiting for sonship, -the 
redemption of our body" (the body of which Jesus is the head 
and all overcomers are members.) Rom. 8:23. 

THE POWER WHICH SANCTIFIES. 

It is not a power of physical force that is used by the Spirit of 
God in our development, but a mental power which appeals to 
our minds and wills. 

The Spirit appeals to our reason, and uses the word of God as its 
agent. In the Word, the Spirit has in former ages stored up, both 
by prophetic utterances and Law shadows and types, those truths 
which God designed should during this Gospel age be the food 
to sanctify the body of Christ and build it up in the most holy 
faith. And we act wisely if we make use of this spiritual food. 
("Thy words were found and I did eat them." Jer. 15:16). It is 
furnished us for the purpose of sanctifying us. If we go to our 
Father and say, Father, I give myself all to thee; I pray thee, set 
me apart as holy to thy service, both now and hereafter. Give me 
needed strength to do thy will. He answers, yes, my child, I have 
already provided a rich store-house of truth, from which, if you 
eat, you shall have the strength you ask. "Knock, and it shall be 
opened unto you"~seek, and you shall find." 

The seeker returns, saying, Father, I found the store-house, but 
saw little but plain food exposed to view; most of the choice 
viands must have been locked up in the great closets which the 
keys did not seem to fit. Father, give me strength in some other 



way. Not so, my child. Part of your lesson is to learn that my 
way is best; that my way of giving is your best way of receiving 
strength. Go; your strength, joy, zeal and love for me will 
increase as one after another these closets open before you, 
revealing their rich treasures. 

Yes, the word of God is the treasure-house of our Father, in 
which He has stored truth to sanctify the church in every age, 
wherein is "given us exceeding great and precious promises, that 
by these we might become partakers of the Divine nature" (2 
Pet. 1 :2,4). In it is revealed "the love of Christ (which) 
constraineth us." (2 Cor. 5:14), and by means of it our Master 
prayed that we should be sanctified: "Father sanctify them 
through Thy truth. Thy word is truth." (John 17:17.) What 
Christian, then, who desires sanctification can afford to ignore 
the Scriptures? Which one will say he has no time to examine 
and seek in it for truth? As well say he has no time for 
sanctification. "It is the power of God unto salvation." (Rom. 
1:16.) Let us, then, who seek this great salvation— high calling- 
say to ourselves as Paul said to Timothy (2 Tim. 3:15-17), 
"From a child thou hast known the Holy Scriptures which are 
able to make thee wise unto salvation." "All Scripture given by 
inspiration of God is profitable, for doctrine, for reproof, for 
correction, for instruction in righteousness; that the man of God 
may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works." 

Now call to mind the steps: First, justification of the human 
nature; second, a consecration or sacrifice of that human nature 
to God, its consequent death and the beginning of your existence 
as a spiritual new creature in the human body during the present 
life; third, the completion of your new, divine nature, by the 
power of God, when you will be like unto Christ's glorious 
body- who is the express image of the Father's person. Glorious, 
high calling! You are called: "Many are called, few are chosen," 
"Make your calling and election sure." 

Do you ask how you can make it sure? I answer, by doing 
according to your covenant; give up your all to Father and let 
Him use you as he sees best- 
All for Jesus ! all for Jesus ! 
All your being's ransomed power: 
All your thoughts and words and doings, 
All your days and all your hours. 

"If you do these things (which you covenanted) ye shall never 
fall: for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly 
into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus 
Christ." (2 Pet. 1:10-11.") God will surely keep His part of the 
agreement [Faithful is He that called you.] "If we suffer, we 
shall also reign with Him." (2 Tim. 2:12.) 



R202 : page 7 



AN OPEN LETTER. 



Dear Brother Russell, I write to ask your prayers for Mr. C, his 
wife, son and daughter. They are steeped in sin. Pray that they 
may be saved and become members of the Bride of Christ. 

My dear brother, your request would be considered a very 
reasonable and proper one by most of Christian people; but from 
our standpoint it would be the height of presumption. I can and 
do thank God that they and all others of our race ARE SAVED, 
are redeemed, and that in God's "due time" they will be entirely 
released from the bondage of sin and death, and during the next 
(Millennial) age will come to a full knowledge of their 
Redeemer, and have abundant opportunity to come to the 
condition of perfect men and women for "Jesus Christ, by the 
grace of God tasted death for every man," "Gave himself a 
ransom for all to be TESTIFIED IN DUE TIME." 

To ask God to convert by any other means than the word "which 
is able to make them wise (now) unto salvation," would be to 
ask Him to perform a miracle. If this be HIS WILL He can do so 
(as in Paul's case) without my asking Him; and would do so 
whether I ask or not. If not God's will to make an exception of 
Mr. C. and family, who am I that I should ask Him to change 
His plans to suit mine? Oh, no! rather reverse the order and 
change my will to suit His plans. 

His plan is to give "Restitution" to the billions in the next age, 
but to select now during the Gospel age "a little flock" (from 
among the billions who are redeemed from death)~to take out a 
people for His name-to be "the Bride, the Lamb's wife" and 
bear His name. It is not our business to help the Lord decide 
who shall be of that selected company. 

The key to many unanswered prayers is "ye ask and receive not 
because ye ask amiss." To be sure of an answer we must ask in 
harmony with God's plan and word. Suppose now that I should 
ask the Lord that Mr. C. and family may be a part of Christ's 
bride, and suppose Mr. C. should not be the Lord's choice for 
that exalted position, one of two things would surely follow: 
either the Lord would take some one contrary to His will, or my 
prayer would go unanswered. And undoubtedly it would be the 
latter-an unanswered prayer. 

Unacceptable prayers come from one of two causes: Either they 
are the desire of our old (human) nature or of the new spiritual 
nature uninstructed as to how to ask and what to ask for. 

Now brother, your request was undoubtedly made by your 
spiritual nature. 

R202 : page 8 



So far it was good; but our new nature or new mind can at 
present operate only through the natural body and may 
consequently make mistakes (therefore, "in this tabernacle we 
groan"— longing for our spiritual body, which will be fully in 
harmony with our new nature—our birth). It is because we are 
thus hampered by the imperfections of earthly conditions that 
"the Spirit helpeth our infirmities;" for we know not what things 
we should ask for as we ought, but "the Spirit maketh 
intercession for the saints according to the will of God." (Rom. 
8:26.) Therefore, sometimes God answers very improper prayers 
in a very gracious manner, though not according to the asking. 

If we would ask and receive, we should study to ask aright. "Let 
the words of our mouth and the meditations of our heart be 
acceptable before Thee, O Lord, our strength and our 
Redeemer." 

There is only one source from which we can learn "what things 
we should ask for," and that is the Spirit's text-book-the Bible. 
How important, then, it is for us to use our text-book and be well 
acquainted with God's plan that we may ask in harmony with it 
and receive. How fully this point was covered by our Lord 
Jesus, when he said: "If ye abide in me (first condition) and my 
words abide in you (second condition), ye shall ask what ye will, 
and it shall be done unto you." 

Truly, your brother in Christ. 



R201 : page 8 

QUESTIONS OF CORRESPONDENTS. 

QUESTION. -Bro. R., how could Moses appear on the Mount 
of transfiguration if not translated? 

ANSWER.-Moses was not translated; he died. (See Deut. 
34:5.) He could have been resurrected by God's power, but not 
as a spiritual body since Jesus was "the first-born from the dead" 
to a spiritual body; "put to death in the flesh but quickened by 
the Spirit." Moses may have been on the Mount as a fleshly 
being but nothing in the narrative demands it. Jesus doubtless 
knew all about it and He charged them straightly, saying, "See 
that ye tell no man the vision until," etc. (Matt. 17:9.) If He thus 
calls it a vision who am I that I should call it a reality. 

QUES.-Bro. R., why do you advise us to read the tracts 
carefully before handing to others? I read them many times and 
have been much instructed by so doing. I don't know why I 
should doubt the truths they teach. 

ANS.-The habit of giving tracts, etc., of whose contents the 
distributors are ignorant, often does harm. We should be as 
careful about not distributing moral poison as any other-more 



so. If all our readers learn to examine the tracts it will aid them 
in the use of the same care with other writings, to see whether it 
be food or poison. If by reading they are convinced that the 
tracts are food, such as many are starving for, it will fire their 
zeal in distributing them. 

Then, too, we should like to think of all readers of the WATCH 
TOWER as preachers of God's plan and truth: "living epistles 
known and read of all men" "ready always to give an answer to 
every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you, 
with meekness." (1 Peter 3:15.) The reading of the tracts might 
be God's way of making ready your answer. 

QUES.-Dear Bro., do you not see that we, the people of these 
U.S. are the seed of Abraham, the lost tribe of Israel? 

ANS. —Abraham was the father of two seeds, the children of the 
flesh [twelve tribes of Israel] and the children of promise, 
[faith], of which two seeds Ishmael and Isaac were types. (Rom. 
9:8. and Gal. 3:23,28,31.) "There are spiritual promises for the 
spiritual seed, which is Christ," "and if ye be Christ's (members) 
then are ye Abraham's (spiritual) seed." (Gal. 3:16,29.) None of 
the spiritual promises belong to the natural fleshly seed, though 
any of them may give up their earthly promises and with the 
"Gentiles become fellow-heirs and of the same body [of Christ] 
and partakers of His promise, in Christ." Eph. 3:6. 

Almost all of the fleshly seed are so blinded by the fleshly 
promises, that they do not see the greater spiritual prize. (See 
Rom. 9:30-32.) "What, then, Israel hath not obtained that which 
he seeketh for (the chief blessing through Abraham) but the 
election (the remnant, the few, in connection with the Gentiles) 
hath obtained it, and the rest were blinded. " But, "they also, if 
they abide not still in unbelief, shall be grafted in again" -into 
the spiritual promises. [That is, as a nation they lost those 
spiritual promises and were cut off from them; but believing 
Israelites, as well as Gentiles, may be grafted into the spiritual 
vine by faith.] But, I would not, (spiritual) brethren, that ye 
should be ignorant of this mystery... that blindness in part (to the 
larger part) hath happened unto Israel until the fullness of the 
Gentiles be come in (to the spiritual blessings) "And (thus) all 
Israel shall be saved," (receive the things promised them as the 
natural seed,) viz: "There shall come out of Zion the deliverer 
(the spiritual seed) who shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob, 
(fleshly seed.) For this is my covenant unto them." (Rom. 1 1:7- 
23-25 and 26.) 

These two seeds of Abraham are referred to in Rom. 4:16: That 
"the promise might be sure to all the seed (natural and spiritual) 
not to that only which is of the law (the natural) but to that also 
which is of the faith." 

We know not whether the people of these United States and of 
England are the natural, fleshly descendants of Israel or not. It 



could make no difference as regards the spiritual "prize of our 
high calling in Christ Jesus." If they are, and were made to know 
it, the effect of those earthly promises would probably be to 
blind them to the spiritual prize as it did the others, 1 800 years 
ago. If they are of the natural seed, they will receive grand 
blessings in the coming age, after the spiritual seed has been 
exalted to glory and power; as it is written. "They shall obtain 
mercy (God's promised blessings) through your mercy" (through 
the spiritual seed.) Rom. 11:31. 

Bro. A. Hipsher, for answer to your question: see 
"Unpardonable Sin," page 3. 

QUES.-Dear Bro. what kind of bodies will little children have 
in the resurrection? 

ANS.-Paul gives us an answer to this question in 1 Cor. 15:38: 
"God giveth...to every seed His own body." "There is a natural 
body and there is a spiritual body"~vs. 44. Adam, the perfect 
man will serve as an illustration of a perfect natural (human) 
body, what the earthly ones shall all be when the work of 
resurrection and restitution, is complete. Christ's body after his 
resurrection will serve as an illustration of a spiritual body. Like 
Him, we who have been begotten of the Spirit shall be, when we 
get our birth, as we have borne the image of the earthly, we shall 
also bear the image of the heavenly.-- Vs. 48,49. 

Now, let us use this rule: Were these children begotten and born 
of the flesh— fleshly bodies? Yes. Were they afterward "begotten 
of the Spirit by the word of truth?" No. Then they remained 
natural, or human, and as such belong to the natural body, while 
we who have been begotten of the spirit and are therefore of the 
spiritual seed, and in the resurrection, God will give to every 
seed his own body; consequently they as part of the natural seed 
will have a natural body, while we who have been begotten of 
the spirit and are therefore of the spiritual seed, will have our 
own bodies, viz: Spiritual bodies, "like unto Christ's glorious 
body." 

While they are designed ultimately to reach the same grand 
perfection of powers, and being enjoyed by the head of the 
human family, (Adam), yet we do not suppose that they will 
come out of their graves thus perfect. We presume (merely) that 
they will arise children and develop. The government, etc., of 
children will be much easier when the curse begins to roll away; 
besides, in past ages the proportion of deaths in childhood, was 
much less than now. 

Bro. J. Baldwin: It would require the entire space of Z.W.T. for 
a year or more to answer all your questions in full. We 
commend to you the reading of all the tracts 3 or 4 times; then 
read "DAY DAWN." You need not expect to obtain all the truth 
on so great and grand a subject at one swallow, it is a continuous 



eating. You must seek. "He that seeketh findeth." "Then shall we 
know if we follow on to know the Lord." (Hos. 6:3.) 

QUES.-Dear Bro. R., may we be sure we belong to the "little 
flock," or must we be in doubt? 

ANS.-'T know in whom I have believed, and am persuaded that 
He is able to keep (preserve) that (life) which I have committed 
unto Him against that day." Paul thus expresses his and our 
confidence in God that He is both able and willing to do for us, 
all of his part of the covenant. The question, then, of our 
membership in the little flock depends entirely upon our keeping 
our part of the covenant. We are His spiritual sheep, ever since 
we entered our covenant relationship, --we are His workmanship. 
If we are entirely given up to Him, so that His will is 
accomplished in us [the human nature crucified] He will give us 
the grand prize. If we hinder the work by opposition of our 
wills, we lose the prize and are obliged to come through the fire 
of tribulation in order to obtain the spiritual body. 

We may not be able to say: the prize will surely be mine; but we 
can say if now entirely given up, -The prize is mine to-day 
unless I lose it to-morrow; and by God's grace I will "keep my 
body (humanity) under lest after having preached to others (of 
the grand prize) I myself should be a castaway" (from it.) 



R202 : page 8 



TIME SERVERS. 



The trimming, hesitating policy of many reminds us of Luther's 
words to Erasmus: "You desire to walk upon eggs without 
crushing them, and among glasses without breaking them!" This 
is a difficult game to play at, and one which is more suitable for 
a clown at a theatre than a servant of Christ. When you are 
attempting to compromise, you have to look around you and 
move cautiously as a tight-rope dancer, for fear of offending on 
one side or the other. A little too much this way or that and over 
you go. A cat on hot cinders is in an enviable position. No true- 
hearted man will ever bear such wretched constraint for any 
length of time, or indeed at all. Think of being able to go no 
further than the aforementioned timorous, time-serving 
Erasmus, who said, "I will not be unfaithful to the cause of 
Christ; at least so far as the age will permit me." Out upon such 
cowardice: life is too dear when bought at such a price. - 
Spurgeon. 



R202 : page 8 

When a cloud comes between us and the sun, it robs us for the 
time of the enjoyment of its beams. It does not prevent him from 



shining, it merely hinders our enjoyment of him. Exactly so it is 
when we allow trials and sorrows, difficulties and perplexities, 
to hide from our souls the bright beams of our Father's 
countenance, which ever shine with changeless lustre in the face 
of Jesus Christ. There is no difficulty too great for our God; yea, 
the greater the difficulty the more room there is for Him to act in 
His proper character, as the God of all power and grace. It is the 
privilege of faith to find God behind the cloud in all His 
faithfulness, love andpower.-Sel. 



R205 : page 1 

VOL. II. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., APRIL, 1881. 

NO. 10. 



pagel 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 

REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H. PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 

L. ALLEN, HONEOYE, N.Y. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN, . FT. EDWARD, N.Y. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance- 
includes postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R215 : page 1 

PITTSBURGH CHURCH MEETING. 

Service held in "Curry Institute Hall," corner Penn avenue and 
Sixth street, Pittsburgh, at 3:00 o'clock P.M., every Sunday. 
Every Wednesday evening, at No. 80 Cedar avenue, Allegheny, 
at 7:30 o'clock P.M. All are cordially invited. 



R205 : page 1 



THE RESURRECTION. 



The death and resurrection of a human body as a thing distinct 
and separate from the intelligent being, is never mentioned in 
the Scriptures. We never read that Abraham's body died, nor that 
Jesus' body died, nor that any one's body died. 

Being signifies existence, and there can be no being or existence 
without life and body both. Withdraw life and the being or 
existence ceases, for life is but a power or principle, the same in 
the lower animals as in man; the difference in qualities between 
man and the brute, consisting not in a different kind of life, but 
in a different kind of body. 

Any being is properly called a soul or person. This is the 
Scriptural sense and usage of the word soul, so little understood; 
viz. Being (life and body combined.) Thus we read of the 
creation of Adam— "And the Lord God formed man of the dust 
of the ground and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life 
(ruach—ihQ same breath said to be given to beasts, birds and 
fishes) and man became a living soul," (being.) Gen. 2-7. 

We will cite a few illustrations of the Bible usage of the word 
soul showing that it signifies being: Lev. 5:2, "If a soul (being- 
person) touch any unclean thing he shall be unclean." Verse 4, 
"If a soul (being) swear." Verse 15, "If a soul (being) commit a 
trespass." Lev. 22:11, "If the priest buy any soul (being) with his 
money." Prov. 6:30, "If he steal to satisfy his soul (being) when 
he is hungry," Prov. 27:7, "The full soul (being) loatheth the 
honey-comb, but to the hungry soul (being) every bitter thing is 
sweet." Prov. 19:2, "That the soul (being) be without knowledge 
is not good." Verse 15, "An idle soul (being) shall suffer 
hunger." Luke 1:46, Mary said, "My soul (being) doth magnify 
the Lord." Jesus said, "My soul (being) is exceeding sorrowful 
even unto death." Matt. 26:38, "Thou shalt love the Lord... with 
all thy soul (being.) Matt. 22:37, The rich man said, "Soul 
(being-self) thou hast much goods laid up for many years; take 
thine ease, eat, drink and be merry. But God said existence) will 
(cease) be required of thee." Luke 12:19, "For what is a man 
profited if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul 
(existence, being,) or "What can a man give in exchange for his 



soul (being existence.") Matt. 16:26. How many illustrations of 
this scripture are furnished us in every day life. Men and women 
labor for wealth, to gain as much as possible of the whole world 
only to find when they are rich that wealth has come at the 
expense of health. How many of those who spend their life in 
laying up earthly treasure, find that their very being- existence- 
has been sacrificed in gaining the wealth. Then what would they 
not give to get back again health, etc. They lavish their wealth 
upon physicians, traveling, etc., but it is of little use: They made 
a poor exchange when they gave their being for money. 

In Acts 2:41. There were added to the church about 3000 souls 
(beings, persons.) Acts 7:14 "He called Jacob and his kindred 75 
souls," (beings.) Acts 27:37, "There were in all, in the ship, 276 
souls," (beings.) "Some purified their souls (beings— lived more 
purely) in obeying the truth." 1 Pet. 1:22. "The law of the Lord 
is perfect converting (changing) the soul" (being.) Psa. 19:7. 
Other souls (beings) were subverted, turned from the truth by 
error. Acts 15:24, Other, unstable souls (beings, persons) were 
beguiled. 2 Pet. 2:14. 

The word soul is used, also to represent the being's affections. 
"O thou whom my soul (being's affections) loveth. Cant. 1:7. 
The soul of David (affections) was knit unto the soul of 
Jonathan.... (The two beings were united.) 1 Sam. 18:1. [The 
word soul is used with reference to fish, fowl and beasts, as it is 
of man; to represent their being or existence, but is usually 
translated "life" in our Bibles as in Gen. 1:20 & 30, etc.] 

With this view of the meaning of the word soul, viz: That it 
includes all being or existence (a combination of life and body) 
let us inquire-what dies— the principle of life, or the body? We 
answer neither; the life principle is one which pervades all 
creation just as does electricity. This principle of life pervades 
and is an essential element of all being, in tree, in fish, in fowl, 
in beast, in man, in angels, and in the fullest degree in God who 
is its source or fountain. This principle cannot be said to die 
though if it be withdrawn from any creature to whom God has 
given it, that creature will die-cease to have being. Thus the 
breath of life is taken from beasts, birds, fish and man. 

Neither can it be properly said that the body dies, since, separate 
from the principle of life the body never had life and 
consequently could not die. The body without the spirit (of life) 
is dead and that which is dead cannot die. 

WHA T THEN IS DEA TH-WHA T DIES? 

We answer, the being dies-ceases to have being or existence. 
Death is the dissolution, or separation of the things which 
combined, constitute being, -namely, life and body. Thus when 
the spirit of life returns to God who gave it (all nature is His 



reservoir of life) then, the being is dead and soon the body will 
return to the dust from whence it was taken." 

We see clearly then, that not the body but the being-called in 
Scripture, soul, dies. Let us notice some instances in which this 
is stated in so many words: Job 31:39 (marginal reading) cause 
the soul of owners thereof to expire" --(dissolve, die.) "Their soul 
dieth in youth, etc." Job 36:14, margin "To deliver their soul 
(being) from death and to keep them alive in famine. " Psa. 
33:19. 

He spared not their soul (being) from death (dissolution). "He 
keepeth back his soul (being) from the pit "...(death.) Job 33:18. 
"He shall deliver his soul (being) from the grave." Psa. 89:48. 
"All souls (beings) are mine... the soul (being) that sinneth it 
shall die." Ezek. 18:4. It was the soul (being) of Jesus which was 
given for our ransom. "Thou shalt make his soul (being) an 
offering for sin".... "He shall see of the travail of his soul and be 
satisfied." "He hath poured out his soul (being) unto death." Isa. 
53:10-12. But, (Acts 2:31.) His soul (being) was not left in hell," 
(hades-the condition of death.) He was raised to being again but 
a being of a higher order-having a grander than human form- 
body. "Put to death in the flesh but quickened by the Spirit." 
And now we come to the point— What will be raised up, in the 
resurrection? The body says some one. Not so I answer, it is the 
BEING that God promises to raise up. It once existed, and lost 
existence and is to be raised up to existence or being again. 
Men, can resurrect a body from the tomb (that is, bring a body 
out of a tomb to the surface;) but only God's power can resurrect 
or bring to existence again a being who has died. 

We see then that resurrection means the restoring of being. 
Now, "with what body do they (these beings) come" (into being 
again?) is a question asked by Paul. (1 Cor. 15:35). [We have 
seen that being is made up of two elements, body, and spirit of 
life— hence if restored to being they must have some sort of 
bodies provided them.] Paul proceeds to tell us, that while each 
must have a body, yet, in the resurrection all beings will not 
have the same kind of bodies. He says that there are two general 
sorts or kinds of bodies-the earthly or natural bodies, and the 
spiritual -heavenly bodies. There are two, perfect illustrations 
of these two kinds of bodies: Adam was the head of the earthly, 
human family and a pattern of the perfect human body. Christ 
Jesus at His resurrection was the first born from the dead to the 
perfect new nature, the spiritual, and He, "thus born of the 
Spirit, is spirit." (John 3:6.) His is a sample or illustration of a 
perfect Spiritual body. 

All humanity, belongs to one of two classes: either they are 
natural men— The ADAMIC SEED, or they have been begotten 
of the Spirit through the word of truth and have given 
themselves up to Christ, that the will of God might be done in 
them. This is the newly begotten man; he belongs to the 



SPIRITUAL SEED. Now says Paul, "God giveth it a body as it 
hath pleased Him and to every seed his own body." That is, 
those who have, during the present life, become partakers of the 
divine nature must needs have a divine form -a "spiritual body" 
"like unto Christ's glorious body" while those who have not thus 
changed nature would have no change of body. When again 
brought into being, they will have natural, human bodies. 

The resurrection which some will have, to spiritual conditions of 
being -with spiritual bodies—is in Scripture designated as 
special, by calling it "The first resurrection," first in importance 
-chief. It is also frequently designated by the article THE (very 
noticeable in the Greek text; but less so in our English 
translations) for illustration-notice the following instances, 
(Luke 20:35.) "They that shall be accounted worthy to obtain 
that world and THE resurrection neither marry nor are given in 
marriage." Again, Paul always taught that there would be "a 
resurrection both of the just and the unjust;" yet he says: If by 
any means I might attain unto THE resurrection. Phil. 3:11. 

R205 : page 2 

The first-to spiritual condition and being. Again he designates 
this resurrection to spiritual being as "His resurrection," because 
Jesus 

R206 : page 2 

was the first one so raised from death to spiritual being. "That I 
might know Him and the power of HIS resurrection (i.e., that I 
might be raised as He was raised.) Then follows an account of 
how he might attain to that glorious resurrection to spiritual 
being, viz.: "knowing the fellowship of His sufferings and being 
made conformable unto His death," (Phil. 3:10.) 

None will attain to this chief resurrection, except they 
consecrate themselves entirely to God's service, "We beseech 
you therefore brethren, by the mercies of God, that you present 
your bodies (and all their powers, talents, reputations -all) a 
living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, your reasonable 
service." So shall you be among those who shall be in THE first 
resurrection for "Blessed and holy are all they that have part in 
THE FIRST resurrection: on such the second death hath no 
power; but they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and reign 
with Him a thousand years. (Rev. 20:6.) 

We can know little about the perfection and grandeur and 
powers of those who shall become spiritual beings except that 
they will be "like unto Christ's glorious body." (Phil. 3:21.) As 
the Apostle says: It doth not yet appear what we shall be, but we 
know that when He shall appear we shall be like Him." (1 John 
3:2.) What an answer is this to those who claim that nothing is 
real but a flesh and bone body. Who would insist that Jesus, 
after His resurrection was the very same flesh and bones He was 



before He died. Was that a glorious body? No, that was the body 
he took for the suffering of death~but being put to death in the 
flesh He was quickened by the Spirit, "a life-giving spirit." (1 
Cor. 15:45) Now He is the express image of the Father's person. 
Is the Father and Creator of all things simply a great Man? Nay, 
verily, "God is a Spirit." "It doth not yet appear, what... but we 
shall be like Him. " Away with that grossness of materialism, 
which can realize nothing higher than the natural, human plane. 
Let us take Paul's account. There are human natural bodies and 
there are spiritual bodies. Both will be glorious, but the glory of 
the human, earthly, (terrestrial) is one thing and the glory of the 
spiritual, heavenly, celestial, is quite another and quite a 
different thing. See (1 Cor. 15:40.) 

The restored world of mankind shall be indeed glorious men like 
the perfect head of the human race, but that glory will not 
compare with "the glory that shall be revealed in us," who have 
given up the human nature and become partakers of the divine 
nature, into the perfection of which we hope soon to be ushered. 
Like the earthly one (Adam) such will they be also that are 
earthly (human)-Like the heavenly one (Christ when "born 
from the dead")~such will they be also that are heavenly, (now 
begotten to the heavenly nature by the word of God through the 
Spirit, then to be born into the perfection of that being). Verse 
48. 

Paul gives us a slight account of the great change from natural to 
spiritual which awaits those who have part in THE first 
resurrection: Vs. 42 informs us "Thus is THE resurrection of 
THE dead: It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it 
is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, 
it is raised in power; it is sown an animal body, it is raised a 
spiritual body." [Diaglott]. 

ORDER IN RESURRECTION. 

All of God's works and plans are full of order: It has well been 
said-order is the first law of heaven. While, there shall be a 
resurrection both of the just and unjust and all shall be made 
alive, and while some shall be made alive as perfect spiritual 
beings, and others in the likeness of the earthly one, Adam, yet 
there are times and seasons and orders for all this, as Paul says: 
"But every man in his own order, Christ the first fruits~(Jesus 
the head and we the "members of his body"~yet "all ONE 
body" -The head raised 1800 years ago, the body very soon we 
trust,) afterward they that are Christ's at his (parousia) presence- 
-the "great company." 

These are the first orders and include all of those who are of the 
spiritual family, but there are others-every man in his own 
order-and when all of these orders are complete (Paul mentions 
only those in which the church's interest centered) when all have 
been brought to life and perfection either on the human or 



spiritual plane (except those who die the "second death") "then 
(at the end of the 1000 years reign of Christ and the saints,) 
cometh the end," "when he shall have put down all rule and all 
authority and power." For he must reign until he hath put all 
enemies under his feet— The last enemy that shall be destroyed 
(during that 1000 years reign) is death" (Adamic) in all its 
forms; sickness, and pain, as well as the tomb- "Then the end" 
will have come-the end of sin on earth, the end of the great 
work of ransoming mankind and bringing them into full 
harmony with their Creator. Then— the Son shall deliver up the 
kingdom-dominion of earth to God even the Father; that God 
may be all-and his will done in all. See vs. 23-28. 



R206 : page 2 

FOUNDATION OF THE WORLD. 

(A SUGGESTION.) 

"Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared 
for you from the foundation of the world." Matt. 25:34. 

Which world is this at whose foundation the kingdom is 
prepared? If there were only one world, and therefore the word 
world always meant the same thing, there would be no room for 
discrimination; but as there are three worlds.— The world that 
was, the world that now is, and the world to come, -there is 
room for the question, "Which world is meant?" The Greek 
word translated world, wherever the heading of this article is 
found, is Kosmos, which, sometimes means the people, or world 
of mankind, as in John 3:16, "God so loved the world," but often 
means, as Greek scholars tell us, the order or condition of 
things. The order or state of things-heaven and earth-which 
was, Peter tells us, ended at the flood; the second order ends at, 
or during, the sounding of the seventh trumpet which is 
associated with the second coming of Christ; and then begins the 
new or third order; the new heaven and earth wherein dwelleth 
righteousness. 2 Pet. 3. 

Now from the foundation of which of these three worlds is the 
kingdom of God prepared? Our suggestion is, that it is the third 
world and not the first. That the same expression is used in some 
Scriptures in reference to the first world, we do not doubt; and 
as to which is meant the plan of the ages should in all cases 
determine. 

We think it is clear that the Bible reveals three kingdom ages- 
the Jewish, Gospel and Millennial ages,- represented by the 
Savior as the three measures of meal, in which the work goes on 
to completion. We can find no trace of a kingdom before the 
Jewish age. In it the typical kingdom was organized. In the 
Gospel age, as shown by many of the Savior's parables, the 



church is called the Kingdom. It is not perfect, however, nor 
pure, for in it tares and wheat grow together, until the tares are 
gathered out of his kingdom. They could not, of course, be 
gathered out unless they were in. 

Some think the kingdom means the earth, and that to gather the 
tares out of His kingdom means to rid the earth of all the world 
of mankind, except the saints. But if we understand their 
position, they do not seem consistent, for they teach that instead 
of taking out the tares, the Lord will take out the saints, leaving 
the world of mankind on the kingdom (if the earth is the 
kingdom) to be burned up. We seriously doubt if the earth is 
ever called the kingdom. 

We understand that during the Jewish and Gospel ages, the 
kingdom of God has been in a process of preparation; but it is 
not fully prepared until the end of the Gospel age, when the tares 
are separated, then the wheat shall be exalted to glorious power, 
and then begin to "shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their 
Father." 

It seems that when the kingdom is prepared it is time to set it up, 
as it could not be set up (put in power— glorified) if it had no 
existence, or before it was fully prepared. Just so the Papal 
church (woman) could not have been placed in power-i.e., 
could not have been set up on the beast (Rev. 17,) before she 
had an existence or before she was prepared for that step, by the 
completeness of the falling away, or apostasy from Christ. When 
the counterfeit kingdom was thus prepared, and set up-put in 
power-She was then prepared and ready to gather within her 
pale the millions upon millions who would not previously have 
listened to her voice. So we believe when the true church or 
kingdom of Christ is set up, she will then be prepared to gather 
to her pale those who will hear her voice. 

It seems to the writer that the setting up of this kingdom is 
laying the foundation of the world-to come— the third and 
endless order of things, and that it is so prepared and set up for 
the benefit of mankind, seems clear from the text, and also from 
the fact that "The Spirit and the Bride" shall say "Come." 

The scene in our text is laid when the Son of Man shall have 
come in His glory; and that the saints are with Him in glory 
before He thus comes is evident, because the gathering 

R207 : page 2 

of the saints to Christ must precede their coming or appearing 
with Him; and Paul tells us that "When Christ who is our life 
shall appear, we also shall appear with Him in glory. " Col. 3 :4. 
Let this fact be noted and it will be seen that the "sheep" of 
Matt. 25, are not the saints who are already rewarded and with 
Christ, but another class. It is not our notion, as some think, but 



Paul's statement, that "The saints shall judge the world." 1 Cor. 
6:2. 

With this view that it is the foundation of the third world at 
which the kingdom is prepared, another passage appears 
luminous; "According as He hath chosen us in Him before the 
foundation of the world." Eph. 1 :4. It seems more in keeping 
with the gospel conditions that we are chosen during the gospel 
age, in order to be prepared to share in laying the foundation of 
the coming world or order of things, and also as the next verse 
asserts to adopt children by Jesus Christ to Himself, than that we 
were chosen, as some express it, "Away back in the counsels of 
eternity," when we had no responsibility in the matter. The 
means by which we are chosen in Christ are not omitted by the 
apostle, which show that though the Lord is the prime mover in 
the work, yet they involve the mental action and obedience of 
the chosen one: "Through sanctification of the Spirit and belief 
of the truth." We do not doubt that the plan to the end was 
known and arranged from the beginning, but the man is chosen 
when the truth is applied and obeyed. We regard it as a 
wonderful privilege thus to be called out, and so to be present at 
the laying of the foundation of the future order of things~"The 
world to come," in which all nations shall be blessed. 

J. H. P. 



R207 : page 2 

NEW VERSION OF THE N.T. 

The necessity for a better translation of the New Testament and 
from older and more authentic MSS., has long existed and now 
seems about to be realized in the New Version just completed 
and soon to be published. [We hope the translators have been 
bold enough to correct not only the many mistranslations of 
words; but, also the interpolations without the fear of man which 
bringeth a snare. A number of these interpolations have been 
noticed in a former number of the WATCH TOWER, as lacking 
in all old Greek MSS. written previous to the fifth century: such 
as John 21:25. Also the words~"in heaven the Father, the Word 
and the Holy Ghost, and these Three are one; And there are 
three that bear witness in earth"~parts of 1 John 5:7,8; and the 
words~"But the rest of the dead lived not again until the 
thousand years were finished" and part of Rev. 20:5. 

From what we have heard of this work, it will be very valuable 
and certainly a great improvement upon the present standard 
version. But we venture the assertion that it will be a great lever 
in the hands of Infidelity, and will be used to overthrow respect 
for Christianity, its teachings and its standard~the Bible, in the 
minds of those who have no understanding of how and why the 



changes are right and proper. For this the church's ministers are 
to blame. For years they have sought to instill into people, and 
particularly children, an unreasoning, superstitious awe for the 
Bible, and thousands who attend church, have the impression 
that to question the correctness of one word in the King James' 
version, is infidelity. Ministers who know, or should have 
known that the word hell in our English texts is the translation 
of more than one Greek word and in a large majority of the 
cases should have been translated- the grave— or-the condition 
of death -have preached year after year from texts where the 
word should be grave and have allowed their hearers to 
understand it as meaning-a lake of fire -for fear, some one 
should get the impression that-"God is love," for fear the 
church could not stand, except supported by error. Many have 
preached right along from the interpolation of 1 John 5:7,8, and 
never informed their hearers that the strange statement that—it 
was witnessed in 



[Continued on seventh page.] 

R207 : page 7 

[Continued from second page.] 

heaven, that Jesus was really the Son of God- was not a part of 
the Word of God; but was introduced by Papacy during the tenth 
century. Who there needed such witness— did not all in heaven 
know it? And why did they thus keep the people in ignorance? 
Because they feared that if people knew this, the only text which 
gives even a shadow of support to the doctrine of the TRINITY, 
to be an interpolation to support a papal error, they might 
renounce the error and believe Jesus' words. (John 5:30; 8:28; 
10:29; 14:28; Rev. 2:27.) 

Yes, in the coming and now beginning trouble upon the church 
(Zion's Travail). The new version of the Scriptures as well as 
Infidelity will play an important part, and "From the time that it, 
(the trouble) goeth forth it shall take you: for morning by 
morning it shall pass over, by day and by night; and it shall be a 
vexation only until He shall make you to understand doctrine, 
(truth.) For the (theological) bed is shorter than that a man can 
stretch himself in it and the covering (doctrines) narrower than 
that he can wrap himself in it." For the Lord... shall do His work, 
His strange work; and bring to pass His act His strange act. 
Now, therefore; be ye not mockers lest your bands be made 
strong. For I have heard of the Lord God a consumption (an end 
-a "harvest,") even determined upon the whole earth." (Isa. 
28:19-22, margin.) 

Yes in the whole world there is to be a separation between evil 
and good, truth and error; but in the church first comes this 
harvesting there will indeed be a fearful shaking, both of wheat 



and tares. (Matt. 13,) as the two classes of the church (the tares 
much the most numerous) are separated by the sickle of truth. 
There will indeed be a great and sore trial upon the church when 
one after another, long cherished errors are torn away —it will be 
a hard time for any to stand as Christians. Paul entreats us 
concerning this commencing evil day, "Take unto you the whole 
armor of God that you may be able to withstand in that evil 
day." Thousands who are building on the good foundation, 
Christ, are building with the wood, hay and stubble of human 
creeds and traditions instead of the gold, silver, etc., of God's 
Word— "The fire of that day shall try every man's work (faith 
structure) of what sort it is," (1 Cor. 3:13.) 

Yes, a thousand (in the churches) shall fall at your side, and ten 
thousand at your right hand, yet it shall not come nigh you if 
you make God's TRUTH your shield and buckler. (Psa. 91.) 
How important, then, that we should see that our faith is 
founded on and supported by the word of God, "That our faith 
should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of 
God." (1 Cor. 2:5.) Then we shall have that which is neither the 
arrow of infidelity, nor the pestilence of spiritualism, nor the 
purifying fire can destroy. Thus only shall we be able to stand 
(these evils). And it shall be a trial only until "He shall make 
you to understand doctrine "--the true teaching of His word. 
Then it will be seen that God's plan (bed) is longer and wider 
and higher than the creeds of men, and a man may stretch 
himself on it and rest, fully covered with the amplitude of God's 
mercy, love and grace, which is sufficient for any man to wrap 
himself in it. O, that Christians might get into this place of rest 
where they could realize a little of the length and breadth, height 
and depth, and know something of "the love of God which 
passeth knowledge!" "O, the depth of the riches both of the 
wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are His 
judgments, and His ways past finding out." (Rom. 11:33.) 

There's a wideness in God's mercy, 
Like the wideness of the sea; 
There's a kindness in His justice 
Which is more than liberty. 

But we make His love too narrow 
By false limits of our own; 
And we magnify His strictness 
With a zeal He will not own. 

If our love were but more simple, 
We should take Him at His word; 
And our lives would be all sunshine 
In the sweetness of our Lord. 

Search the Scriptures, search and see; 
These, said Jesus, speak of me. 



R207 : page 3 



THE COMING STORM. 



Oh! sad is my heart, for storm that is coming; 
Like eagles the scud sweepeth in from the sea; 
The gull seeketh shelter, the pine trees are sighing, 
And all giveth note of the tempest to be. 

A spoil hath been whispered from cave or from mountain, 
The shepherds are sleeping, the sentinels dumb, 
The flocks are all scattered on moorland and mountain, 
And no one believes that the Master is come. 

He's come, but whom doth he find their watch keeping? 
Oh, where-in his presence-is there faith the world o'er? 
The rich, every sense in soft luxury steeping; 
The poor, scarce repelling the wolf from the door. 

Oh, man, and oh, maiden, drop trifling and pleasure, 
Oh, hark, while I tell of the sorrows to be, 
As well might I plead in the path of yon glacier, 
Or cry out a warning to wave of the sea. 



--Altered 



R208 : page 3 



THE LORD'S SUPPER. 



Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us, therefore let us keep the 
feast. 1 Cor. 5:7. 

The Passover was a Jewish feast kept annually (and is still 
observed by them) as a commemoration of their remarkable 
deliverance under the tenth plague upon Egypt—the Passing-over 
or sparing from death of their first-born. 

The circumstances as narrated in Ex. 12 -the slaying of the 
Lamb, the roasting of the flesh with fire, and the eating of it with 
bitter herbs and unleavened bread while the eaters stood, girded 
and shod, and with staff in hand ready to depart out of Egypt for 
the Land of Promise- Canaan-are doubtless familiar to most of 
our readers. Also, the meaning of these things which were but 
types: How that Jesus came- "The Lamb of God which taketh 
away the sin of the world," and "Christ our Passover was 
sacrificed for us "-how the door posts and lintels of the 
household of faith are sprinkled (typically) with the blood of our 
Lamb which speaketh better things, and saves in a higher sense 
all that are in that house— how that we are to be pilgrims and 
strangers, not making Egypt (the world) our home nor resting 
there, but with staff in hand-how that the "bitter herbs" 
represent the bitter experiences and trials of this life, which are 



needful to us and tend to sharpen our appetite for the unleavened 
bread, (truth in its purity; leaven being a type of corruption or 
error,) and for the eating of our Lamb, who said unless you eat 
my flesh... you have no life in you: Thus we partake of our Lamb 
and have Christ formed within, the hope of Glory. Thus during 
this night of more than 1 800 years, since our Lamb was slain, 
the one true household has been eating— waiting for the morning 
of deliverance—the early dawn of which we believe has already 
come. 

When Jesus died on the very same day, and in fulfillment of that 
part of the type-the Lamb-how fitting it seems that all 
Christians should commemorate the day on which our Lamb 
died. We certainly have much more interest in the day than has 
"Israel after the flesh," who recognize only the type. Then, while 
we keep the feast daily-partaking of Christ and His word of 
truth, would it not be a great pleasure and a beautiful way, to 
commemorate our Lord's death on its anniversary? 

We understand that it was our Lord's wish that this day be 
observed annually as a remembrance of Him, and that he 
instituted what is termed, The Lord's Supper, of bread and wine- 
-emblems of His body and blood, our Passover supper -as a 
substitute for the Jewish observance of the type. 

Everything connected with it seems to show that this was His 
intention. He kept the Passover regularly every year, and at the 
last one, the night in which he was betrayed, he said: "With 
desire I have desired to eat this Passover with you before I 
suffer." What Jesus commemorated was the killing of the 
Passover (Lamb;) and not the "Feast of Passover," which 
followed it for seven days. The Jews at that time kept both, but 
particularly the latter, (the feast). They do not now, and have not 
for a long time commemorated the killing of the Passover, but 
the feast only. 

Jesus commemorated (the last time) the killing only and then 
gave Himself as the real sacrifice. When he had instituted the 
new supper-remembrancers, (the bread and wine) instead of the 
old type (the lamb) he gave to his disciples and said: "This do in 
remembrance of me. " (Keep no longer the type or shadow but 
use these new emblems to commemorate me-the anti-type.) "As 
often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye do show the 
Lord's death, (not the typical lamb's) till He come," the kingdom 
be established and the type completed by the passing over, or 
sparing of the first-born (overcomers) and the ultimate 
deliverance of the entire "household of faith." 

The Passover killing-Christ's death, can be remembered at no 
time so appropriately as on the regular anniversary, the 
fourteenth day of the first month. Jewish time which this year 
falls on April 14th (commencing at 6 o'clock P.M.) The feast of 
seven days eating unleavened bread, which followed 



representing in type the continuous, perfect and everlasting feast 
which we enjoy after and because of our ransom; (seven being 
typical of perfection). 

We are aware that some Christians observe the Lord's supper 
every Sunday, and claim that their custom is based upon the oft 
repeated mention in Acts of the "breaking of bread," and "upon 
the first day of the week when the disciples were come together 
to break bread." (Acts 20:7) etc. They evidently overlook the 
fact that bread-breaking, was of necessity a frequent occurrence 
but that there is no mention of wine in any of these instances 
which constitute as important a feature in the ordinance as the 
bread, nor are any of these meetings on the first day of the week 
ever called the "Lord's Supper" or by any name that should lead 
us to such a conclusion. 

There are several reasons why "The Lord's Day" would not be at 
all appropriate for the commemoration of His death, the 
principal one being, that "the first day," or "Lord's day" was 
instituted and used to commemorate an event the very opposite 
in its character, viz: The resurrection of our Lord. The one was 
in the "night" and called a supper, the other was observed in the 
day. The one was a night of weeping and sorrow, the other a 
morning of joy and rejoicing, saying- "The Lord is risen 
indeed." The one was a type of the present night of suffering- 
the Gospel Age— the other a type of our gathering together and 
communion in the bright Millennial day—after the resurrection 
of the body "very early in the morning." 

When Jesus had risen from death He appeared to the disciples 
frequently, if not invariably on the "first day" of the week, and 
on several occasions made himself known to them in the 
breaking of bread at their ordinary meal. Upon the organization 
of the church what would be more reasonable, than to suppose 
that they would set apart that first day, as especially a day for 
meeting with each other and with Him, and that coming from 
distances as well as because He thus revealed Himself first, they 
would arrange for the having of their food in common on that 
day? But this was always a day of joy as the other was properly 
a night of sympathizing grief. 

The proper observance of this ordinance like that of baptism, 
seems to have been lost sight of during Papacy's reign: This one 
doubtless, was made void, to allow for the deathbed 
administration of the "Sacrament" to keep the dying from 
purgatory, etc. Protestants have not generally given the subject 
much attention, using the words-"As often as ye do this-"as 
authority for any convenient time, and not seeing that "this" 
referred to the Passover, as oft as ye do commemorate this event 
do it in remembrance-not of the type but of the anti-type-Me. 

We do not say that a sin is committed by an untimely 
observance, nor that the non-observance, is sinful; but we do say 



that the observance of it as instituted is much more suggestive, 
appropriate and commemorative than any other. 

We have so observed it here in Pittsburgh for some years and it 
has ever been a blessed occasion. We will celebrate it this year 
at the residence of Bro. W. H. Conley, No. 50, Fremont street, 
Allegheny City, Pa. April 14th, at 8 o'clock P.M., and cordially 
invite all who can do so, to be present and join with us. Brethren 
and sisters from a distance will be entertained by the friends 
here. If possible please send a postal card to "WATCH 
TOWER" office, No. 101 Fifth avenue, Pittsburgh, and call 
there on your arrival. 



R208 : page 3 



IN THE FLESH. 



The proper distinction between "the flesh" and "spirit" and the 
significance of each as used in Scripture relative to mankind, is 
but little understood; yet is very important to an understanding 
of God's word and plan. 

The word flesh is used in a general sense to mean mankind- 
humanity. As originally created it was "very good," an image on 
a perfect though small scale, of the spiritual order of which God 
is the head. 

But through sin and its consequences, death and disease, a blight 
came and flesh is no longer perfect and beautiful, but marred, 
sinful, and imperfect to such an extent that none of the race can 
keep God's law, consequently none can be recognized by a just 
God except as sinners, and the only just thing to do with sinners 
is to punish them, and "The wages of sin is death." Hence we 
read "All flesh is grass and all the goodliness thereof is as the 
flower of the field: The grass withereth, the flower fadeth, etc." 
(Isa. 40:6.) 

There was a time when they that were in the flesh could please 
God. That was when Adam and Eve held daily communion with 
God before sin entered; but now all flesh has become "sinful 
flesh," and therefore now, "they that are in the flesh cannot 
please God." If they live as exemplary moral lives as they know 
how, their best works will be imperfect, hence they cannot claim 
that they are not sinners, nor could God in justice recognize 
them or deal with them in any other manner than as sinners, and 
punish them according to the penalty of his just law—put them 
into the great prison house of death-the tomb. 

R209 : page 3 

But as we have already seen, God has a purpose— a double 
purpose: the first part of which relates to the present Gospel 
(good news) age, and the second part belongs to the incoming 



Millennial age. His purpose is first, to select a part of the race 
whose nature shall be changed so that they will no longer be 
human or earthly beings, but spiritual or heavenly beings, and as 
such enjoy themselves in his service. His purpose secondly 
being that all the remainder of the race may come again to the 
perfection of the human nature, and as perfect earthly beings 
ever live in harmony and communion with Him and His law, as 
Adam did before sin entered the world; and on this, their plane, 
enjoy perfect human pleasure in doing those things that are well 
pleasing to God. Then it will be true of all on both the spiritual 
and natural planes- "I delight to do thy will O God." Then they 
that are in the flesh can please God, because all flesh will be 
perfect and free from sin. This is the "Restitution of which God 
hath spoken by the mouth of all the holy Prophets since the 
world began." (Acts 3:21.) 

During the Millennial age all mankind will be brought to a 
knowledge of God—His plan, His wisdom, His power, His Love- 
-"all shall know Him from the least to the greatest," for "The 
knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth." And it seems 
as though to know Him will mean to love Him, and to love Him 
will mean to obey Him, and to obey Him will mean to have life 
and enjoy God forever, to the great majority of the race. That all 
will then be called upon to exercise faith, to some extent, we 
cannot doubt, for "without faith it is impossible to please God," 
but everything will be favorable to faith. Evil will be restrained, 
(Satan bound a thousand years) error and vice will be checked, 
while righteousness and truth shall be dispensed to the people by 
the antitype of the Melchizedec Priesthood -Jesus and the 
gospel church as Kings and Priests-" A priest upon his throne." 
Priests to instruct in righteousness; Kings to enforce obedience 
to righteousness. Faith then will be easy. 

They will readily appreciate the statement-Christ died for our 
sins- was our ransom, &c. -because they will themselves be 
witnesses that the penalty, death and pain, and sickness, is being 
removed, and that they are again brought into favor with God; 
and it would be only reasonable for them to ask why sinners are 
restored to life, &c, again. Has God changed His mind and 
concluded that sin was not so bad a thing after all, and that he 
had erred when he pronounced sinners unworthy of life and was 
now repenting of his action? 

No, the answer comes, God changes not; you were justly 
condemned, but God loved you and gave His son, and Jesus 
loved you and gave himself a ransom for you. You are redeemed 
and therefore restored. Then it will be easy to believe that- 
" Jesus hath died and there is remission." 

But during this age, as many as now hear ("He that hath an ear 
let him hear,") the good news are by it informed that Christ died 
for our sins, that the price of sin has been paid, and they are 
justified, if they believe it, and that they can come unto 



R209 : page 4 

God not as sinners but as righteous persons, and by faith call 
God "Father." It is as justified (perfect) fleshly beings that they 
now call God Father-because in God's sight restored to the 
condition occupied by Adam before he became a sinner, viz: a 
fleshly or human son. (Luke 3:38.) 

The next step for these justified beings to take, is to consecrate 
their justified flesh (being) to God. "Present your bodies a living 
sacrifice," present it to God alive, for his service. God accepts it 
and reckons you dead as a human being, but alive as a new 
creature (begotten) to a new life of a new (divine) nature, and 
your human nature is reckoned as dead forever, and in due time, 
when perfected as new spiritual beings we will have our 
spiritual bodies. But now we, new creatures, live in these old 
bodies- reckoned dead; yet our Father counts us no longer sons 
on the fleshly plane to which he justified us through Jesus' 
ransom, but sons on the higher plane as begotten of the Spirit, 
and he says of such: "Ye are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, if 
so be that the Spirit of Christ dwell in you." Those who have 
thus given up the human nature -become dead-are reckoned by 
their fellow men as being still in the flesh; but of God, as being 
in the Spirit. To those thus dead God reveals His plan and the 
exceeding riches of His grace. Thus the good news is declared to 
them that are dead, that they might be judged (reckoned) 
according to men (as being) in the flesh but live according to 
God in the Spirit." (1 Pet. 4:6.) 



R209 : page 4 

HOW MUCH WILL YOU GIVE? 

Dear friends we are not going to pass around the contribution 
box now, but thinking this to be an all-important question, one 
upon which depends, perhaps, as much the interest of every one 
of us, as any question we could propound, let us each for 
himself carefully consider it. 

We do not ask how much will you contribute towards paying for 
the organ in the church, nor how much will you subscribe 
toward paying the minister, nor how much you will subscribe 
toward sending the gospel to the heathen, nor even how much 
you will contribute for the relief of the poor, though each of 
these may be considered commendable objects in their time and 
place; but how much will you give for the gospel of Christ? 

But do you say, is it not a free gospel? Does not the prophet say 
"Ho, every one that thirsteth come ye to the waters, and he that 
has no money come ye, buy, and eat; yea buy wine and milk 
without money and without price?" Yes that is a correct 
quotation, but there is nothing in the passage quoted to indicate 



that a man who has money can have the gospel and still keep his 
money; those who are to have it without money are those who 
have no money to pay. But sincerely my brother, my sister, my 
friend HOW MUCH will you give for the Gospel? It is 
exceedingly valuable and you should not expect to get it for 
nothing, you should not be willing to take it for nothing if you 
could, neither can you expect to give an equivalent for it, for "its 
price is beyond rubies, and all the things thou canst desire are 
not to be compared unto it." 

Now if you have some faint idea of its value, perhaps, you will 
be willing to make some offer for it. Offerings are in order for it 
now, this is "the acceptable (receivable) year of the Lord," and 
we are close to "the day of vengeance of our God;" and if you 
want a chance in the high calling, you need to be quick and 
prompt about it; we expect the quota under this call will soon be 
filled and hope you will not be among the number who will 
"stand without knocking and saying open unto us," when it will 
be forever too late. Again we ask how much will you give? 
Suppose we consider the word give (as it has a number of 
significations) first in the sense of yielding, in the phrase to 
"give ear," which signifies to hear, to listen; now are you willing 
to give your attention and thought to this gospel? Are you 
willing to bend your mind to it? Are you willing to carefully, 
prayerfully and persistently consider it? Are you willing to give 
it all the thought which you have hitherto given to matters of 
little or no importance? Consider it well; think of the hours you 
have spent reading works of fiction, wit and humor, perhaps in 
playing some sort of game for diversion, or even in reading 
history or secular news, mainly for the purpose of being 
considered "well informed," or possibly for the purpose of being 
qualified for some position of honor (worldly) or fame. 

Are you willing to give way, to give that attention to the gospel 
that you have to these? Do you answer in the affirmative? That 
is well so far, but that is not enough. Are you willing (notice, 
these questions are for you to answer to yourself in the present 
tense, not to-morrow) to give in the sense of quitting as in the 
phrases, to give place, to withdraw, to make room; are you 
willing if this gospel requires it, to give place to principles 
which will antagonize those which you have hitherto 
entertained? Are you willing to have a radical change made in 
your mind, and in your manner of reasoning, i.e., so that instead 
of reasoning from an earthly or natural standpoint, it shall be 
from a spiritual or gospel stand point, for earthly wisdom 
"descendeth not from above, but is earthly, sensual; devilish." 
James 3:15. 

Earthly wisdom would reason, "if thine enemy hunger let him 
starve," and everything else on the same line, but heavenly 
wisdom waits to have our heavenly Father who understands all 
the weaknesses of our natures, and all the influences that have 



been brought to bear upon us, adjust matters for us, instead of 
taking them into our own hands and managing from an earthly 
plane, and with earthly wisdom; that is to say, looked at from an 
earthly standpoint, we resign our own wisdom and become fools 
for Christ's sake. You think that is giving considerable do you? 
Well it is, but you cannot become a vessel fit for the master's use 
without. Are you willing? Yes. Very well that is good, but that is 
not enough, for this gospel requirement, very likely will reveal 
to you that very many things which you have hitherto 
considered harmless in their nature, are really very injurious to 
you and you will be called upon to give in the 

R210:page4 

sense of relinquishing, or in the still stronger sense of 
abandoning, i.e., to let go of in the sense of never taking hold 
again— a long good bye-to the things you once loved; among 
them may be earthly hopes and expectations; this heavenly 
wisdom will teach you that all these are transitory and vain, and 
that the more you depend upon them the more you will be 
deceived by them, and the greater will be your disappointment, 
for your expectations will fail to be realized, and your hopes will 
be blasted. You will find everything turned around under the 
influence of the gospel, and that the things which are highly 
esteemed among men are abominations in the sight of God. 
Luke 16:15. 

Notice the words "highly esteemed among men;" earthly things 
needful for our physical well being are not to be despised, nor 
will heavenly wisdom prompt us to despise them, nor are they 
the things referred to as highly esteemed among men, for men 
will sacrifice these for the highest interests of the soul, and if 
you will give way to the influences of the gospel upon you, you 
will be led to abominate that which is HIGHLY esteemed 
among men. 

Let us see what things are highly esteemed among men; what do 
they make the greatest sacrifice for? Probably the greatest effort 
that men make is to be worshiped; honor, fame, a name among 
men; not so much to be superior as to be regarded superior. 

To have men cast out your name as evil, that is a terrible thing 
for a man who knows nothing of the gospel of Christ; to lose his 
reputation is one of the greatest if not the greatest calamity that 
can befall a man, he will not mind as much the loss of his 
character, but the loss of his reputation is most terrible, to the 
man of the world, for if you lose this you will lose your worldly 
friends mostly, some of them will stand by if you have plenty of 
money, but it will take a great deal even of money to hold many 
friends after your reputation is all gone, so if you relinquish your 
reputation for the sake of the gospel (nothing else should induce 
a man to part with it) you will be doing pretty well, you will be 
giving considerable. Do you think you can do it? Y-e-s? Well 



can you not say it with emphasis? "By the grace of God I will!" 
That is good. You are giving yourself poor, after the wisdom of 
this world, aren't you? Never mind, look not at the things that 
are seen; they are temporal. But you have not given enough yet- 
Have you any money? (No, we are not going to pass the 
contribution box now.) Yes, some. Well much or little you will 
need to give it, not to pay for the gospel but out of gratitude and 
that it may be sent to others, and there are some of the Lord's 
brethren living near your house that are hungry or sick and need 
help, so your (?) money will be needed, and with it will go those 
few friends who stuck by you for your money's sake after your 
reputation was gone; you found by bitter (blessed) experience 
that a great share of your friends left you when your reputation 
did, and now the rest of your worldly friends will go and you 
will be left alone; will you do it? "Yes, by the grace of God I 
will!" The sting of death (to the world) is past, isn't it? How 
much easier it is to say yes, now. Praise the Lord! But you have 
not given enough yet. 

Now, my dear friend, you are not far from the kingdom. Will 
you sacrifice your ease, your comfort, yea life itself if called 
upon? Will you let it be worn out, or burnt out, or in any way 
used up for the sake of the gospel of Christ? You will? Thank 
God! I am so glad; you will be so rich. Now let us look over this 
covenant. You have given your attention, your time, your mind, 
your reputation, your friends, your money, your life—seven 
items. You have given yourself poor indeed, haven't you? I 
acknowledge the fact, it is so, poor, very poor, and you have 
done this willingly. It makes me think of something I have 
heard, and while I am looking at you, your countenance seems 
changed; you remind me of some one I have known. Ah, it 
comes to me now, Jesus of Nazareth was his name, why how 
much you resemble him, you must be his brother. "You know 
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet 
for our sakes he became poor, that we through his poverty might 
be rich." 2 Cor. 8:9. Why you have done just as he did and just 
what he intended when he said: "I have given you an example 
that ye should do as I have done to you." John 13:15. Well that 
is the best kind of will you could make, and I am glad to greet 
you as my brother, I also having done the same things~"for 
which cause he is not ashamed to call us brethren." Heb. 2:1 1. 

You can afford to be poor and go about in disguise for a while, 
now, inasmuch as you are an heir of the kingdom. "Hearken my 
beloved brethren, hath not God chosen the poor of this world, 
rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he hath promised 
to them that love him?" James 2:5. And now you will learn 
faster and be able to prepare yourself for regal employment in 
the regal family; for "if any man will (wills or wishes to) do his 
will, he shall know of the doctrine. John 7:17. You now belong 
to that company so aptly described by the poet when he said: 



What poor despised company 
Of travelers are these, 
Who walk in yonder narrow way, 
Along the rugged maze? 

Ah; these are of a royal line, 
All children of a King. 
Heirs of immortal crowns divine, 
And lo, for joy they sing! 

Why do they, then, appear so mean? 
And why so much despised? 
Because, of their rich robes unseen 
The world is not apprised. 

But why keep they that narrow road 
That rugged, thorny maze? 
Why that's the way their leader trod; 
They love and keep His ways. 

What! is there, then, no other road? 
To Salem's happy ground? 
Christ is the only way to God; 
None other can be found." 



J. C. S. 



R210:page4 

NUMBER THREE. 

PART III. 

Many of our readers are familiar with the outline of God's plan 
as embodied in three worlds, -The world that was before the 
flood, the world that now is, and the world to come. This is a 
striking example of the fundamental character of number three 
in the structure of the Bible plan of revelation and salvation. 
Each of these worlds, or orders, is spoken of in succession as 
having its own "heavens and earth." 2 Pet. 3. Here we have the 
foundation of the idea of the third heaven. The third earth and 
the third heaven are the final and perfect, wherein "the 
tabernacle of God is with men," (Rev. 21:3) and "wherein 
dwelleth righteousness." 2 Pet. 3:13. 

Be it observed there are heavens, as well as an earth in each 
order. They seem to exist in relation to each other as cause and 
effect, the outer, lower and visible as an expression of the inner, 
higher and invisible. The heavens rule and the earth is subject. 
This is at least clearly so of the second and third orders. In the 
second, called "This present evil world," the "powers of 
heaven," (by permission and with limitations of course, as no 
creature can outwit the Creator) are "wicked spirits," all 



embodied as Satan, their head and Prince. Eph. 6:12 and 2:2. His 
kingdom is invisible, but under invisible 

R210:page5 

control, uses men and nations as visible agencies, and produces 
visible results of the most baneful and atrocious character. The 
earth is in harmony with the heavens; and we would suggest that 
it may be that all evil physical conditions, including wars, 
storms, diseases, pains and death are but the pulsations, so to 
speak, of the powers of darkness. We see an intimation that this 
is so, in the fact that the earth was cursed for man's sake when 
he sinned. It was for man's sake, or on account of man, perhaps, 
in two senses, first, it was a consequence of man's yielding to 
evil, and second, it was for man's good, as pain by fire is to 
teach us to avoid the fire. 

In view of the facts and promises we hail with joy the near 
change from the second to the third world. The day dawn, or 
transition period we believe has come. In the third world the 
power of heaven will be the "spirits of just men made perfect," 
or "raised a spiritual body," and all embodied as Christ, their 
Head and Prince~"The King of kings and Lord of lords." His 
kingdom, having supplanted Satan's and taken its place, will 
also be invisible to mortals, only when for special reasons 
miraculously manifested; (John 3:3-8 and Luke 17:20,) but it too 
shall act through visible agencies, and produce visible results, 
not baneful and atrocious, but grand and glorious. For all nations 
shall serve and obey 

R211 : page 5 

Him, and in Him be blessed. Dan. 7:14-27 and Gen. 22:18. 

Let me ask the reader to which he aspires, ~a place in the new 
earth, or a place in the new heaven?~to be a subject of God's 
kingdom, and so enjoy its blessing, or to be a royal priest and 
reign with Him? He and His royal associates will rule to bless. 
Let us aim high, —at "the mark for the prize of the high 
[heavenly] calling of God in Christ Jesus." Phil. 3:14. 

This present or the second world has its three ages-Patriarchal, 
Jewish and Gospel. These are three progressive steps from the 
lower to the higher in the plan of revelation. 

There are three kingdom ages,-- Jewish, Gospel and Millennial. 
There is no kingdom of God, mentioned in the Bible, as in any 
sense related to the Patriarchal or One Man age. In the three 
ages mentioned, the work is represented as being done by a 
"Woman" -the church; and the progression may be characterized 
as from the Jewish typical to the Gospel mystical or hidden, and 
then to the Millennial glorious- "the manifestation of the sons of 
God," by which the groaning creation is to be "delivered from 
the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the 
children of God." Rom. 8:19-21. 



This work of progression and glorious success, seems to be 
illustrated by the Savior's parable, in which He compares the 
kingdom of heaven to leaven, which a woman took and hid in 
three measures of meal until the whole was leavened. Matt. 
13:33. A very plausible and we will add, forcible objection to 
this application of the parable, is based on the fact that leaven of 
bread and of doctrine are spoken of in the Bible as elements of 
impurity and of corruption. Would the Savior represent the 
kingdom of heaven by an element and process of corruption? 
We understand the Savior here uses one feature of the leaven 
only, in His illustration, that is its permeating power. It does not 
cease until the work is done, so God's kingdom will not cease its 
operations until the curse is removed. 

Another example in which the Savior uses only one feature of a 
thing to illustrate a point, may be seen in Luke 17:37, or Matt. 
24:28, when in speaking of the "gathering together unto Him," 
He says: "Wheresoever the carcass [dead body] is, thither will 
the eagles be gathered together." "How could the Savior," we 
have been asked, "compare himself to a dead body?" The 
attraction is the point of the illustration: as the eagles are, by an 
unerring instinct, sure to find the carcass, so that the Divine 
Spirit in the saints will surely bring them to Him whom their 
soul loveth. 

The Savior seems to use the idea of progression in three steps in 
reference to the development of the Gospel age ending with the 
harvest, in His illustration of, "First the blade, then the ear, and 
after that the full corn in the ear." Mark 4:26-29. This may be 
regarded as true also in reference to individual growth in grace 
and in the knowledge of Christ. 

When the Lord sets out to do anything He means to make a 
success of it. Let us imbibe His spirit and follow His example. 

J. H. P. 



R211 : page 5 



PASSOVER. 



As the time draws nigh for the celebrating of the Passover; it 
may not be out of place to consider a few points therewith 
connected. As to the proper time of observing the Lord's supper, 
there is much diversity of opinion. Some claim the first day of 
each week as the only correct time; others, that it should be 
observed every first Sunday of each month, while some only 
partake of the feast once in three months. If there is a correct 
time for the observance of the Passover, it is evident that all the 
above views cannot be correct; and indeed it would seem, from 
the manner in which many speak of it, that God had left the 
matter entirely in our hands; that we might please ourselves, 



observing it just as our opinion of the matter might dictate. From 
examination of the Scriptures, we feel confident that all the 
positions cited are merely inferences drawn by man, and 
therefore if not obeyed would not prove fatal; for there is much 
difference between the doctrines of men, and the 
commandments of God. Without stopping to inquire into the 
various causes for such a variety of ideas as to the proper time 
for the Lord's Supper, we shall at once proceed to investigate the 
Bible-our only guide and instructor in all matters of religion, its 
ordinances, etc. Under the law dispensation, [which was a 
shadow of good things to come; Heb. 10:1,] there was a 
particular time for the killing and eating of the paschal lamb- 
" Speak ye unto all the congregation of Israel, saying: In the 
tenth day of this month they shall take to them every man a 
lamb;... and ye shall keep it up until the fourteenth day of the 
same month, and the whole assembly of the congregation of 
Israel shall kill it in the evening." Exodus 12:3-6. 

The month referred to corresponds with the new moon of April 
or March; and counting forward from that point the allotted 
time, will bring us to the Passover. That the lamb slain, pointed 
forward to Jesus, there can be no doubt; and when we examine 
minutely, the details connected with His death; the time will be 
seen to be clearly marked. "Then Jesus, six days before the 
Passover, came to Bethany.... On the next day [five days before 
the Passover] much people that were come to the feast, when 
they heard Jesus was coming to Jerusalem... went forth to meet 
Him." John 12:1,12,13. As the lamb was taken up on the tenth; 
so Jesus went up to Jerusalem [where he was sacrificed] five 
days before the Passover, which would be the tenth. "Then came 
the day of unleavened bread, when the Passover must be killed... 
and they made ready the Passover, and when the hour was come, 
He sat down, and the twelve apostles with Him: and he said unto 
them, with desire I have desired to eat this Passover with you 
before I suffer," Luke 22. The lamb pointed to Jesus, and we in 
eating the Lord's Supper; commemorate His death, and also the 
time. If this truth were recognized by Christians; they would not 
attempt to commemorate the Lord's death on the first day of the 
week; for Jesus died not then, but rose from the dead; therefore, 
no one should celebrate His death on the day of His resurrection; 
unless that day should happen to be the fourteenth day of the 
first month, at which time the Lord's Supper should be observed. 
One cannot keep the fourth of May in commemoration of the 
"Declaration of Independence;" then, neither can any person 
celebrate the Lord's death on the day he arose. 

It is true that Jesus said: "For as often as you eat this bread, and 
drink this cup, ye do show the Lord's death till He come;" [1 
Cor. 11:26.] However, as he did not say how often, and all the 
truth on any Bible subject is not found in one place; we must 
determine, what time it would be proper, from the various 
connections, and the sense demanded by the type. Therefore, as 



the type foreshadows it, and the sense demands it; we conclude 
that the Lord's death should be commemorated at the time He 
died. 

The night in which they ate the flesh of the lamb: typifies the 
whole gospel age: and through this night of 1800 years; we 
should, as each fourteenth day of the first month of the Jewish 
year rolls around, celebrate the Passover in commemoration of 
the death of our paschal lamb. 

The lamb slain was to be, "without blemish." Exo. 12:5. This 
shows beautifully, the perfection and purity of our lamb: "For 
even Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us." 1 Cor. 5:7. 
"Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with 
corruptible things, as silver and gold;... but with the precious 
blood [life] of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without 
spot;" [1 Pet. 1:18,19.] "And ye know that He [Jesus] was 
manifested to take away our sins; and in Him is no sin." 1 John 
3:5. 

There are several features to be observed in the application of 
this type. The slaying of the lamb [as already found] 
foreshadowed the death of Jesus; but now we wish to consider 
another point, viz., "And they shall eat the flesh in that night, 
roast with fire, and unleavened bread; and with bitter herbs they 
shall eat it." Exo. 12:8. In this picture is shown how we [the 
church] partake of the nature of Christ, by eating His flesh; [in 
the figurative sense] for he says: "Verily, verily, I say unto you; 
except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink His blood, 
ye have no life in you. Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my 
blood, hath eternal life; for my flesh is meat indeed; and my 
blood is drink indeed." John 6:53,54. The reader will remember 
that the flesh of the lamb was to be eaten with unleavened bread; 
so says Paul: "Purge out therefore the old leaven, [corrupt 
nature] that ye may be a new lump, as ye are 
unleavened.... Therefore let us keep the feast, not with old 
leaven, neither with the leaven of malice, or wickedness; but 
with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth." 1 Cor. 5:7,8. 

The Passover was not only to be eaten with unleavened bread, 
but with bitter herbs. This shows the suffering of the body of 
Jesus. If we eat, [partake of His nature] we will suffer. The truth 
obeyed, will lead us to give up the world; resist the devil, and 
overcome [crucify] the flesh; which is hard to do, and 
necessitates suffering. Truth declares: "If we 

R212:page5 

have been planted together in the likeness of His [Christ's] 
death, we shall be also in the likeness of His resurrection: 
knowing this, that our old man [fleshly nature] is crucified with 
Him, that the body of sin might be destroyed;... for he that is 
dead is freed from sin." Rom. 6:5-7. 



Again says truth: "For thy [Christ's] sake we are killed all the 
day long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter," [Rom. 
8:36.] and, "All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer 
persecution." 2 Tim. 3:12. All of these things require an effort 
on our part: self-denial, and suffering; for we bear "about in the 
body the dying [suffering] of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of 
Jesus might be made manifest in our body: for we which live are 
alway delivered unto death [of the flesh] for Jesus' sake, that the 
life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal flesh;" [2 
Cor. 4:10,11] and: "Though our outward man [natural] perish, 
yet the inward man [spiritual] is renewed day by day;" (verse 
16) for: "They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the 
affections and lusts." Gal. 5:24. There is no doubt, that if we 
follow in the footsteps of Jesus, [a life of obedience] we shall 
suffer. This is clearly intimated by our Lord when He says: "Are 
ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, and to be 
baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?... And He 
saith unto them, ye shall drink indeed of my cup, and be 
baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with." Matt. 
20:22,23. By referring to Matt. 26:39. We know the cup spoken 
of was in reference to His death, therefore we drink of the same 
cup; and are baptized with the same baptism, [death] for: "Know 
ye not that as many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, 
were baptized into His death?" Rom. 6:3. By viewing this in the 
above light, it is very significant that Jesus partook of the 
Passover; for as He ate it with "Bitter herbs," [suffering,] so also 
do we, and in this He was our example and forerunner. Let us 
therefore, walk in the narrow [difficult] path of life; the one 
Jesus trod: "Forasmuch then as Christ hath suffered for us in the 
flesh, arm yourselves likewise with the same mind; for he that 
hath suffered in the flesh hath ceased from sin," [1 Pet. 4:1] 
therefore; "Rejoice, inasmuch as you are partakers of Christ's 
sufferings; that, when His glory shall be revealed, ye may be 
glad also with exceeding joy." verse 13. 

The next point in connection with the Passover to be considered 
is: "And thus shall ye eat it; with your loins girded, [loins girt 
about with truth; Eph. 6:14,] your shoes on your feet, [your feet 
shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace; verse 15] and 
your staff in your hand; and ye shall eat it in haste; it is the 
Lord's Passover; 

R212:page6 

for I will pass through the land of Egypt this night,... and the 
blood shall be to you for a token... and when I see the blood, I 
will pass over you, and the plague shall not be upon you to 
destroy you, when I smite the land of Egypt." Exo. 12:11-13. 
This type being a figure of the whole Gospel Age; and the living 
phase of the church, being always represented, we are brought 
down to the end of this dispensation, where the living saints are 
to be changed and caught away to meet Jesus, without the 



tasting of death; [1 Thess. 4:15-17] being: "Accounted worthy to 
escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand 
before the Son of man." Luke 21:36. 

The Hebrew word "Pesach," and the Greek "Pascha," [its 
equivalent] signifies: "A passing over." This feature of the type 
is yet to be fulfilled, Jesus said: "I will not any more eat thereof, 
until it be fulfilled in the kingdom of God.... I will not drink of 
the fruit of the vine, until the kingdom of God shall come." Luke 
22:16-18. Hence it will not be fulfilled until we [the living] are 
changed into the likeness of Christ; at which time we will be 
gathered unto Jesus, being those mentioned by the prophets: 
"Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another:... and 
they shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts; in that day when I 
make up my Jewels; and I will spare them, as a man spareth his 
own son that serveth him." Mai. 3:16,17. As we are living in 
"That day." [A period of 40 years,] therefore ought we to be 
ready: having our loins girt about with truth; our staff in hand, 
all ready for a journey, [our change] for we know not how soon 
we shall see Jesus as He is: and so be passed over. It will be 
observed that only the "First-born, " were threatened; [Exo. 
12:12] so now only: "The church of the first-born." [Heb. 
12:23,] is in danger: for, if we are not passed over: ["Accounted 
worthy to escape,"] we lose our high calling; and not only so but 
we lose it forever; therefore let us so live, that we may be ready. 
Paul says: "Through faith he [Moses] kept the Passover, and the 
sprinkling of blood, lest He that destroyed the first-born should 
touch them." Heb. 1 1 :28. That being the type, and this the anti- 
type certainly it is as important that we do God's will, lest we be 
not spared as one of the Bride company. 

One more feature of the Passover is worthy of notice: "And ye 
shall let nothing of it [the lamb] remain until the morning; and 
that which remaineth of it until the morning, ye shall burn with 
fire." Exo. 12:10. In this there is a very important truth to be 
observed; viz.: That those who were passed over, had eaten 
during the night. So, during this Gospel Night, we partake of our 
Lamb, [Christ] and apply the blood of sprinkling; but as there 
was none of the lamb to remain until the morning; so in like 
manner here; for, when we are ushered into the full dawn of day 
and the morning has fully come; no one can eat of the lamb, 
[that is, partake of the Divine nature-Immortality] as the Lord's 
Supper will be a thing of the past, for it is to be fulfilled when 
the kingdom has come, [that is, when the living saints are 
changed; and we are thus passed over,] and we need not longer 
keep it in remembrance of His death; hence it will be an 
ordinance forever past, as also will be baptism into Christ; for 
the Christ [anointed] head and body (Jesus and Bride) will be 
complete; therefore, these ordinances pass away with the ending 
(harvest) of the gospel age, and people (those in the light) will 
then look back on these things; [now glorious privileges] as we 
now look back to those ordinances obtaining under the law. 



Finally brethren and sisters in Christ, seeing these things are 
true; ought we not to be earnest? and especially as we have 
reasons for believing the time very short; for if we have not 
Christ formed within~and under the blood of sprinkling when 
the door closes the prize now offered, [Immortality and heirship 
with Jesus] is to us forever lost. 

Can aught on earth compare, 
With the glory we shall share? 
Is there aught to us so dear, 
Twill take the place of Jesus here? 

Ah no ! methinks there naught can be 
To ever sunder, He and me; 
For to Him, myself I give, 
Hence, I shall with Him ever live. 

A. D. J. 



R212:page6 

THE STRANGERS IN ZION. 

The idea which has become general among Christians, that it is 
a very easy thing to be a Christian, a life free from trouble, very 
respectable, containing all the pleasures of natural conditions 
without any of its evils, is one of the great evils of the present 
system of evangelization. The Evangelist says come, leave off 
liquor, profanity, lying and all great presumptuous sins, join our 
church, attend its meetings, give to its support regularly and 
believe, that you may go to heaven and you are one of the best 
of Christians. You will find through the church the passage way 
to wealth, to social standing and the most advantageous 
matrimony, and if you desire a valuable aid to political 
ambitions. Thus you will have the most pleasant and happy time 
of any people living on earth: come, then, with us. 

In this way Zion is full of "strangers"-- they are in her— her 
children, but not of God's begetting. They are tares sown by the 
wicked one; begotten of evil desire—desires of the flesh. The 
desire that she might be great, and her outward appearance and 
prosperity such as would commend her to the world and cause 
her to be admired; that by the numbers and wealth of these 
strange children she might build grander and costlier edifices 
with higher steeples; that her ministers should be noble men of 
titles and large revenues— the language artists of earth; that her 
music should be the most refined and artistic. 

Thus she draws nigh to the Lord with her lips, and honors Him 
with her mouth, while her heart is far from Him, courting the 
world and its vanities and pleasures. She has ceased to know as 
of yore that "the love of God constraineth," and "the goodness of 



God leadeth to repentance, " and now she knows Him only to 
fear, and God says: "Their fear toward me is taught by the 
precepts of men. Because of her love of the world, (which is 
enmity against God,) therefore has He permitted blindness to 
come upon her, and her teachers hath He covered. 

The prophecies and visions of God's word are become unto her 
"as the 

R213 : page 6 

words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is 
learned [a Doctor of Divinity,] saying: Read this I pray thee: and 
he saith I can not, for it is sealed; and the book is delivered to 
him that is not learned, saying: Read this I pray thee~and he 
saith I cannot, I am unlearned.... Therefore behold I will proceed 
to do a marvelous work among this people, even a marvelous 
work and a wonder for the wisdom of their wise men shall 
perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid." 
Isa. 29:10-14. 

Oh Zion how hast thou defiled thyself! how hast thou become 
Babylon! how hast thou multiplied thy riches but not thy joy! 
how hast thou increased thy children but not of God -for the 
multitude of thy strangers is as the dust. 

How is the mustard seed become a great tree, spreading itself in 
all the earth for the wicked, yea the fowls of the earth find a 
home in thy branches. Thou art become the habitation of devils, 
the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and 
hateful bird. How art thou become Babylon and confusion? it is 
even the voice of thy confused company of strange children. 

Woe unto thee O Zion, how art thou become Babylon and 
confusion: it is woe unto thee, for thine anguish and travail 
cometh: for the Lord shall take from thee His children, and in 
the multitude of the strangers thou shalt not have consolation. 
With anguish, and through great tribulation shall his children 
come out of thee. For the Lord shall sit as a refiner and purifier 
of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as 
gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in 
righteousness. But who may abide the day of His coming, 
(presence,) and who shall stand when he appeareth? For He is 
like a refiner's fire and like fullers soap." 

But Zion saith: "I am rich and increased in goods and have need 
of nothing," and knoweth not that she is poor, and wretched, and 
miserable, and blind, and naked. Thus saith the Lord: "I counsel 
thee, buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou mayest be rich, 
and white raiment that thou mayest be clothed... and anoint thine 
eyes with eye-salve that thou mayest see. So, then, because thou 
art neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out of my mouth. Come 
out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and 
receive not of her plagues." (Rev. 18:4.) 



Would that God's children might all realize that their joy should 
come from their faith in His promises, and not from the world's 
smiles; that their pleasure should consist in self denial and 
crucifixion of the fleshly nature, and not from its gratification. 
Then could they indeed count present afflictions a joy, and 
"rejoice to be accounted worthy to suffer reproach for the name 
of Christ." They would think it not strange concerning the fiery 
trial which shall try them, as though some strange thing 
happened unto them: remember that when men shall revile you 
and say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my name's 
sake, rejoice and be exceeding glad." Yea, and whosoever will 
live Godly shall suffer persecution, and persecution has always 
come from some religious class in power. 



R213 : page 6 

"BY AND BY HE IS OFFENDED." 

Jesus tells us of a class who when they hear the truth receive it 
with joy until they find that it costs something to possess it; then 
they are disappointed and would rather surrender the truth than 
pay its inevitable price —persecution and self sacrifice. 

People under different circumstances have different trials to 
encounter and different valuable things to part with if they 
would "Buy the truth and sell it not." As a rule the price of it is 
demanded in those things which the purchaser values most 
highly. Usually social standing, reputation, a good name are the 
most prized of all things, and usually this is the price which we 
must pay for truth. No doubt it is to-day much as it was when 
Jesus was present in the form of a servant. The severest cross 
then was to confess and follow the lowly one, among whose 
followers were none of the Scribes and Pharisees-the 
theologians of that day- whose only answer to Jesus' teachings, 
&c, were, "Give God the glory, we know that this man hath a 
devil." 

The church rulers of that day were the most strict in outward 
forms of any period of Judaism, and no doubt they thought they 
did God service in warning the people against Jesus. They felt 
keenly the importance of their position as Teachers, and were 
proud of it, and hence were in no way prepared to receive the 
meek "Lamb of God." Jesus said they were "Blind leaders of the 
blind," and only the blind ones followed their leading. Those 
who had ears to hear and eyes to see followed the Lord. 

It must have been quite a trial- scorching-for the Jewish 
convert to realize that in believing this Jesus, they were 
opposing the great system of theology that had been in force for 
centuries. It must have tried their courage and faith intensely to 
realize that they, illiterate men, were opposing their ideas 



against the views of all the learned theologians, who pronounced 
the new Teacher a fanatic. Again, it would cut them off from the 
pecuniary advantages accruing from the friendship of the 
wealthiest and most influential class of society. All of these 
things were sore trials, but were put as trial in this way to 
develop and separate the "peculiar people," for Jesus declared 
that if any man was ashamed of him and his words— teachings- 
the same was not worthy to be his disciple. All of this finds its 
perfect parallel in this time of harvest, and now as then. He that 
is ashamed of the Lord's teachings-ashamed to confess his faith 
in His presence is unworthy to be His disciple and is not wanted. 

The theologians of that day threatened and scourged those who 
followed and believed in Jesus as the Christ. (They all believed 
that Christ was coming, but denied His presence and "knew not 
the time of their visitation.") Just so the theologians of to-day 
are the bitter opposers of the presence of Christ. Because they 
know not the time of their visitation; they are "stumbling" as did 
the Jewish church. They threaten and scourge in the synagogues 
(churches) now, too, except it is in a different way; it is now a 
scourging with the tongue-far sharper often and more powerful 
than a literal scourge. 

One of the severest trials at that day was to be put out of the 
synagogue; "They feared the Jews," for the Jews had agreed 
already, that if any man did confess that he was Christ, he 
should be put out of the synagogue." (John 9:22.) This was the 
only "respectable church" in those days, and to the poor Jew it 
seemed disgraceful to be cut off from the church. No doubt they 
considered that their relationship to God was dependent upon 
their belonging to the nominal church. The new Teacher spoke 
against the Pharisees and Rulers of the synagogues, and said that 
in many things they were hypocritical; that for a pretence they 
made long prayers and drew nigh with their lips. Some felt the 
truth of this and would have followed 

R213 : page 7 

Jesus and have been willing to join His church, if He had one- 
but the church He represented was bound together by the truths 
he taught, and He said to them: "Rejoice rather that your names 
are written in heaven." (Luke 10:20.) 

So now, "in the days of the Son of Man," those who receive 
present truth are cut off from fellowship with the nominal 
churches. Having tasted the heavenly manna they are no longer 
satisfied with the husks. Yet they have so long been identified 
with the churches, have been so actively engaged in their 
socials, fairs, etc., which in their simplicity they have come to 
regard as "working for Jesus," that the thought of sundering 
those ties is like cutting off a right hand. But dear friends, 
remember that as then, so now, the nominal church stumbles and 
falls, (Isa. 28:13 and Rev. 18:2,21,) and those in it, whose names 



are written in the Lamb's book of life are the only ones now 
recognized as His church. 

As when then present Jesus used clay mixed with the product of 
His mouth to anoint literally the man born blind, and thus gave 
him sight, so now in this "harvest" the words of His mouth, 
mixed with and used through the clay of humanity, may have 
been his agency in the opening of your spiritual perceptions to 
understand his truth and see its beauties. It was on the Sabbath- 
the seventh day—that his eyes were opened: It is now the seventh 
day [--on a grander scale-the 6000 years of time having been 
complete in 1873.] It was by the power of the present Jesus that 
the clay and washing gave sight; so here also. 

Marvel not if in other respects the blind man's case was typical 
of yours. When he confessed his faith in Jesus they said: "Dost 
thou teach us?~and they cast him out of the synagogue." He 
might have kept quiet and believed in his heart and retained his 
standing in the church, but that would have been cowardly and 
had he done so-been ashamed of him he would have missed his 
subsequent communion with Jesus. So here, your eyes being 
opened to the recognition of the Lord's presence and blessings of 
light and truth, which in consequence have come to you-it 
remains with you as it did with him to keep silence and remain 
in the church, or confess his presence and be cast out; to hold 
"the fear of man which bringeth a snare" and be ashamed of 
Him and His words, or confess Him and be confessed before the 
Father and the 

R214:page7 

holy angels. If we love the opinions and respect of men and of a 
worldly "Babylon," church, and seek honor one of another, how 
shall we expect that honor which cometh of God only— To be of 
the bride of Christ. 

"Your brethren that hated you— that cast you out, said-'The Lord 
be glorified:' But He shall appear to your joy and they shall be 
ashamed." (Isa. 66:5.) 

And "Jesus heard that they had cast him out... and He found 
him," (vs. 35,) and became his teacher personally, and the man 
"worshiped Him." So with you, the Lord will hear of your 
witness for Him, and when you are separated from the nominal 
church— "Babylon"— your experience will be that Jesus himself 
will teach you and show you marvelous things of His truth and 
plan. And then you can indeed worship HIM-in spirit and in 
truth, and no longer worship the creeds of men. Jesus' 
explanation of our trial in receiving him will be explained to us 
as to him: "For judgment (a trial) am I come into this world that 
they which see not might see; and that they which see might be 
made blind." (vs. 39.) 



We know of some who are now experiencing this kind of 
scorching. They have heard the word and received it with joy- 
their eyes have been opened to see wonderful things in God's 
word. They have realized that the Lord is present and has 
opened their eyes-they have confessed Him and denied not- 
they have been baptized typically in water, in a likeness of His 
death and raised in the figure. Now they are seeking daily to be 
baptized into death~the death of the old natures-the likeness of 
Christ's. The sun of persecution and reproach has risen and the 
scorching has commenced. If they be stony ground hearts their 
profession and all will wither away and die out, but if good 
hearts, the seed will continue to grow and yield fruit which the 
sun will only ripen and perfect— not wither. 

To these we would say, remember how our master said that if 
any man would be His disciple (pupil-to learn of Him) he must 
take up His cross and follow Him. Remember how you 
promised to follow Him through evil and good report; 
remember, too, that He is an ever present help in time of trouble, 
and thus remembering, may you be enabled to "endure hardness 
as good soldiers"— "Endure as seeing Him that is invisible." 

"Beloved think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is 
to try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you. If 
ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the 
spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you: On their part He is 
evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorified. Nothing glorifies 
God's name and character more than does the grand plan which 
He is showing to us, and which we preach. Rejoice inasmuch as 
ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings; that when his glory shall 
be revealed ye may be glad, also, with exceeding joy." (1 Pet. 
4:12-14.) 



R214 : page 7 

WANTED 1,000 PREACHERS. 

A vast field is open for the employment of the time and talent 
of every consecrated man and woman to whom the Lord has 
committed a knowledge of His truth. 

The harvest message that the King has come, and the separation 
between wheat and tares is progressing, and the opportunity for 
seeking the prize of the high calling to joint heirship with Christ 
as His Bride is soon to end, are important items of truth for the 
entire "household of faith." The knowledge of the plan of God 
as it relates to the blessing of "all the families of the earth" in 
"the ages to come, " and other information concerning the 
manifold grace of God, whereof he has made us stewards, (to 
distribute and use) would be of incalculable value and aid to 



many who so soon will find themselves assaulted with the errors 
of Infidelity, Spiritualism, etc. 

It seems as though the language of Jesus, (Matt. 20:7,) is 
applicable now~"About the eleventh hour (five o'clock P.M.- 
only one hour before the labor of the day would cease) he went 
out and found others standing idle.... He saith to them, 'Go ye 
also into the vineyard and whatever is right that shall ye 
receive.'" 

The church is God's vineyard and we are just at the close of the 
Gospel day. Let us all go in, thankful for the opportunity to be 
co-workers with God here; and if faithful hereafter also. There is 
so great a variety of work that all may find employ-all were 
hired in the parable. If you have a half hour, or an hour, or two, 
or three, you can use it and it will be acceptable with the Lord of 
the harvest. Who can tell the blessings which may flow from 
one hour's service under God's direction. 

To those so situated that they can give one-half or more of their 
time exclusively to the work of the Lord, we have a plan to 
suggest. [We refer to those who have not families dependent on 
them for support- both men and women,] viz: That you go forth 
into large or small cities, according to your ability, as 
Colporteurs or Evangelists, seek to find in every place the 
earnest Christians, many of whom you will find possessed of a 
zeal for God, but not according to knowledge; to these seek to 
make known the riches of Our Father's grace, and the beauties of 
His word, giving them tracts; and as a work of kindness and love 
to them, endeavor to sell them the "Day Dawn," or to take their 
subscription for the "Watch Tower," [or if interested, but too 
poor to purchase, presenting the same as a gift from God.] 

As few could afford to travel, pay their board and clothe 
themselves without some income, we propose to furnish the 
TRACTS and DAY DAWNS free, and to allow any such person 
to take subscriptions for the WATCH TOWER, using the money 
obtained from both of these sources, ("Day Dawn and Watch 
Tower,"- the Tracts are free and must not be sold,) in defraying 
necessary expenses. Should your receipts be more than would be 
needed to pay expenses, (not at all probable,) you would be 
expected to make some returns to us. 

Now, who has a burning desire to go and labor in the Vineyard, 
and has been praying that the Lord would open the way. Is not 
this the way? This offer is made to you by the 

"WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY." 

The immense proportions which the tract work seems to be 
assuming suggested the idea of a combination of effort in this 
direction, and the result is the forming of this Society. There is a 
great demand for tracts. Over 900,000 pages have already gone 
out, and we are now making contracts for several millions of 



pages. We trust that the Lord may be pleased to use these as the 
agencies for opening blind eyes to the beauties of His word, as 
He once used even clay and spittle to open natural eyes. 

To all we would say: Order all 

R214 : page 8 

the tracts you can use to God's glory. We repeat our previous 
suggestion, viz: That you give them, not all at once, but one at a 
time, and generally in their order as issued-keeping a list. 



R216:page8 



HOW TO TEACH. 



To these who would go forth to use either much or little of their 
time, we would say: It is a matter of great importance not only 
to teach the right thing but to present truth in a proper manner 
and order. This may be observed as a rule of life, pertaining to 
everything we undertake: if we would reap good fruit we must 
not only plant good seed, but it must be planted at a proper time, 
in a soil previously made ready, and it must be cared for until it 
becomes possessed of strength. So, too, must the seed be 
carefully, prayerfully and wisely sown, and the words of our 
Master are: "Be ye wise as serpents but harmless as doves." 

Present first the Restitution and the beauties of God's unfolding 
plan; then show that all this awaits and is dependent on the King 
and kingdom coming. Then, when your hearer or reader has 
come to love the King and to long for his kingdom, may be quite 
soon enough to present the manner of His coming-that it is not 
Jesus the man but Jesus a spiritual being, who comes, unseen, 
except to the Bride's eye of faith, enlightened by the golden 
candlestick— the word of truth. 

And lastly present "the time, that now we are "in the days of the 
Son of Man," "the day of the Lord" -if they scoff and say, 
"where is the promise of His coming~(parousia~ presence) 
while all things continue as they were?" (2 Pet. 3:4.) Point them 
to Matt. 24:37 and Luke 17. But let time be the last part of the 
"good news," and tell no one of the time and presence, except 
they show that they have "an ear to hear," and "him that hath an 
ear let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches," not 
unto the world. 



R215 : page 8 



A PRAYER FOR LIGHT 

[These lines were written by Mrs. Commodore Inman, of 
Philadelphia, whose husband gave the name to the popular line 



of trans- Atlantic steamers. They are only recently from her pen, 
though she is upwards of eighty years of age.] 

Life! great mystery! Who shall say 
What need hath God of this poor clay? 
Formed by his hand with potent skill- 
Mind, matter, soul and stubborn will; 

Born but to die; sure destiny-death. 

Then where, Oh, where this fleeting breath? 

Not one of all the countless throng, 

Who have lived and died and suffered long, 

Returns to tell the great design- 
That future-which is yours and mine. 
We plead, Oh God! for some new ray 
Of light for guidance on our way; 

Based not on faith, but clearer sight, 
Dispelling these dark clouds of night; 
This doubt, this dread, this trembling fear; 
This thought that mars our blessings here; 

This restless mind, whose bolder sway 
Rejects the dogmas of the day 
Taught by jarring sects and schools, 
To fetter reason with their rules. 

We seek to know Thee as Thou art- 
Our place with Thee-and then the part 
We play in this stupendous plan, 
Creator Infinite, and man. 

Lift up this veil obscuring sight, 
Command again: "Let there be Light ! " 
Reveal this secret of Thy throne; 
We search in darkness the unknown. 

The above we clip from one of the daily papers, because it so 
clearly shows the longings and groanings of creation. The 
"whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until 
now," "for the earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the 
manifestation of the sons of God." (Rom. 8:19-22.) From how 
many hearts this wail and groan for truth ascends to God we 
may never know in this life, but certain it is that freedom of 
thought (unsectarian- not creed-bound) is largely on the 
increase. 

Even the natural man is so fashioned (mentally) in the image of 
his creator, that with intelligence, (notwithstanding the depravity 
and degradation under which he now is) he cannot but look 
upward and realize that there must be a great Creator: and 
reasoning further, he knows that he must have been created with 
reference to some great plan; and reasoning that so great and 
powerful a being must be great in Love and benevolence as well 



as in power, he longs to know something of that plan and his 
part in it. He looks about him for a solution of the mystery of his 
being and future, as though expecting that the great loving One 
would have anticipated his wants and have made preparation for 
their answer. 

Before him stands the Christian world with its hundreds of sects 
and isms and creeds of men; each contradicting more or less the 
others- each claiming the Bible as its text book and guide—each 
supporting its claims by some (often very few) passages from 
that book. He is confused, yet listens. They all declare man's sin 
and need of heavenly help; that commends itself to him as truth; 
they each point to God as the only helper, and most of them to 
Jesus as the ransom from sin and death. This is not 
unreasonable. He listens, still they offer no solution to the 
mystery, whence came sin and why? But they begin to describe 
God as either a being so weak and helpless that he could neither 
prevent sin nor abolish it, or else as a loveless one who 
possessed the power to overthrow sin and evil, and could elect 
all the race to glory and happiness, as well as the few whom 
they claim will be so blessed, but did not want to-wanted to 
illustrate His great power at the expense of the endless torment 
of his weak and helpless creatures. He hears, but neither of these 
views give him rest. No, he "groans" show me a God not only 
possessed of more power than myself but one also possessed of 
wisdom to frame a plan in harmony with a love and mercy 
greater than my own, and I will worship Him. 

Thus not only does the reflective natural man find no rest, but 
those in the church who are possessed of the best and most 
loving minds (and therefore most God-like and Christ-like) 
groan and agonize and pray for light, by which they can see 
God's love; for all who know him at all, know that "God is 
love." The condition of this last mentioned class is described by 
the prophet (Isa. 28:20.) "For the bed (theological resting place), 
is shorter than a man can stretch himself on it." The creeds may 
serve as a resting place for those who are curled up in 
selfishness and fast asleep, but when they awaken and attempt to 
stretch themselves, they will find it no longer a resting place. 

And now dear brethren and sisters what have we to offer these 
distressed ones? Thank God (to Him be all the glory) we are 
living in the morning of the Millennial Day when the "mystery 
of God" is being finished-completed, and the fragments of 
truth, held by the various denominations of Christendom, are 
taking their places in one great, grand, harmonious PLAN, based 
not on isolated passages of Scripture, but comprehending and 
including every passage in harmony- Showing the selection by 
FAITH of "a little flock" in order that in God's due time the 
masses of mankind should be blessed through these —showing 
the necessity of Evil in the proper education of man in order to 
prevent his ever choosing it or thinking it good in the future. 



The numbers of those who weep and mourn in Zion are on the 
increase daily, and it is your privilege and mine to comfort them 
and point them to the glorious plan, which illustrates our 
Father's glorious character to be, Wisdom, Power, Justice and 
Love combined. 

Are we using every effort to make known the riches of God's 
grace, which so many are ignorant of, yet all are longing to 
hear? Are we sparing ourselves either physical or mental 
exertion or pain? Are we selfishly satisfied to rest in God 
ourselves, and permit others to grope in darkness-groaning until 
by and by the Sons of God will be manifested with power? 
(Rom. 8:19.) If so, we are cherishing an un-Christ-like spirit and 
may never be exalted with those who walk in His footsteps as 
He hath set us an example-counting not their lives dear unto 
them. 

It is a glorious privilege to spread the truth and open blind eyes 
now, and if we do not love it enough to undergo some sacrifice 
for the privilege, we are not sufficiently interested to be among 
the few engaged in that glorious work in the ages to come. It is 
he that is faithful in the least that shall in due time be given 
greater opportunities. 



R214 : page 8 



THE JEWS. 



The condition of the Jews in Germany has long been one of 
exceptional honor and influence, and "In no country have they 
supplied such a large number of leading scholars, poets, judges, 
administrative officials, and politicians." But the old jealousy, 
which in the middle ages brought such terrible cruelties upon 
them, alike in Germany as elsewhere, seems still to exist, and 
has of late begun to manifest itself in the formation of "Anti- 
Semitic Leagues" in Berlin and elsewhere. The movement is 
said to have originated in certain discourses of the Court 
Chaplain, Dr. Stocker. The Emperor has been appealed to, and is 
said to have expressly commanded his Chaplain "to discontinue 
his effusions." The president of an Anti-Jewish Society started 
in Dresden "desires that the Jews be deprived of their political 
and social rights and privileges, and that the German 
government should purchase, or otherwise obtain possession of, 
Palestine, in order to force the Jews of Germany to emigrate en 
masse to the Holy Land. "-Glasgow Messenger. 



R217 : page 8 



IN NEWARK, N. J. 

The friends in Newark may expect three meetings on Sunday, 
April 10th. Bro. A. D. Jones and the Editor will meet with you. 
Bro. Jones will remain over and celebrate with you the Lord's 
Supper on the evening of its anniversary- April 14th. 



A CORRECTION. 

By mistake, an article appeared in last paper as an editorial 
which should have been credited to Bro. J. C. Sunderlin. It was 
headed "Looking unto Jesus." 



EXCUSE BRIEF LETTERS. 

The editor feels that he owes himself an apology. His time is 
very much occupied. The Watch Tower, the tracts, the Sunday 
and Wednesday meetings besides other necessary business 
occupy his time fully and the mail correspondence is necessarily 
much neglected. 

I receive and read with interest your many kind letters, but I 
cannot answer them all, much as I should like to: sometimes 
they go entirely unanswered and sometimes very briefly. 

I do not make these remarks to hinder your writing, but to 
excuse and explain what otherwise might seem like negligence 
or indifference. I am ever glad to hear from you— to know of 
your welfare and your trials and to learn your questionings -I 
can read ten letters, while I would be answering one— therefore 
write on, but accept the articles of the WATCH TOWER as 
special answers to your letters. 



DEAD SEA PRODUCTS. 

A French Company is said to have been recently formed for the 
purpose of utilizing the products of the Dead Sea. An engineer 
last May visited the ground, to report upon the feasibility of 
procuring from its waters and shores natron, salt, petroleum, 
sulphur and other chemical substances, to be brought by a small 
boat to the north-west shore, near Jericho, and thence to be 
carried to the Mediterranean Sea at Joppa. At the same point on 
the sea a small factory will be put up, to reduce crude materials 
to pure and more compact state. Should the scheme assume a 
practical shape it will do much to bring about that development 
of trade with the eastern shores of the Mediterranean which the 
study of prophecy leads us to expect. -Selected. 



REGULAR MEETINGS. 

We desire to make a list for our office of all places where our 
readers hold regular meetings and services of any kind, whether 
in churches, halls, or private houses. Evangelists and Teachers 
frequently pass the "twos and threes" en route from one point to 
another. 

If you have no gathering of this sort, let me recommend you to 
establish one in your own home with your own family, or even a 
few that may be interested. Read, study, praise and worship 
together, and where two or three are met in His name, the Lord 
will be in your midst-your teacher. Such was the character of 
some of the meetings of the church in the days of the Apostles. 
(See Philemon 2.) 



WHY EVIL WAS PERMITTED. 

Tract supplement No. 4, accompanies this number and will, we 
trust, be acceptable to you all. It is a subject much thought of by 
all, and more than one child has asked, "Why did God make the 
Devil?" It is a subject which should command some attention 
from all thinking Christians. 



R216:page8 

THE Turkish government in Palestine has secured 80,000 acres 
of land between Jerusalem and Jaffa, for a colony of Jews. The 
proposition is to open up a settlement for the persecuted 
Israelites in Europe; and England and America are raising funds 
for the project. 



R217 : page 1 

VOL. II. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., MAY, 1881. 

NO. 11. 



pagel 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 

REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H. PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... BRADDOCK, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 

L. ALLEN, HONEOYE, N.Y. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN, . FT. EDWARD, N.Y. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance- 
includes postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R217 : page 1 

THE GOSPEL TO ABRAHAM. 

The word gospel signifies good news. There are parts or 
elements to the good news however; there are first principles of 
the gospel of Christ (Heb. 6:1.) and there are more advanced 
doctrines also. For instance, when you became aware that you 
were a sinner, and learned that Jesus had become you ransom, 
and that as a result you might now, approach God as a perfect 
man and not as a sinner, and that by and by in God's due time 
(the Millennial Age) all marks of sin would be removed and you 
would then be actually perfect (still a man), that was good news 
to you; it was the basis of your harmony and friendship with 
God. It was the same thing which centuries ago was good news 
to Abraham. Paul tells us: "Abraham believed God and it was 
counted unto him for righteousness." Rom. 4:3. What good news 
did God communicate which he believed? "The gospel... saying: 
In thee shall all nations be blessed." The process by which all 
nations were to be blessed was not understood by Abraham 
except that it should be through his offspring, but he believed 
the fact without knowing how. We are made acquainted with the 
manner in which the blessing comes, viz: that Jesus was 
(through Mary) the seed of Abraham, and as such gave his life a 
ransom for all men; that as a consequence, in due time all men 
will be justified, and released from all the ills which come 
through sin. 

Yes, the restitution from Adam's sin~the justification of 
humanity by Christ's sacrifice, was the good news to Abraham, 
to us of the gospel age, and is to be good news to the whole 
world in the Millennial Age, for it is "to be testified in due 
time." 1 Tim. 2:6. It is this message that is called "the 
everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth 
and to every nation and kindred and tongue and people," (during 
the coming age). Rev. 14:6. 

But there is another phase of the good news (gospel) which 
belongs exclusively to this Gospel Age. Something "which in 
other ages was not made known unto the Sons of men, as it is 
now (during this Gospel Age) revealed unto his saints (n.t.) and 
prophets (public expounders,) by the Spirit." Eph. 3:5. 

This special good news is, that since Jesus' sacrifice, God is 
calling out from the world of humanity, some to become "the 
Bride, the Lamb's wife" -to "become partakers of the divine 
nature," (2 Pet. 1:4) to cease to be men and become "new 
creatures in Christ Jesus," (2 Cor. 5:17.) and as such to be "Heirs 
of God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord." This is "our high 
calling" of God, which we are to make sure of, by crucifying 
and sacrificing the human nature. This is the prize for which we 
seek~"Glory, Honor and Immortality." 



But these prizes were not offered to Abraham; he was not told 
about the joint-heirship, nor about sitting in the throne, nor 
about Immortality. No, these were not made known in past ages. 
"Jesus Christ... brought Life and Immortality to light through the 
gospel." 2 Tim. 1:10. Nor will this high calling be made during 
the future ages, for the "body of Christ" will be completed in 
this age. The Bride will be developed, and the marriage of the 
Lamb will come when "his wife hath made herself ready." Rev. 
19:7. 

So we see that we get all that Abraham got, viz: justification by 
faith from all Adamic sin, and in addition are invited to become 
a part of "The Seed which is Christ." Gal. 3:29. Abraham was 
the father of this Seed in a certain sense, but certainly not a part 
of his own Seed. But more on this again. 

Jesus was anointed of the Spirit— "the Lord's anointed"~and this 
we have seen is the meaning of his title, Christ; and all who 
become members of the Christ, must be made partakers of the 
Holy Ghost-anointed. Now we want to show that none were 
ever thus anointed before Jesus, and if this be the case none ever 
were members of his body before this age. 

David is called the Lord's anointed, but he was anointed of 
Samuel with the anointing oil to the office of King; but both 
David and the oil were types: The oil a type of the Holy Spirit, 
and David a type of Christ in his office of King. Aaron was the 
Lord's anointed also, but he too was anointed only with the 
typical oil and was himself a type of Christ in his office of 
Priest. The Spirit of God [Holy Spirit] came upon the Prophets 
during the Jewish age, but in a different way entirely and for a 
different purpose than its operation on the church during this 
age. Then, it was simply a power, which took possession of the 
Prophet; over which he had little or no control, which simply 
used him as a machine. (See Num. 22:38.) Never before Jesus, 
did the Holy Spirit act as "a comforter" and guide into an 
understanding of truth, and this is the special work of the Spirit 
now. It is given to the new creature as a seal or evidence of his 
being begotten to the divine nature and as an earnest of his final 
deliverance, or birth into the Spiritual form. 

The Spirit had written the mysteries through the Prophets, but 
had not revealed them. These mysteries were written for the 
church; (Jesus and his 

R218 :pagel 

body) and no one else could know them, nor will any one else 
understand them until the church is complete and "the mystery 
of God... finished." 

Many of the Prophets were good men who loved God and whom 
God loved; yet, Daniel called the "greatly beloved" prayed for 
weeks, to God, desiring an understanding of some of the 



prophecies which he himself had uttered. But the Spirit gave 
him no understanding of it: finally in pity God sent an angel, 
gave him all the understanding possible (but evidently not 
satisfactory) and finished by telling him that the thing was 
closed up and sealed for a time, but would be understood when 
due. See Dan. 12:9. 

For the same reason that prophets though beloved could not 
understand, the angels also beloved could not understand, viz: 
God had not revealed his plan, hence it is written, "Eye hath not 
seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of man 
(nor angel; we might add, on the strength of Peter's statement) 
the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. But 
God hath revealed them unto us (the church) by His Spirit;... 
Now we have received... the Spirit of God, that we might know, 
the things freely given to us of God." 1 Cor. 2:9,13. 

Peter evidently refers to Daniel's interest above referred to, 
when he says: (1:10.) "Of which salvation (our high calling) the 
prophets have enquired and searched diligently who prophesied 
of the GRACE THAT SHOULD COME UNTO YOU: 
searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ 
which was (speaking) in them did signify, when it testified 
beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should 
follow. Unto whom it was revealed (by the angel, no revelations 
were made to them by the Spirit) that not unto themselves, but 
unto us they did minister, the things which are now reported 
unto you, by them which have preached the gospel (good news) 
unto you, with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven, [to be 
your guide in understanding the preaching] which things the 
angels desire to look into." Now we ask, could Peter express 
more pointedly than he here does the view which we are 
advocating. They prophesied of the grace (favor-high calling) 
which is come unto you-the gospel church. Now notice another 
point made strong by Peter's expression; the prophets testified 
beforehand the sufferings of Christ. To all who see how the 
church or "body" of Christ has fellowship with the "head" both 
in sufferings and glory, this statement is full of meaning. Our 
hope is to be accounted worthy to suffer with him, that we may 
be also glorified together; (Rom. 8:17.) but the Prophets spoke 
of the sufferings as all future; they spoke of them "beforehand," 
so we may be sure that no matter how much the prophets may 
have suffered as witnesses for God, their sufferings were not 
like those of the gospel church reckoned a part of the sufferings 
of the Christ. 

Now again, to his body the church, Jesus is called the "Head," 
"Leader," "Captain of our Salvation," and how proper it is that a 
leader should precede the followers. How could Abraham and 
the Prophets walk in His footsteps as he hath set us an 
EXAMPLE? (1 Pet. 2:21). If Abraham and the Prophets be 
counted as a part of the Christ, then Jesus was their follower; if 



their sufferings be a part of the afflictions of Christ, then Jesus 
was merely filling up their afflictions. But not so-the Head 
suffered first and then the body follows- "considers him" and 
his example. This is our privilege to "Fill up that which is 
BEHIND of the afflictions of Christ." (Col. 1:24). 

But we have already shown that one reason why we are called 
the Christ, is that we are like our Leader, anointed of the Spirit 
or power of God. The Father gave it without measure to Jesus 
the head; and Jesus when glorified gave of the same to his body, 
the church at Pentecost, as Peter explains: "He being by the right 
hand of God exalted, hath shed forth this." (Acts 2:33.) The 
Spirit in this sense as a witness of our sonship (on the spiritual 
plane), as a guide into all truth (as it becomes "meat in due 
season") came to the church first at Pentecost, as we read that 
The Holy Ghost was not yet 

R218:page2 

given because Jesus was not yet glorified. (John 7:39.) Jesus 
must first make his sacrifice and be accepted of the Father, 
before any could be received as spiritual, new creatures and 
recognized by the Spirit's adoption as such. Jesus' words bear 
the same import; He said: "It is expedient for you that I go away, 
for if I go not away the comforter will not come unto you; but if 
I depart I will send him unto you"-- "even the Spirit of truth." 
(John 15:7, 15:26). Hence it is evident that the Spirit in this 
sense of enlightening and anointing is given only to the body of 
Christ (anointed). 

But some one enquires, Is it ever stated that the church is 
anointed? Yes, we read (1 John 2:27): "The anointing which you 
received from Him abides in you, and you have no need that any 
one should teach you [Ye are not dependent upon human 
wisdom and science.] but the same anointing teaches you 
concerning all things." [Diaglott]. Again let Paul tell us of our 
anointing (2 Cor. 1:21) "Now he which establisheth us with you 
in Christ, and hath anointed us in God; who also hath sealed us, 
and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts." 

We conclude then, that whatever God may have in his plan, as 
the reward of Abraham, the Prophets, and all ancient worthies, it 
is not the same thing which is promised to the Christ, which 
began with the head and will end with the last member —in this 
age. Thus we see that while there was good news to Abraham, 
and is to be everlasting good news in future ages, yet our Father 
hath bestowed "the exceeding riches of his grace, in his loving 
kindness toward us in Christ Jesus." 



R218 : page 2 



"SOME BETTER THING FOR US." 

"Art thou greater than our father Abraham which is dead and 
the prophets are dead? Whom makest thou thyself?" John 8:53. 

In being born of a virgin, Jesus had taken "the seed of 
Abraham" and so continued until he was 30 years of age when, 
in baptism he consecrated his being to God a living sacrifice. He 
was accepted, and from that moment, being begotten of the 
Spirit and sealed as a new creature, he is a partaker of the divine 
nature, the human nature (Abrahamic seed) being the thing 
sacrificed. 

Consequently in this conversation with the Pharisees Jesus calls 
Abraham their father and God his Father. (Vs. 54,56). We 
answer for Jesus then, that he at that time was greater than 
Abraham and the prophets, in as much as they were only 
justified men- human nature- while he (since baptism) was 
begotten of the Spirit and a "partaker of the Divine nature." He 
was then, as much better and greater than them, as the divine 
nature is superior to the human. 

Abraham became heir to the righteousness which is by faith; 
that is, he was "justified freely from all things," but this did not 
change his nature; no, it left him still a man-but a righteous 
man. Those who become heirs of God, joint-heirs with Jesus 
Christ, follow Abraham thus far: They also believe God and are 
justified as men, and then, they go further than he; being called 
of God they present themselves living sacrifices, as Jesus did 
and are accepted in the beloved and thus (by making their 
calling and selection sure), they become as Jesus did- "partakers 
of the divine nature." These exceeding great and precious 
promises Abraham and the prophets heard not of and therefore 
were not called, to run for the prize we seek. 

Abraham, Isaac and Jacob while in some respects noble 
characters receive much of their lustre and grandeur from their 
being used as types of spiritual things. We have often noticed 
many ways in which Abraham was a type of our heavenly 
Father and Isaac the son of promise a type of God's Son, our 
Lord: Rebecca, Isaac's wife, was a type of Jesus' bride-the 
church, who soon will become joint-heirs with him to our 
Father's inheritance. 

The promises to Abraham were all seemingly, of an earthly sort, 
and until the Spirit through Paul unfolded them, it was 
impossible to see anything but earthly promises to a human 
seed; but now thank God we see how all of those promises made 
to Abraham will have a fulfillment, just as they were made to 
him and much as he understood them; and we also see beyond 
Abraham the type, to him whom he typified-the true Father of 
the true Isaac-in the fullest sense, "The Father of the faithful" 
who is himself calling us to be the Bride of His only Son and 
heir of all things. And when we apply to our Father, God; 



instead of to the type, Abraham, the words: "In Thee and in Thy 
Seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed," we see a 
strength and depth of meaning never discerned when we applied 
them to the type. No, Abraham is no part of "The Seed"; neither 
is he in any but a typical sense, its father for, "One is your 
Father even God. " 

What shall we say then, is there unrighteousness with God? Did 
he make promises to Abraham, which he never intended to 
fulfill and in which he was only a type? No, the promises which 
God made to Abraham were all of an earthly kind and so 
Abraham must have understood them; but, God foreknowing his 
own great plans, so arranged those earthly promises that the 
higher— spiritual blessings and spiritual seed, would be hid in 
earthly promises, until in his own due time, His spirit should, 
through Paul, reveal it to the church. This mystery of the 
spiritual seed 

R219 : page 2 

was kept secret in past ages, but is now revealed. Eph. 3:9. 

Now let us look at any of the promises made to Abraham or 
expressed by the apostles, and we find them all susceptible of 
earthly fulfillment. We will examine some of them shortly, first 
stating the reward we expect Abraham to get and then seeing 
how the promises accord. 

To Abraham and the prophets God will give, "a just recompense 
of reward" undoubtedly—all that was ever promised them and 
probably much more than they ever expected; yet they, may 
never receive the spiritual gifts promised only to Jesus and his 
Bride. We repeat, that the prophets knew nothing of "our high 
calling" to be joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, our Lord. 

Jesus said of John the Baptist, the prophet- "there hath not risen 
a greater;" (Matt. 11:11.) yet this greatest prophet did not claim 
the honor of being a part of the Bride but said: "He that hath the 
Bride is the Bridegroom: but the friends of the Bridegroom 
which standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth greatly because of the 
Bridegroom's voice: this my joy, therefore is fulfilled." John 
3:29. Thus does John tell us that his joy and privilege was not to 
be of the Bride, but to be a friend of the Bridegroom and to 
introduce him. Moses also was a great prophet, yet Paul does not 
class him with the spiritual house of sons, for he says, "Moses 
verily was faithful in all his house as a servant... but Christ as a 
son over his own house, whose house are WE?" Heb. 3:5,6. 

Since (as shown in the preceding article) the anointing or 
begetting of the Spirit to a new nature (the spiritual) began with 
our Head, Jesus, we conclude that none of the patriarchs or 
prophets were thus begotten; and if not begotten they never can 
reach birth or a perfection of spiritual being (like unto the angels 
and like unto Christ's glorious body). How then will they be 



resurrected we enquire— with what body will they come? They 
belonged to the human family and will be raised human 
(earthly) beings. By their faith, they were justified as men; 
(reckoned free from sin and its penalty, sickness and death), and 
in the resurrection they will we believe be raised perfect men. 

Herein will be the value of their faith, viz: that while the world 
in general will be raised to a measure of life only, and require 
faith and works during the Millennial age to prove their 
harmony and test their obedience to God and thus come 
gradually to perfection, these ancient worthies will, because 
tried and found worthy and justified by faith, be raised in the 
glory and perfection of earthly being. 

Let no one forget that there is a "glory" attaching to the earthly. 
There are "celestial (spiritual) bodies and bodies terrestrial 
(earthly): but the glory of the celestial is one (thing) and the 
glory of the terrestrial is another." 1 Cor. 15:40. 

Raised in the perfection of being, how they would tower above 
others on earth, degraded as all humanity is by sin. How 
naturally would come to them the homage and respect of the 
whole race. They would naturally assume the place first given to 
Adam -"A little lower than the angels"-- crowned "with glory 
and honor" and set over the works of God's hands:-- "Have thou 
dominion." (See Heb. 2:7 and Gen. 1:28.) 

THE NEW JERUSALEM 

is a figure of the coming kingdom of God. It represents, we 
believe, both spiritual and earthly beings. When first seen (Rev. 
21:2.) it contains only the Bride, it has not reached earth yet-it 
is "coming down from God out of heaven." From the 
commencement of the reign of Christ, the kingdom or dominion 
of God will commence; it will continue to overthrow evil and 
establish right, until in the end of the time of trouble the 
kingdom ("New Jerusalem") shall have reached earth, and it 
shall be established here, during the Millennial reign (of which 
that city is the figure). 

As we have already seen, the real rulers of earth will be the Lord 
and His Bride, invisible to humanity because of a new and 
different nature- spiritual beings-the new "powers of the air: " 
but there will be earthly agencies, made use of in ruling and 
blessing and restoring mankind— just as the present "Prince of 
the power of the air" now makes use of human agencies 
(governments and men), in oppressing and degrading. 

There will then be true "civil service reform," and none but 
perfect beings will be allowed to hold office, or be identified 
with the government; and each earthly one as soon as he learns 
of the goodness and love of God, will seek and be assisted, to 
approach the kingdom (New Jerusalem). "They shall bring the 
honor and glory of the nations into it: And there shall in no wise 



enter into it anything that defileth (sinful) neither whatsoever 
worketh abomination or maketh a lie: but they which are written 
in the Lamb's book of life." (Rev. 21:26.) 

The whole world will be on trial for life, [life as human beings— 
as Adam had it] and the conditions will be their coming into full 
harmony with the Kingdom (New Jerusalem) and its laws of 
love to God and men. None other, shall enter the kingdom or be 
enrolled of the Lamb as worthy of life. In the end of the age all 
who have not entered (the symbolic city) will be destroyed. 
(Rev. 20:14,15.) 

We see then, that the kingdom (dominion-recognized authority) 
of God, "cometh not with observation, neither shall men say, lo, 
here! or lo, there!" for the kingdom when it cometh, will be in 
their midst, a spiritual unseen power; but as it proceeds and 
conquers, it begins to have human representatives (who can be 
seen) who continue to increase until the kingdom shall be, 
"Under the whole heavens" and shall "Fill the whole EARTH." 
(Dan. 2:35). 

Now, in this kingdom there will be a work for spiritual beings to 
do, viz: to overrule, oversee and reward with perfection of being 
and continuous life, all who shall prove themselves worthy of it- 
-who will thus be delivered from the bondage of corruption 
[sickness and dying] into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. 
[Adam was thus gloriously free, before sin bound him to death]. 
And there will be work for humanity in the glorious restitution 
of all things, for they will be co-workers with the Lamb, the 
Spirit and the Bride. 

Now we can perhaps understand why it is, that "without holiness 
no man shall see the Lord," ("we shall see him as he is" for "we 
shall be like him, "--also spiritual beings) and yet, men shall see 
the Patriarchs, for we read: 

"YE SHALL SEE ABRAHAM, ISAAC AND JACOB 
IN THE KINGDOM OF GOD, 

and ye yourselves thrust out." (Luke 13:28). The earthly phase 
of the kingdom was all that ever had been revealed until Jesus 
came and taught concerning a kingdom higher, into which 
humanity (flesh and blood) could not enter. 

It was this (earthly) kingdom they sought and which had been 
promised them-the dominion over all nations to rule and to 
bless all others. It was this earthly phase of the kingdom which 
had been established in a small way under David, and this the 
Jews in Jesus' day claimed still to represent; and now notice 
Jesus' words--" You yourselves (shall be) thrust out. "--They 
could not be thrust out of a thing which they were not in, in 
some sense; and they were in the earthly kingdom, in the sense 
that they as a nation had all been typically cleansed by typical 
sacrifices, and thus constituted a figure of the future earthly 



kingdom, into which will enter none but those absolutely 
cleansed from all sin by virtue of the "better sacrifices." 

If then Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets, justified 
by faith, shall be raised perfect men, and as such will be in 
perfect harmony with God, we see how they would be the first 
of the earthly element of the kingdom. With this thought of the 
spiritual and human parts of the kingdom of God, and the 
necessity of the spiritual, being first perfected before the human 
would be possible, let us remember Jesus' words, "There 



[Continued on seventh page.] 

R219 : page 7 

[Continued from second page.] 

are last (the Gospel church) which shall be first (or chief), and 
there are first (Abraham, the prophets, etc.) which shall be last" 
(or under). Luke 13:28-30. 

But, can the promises to Abraham be thus fulfilled? We think 
so-let us see. We read (Gen. 12:1-3), "Now the Lord had said 
unto Abram, Get thee out of thy country [Chaldea] and from thy 
kindred and from thy father's house, unto a land which I will 
shew thee, and I will make of thee a great nation, and I will 
bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a 
blessing: and I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that 
curseth thee: and in thee shall all families of the earth be 
blessed." If Abraham be placed at the head of the (earthly) 
kingdom, all this can be accomplished. 

Again we read (Gen. 13:15,16): "All the land which thou seest, 
to thee will I give it and to thy seed forever; and I will make thy 
seed as the dust of the earth, so that if a man can number the 
dust of the earth, then shall thy seed also be numbered." [There 
is not much need of urging that this does not refer to the "little 
flock."] 

Again (Gen. 17:7,8): "I will give to thee and to thy seed after 
thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger-all the land of Canaan 
for an everlasting possession." 

Again (Gen. 22:17): "In blessing I will bless thee, and in 
multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven and as 
the sand that is by the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the 
gate of his enemies, and in thy seed shall all the families of the 
earth be blessed." 

Now unless we can see more seeds than one in these promises, 
we will 

R220 : page 7 

have confusion: but if we can see that the earthly is to be as the 
sand, and that the blessing seed is Christ and the little flock 



under him, we may see how Abraham might suppose it all to 
belong to the natural seed. And indeed we should not know of 
the distinction were it not revealed through Paul. (Gal. 3:29). 

Paul, in Rom. 4:16, seems to mention both of these seeds 
(natural and spiritual) when he says, that God's promise was "of 
faith, to the end that the promise might be sure to all the seed, 
not to that only which is of the Law, but to that also which is of 
the faith of Abraham who is the father of us all (...) like unto 
Him whom he believed, even God." [We give the marginal 
reading which conveys the true idea, viz: that Abraham was the 
actual father to one of the seeds and a likeness of the Father of 
the other -"even God."] 

Let us next read from the sermon of Stephen, the second 
Christian martyr, (Jesus being the first) about God's promise to 
Abraham. He says (Acts 7:1-6): "The God of glory appeared 
unto our father Abraham... and said unto him, 'Get thee out of 
thy country and from thy kindred and come into the land which I 
will show thee.' Then came he out of the land of the Chaldeans 
and dwelt in Charran: and from thence... he removed and came 
into this land wherein ye now dwell. And he gave him none 
inheritance in it, no not so much as to set his foot on, yet He 
promised that He would give it to him for a possession, and to 
his seed after him.... And God spake on this wise, That his seed 
should sojourn in a strange land and that they should bring them 
into bondage and entreat them evil four hundred years." 

Let no one question therefore that there is an earthly seed to be 
blessed with earthly blessings as men, and that the promise to 
Abraham associates him especially with that seed, and not with 
the higher one whose father is God. 

Paul speaks of Abraham's hopes, saying (Heb. 11:8-17): "By 
faith Abraham when he was called to go out into a place which 
he should after receive for an inheritance obeyed; and went out, 
not knowing whither he went. By faith he sojourned in the land 
of promise... dwelling with Isaac and Jacob heirs of the same 
promise: For he looked for the city which hath foundations 
whose builder and maker is God." "These all died in faith, not 
having received the promises (the things promised- the land 
wherein they dwelt, etc.), but having seen them afar off... and 
confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on earth. For 
they that say such things declare that they seek a country, and 
truly if they had (wished) been mindful of that country from 
whence they came out [Chaldea], they might have had 
opportunity to have returned. But now, [instead of returning] 
they desire a better (the promised) country, that is an heavenly, 
(Canaan in the heavenly kingdom). Wherefore God is not 
ashamed to be called their God: for he hath prepared for them a 
city." The city to which we have seen Abraham and the Prophets 
are coming, is the Millennial Kingdom into which they shall be 
the first to come on the earthly plane, and whose earthly seat of 



government will probably be Canaan the very land here 
mentioned, in which they sojourned as strangers. 

Paul proceeds to add to his list of ancient worthies David, 
Samson, Rahab and the prophets who succeeded in various 
undertakings because of faith in God: and he suggests the 
thought that these faithful ones will also get a reward in "the 
city" being prepared. But after mentioning all these Paul adds: 
"These all having obtained a good report through faith received 
not the promise [the chief or "high calling"] God having 
provided 

SOME BETTER THING FOR US 

that they without us [the Christ] should not be made perfect." 
That is, they shall not perfectly receive, the things promised 
them until THE SEED [Christ] has first received its reward; 
until the New Jerusalem shall come down; then the promises 
made to them, shall all be accomplished or "made perfect." 

And now methinks, some one would say, "Art thou greater than 
our father Abraham... and the prophets? Whom makest thou 
thyself?" To which we answer in Jesus' words, "If I honor 
myself my honor is nothing: it is my Father that honoreth me. " 
No, dear brethren and sisters, none of us could have imagined 
such a "high calling" as we have received; but as we read his 
promises we should be unworthy of them did we not believe and 
confess and accept them, with grateful hearts. 

As we see the exclusive character of the call to be joint heirs of 
"Glory, Honor and Immortality" let us lay aside every weight 
and run for it. The prize given to the patriarchs is almost beyond 
human comprehension, and yet God has PROVIDED some 
better thing for us. I shall praise him eternally for the 
opportunity provided even if I should not "so run as to obtain" it. 
But why should I not attain it- why should you not obtain it? 
Our justification is complete—it is Christ that died. Our call is 
official, it is "of God in Christ Jesus." True, we are weak, but He 
who invites us says, "My grace is sufficient for thee." Haste then 
to perform your covenant; to present your bodies living 
sacrifices. The time of sacrifice will soon be over -haste to 
make your calling and election sure by submitting yourself to 
God, who will work in you both to will and to do of His good 
pleasure. 



R222 : page 3 



'HOW READEST THOU?" 

LUKE 10:16. 



Tis one thing now to read the Bible through, 
And another thing to read, to learn, and do; 
Tis one thing now to read it with delight, 
And quite another thing to read it right. 

Some read it with design to learn to read, 
But to the subject pay but little heed; 
Some read it as their duty once a week, 
But no instruction from the Bible seek. 

Whil'st others read it without common care, 
With no regard to how they read nor where. 
Some read it as a history to know 
How people lived three thousand years ago. 

Some read to bring themselves repute, 
By showing others how they can dispute; 
Whil'st others read because their neighbors do, 
To see how long t'will take to read it through. 

Some read it for the wonders that are there, 
How David killed a lion and a bear: 
Whil'st others read—or rather in it look, 
Because, perhaps, they have no other book. 

Some read the blessed Book-they don't know why, 
It somehow happens in the way to lie; 
Whil'st others read it with uncommon care, 
But all to find some contradictions there. 

Some read as though it did not speak to them 
But to the people at Jerusalem; 
One reads it as a book of mysteries, 
And won't believe the very thing he sees. 

One reads with father's specs upon his head, 
And sees the thing just as his father did; 
Another reads through Campbell or through Scott, 
And thinks it means exactly what they thought. 

Whil'st others read the Book through H. Balou, 
And if it cross his track it can't be true! 
Some read to prove a pre-adopted creed, 
Thus understand but little what they read. 

For every passage in the Book they bend 
To make it suit that all important end. 
Some people read as I have often thought 
To teach the Book instead of being taught. 

And some there are who read it out of spite, 
I fear there are but few who read it right, 

So many people in these latter days 
Have read the Bible in so many ways, 
That few can tell which system is the best 
For every party contradicts the rest. 



-Selected. 



R220 : page 3 

NOT ASHAMED OF THE GOSPEL. 

"I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ, for it is the power of 
God unto salvation to every one that believeth; to the Jew first 
and also to the Greek." Rom. 1:16. 

These words like all of Paul's words, in general, are fitly spoken 
and are like "apples of gold in pictures of silver." Gospel 
signifies good tell, good news, glad tidings, something to make 
one rejoice and be glad; it must have been something of very 
great importance, something far-reaching in its nature, 
something supremely grand and glorious, for it had wrought a 
most wonderful change in Paul. He had not always been of the 
opinion which he now expresses, for he had persecuted those of 
"this way" even unto strange cities, and when they were put to 
death, he gave his voice against them. 

What had caused this change in the mind of the apostle? 

Surely the gospel had not changed in its character; no, but he 
had become better acquainted with it. That is the way it ever is 
with the world: the better they are acquainted with the gospel of 
Christ, the better opinion they have of it, the higher they value it. 
Paul was expecting soon to visit Rome, that imperial city, the 
mistress of the world, and of course if he spoke in public he 
wished to talk about something which he was not ashamed of, 
and this he declared was the thing: "I am not ashamed of the 
gospel of Christ." Paul proved the truth of his assertion not only 
by his words, but by his actions as well. 

The mighty mind of Paul, in its natural sweep immense, saw 
THAT in the gospel of Christ which was infinitely above and 
beyond everything else. If he could have seen how man, through 
the blinding effects of pride, and superstition, would have finally 
come to consider the gospel of Christ -if he could have stood 
upon the orthodox platform of our day and have looked out upon 
the pile of "wood, hay, stubble," which is built on the 
foundation, Christ, can any one suppose he would have been 
able to say he was not ashamed of it? If the "mother church," 
which is proud of calling him her patron saint, and after whom 
many of her churches are named, should through some of her 
dignitaries expound to him the doctrines of penance, papal 
succession, confession of sins to the priest and obsolution, the 
state of the dead in purgatory, &c, can we suppose that he 
would endorse them and say of them, "I am not ashamed?" If 
some one were to represent to him the doctrine of predestination 
as held by our Calvinistic brethren, and undertake to prove it by 
Paul's own writings in Rom. 8:29,33: "For whom he did 



foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image 
of his son," &c, and again in Rom. 9:15,24: "I will have mercy 
on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on 
whom I will have compassion," &c, and conclude from it that 
God from all eternity planned to bring into being a few, favored 
with advantages of every sort-birth in a Christian land, 
surrounded by Christian influences and upheld by Christian 
associations and the particular favor of God; but the large 
majority by the same eternal decree were born in the darkness of 
moral night and bound by the strong cords of corrupt hereditary 
taint and association, and although they may have dim 
perceptions of God and truth, and may desire to know him, yet, 
though they may groan and strive, and turn their tear-dimmed 
eyes toward heaven, with untold longings, yet they shall go into 
a night of eternal anguish, "without one cheering ray of hope, or 
star of glimmering day," and the righteous from their exalted 
seats in glory shall look on this display of God's wisdom, and 
justice, and power and praise him for this manifestation of his 
love. 

Is it possible that any thinking man can suppose that Paul would 
endorse this? That this was what he was not ashamed of? But 
would he look with more favor upon the view of our Arminian 
brother, who should say to him: that although the decree was 
made as our Calvinistic brother has stated, yet the provision was 
for all to be saved, the ransom was provided 

R221 : page 3 

for all, but the secret of it is in the words of Jesus, "ye will not 
come unto me that ye might have life. " The table was spread and 
bountifully provided for all, but they "would not and made light 
of it;" not taking into account the fact that more than nine-tenths 
of them never knew that there was any supper provided for 
them, that is to say, that infinite wisdom decreed that a certain 
number only should be informed of it, and be at the table, but 
had it set for ten times as many as he knew would be there to 
sup, and because they were not there, consigned them to eternal 
torment. Acting upon this basis of reasoning, if such it is, our 
Arminian brethren have sent as many missionaries as possible to 
tell the starving millions that there is a supper provided so that 
the poor creatures who are fortunate enough to hear of it may 
come and welcome, but those who do not must starve. But this 
when looked at squarely, our Arminian brethren cannot see to be 
very good news, and so sometimes conclude, (though not in a 
very orthodox way) that these unfortunate millions who never 
heard of the gospel, will be provided for "in SOME way or 
other," (a good conviction). Can we think this is the gospel 
which Paul had in mind when he said, "I am not ashamed of the 
gospel? Nay, verily ! 

But there is still another view that has seemingly strong 
scriptural support, and this includes all men; this surely is a free 



gospel and universal, and Paul is supposed to be its strong 
supporter, for he has given that which is the key note in the 
promulgation of it, viz: "As in Adam ALL die, EVEN SO in 
Christ shall ALL be made alive." 1 Cor. 15:22. So our 
Universalist brother infers from this that in some way, in the 
hour of death, or before, or after, by some means, whether sinful 
or holy, everybody, everywhere shall be saved; and why not? He 
says, did not Christ by the grace of God taste death "for every 
man?" And if so did he die in vain for any man? But our brother 
of this opinion would not probably dwell with as much 
satisfaction upon the passage "without holiness no man shall see 
the Lord," Heb. 12:14, and would prefer that murderers and 
pickpockets should occupy a separate apartment in the many 
mansions." (Here again conviction almost arrives at truth.) Now, 
candidly, can we suppose that these views, which we think, in a 
plain-spoken way, we have fairly represented as being the views 
held by the churches in general, regarding the gospel, are the 
views held by saint Paul when he uttered the words we have 
referred to? 

We cannot think so, and we do think that few, if any, who 
reflect are perfectly satisfied that either of these were the views 
which he held. Then do you stand back aghast and say: Can it be 
possible that all this is error that we have been taught so long, 
and that has so much seeming support from the Bible? Do you 
say, impossible? If these are errors, which is your choice, and 
which is good news to you? Can you walk out beneath the starry 
heavens at night and looking up into illimitable space among the 
exhibitions of infinite wisdom and power, and there alone in the 
presence of God lay your hand upon either one of these dogmas 
and say, I believe THIS is the gospel of Christ, of which Paul 
was not ashamed? 

No, my dear brother or friend these dogmas are not all errors, 
neither are they all truth. Like the confederation of states, to 
which has been proudly attached the term "E Pluribus Unum, " 
so the truths of the gospel of which Paul was not ashamed are "E 
Pluribus Unum," i.e. one composed of many. We understand 
then that the gospel, of which Paul spoke, embraces in its scope 
many of the ideas held by each of our brethren to whom 
reference has been made, and for whose opinions we have 
respect, but we cannot think that either of them is complete 
alone, and we believe that either of the churches who think that 
its plan or creed is the only and true one, while so much at 
variance with the others, has done much to make the man of the 
world who is uninformed, reject the instrument (the Bible) upon 
which he thinks so many variant tunes can be played. With force 
then the question recurs to us; what was the gospel or good news 
of which Paul was not ashamed? What was the great and 
glorious thought connected with the gospel that he had in mind? 



Paul's was a critical and calculating mind, and his inspired 
thoughts were stamped with that peculiarity. He "reckons" about 
his sufferings; he "counted all things loss," etc., etc. In this case 
he is "not ashamed of the gospel for, i.e. for the reason that it is 
"the power of God," something above and beyond all human 
institutions, something that the world, the mind of the natural 
man never would have thought of, something supernatural, yes 
and something from which the mind of man (if left to itself) 
would soon wander; and that is evidently why these truths have 
been torn asunder, and the different parties in the church have 
each taken a piece, and upon it built a superstructure of its own, 
much of it, the "wood, hay, stubble," to which Paul refers in 1 
Cor. 3:12. Each of these, according to our understanding, has 
already begun to be swept away or to be burned up, and "the 
day" which "shall declare it" is even now begun, (vs. 13) we 
fully believe. We feel convinced that the fire which is to 
consume the world (of error) is even "now kindled." 

But says one, where is the disagreement? Do we not all believe 
that this gospel is the power of God unto salvation? (to every 
one that believeth, our Arminian brother breaks in-but he must 
wait a little). Well they say so, but in practice deny it. Our 
Calvinistic brother says "unto salvation" and adds, (in creed) of 
a few, and unto damnation of the many, i.e. power to save all, 
will to save a few. Our Arminian brother can emphasize the will 
of God to save, but whisper the power, for O! man opposes his 
will. Our Universalist brother can declare aloud both will and 
power and take all into glory. 

Let us illustrate the difference between our brethren, and 
suppose three natives of some foreign land, who were totally 
unacquainted with the design or nature of the national emblem 
"the stars and stripes," were to call at different times upon the 
American Consul in that land, and he was to present to one a 
portion of the flag as a memento, having only the red, at another 
time, to another one, a portion having only the white, and still 
another having only the blue, each might suppose that his 
portion represented in color the whole and contend that because 
the representative of the nation gave it to him, he was sure that 
was the true color, and so of each of the others, while the fact 
would be that each was right in supposing that he had the true 
color, but erred in the supposition that he had the only color, 
when it was composed of "red, white, and blue," and that in a 
specified proportion. 

Now our Calvinistic brother, sees so clearly that predestination 
is taught in the scriptures, that he cannot see that there is a 
universal salvation; and our Arminian brother sees so clearly 
that there is salvation provided for all, that he cannot see that 
there is clearly taught the doctrine of predestination and 
election; and our Universalist brother sees so clearly that all will 
be saved, that he cannot see either of the others. 



But says one, you seem to agree with each, and disagree with 
each; how is this? They cannot all be right and wrong at the 
same time. Well not altogether right, but partly right, as in the 
illustration. We are glad to see that each has enough ground for 
his belief to awaken our sympathy and respect. Respect for what 
Paul would have been ashamed of? No, we did not say that Paul 
was ashamed of these brethren, but of the doctrines or creeds 
that have come to be called the gospel, or are considered as 
representing the gospel. 

R221 : page 4 

Well, says our Calvinistic brother, answer me one question: Is 
not Predestination or Election clearly taught in the Scriptures? 

Yes, my brother, yes. Well, says my Arminian brother, is not 
free will as clearly taught? Yes, my brother, we so understand. 

And is not universal salvation as clearly taught, says my 
Universalist brother, and we answer we think and believe so. 

Perhaps all of these brethren, including the Papist brother, cares 
to hear no more; if so, perhaps some "fool for Christ's sake" 
will, so we will say on and consider the last question first. We 
consider our Universalist brother's text "As in Adam all die, 
even so in Christ shall all be made alive," 1 Cor. 15:22, as 
unanswerable as regards the universality of salvation; if there 
were not another text in the Bible to teach it, that would. It 
seems to us that nothing can be plainer, and for this reason other 
scripture somewhat obscure must in some way harmonize with 
it, and so of each of the other texts quoted by our brethren as 
teaching the doctrines of "Election," and "Free will," or 
Arminianism. In the above text we think no one would 
undertake to make the word "all" in the second place mean less 
than in the first, especially when the first is followed and the 
latter preceded by the words "even so." The misunderstanding 
seems to be as to the kind or mode of life. "As in Adam all die;" 
how do all die in Adam? To answer it correctly first conclude 
how all lived in Adam. Not spiritual nor eternal life was it? 
Natural life and its continuance CONDITIONED on obedience, 
was it not? Then he (and all in him) lost no more than that, and 
"even so" he (and "all" in him) will be made alive in Christ, the 
second Adam. But, says one, is that all the life we get through 
Christ? That is all the universal salvation we can find held out to 
mankind in the Bible, and that we think is "very good;" God said 
it was, but thank God there is more, but if any wish to stop there, 
God has predestinated to let them, but if they have heard of the 
higher life and 

R222 : page 4 

neglected "so great salvation," theirs will be an irreparable loss. 

Then you think, says one, that there are different degrees of 
salvation? O, yes; let us read on a little further (23d ver.): "But 



every man in his own order, Christ the first fruits, afterward they 
that are Christ's at his coming." 

Having seen that there are orders or ranks of being, as is also 
shown by the apostle in the 39th verse and onward, we can see 
that it does not follow that because all are made alive through 
Christ, they will therefore come finally to the same kind of 
being, but are brought to life and take position according to 
"order," for "As is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy; 
and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly" (48 
ver.). 

With this view, that there are different orders, and that all are 
brought to the restoration of what was lost in Adam, we can see 
how there may be a will in man to gain a position in any given 
order, and how there may be a selection, "Election" or 
"Predestination," (whichever you choose to call it) of God from 
among his creatures of those who are qualified or fitted for the 
different grades, orders, or ranks of being. He has predestinated, 
or established a law, that, "to those who by patient continuance 
in well doing SEEK for glory and honor and immortality, eternal 
life" shall be given. Rom. 2:7. "But unto them that are 
contentious, and obey not the truth, but obey unrighteousness, 
indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish to every soul of 
man that doeth evil," (8 and 9 verses). Now who disobey? Those 
who know the truth surely. You do not consider your child as 
disobedient until it transgresses a known command; neither does 
God, for "like as a father pitieth his children so the Lord pitieth 
them that fear him." Many fear him who do not know much 
about him, and do not know what is commanded, or whether he 
has commanded anything or not. Such cannot, of course, obey 
the truth, nor come under wrath, but will come to life (not 
eternal), the life lost in Adam without any will or choice of 
theirs, and restored to that measure, through the second Adam 
without will or choice of theirs. It was for this purpose that "He 
by the grace of God should taste death for every man." Heb. 2:9. 
And God commendeth his love toward us, in that while we were 
yet sinners Christ died for us. Yes "WHEN we were enemies we 
were reconciled to God by the death of his son." Rom. 5:8-10. 

But does some one say, very well, but Paul says here of the 
gospel, that it is the power of God unto salvation to every one 
that believeth? 

Ah, but brother, now you are reaching that point in the mind and 
teaching of the apostle in which is embraced another rank or 
"order:" the power of God UNTO; we do not imagine that the 
power of God is staid at all when man is brought back to the 
Adamic condition, that is, to a reconciled condition; he lost that 
life without previously knowing the nature of sin or death; true, 
God told him, but like children without experience, they 
disobeyed, and his posterity die for it, or because of it; whether 
they sin or not they all go down in death because of the sin of 



Adam which "taints us all," and come up because of the 
righteousness of Christ that restores us all. We die on Adam's 
account, and live again on Christ's account. Now brought back 
to the Adamic condition we are reconciled to God. Well, is there 
anything more for us? Yes, hear the apostle again, "Much more 
being reconciled we shall be saved by his life." 10th verse. 
What! Saved more? Yes, much more by the power of God unto 
salvation. Will all men be saved much more? We are sorry to 
part company with any, but though this is a blessed restored 
condition, yet we shall have to leave on this plane those who do 
not believe, for this much more salvation is to every one that 
believeth. Now my Calvinistic and Arminian brothers stand by 
and see the beauty of those texts which you have had to stretch 
and twist so. You need not stretch them now; they are all right 
and true. "Whom he did foreknow" would be fitted by desire, 
and faith, and continuance in well doing, each and severally for 
the different orders, "He predestinated" them to, and so this 
gospel, GOOD news is the power of God unto salvation to every 
one that believeth; to the Jew first and also to the Greek." Why 
to the Jew first? ("He is not a Jew which is one outwardly," "but 
he is a Jew which is one inwardly." Rom. 2:28-29), because he 
believes first, here, in time to reach the great salvation. Dear 
brethren, let us desire more, study God's word more, believe 
more, and have the "much more" salvation. "Eye hath not seen 
nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the 
things which God hath prepared for them that love him. But God 
hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit, for the Spirit searcheth 
all things, yea the deep things of God." 1 Cor. 2:9-10. 

J. C. S. 



R222 : page 4 

SUNTELIA, THERISMOS, PAROUSIA. 

Though Greek, like English words, have different meanings; the 
Bible student frequently finds it extremely interesting to learn 
that many Greek words were used by Christ and the Apostles 
with a certain and fixed signification. The literal rendering of the 
three words above, is end, harvest, and presence respectively; 
and we would briefly call attention to them, 

R223 : page 4 

as they are intensely interesting terms to us, who believe that 
they all are used with reference to the period of time, in which 
we are living. 

Suntelia, end occurs six times; once in Heb. 9:26. "But now 
once in the Suntelia (end) of the aionon (ages) hath he (Jesus) 
appeared to put away sin, by the sacrifice of himself." 



In the other five cases, it has reference to the end of the gospel 
age; as can be seen by reading Matt. 13:39,40,49; 24:3; and 
28:20. 

The harvest is the end of the age, and Matt. 13:30, gives us to 
understand that it is a space of time, in which a work is to be 
done. 

Therismos (reaping harvest) occurs thirteen times; Matt. 
9:37,38; 13:30,39; Mark 4:29; Luke 10:2; John 4:35, and Rev. 
14:15. 

It will be noticed that it refers to the gospel harvest four times; 
Rev. 14 speaking of the two facts, that for the little flock and 
afterward for the great multitude. The Heb. qatsir is the 
equivalent of Therismos; and Joel 3:18, and onward, refers to 
the same harvest mentioned in Rev. 14, though perhaps first to 
the Jewish harvest. 

Parousia, signifies presence, invariably. Liddell and Scott, 
standard authority, give it that signification; and Young's 
Analytical Concordance renders it the same. Whedon's 
Commentary, page 277 says: "The word Parousia, never in the 
whole New Testament, signifies anything else." It never means 
the act of coming, but presence. It is twenty times improperly 
translated coming, in the common version; in fourteen cases, at 
least, when referring to the presence of Christ at the end of the 
age. We give the passages in which it occurs. Matt. 
24:3,27,37,39; 1 Cor. 15:23; 1 Thess. 2:19; 3:13; 4:15; 5:23; 2 
Thess. 2:1,8,9; James 5:7,8; 2 Pet. 1:16; 3:4; 1 John 1:28. The 
question, Matt. 24:3, is: What will be the sign of thy Parousia 
(presence) and the Suntelia (end) of the aion (age)? And we 
must believe that the answer had direct reference to the question. 
He not only gave a series of events which would precede his 
presence; but also events or signs which would be due, during 
the presence, as will be noticed by those who will read carefully 
the passages indicated above; and it would seem that all might 
see that not alone the passages involved in the answer to the 
question; but all the others, where parousia occurs, appeal, like 
everything else in the gospel, to the "eyes of the understanding," 
(Eph. 1:18,) rather than to the natural eyes, as has been so many 
times shown. The Therismos (harvest) is the Suntelia (end) of 
the age; and the Parousia (presence) is in the Suntelia (end) of 
the age; and the evidence seems conclusive that it is the same 
Suntelia in both cases; not one preceding the other; the evidence 
is so abundant and clear, that we must believe it until compelled 
by facts, not by any amount of scoffing, to discard the position. 
The same evidence which caused us to believe in the one, made 
us believe in the other; and any one who doubts that we are 
living in the time of the Parousia, ought to be consistent, to 
question the Therismos (harvest) also. The work of separation 
due to be done in the first part of the harvest, has evidently been 
going on, and is about complete. What was the special prophetic 



argument which proved the harvest and presence to begin in the 
autumn of 1 874? The Jubilee, we answer. The writer has been 
studying the time question since 1867, and has been associated 
with the movement in connection with the fulfillment of all the 
prophetic measurements since the above date; and still accepts 
all the legitimate conclusions to be drawn from them, as he 
understands them. 

Those who would study the Jubilee argument, will find it in the 
"Day Dawn." It is not the design to give it in this connection; 
but we reiterate that it was the main argument used to prove that 
we had come to the "harvest" or end of the age. The 1335 days 
of Dan. 12 were prolonged to their utmost, to harmonize with 
this. We would recommend all who are interested, to carefully 
study all the arguments; and caution all not to be ready to give 
up old "land marks" too easily; and to be careful lest haply you 
may be found among those referred to in 2 Pet. 3:4. 

We would suggest that those who have never had the "eyes of 
the understanding enlightened" on the subject, as well as those 
who once understood, but have gone out into darkness in regard 
to it, do not comprehend the presence. Whatever others have 
thought, or may now think, the writer has never believed nor 
taught, that Christ was walking the earth during the period of his 
presence; it is called presence, because he has assumed a new 
character, to do a new work, superintending the harvest. The 
Son of Man sowed the seed (Matt. 13:37), and he sends forth the 
reapers. Vs. 41. He employs agents in both sowing and reaping; 
yet it can be said that he does both, and during this period of 
reaping, he has appeared especially near to those who have 
understood it, and they have enjoyed the time of his Parousia. 
Some who once expressed the same enjoyment of it, are now 
asking: Where is the evidence promise: if not fulfilling the other 
part of Peter's prediction? Those who understand the teaching of 
the Law in regard to "the day of atonement," (Lev. 16) we think, 
will not expect to see Christ in the flesh, nor while they are in 
the flesh. If our understanding of the prophetic arguments be 
correct, we are nearing the close of that part of the harvest which 
pertains to the little flock. If there shall be found any mistake 
about what may be expected here, we know that the conditions, 
upon which we may attain to the Brideship are not affected: We 
must count ourselves dead indeed unto sin, Satan, self and the 
world, and alive unto God. 

B. W. K. 



R285 : page 4 

NOTWITHSTANDING the distress of that country, the Roman 
Catholic bishops of Ireland, in a recent audience with the Pope, 
presented him with a purse of over $40,000. 



R223 : page 5 



THE YEAR 1881. 



This year would be indeed a notable one, if the predictions and 
expectations of all men could be realized. "Second Adventists," 
whose applications of the prophetic periods (The "2300 days," 
the "1335 days" and the "1260 days,") have all run out, and who 
because they are looking for Jesus to again become a man and 
appear to them in the flesh, cannot discern that he is now present 
a spiritual being. They have not "the eyes of their 
understanding" opened, else they could realize that those 
prophetic periods were fulfilled and the "harvest" of the age has 
come~"the day of the Lord." 

With only a little spiritual discernment they might see the 
harvest work in progress-the ripened grains of wheat being 
separated from the "Babylon" mixture. But they see not: they, as 
well as the church in general stand in the same relation to the 
second advent that the nominal Jewish church did to the first 
advent. Jesus was then present, but they could not believe it— 
"they knew not the time of their visitation." Only "Israelites 
indeed in whom was no guile," then received him and believed 
on him, and the others "stumbled" -Thus the separating of that 
harvest was accomplished. 

And now, how fully we seem to have the parallel here. This 
movement based upon the statements of the prophets, claims 
that the Lord is present- that those prophetic periods did not fail 
of fulfillment, and some of the best and holiest people of all 
denominations are coming to a realization of these truths. 

They find spiritual food for which they have long been 
hungering; they come to the enjoyment of the liberty wherein 
we stand and rejoice, knowing no name but that of our 
Bridegroom, and recognizing each other only by the spirit of 
Christ; needing not the shackles of creeds to unite, since the 
only bonds of union are the bonds of love and of the Spirit. 

Yes, the sifting work goes on, and serves to prove every man, 
whether he loves truth and liberty, or error and bondage; let each 
one take his choice. The bondage is the most honorable and 
brings the approval of the highly respected among men, while to 
step out, brings much the same results as at the first advent. 
Then the frown and displeasure of the Chief Priests and 
Pharisees— the church— came upon all who received the words 
of the Master, and their names were cast out as evil. That was 
the test by which it was ascertained, who were "Israelites 
indeed"-so now the same class are being gathered in much the 
same way. 



"The Second Advent Church" people, and many in other 
denominations, interested in the Lord's coming and expecting 
him in the flesh, have turned their attention to 1881, and feel 
confident that they will see Jesus with their natural eyes this 
year. Their hopes are based partly upon an old rhyme called 
"Mother Shipton's prophecy," which concludes thus: 

The world unto an end will come, 
In eighteen hundred and eighty-one. 

and partly upon the teachings of "The Great Pyramid" of Egypt, 
whose "Grand gallery" measures 1881 pyramid inches. This 
"Grand gallery" is supposed to symbolize the gospel 
dispensation, and its 1881 inches are supposed to teach that the 
gospel dispensation will be 1881 years long, and a further reason 
for belief in 1881, is that so many other people are expecting 
something. (Not a prophetic period, can be claimed, as they are 
all past.) Now to us, these things seem a poor and weak 
foundation for the hopes built upon them. Our belief that the 
Lord is present, is based on the "more sure word of prophecy" to 
which Peter said, we would do well to take heed. 

The interest felt and expressed relative to this year by most of 
those 

R224 : page 5 

interested in the Lord's coming, and the fact that we expect 
SOMETHING, has perhaps led some people, who do not 
understand our position, to suppose that we are looking for 
much the same things as others. We would like to correct this 
misapprehension once for all, by stating that we do not expect 
Jesus to come this year, nor any other year, for we believe that 
all time prophecies (bearing upon Jesus' coming) ended at and 
before the fall of 1874, and that He came there, and the second 
advent is now in progress and will continue during the entire 
Millennial age. We believe that his presence will be revealed to 
the eyes of men's understandings gradually, during this "Day of 
the Lord," (forty years-from 1874 to 1914,) as it now is to ours; 
except that we, discern it through the word of prophecy revealed 
by the Spirit, and they will recognize his presence by His 
judgments upon Nominal Zion, and the World- for the Father 
"hath committed all judgment unto the Son." 

The WATCH TOWER never claimed that the body of Christ 
will be changed to spiritual beings during this year. There is 
such a change due sometime. We have not attempted to say 
when, but have repeatedly said that it could not take place 
before the fall of 1881. 

Now let us state briefly what we do expect in the fall of this year 
and why. We find that the entire Jewish age was a prophetic 
"shadow" of this Gospel Age in every respect: Its Israel and his 
twelve sons, a shadow of the true Israel of God (Jesus) and his 



twelve disciples; their sacrifices, typical of the "better sacrifices" 
for sin, offered during this age; the length of their age the same 
as ours; the end of their age "a harvest" the same as ours: Jesus 
present as the Reaper in their harvest as in ours. The unexpected 
manner of his coming caused him to be "a stone of stumbling" 
to the nominal church there, and it is proving the same here: He 
is to be "a stone of stumbling and rock of offense to both the 
houses of Israel." Isa. 8:14. (The nominal house of servants, of 
which Moses was the head, and the nominal house of sons, of 
which Christ is the head. Heb. 3:5-6). The harvest of the Jewish 
house was of two parts, viz: Seven years of favor to the church, 
and thirty-three years of wrath and trouble upon the then 
rejected and desolate one, from which the wheat was gathered. 
These parallels being prophetic and in harmony with the 
prophecies already fulfilled, give reason for believing that the 
harvest to this age which began in 1 874, will be like the shadow, 
viz: Seven years of favor to the church, to be followed by thirty- 
three years of falling and destruction upon the "Babylon" 
company which will completely separate all grains of wheat 
from tares. 

The seven years of favor to the church, commencing with 1874, 
will end in 1881 -about the 2nd of October. Now what special 
favor did the church enjoy during these seven years? We can get 
an answer best by looking at the prophetic shadow- What favor 
did fleshly Israel enjoy during the seventieth week? Jesus was 
present- "He came to his own, and his own received him not"- 
yet it was a favor to have the offer, even though the nominal 
church rejected him. This special part of the work, offering 
himself to the nominal house, lasted three and one-half years 
(until five days before his death) when He addressed them, 
saying, "How often would I have gathered you as a hen 
gathereth her brood under her wings, but ye would not: Behold 
your house (the nominal church) is left unto you desolate. " 
(Matt. 23:38.) Yet for the remainder of their covenant week 
(three and one-half years) he showed them favor. It was not in 
the same way-it was no longer an appeal to the nominal house 
"left desolate," but to the pure and true individuals in that house 
to come out of it. (The preaching of the gospel by apostles was 
confined to Jews, for three and one-half years after Pentecost). 
The gospel call was to come out on the Lord's side, separate 
from Judaism, and "stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ 
hath made you free. " 

Now what would be the parallel, or meaning of this prophetic 
"shadow" here? We answer that during the three and one-half 
years from 1874 the proclamation of Jesus, the present 
Bridegroom was made to the church as a whole, that the spirit 
addressed nominal Zion as a whole, saying: "I counsel thee buy 
of me gold tried in the fire, and white raiment,... as many as I 
love I rebuke and chasten: be zealous therefore and repent. 
Behold I stand at the door and knock." (Rev. 3:18). 



But they heeded not his presence and call, as the "shadow" 
showed they would not, (the "Doctors of Divinity" mostly 
opposing it, as the "Doctors of the Law" had done in the 
"shadow"). After three and one-half years (in 1878) he rejected 
or left desolate the nominal church here, as he had done in the 
"shadow," saying, "Because thou are neither cold nor hot I will 
spew thee out of my mouth." (Rev. 3:16). The Jewish church 
was God's mouthpiece until "left desolate," but from that time 
forward God's truth came through another channel. So here the 
gospel church has been God's recognized channel of truth, or 
mouthpiece, but are such, we believe, no longer. Truth will now 
come through other channels. 

Since 1878 (and never before that) we have felt at liberty to call 
God's children out of the nominal churches to a position of 
freedom and liberty, where they would be free to serve Him 
fully, as well as to study his word and be taught of Him: saying, 
"Babylon... is fallen and become the habitation of devils and a 
hold of every foul spirit and a cage of every unclean and hateful 
bird." (This falling of the nominal church and receiving into her 
bosom the corruptions of earth has been in process for some 
time). Now comes the message: "And I heard another voice 
saying, Come out of her my people that ye be not partakers of 
her sins and receive not of her plagues." (Rev. 18:2-4). The 
favor of the present (and which we believe will end in October, 
1881) is not to the nominal church but to individuals in her, that 
they may come out and receive the present Lord. He says: "If 
any man (not church) hear my voice, and open the door I will 
come in to him and will sup with him and he with me." (Rev. 
3:20). 

We have no desire to dogmatize nor to keep any one out, but we 
believe (and therefore speak) that the favor which ends this fall, 
is that of entering the Bride company. We believe the door of 
favor is now open and any who consecrate all and give up all, 
can come in to the wedding and become members of the Bride, 
but that with this year the company will be reckoned complete 
and the door to that high calling (not the door of mercy) closed 
forever. 

In one of His parables pointing to the end of this age Jesus says, 
"The Bridegroom came and they that were ready, went in with 
him to the marriage and the door was shut." (Matt. 25:10). Our 
understanding of this is, that the Bridegroom came in 1 874 and 
since then the ready (consecrated) ones have been going into a 
condition of light with reference to his presence, and preparation 
for marriage, and that this fall, the door of opportunity to join 
this company will close. 

Another of Jesus' discourses seems to bear upon this point-He 
said: (Luke 13:24) "Strive to enter in at the straight gate; for 
many I say unto you will seek to enter in, and will not be able, 
when once the Master of the house (church) is risen up and hath 



shut to the door (to the "Narrow way"~see supplement tract No. 
5), and ye begin to stand without and to knock at the door, 
saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us; (Let us also become a part of 
your Bride.) And he shall answer and say unto you, I know you 
not, whence ye are." (I do not recognize you as the ones I 
promised to make my Bride—she has come in). 

What may be the outward indication that the door is shut, we 
know not, but will expect to see some evidence of it. 

Now, it was on the strength of this prophetic "shadow" which 
shows that the "door" would not close until this fall, that we 
said, the living would not be changed before that time. As to 
when our change is due we can only say: To our understanding 
it will be due at any time after October 2nd, 1881, but we know 
of no scriptural evidence as to what time we will be changed 
from natural to spiritual, from mortal to immortal. We have the 
testimony that we shall "execute the judgments written" (seven 
last plagues) and we expect our change before those last plagues 
begin. We should be glad to go sooner if it were the 
Bridegroom's will, but we will be equally glad to remain here in 
earthly conditions if it is His will. 

Our expectations then, relative to this year, are very different 
from those of others interested in it. As to "Mother Shipton's 
prophecy" we of course give no heed to such "old wives' fables." 
But the teachings of 

THE GREAT PYRAMID 

are quite different. We have great respect for it, though we do 
not build our faith upon it. It has well been called "A Miracle in 
Stone," and it commends itself to us as a work of God, and not 
planned by men, for it seems in every respect to be in perfect 
accord with God's plan as we are finding it written in His Word; 
and this it is, that causes our respect for it. 

It has an entrance passage downward to a pit representing the 
"broad road to destruction." From this a passage starts upward- 
representing the Law dispensation. This in due time enlarges 
and becomes a "grand gallery," seven times as high, still leading 
upward, representing the Gospel Age. Thirty-three inches from 
the beginning of the grand gallery 

R224 : page 6 

is a well, representing the death and resurrection of Jesus. From 
this well there is another downward passage-way which 
connects with the entrance passage near the pit, and seems to 
teach the restoration of all 

R225 : page 6 

men from the "horrible pit" of death, through and on account of 
Jesus' death. 



The "grand gallery" measures 1874 inches long at the top, 1878 
inches long at a groove cut in its sides about midway between 
bottom and top and 1881 inches, at the bottom. (The upper end 
wall impends or slants forward). 

Now notice how aptly these three distinct dates (1874, 1878, 
1881,) are marked by the pyramid, in ending the grand gallery, 
and see how ably it supports the teaching of the Bible, viz: that 
the gospel favors and privileges have been ending during these 
seven years~and will entirely cease this year. 

Two other ways, in which the Pyramid corroborates scripture, 
are these: At the top of the "grand gallery"— just where it 
measures 1 874 inches, there is an opening or passage-way 
which seems to say, something might go out or come in here. 
For some time we thought this might represent the "change," or 
catching away of the church as spiritual beings; but it would 
have been due in 1 874 and no translation took place; then it 
must mean something else. It seems very plain and clear to us 
now that that opening can mean nothing else than what the 
Prophets have taught us, viz: that there the Bridegroom came a 
spiritual being. It fits, as all the other parts of that wonderful 
structure fit and harmonize with the Word. 

Secondly, we are claiming that our Lord's presence here, is to be 
to many in the nominal church "a stone of stumbling," and this 
too finds its illustration in the Pyramid, for at the upper end of 
the "Grand gallery" a huge block of stone juts out into the 
pathway and further progress becomes impossible, unless the 
traveler climbs with difficulty to its level. So we find it; many 
are stumbling, and the progress of all seems to depend on their 
recognizing the present one. 

IF I WERE SURE. 

There seems to be a disposition on the part of some to say-now 
if you could only assure me positively that we will be changed 
this fall, I should be willing to endure anything: I could then 
take up any cross, deny myself, and do God's will only. 

Now dear brother, sister, this is not the right way; it is not the 
correct thought: God called you to the "high calling" on 
condition, not that you would do his will and not your own, for a 
few months only, but for all eternity. And this you promised to 
do, did you not? Well, if so, what right have you to any will in 
the matter? Should you not the rather say, "Not my will, but 
thine be done?" His will regarding our present life and its 
circumstances-its joys and its sorrows and its labors; and His 
will as to the time the present kind of labor in His service shall 
give place to the more perfect service, when we shall be 
"changed" into likeness of Him who is the express image of the 
Father's person. 



The Lord's grace (favor) he says, "is sufficient" for us and we 
should ask no more. It has proved sufficient in the past and we 
trust Him for the future. He gives his favor-gives us strength by 
showing us more and more of his plan and our part in it, etc., 
and how much in this way we have enjoyed during the past three 
years, especially our daily feasting on the heavenly food. I trust 
we all feel stronger spiritually than ever before. If any do not, let 
them fear that they are not walking up to the light, in the full 
consecration of their all. 

But does some one say: I would consecrate all-my means, my 
time, my talents, and my reputation, if I knew surely that I 
would get the prize; but I fear to lose my little stock of earthly 
treasure and perhaps not be accounted worthy of a place in the 
Bride company? To such we say, "Oh thou of little faith, 
wherefore didst thou doubt?" "Faithful is he that calleth you, 
who also will do it." (Will keep his promise.) 1 Thes. 5:24. We 
are absolutely sure of obtaining what God, who cannot lie, hath 
promised, if we do sacrifice all. The very object of the present 
age is to develop from among others those who will- 

"Trust in His unchanging grace." 

If you think the prize too dear- not worth your little all, don't 
exchange; but if you see it to be worth a million times what you 
are asked to give for it, sell "all that you have and purchase it." 
If our understanding of the matter be correct, the opportunity for 
making this exchange which is so favorable to us, will end with 
this fall. 

Those who do not exchange, will soon have reason to regret it, 
as they will find their all melting from their grasp during the 
time of trouble. Those who come knocking afterward, desiring 
admittance would apparently be glad then to give all for an 
opportunity to enter, but it will be too late "when once the 
Master... hath shut to the door." Luke 13:25. 

Just what we should look for from October 1881 onward we can 
scarcely say, but expect that as these seven years of the harvest 
(which altogether is forty years) have been a time of favor to the 
church, the succeeding years will show a lack of favor, and that 
consequently the nominal church will rapidly fall to pieces, and 
as a consequence, many who have heard of these things but 
dared not brave the frown of a popular and flourishing church 
organization, will then be set free and begin to knock and 
inquire. But while we shall be glad to greet them and to help 
them in every way in our power, we believe that they will not be 
recognized of the Lord as a part of the Bride. It is not for us to 
judge, however; we understand this to be the teaching of His 
word, but will wait for him to tell them that they are a part of the 
"great company" and not of the "little flock" to whom "it is the 
Father's good pleasure to give... the kingdom." 



In different churches there are dear saints of God-consecrated 
to Him- sanctified yet ignorant of his presence, the harvest, etc. 
They are out of harmony with the spirit of the world, and the 
money influence which rules the church, but do not yet hear the 
voice of the Lord saying, "Come out of her my people that ye be 
not partakers of her sins and receive not of her plagues." Such 
will, we believe, be brought to recognize the Lord's presence, 
and that the "harvest" or separating time has come, before the 
door closes and it will test their consecration, and all who are 
fully consecrated will follow the voice of the Shepherd and 
come out. 

To those who are seeking to sacrifice all, we would suggest that 
the spreading of this light and these truths which God has given 
us, is the important work of these times. When God gives light it 
is not to be put under a bushel—not to be hid in your own heart 
for fear, or for any other cause; it is given you that you may let it 
shine. Now, "pray ye the Lord of the harvest that he will send 
forth laborers into his harvest" -pray him to send you to tell the 
glad and cheering tidings to others of his dear ones who as yet 
know it not. Then realizing that he heareth us and is willing to 
let us do our little part with him, go forward day by day doing 
with your might what your hand finds to do, and you will 
doubtless find your prayer richly and abundantly answered. 

Thus while looking forward to the future glory, you will also 
enjoy present privileges of suffering and self-denial as a member 
of His body, for other fellow members. O, how much work there 
is in this direction, how much opportunity for all who will lay 
aside all unnecessary earthly hindrances. 



R225 : page 6 

OUR PASSOVER 

Our celebration of the death of "Christ our Passover" on its 
anniversary, the 14th of April, announced in last paper, was, as 
the occasion has always been, a "blessed season:" a time for 
remembering our Lord's agony for our sins, and also of our 
"redemption through His blood. " As we looked at the 
acceptableness of our ransom we realized the completeness of 
our forgiveness, and said with Paul: If God be for us who can be 
against us? He that spared not his own Son but delivered him up 
for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all 
things? Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect? It is 
God that justifieth. [God by his own arrangement has purged us 
of sin— who shall say it was not fully and properly done?] Who 
is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died. [Who says we are 
yet sinners? Let him remember who it was that paid our debt-it 
was Christ, and surely his was an acceptable sacrifice.] (Rom. 
8:31-34.) 



Seeing our justification, we reflected on what Paul said to all 
justified persons: "I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God 
[His daily mercies and especially his mercy in providing Jesus 
as your ransom and thus justifying you] that ye present your 
bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, your 
reasonable service." We looked at the significance of the 
memorials of his death which Jesus had provided-the bread and 
the wine-and found that they taught the same lesson- 
consecration and sacrifice. First the body was broken and the 
blood shed for our sin— to justify us-then the bread (truth-"I am 
the truth") is offered us to give strength for the sacrifice which 
we are asked to make. God first gives the exceeding great and 
precious promises of becoming joint heirs with Jesus Christ our 
Lord to the "Divine nature" and kingdom, and then tells us how 
we may claim and attain those promises, viz: "If so be that we 
suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together." Rom. 
8:17. This is all expressed 

R226 : page 6 

in the symbol, as Jesus first handed the "bread," and after supper 
the "cup" (wine), so during this age to all that come to him as 
disciples he offers first the nourishment and preparation of truth, 
and when they have eaten it and discerned the prize of their high 
calling, he offers them the cup of-death. Wine is a symbol of 
two things— first, in appearance it is like blood, and is called "the 
blood of grapes," in this way it symbolizes death; second, it 
symbolizes the spirit, the effect being to cheer, refresh and 
enliven. 

When we have been enlightened and strengthened by the 
heavenly food, Jesus passes us each the cup, saying, "Drink ye 
all of it"— drink unto my death-take up your cross and follow 
me, and at the same time you will be drinking unto my spirit and 
have a joy and refreshing which the world can neither give nor 
take away-and finally with me, inherit all things. 

We remembered that we had been thus fed and strengthened by 
God's promises, and had already covenanted to drink of his cup 
and become dead with him if we might "reign in life" with him. 

We remembered the two disciples who had asked Jesus about 
their positions in his throne, to whom he answered, "Ye know 
not what ye ask. Are you able to drink of the cup that I shall 
drink of, [death- "Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from 
me."] and to be baptized with the baptism that I shall be 
baptized with"-death? ["I have a baptism to be baptized with"- 
water was its symbol- "and how am I straightened until it be 
accomplished."] The disciples answered him, "We are able," and 
he said "Ye shall indeed." So we have been begotten to the hope 
of sitting with him in his throne, and how his words apply to us: 
"Are you able to drink of my cup?" We asked ourselves, are we 
willing to share the sufferings as well as the glory? Then we 



said-Lord by thy word we know that we may have "Grace to 
help in time of need;" and that "Thy grace is sufficient for us." 
We have given our all to Thee- "Work in us both to will and to 
do of thy good pleasure." Thus having his strength made perfect 
in our weakness— we are able. Amen. 

Brother A. D. Jones reports a very interesting and profitable 
meeting at Newark, New Jersey, among the friends there and 
some from neighboring towns, with whom he celebrated "Our 
Passover "-between fifty and sixty taking part. 

A number of letters received seem to indicate that the occasion 
was very generally celebrated among the scattered "twos and 
threes" "of this way." We presume that it was celebrated in 
about twenty places. All who wrote expressed the feeling of 
solemnity and appropriateness, attaching to the celebration on 
the anniversary, rather than at any other time. 

One or two brethren questioned the date announced-suggesting 
that by the almanac it would fall on the 12th instead of the 14th 
of April. To these we reply that the calendars in most almanacs 
are arranged upon astronomical calculations and are seldom 
exactly in harmony with the Jewish methods, which seem to be 
based on the eyesight. Some almanacs publish the Jewish 
calendar, and we used it in ascertaining when the "14th day of 
the first month," Jewish time, would come. 

The moon is used to symbolize The Law or Jewish nation, 
which reached its full at the time of Jesus' presence, but began to 
wane when he gave them up and died. The moon was at its full 
on the 14th of April and began to wane; this seems to agree with 
the Jewish calendars and therefore we observed that time. 

One sister wrote expressing disapproval, and asks, Why not go 
back to the Law in everything as well as 

R226 : page 7 

in keeping the Passover? Our sister is in haste; we did not 
suggest the observance of the Passover as instituted by The Law, 
but the observance of "The Lord's Supper" instead of it. Nor did 
we suggest this as a law, believing that "Christ is the end of the 
Law for righteousness to every one that believeth." (Rom. 10:4, 
and 7:6). But who will say that we may not celebrate the death 
of our Lamb on the anniversary, for, "as often as ye do this, ye 
do show forth the Lord's death." 



R226 : page 7 



"PINK COTTAGE" FAITH CURE. 

We are in receipt of information relative to some remarkable 
cures being performed in answer to prayers of faith in different 
sections of the country, among others, one recently received 



refers to several such cures at "Pink Cottage" Faith Cure. The 
writer (a brother) inquires our view of these cures— are they of 
God, or by Satan's power? We answer: "He that hath the power 
of death, that is the devil," very seldom uses it to restore life and 
health, and never, we think, in answer to the earnest prayers of 
God's children. Unquestionably then we would regard every 
case of curing in which the instruments are the prayers of saints, 
as being of God. 

Many have been led to question whether the power were of God, 
because many of those thus used are wonderfully in the dark 
regarding God's plan, the time of "harvest" and the presence of 
the Lord, but to thus judge would be much like the disciples, 
who said to Jesus: "We found one casting out devils in thy name 
and we forbade him because he followed not with us." But Jesus 
answered them, "Forbid him not, for he that is not against us is 
for us." Luke 9:50. 

We must learn that in the school of Christ, there are various 
classes, and the exercises and instruction of each is under the 
direction of the principal teacher, Christ, who will lead each 
class as it may be able and willing to advance. 

Seeing these classes we should earnestly desire the best gifts— 
the higher class, for though it be honorable to be used of the 
Lord in opening blind natural eyes, it is more honorable to be 
used in giving the spiritual sight and insight into God's word and 
plan and love. It is grand indeed to be an instrument in restoring 
and perfecting the old human body, but it is yet more grand to 
be used in building up and perfecting the new nature- showing 
them how they may sacrifice the human and obtain a divine 
nature and form. Both branches of service are well pleasing to 
God. Choose which you think the "most excellent," but "forbid 
no man because he follows not with us." 

It is a little remarkable that very few of those who are used thus 
of the Lord in physical healing, are in any way identified with 
the nominal church; and they are generally out of all harmony 
and sympathy with its degenerated worldliness and 
faithlessness. 

In this connection we might add that we have been agreeably 
surprised within the last six months to learn by meeting with 
some, and hearing from others, that in many cities and towns 
little companies of men and women meet regularly for the study 
of God's word. Though not so fully instructed in the plan of God 
and the times in which we live and the "harvest" separating, as 
we are, yet they have felt the cold deadness of the nominal 
church; they have felt that in it they were starving for "meat in 
due season," while the under shepherds acted like hirelings 
whose own the sheep are not, and preached to the "itching ears" 
of largely unconverted congregations. 



These sheep are gathering in little bands to have the "chief 
Shepherd" himself feed them. Thus already consecrated and 
following his leadings, they are already out of Babylon and in 
this respect are in advance of some who have had more 
knowledge. These, so far as we have met them, seemed prepared 
for the very things we had to present-the presence of the Reaper 
and the "harvest" work of separation now going on. Among such 
we are finding many of the faith-prayer-cure people. 

In this connection, we are reminded of the prophecy by Joel 
which Peter quoted at Pentecost, viz: "It shall come to pass in 
the last days saith God, I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh: 
and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your 
young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream 
dreams: And on my servants and on my handmaidens I will pour 
out in those days of my Spirit and they shall prophesy." 

Few perhaps have noted the double character of this prophecy, 
that one part relates to the servants and handmaidens [The literal 
rendering of the Greek here would be male and female slaves- 
bounden persons -those who are bound to the Lord by a 
covenant.] and the other part of the same prophecy relates to all 
flesh: and again, one part is to take place in certain days [Gospel 
days] and the other part is to be fulfilled after those days. 

By referring to the prophecy (Joel 2:28,29) you will see this 
distinction much more clearly. This prophecy began to have its 
fulfillment at Pentecost, where the servants and handmaids 
began to prophesy (or instruct) and all through this age it has 
continued to be so, and those who partake of the Spirit of truth 
are particularly the channels through whom truth and knowledge 
flows. As Jesus had said: "When he the Spirit of truth is come he 
shall guide you into all truth." 

R227 : page 7 

A further part of it will not have its fulfillment until the little 
flock is complete-the sacrifice over and the full atonement price 
paid for all men. Then, the whole world of mankind will be no 
longer treated as sinners, but as forgiven human sons. [For 
remember that as the Bride of Adam was a sharer in the fall and 
curse, so the Bride of Christ is permitted to share in the 
redemption sacrifice, and blessing of all mankind.] 

God usually does things gradually and we regard these powers 
of faith now being given to some, as a sort of preparation for the 
giving of such power to any one and every one who will use it— 
"all flesh." 

We doubt not that in this way, or in some such way, the healing 
of human ills will be performed during the Millennial age; a way 
which would 

R227 : page 8 



seem too, to show God's special favor and power, and teach men 
to exercise faith in Him. 

The Spirit of God (God's power) operates differently at different 
times and for different works. Through the Prophets upon whom 
it came, its effects were to give utterance to truths not 
understood. During the Gospel Age, its object is to give us 
evidence through the Word, of our call to be spiritual beings like 
unto Christ's glorious body-to be his Bride; causing us to 
understand "what is the fellowship of the mystery which from 
the beginning of the world hath been hid;" (the sharing of the 
body with the Head both in the sufferings of this Gospel Age 
and also in the glory to follow)-- "This is a great mystery; but I 
speak concerning Christ and the church." Eph. 3:9, & 5:32. And 
when this mysterious work of the present age is ended and the 
Bride of Christ (and also the "great company"~"the virgins, her 
companions which follow her,") completed, then the Spirit is to 
do another and still different work. Being poured out "upon all 
flesh" it will lead the world to know of their justification as men; 
they shall dream dreams and see visions and prophesy (teach). 
They will come to understand the truths of God, and His plan 
concerning them—their restitution to the perfection of humanity. 
And as already suggested, we doubt not, that the healing of 
earth's woes and pains will then be done in answer to prayers of 
faith; thus tending to bring the world into union, harmony and 
love with their Creator. In this work of restoration, the Bride 
will have some important part-perhaps as yet, not fully 
understood-for the Spirit and the Bride will give the invitation 
to "come" and then they that hear will say "come," until all who 
will may come to the fountain of life and drink freely and 
forever of life to which they are justified by the death of Christ. 

We think then, that these healings are probably a beginning of 
the Millennial blessings to mankind, and that they will rather 
increase— that they will be mostly among the "poor of this world 
rich in faith," and probably after this fall, will only be granted 
through those who are outside of the nominal church; thus 
giving additional evidence that she is no longer recognized of 
God, and that those within her are "partakers of her sins" (Rev. 
18:4) and cannot please him. 



R227 : page 8 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

QUESTION. I was much interested in the article, "The 
Resurrection," in last paper, and would like to enquire -when 
we read of the resurrection of the Prophets and Saints and those 
that fear God's name small and great, (Rev. 11:18.) are we to 
conclude that these are the orders Paul mentions in 1 Cor. 15:23, 
"Every man in his own order "-or rank? If so, does the mention 



of the prophets first, imply that they constitute "The first 
resurrection?" 

ANSWER. No, the "first resurrection" is first in the sense of 
chief or principal and not because it precedes others. 

If it meant first in point of time then Jesus was not the beginning 
of the first resurrection (as declared, Acts 26:23.) for the 
prophets had raised the dead and so had Jesus. [Lazarus was 
dead for a longer time than Jesus]. But, none of these were 
raised spiritual bodies, Jesus being the first of that order and all 
others who are raised in his likeness-spiritual, immortal beings 
-are sharers in the chief-most excellent -or first resurrection. It 
does not follow then that because mentioned or raised first, that 
the prophets would be in the first resurrection. 

QUES. Bro. Russell: How do you interpret Phil. 4:3. "I entreat 
thee with me in the gospel... whose names are in the book of 
life." And Acts 1:14: "All continued with one accord in prayer 
and supplication with the women." And 1 Cor. 11:5: "Every 
woman that prayeth or prophesieth (teaches)?" 

ANS. We understand these scriptures to teach, that women did a 
work in the apostles' days which was approved and appreciated 
by them and by the Lord. Yet we believe that women usually 
spoke only at the smaller gatherings, and that when Paul said 
"Let the women keep silence in the [congregations,] he probably 
had reference to the public gatherings, at which it was the 
custom to have more or less of a debate. In these public 
debatings, Paul thought a woman's voice would be out of place, 
and this is the opinion of most thinking men and women to-day, 
though we think that it has by many been carried to an extreme, 
forbidding them to pray or teach on any occasion, even in more 
private assemblies of Christians, and this we regard as an error. 

God has arranged that the man and woman are representative of 
Christ and his Bride the church, and this rule by which the 
husband is the head of the wife is always maintained in 
scriptures. (Though there are exceptions to the rule in nature.) 
And probably this is one reason, that men have always been 
given the more active and public work of the ministry and 
women more the work of assisting and more private teaching, 
yet equally as acceptable to God. So Christ is the active agent in 
carrying out his own plan. He is the great minister of all, and we 
as His church do a lesser part and yet an acceptable part, well 
pleasing to God. 

QUES. Bro. Russell: Please explain 2 Cor. 6:17. 

ANS. Paul makes a quotation from the Old Testament to support 
his teaching of the preceding verses, that Christians should be 
separate from unbelievers. We are to be a temple of God; and 
what association is proper between God's Temple and Idols? 
None. The quotation is as follows: "I will dwell among them and 



walk among them, and I will be their God and they shall be to 
me a people-Depart from the midst of them and be ye 
separated, and touch not the impure; and I will receive you, and 
will be to you for a Father, and you shall be to me for sons and 
daughters, saith the Lord Almighty." 

In person we are to be separate from sin-pure-clean in mind 
(and in body, for cleanliness of person is almost always 
associated with purity of thought. Sometimes the impure within, 
will clothe and cleanse the outward form to purity; but the pure 
within, clothing the outward form in filth can scarce be 
imagined), and we are to live separate from sinners. (See 1 Cor. 
5:10.) 

But we think that the pith of the apostle's reasoning is directed 
against association with false religious systems. Paganism 
claimed to be a religion then, and there was danger that 
Christians should come to look with favor upon moral pagans 
and treat them as though they were Christians and thus 
countenance their evils. In a word, whatever God condemns and 
disapproves we are to condemn and discountenance both in 
word and in deed-not even to encourage or countenance with 
our presence. 

The circumstances are different now from then, here Paganism 
does not require resistance, but it has its equivalent in modern 
"Spiritualism," "Freelovism" and "Infidelity." And more 
dangerous because associated with more light, are the worldly 
practices and customs of the nominal church of Christ to-day, 
which constitute her the Babylon of God's word. As we have 
already seen there is a message to us, to leave Babylon and thus 
discountenance the worldly corruptions which have of late years 
been brought into God's Temple as idols to distract and divide 
the worshiper's attention. Therefore, "Come out of her my 
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins and receive not of her 
plagues." And this voice must be obeyed at any cost, or you 
become one of the idol worshipers. "What agreement hath the 
temple of God with idols?" 



R228 : page 8 

A MISAPPREHENSION. 

In our last paper we had an article headed "1,000 Preachers 
Wanted," which brought many good responses and we trust 
started some into the Vineyard who had been anxiously looking 
for some way in which they could give their time to teaching 
and preaching from house to house; making known to their 
fellow Christians "The good word of God," the gospel of which 
Paul was not ashamed. This was the meaning we wished to 



convey: if there are others such, we will be glad to hear from 
them and we continue to such the same offer. 

But some seem to have misapprehended us and thought we 
wanted everybody—regular canvassers and book agents, and 
called the attention of their friends to it as a nice chance to 
obtain some employment, etc. This is a misapprehension of our 
proposition. We want laborers (and so does the Lord) who will 
be working for heavenly wages, rather than for the price of a 
paper or book, be that ever so needful. No, we want those only 
who can explain the paper and book and plan, who as they go 
will preach, saying: "The kingdom of heaven is at hand, repent 
ye." (Matt. 3:2). 



R227 : page 8 

DR. CHALMERS beautifully said: "The little I have seen in the 
world and known of the history of mankind, teaches me to look 
at their errors in sorrow, and not in anger. When I take the 
history of one poor heart, that has sinned and suffered, and 
represent to myself the struggles and temptations it has passed 
through- the brief pulsations of joy; the tears of regret; the 
feebleness of purpose; the scorn of the world that has little 
charity; the desolation of the soul's sanctuary, and threatening 
voices within; health gone; happiness gone -I would fain leave 
the erring soul of my fellow-man with him from whose hands it 
came. " 



R285 : page 8 

WHAT pleases only for the moment, whether poetry, or 
oratory, or policy, will die with the moment. What looks beyond 
the moment will live beyond the moment. What speaks to the 
intelligent few will at last make a conquest of the unintelligent 
many; what speaks only to the unintelligent many will never 
reach the intelligent few, and will soon be forgotten by the 
unintelligent many also. -Dean Stanley. 



R228 : page 8 

TRACT SUPPLEMENT NO. 5. 

THE NARROW WAY TO LIFE. 

This tract we hope will be acceptable to you all. We hope that 
its general distribution will be productive of good results and 
that it may be used of the Lord as an eye salve to many to enable 
them to see "the exceeding riches of His grace in His loving 
kindness toward us." 



And for you, brethren, we pray that the viewing of the narrow 
way to life, may bless you, and that "The Father of Glory may 
give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the 
knowledge of him (that) the eyes of your understanding being 
enlightened; ye may know, what is the hope of his calling; and 
what the riches of the glory of His inheritance in the Saints; and 
what is the exceeding greatness of his power to us." Eph. 1:17. 

We have quantities of this tract, and will try to supply all your 
demands. Order all you can use, and use all that you order. 

Tracts 6 and 7 are not yet published, but will be out soon. 

R228 : page 8 

EXHAUSTED. 

We published very large editions of Tracts 1,2,3, and 4, but not 
enough for the demand. The supply is about exhausted. We are 
having them prepared again however, and next time will issue 
them all together with some additional matter under one cover. 
But we cannot expect this before July or August. 



R285 : page 8 

LOVE to Christ smooths the path of duty, and wings the feet to 
travel it; it is the bow which impels the arrow of obedience; it is 
the mainspring moving the wheels of duty; it is the strong arm 
tugging the oar of diligence. Love is the marrow of the bones of 
fidelity, the blood in the veins of piety, the sinews of spiritual 
strength; yea, the life of sincere devotion. He that hath love can 
no more be motionless than the aspen in the gale, the sear leaf in 
the hurricane, or the spray in the tempest. As well may hearts 
cease to beat, as love to labor. Love is instinct with activity, it 
cannot be idle; it is full of energy, it cannot content itself with 
littles; it is the well-spring of heroism, and great deeds are the 
gushings of its fountain; it is a giant —it heapeth mountains upon 
mountains, and thinks the pile but little; it is a mighty mystery, 
for it changes bitter into sweet; it calls death life, and life death; 
and it makes pain less painful than enjoyment. -Spurgeon. 



R298 : page 8 

ROME AND JERUSALEM.-The Roman Church maintains a 
steady attention to the Holy Land. At Jattha they have erected a 
new hospital, they have established a branch nunnery at Ramleh, 
and a nunnery and schools at Bethlehem. It would appear that 
the Franciscans have a new establishment at Emmaus, in 
addition to the large hospice at Jerusalem. On the Mount of 
Olives a grand sanctuary and an extensive nunnery have been 
erected and endowed by the Princess de la Tour d'Auvergne, 



who, with great devotion, spent several years on the spot, in 
order personally to superintend the work. 



R281 : page 8 

THE block of granite which was an obstacle in the pathway of 
the weak, becomes a stepping-stone in the pathway of the 
strong. -Carlyle. 



R228 : page 1 

VOL. II. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., JUNE, 1881. 

NO. 12. 



pagel 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 

REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H. PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... BRADDOCK, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 

L. ALLEN, HONEOYE, N.Y. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN, . FT. EDWARD, N.Y. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance- 
includes postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R228 : page 1 

HE ON THE HOUSETOP. 

"In the day that the Son of man is revealed; in that day, he 
which shall be on the housetop and his stuff in the house, let him 
not come down to take it away; and he that is in the field, let 
him likewise not return back. Remember Lot's wife. Whosoever 
shall seek to save his life shall lose it, and whosoever shall lose 
his life shall preserve it." Luke 17:30-33. 

The description is relative to matters due to take place after the 
Lord has come. The six preceding verses explain how he will be 
present in his days as the lightning-invisible, its presence 
recognized only by the thunder and the flashes of light which 
come from it. Present while mankind will be eating, drinking, 
planting and building; present, but unrecognized; but not long 
will it be so; his presence will soon be made known; he will be 
revealed in this day so that all shall recognize his presence and 
power. 

First to recognize him will be the "little flock" soon to be made 
His Bride, otherwise called his friends, from whom he hides no 
good thing, but reveals to them all things and shows them not 
only things present but also "things to come." These will know 
first the blessed news of the presence of the heavenly 
Bridegroom; then by-and-by as the judgments begin to come, 
first on the nominal church and then on the world, all men will 
come to know of his presence, for He shall be "revealed in 
flaming fire." (Great and notable judgments.) We find from our 
lamp-God's word-that the Bridegroom has come, is now 
present, consequently the revealing of his presence has 
commenced; it is revealed to us through the "sure word of 
prophecy" and we do not wait to see in the light of flaming 
judgments. Seeing, then, that we are living in the day of 
revealing, it is due time that we should understand our text 
which treats of matters due to transpire here and now; let us 
therefore give heed to our text and obey its teachings. [Read it 
again.] 

We first inquire what house is referred to, and find that the 
nominal church is meant. There is a sense in which only the 
overcomers are spoken of as the house- "Christ as a son over his 
own house, whose house are we if we hold fast," etc. Again the 
Jewish Church and the entire nominal church of wheat and tares 
are called houses, and we read that Jesus shall be for "a stone of 
stumbling and rock of offence to both the houses of Israel." Isa. 
8:14. 

This is the house referred to in our text— the nominal Gospel 
house- which we elsewhere read is to stumble. They in the 
house are the members of the nominal household; they on the 
housetop represent those nearest heaven-the most devoted and 



consecrated ones-the jewels which the Lord says he will gather; 
"the stuff in the house" represents the individual interests 
centered in the organizations, such as honor, respect, family ties, 
friendships; these are valuables indeed; we all love these things, 
but the Lord says that in this day, as soon as we discern his 
presence we must flee and escape from the house-the house is 
stumbling and about to fall. A terrible gale is coming on; we 
know it is just at hand, for we see the flashes from the dark 
clouds of trouble which indicate the presence of him who is as 
the lightning. 

It is the same message which is put in other words in Rev. 18:2. 
"Babylon is fallen; come out of her, my people, that ye be not 
partakers of her sins and receive not of her plagues." But how 
loathe are the inmates to leave their old and comfortable home; 
they will not believe that their house can fall—these will not 
obey the voice; they will be buried in the ruins. "Woe unto them 
that are at ease in Zion." 

But there is another class which cries and laments for Zion's 
transgressions, who are not at ease. Some of these housetop 
saints hear and believe the call, but some stay and try to prop up 
the shaking house and hope against hope; some of them take the 
alarm and attempt to escape, but loving their stuff (goods) seek 
to take it with them; this involves delay, and is dangerous. It is 
this danger our Lord warns us against, saying: "Let him not go 
down to take it away. And let him that is in the field likewise not 
return back." Those who have got out of the house and are 
fleeing from the coming storm let them not think it a false alarm 
and return, for the destruction of the house (nominal church) 
lingers only until such sheep as hear the shepherd's voice, 
"Come out of her, my people," and are obedient, shall have had 
opportunity to escape; then will come the crash and fall. 

Now mark the illustration given: "Remember Lot's wife." In the 
days of Lot they of Sodom ate, drank, etc., as usual, but the 
same day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained fire and 
brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all. We all recall the 
story, how Lot was called out of Sodom before sunrise; how he 
endeavored to get his relatives, who were wedded to Sodomites, 
to flee with him; how his words seemed to them like idle tales; 
how even Lot and his family were so tedious that the angels laid 
hold of their hands and urged them out. They had hardly 
escaped when the destruction came upon the city. So here God 
pronounces certain judgments upon the world and on a worldly 
church. He tells his "friends" (represented by Abraham), who 
live separate from the world-from under the influence of 
Sodom, of what is coming upon Sodom, and delivers the class 
who have become almost overcharged with the cares of this life- 
-if they will hear his voice, obey and come out into separateness 
of life. 



But Jesus called special attention to Lot's wife, who, when on 
her way out, began to remember her goods, and slacked her pace 
for a moment to sorrowfully look back. Let us see the 
application of this to those who are now called in this day of the 
revealing of the present Lord to come out from the Gospel 
"house." He that loveth houses, or lands, or reputation, or 
relatives, or friends, more than the Bridegroom is not worthy to 
be of his Bride; let him stay with his stuff, and they will; but let 
each one who has consecrated all to the Lord remember that he 
has 

R229 : page 1 

nothing of his own, and let him leave all and obey the voice, 
"Come out of her." 

Here the test seems to be entire consecration; every interest of 
life and comfort draws and binds you to remain in the now 
condemned house. [We understand that the nominal church was 
given up in 1878, the exact parallel of time to the giving up of 
the Jewish house when Jesus said to them: "Your house is left 
unto you desolate;" as he now says to this house: "Because thou 
art neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out of my mouth; "--my 
word of truth and knowledge will no longer be uttered through 
you. We believe also, as previously shown that there are three 
and one-half years of favor to those in the house, during which 
the Lord is revealing his presence to the saints and calling on 
them to come out- that this three and one half years of 
individual favor ends with October of this year, and by that time 
"the voice of the Bride will be heard no more in the Babylon 
(confusion) house. Hence we would urge, Flee out of Sodom; 
"flee out of Babylon;" stay not in all the plain-leave the stuff - 
sacrifice it in obedience to the Lord's word. 

Yes, it will test you sorely— "every man's work shall be tried so 
as by fire." He that loveth his life, (honor, reputation, friends, 
etc.,) shall lose it, and he that sacrifices all these elements of the 
human nature, shall find that which God hath promised to the 
overcomers, viz: The crown of life"— immortality. 



R229 : page 1 

ONE SHALL BE TAKEN 
AND ANOTHER LEFT. 

Continuing the above discourse on the things due during the 
day of the revelation of his presence, Jesus says: "I tell you in 
that night (before the day has dawned yet a part of that day) 
there will be two in a bed; one will be taken and the other left. 
Two will be grinding together; the one will be taken and the 
other left." [Diaglott.] 



A bed is a place in which to rest; it is here used, we believe, to 
represent the resting place of the church~the belief or creed. The 
same bed is here referred to as that mentioned last month 
described in Isa. 28:20. The prophet is speaking of the stumbling 
of the church (v. 13) and of the flood of trouble coming upon 
them (v. 18), and says (see margin): "When the overflowing 
scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it; 
from the time that it goeth forth it shall take you (The trouble 
will commence with the church); for morning by morning shall 
it pass over, by day and by night (increasing like a flood of 
waters); and it shall be a vexation only until he shall make you 
to understand doctrine. [The church has largely substituted 
doctrines of men for those of God, and they will be vexed and 
perplexed by the spread of Infidelity, etc., until they come to 
understand God's word and plan. Then their perplexity and 
trouble will be at an end, for they will see 

R229 : page 2 

that the whole plan is working out gloriously to the praise of 
God and the good of his creatures.] For (the vexation is because) 
"the bed (creeds -belief) is shorter than that a man can stretch 
himself on it. " The creeds cramp any who have any degree of 
development. When we were babes we could rest in them, but 
by reason of growth in grace and knowledge some are coming to 
find themselves in a very uncomfortable place- no rest there 
now; it will be quite a relief to get out of such a bed. 

It is from this short bed that some will be taken in the day when 
the Son of man is present turning the light of truth upon error, 
and bringing to light all the hidden things of darkness. During 
this time before the sore vexation of the falling house comes, 
some will awaken and get out of such a short, uncomfortable 
man-made bed, into the liberty wherewith Christ hath made 
them free, and some will be left; some will be so short that they 
will feel no inconvenience, and others so sleepy and drowsy as 
to not notice the matter, and will so remain until the Gospel 
house, beds and all, become a mass of ruins; then these will 
"come out of great tribulation." 

"Two will be grinding together." Grinding is the preparing of 
food for the household— this, then, seems to refer specially to the 
teachers in the church; some of these will be taken and some 
left. 

The disciples inquired where they would be taken to, and Jesus 
answered: "Where the body is there will the eagles be 
assembled." The ones taken from the bed and from grinding are 
likened to eagles; they live high up above the world, in the 
mountains, far-seeing; having eyes adapted to looking at the 
light (How they represent the intelligently earnest Christians). 
What causes the assembling together of the eagles from various 
quarters? It is hunger, and because they see the prey-the food-a 



long way off —the food attracts them; they come to eat the 
carcass-the food. 

Now look at the wonderful figures Jesus has given us. First, he 
will be present invisibly, as the lightning, and men will eat, 
drink, and know not in the days of the Son of Man; second, in 
this day all that are on the house-top should escape before the 
storm destroys the house (nominal church) and injures many in 
it; third, in the night, before the day has fully come, some, both 
of grinders and of those not at ease in the short bed will escape; 
fourth, these thus attracted away, will be like eagles; fifth, the 
thing which takes them away is a desire for food; sixth, such as 
thus seek food find it and meet the others similarly hungry and 
feed together. 

How true this picture is; the church has more preaching and 
teaching and forms than it ever had, yet no food is found by the 
"eagle class "--the eagles are hungry, and it is their hunger which 
takes them away, and every such hungry one thus separated, the 
Lord will feed, and as they come to feed, they find others of 
"like precious faith" and character, who have forsaken all for 
truth-the food. 

Thus the "gathering" of the ripe wheat-of the jewels~of the 
eagles is now in progress, and bye and bye these will be 
glorified with their head -Jesus-changed in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye from human and mortal conditions, to 
spiritual and incorruptible. Let us say in the words addressed to 
Lot; "Escape for thy life, look not behind thee, neither stay thou 
in all the plain; escape to the mountain lest thou be consumed. "- 
Gen. 19:12-17. 



R229 : page 2 

FLEE BEFORE WINTER. 

The above subject (Luke 17:31) is found with other connections 
in Matt. 24:17-21, viz: "Let him which is on the housetop not 
come down to take anything out of his house... and woe unto 
them that are with child and to them that give suck in those 
days ! But pray ye that your flight be not in the winter (neither on 
the Sabbath day) for then shall be great tribulation such as was 
not since the beginning of the world to this time; no, nor ever 
shall be." 

This has been very generally applied as having its fulfillment 
with the Jews, after their house was given up and at its 
destruction, which followed the end of its seven years of favor. 
We believe that they did have a fulfillment there, but that they 
apply to the end of this age especially— in fact as we have seen, 
everything which occurred to them during their harvest was a 
shadow of what occurs now during this harvest. To the Jew, it 



was literally fulfilled; they fled from literal Zion, left literal 
housetops, fields, beds and mills, and Josephus tells us that 
mothers ate their own offspring in those days. 

But we are looking for the substance there shadowed; we have 
found the meaning of the "bed" and of the "grinding mills" and 
of the "house-top," and now let us see who in Zion are they that 
give suck and are with child in these days. We suggest that Paul 
and Peter and Isaiah tell us who the children are. Written to new 
converts, we read: "As new-born babes, desire the sincere milk 
of the word that ye may grow thereby." (1 Pet. 2:2.) Again, 
written to those who made slow progress in divine grace and 
knowledge, we read: "I have fed you with milk and not with 
meat—even as unto babes." (1 Cor. 3:2), "for when for the time 
ye ought to be teachers [suck givers] ye have need that one teach 
you again, which be the first principles [milk] of the oracles of 
God; and are become such as have need of milk, and not of 
strong meat. For every one that useth milk [first principles only] 
is unskillful in the word of righteousness: for he is a babe. But 
strong meat belongeth to them that are of full age [men-it is 
when grown to this full age and size of manhood in Christ, that 
the bed is found too short-that a man cannot stretch himself on 
it] even those who by reason of use have their senses exercised." 
Heb. 5:12. 

In Isa. 28:9 we read: "Whom shall he teach knowledge? and 
whom shall he make to understand doctrine [the deeper elements 
of his Word and plan]? Them that are weaned from the milk and 
drawn from the breasts." 

The nominal church to-day is composed largely of those who 
give no evidence whatever of being begotten of the Spirit- 
consequently are not even (embryo) babes in Christ, and have 
neither part nor lot in spiritual things; and of those who are 
spirit-begotten, how few have reached any degree of growth- 
how few are men-nearly all are babes in Christ. We love babes- 
-new-born 

R230 : page 2 

babes especially, but we feel disappointed, and disposed to chide 
them (as Paul did), when for the time they ought to be teachers 
and still have need that one teach them the first principles. They 
themselves are much to blame that they are "unskillful in the 
Word," for the strength comes "by reason of use." We should 
not confound these babes with the class referred to as babes by 
Jesus, unto whom he says God reveals his plans, hidden from 
the prudent. There is a sense in which we always should be 
babes-in meekness and simplicity; we should always be Christ's 
"little ones." Paul defines the distinction between the two classes 
of babes in 1 Cor. 14:20. 

If now we have found that nearly all the true Christians of to- 
day (like the Corinthian church of Paul's day) are babes not 



weaned from the milk, but still needing it, who shall we suppose 
to be those who give suck in these days? We answer, they are 
the ministers, class leaders, and Bible class teachers of the 
church. They almost all boast of giving only first principles - 
milk; and they seek by all means to prevent those in their charge 
from wandering off and getting even a morsel of meat—from 
hearing anything which would cause their "senses" to be 
exercised. 

As we progress into the time of the church's trouble, (Zion's 
travail) when truth and error are both attacking her and causing 
her pain, until all of God's true children are delivered out of her- 
-the brunt and severity of anguish will come mostly upon those 
that "give suck." They will find (and even now are beginning to 
be alarmed) that not only will the babes cease to come into her, 
but many (yes, ultimately all) of those now being fed with milk 
will be weaned and learn to eat meat or die of starvation. "It 
shall be for a vexation only until He shall make you to 
understand doctrine" -or to eat meat. Isa. 28:19, margin. 

One day is with the Lord as a thousand years. (2 Pet. 3:8.) The 
seventh thousand (or Sabbath~"the seventh day is the Sabbath") 
commenced in 1873, consequently we are now in the Sabbath 
day of our text: Pray (desire) that your flight be not on the 
Sabbath. The Jewish law placed restrictions upon the people on 
the Sabbath, and hindered them from journeying as much as 
they might desire—therefore, if bound by those laws it hindered 
flight. How is it now? Is there any special hindrance to escape 
from nominal Zion since we entered the seventh day? We 
answer, Yes; those who stood fast in the liberty wherewith 
Christ hath made us free, and were not entangled by any yoke of 
bondage or creed of men, were in a favored position- those who 
get weaned now and eat the strong meat of present truth (See 
Matt. 24:45,46— which shows that "meat in due season" will be 
given when the Lord shall have come and is present), and hear 
the Lord's word, saying: "Come out of her, my people, that ye be 
not partakers of her sins and receive not of her plagues." If they 
now attempt to obey they will find such laws in force in Zion as 
will make it difficult to get out quickly unless those man-made 
laws are disregarded. 

During the last seven years nominal Zion has sought by every 
means to prevent escape from her house; it is easy, very easy, 
for almost any sort of creature to gain admittance, but vile 
indeed must be the one she casts out; but be you ever so faithful 
a child of God, and attempt to go forth in obedience to His call, 
you will find your way wondrously hedged up, and unless your 
senses have been exercised-unless God has taught you 
knowledge and made you to understand true doctrines, you will 
be unable to make your escape. You will first be fawned upon, 
told how indispensable are your services, how much good you 
are doing, how you would be throwing away all your Christian 



influence, how you would lose your social standing, etc. You 
will also be reminded of the extent of learning (worldly wisdom) 
of the church and her ministers, of the comparatively few 
"peculiar people" who hold these views, etc. And, unless you 
have had your spiritual senses exercised in the Word [not by 
merely reading, but by searching] you will be unable to force 
your way against these barriers. Unless possessed of a 
knowledge of the Word you will be unable to test their ministers 
by the evidences of heavenly wisdom~the understanding of 
God's Word, as shown in Isa. 29:10-14. You will be unable to 
prove whether or not they are the Lord's friends by the tests of 
John 15:15, and 16:13. Unless you have laid all on the altar, you 
cannot break away from the social ties and flattering influences; 
but if you have you can say: "We ought to obey God rather than 
men." Yes, you must say: 

The dearest idol I have known, 
Whate'er that idol be, 
Help me to tear it from thy throne, 
And worship only Thee. 

And not only say, but do it. You will be severely tested, for if 
you have been blameless before, an example in conduct, and 
insist on withdrawing, your character will be carefully 
examined, and if possible some pretext will be found to let you 
down and out- as though you had been expelled. 

But we read: "Pray that your flight be not in winter." How shall 
we understand this? We believe that we are now in the 
"harvest," that it is composed of two parts, or as shown in Rev. 
14:14-18, two harvests. The first seven years of gathering the 
"first fruits of the wheat" and a succeeding period of (33 years) 
harvesting of the "Vine of the Earth." The first a time of favor, 
the latter a "time of trouble such as was not since there was a 
nation." It is with reference to this first (7 years) harvest (which 
ends we believe in Oct. this year,) that we understand all 
reference and exhortation to the Bride or "little flock" stands 
related: it is her harvest time and if we rightly interpret the Word 
all who will have part in that company and be overcomers will 
come out of "Babylon" before this harvest ends. Harvest always 
comes in summer and is followed by the destructive frosts of 
winter and in the figure used by our Lord we believe that the 
second harvest or time of trouble stands to the first harvest soon 
to end, in the relation of winter. With this thought see the force 
of Jesus' words pray (seek, desire) that you may get out before 
winter—in season to be an overcomer. 

We know that some will say: "The harvest is past-the summer 
is ended and we are not saved." "Yea, the stork in the heaven 
knoweth her appointed times; and the turtle and the crane and 
the swallow observe the time of their coming; but my people 
know not the judgment [dealings] of the Lord. How do ye say, 
we are wise and the law of the Lord is with us? Lo, certainly in 



vain made He it. [They use very little of it].... The wise man is 
ashamed, they are dismayed and taken: lo they have rejected the 
Word of the Lord and what wisdom is in them?" (Jer. 8:7-9, 19- 
22.) No, Zion knows not the time of her visitation, and soon, 
when the harvest and 



[Continued on seventh page.] 

R230 : page 7 

[Continued from second page.] 



summer are ended, it will also be true that the Lord is not in 
Zion-there is no king in her, there is no balm in Gilead~no 
physician there and those then in Zion will have lost the 
"especial" salvation, the prize of being made the heavenly Zion. 

This "winter" time coming, is the time of Zion's travail when the 
great majority of her children will be brought forth but those 
who will be members of the first-born will come forth before the 
travail [and we know not how soon thereafter, they will be 
"changed in a moment in the twinkling of an eye."] 

Thus we read "Before she travailed she brought forth; before her 
pain came she was delivered of a man child [the overcomers]. 
Who hath heard such a thing?... for as soon as Zion travailed she 
brought forth her children" [the great company.] Isa. 66:7. 

In view of these things can you wonder that Jesus says escape 
from the house before winter? The harvest is nearly over; the 
summer will soon be ended, and the winter of trouble will soon 
be here~"Come out of her my people." 



R230 : page 3 



GOD KNOWS. 

God knows—not I-the devious way 
Wherein my faltering feet must tread, 
Before into the light of day 
My steps from out this gloom are lead, 

And since my Lord the path doth see, 
What matter if 'tis hid from me? 
God knows—not I-how sweet accord 
Shall grow at length from out this clash 

Of earthly discords which have jarred 
On soul and sense; I hear the crash, 
Yet feel and know that on His ear 
Breaks harmony-full, deep and clear. 



God knows—not I-why, when I'd fain 
Have walked in pastures green and fair, 
The path He pointed me hath lain 
Through rocky deserts, bleak and bare. 

I kindly trust-since 'tis His will— 
This way lies safety, that way ill. 
His perfect plan I may not grasp, 
Yet I can trust Love Infinite, 

And with my feeble fingers clasp 
The hand which leads me into light. 
My soul upon His errand goes- 
The end I know not-but God knows. 



-Selected. 



R231 : page 3 

EVIDENCE OF FRIENDSHIP. 

"Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you. 
Henceforth I call you not servants; for the servant knoweth not 
what his Lord doeth, [his plans, etc.] but I have called you 
friends; for all things that I have heard of my Father I have made 
known unto you." lohn 15:15. 

The end of lesus' earthly ministry was come; during those three 
and a half years he had uttered truths which served to test his 
followers, which proved to some causes of stumbling, to all who 
were not "Israelites indeed:" -truths which had brought the 
opposition of the nominal Jewish church, and of which even 
some of his followers, had said: "This is an hard saying; who 
can hear it?" and walked no more with him. But now this work 
of separating was all over; even Judas had gone out, and Jesus 
and the eleven are alone. He has been telling them some things 
regarding their new and high privileges, their new relationship 
toward God about to be purchased by his death, into the 
enjoyment of which they should enter after he should ascend to 
the Father, and His work as ransom be recognized as perfect. 
Then would come the "power from on high"— the Spirit which 
would endue them with ability to understand spiritual, or 
heavenly things. 

It may have escaped the attention of some that at this time the 
disciples were not begotten of the spirit, though they were 
justified by faith- justified human beings, but not begotten new 
creatures, consequently Jesus' teachings contain little reference 
to the highest things except in parables; he explained little 
concerning the "high calling" of the Bride, but said: "I have yet 
many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. 
Howbeit, when he the spirit of truth is come, he will guide you 



into all truth." How this corroborates Paul's statement: "The 
natural man receiveth not the things of the spirit of God," 
"neither can he know them because they are spiritually 
discerned." 1 Cor. 2:14. Though justified men, they must be 
begotten of the Spirit to comprehend things above the human 
plane. 

After telling them of the future unfolding of truth and of his 
words he tells them why his revelations are for them, viz: 
because he will henceforth treat them as friends and reveal all 
things to them. 

There are two important lessons conveyed in these words of the 
Master, as applicable to us as to the eleven Apostles: first, the 
rule by which He judges who are His friends~"ye are my friends 
if ye do whatsoever I command you." If we submit our wills 
completely to his will, thus becoming dead to the world and 
alive toward God—then he reckons us friends; second, the rule 
by which we may judge whether he reckons us among this class 
of special "friends," viz: If he reveals his work and plans to us, 
even all things which he has heard of the Father. 

Now apply these rules to yourself. If you can say, "Not my will 
but thine be done" -not my plan of saving the world, not my 
plan relative to the preaching of the Gospel-not my will 
regarding the nominal church-not my will regarding myself and 
what I shall do or be-but "Thy will be done" in all these things, 
then you are a "friend" in this special sense spoken of by Jesus. 
Now try the other rule, have you evidence that you are a special 
friend? Is the Spirit leading you daily into more and more of an 
understanding of his words and plan-revealing more and more 
of the "mystery" kept hid in former ages, and showing you 
"things to come." Do you say yes? Very good, then yours is the 
blessed experience of heavenly wisdom, which at the same time 
is a proof that you are a special "friend." Continue and if 
possible increase your consecration, and you shall continue to 
abide in his love and to have fresh evidences of his friendship by 
growth "in grace and in knowledge." 

If the Word and plan of God are not opening before you: [The 
Spirit often uses human agencies for communicating truth.] If 
you are not being led of the Spirit into all truth- if he is not 
showing you "things to come," (John 16:13.) then it looks 
indeed as though you were not of the special friends, and it 
should be your first work to gain this divine friendship by self- 
surrender— consecration. 

All who believe themselves acceptable servants of our Master 
should look for and not be satisfied without this witness of the 
Spirit that they are Christ's friends. 



R231 : page 3 



THE CREDIBILITY OF THE SCRIPTURES. 

Extracts from an Address Delivered by Dr. J. H. Thomas before 
the "Liberal League" (an Infidel Society), of this City and 
published in the Restitution. 

[We have selected these from among other able arguments, 
thinking they might be of interest to our readers, though 
probably most of them you are already familiar with. -ED.] 

If then we believe those things that are unaccountable by law, 
and contrary to our experiences which are the discoveries, and 
works of men, why should we discredit those things that are the 
work of God, as evidenced by competent and creditable 
witnesses? Again I ask in the words of Paul, "Why should it be 
thought a thing incredible that God should raise the dead?" 

We believe there was a time when man did not exist. We know 
he exists now. What has been, may be again; therefore, if man 
ceases to exist, he may exist again, which would not even be 
contrary to our experiences. I contend, therefore, that the Atheist 
and Infidel, in accordance with their own reasoning are bound to 
accept the testimony of the apostles that Jesus rose from the 
dead, whereby the divinity of the Scriptures is proved: for, if 
God raised Jesus from the dead he was divine; and as he 
acknowledged the authority of the old Scriptures, and they 
testified of him, they are divine. 

Having noticed a few of the arguments that might be adduced 
under this head, I call your attention to the New Testament 
prediction of an apostasy and its fulfillment as another reason 
why I believe the Bible to be the word of God. 

If the New Testament prediction be divine authority, there 
should be to-day not only an apostasy from the faith once 
delivered to the saints, but there should be a dominant 
Christianity (at least so-called) political, tyrannical and corrupt. 
As proof of this we call your attention to the predictions. 

Says Paul (Acts 20:28): Take heed to yourselves, and unto all 
the flock over which the Holy Spirit hath made you overseers; 
feed the flock of God, which he hath purchased with his own 
blood; for I know this, that after my departure shall grievous 
wolves enter in among you not sparing the flock; also of your 
own selves, shall men arise and speak perverse things. 

Again, writing to Timothy he says: The time will come when 
they will not endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts 
shall heap to themselves teachers having itching ears, and they 
shall turn away their ears from the truth and shall be turned unto 
fables. 

This is a plain prediction of a departure from the truth as 
proclaimed by Christ and his apostles; and before the apostles 
had finished their work this departure from the truth, or apostasy 



had commenced, and we find Paul writing to the Galatian 
believers, saying: "I marvel that ye are so soon removed from 
him that called you into the favor of Christ unto another gospel; 
which is not another, but there be some that trouble you, and 
would pervert the gospel of Christ." 

We see the predicted apostasy had commenced in Paul's day. 
This was to go on and grow into a political form and become in 
the world an ecclesiastical system supported by the sword. This 
is clearly predicted by Paul. The Thessalonian believers had 
become anxious about the return of Christ as an event about to 
happen, but Paul writes them, saying: "Let no man deceive you 
by any means, for that day shall not come except there come a 
falling away first and that man of sin be revealed, the son of 
perdition who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is 
called God, or that is worshiped so that he as God sitteth in the 
temple of God showing himself that he is God." 

Paul further says: "This wicked one the Lord shall consume with 
the breath of his mouth and destroy with the brightness of his 
coming. " 

According to these predictions then, there ought to have been in 
the past an extensive departure from the faith, a corruption of 
Christianity, developing a pretender to divine authority, lording 
it over the kings, and governments of the earth. 

I ask if this prediction has not been fulfilled-realized in every 
particular? What has been in the past, and what is to-day the 
most notable feature of European history? Is it not a man at the 
head of an ecclesiastical system exhibiting himself as an object 
of the highest homage upon earth, and in the name of Christ 
claiming the highest authority, and the right to lord it over the 
kings and governments of the earth? 

I contend then that the developments of this apostasy-a 
prominent feature of which is a union of church and state -is an 
exact fulfillment of Paul's prediction, and is therefore a good 
and valid reason why we should believe the Bible to be the word 
of God. What human being unassisted by divine inspiration 
could have predicted 1 800 years ago with such clearness of 
vision— such accuracy of detail an apostasy such as now exists, 
headed up in Rome and extending nearly, if not quite, to every 
inhabited part of the globe, and embracing every false system of 
religion-teaching 

R232 : page 3 

for doctrine the commandments of men, and which is fully 
ascribed in the apocalypse and symbolized by a woman sitting 
upon a scarlet colored beast, upon whose forehead is written: 
"Mystery, Babylon the Great. The mother of harlots and 
abominations of the earth." 



This is symbolical and expressive of all names and 
denominations of the great apostasy, from the church of Rome 
to the most extreme division of Protestantism who make void 
the truth by their traditions, and so fill up the measure of Paul's 
predictions, which is evidence that Paul spoke not of himself but 
as he was instructed by the Holy Spirit. 

We call your attention to the wonderful fulfillment of prophetic 
history in relation to the Jews, or Jewish nation, and their 
distinct racial existence at the present time as another reason 
why I believe the Bible to be the word of God. 

That a race of people with no national organization, no 
centralized power, banished from their own land, scattered 
among every nation under heaven, despised, cast out as evil, 
down-trodden, robbed again and again of their wealth, should 
still exist as a distinct people is a remarkable thing, 
unaccountable from any human standpoint. A people massacred 
by tens of thousands, yea more; in A.D. 70, 1,300,000 perished 
at the destruction of their city and temple, and 97,000 were 
carried away captive. Sixty years after, in attempting to return, 
half a million were slaughtered. A.D. 135, the Emperor Adrian 
destroyed 50 castles, 800 cities, and slew 530,000. Under King 
John of England 1,500 were massacred at York in one day. 
Under Ferdinand and Isabella 800,000 by a single decree were 
forced out to sea in boats, and the most of them perished. And 
still they live. 

Does the history of the world record another case like it? Over 
3,000 years ago going down into Egypt a family of 70 persons 
and in 430 years coming out a great nation. They saw the proud 
Egyptian perish in the Red Sea. They witnessed the fall of great 
Babylon and the rise and fall of the mighty empire of Medo- 
Persia -in the words of another: "They out-lived the Caesars 
and the terrible visitation of the dark ages, and here they stand 
to-day as distinct as ever; occupying no country of their own, 
scattered through all lands; identified in their immemorial 
physiognomy, earth's men of destiny, before the venerableness 
of whose pedigree the proudest escutcheons of mankind are but 
trifles of yesterday." 

We return to the works of creation; to the world of liberal- 
minded, to the Atheist, or Infidel for an explanation. Tell us how 
it is that such a remarkable race of Jewish people, in whose days 
nations have been born, kingdoms established, empires formed, 
great and magnificent cities builded, and passed away, leaving 
no sign of their glory, and scarcely a relic to show that they ever 
had an existence; while this people, persecuted, 

R232 : page 4 

banished from place to place, massacred, robbed, and cruelly 
deprived of their wealth by almost every government on the 



earth, still live a powerful people, distinct in their facial and 
racial peculiarities, and still hold the wealth of the world? 

We read no answer in the Infidel's revelation~the works of 
nature~to such a question, and we contend that apart from the 
Bible-apart from a revelation from the Deity no answer can be 
given. 

How different has been the course of the other people! What 
Englishman can say with a certainty to-day he is from Briton, 
Roman, Saxon or Norman stock? But find the Jew where you 
may, in Russia, Germany, England, or our own great republic 
where English, Irish, Germans and all nations amalgamate like 
metals in a furnace, and he is a Jew still claiming Abraham as 
their father, clinging to Moses, holding fast their traditions, 
looking toward Jerusalem, longing for their Messiah, as when 
their fathers trod the vine-clad hills of Judah's land- wandering 
for centuries, weary and foot-sore, in every land but their own; 
surviving the greatest persecutions ever inflicted upon a people; 
suffering enormous and almost incredible butchery again and 
again for over eighteen centuries, they have risen again as a 
great power among mankind. Holding the money power of 
Europe, among the foremost in science, literature, or 
government, you find the Jew the marvel of nations, the 
standing miracle of the world's history, which no human tongue 
untouched by spirit power has ever been able to explain apart 
from that book, the Bible— that book from whose divinely 
inspired pages comes the solution of the mystery in the words of 
Jeremiah, the prophet: 

"Fear thou not, O my servant Jacob, neither be dismayed, O 
Israel, for I am with thee, saith the Lord, to save thee; though I 
make a full end of all nations, I will not make a full end of thee; 
but I will correct thee in measure, and will not leave thee 
altogether unpunished." 

Surely there are none so blind as not to see a solution of the 
mystery and the voice of God in this prophetic announcement: 

"O Israel be not dismayed, for though I make a full end of all 
nations whither I have scattered thee, yet will I not make a full 
end of thee; for lo! the days come, saith the Lord, that I will 
bring again the captivity of my people Israel and Judah, and I 
will cause them to return to the land that I gave to their fathers, 
and they shall possess it; for lo, I will save thee from afar, and 
thy seed from the land of their captivity, and Jacob (or Israel) 
shall return and be at rest, and none shall make him afraid." 

From this book, the Bible, then, we learn why the Jews still 
exist, why they still retain a distinct racial identity, why they are 
a power among mankind, why they hold the wealth of the 
world! —because God hath said he will not make an end of them, 
but will deliver them from their captivity and bring them again 
to their own land, where they shall have rest. 



I contend, then, that the Israelitish people are a living testimony 
of the divinity of the Bible-of the spoken word of God. Like the 
bush of Moses-ever burning yet never consumed- an 
unanswerable refutation of the blasphemous sophistry of that 
class of Atheists who, like Col. R. G. Ingersoll, dare to speak 
with solemn mockery of the word of God, and defy Yahweh the 
Elohim of Israel, who hath said again, by the same prophet: 

"Hear the word of the Lord, O ye nations, and declare it in the 
isles afar off: Say, He that scattered Israel will gather him, and 
keep him as a shepherd doth his flock; for the Lord hath 
redeemed Jacob from the hand of him that was stronger than he. 
Behold, I will bring them from the north country, and gather 
them from the coasts of the earth.... I will say to the north give 
up, and to the south keep not back; bring my sons from far, and 
my daughters from the ends of the earth (Isa. 43:6.), for I am a 
father to Israel and Ephraim is my first-born." 

Let me assure you that as certain as this prophecy has been 
fulfilled in the preservation of down-trodden Israel in all lands, 
so certain will it be fulfilled in their restoration to their own 
land. Even now the Jews number 30,000 in Jerusalem and 
vicinity, and every day increasing. I ask what better reason need 
we give for believing the Bible to be the word of God? 

But no greater reason is the one I have just advanced than the 
one which follows why I believe the Bible to be the word of 
God. I refer to the prophecies in general and the wonderful and 
marvelous accuracy of their fulfillment. 

How different from the vague, incoherent predictions of the 
Greek and Roman augurs, and the doubtful, hesitating utterances 
of diviners, soothsayers, psychologists, and false prophets of all 
ages. The latter, speaking from the inspiration of nature and an 
intuition common to an animal creation, there is no certainty of 
their predictions coming to pass; while the prophecies, being 
accurately fulfilled, compel us to believe that they spoke as they 
were moved by the spirit or inspiration of God. 

The prophets, being inspired by Him who knoweth all things, 
and who hath said to the world by the prophet Isaiah: "I am God, 
and there is none like me, declaring the end from the beginning, 
and from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying 
my counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure." 

Their predictions are always fulfilled. I contend that if we 
carefully consider the prophecies and their fulfillment the 
evidence of the divinity of the Scriptures is overwhelming. 

Take for instance the prophecies concerning the Jews. It is 
admitted by Atheists and Infidels that the Jews are an ancient 
people, going back at least 3,000 years, that they have 
documents which they regard as those of Moses, and hold as 
divine. 



We turn, then, to Moses and read what is written, and we find 
that God informs Moses that after he has brought Israel into the 
land, which he swore unto their fathers, that floweth with milk 
and honey, and when they shall have eaten and filled themselves 
and waxed fat, then will they turn unto other gods and serve 
them, and "provoke me, and break my covenant." 

And Moses was required to write the words in a book as a 
witness against them, and tell the words to the people. Moses 
did so, and you will find them in the 31st chapter of 
Deuteronomy, and Moses said to the people: "I know that after 
my death ye will utterly corrupt yourselves and turn aside from 
the way which I have commanded you, and evil will befall you 
in the latter days, because you do evil in the sight of the Lord, to 
provoke him to anger through the work of your hands." 

Then follows a prediction of the evils that should fall upon them 
in the latter days of the Mosaic constitution of things which was 
then being laid or founded. Some of the evils predicted 

R233 : page 4 

are as follows: "I will scatter you among the heathen, or nations, 
and will draw out a sword after you, and will bring a nation 
against thee from afar, from the end of the earth, as the eagle 
flieth, a nation whose tongue thou shalt not understand, a nation 
of fierce countenance... and he shall besiege thee in all thy gates 
until thy high and fenced walls come down, wherein thou 
trustedst throughout all thy land: and thou shalt eat the fruit of 
thine own body, the flesh of thy sons and of thy daughters ...in 
the siege, and in the straightness wherewith thine enemies shall 
distress thee." 

I ask you to read the history of the passing away of the Mosaic 
constitution of things at the destruction of Jerusalem, and you 
cannot help being awed by the accuracy of the fulfillment. The 
Roman eagles were planted upon her walls, and in the midst of 
the siege so great was the distress that women took their babes 
from their breasts and roasted them for food. 

Every line and word of the prophecy by Moses was fulfilled 
with awful reality. One million three hundred thousand Jews 
perished and ninety-five thousand were carried away captive; 
and so the Jews were scattered among all nations. Jerusalem was 
laid in the dust, not one stone of their magnificent temple was 
left standing upon another, and to-day Jerusalem continues to be 
trodden down by the desecrating footsteps of the Mussulman 
and Turk. A marvelous fulfillment of that prophecy of Jesus 
when he stood and cried: 

"These be the days of vengeance that all things that are written 
may be fulfilled: for there shall be great distress in the land, and 
wrath upon this people, and they shall fall by the edge of the 
sword, and shall be led away captive into all nations, and 



Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles until the time of 
the Gentiles be fulfilled." 

Jerusalem to-day is a standing fulfillment of this prophecy. 

Don't tell me this prophecy was written after the event, for the 
preponderance of evidence is against you. There is little if any 
doubt that this prophecy was written as early as A.D. 50. But it 
matters not when it was written, as it is testified by the apostles 
that it was spoken by Christ, and their testimony has never been 
impeached. Not only so, but the prophecy is in course of 
fulfillment before our eyes, and speaks for its own divinity; the 
Jews are still scattered, Jerusalem still trodden down. Why? 
Because the times of the Gentiles are not yet fulfilled. 

But we turn to other prophecies equally remarkable. Of the city 
of Tyre, once the stronghold of the Phenicians, that stood a 
thirteen-years siege by land and water, and even then not 
conquered, it is said: 

"Behold! I am against thee, O Tyre! and will cause many nations 
to come up against thee: and they shall destroy the walls of Tyre 
and break down her towers. I will also scrape her dust from her, 
and make her like the top of a rock, and it shall be a place for the 
spreading of nets, for I have spoken it." 

History informs us that Alexander scraped the ruins from the 
site of the old city. The Infidel, Volney, states that it is a place 
where fishermen spread their nets. It is evident, then, that the 
prophecy was the voice of God, and not man. 

Again the prophet says concerning Samaria: "I will make 
Samaria as an heap of the field and as a planting of a vineyard, 
and I will pour down the stones thereof into the valley, and I 
will discover the foundations thereof." Was this fulfilled? Says 
Dr. Keith: "The people of the country, in order to make room for 
their fields and gardens, have swept away the old houses and 
poured the stones down into the valley. The hill is left like the 
plantings of a vineyard. Every clause of the prophecy has been 
fulfilled with awful minuteness. 

Do we need a better reason for believing the Bible is the word of 
God? Could a man whose lips were not touched with the 
inspiration of Deity have spoken with such unerring certainty? 
Every man of sense, of culture, of reason, must answer "No." 

The same is true of the Babylonian, Medo-Persian, Grecian and 
Roman kingdoms. Their rise and fall were accurate fulfillments 
of prophecy. Even the Roman empire to-day, in its divided state, 
fills the prophetic vision. 

But for a moment we must call your attention to prophecies that 
relate to our own times; and what are they? I answer, it is 
declared in the prophecies that "in the latter days"-- mark, it says 
in the "latter days"-- that the land of Israel shall be "brought 



back from the sword," and numbers of the Jews are to return, 
having been gathered out of the nations, and settle in agricultural 
colonies, dwelling in unwalled villages, dwelling safely, without 
bars or gates, possessing much wealth in cattle and goods, under 
the protection of a foreign power easily recognized as the British 
power. That the Ottoman or Turkish power must pass away. 
That it will be accomplished or brought about by Russia, in 
conjunction with other powers. That she will be led on with a 
view to take great spoils from the Jews. That she will plant her 
standards at Constantinople and take Egypt. That she will be 
opposed in her onward march by the British lions, who will say 
to her: "Hast thou come to take a spoil?" That it will result in all 
the nations of Europe being gathered together in the great battle 
of Armageddon. That the armies of the nations are overthrown, 
the kingdom of God established upon the mountains of Israel, 
the nations subdued, and a reign of righteousness and peace 
given to the world. 

These are prophecies that relate to our own times. I ask what of 
the outlook? Are they being fulfilled as evidence that God has 
spoken? Most assuredly they are. 

The Jews are slowly but surely turning their wandering feet 
toward Jerusalem. The Anglo-Turkish Convention opened the 
way for their return with a freedom that has never been granted 
before. England has thrown her protecting arm over Asiatic 
Turkey, which makes the British power, in fulfillment of the 
prophecy, the protectorate of the Jews. 

When the protectorate was officially announced the Jewish 
Chronicle wrote thus: "There has dawned in the East~the cradle 
of our race~a light which deepens in effulgence as the day 
advances." 

The Jewish World wrote: "This opens a great future for the Jews 
of the Holy Land." 

R233 : page 5 

The result is, numerous schemes are being put forth to further 
the return of the Jews and establish them in agricultural 
colonies, which is an accurate fulfillment of the prophecy. Of 
these I may mention the great humanitarian scheme of the Sir 
Moses Montefiore Testimonial Fund, the object of which, says 
the Jewish World, is to better the condition of the Jews of 
Palestine by the introduction of industrial and agricultural 
pursuits. But lately, the Testimonial Fund Committee advanced 
L2,600 to a building society in Jerusalem, of which societies 
there are several. I may also refer to Mr. Oliphant's book which 
has just appeared advocating the formation of a Jewish 
settlement in the land of Gilead. 

Of this work, the Jewish Chronicle writes: 



"We are inundated with books and pamphlets on Palestine; the 
air is thick with schemes for colonizing the Holy Land once 
more, but none of the projectors are more enthusiastic, or more 
practical than Mr. Oliphant." 

I ask what is this but the fulfillment of the prophecies before our 
eyes —the prophecies I have just referred to—an evidence that 
God has spoken? 



R233 : page 5 

THE FOOTSTEPS OF JESUS. 

"Christ suffered... leaving you a copy so that you may follow in 
His footsteps." 1 Pet. 2:21, Diag. 

If we follow in the exact footsteps of another we always arrive 
at the same destination. Our text informs us that the steps in 
which Jesus trod, and in which he calls upon us to follow, were 
steps of suffering. But why does he call upon us to endure 
suffering? Because of the great love wherewith he hath loved us, 
and because as he prayed (John 17:22-24), he would have us 
with him that we may behold his glory, and be joint heirs with 
him to all that glory. 

For the joy set before him he endured that suffering, despising 
the shame. What was that joy that nerved to such endurance our 
suffering Lord? Paul says because "He was obedient unto death. 
God also hath HIGHLY EXALTED him and given him a name 
above every name, etc." Phil. 2:9. If he was highly exalted after 
and because of his obedience to death, he had more glory and 
honor then than that which he had with the Father before the 
world was. Was he immortal then? No, for the Scripture saith 
that the King of kings and Lord of lords who, in his times, Jesus 
will show to be the blessed and only Potentate, and to whom he 
will deliver up the kingdom of earth, after that he has subdued 
all things unto him, this one, the Father, Jehovah, is the only one 
who hath immortality: (1 Tim. 6:16)~"life in himself '-- 
independent of any support outside itself, subject to no 
conditions, incorruptible, exhaustless, unlimited, eternal. Now 
when Jesus was highly exalted he became partaker of the same 
Divine, immortal nature, for we read "As the Father hath life in 
himself, 

R234 : page 5 

so hath he given to the Son that he should have life in himself. 
John 5:26. 

This partaking of the Divine nature, becoming the Son of God, 
the "only begotten Son" on this divine plane was a part, but only 
a part of the joy set before our Lord. He was also to redeem 
from death and restore to perfection a glorious race of beings, 



once created in the image of God, so that "every creature which 
is in heaven and on earth will say, blessing, and honor, and 
glory, and power be unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and 
unto the Lamb for ever and ever." 

O, what a joy that will be to his glorious benevolent nature. But 
that is not all. Having been found in fashion as a man (a perfect 
man) he loved humanity with all the devotion and tenderness of 
a perfect affection. And as some of the race come to realize and 
appreciate his great love and so much so as to forsake all and 
follow him, he longs to have these with him where he is that 
they may behold and share his glory. This joy was also set 
before him-the joy of bringing many sons (other Sons begotten 
of God) to glory— to the same Divine plane. O, what wonder that 
for such glory, and honor, and blessing, he should bear the cross, 
despising the shame. 

And this same joy— this exceeding and ETERNAL WEIGHT of 
GLORY is set before you who are called to follow in his 
footsteps. Now weigh it if you can; measure it if you can- the 
breadth, the length, the height, the depth. Oh, can you? Eye hath 
not seen nor ear heard it, neither hath entered into the heart of 
(the natural) man, the things which God hath prepared for them 
that love him. But he hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit. 

We are called to be joint heirs with Jesus, heirs of immortality, 
partakers of the divine nature, part of the divine family, far 
above men and angels. We as the bride of the Lamb are to have 
a name that is above every name, since we are the people for his 
name. The Bride shall bear her husband's name, and she shall be 
like unto his glorious body. 

Wherefore holy brethren (reckoned holy since purchased from 
sin and death), partakers of the heavenly calling, consider Jesus. 
"He was rich," (a glorious spiritual being before the world was) 
yet for our sakes he became poor (transferred his life from a 
spiritual to a human form, then sacrificed that) that we, through 
his poverty, might be made rich (partakers of his high 
exaltation). 

Let us look for his footprints. We find that his first step was 
consecration. "A body hast thou prepared me (not prepared until 
it had reached its maturity-thirty years, according to Jewish 
law). Then said I, Lo, I come to do Thy will, O God." Heb. 
10:5,7. "Not my (human) will but thine be done." He then 
symbolized by his burial in, and resurrection from, the water, his 
entire consecration, his willingness to be immersed- swallowed 
up in death-and his faith in God's power to raise him to a new 
life. Have you followed him here? Immediately after, he was led 
into the wilderness, away from human sympathy, human 
society, and human pursuits. Are you there, or are you clinging 
to a worldly church for sympathy, society, and worldly 
ambition? There he was tempted and tried in all points; so must 



you be. He was armed with the sword of the Spirit, which is the 
Word of God, wherewith he was able to quench all the fiery 
darts of the enemy. Are you thus armed? 

His entire consecration separated him from all human sympathy 
and friendship. He was a man, with the same natural desires and 
necessities as other men; consequently, when these were all laid 
on the altar of sacrifice: "He was a man of sorrows and 
acquainted with grief. " The purity of his life and teaching 
condemned the teaching of the Scribes and Pharisees, (and 
brought upon him the anathema of the church of his day.) He 
was counted a fanatic, an impostor, a teacher of false doctrine, 
as one possessed of a devil. The religious teachers to whom the 
people looked for guidance denounced him and finally stirred up 
the people to have him crucified. It separated him from his 
earthly relatives, "for neither did his brethren believe on him. " 
(They were doubtless ashamed of the stigma which his peculiar 
and unpopular course brought upon them as a family.) It would 
seem that he was an outcast from his mother's home, for he said: 
"The foxes have holes and the birds of the air have nests, but the 
Son of Man hath not where to lay his head." As a citizen he was 
despised by his fellow citizens, counted an enemy of Caesar's, 
and one who sought to usurp kingly authority. His conversation 
was in heaven, and earth understood it not. 

Has your consecration so sanctified —set you apart from the 
world, the nominal church, your former worldly friendships, 
etc.? Have you followed Jesus here? Has your name been so cast 
out as evil? It will be if you follow Jesus closely. If they hated 
me, said Jesus, they will hate you also, and whatsoever they 
have done unto me, they will do unto you also. But if they do so 
cast you out, Jesus will hear of it, as he did of the blind man 
whose eyes he had opened, and as then, he will find you and 
show himself to you, and talk with you and open the eyes of 
your understanding, causing your heart to burn within you while 
he opens up the Scriptures. Blessed communion: What a friend 
we find in Jesus ! 

This was the victory whereby he overcame—even his faith in 
God, for he looked not at the things which are seen, but at the 
things which are unseen-eternal. Are you so doing? When he 
was led as a lamb to the slaughter, he opened not his mouth. Do 
you seek to imitate that uncomplaining, patient meekness in the 
everyday trials of your wilderness life, and will you by his grace 
do so until he says it is enough? Step cautiously, plant your feet 
just in his prints, and you cannot mistake the way. Don't think to 
reach the same end by avoiding some of the most difficult steps. 
You cannot do it; you will lose your footing and fall. Neither 
should you hesitate when you find the steps leading through a 
thorny and difficult way. O no: the time is too short. RUN with 
patience. 



Ah, dear brother, sister, it is no easy road; but do you think the 
end justifies the means? Now look again at the prize; keep your 
eye of faith fixed on that. Give up your human will, your human 
ambition, etc., as Jesus did, and commit your new spiritual life 
to him who is able to keep it. If you let Him, God will work in 
you to will and to do of his good pleasure, and Jesus says: "Fear 
not, little flock; it is the Father's good pleasure to give you the 
kingdom. " 



R234 : page 5 

THE TIMES WE LIVE IN. 

The present is a momentous crisis. All sects are shaking. The 
religious world is convulsed. Atheism has opened her batteries, 
and unsheathed her sword. Skepticism is big with hopes. 
Catholic and Protestant Popery are plodding and plotting for the 
supremacy. The little and the great Popes are on tiptoe. Saints 
are praying for the millennium; myriads are laboring for its 
introduction. The Bible and the creeds are at war. There is no 
truce. Such is the present. -Christian Baptist. 



R234 : page 5 

"ART THOU HE THAT 
TROUBLETH ISRAEL?" 

These were the words of Ahab, king of Israel, to Elijah. Ahab, it 
will be remembered, was the husband of Jezebel, the wicked 
woman, who persecuted Elijah, and from whom he fled into the 
wilderness for three and a half years. (See 1 Kings 18:17.) 

We have heretofore seen that all three of these Jewish characters 
were types or figures of classes in the Gospel age, and that their 
actions were such as to illustrate the actions of those classes 
which they represented: Elijah represented the church-the true 
and earnest teachers of God's Word; Jezebel is used to represent 
the false church, Papacy, and which came into power by 
marriage with the Roman Empire, which is represented by 
Ahab. 

As Papacy used the Roman army and power to persecute the 
true teachers of the Lord (and slew many) for three and a half 
symbolic years, or twelve hundred and sixty symbolic days; so 
Jezebel used Ahab's power to persecute Elijah and slay the 
Lord's prophets for three and a half literal years. During those 
years there was great drouth in the land; so, too, during the 1260 
years of Papal persecution, ending in 1798, there was a great 
spiritual drouth and "a famine, not of bread nor a thirst for 
water, but of hearing the words of the Lord." Amos 8:11. Then 



the false teachers of Baal (Papacy), being refuted, an abundant 
shower has come; Jehovah is again recognized. But Jezebel and 
her daughters still hate the Elijah class and seek their 
destruction. 

It is about this time that Ahab said to Elijah: "Art thou he that 
troubleth Israel?" Elijah troubled them because he was a true 
prophet and opposed their sins; so too with those now who 
remain true to God, who will not bow to the forms and customs 
of this perverse age, but rather reprove them. Sorely vexed by 
these reproofs, those at ease in Zion use almost the words of 
Ahab to Elijah: "Art thou he that troubleth Israel?" 

Yes, we would trouble Israel. God has said: "He that hath my 
word let him speak my word." "Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy 
voice like a trumpet and show my people their 
transgressions... yet they seek me daily and delight to know my 
ways 

R235 : page 5 

as a nation that did righteousness and forsook not the ordinances 
of their God." This was applicable to fleshly Israel (the 
"shadow") and to the nominal Gospel church as well. There 
never was a time in which the Jewish laws and ordinances were 
more faithfully observed than during the seven years of their 
"harvest." Every form and ceremony and tithe was scrupulously 
remembered. The Temple just finished by Herod was the 
grandest in which they had ever worshiped. Their religious 
system was gaining a worldwide reputation. Missionary 
enterprises were on foot for Judaising the world, and so zealous 
were they that Jesus said of them, "Ye compass sea and land to 
make one proselyte." Yet of all this grand display-zeal, pomp, 
and seeming success—it was said, "This people draweth nigh 
unto me with their mouth and honoreth me with their lips, but 
their heart is far from me. Matt. 15:8. Of their religious 
observances Jesus said: "Ye make clean the outside-like whited 
walls and sepulchers clean and beautiful outside, but full of 
decay and corruption within. 

R235 : page 6 

That church, that age and that "harvest" were but the shadows 
of this age, church, and harvest. As then so now, prosperity and 
seemingly great success attends both at home and abroad the 
church's efforts. Magnificent temples of worship, grand music 
and costly apparel, seem to stamp the present time as one of 
unparalleled success; yet now as then, it is mostly on the outside 
that the beauty is seen, for inwardly the church seems daily to 
become more corrupt and worldly. "Lovers of pleasures more 
than lovers of God, having a form of godliness, but denying the 
power thereof; from such turn away." 2 Tim. 3:1-5. 



Jesus said the converts to Judaism were really injured by being 
brought into that corrupted church, and we believe that the same 
thing is true here since the degeneracy of the Gospel church. 
The man of the world is injured more than benefited. While of 
the world he was open to conviction of sin, but the church has 
said to him: You are a moral man, and hence not a sinner; if you 
have any secret vices let them go, and come join our church, 
then you will be one of us in "good and regular standing." The 
man is surprised at the liberality of the view, always thought he 
was as good as the majority of the church members and better 
than some, and is pleased to know that the church recognized his 
worth; pleased, too, perhaps, to enter into organized respectable 
society. He joins the church, and is now a church member in 
name. He is benefited by being kept from some outward and 
shameful sins, but he is injured in as much, as he is now 
persuaded by the church that he is a Christian while in reality he 
has neither part nor lot in the matter. 

He is injured by getting the form without the power of 
Christianity. He now falls fast asleep—at ease in Zion; he awakes 
only when a criticism of the church is made; he then feels 
himself a "defender of the faith." 

And not only is the man injured, but the church is injured yet 
more, for who can estimate the weight and effect of every such 
"tare," every such sham Christian, every such self-deceived 
deceiver? But the Lord's wheat field (Matt. 12.) is overrun with 
such tares, which choke the wheat and almost hide it from view. 
Now that we are in the "harvest" and the sickle of truth is doing 
its work, what wonder if there be some commotion? 

Zion is at ease and self-satisfied, and when we cry aloud and 
spare not, but show God's people their sins and their forms of 
godliness without the power thereof, they become enraged and 
complain that we are troubling Israel. When this same charge 
was made against Jesus, our head-that he was opposing and 
hindering the God-appointed leaders and teachers, the Chief 
Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, he said: "Think not that I am 
come to send peace on the earth: I came not to send peace, but a 
sword [Truth is a sword]. For I came to set... at variance... and a 
man's foes shall be they of his own household... and he that doth 
not take his cross and follow after me is not worthy of me. " 
(Matt. 10:34.) 

TRUTH NEVER HAS LED 

the majority, during this time when evil is permitted to reign, 
and hence always has had as a large part of its work to reprove 
darkness. Reproof is never pleasant, but is especially unpleasant 
to those who most need it. [Of the saints it is written: "Great 
peace have they that love thy law, and nothing shall offend 
them."] It was because he thus reproved sin and error that Elijah 
was hated and called Israel's troubler; for the same reason Jesus 



was denounced, and for the same reason all who will live Godly 
are similarly offensive. 

But if any man will reprove, let him speak as an oracle of God, 
and let nothing be done or said, through bitterness, strife, or vain 
glory; but let him by a meek and quiet spirit show forth in love 
the power, as well as the form of Godliness to the praise of Him 
who hath called us out of darkness into his marvelous light. 

Jesus in his day called the attention of the Jews to the judgments 
of God about to come upon them, saying: "These be days of 
vengeance that all things written should be fulfilled." (Luke 
21:22.) Elijah gave warning of the death of Jezebel and Ahab, 
that dogs should lick his blood and eat her flesh. So here it 
becomes our place to speak the word of God as declared by him, 
that Ahab and his successors (the Roman and succeeding 
empires) shall be slain— i.e. destroyed. (Dan. 2:44.) Also, that 
Jezebel shall be "eaten by dogs" (the degraded), i.e. Papacy, and 
in fact the nominal church, as it represents the same church and 
world-united system, shall be cast down and consumed. 

Elijah further represents the "little flock" of despised ones, by 
being highly exalted, caught up in a whirlwind. Oh, that we may 
be among the little company now separating, who shall soon be 
changed in a moment into the perfect likeness of our Lord and 
head! 



R235 : page 6 

PRUDENT OR IMPRUDENT, WHICH? 

Wisdom and prudence are good things in their place, and when 
not overdone or abused; but there is such a thing as being over- 
wise, or "wise above that which is written," and there is, we 
think, such a thing as being prudent above that which is written. 

We have been somewhat exercised upon this thought by the 
expressions and looks of some of our friends, when their 
attention has been called to the subject of Restitution. 

The thought that men are to be restored to natural life again, to 
live again in the flesh as men, that they are in fact to be restored 
to all they lost through Adam, or because of the sin of Adam, 
seems to many to be the height of presumption, but they would 
not apply the same rule of reasoning to other matters, we think. 
Take Rom. 5:18-19: "As by the offense of one, judgment came 
upon all men to condemnation, even so by the righteousness of 
one the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life. For 
as by one man's disobedience, many were made sinners, so by 
the obedience of one shall many be made righteous." Now if 
these words were used in the same way regarding anything other 
than the relation between God and man, who would think of 



making the second part of each statement mean less than the 
first? 

Now without asserting positively that man will live again in the 
flesh, restored to Adamic perfection, let us consider our attitude 
in connection with the fact, (if it be a fact) and who would be 
likely to know it. 

First, then, those would be most likely to know it who are in a 
condition to receive the truth whatever it be. Not that the truth 
can be anything but the truth, but it may be very different from 
what we had supposed it to be, owing to previous education and 
training; but if we are willing to receive it because it is truth, it is 
presumptive evidence that we shall be likely to recognize it 
when brought to view. 

Again, having recognized the truth, and having become 
acquainted with it, we should be likely to love it, and of course 
to receive it; for we cannot suppose one would reject a thing 
they loved (unless indeed they love something else more, and 
that something antagonize this). Then having recognized, loved 
and received this truth, what more natural than that they should 
proclaim it? 

It is hardly supposable that one could become acquainted with a 
truth of such a deep interest to mankind as this is, and yet say 
nothing about it. 

The subject is one so full of comfort, and one, too, which 
appeals to our sense of God's wisdom, justice, and love; and one 
which, from every stand-point, except of settled prejudice, gives 
us a view of God's attributes shining forth gloriously, which so 
entrances us as we gaze that we are constrained to cry out with 
the Psalmist (107-8): "O that men would praise the Lord for his 
goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men. " 

But if the doctrine of restitution be true (don't forget that there is 
a "much more" salvation), how nicely it would match with and 
explain this Scripture which has so long puzzled us: Ezekiel 
16:53. In this chapter, God, through the prophet, is "causing 
Jerusalem to know her abominations," (2nd verse) and after 
speaking at some length upon the subject, says: "When I shall 
bring again the captivity, the captivity of Sodom and her 
daughters, and the captivity of Samaria and her daughters, then 
will I bring again the captivity of thy captives in the midst of 
them." But says one: "That does not prove restitution; some 
commentators say that God did not intend 

R236 : page 6 

to bring again the captivity of either; he only says, when I do 
one, I will do the other, and he is speaking not of death." 

We are not asserting NOW that it does prove restitution, only 
considering that if the doctrine is true, how easy you would get 



along with some Scriptures, and how you would not have to be 
so very "wise and prudent" with a good many passages of 
Scripture. 

(55th verse): "When thy sisters, Sodom and her daughters, shall 
return to their former estate, and Samaria and her daughters shall 
return to their former estate, [they were dead and in their graves, 
you know,] then thou and thy daughters shall return to your 
former estate. " 

Opposed to the thought that this was an emphatic way of saying 
that he would do neither is the statement in the 61st verse: "And 
I will give them unto thee for daughters, but not by thy 
covenant~(i.e., the old covenant). 

Again, if it is true, what light would be shed on the words of 
Jesus in Matthew 1 1 :24, where in speaking of the privileges 
which Capernaum had failed to improve, he said: "But I say 
unto you, that it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in 
the day of Judgment, than for thee. " And this last would 
harmonize with the other quoted from Ezekiel. This view would 
lend some meaning to the words of Jesus in Luke 12:32: 
"Whosoever speaketh against the Holy Spirit, it shall not be 
forgiven him, neither in this world nor in the world to come. " 
With this view we shall not wonder so much that Peter said 
(Acts 3:21) of Jesus: "Whom the heaven must receive until the 
times of restitution of all things which God hath spoken by the 
mouth of his holy prophets which have been since the world 
began. " 

But say some: "Do not tell the people such things; if you do they 
will never repent, but will live right on in sin." My dear sir, who 
told you that? 

If it is true, and God has been speaking of it by the mouth of all 
his holy prophets since the world began, as Peter says, shall we 
be prudent above that which is written? If we should, it would 
be equivalent to saying that God was very unwise to allow the 
prophets to utter such things, even though they were true, and 
that if he had the prudence of some of his creatures, he would 
never have allowed such writings as that in Ezekiel to be put 
before the world, together with many other careless (?) 
statements, lest men might guess that the Psalmist was right, 
when at the end of every verse of the 136th Psalm he says: "The 
mercy of the Lord endureth forever," and if they were to think 
that, just as likely as not the very next thing they would think 
would be that the punishment of the wicked would end some 
time; and if they should get that idea, they might find an 
explanation to some texts that prudence has said taught the 
doctrine of "endless torment;" and if they should become 
convinced that God did not intend to punish the wicked beyond 
the point of reformation, they might conclude that his name 
(Love) was very appropriate, and love him too. 



Now, it is a noticeable fact, that those who do not believe in the 
doctrine of restitution are the ones who think it is imprudent to 
teach it. Query: Are they the ones referred to in Matthew 1 1:25? 
Jesus had been telling, how much more tolerable it would be for 
Sodom in the day of judgement than for Capernaum, and: "At 
that time Jesus answered and said: I thank thee, O Father, Lord 
of heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these things from the 
wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes." 

And 1 Cor. 1:19: "I will destroy the wisdom of the wise and 
bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent." Is it not best, 
then, dear brethren, to give our whole attention to the "spirit of 
truth," and like prattlers (babes), tell it just as it is, and thus 
insure further revelations? For: 

Blind unbelief is sure to err, 
And scan His work in vain; 
God is his own interpreter, 
And He will make it plain. 

If our Heavenly Father has not been prudent enough to guard 
his own character, we shall make a poor display of our wisdom 
to undertake to do it for him, and we cannot afford to lose the 
things that would be "hid" from us by so doing. 

"I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou 
hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast 
revealed them unto babes." "Even so, Father, for so it seemed 
good in thy sight." 

J. C. S. 



The desert rose, though never seen by man, 
Is nurtured with a care divinely good. 
The ocean gem, though 'neath the rolling main 
Is ever brilliant in the eyes of God. 

Think not thy work and worth are all unknown, 

Because no partial pens men paint thy praise; 

Man may not see nor mind, but God will own 

Thy worth and work, thy thoughts and words and ways. 

N. B. Cobb. 



R236 : page 7 

THE PRESENCE AND HARVEST. 

(MATT. 24:3.) 

"What shall be the sign of thy presence and of the 
consummation of the age?" (See Emphatic Diaglott.) 



This rendering sheds light on the relation between the presence 
of Christ and the Harvest. The Greek word parousia does not 
mean the act of coming, but the being present. So the Lexicons 
tell us. The word aion does not mean this globe, or this general 
order of things, but an era, or age. 

This passage, it will be seen, gives no countenance to the quite 
popular conception of the relation between the coming of Christ 
and the "wreck of matter and crush of worlds." This false notion 
makes the subject one of dread. 

The word suntelia, translated end, does not mean a point, but a 
period of time. The same word is used in Matt. 13:39: "The 
harvest is the end [suntelia] of the age." In verse 30 Jesus shows 
that the harvesting is a work done. "In the time [period] of the 
harvest." With these few facts before us, reading the text gives 
this as the substance of the question: "What shall be the sign 
[evidence] of thy presence and of the harvest of the age?" 

The sign of the presence is the sign of the time of harvest-one 
sign (evidence in the aggregate) for two things. The worker and 
the work are related to each other. Whoever believes, on the 
strength of what he considers good evidence, that the harvest is 
come, ought to believe in the presence of Christ, as Lord of the 
Angel reapers. The presence and the harvest are related not only 
in the text, but in reason. Some who once consistently accepted 
both, because of their relation, now deny the presence, and 
inconsistently hold that He will not come until the end of the 
harvest. They will doubtless soon, in order to regain the balance 
of consistency, discard the harvest also. Matt. 24:3 must suffer 
violence, if it must be maintained that the harvest -the end of 
the age, and its work, -precedes the coming of Christ; and this is 
the position of all who deny the presence of Christ and yet teach 
that we are in the harvest time. 

It would not be so inconsistent with the order of the text should 
it be claimed that the presence of Christ, for some preparatory 
reason, should precede the harvest, as it was at the first advent, 
from His birth to His ministry; but to invert the order and have 
the consummation of the age before His arrival seems absurd. 

We have no desire to make parallels, but when parallels really 
exist between the closing work of the Jewish and Gospel ages, 
we are glad to accept them, and regard them as a strength to the 
argument on the equality of the "Two Dispensations." And it is 
strangely out of harmony with the pattern character of the 
Jewish dispensation to claim, as some do, that though Christ was 
present on the Jewish level to introduce the Jewish harvest, yet 
He will not come to the level of the Gospel church until the 
Gospel harvest is ended. 

There can be no doubt that the cause of this inconsistency, and 
denial of the presence of Christ during the Gospel harvest, is a 
misapprehension of what the level of the perfect Gospel church 



is. Paul gives us the key when he says: "Ye are not in the flesh, 
but in the spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you." 
(Rom. 8:9.) The ideal of the flesh is a perfect flesh man, but the 
ideal of the Spirit is "the spirits of just men made perfect." (Heb. 
12:23.) If a perfect flesh man has a flesh body, a perfect spiritual 
being ought to have a "spiritual body "--and such Paul assures us 
will be the case: "It is sown a natural [psukikon— animal] body; it 
is raised a spiritual [pneumatikon] body." The former, even 
when perfect, is, and must be, according to the law of the flesh; 
and the latter is by the law of the Spirit. So Jesus, knowing both 
laws, says: "That which is born of [produced by] the flesh is 
flesh; and that which is born of [produced by] the Spirit is 
spirit." 

No wonder that those who deny the presence and yet believe the 
harvest is here, are anxious to ignore some of the parallels of the 
Two Dispensations. Losing sight of the parallel causes them to 
ignore also the contract; for the second coming is, 

R237 : page 7 

and should be, in harmony with the spiritual character of the 
Gospel dispensation, even as the first coming was in harmony 
with the fleshly character of the Jewish dispensation. 

That spiritual beings are naturally invisible to mortals, has often 
been proved; and that they have power to appear when it is 
necessary. God is said to be invisible, and of Christ it is said: 
"Who is the image of the invisible God, the first born of every 
creature;" (Col. 1:15) clearly implying that as soon as creatures 
are born of the Spirit they, too, become invisible. Angels are 
naturally invisible to mortals, and yet on special occasions they 
have been seen, and men have the promise of being made like 
unto the angels, and also like unto Christ. 

The invisibility of the new being to mortals is more than implied 
in Paul's teaching in 2 Cor. 4:14-18. 

That the risen body of Christ was invisible to mortals, only 
when for special reasons He appeared, should be admitted by all 
who ever knew that truth, or who have read the account. That, 
though Christians are actually in the flesh until these bodies are 
changed, (Phil. 3:21) God does not count them in the flesh, but 
in the spirit, (Rom. 8:9) and therefore as "risen with Christ" 
(Col. 3:1) "through the faith of the operation of God, who hath 
raised Him from the dead," (Col. 2:12) cannot be ignored with 
impunity. 

As Christ risen is naturally invisible, as we have shown, so when 
we have attained His perfect state, we too will be naturally 
invisible to mortals; i.e., when we have actually attained that in 
which we are now counted, on account of our faith, and the new 
work begun in us by the Spirit. That new nature is spoken of as 
Christ in you; (Rom. 8:10, and Gal. 2:20) Christ formed in you; 



(Gal. 4:19) "the hope of glory;" (Col. 1:27) "the inner man;" 
(Eph. 3:16) and "a new creation," (2 Cor. 5:17). The last 
passage, with its context, shows that this new nature by which 
we are related to the second Adam, and not the old Adam, 
nature, is the basis of our recognition as Christians, and of our 
fellowship. It also shows that the reason we are so counted is 
because we are in Christ, and He is no longer known after the 
flesh. 

In the preceding chapter, before mentioned and to which 
attention is now called, the two natures, or men, are contrasted; - 
the old being the outward, the seen, the temporal, the perishing; 
while the new is the inward, the not seen, renewed day by day, 
the eternal. Those who cannot see that the new creature is 
invisible to mortals, both in the pre-natal and perfect state, it is 
to be hoped, are not willfully blind. 

Failing to apprehend the double relationship of the Christian, in 
all its bearings, has caused some to misapprehend our position 
as to the presence of Christ. As natural or mortal beings we are 
related to the first Adam, but in our new nature we are related to 
the second Adam. Now we are as new beings in an "earthly 
house," and so our bodies are said to be the "temple of the Holy 
Spirit." We do not, however, wish to be unclothed, but clothed 
upon with the heavenly house, or house from heaven. 2 Cor. 
5:1-8. 

There are two phases of service appropriately related to these 
two phases of life~an external service and an internal service. 
The "court" and the "holy place" of the tabernacle seem to 
represent these two phases of service. The court was open and 
visible, but all beyond the first vail was covered with dyed rams' 
skins, "and a covering of badgers' skins above that." Ex. 36:19. 
No eye could penetrate it. The only light there was from the 
lamps. The court (sometime also called the "holy place," (Lev. 
14:13 and Ex. 29:1 1,31) was the place of sacrifice and of 
washing, and seems to represent our more earthly phase of life, 
and the disposition to be made of the flesh, by the indwelling 
Spirit. (Rom. 8:13.) But the "holy" or second apartment seems to 
represent our hidden life— in which "we walk by faith, not by 
sight." In this department and by faith, we eat of the hidden 
bread, walk in the light the world cannot see, and serve at an 
unseen altar. When we ascend to the perfection of spiritual 
beings we will see Him with eyes immortal; but while we walk 
by faith, we must receive His presence by faith, under the 
leadings of the Spirit. Nickname our view as men may please, to 
us it appears in harmony with the Law and the Prophets. 

The philosophy of the plan, as well as the general statements of 
the New Testament, teaches the higher and spiritual and 
invisible character of the coming of Christ to receive His saints 
to Himself. To ignore that philosophy and those teachings is to 
ignore the relation of the natural and the spiritual as seen in the 



two Adams, the two Dispensations, the two Jerusalems, the two 
bodies and the two- "First the natural, afterward the spiritual," 
in almost every element of the plan. 

The fact that a sign of His presence was needed and given is 
evidence that the presence was to be invisible to the natural eye. 
The sign— (all the evidences)— is for the church. This is proved 
by the general plan. "Light is sown for the righteous." The world 
is to learn by judgments, which will doubtless be the appearing 
of the sign to them. There is doubtless import in the fact that the 
disciples came to Him privately, saying: "Tell us when shall 
these things be, " &c. 

The condition of the world-their excuse and ignorance-during 
the first part at least of the parousia— presence -of Christ-is 
stated by Himself. (See Matt. 24:37-39.) The word coming in 
this passage is not Erkomia, but Parousia. The Savior compares 
the period of His presence to "the days of Noah"- not to the 
flood, as some suppose, but to the "days which were before the 
flood," while the ark was preparing." (See verse 38 and compare 
1 Pet. 3:20.) 

In Luke 17:26, instead of "coming," we have a "phrase "in the 
days of the Son of man," which agrees with the idea of Presence. 
That this presence, in his days precedes, for a time, the rapture 
or taking away of the saints, is proved by the light given for 
them by the Savior; and by the fact that the day does not come 
unawares on the watchers, because they walk in the light. (Luke 
21:34-36 and 1 Thess. 5:1-5. Another evidence that He will be 
present for a time and that presence proclaimed, before the wise 
are gone, may be drawn from the contrast between the work of 
the "Faithful and wise servant" and the "Evil servant." (Matt. 
24:45-51.) The evil servant says: "My Lord delays," and smites 
his fellow servant, who must be proclaiming the opposite, which 
is, "My Lord no longer tarries." Until he has come of course he 
delays. It is not so much the honest doubt that is to be 
condemned as the persecuting spirit. 

This Suntelia— the end of the age, the harvest— agrees with 
Peter's "Last of the days," in which he says: "Scoffers will come 
with scoffing," and saying, 'Where is the promise of His 
presence?'" The scoffer's point is that nothing in the 
circumstances appeals to the natural eyes "All things continue in 
this way from the beginning." 2 Pet. 3:3-4. (Diaglott) "If your 
Christ has been present these seven years, He has done 
nothing "-an expression some use (and we give it free from its 
severity) sounds a little like the plea Peter mentions. If the 
harvest work has been in process, He has not been idle, for even 
though the Reapers are the Angels, He is Lord of the Angels as 
well as men. He is therefore the chief Reaper— the Lord of the 
Harvest. If there is no evidence of the presence, there is none of 
the Harvest, -the sign of the one is the sign of the other. To use 
the amount of evidence is great-coming by a combination of the 



prophetic periods, the parallels and the "signs of the times." 
There are doubtless unseen facts which, when knowledge is 
perfected, will be found in harmony with what we have seen. 
But there is so much evidence which appeals to faith, 

R237 : page 8 

that we are encouraged to hold fast. We think if Jesus were 
present in the flesh, as when he came to the Jews, He would say 
now as then: "Ye can discern the face of the earth and of the 
sky; how is it that ye cannot discern this time?" The clearer the 
understanding, the deeper will be the impression of the facts, 
and the sanctifying effect will be the greater. 

J. H. P. 



R237 : page 8 

THE LORD'S AND OUR NEW NAME. 

"Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my 
God, and he shall go no more out; and I will write upon him the 
name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, which is 
New Jerusalem, which cometh down out of heaven from my 
God: and I will write upon him my new name." Rev. 3:12. 

By the above it would seem that Jesus is to be known by a new 
name and a title different from that which He now bears; and not 
only will this be true of Him, but also of us; for if overcomers 
we shall bear His name, being his bride. We think a new name 
suggests the idea of a change in Christ's official position toward 
restored Israel and other of earth's nations in the coming age; 
therefore he should assume that position in the end of this age, 
for then Israel is to return to a position of favor; as: "Simeon 
hath declared how God at the first did visit the Gentiles, to take 
out of them a people for His name [His bride] and to this 
agree... the prophets; as it is written, after this [after He selects 
His bride] : I will overturn and build again the tabernacle of 
David... and I will build again the ruins thereof, and I will set it 
up." Acts 15:14-16. In harmony with this we quote from the 
prophet, saying: "Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I 
will 

R238 : page 8 

raise unto David a righteous branch, and a king shall reign and 
prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice in the earth. In 
His day Judah shall be saved and Israel shall dwell safely; and 
this is His name whereby He shall be called: THE LORD, OUR 
RIGHTEOUSNESS !" It is evident that the above scene is laid at 
the time of favor to Israel, when God shall comfort them; for 
their double chastisement will then be complete, (Isa. 40:1-2) 
and the Lord shall be known by them in that day [now entered 



upon] as: "THE LORD, OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS." This is His 
new name, and He shall be so recognized during his reign over 
the nations. Melchisedec, being a type of Christ, was: "First, 
being by interpretation, King of Righteousness, and after that 
also King of Salem, which is King of Peace;" (Heb. 7:2) and to 
this end (to be a king and reign in righteousness) was Jesus born. 
John 18:37. During the presence of Jesus Acts 15:16 will have a 
fulfillment, and also Acts 3:19,23: "Moses truly said unto the 
fathers: A prophet shall the Lord, your God, raise up unto you of 
your brethren, like unto me; Him shall ye hear in all things 
whatsoever He shall say unto you." The change to Israel is 
gradual, and during that time the espoused of Christ is exalted 
(married) and receives His name; and so our text reads: "I will 
write upon Him (that overcometh) my new name." The city 
mentioned is the new Jerusalem, and this was shown John in 
vision as being a picture of the glorified church-the bride- Rev. 
21:2,9-11. We shall show you that the new Jerusalem is called 
by the same name in that day as our Lord, for says the prophet: 
"In those days, and at that time, will I cause the Branch of 
righteousness to grow up unto David; and He shall execute 
judgment and righteousness in the land. In those days shall 
Judah be saved, and Jerusalem shall dwell safely: and this is the 
name wherewith SHE shall be called, THE LORD OUR 
RIGHTEOUSNESS." Jer. 33:15,16. How beautiful is this and 
how harmonious with all light we have had on this point. All 
who are acquainted with our position, know that we have 
claimed the church as now espoused to Jesus in order that we 
may be united as one; and as God called the first pair-after 
marriage- Adam (Gen. 5:2) so the second Adam includes His 
bride, and they united constitute the new Jerusalem, which will 
be the righteousness of the nations. This will be called: "The city 
of righteousness, the faithful city;" (Isa. 1:26) and those who 
constitute it will be known as: "Trees of righteousness, the 
planting of the Lord, that He might be glorified;" (Isa. 61:3). 
"That in the ages to come He might show the exceeding riches 
of His grace in His kindness toward us through Christ Jesus." 
(Eph. 2:7.) Then will (Isa. 32:1) be fulfilled: "Behold, a king 
shall reign in righteousness, and princes (the saints) shall rule in 
judgment;" "And Saviors (Jesus and his bride) shall come upon 
Mount Zion: and the kingdom shall be the Lord's." (Oba. 21.) 
As we shall then rule Israel for their good we shall be to them: 
"The sun of righteousness," that shall arise with healing in his 
wings and they shall grow up as calves of the stall; (well cared 
for) and: "There shall come out of Zion the Deliverer, and shall 
turn away ungodliness from Jacob;" (Rom. 11:26) or as David 
says: "Oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion." 
(Psa. 53:6.) Then will be their time to shine; as the prophet says: 
"Arise, shine: for thy light (the bride) is come, and the glory of 
the Lord is risen upon thee." (Isa. 60:1.) Yes friends, the 
marriage of the Lamb is the next great and important event for 
this world; next to the death of Jesus; for not until then will the 



enlightening and blessing of the nations come: (Rev. 21:24) and 
until then: "The earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for 
the manifestation of the sons of God;" (Rom. 8:19) and we will 
not be manifest to the world until we take upon us by 
glorification the name of Jesus. After the marriage of the Lamb 
people shall be judged by righteousness and: "The mountains 
(earth's governments) shall bring peace to the people,... He shall 
judge the poor of the people, He shall save the children of the 
needy:. ..and men shall be blessed in Him." (Psa. 72:3,4,17.) 
Christ (head and body). "With righteousness shall He judge 
(rule) the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the 
earth:... They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain; 
for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the 
waters cover the sea:" (Isa. 11:4,9.) "And the work of 
righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of righteousness 
quietness and assurance forever;" (Isa. 32:17) for "The Lord is 
exalted: for He dwelleth on high: He hath filled Zion (city of the 
living God, Heb. 12:22) with judgment and righteousness:" 
"Because He hath appointed a day, (1000 years) in the which He 
will judge the world in righteousness by that man (the Christ: 
head and body for we shall judge the world. 1 Cor. 6:2) whom 
He hath ordained." (Acts 17:31.) Though we shall rule the world 
it will be when in glory (Psa. 149) and: "If the ministration of 
condemnation (that under the law) be glory, much more doth the 
ministration of righteousness (that under the new covenant: in 
the next ages) exceed in glory." (2 Cor. 3:9.) The glorified 
Jerusalem being the bride, the Mount Zion, from her shall go 
forth the law; (Isa. 2:3) and by it the world will be blessed, for to 
the world we shall be as: "The Lord our righteousness." 
Beloved, seeing we shall bear such a name, and hold such an 
exalted position; let us be holy, and strive to overcome as Jesus 
overcame, for alone to the overcomers shall the new name be 
given. Strive, therefore: "That no man take thy crown." (Rev. 
3:1 1.) He that hath an ear let him hear what the Spirit saith unto 
the churches: "To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the 
hidden manna, and I will give him a white stone, and in the 
stone a new name written, which no man knoweth saving he that 
receiveth it:" (Rev. 2:17) and true it is that no person knows our 
new name except they that receive it: for it is, "The Lord our 
righteousness." 

A. D. J. 



R238 : page 8 

TO THE READERS OF 
THE WATCH TOWER. 

BELOVED: It is fitting that new recruits should cheer, if 
nothing else presents that they can do. It is well that overcomers 



should continue to use the "word of their testimony." In the true 
life of faith there must be habitual obedience to the revealed will 
of God. The just shall live by faith. To the one that lives by 
every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God, it should 
not appear strange that God should present objects of faith one 
by one, and not all at once; neither should we stumble if our 
faith meets with higher truths than those first presented. Faith, 
like muscular organs, is strengthened by use-the whole 
gymnasium is open to the athlete; he would spurn the gentle and 
easy exercises of the invalids. But how often we rebel when this 
principle is used in the acts of faith: It is trying to the man who 
has arrived at the justified plane to be told about the entire 
consecration demanded of the "overcomer." For a week I have 
been instructed in the things of the Kingdom especially referring 
to the presence of Christ doing the separating work preparatory 
to the marriage. And most joyfully do I receive these teachings. 

With shame I record that for three days I rejected these truths, 
almost wishing they were not scriptural and the very truth of 
God, instead of joyfully welcoming them with grateful heart. 
Following closely came another trial of faith and measure of my 
obedience and consecration, when I, as one of God's stewards, 
was urged to do the work of a steward and deal out these truths 
exactly in the measure of my ability to proclaim them. This 
meant for me the preaching service; the proclamation of truths 
so unwelcome to many up and down the land everywhere and 
always. 

I ask pardon from the blessed Master -Christ Jesus, that I ever 
hesitated to accept His place in true humility, and the obedience 
of faith. I bring, not a parade of the Christianizing and civilizing 
elements to elevate and liberalize the world, and thus make it fit 
for a coming Messiah; but we proclaim: "The times of 
restitution spoken of by all the holy prophets since the world 
began"— the glorious manifestation of the sons of God, now so 
near. Glorious body of Christ, take courage. "Now I beseech 
you, brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love 
of the Spirit, that ye strive together with me in prayers to God 
for me; that I may be delivered from them that do not believe in 
Judea (the nominal church), and my service that I have for 
Jerusalem the Bride) may be accepted of all the saints." Rom. 
15:30,31. 

Rejoicing in the light shining from the present one. 

J. B. A. 



It gives me pleasure to thus introduce to the readers of the 
WATCH TOWER one whom we have recently come to know as 
a very dear saint- a brother in Christ. We first became 
acquainted about one year ago and his interest has been growing 
in the precious truths advocated in the TOWER. Again visiting 



this city, we have had very pleasant and profitable interchanges 
on the all important themes~the presence, the "high calling" and 
the "narrow way" of entire consecration by which it may be 
reached. 

Our brother has concluded as the above letter indicates to give 
all that he has of time, reputation and ability for the Pearl of 
great price, the "Crown of life, "--immortality and joint-heirship. 
He leaves a profitable and increasing business paying about 
$1,500 

R239 : page 8 

a year as well as other things-this might be considered a great 
deal to give but it is really nothing— nothing compared to the 
privilege of being an Ambassador and mouth-piece of the King 
of kings; nothing compared with the privilege of telling the 
"Glad tidings of great joy which shall be to all people" causing 
men to know and love God and their Redeemer and refreshing 
the hearts of the Saints; nothing compared to the great riches and 
glory and honor promised of God to those who walk in Jesus' 
footsteps. 

Bro. Robert Bailey, of Michigan, has also gone forth a 
proclaimer of the same "Glad tidings" entirely consecrated to the 
Lord and his work. He was with us as well as Bro. Sunderlin, of 
N.Y., (who has been in the work for three months) at the above 
mentioned conference. We trust that the studies of those days 
were profitable to each of us. May the Lord go with, and bless 
these brethren by using them abundantly in his service. 

Some of them may call upon you in the course of their travels; 
we bespeak for them your kindest and warmest reception. In this 
connection it may be of cheer to some of you to know that the 
Lord is stirring up the depths of the hearts of his consecrated 
children and each seems desirous of doing what he can. Brother 
McGrannor, of Pennsylvania, has also gone forth recently to 
give his entire time and labor in the "harvest" field; may his 
labors also be crowned with such success as may seem good to 
the Lord of the harvest and gain finally the "Well done good and 
faithful servant, thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will 
make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joys of the 
Lord." 

Many other evidences less notable but equally acceptable to the 
Lord could be mentioned showing the power of truth to 
consecrate and separate from everything and to use humble 
efforts for the glory of our King, but these will suffice. Now let 
me ask- are there others who as stewards (not bankers to pay 
when demanded but stewards) possessing talents, time, etc., 
consecrated to God, which he entrusts to them to be used in his 
service: are there more such who want to render to the Lord his 
own?-[EDITOR.] 



R239 : page 1 

VOL. III. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., JULY AND AUGUST, 1881. 

NOS. 1 & 2. 

pagel 

(CHART SUPPLEMENT.) 



ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 

C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 

R239 : page 1 

REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H. PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... BRADDOCK, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 

L. ALLEN, HONEOYE, N.Y. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN, . FT. EDWARD, N.Y. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he can not and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

This paper will be sent to those desiring it, upon application. As 
this constitutes a part of the preaching of the Gospel, it is our 
belief it should be without money and without price. If any one 
wishes to give to the maintenance of this branch of the service, 



let him give according to his estimation of its value and of his 
ability. Free-will offerings and communications may be sent to 
the Editor, addressed as above, and all "money orders," "drafts," 
&c, made payable to him. No agents are authorized to take 
donations for "ZION'S WATCH TOWER." 



pagel 

PITTSBURGH CHURCH MEETINGS. 

Service held in "Curry Institute Hall," corner Penn avenue and 
Sixth street, Pittsburgh, at 3:00 o'clock P.M., every Sunday. 
Every Wednesday evening, at No. 80 Cedar avenue, Allegheny, 
at 7:30 o'clock P.M. All are cordially invited. 



R239 : page 1 

OUR NEW YEAR. 

This number ushers in our third volume and third year, and we 
take the liberty of wishing both our paper and its readers a 
happy and profitable new year. 

The Editor never enjoyed a year so much~of growth in grace 
and in knowledge and in love-as the one just closed: He hopes, 
and has reason to believe from the expressions of hundreds of 
letters received, that the readers have been similarly blessed. 
And for us all we pray that our bountiful Father and present 
King, may continue to dispense his favors feeding, 
strengthening and enlightening us more and more during the 
year begun. 

This seemed a favorable time for a change in the TERMS of the 
paper, which we accordingly have made, for several reasons. 

First: This is a part of the preaching of the gospel, and it is both 
without price and beyond price; and we believe that it would be 
just as proper to charge for admission to hear the spoken Word- 
or to charge pew rent -as to charge for the written gospel. 

Second: Many of the Lord's purest jewels are very poor, and 
though the paper was offered- "Free to the poor," many of this 
class do not like to ask favors except of the Lord: Such, under 
our new terms, will feel no embarrassment in asking for it; and 
coming to them like all the bounties of heaven— sunshine, air, 
etc., they will appreciate it more as one of the gifts which 
"cometh down from our Father." 

Third: The subscription price was made so low in endeavoring 
to make it burdenless upon the majority of our readers who 
cannot well afford to spend more, that it did not pay expenses. 
(The paper from the first, has only paid about two-thirds of its 



expenses-not to mention the additional cost of Supplements 
during the last six months.) 

Fourth: The truth is worth more than gold, and its price is above 
rubies, and doubtless there are some who could as well pay one 
hundred or one thousand dollars, as others could pay one dollar; 
and the new terms will place the responsibility where it belongs- 
-with each one of us according to our several ability. 

Fifth: If it is the right way, as we believe, it should be followed 
regardless of consequences, and will be. If the means necessary 
for its publication become exhausted, the paper will stop. We 
will not go into debt, neither will we ever beg~It is the Lord's 
business; He is rich~"all the gold and silver of the mountains 
are his, and the cattle upon a thousand hills," and if he does not 
supply necessary means, we should know of no better way of 
judging that he wished the paper discontinued. Therefore, 

READERS TAKE NOTICE 

that all moneys due and in arrears on subscriptions are now 
stricken out, and all who desire "ZION'S WATCH TOWER" 
continued, will please send word immediately. 

Brethren and sisters who have heretofore taken subscriptions for 
this paper, will please notice the change and hereafter collect no 
money, on account of this paper. If disposed, they may take the 
addresses of those who desire and request the paper, and 
forward the same to this office. All free will offerings to the 
WATCH TOWER, should be sent direct to its office. 



R240 : page 1 

ANOINTED TO PREACH. 

"The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because he hath 
anointed me to preach good tidings (gospel) unto the meek; he 
hath sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty 
to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are 
bound; to proclaim the acceptable year (time) of the Lord, and 
the day of vengeance of our God." Isa. 61:1. 

This prophecy Jesus quoted (Luke 4:18) and applied to himself 
and his work. We found that he was thus anointed when, at 30 
years of age he had reached the perfection of manhood, having 
presented himself to his Father—a living sacrifice; indicating his 
surrender or death by being baptized of John in Jordan, and 
symbolizing his faith in the power and will of God to raise him 
from the tomb to newness of life—as a spiritual being. It was 
because John had been a witness of this anointing of Jesus, that 
he bore record, saying— "And I saw, and bare record that this is 
the Son of God." John 1:32-34. 



We next inquire—Of what value to Jesus was this anointing?-- 
and find answer that it was of the utmost importance: though he 
had been a spiritual being yet he had given that up when he took 
our nature, which is not spiritual, but human; consequently he 
no longer had a spiritual body, but a human or fleshly body- in 
fashion as a man. Understand us; we believe that there was no 
sham or pretention in this matter-no false pretence on the part 
of the Father and Jesus: We believe that Jesus actually gave up 
entirely and forever, his existence as a spiritual or heavenly 
being, changing or transferring it for a human or earthly 
existence. We state the matter thus plainly because so many 
have the idea that Jesus retained his spiritual being, merely 
covered, or concealed under the guise or pretence (deception we 
should call it) that he was a man. Such are continually in trouble 
and difficulty to explain away the statement that "He was 
tempted in all points like as we are, yet without sin," and the 
temptation of the devil in the wilderness, etc. 

Now, if he really took a human nature and became a man, we 
can understand how he that was rich (in a better state or 
condition), for our sakes became poor, that we, through his 
poverty, might become rich. If he merely left his riches for a few 
years to return again, and never really gave up his right or claim 
to them, then he did not become poor, but only appeared or 
pretended to do so. 

But we prefer to take it as it says, and believe that God is true, 
though it contradict a great many men's theories-He who was 
rich, became poor-He who was a spiritual being, became a 
human or earthly being; not a depraved and death-condemned 
human being. No; having done no sin, it would have been unjust 
in the Father to have placed him under sin's penalty- "the 
bondage of corruption" -death. No; though of our own nature, 
he was the perfection of it, and stood on precisely the same 
plane that Adam occupied before sin, abundant arrangement 
being made for this in his miraculous birth. 

When he had reached the perfection of manhood (thirty years), 
knowing why he had taken that nature -that it was not because 
he wanted to be a man and live on earth, rather than be a 
spiritual being and live in heavenly conditions- but that he 
might carry out the Father's plans, and redeem mankind from 
death, by giving himself a ransom for them, that, "as by man 
came death, by a man also, came [the right of] resurrection of 
the dead"- that "as by one man's disobedience many were made 
sinners, so by the obedience of one (man) shall many be made 
righteous." Rom. 5:19. 

This was necessary, for according to God's own arrangement of 
an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, and a life for a life, none 
but a human being could redeem or pay the ransom for 
humanity, and hence the necessity that he who was rich should 
become poor. 



As we have seen, Jesus understood the object of his having 
become a man, and hastened at once to fulfill it, saying, in the 
language of the prophet, "Lo, I come ! In the volume of the book 
it is written of me to do thy will, O God. " The Father's will was 
that that perfect being should freely deliver himself up to death 
as a ransom for us all. Did Jesus do this? Yes, everything was 
consecrated~a living sacrifice, there at Jordan~in the symbolic 
water baptism. Earthly life was henceforth to be surrendered and 
spent daily and hourly until it would ALL be gone-swallowed 
up of death— a ransom for many. 

But, having given up his life, unless it was a mere sham and 
pretence, his existence must have forever ended, says some one. 
We answer, yes; he gave all that he had. (Matt. 13:44.) But the 
Father's promise, which he well understood, was that if he were 
obedient in this matter, "even unto death," He, the Father, would 
create him again-a new creation, different from the human 
creatures, and though spiritual also, yet different from and 
higher than the angelic creatures; in a word, he would highly 
exalt him-though before he became a man he had been the chief 
of all God's creation- "the beginning of the creation of God." 
Yet if thus obedient unto death, he was to be exalted far above 
all, and to a higher position and condition than he himself had 
previously enjoyed— to become a partaker of the DIVINE 
NATURE, a sharer of the Divine Glory, Honor and Immortality. 

The value then of the anointing, was, that by it the Father gave 
witness that the sacrifice was accepted; it was the seal or 
evidence to him that the Father would give him the promised 
DIVINE NATURE when he had finished and fulfilled the 
covenant there made, when he had actually given his life. And it 
was more, it was the power of God, which dwelling in him, 
enabled him not only to know 

R240 : page 2 

the Father's will, but also to do it. Thus, because he had entirely 
laid aside his own will, the Father worked in him both to will 
and to do of his good pleasure, so that he could and did say, 
"Not my will, but Thine be done." 

It was of this indwelling spirit or power of God, that Jesus 
spoke, when he said: "The words that I speak unto you, I speak 
not of myself, but the Father that dwelleth in me, he doeth the 
works." (John 14:10.) And it was not merely because he was a 
perfect man, while all others were imperfect, but also because 
his words were indited of the indwelling Spirit of the Father, 
that men said of him: "Never man spake like this man." 

Does any one question this? We refer to Peter's words (Acts 
10:37-39) "That word ye know, which was published throughout 
all Judea, and began from Galilee, after the baptism which John 
preached-how God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy 
Ghost, and with power, [thus constituting him Jesus the Christ, 



which means Jesus the anointed,] who went about doing good 
and healing all that were oppressed of the devil; for God was 
with him, and we are witnesses." 

But another result of the anointing was that in consequence of 
his sacrifice, already reckoned complete, (by which he ransomed 
mankind,) he was permitted to preach or declare the good news. 
He was 

"ANOINTED TO PREACH." 

To him who so loved the world as to surrender his life for them, 
it must have been a great pleasure to be permitted to declare to 
the ones being redeemed, the good news of the blessing to result 
to them, and so Jesus preached. 

We next inquire as to the exact doctrines which Jesus was 
anointed to preach, assured that if we can understand it we shall 
get the cream of all true doctrine and the essence of all correct 
preaching. Was he anointed to preach that every one who did 
not believe in the "shorter catechism" and the eternal torment of 
nine-tenths of the human race, would himself be condemned to 
never-ending torments? No. Was he anointed to preach such a 
torment as being the doom of any of God's creatures, no matter 
how wicked, no matter against how much light they had sinned? 
No, the prophet knew nothing about such preaching 
commission. Where then did the preachers of to-day get the 
authority to preach these doctrines, and to make them the back- 
bone of all their teachings? Not from the Law or the Prophets, or 
the Gospel (good news) of Jesus and his Apostles, we are sure:- 
probably from the "tradition of the elders," and the creeds 
formed in the "dark ages," when God's people began to get free 
from what Luther called "the dung-hill of Romish decretals." 
But what, according to the prophet, was Jesus anointed to 
preach? The prophet answers us: "To preach the good news to 
the meek." What is the "good news?" It is "Liberty to the 
captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound." 

How singular-did Jesus tell of the emancipation of slaves-of 
the freedom of the serfs of Russia, or the negroes of America? 
And did he preach that there would be a general discharge of all 
culprits in states prisons? Surely this last would not be "good 
news." 

Ah no my brother; it was slaves— bondmen and bond-women of 
another sort whose freedom he proclaimed. All mankind are 
slaves to sin, bound and crippled by the various maladies which 
sin brought upon them; and millions had gone down into the 
great prison house-the tomb. These were the captives and this 
the prison, and of no others did Jesus preach. But did he in his 
preaching ever refer to these and preach the deliverance of these 
captives? Yes, oh yes, repeatedly; hear him: "The hour is 
coming, in the which all that are in 



R241 : page 2 

the graves shall hear his (Jesus') voice and shall come forth." 
"The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of man and they that 
hear shall live." (John 5:25,28.) Again, "I am the resurrection 
and the life." 

As Jesus preached freedom from evil maladies, and death, he 
exemplified the power and authority of his preaching by 
"healing all manner of diseases," raising the dead to life, and 
turning sadness and mourning into gladness and joy, giving 
"beauty for ashes." And all of those miracles and all of Jesus' 
preaching was but the proof or exemplification of the power by 
which the great work, not yet commenced should finally be 
accomplished. The apostle indicates this when he says 
concerning Jesus' miracles- "These things did Jesus and 
manifested forth [before the time —the Millennial age] his 
glory." (John 2:1 1.) Thus did Jesus preach by word and 
illustration the coming emancipation of mankind from the 
thralldom of disease and death- "liberty to the captives and 
opening of the prison to them that are bound." 

But while Jesus had this general proclamation of deliverance for 
the world he had a special message to some— viz.: an invitation 
to those who would, to enter in at the strait gate and the narrow 
(difficult) way, and become with him joint heirs to "Glory, 
Honor and Immortality." Of this way he truly said- "Few there 
be that find it." And foreknowing that few would take up their 
cross and follow him, he called those who would do so and 
thereby become heirs of the kingdom which God hath promised, 
a little flock- saying: "Fear not little flock it is your Father's 
good pleasure to give you the kingdom." And this feature of 
Jesus' preaching is mentioned by the prophet— "To appoint 
[promise] unto them that mourn in Zion [the repentant] to give 
unto them... the oil of joy for the spirit of mourning; (this is the 
promise of the spirit to all who truly turn to God. Oil, is a 
symbol of the spirit. Thus the "little flock" is promised a share 
of the same anointing as their head-Jesus,) that they might be 
called trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord that he 
might be glorified. 

Thus did Jesus preach the "good news" in two parts-First to the 
world a restitution of all things by a resurrection-illustrated by 
his miracles; and second— the great prize and blessing obtainable 
by those who will now walk in "the narrow way" illustrated in 
his own person, for he set us an example that we should walk in 
his footsteps. 

THE CHURCH ANOINTED. 

The anointing spirit power which came first upon the head was 
due and did in due time (Pentecost) come upon the church which 
is his body. And the anointing which she there received abideth 



in her. (1 John 2:27.) Why was the church anointed? The word 
answers-that she might share with her Lord in the present time 
the dishonor and sacrifice and in the coming age of glory be 
joined with him in glory and power. And more -as he was 
"anointed to preach the good news" so must we, his body, be 
anointed to preach the same gospel with its same two parts~viz.: 
that for the world-freedom-restitution through ransom and a 
resurrection; and for the little flock who follow the Lamb-the 
kingdom, through the ransom and consecration. 

This is all of it, just what it is called --"good news." It is what 
the apostles preached- "that there shall be a resurrection of the 
dead both of the just and unjust." (Acts 24:15.) They "preached 
through Jesus (because of the ransom he had paid) the 
resurrection from the dead." (Acts 4:2 and 17; 17:32; and 23:6.) 

The news was so new to them and so good that the Pharisees 
and religious teachers could not believe it to be true; they had 
become so accustomed to binding on mankind burdens which 
they did not help to remove, (Matt. 23 :4) that though the 
common people "wondered at the gracious words (words of love 
and promises of release from death,) which proceeded out of his 
mouth," the church authorities were "grieved." Thus it still is 
and ever will be-the preaching of the cross and its value as the 
price of the peace of all sinners, has always been to all but those 
anointed to preach it- "foolishness." 

WHO ARE TO PREACH? 

We answer all who receive of the anointing spirit and are thus 
recognized as members of the body of Christ (the anointed.) Of 
each member it is true as of the head- "He hath anointed me to 
preach the gospel." We have each gifts and talents differing 
from the other and none of us are like our head, perfect, but each 
is responsible for such and so much preaching as he can do. 
Some can preach to multitudes; others to the twos and threes; 
others from house to house; others can drop a word in season; 
others can distribute tracts; others can give of the consecrated 
money entrusted to their stewardship to help others preach. 
Some can do several of these things, and some can do all of 
them, and all can and should preach by their life and customs the 
power of the good news to transform, for we are all living 
epistles, known and read of all men. 

Are you preaching? We believe that none will be of the little 
flock except preachers. Are you preaching with all your talents 
and all your might? If so, you will by-and-by hear the words: 
"Well done good and faithful!" If not, begin now; remember that 
you consecrated your all before you were anointed, and now you 
cannot be an overcomer and keep back part of the price. (Acts 
5:4.) Paul says: "Ye know your calling, brethren." Yes, we were 
called to suffer with him and to proclaim the good news now, 
that in due time we might be glorified and perform the things 



now preached. We were not called, nor anointed to receive 
honor and amass wealth, but to spend and be spent, and to 
preach the good news. Let us give all diligence to make our 
calling sure and to perform that for which we were anointed. 

FUTURE WORK AND GLORY. 

If Jesus was anointed of the Spirit to preach coming blessings 
and freedom to Death's captives, tell me was his preaching (and 
ours) true? Will there ever be such a wholesale release? Yes, oh 
yes. "As in Adam all die, even so (unconditionally so far as they 
are concerned) in (or by) Christ, shall all be made alive." But the 
preaching of the good news comes before the performance of 
the blessings promised. Now the preaching is going on "to the 
meek"-- those willing and able to hear, in order to develop from 
among them the body of Christ, the joint heirs. 

This work is almost finished, and soon the actual blessing 
(instead of the promise) will be given. Then we shall have Jesus' 
words fulfilled: "Greater works than these shall ye do." The 
works which Jesus did were raising the dead, healing the sick, 
opening blind eyes, etc., and none of the disciples ever did 
greater works, hence the application of this language applies to 
the Millennial Age, and the great works there to be performed, 
of which Jesus' miracles were but illustrations of a less 
important character. The work of the coming Glory Age, 
opening the eyes of men's understanding, that they may 
understand the truth; the unstopping of the deaf ears that they 
may hear and know of "the love of God which passeth all 
understanding;" the making whole of the sin-sick, and the 
healing of the morally lame and crooked, are surely far, far 
greater things than the temporary healings which Jesus 
accomplished and which served only to show forth his (coming) 
glory. 

But some one inquires: What means the prophet when he says, 
he shall "proclaim the acceptable year (period or time) of the 
Lord and the day of vengeance of our God?" 

The acceptable time is this Gospel Age, during which, if any 
man hear the good news and fully consecrate himself to God, a 
living sacrifice, he will be accepted and made a joint heir with 
Jesus Christ our Lord. It is an acceptable time in that, during this 
age, God accepts of all such sacrifices. And it ends with this age 
because the "little flock" will be complete, and no more will be 
accepted to the DIVINE NATURE. 

The day of vengeance of our God is the time of fire, or purifying 
trouble, in which the world and all the church, except the "little 
flock," are to be tried and purged, and made ready for the 
blessings of the Millennial Age. [It is this Day of the Lord," in 
which, from prophetic evidences, we believe we have been, 
since 1 874, and which we believe will continue with increasing 



severity—first, on nominal Zion, and secondly, upon the world, 
until 1914, the first seven years of which, as heretofore shown, 
are years of favor and end in October of this year.] 

Jesus, in applying this prophecy to himself, stopped in the 
middle of this paragraph, and said nothing relative to the "Day 
of Vengeance," because it was not then due. The Spirit, through 
the Word, now shows it to be due. We believe, and therefore 
now declare it. 

How intimate a relationship this shows between Him, as head, 
and us as the body of the Lord's anointed. The special work of 
announcing this "Day of the Lord"~"Day of Vengeance," being 
done now, because now due, is mentioned as being part of the 
good news proclaimed by the Lord's anointed. It is good news 
only as we are able to recognize the blessed results God intends 
shall follow afterward. 

God having called us to preach the Good News, let us see to it 
that we do his will, and with Paul, we should feel, "woe is me if 
I preach not the Gospel." But if you are filled with the subject 
this privilege will be your greatest pleasure and chiefest joy, and 
you can truly say: 

"I love to tell the story. " 



R239 : page 3 



HIS HOLY NAME TO BEAR. 

Oh! patient traveler in life's narrow way, 
Tempted and tried, with hardly strength to pray, 
Rejoice! thy rest is near. 

Think what the Lord to those he loves will give, 
To share his glory, and with him to live, 
His holy name to bear. 

The name which highest angel may not own, 
Which, with his waiting bride He'll share alone, 
She whom He loves to bless. 
Upon His heavenly throne by love installed, 
This is the name wherewith she shall be called, 
The Lord our righteousness. 

I know that steep, and narrow is the way, 
And shadows, sometimes hide the light of day, 
Till our feeble faith is tried; 
But if with Him we're crucified; if for His sake 
We suffer loss, with Him our portion take, 
We shall be satisfied. 

Though now the cross is ours, and we must stay 
Until we hear the summons, "come away! 
The Master calls for thee;" 



How blessed then, to lay the cross forever down, 
And in its place receive the victor's crown, 
To wear eternally. 

Lord guide our feet each step through life we pray, 

Grant we ne'er may wander from the narrow way, 

That leads to life unseen. 

Then let us gaze upon thy glorious face, 

Thou blest Redeemer of a ruined race, 

Without a vail between. 

-MRS. A. AGENS. 



R242 : page 3 



BEHOLD! BEHOLD! 



"There standeth one among you whom you know not. "--(John 
1:26.) 

How difficult a thing it seems, to believe spiritual things; that is 
to say things belonging or pertaining to spiritual beings or 
conditions. Our experiences as men-earthly beings -are so 
constant that our ideas are apt to be entirely from that 
standpoint, while only those who are separated from the earth by 
their hopes and ambitions, and who are continuously making 
spiritual things their study, are able at all to appreciate them and 
to rightly divide truth and discriminate between earthly and 
spiritual things. 

How few there are who know that there is a natural (or human) 
body and there is a spiritual body; their only idea of organization 
is drawn from their daily experiences; they never saw any 
person whose body was not flesh and bones and blood and 
therefore they do not believe that there could be a being 
differently constructed. This is human reason unguided by the 
Spirit and consequently it frequently finds itself in direct conflict 
with the "Sword of the Spirit— the word of God."-(Eph. 6:17.) 
For instance, they can tell you they say, just exactly what they 
will be like in the future-that is just like what they now are 
except free from present weaknesses and ailments; and they 
know too just what Jesus will be like; they say he will be just as 
he was when crucified, the same wounds in hands, feet, brow, 
etc., for they insist that it is "This same Jesus," who shall come 
and reign. Now, we do not blame those who cannot see spiritual 
things for looking at and imagining everything on the earthly 
plane, for we know (The Spirit declares it — 1 Cor. 2:14.) "The 
natural (human) man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of 
God- (they are foolishness unto him,) neither can he know them 
because they are spiritually discerned." But to those who have a 
spiritual eye to see and a spiritual ear to hear we would say: Paul 
teaches such that there will be a complete change from natural 



(human) to spiritual conditions on the part of that "little flock" to 
whom it is the Father's good pleasure to give the kingdom which 
"flesh and blood cannot inherit. "— (1 Cor. 15:50.) So great a 
change we repeat, that "it doth not yet appear what we shall be. " 
The spirit-begotten Apostle knew of the human nature and 
human body, and if we were to be changed to the perfection of 
humanity he well knew how to so express it, but knowing all 
this he positively asserts that after the change it will be a 
spiritual and not a natural body, and that "it doth not yet appear 
what" a spiritual body is or what may be all of its powers~but 
"we shall be like Him." It follows then that Jesus will be 
different from what he was also, so different that Paul intimates 
that though he (and he only- 1 Cor. 15:8) had seen him after his 
change he could not describe him, and we could not understand 
what our change will be, or what his was, until changed and 
made "like unto Christ's glorious body." 

"Who says that the body with nail prints in the hands and feet 
was Christ's glorious body? Certainly there is no one who has 
his senses exercised in spiritual things who cannot see that "the 
body of flesh"-- "the likeness of men"~"the form of a servant" 
was not His glorious body, but the one taken in order that 
"He... might taste death for every man." 

If then, Jesus took a human nature and form that "as by man 
came death, by man also might come the resurrection of the 
dead," (1 Cor. 15:21) and if we are told that he has now another 
nature and spiritual form, shall we not recognize two- first the 
natural (human) afterward the spiritual? It was the man 
(anointed Jesus) who died for our sins; but he is a man no 
longer; he is now a spiritual being. He as a man was "obedient 
unto death even the death of the cross. Wherefore, God also hath 
highly exalted him" (Phil. 2:9) and his is no longer the human 
nature and form, but the Divine. He is now a "glorious body"- 
the express image of the Father's person-of the invisible God, " 
"whom no man hath seen nor can see." Paul as one born 
(resurrected) before the time was granted a glimpse of the 
glorified Jesus, which destroyed his natural sight.— (1 Cor. 15:8.) 
Can we doubt as to the time when Jesus received these forms? 
Was not the natural born of a woman, and after thirty years of 
growth in wisdom, stature, etc., did not the human reach its 
perfection? Did he not immediately (when thirty years of age) 
consecrate that human nature a sacrifice for the world? Was it 
not accepted of God, and did not the Father testify to the 
acceptance of that sacrifice by anointing and filling the man 
with His Spirit? Was not that anointing the begetting of the man 
Jesus to the Divine spiritual nature? Were not the three and one- 
half years of his ministry, years of the crucifying of the flesh or 
(perfect) human will of Jesus? Did he not finish the sacrifice at 
the cross? Was he not raised from the dead the third day? Was 
not that called his birth --"The first-born— from the dead"— 
"First-born among many brethren," etc.? Was that said to be a 



birth of the flesh or of the Spirit? If then He is said to have been 
born of the Spirit, how say some among you that he was still 
flesh— human-does not the Word record that "That which is 
born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is 
Spirit"? John 3:6. Was he not sown a natural body"-"raised a 
spiritual body"? 

If then Jesus is and has been since his resurrection a spiritual 
body, why should we look for him to be a fleshly body at his 
second coming? Do you know of any place in holy writ where it 
says he will be changed so as to become again a human, earthly, 
fleshly body? Is it not foolish for those who have been 
somewhat enlightened by the Word of God to expect that Jesus 
will come in the flesh— to be seen of the earthly eye? 

Have any ever seen spiritual beings -God, or Angels, or Devils- 
- with the human eye (except as a miracle has occurred which 
specially revealed them as recorded in Scriptures)? Did any 
astronomer sweeping the sky by day or by night with powerful 
telescope ever see those (angels) whom Paul declares are 
ministering spirits sent forth to minister for those who shall be 
heirs of salvation"— or did they ever see Him who is called "the 
Devil"— the "Prince of this world"— "the Prince of the powers of 
the air?" Who hath seen such spiritual beings by human eyes 
without a miracle? If there be none why should any look for the 
Lord who at his resurrection became "a life-giving Spirit" to be 
thus visible to mortals? 

But does some one object-Did not the Angels say, "This same 
Jesus shall come? Yes, we answer as frequently before; yes, it 
will be so; but was it the Jesus born of Mary, or the Jesus born 
of the Spirit, a spiritual body, a quickening spirit, of which the 
Angel spoke? You answer that it was he who was raised by the 
power of the Father to the perfection of spiritual being; and we 
answer yes, this same (spiritual) Jesus shall so come in like 
manner as he went away -unknown to the world who were 
eating, drinking, planting, and building and knew not. 

So we believe he has come again, not a man but a Spirit, not a 
man's form of flesh-but a Spirit's form-a spiritual body. Now 
none can see him present but those who have spiritual eye-sight 
and are looking. Some who are thus looking can now see him- 
the eyes of their understanding being enlightened by the light 
shining from the more sure word of prophecy: Such walk by 
faith and not by sight, and may well endure "as seeing him that 
is invisible" to humanity. 

Our mission-those who see the present one-is to declare Him 
to the nominal church— the ripe wheat of which, we expect will 
hear and recognize, while others will in this respect be blind. 
Our position is much like that of John the Baptist at the first 
advent of Jesus when he came in the flesh to "Israel after the 
flesh." John introduced him-announced him as the "Lamb of 



God" who would take away the sin of the world. So we 
announce him now to the Spiritual Israel as the Lord of life and 
King of Glory. 

When addressed by the leading men of the fleshly house as to 
his business and his right to preach outside the pale of the 
Jewish church, he declares it to be his special work to bear 
witness to the light and the truth of the presence of Jesus the 
Lord's anointed. So too when we are asked for our reasons, they 
are these: that the King has come and is calling for the joint- 
heirs and they must needs be made aware of his presence. Now 
as then it is true, that "There standeth one among you whom you 
know not." Behold, see, but "look not at the things that are seen 
but at the things that are not seen; for the things that are seen (by 
the natural eye) are temporal, but the things which are not seen 
are eternal. "--(2 Cor. 4:18.) 

Though you cannot see the "reaper" you can see his work going 
on around you in the nominal church— the wheat and the tares- 
the real and the imitation must be and now are being separated, 
that in due time the wheat may "shine forth as the sun in the 
kingdom of their Father"-- which flesh and blood cannot inherit. 

This recognition of the Lord's presence we understand to be the 
sanctifying and essential truth necessary to the perfecting of the 
saints now living, and the ability to perceive it, the test of 
spiritual sight now, even as at the first advent: Then, the test was 
not whether the Jewish church believed the Prophets—that the 
Messiah should come sometime, nor whether they believed that 
that coming would be soon, for we read that "All men were in 
expectation" of His coming; but the test to them was, would they 
believe in His presence, in a way they had not expected Him to 
come. So now the test is similar-not who believes Jesus is 
coming-but who can see Him to be present; and only those 
possessed of spiritual sight can see Him. "There standeth one 
among you (in your midst) whom you know not." 



R243 : page 3 

THE TABERNACLE. 

THE LAMPSTAND. 

"And thou shalt make a Lampstand of pure gold: of beaten 
work shall the lampstand be made; his shaft, and his branches, 
his bowls, his knops, and his flowers shall be of the same. And 
six branches shall come out of the sides of it; three branches of 
the lampstand out of the one side, and three branches of the 
lampstand out of the other side; three bowls made like unto 
almonds, with a knop and a flower in one branch; and three 
bowls made like almonds in the other branch, with a knop and a 



flower: so in the six branches that come out of the 
lampstand.... Their knops and their branches shall be of the same: 
all of it shall be one beaten work of pure gold. And thou shalt 
make the seven lamps thereof; and they shall light the lamps 
thereof, that they may give light over against it. And the tongs 
thereof and the snuff-dishes thereof shall be of pure gold. Of a 
talent of pure gold shall he make it with all these vessels. And 
look that thou make them after their pattern, which was showed 
thee in the mount." Ex. 25:31-40. 

Light has ever been symbolic of that which brings joy and 
gladness, while by common consent night and darkness have 
been put for ignorance and its accompanying misery. We find all 
about us in nature that light is the cause of the most beneficial 
results, so very early in the world's history among those who 
were in moral darkness, light, fire, the sun, moon, &c, became 
objects of worship and were adored either as symbols of a god 
or as gods in visible form. The natural man has ever been 
desirous of some visible manifestation; he seeks to walk by 
sight; only the just~the spiritual— walk by faith. Perhaps it was 
for this reason mainly, that Jehovah saw fit to give so many 
typical forms to the children of Israel. The nations around them 
all had their objects of sense which, placed where they could 
often see them, satisfied the eye and gave them contentment. 
How often we have seen children, who, not satisfied with 
knowing that their mother was in the house, must follow her 
from room to room, refusing even to have a door shut between 
them. So we find even in this age those who must have 
crucifixes, pictures, relics, &c, to fill the eye, and satisfy an 
untutored conscience. We might come nearer home and speak of 
those who think there is neither life nor power without a 
mourners' bench and a great deal of noise and excitement, but 
we 

R243 : page 4 

remember that there are true children who are but children, and 
we would not offend the least. However, noise is not power, and 
as we are speaking of light, and of light as a symbol of God, it 
might be well to say that although it is one of the most powerful 
forces in nature, it is one of the most quiet. Bonar, who has 
written so much that is pure and true says: 

The light is ever silent; 

It sparkles on morn's million gems of dew. 

It flings itself into the shower of noon, 

It weaves its gold into the cloud of sunset, 

Yet not a sound is heard; it dashes full 

On yon broad rock, yet not an echo answers. 

It lights in myriad drops upon the flower, 

Yet not a blossom stirs; it does not move 

The slightest film of floating gossamer, 

Which the faint touch of insect's wing wo'ld shiver 



The light is ever pure, 

No art of man can ever rob it of its beauty, 

Nor stain its unpolluted heaven lines. 

It is the fairest, purest thing in nature; 

Fit type of that fair heaven where all is pure, 

And into which no evil thing can enter; 

Where darkness comes not, where no shadow falls; 

Where night and sin can have no dwelling place. 

The first recorded words of Deity are, "Let there be light." It 
seems to be a pre-requisite in the formation and development of 
the natural, and our hearts seeking spiritual light and growth, 
echo the cry: "Let there be light." Whither shall we go? as God 
is the source and fountain of all life and love, so is he the source 
of all light. To us he manifests himself through his Words. Not 
the written word alone, but its author Jesus, "The word of God." 
"This is the true light which lighteth every man that cometh into 
the world." "In him was life and the life was the light of men." 

The lampstand then primarily typifies Christ, and consequently 
in some sense every true member of the Christ body. Light is 
peculiarly expressive of the character of God and of his people. 
"God is light," says the beloved John. James calls him the 
"Father of lights with whom there is no variableness, neither 
shadow of turning. Jesus said, "I am the light of the world; he 
that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the 
light of life." Of his followers he says, "ye are the light of the 
world." The lampstand beautifully symbolizes Christ as the hope 
of our fallen race. It stood where there was no other light. Christ 
is the light of life. It had seven branches typifying perfection, or 
as seven is a symbol of that which is complete and entire, it 
represents Christ as the embodiment of light, not only the truth, 
but the whole truth, the fullness of God. 

Light is composed of the seven primary colors, thus symbolizing 
Jesus as the one altogether lovely. The beautiful rainbow-the 
seal of promise -is but an individualizing of the pure white ray; 
so the hope of the world and the promise of its eternal 
preservation is in the manifestation of the various beauties, the 
ineffable glories of the immaculate one; that concentrated beam 
of heavenly light which piercing the dark clouds of despair, 
reflects even from the storm drops a vision of hope and a pledge 
of the covenant of mercy. 

Majestic sweetness sits enthroned, 
Upon the Savior's brow; 
His head with radiant glories crowned, 
His lips with grace o'erflow. 
No mortal can with him compare, 
Among the sons of men; 
Fairer is He than all the fair 
Who fill the heavenly train. 



"And he made the lampstand of pure gold; of beaten work made 
he the lampstand. His shaft, his branch, his bowls, his knops and 
his flowers, were of the same." Ex. 37:17. We feel almost 
discouraged sometimes at the rough handling we seem to 
receive~the knocks and the blows. We forget the branches must 
be like the shaft—all of beaten work. No machine made lords of 
the flock, no church ornaments cast wholesale in a mold, about 
this lampstand; as is the shaft so are the branches-all of beaten 
work. In its structure there was a knop and a flower in 
continuous succession, typifying the beautiful graces of a Christ- 
like spirit accompanying the solid fruit of a Christian life: a sort 
of combination of faith and works. It would also represent a 
vigorous ever-developing plant, always blooming, continually 
fruit bearing; like the trees growing by the river of life, yielding 
their fruit every month. 

The tabernacle as we have seen contained wondrous things, but 
as there were no windows in it, they would have been unseen, 
but for the lampstand. The well furnished table of shew bread 
with its typical spiritual food, ever fresh and fragrant, was 
unknown to natural light; hidden to those without. Here was the 
Altar of Incense and the way to God, but the world by wisdom 
(natural light) knew not God. As Paul said to the Athenians, 
groping in darkness "they seek God, if haply they might feel 
after him, and find him, though he is not far from each one of 
us." In their blindness they erect an altar inscribed, "To the 
unknown God." In our day men still erect altars to baseless 
creeds and isms, and sacrifice themselves upon them. Thank 
God that we can say: "With Thee is the fountain of life; in thy 
light shall we see light." Psa. 36:9. 

The furniture of the Tabernacle was all made of wood, covered 
with gold, excepting this piece, which is frequently called the 
pure lampstand by way of pre-eminence. Like the Laver it was 
made of one material; like the Laver its dimensions are not 
given. They both evidently symbolized the illimitable truth of 
God. Pure and unalloyed, able to stand alone without help of 
human reasonings and imaginings. For long years men have 
been trying to excuse God's character, his dealings and his word. 
The truth requires no bolstering; keep it pure and you keep it 
safe. The poet has said: 

Truth crushed to earth will rise again; 
The eternal years of God are hers. 

To be eternal it must be pure; this is a universal law. 

The Laver and lampstand being without dimensions would seem 
to typify the fact-O that creed worshipers might see it—that 
truth like its author is boundless. The various sectaries scattered 
along the stream of truth ever flowing from the throne, have 
built little mud dams in the sand and have fenced off a little of 
the stream; and claiming that they had secured it all, have 



covered it up carefully from the light and air, until what should 
have been to them a well of life, has become a veritable frog 
pond. Rev. 16:13; 18:2. 

In this age the Word is the lamp (Psa. 1 19:105; Matt. 25:1) and 
the church is the lampstand; (Rev. 1 :20) but we think it will not 
always be so. Jesus said to his followers, "ye are the light of the 
world," and he evidently intended that his light should 

R244 : page 4 

shine through and be reflected by us; but in a deeper sense will 
we be the light of the world, when, made partakers of his 
glorious body, we shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of our 
Father. Matt. 13:43. 

After the earthly Jerusalem has been restored, the heavenly 
Jerusalem will be its source of light and law and will shine 
through it (the earthly) upon the nations. Isaiah (2:23) tells us 
that after the kingdom has been set up--" out of Zion (the 
heavenly) shall go forth the law and the word of the Lord from 
Jerusalem," (the earthly). Before this takes place however, 
Jerusalem must first hear the cry, "Arise, shine! for thy light is 
come and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee." (Isaiah 60.) 
This explains what John says of the new Jerusalem. The Lamb 
(Head and body) is the light thereof. (Also, Isa. 60:19,20.) It is 
evidently this heavenly company, the united and perfected body 
of Christ, that Malachi alludes to as the sun of righteousness that 
shall arise with healing in his wings to bless first the Jewish 
people and ultimately every man that cometh into the world. 
John 1:9. 

The lampstand seems to have been modeled after the Almond 
tree with its knops, flowers and nut-like bowls. The Almond is 
remarkable for its early blossoming (sometimes even in January) 
the flowers appearing before the leaves. The Hebrew word for 
Almond is from a root which signifies "to hasten, " being thus 
descriptive of the tree which hastened to put forth its blossoms 
in spring. Hence, it was regarded by the Jews as a harbinger of 
spring. The lampstand would thus symbolize the church of the 
first-born; and the appearance of this company arrayed in 
beauty, the surety that the winter is past, that the time of the 
singing of birds is come, that soon the voice of the dove will be 
heard in the land. The nations of course, will not see the church 
of the first-born until the eyes of their understanding are opened, 
which will be after the time of trouble has prepared them for the 
reception of the truth. 

While Christ and His bride are clearly the light of the future, in 
this age we are dependent on the written word which is a lamp 
to our feet and a light to our path. (Ps. 119:105.) In one of the 
visions of Zachariah (ch. 4), he saw a golden lampstand between 
two olive trees from which through golden pipes flowed the 
needed oil. The Angel explained that these lamps did not burn 



by human wisdom or knowledge, "not by might, nor by power, 
but by My Spirit; saith the Lord of hosts." The prophet was 
further told that these are the two anointed ones, (Heb., sons of 
oil) that stand by the Lord of "the whole earth." This helps us to 
understand the symbol of the two witnesses in Rev. 1 1 for it is 
written "these are the two olive trees, and the two lampstands 
standing before the God of the earth." Thus we perceive they are 
the Old and New Testaments; the sources of light from which 
the church, (the spiritual channel,) must draw her supply of oil. 
These witnesses were to be clothed in sackcloth (symbolic of 
mourning and probably of the clothing in a dead language, 
Latin) during 1260 years, while they testified for God. They 
were killed in the Babylonian city— Rome—and exposed in one 
of her ten streets-France-during three and one-half years (1793 
and onward). Since then, they have been caught up to heavenly 
places in symbolic language -a position of honor and power, 
and translated into nearly every tongue have witnessed to all 
nations as Jesus foretold. 

The lampstand was the only light available to those in the 
Tabernacle. This shows us plainly where we must go for all our 
light. What if none of the rulers or of the Pharisees have 
believed? Why should they? Very, very few of them have 
entered into the presence of the lampstand. The butterflies love 
the sunshine. Let us be followers of Him who walked in the 
midst of the seven golden lampstands. He was there to trim and 
furnish the light; let us rejoice and walk in it. 

Walk in the light ! thy path shall be 
Peaceful, serene, and bright; 
For God, by grace, shall dwell in thee, 
And God, Himself, is light. 



W. I. M. 



R244 : page 4 



DO YOU LOVE GOD? 



"By this we know that we love the children of God, when we 
love God and practice his commandments." 1 John 5:2. Diaglott. 

This does not read as is generally supposed; it does not say we 
know that we love God because we love his children, but almost 
the reverse: We love the children because we love the Father. In 
a word, it is through our relationship and union with our Head, 
Jesus, that we are permitted to partake of the spirit or mind of 
the Father, and that spirit is the spirit of Love-love toward all 
that is good and noble and pure and just, and consequently, 
hatred of all that is impure, sinful, and opposed to the things 
loved- "hating iniquity"- loving righteousness. 



If then you love God and have become a partaker of His spirit, 
("Let the same mind [spirit] be in you which was also in Christ 
Jesus, our Lord")~"if the spirit of Christ dwell in you," you will 
love all things in which there is any good and hate all evil, 
because it is opposed to good. And not only so, but as John 
expresses it, if we are entirely surrendered to God and to 
obedience to his will, those to whom we will be especially 
drawn and whom we will especially love will be those who are 
begotten of the same spirit—who also love righteousness and 
hate iniquity. 

How you have proved this in your own experience: You met a 
stranger and before you were aware you were acquainted; you 
recognized in each other the spirit of Christ and not the spirit of 
the world, and this was the basis of fellowship. But how shall 
we know whether the ones you love are the children of God or 
not? Perhaps you love worldly people, or perhaps you love 
moral people who are not new creatures, best. How can you tell? 
By the Apostle's rule: "By this we know that we love the 
children of God" -if we love God supremely. 

But does some one say: "How can I know that I love God 
supremely?" We have heard dear Christians pray: "Oh, Lord 
help me to love thee, " and we remember a sweet hymn which 
says: "Let me love thee." And we wish that all who are the 
Lord's might realize that love to him is not a gift to be prayed 
for, and not a thing which is given to us, but a thing which we 
ourselves must develop. The basis of all love for any person or 
thing is knowledge. You can only learn to love good and hate 
evil by becoming acquainted with them; so the way by which we 
come to love God is by becoming acquainted with him. We 
cannot become personally acquainted with him, for no man hath 
seen God, but we can and do become acquainted with his spirit- 
his mind—as we see it manifested in Christ Jesus, our Lord, and 
through the apostles, and through those who are entirely 
consecrated to him now living in the world. And the more we 
see of his spirit-its meekness, patience, long-suffering, charity- 
love, the more we come to love Him who is the fount or source 
of all this— for we realize that God is love. 

Nor is this the only way we can 

R244 : page 5 

learn of God's spirit, for as we look into His Word, (having 
come into harmony with him and consecrated ourselves to him) 
the spirit of God is more and more revealed to us as we come to 
see his great and loving plans therein recorded; and the more we 
see of perfection and beauty and love in the plan, the more we 
will admire and love the great planner- our Father. God desires 
all his creatures to become acquainted with him (and in due time 
will cause "the knowledge of the Lord to fill the whole earth," in 
order that all may have an opportunity to love him- "for his 



mercy endureth forever") but now during this "present evil 
world," or time while evil is allowed to reign, he is revealing 
himself only to those who have eyes to see and ears to hear, and 
who use them. If then we would love, we must know God; if we 
would know, we must make use of the instrumentality and 
search the Scriptures for his plan and will, and seek to know 
what is "that good and acceptable and perfect will of God. " 
"Then shall we know if we follow on to know the Lord." 

In the verse following the one above considered, the apostle lays 
down a rule by which we may know whether we really love God 
or not, viz.: "For this is the love of God: that we keep his 
commandments, and his commandments are not burdensome." 

Are you in the Lord's hands-are you seeking to do his will? If 
so, what motives actuate you-love, or fear? If fear, your service 
will be a drudge; you may perform, but it will be a burden and a 
continuous effort to render obedience to his wishes. If you serve 
God from love your experience will be different—it will be a 
pleasure to do his will; a 

Joy to find in every station 
Something still to do or bear 

— a pleasure to sacrifice earthly comforts or pleasures whenever 
his will thus indicates. 

R245 : page 5 

How simple and yet how absolute is this test of whether and 
how much we love God or fear him! If we fear we may obey 
and find it burdensome, but if we love him we keep his 
commands and do not find them burdensome. 

Oh, how often has this burdensome obedience to God been 
brought to our notice! Some one whom we had supposed was 
serving the Lord in loving obedience begins to tell us how much 
he suffers for Christ's sake, and how much he bears of the 
burden and heat of the day laboring in the vineyard. No, if we 
have the spirit of Christ, we will not feel the commands of our 
Father burdensome, but a pleasant service, and it will be true of 
us as of him: "I delight to do thy will, O God." 

If then the doing of the will of God be unpleasant to us, if it be 
not with us as with Paul, that the sacrifices of earthly things- 
earthly wealth, influence, pleasures, are a privilege and a joy, it 
must be because we lack the love of God, which constrained 
Paul and all the apostles to reckon all these things and life itself 
but loss and dross, on account of the knowledge of the anointed 
Jesus, our Lord, on whose account we suffer the loss of all 
things and consider them to be vile refuse, so that we may gain 
Christ. (Phil. 3:8.) 

Come then, you who labor, you who are burdened in the Lord's 
service, come to Him who speaks, saying: "Come unto me, ye 



that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." (Matt. 
11:28) Come, receive of his spirit of entire consecration. Then 
you can with him say: "I delight to do thy will, O God." Thus 
we will know that our obedience is from love of God~if his will 
is not burdensome, but a delight to us. 



R245 : page 5 

THOUGHTS ON THE TABERNACLE. 

Editor Zion's Watch Tower: 

DEAR BROTHER--I send you a few thoughts on the tabernacle 
and the work of the high priest. I presume all admit that the 
tabernacle that God commanded Moses to build was a "figure" 
or "pattern" of, and was designed to teach us the way into the 
"true tabernacle which the Lord pitched, and not man" (Heb. 
8:2); also that the office and work of the high priest prefigured 
the office and work of Christ; and that the high priest making 
atonement with the blood (life) of the victim, carrying it into the 
most holy, "within the vail," and applying it to all that needed to 
be cleansed, foreshadowed the atonement by and application of 
the blood (life of Christ). Therefore, the study of the movements 
of the high priest in his official duties is one of great interest to 
us who are hopefully awaiting the blessing of Him who hath 
entered within the vail for us. 

The 16th of Leviticus gives a pen picture of the official scene. 
The high priest was to be attired with linen coat, breeches, girdle 
and miter. "These are holy garments" (verse 10). He was to 
"wash his flesh with water and so put them on." [Thus clothed 
with "holy" garments -or righteousness --("The fine linen is the 
righteousness of saints, i.e., holy ones. Rev. 19:8)-- he was 
prepared to offer acceptable sacrifice.] 

"And Aaron shall bring the bullock of the sin-offering, which is 
for himself, and shall make an atonement for himself and for his 
house"-- "whose house are ye?" (verse 1 1 and Heb. 3:6). This 
offering of the bullock, in its antitype in the body of Jesus, 
which was prepared for sacrifice (Heb. 10:5) was certainly for 
the church, the body of Christ. The shed blood (i.e., the evidence 
of the completeness of the sacrifice) was carried within the vail 
by the high priest, and atonement made. When that work was 
done he came out- "his house" being typically cleansed. 
"THEN shall he kill the goat of the sin-offering that is for the 
people [type of the world, as the house of Aaron is a type of the 
church], and bring his blood within the vail, and do with that 
blood as he did with the blood of the bullock" (verse 15). 

The point to which I would call especial attention is, the going 
in and coming out of the high priest. If the first going in, with 
the blood of the bullock, was for the "church of the first born," 



and, like the paschal lamb, affected only them, as seems clear, 
then the blood of the goat, which was not for the priesthood, but 
for the people, would not be applied until its blood had been 
carried in and sprinkled, and the high priest would again come 
out. It will be seen that the law teaches that the high priest goes 
in and comes out twice. 

As the bullock represented Jesus, the Head of the church, does 
not the goat represent the church? As the goat followed the 
bullock in the sacrifice, does not the church follow her Head? 
Do not we "fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of 
Christ?" (Col. 1:24.) The Head suffered first, and the body 
through the Gospel age, under the control of the Spirit, as Christ 
in us, presenting "our bodies a living sacrifice." (Rom. 8:13 and 
12:1.) If we suffer with Him, we shall be glorified with Him, 
and so reign with Him. (Rom. 8:17 and 2 Tim. 2:12.) 

Is not then our suffering as necessary in order that we with Him 
may become the Kings and Priests of the world, in order to their 
salvation, as was His suffering necessary in order that He might 
be our Savior?~it being God's purpose to bless the world, "the 
people," or the nations, through the Seed, Head and Body, made 
perfect through sufferings. 

The thought, then, is, that as the bullock slain represented the 
sacrifice of the flesh- life of Jesus, which secured to Him the 
right and power to shed forth His Spirit-as the power of Eternal 
life—on the church, so the slain goat represented the sacrifice of 
the flesh-life of the church, which secures to her the right and 
power, as the Bride of Christ, to apply her spiritual power for 
the benefit of the people. Then it is certainly a fact that the high 
priest must come out and take this goat-blood (the evidence of 
the completeness of the sacrifice) within the vail, before it will 
affect the world. And will not Christ fulfill this when He gathers 
the saints to Himself and presents them before the Father? Christ 
coming for His saints and our gathering together unto Him is 
certainly the "coming as a thief," but not the appearing with Him 
in glory, which must be a later event. This later event seems to 
be the fulfillment of Zech. 14:5 and of the prophecy that "every 
eye shall see Him." (Rev. 1:7.) 

If the above conclusions are correct it follows that the high 
priest's coming out after making the atonement for "the people" 
by sprinkling the goat's blood, is a type of the open 
manifestations then due— the saints being already with Him. 
Now we desire to fasten this one point, that the high priest did 
not change his clothes nor wash his flesh at the coming out from 
the work of atonement "for his house," but after the sprinkling 
of the goat's blood, on coming out the second time. 

It then follows that the visible or open appearance of Christ is 
not due now, that is when He comes for His saints. And one 
thing more is equally true that the washing of the flesh is not due 



until the change of garments, and therefore cannot be fulfilled 
on the saints, unless they need washing after they have been 
beyond the vail. Some are certainly locating this washing at the 
wrong time according to the law. May we be fully prepared for 
every event in God's order, by the sanctifying influences of the 
word. 

W. F. CARSON. 

DEAR BROTHER: 

We are glad to hear from you and furthermore we are glad that 
our views regarding the teachings of the word on this important 
subject are so much in harmony. Our views on this subject as 
expressed in previous papers, are almost identical with those 
you herein express; the only point of difference perhaps being 
that you (seemingly) expect a manifestation of the great High 
Priest (Christ Jesus the head and his body, the church) in glory 
visible to the natural sight of humanity, while in my view of the 
matter, "the world seeth him no more" with the natural eye, but 
will see or recognize his presence and reign by the eyes of their 
understandings being opened by the judgments of the "day of 
the Lord." Then they all shall see him and us by the light of 
those judgments as we now see him by the light of His Word- 
our Lamp. 

We agree fully that the washing and change of garments from 
those of sacrifice— the linen—to those of executive office of— 
"glory and beauty," takes place after we have been changed and 
been presented in the Father's presence as His Bride or body. 
The significance of the washing and change to our mind is, that 
when he begins to reveal himself to those in the "court" 
(believers-not accounted worthy of translation-and to be a part 
of the Bride) they will be able to recognize the Christ as 
changed and then invested with Glory, Honor and Immortality - 
they will realize him as the one whose blessing is to be desired. 
Afterward (Lev. 9) he goes forward to the gate and there blesses, 
all the people (the world at large, -unbelievers) all of whom 
while he blesses (the work of the Millennial Age) will come to 
recognize Him as the one altogether lovely; in whom all their 
hopes centre and upon whom all the covenants and promises of 
God (the Ephods) depend. 

If we but keep closely in sight the intimate relationship and 
close resemblance between the bullock and the Lord's goat, it 
should continually stir us up to see that we are being crucified 
with Him if we would reign with Him, the "Scapegoat," 
evidently representing 

R246 : page 5 

that part of the church who shall be delivered afterward. After 
"the body" is complete He shall "deliver those who through fear 
of death (crucifixion of pride and self, etc.,) were all their 



lifetime subject to bondage" -Let us not be of this class, but as 
the Lord's goat- "Let us go to him without the camp (nominal 
church) bearing the reproach with him. "--[EDITOR.] 



page 5 

A LETTER 

FROM YOURS AND OURS TO HIS AND OURS. 

"Unto you who are sanctified by God the Father, and preserved 
in Jesus Christ and called; mercy unto you, and peace, and love, 
be multiplied. I thank my God, making mention of Thee always 
in my prayers, hearing (knowing) of thy love and faith, which 
thou hast toward the Lord Jesus and toward all Saints: That the 
communication of your faith may become effectual by the 
acknowledging of every good thing which is in you in Christ 
Jesus." 

I am happy to say to the "little flock," that I am rejoicing in 
"present truth," believing that I have received it in answer to 
prayer. About four years ago I forsook the paths of sin, and gave 
up all for Jesus; since then I have been striving to follow Him. I 
studied His word faithfully in order to know my duty, and can 
say, to the praise of our Heavenly Father, that He permitted me 
to see many precious promises, and faith claimed them mine. 

Within the last year, however, I became convinced that there 
was greater light to be obtained from our "lamp" if it could be 
properly trimmed. I remembered the promises: "Ask and ye 
shall receive." "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God," 
etc. My daily prayer was for wisdom, and an understanding of 
His Word. I believed my prayer would be answered; but, by 
what means, or instrument I knew not. Father uses a variety of 
means to bless His children; and has given those precious things 
to His stewards "to do good and to communicate" them to 
others. Accordingly, in February, 1881, He sent one of His 
messengers (Brother Paton,) who, by the grace of God, "opened 
our eyes 

page 6 

to behold wondrous things out of His law." To-day we can truly 
say, as did David: "The law of thy mouth is better to me than 
thousands of gold and silver. How sweet are thy words unto my 
taste! yea sweeter than honey to my mouth. Through thy 
precepts I get understanding: therefore I hate every false way." 
As Jesus said to the disciples, (John 4:32) so we can say to the 
nominal church, "we have meat to eat that ye know not of." 

During the month of May, I had the pleasure of a visit to 
Pittsburgh, Pa., where I was privileged to meet and hold sweet 
converse on these precious and exhaustless themes with our 



beloved brothers-Sunderlin, Mann, Jones, Adamson and the 
editor of the "TOWER." It is needless for me to tell you that it 
was a delightful and profitable season. 

These precious truths thrill my whole being. I am willing to 
spend and be spent, in telling the "story of Jesus and His Love." 
Pray for me, that I may have wisdom to "rightly divide the word 
of truth," and grace to enable me to suffer with Christ, and with 
you share the glories of the world to come. "Now may the God 
of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that 
great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting 
covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do His will, 
working in you that which is well pleasing in His sight, through 
Jesus Christ; to whom be glory forever and ever. Amen." 

ROBERT BAILEY, 

Howardsville, Mich. 



R246 : page 6 

"IT'S ALL IN THE DOCUMENT." 

In conversing with an inquiring soul, who was seeking to find 
how he might know his sins were forgiven, it pleased the Lord 
to use the following illustration, as bringing before him the 
simple message of the gospel as in Gal. 3:13. He could not get 
hold of the truth in the verse, and had been told: "Now, my 
friend, instead of trusting just what that word reveals, and 
accepting your pardon upon the authority of God's word, and 
commencing the service of God as a saved man, you are 
occupied with looking at your feeling or something in yourself, 
in some expected change of heart, as a ground of hope that you 
are saved. Let me give you this illustration: Suppose three men 
under condemnation for crime, and shut up in prison, were to 
receive, each of them, as an act of grace from the governor, a 
pardon. This pardon is a written document signed with the 
governor's name and bearing the seal of state. Now upon what 
ground does the keeper of the prison release these three men 
from the penalty of their crime?" 

"Why, on the ground of the pardon by the governor." 

"Yes, just so. Supposing one of them should come to the keeper 
after having had the pardon handed to him, and should weep, 
and cry, and feel bad on account of his crime. Would his 
weeping and crying and feeling bad be the reason of the keeper 
unlocking the door and setting him free?" 

"No; it would not. He is let go because of the pardon." 

"Supposing another should come after having received the 
pardon, and begin to beg and plead and pray with the keeper in 
very earnest, touching words to be released. Would his begging 



and praying be the reason of the keeper's unlocking the door 
when he finally was released?" 

"No; the keeper lets him out because he is pardoned." 

"Well, supposing the third one should come after he had 
received his pardon, and should say: 'Now, Mr. Keeper, I want 
to get out and have seen the pardon, but of course before I can 
be released I must promise you as to my future behaviour, and 
here are twenty-seven resolutions and promises that I have 
drawn up in writing that I think will cover the ground.' The 
keeper, without reply, unlocks the door and he goes free. Is the 
door unlocked because of his promises and resolutions?" 

"No; it's his pardon, and that alone, that sets him free." 

"Very well; now let us pursue the illustration a little further. Let 
us follow these three men as they leave the prison with their 
pardons safely in their pockets. The first one, we will imagine, is 
met, not far from the prison, by the officer who detected him in 
his crime and was the means of his arrest and punishment. This 
officer knows that according to the law the man should be in 
prison. He does not know of the pardon provided by grace. He 
advances toward the man with keen, suspicious glance. How 
shall the released man act- what reply make to the searching 
question: 'Have you any right to be here? Have you been 
pardoned?' Let us imagine him, if we can, so occupied with 
himself, so lacking in confidence in the seal of the governor, as 
to sadly reply: 'Well, I thought I had been pardoned, but since 
seeing you my crime and my unworthiness come back to me, 
and I do not feel that I have been. I am unworthy of it, and you 
can take me back again where I belong. I was wrong in leaving 
and thinking I was pardoned.' What would you have said to that 
man if you had been near him?" 

"Why, I should have told the foolish fellow to look at his 
document and show it to the officer, who would very quickly 
have let him alone." 

"Just so. Well, let us follow the second man as with his pardon 
in his pocket he is getting away from the prison. He is very 
happy, he is freely and joyfully telling old acquaintances as he 
meets them that he has been pardoned and delivered from 
penalty. Soon an officer also stands in his path, and as he 
recognizes in him a former criminal he asks for evidence of his 
pardon. Let us imagine him so occupied with himself, so utterly 
unappreciative of the grace of the governor, and of his only 
ground of safety, as in the written pardon, as to answer: 'Why, I 
know I am pardoned because I feel I am pardoned. Don't you 
see how happy I am?' The answer of the officer would certainly 
be: 'Well, sir, I make no account of your feeling happy; if you 
have nothing to show as evidence from the governor that you are 
pardoned, you will just come right back with me to prison.' 



Now, what would you have said to that man if you had been 
there?" 

"Why, of course I would have told him to pull out his document 
and show that, instead of talking of his feelings." 

"Very well; now one more illustration, and then for the 
application: We will suppose the third man met by an officer. 
He has bought a new suit of clothes, washed and shaved himself, 
and procured a situation, where he proposes to go to work and 
earn an honest living. We will imagine his reply when asked for 
evidence that he is pardoned. 'Why, sir, you see I have turned 
over a new leaf. I have put on new clothes, I have formed honest 
associations, and purpose to be a new man.' Not a word as to his 
pardon, and no presentation of that as the ground of his liberty. 
The inexorable officer would at once reply: "Sir, your turning 
over a new leaf is all very well, but that cannot deliver you from 
the sentence of the law. If you have no pardon from the 
governor to show, you are my prisoner.' You see the folly of this 
third man's talking about his new leaf, as you saw the folly of 
the first man's talking about his bad feelings, and the second 
about his good feelings, instead of simply showing their pardon 
and relying only upon it. 

"Now for the application: I have read to you the testimony of 
God's word (Gal. 3:10; Rom. 3:19; John 3:18, and other 
passages), that having broken God's law you are condemned by 
the law, and under the penalty of sin. You admit this testimony 
as true, and confess yourself a sinner before God, and are 
anxious to be saved. I have read to you the testimony of God's 
word (John 3:14-17; Isa. 53; Acts 10:36-43) as to the coming of 
the Lord Jesus Christ from heaven to be the Saviour of lost 
sinners by dying on the cross for their sins (1 Pet. 2:24), and 
ascending in newness of life to the presence of God as their 
justification (Rom. 4:25). You say you believe this testimony. I 
now point you to the pardon from God to you, on the ground of 
Christ's death, as summed up in Gal. 3:13: 'Christ hath redeemed 
us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us.' Now, 
please read that over; read it again, and again. Do you believe 
that message?" 

"Yes, sir; I do." 

"Very well; are you redeemed?" 

"No. I don't feel-" 

"Hold up-what did you say about that pardoned man who talked 
about his feelings, instead of showing his pardon?" 

"O, I see, I see; it's all in the document, of course. How stupid I 
have been! Christ hath redeemed me; I have never believed the 
word." And a happy smile broke over the inquirer as he looked 
at the word. 



"Well, are you redeemed?" 

"Yes, I am." 

"How do you know you are? Supposing the detective meets 
you? Supposing the memory of past sins comes up?" 

"I know it by believing the word. I accept Christ as my Saviour. 
I have His word that He has redeemed me. I pull out the 
document." 

"That is right, my friend. God has given you light. Make much 
of the document. Rest only upon that as the ground of assurance. 
Now, one word as to the life you are to live as a saved, a 
redeemed man. Redeemed means bought—what did Christ pay 
for you?" 

"His own life." 

"Peter says we are redeemed (bought) not with silver or gold as 
corruptible things, but with the precious blood of Christ. Well, if 
Jesus bought you, whom do you belong to?" 

"To Jesus." 

"Are you willing to have it so, to be His property, to have Him 
to put His name upon you, and you own yourself as His disciple, 
and to live henceforth to please Him, as your Lord and Master?" 

"lam." 

"Well, let us tell him so." 

And we knelt in prayer and the Saviour rejoiced over another 
blood-bought soul, saved by grace. 

D. W. WHITTLE, 

In Messiah's Herald. 

Brother Whittle's illustration is good: We would that all might 
realize that their justification is based not on their feelings, nor 
on good resolutions, but upon the ransom, purchased by the 
precious blood of Christ. 

R247 : page 6 

Death is the great prison-house. Sin is its bolts and bars. Our 
ransom -pardon— opens those bolts and bars, thus setting us at 
liberty to go forth, and the loving voice of Him who redeemed 
us calls us to come forth and become his Bride. Oh! what love! 
Some of (us) the prisoners "have an ear to hear," and have 
accepted gladly the call to become joint-heirs with him in the 
coming kingdom. Others are so degraded by prison life that they 
are "blind and cannot see afar off." Sin hath blinded their eyes, 
and some are so deaf that they have no "ear to hear" the message 
of liberty and ransom. 

But what-how many of those prisoners were ransomed- 
pardoned? Is it only those who now have the hearing ear and 



unclouded vision? If so, Jesus' death will affect but very few. 
But no, the ransom was given for all the prisoners, every child 
of Adam -for those more degraded as well as for those yet 
possessed of sensibilities; 

For all my Lord was crucified; 
For all the world my Savior died. 

We thank God that he is showing us a little of his boundless 
love, and the value of Jesus' death, as being great enough to 
ransom all from the great prison-house of death. He came to 
"bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives 
and opening of prison doors to them that are bound." This was 
the substance of Jesus' preaching, and it is proper, as the theme 
of all the church, which is his body, during this Gospel Age (or 
"acceptable year"). 

But the Millennial reign will not be a proclamation, but a 
performance of the things now proclaimed. The great prison- 
house~death~is to be destroyed, and the blind and deaf shall all 
be brought to know of their redemption through his blood-that 
Jesus Christ (by the grace of God) tasted death for every man-to 
be testified in due time. " 

For the sharing with our Lord as his Bride, in this great work of 
blessing and liberating those who were our fellow prisoners, we 
are called. When this "church," "little flock," "Bride," is 
perfected, at the resurrection (of which they will constitute the 
"first" or chief) "then shall be brought to pass the saying which 
is written" by the Prophet Isaiah 25:6-8. He will destroy the 
covering of death spread over all people and the vail of 
ignorance spread over all nations. He will swallow up death 
victoriously. Then the prisoners will all come forth out of the pit 
(tomb)- "Then the blind eyes shall be opened and the deaf ears 
shall be unstopped." (Isa. 35:5.) -[EDITOR.] 



R247 : page 6 

THE first honors of the graduating class of Yale were taken by 
a Jew. 

Commenting on this fact a New York paper says that in the 
public schools of that city the best pupils are very apt to be 
Jews. They take the lead both in scholarship and deportment so 
often that the principals expect to see Jews at the head of the 
classes. When prizes were given not long ago to the pupils of the 
grammar schools who had made the most creditable record 
during a specified time, the majority of them were carried off by 
boys of Hebrew parentage. 

This is significant; this is the race to be elevated to chief 
position among nations during the millennial age. 



R247 : page 7 



WHAT WE EXPECT. 



The hope of our change from the human, earthly nature, to a 
spiritual, heavenly nature, is of course the grand climax of our 
hopes. As begotten ones, we long for birth into the full and 
express image of our Father's person, into the glory of Christ's 
glorious body. This being the case, it is not to be wondered at 
that this most coveted thing is ever supposed to be the thing 
expected, when any date is referred to as being the fulfillment of 
a prophetic period. 

We continually meet with this difficulty in referring to the 
present year, 1881. Since all know that we expect the Saints to 
be changed from human to spiritual being, and since we 
frequently refer to October of the present year as the terminus of 
a prophetic parallel, some readers have supposed that we expect 
the change at that time. This is not the case; we look to October 
of this year, as the limit of favor~the end of "the acceptable year 
(time or age) of the Lord" -the closing of the "strait gate" to the 
"narrow way" of opportunity to become a member of the Bride 
of Christ and partaker of his Divine Nature. 

The Gospel age has been a period of selecting from the world 
those that have made a covenant with the Lord by sacrifice (Psa. 
50:5, and Mai. 3:17.) They shall be his Bride. It has been a 
period of "sealing" of the saints-a marking of them off as 
separate; and our understanding of the matter is, that this 
choosing and sealing will cease in October and whoever would 
be of the "Bride, the Lamb's wife" must consecrate and sacrifice 
before that time, or it will be too late. Now some one will 
doubtless suppose from this expression, "too late," that we 
expect that the Bride will be withdrawn from the earth, and 
therefore it will be~"too late." Not so, however; we expect that 
while they will all be counted sealed and selected they may not 
be changed for some time after: We do not pretend to know how 
long, but believe that there is a work of instructing the "great 
company," to be done before their translation-change. 

Do you then believe that all those who are not thus consecrated 
and sealed before October are lost?— is asked by some one not 
familiar with our views. We do not believe that they will be 
"lost" in the sense generally understood by that word, viz.: to be 
put into everlasting torments: But we do believe that all such 
will have lost the great "prize of our high calling"— lost forever 
the opportunity of becoming members of the Bride of Christ- 
joint heirs with Him and partakers of the Divine nature. They 
still will have the old or human nature and it, Jesus has 
redeemed, and promises that it (when the Bride is complete-in 
the Millennial age) shall be restored to its original (human) 
perfection. 



If then, we do not expect that the completion of the Bride will be 
indicated by their change, what do we expect as a sign then? We 
expect no sign visible to our physical eye; it has been with the 
eyes of our understandings enlighted by God's word that we 
have seen all that we do see, of what is now taking place- viz.: 
"The Harvest" and the presence of our Lord. And it is by that 
same eye of faith that we expect to see "the acceptable year 
(age) of the Lord" close, and "the day of vengeance of our God" 
commence with October next. This same thought is conveyed by 
the prophet when he says (Isa. 63:4): "The day of vengeance is 
in mine heart for the year of my redeemed is come"— vengeance 
follows immediately upon the completion of the "little flock." 

This transition period following the Gospel age and preceding 
the Millennial age is often mentioned as "a time of trouble," or 
"day of vengeance" designed to punish evil doers and to prepare 
the world for the blessed reign of righteousness under "The 
Prince of Peace." See the following texts: Prov. 6:34, Isa. 35:4; 
and 34:1 to 8, Rom. 12:19, Heb. 10:30 and 2 Thes. 1:8, some of 
which are symbolical. 

This "day of vengeance" began chronologically in 1874, but the 
first seven years of it seem marked off upon the nominal church 
here, as a time both of trial and favor, just as the parallel period 
of seven years, was to fleshly Israel. Seven years there, (the 
seventieth week of Daniel 9:27) of favor-trial and separation of 
"Israelites indeed in whom was no guile" from nominal Israel. 
Seven years here, (the exact parallel) of favor -trial and 
separation of the Christians indeed (entirely consecrated) from 
the nominal church of professors. 

Now if this be the correct understanding of the Word, we may 
expect vengeance to commence in October. As we have already 
shown, this vengeance begins with the nominal church and will 
cause pain, anguish, "vexation" and symbolic "gnashing of 
teeth" among those who are taught and governed by church 
creeds instead of by the word of God-among those who 
recognize Synods, Councils, Conferences, Presbyteries, etc., as 
the heads, "standards" and "authorities" from which emanate the 
laws by which they are governed, instead of recognizing Christ 
as the only head and authority— as Paul puts it: "Holding the 
head (Jesus) from which all the body... having nourishment, 
increaseth with the increase of God" -in grace and knowledge: 
(Col. 2:19.) Whose law -the Word-should be the ONLY "law" 
or "standard" for those who are truly his members. 

Terrible indeed will it be to those, to find their organizations 
crumbling and their laws and creeds torn to shreds and their 
"standards" and "authorities" (their heads) losing power, being 
cast off and disregarded. ["Woe unto them that give suck (teach) 
in those days."] It will be because the true Head, Authority and 
Standard of the church— Christ, shall have taken to himself his 
great power, and begins his reign (Rev. 11:17) that these false 



heads, "standards" and "authorities "--will be overthrown -for 
"His lightenings (shall) enlighten the earth." Light and 
knowledge will so increase that all forms of error and evil will 
be finally dispelled by "the bright shining of the present one. " (2 
Thes. 2:8.) 

Let none hereafter think, that we are expecting translation this 
year; and to those who did so think, we suggest a second careful 
reading of the article in the May number headed 

R248 : page 7 

"The Year 1881." Let us add, that while the "vengeance" or 
"trouble" will be no longer hindered after October, yet, it does 
not follow, that great results need be looked for in a day. It will 
require months and years for its full accomplishment. 

It has been asked what do you mean by saying "come out of 
her"— do you really mean for people to sever their connection 
with the church of Christ? By what authority do you denounce 
the church of Christ-or lay anything to the charge of God's 
elect—in which we know of many undoubtedly the Lord's 
Jewels? 

Ah yes, there is your mistake. We never advised any one to 
sever their connection with the church of Christ ("whose names 
are written in heaven.") No, far, far from that. We never 
denounced that church whose creed is the Word of God, whose 
organization is that of the Spirit; and whose union is in the 
"bonds of love;" and when we quote the denunciations of the 
Word, we do not offend "God's elect"-the Saints-because, 
"Great peace have they that love thy law and nothing shall 
offend them. " Nor have we ever claimed that the nominal 
church is devoid of those whom the Lord calls his "jewels": on 
the contrary it is because there are such in the nominal church, 
that the Spirit through the Word calls to that very class and to 
them only- "Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers 
of her sins and receive not of her plagues." And those who do 
not free themselves and come out from bondage to creeds and 
isms we shall be forced to conclude are so bound by "the fear of 
man that bringeth a snare," that they have obeyed men, rather 
than God, and consequently are not "overcomers." 

Look about you in the nominal churches, you who think that 
they are the church owned by the Lord as the chaste virgin soon 
to be made his bride; apply the scriptural conditions of 
discipleship to them and to yourselves and let them judge 
themselves whether they come near the standard: Jesus said "If 
any man will be my disciple let him deny himself and take up 
his cross and follow me." Now do you think there are many in 
the nominal church who are thus entirely consecrated- time, 
money talents, reputation, all? All of the members of the real 
church are thus consecrated, but few of the nominal. Have you 
any reason for supposing that one in ten of those who are 



professors, are performers of this their covenant? Yet, those who 
are thus following in the footsteps of Jesus, are the only ones 
who are overcoming the world and who will be his joint-heirs. 
Of the others, some are being overcome by the world and others 
never were consecrated, consequently always were of the world. 

In conclusion, let us add: If you realize that we are now in the 
"harvest," you can readily see that the work in order is to 
separate and divide. The work of the Reaper King, now present, 
is to gather his jewels, and he calls his sheep by name, and they 
know his voice and they follow him. 

When we come to see the matter from the right standpoint, we 
realize that nothing is really injuring and crippling the 
usefulness and influence of the truly consecrated "little flock" so 
much as the great worldly-minded institutions claiming the 
honor of being the followers of the meek and lowly Saviour— 
who indeed draw nigh to God with their lips, but whose hearts 
are far from him. By attending to making clean the outside they 
divert their own attention from the real inward condition, and so 
exalt the commandments and creeds of men as to inspire their 
members with a fear of future torment if they should think for 
themselves. It is from these institutions which have gained so 
strong a hold upon society as to be able to threaten with 
ostracism any who venture to gainsay their mandates, which 
"make void the law of God (His word) through (their) traditions, 
that God's word calls, "Come out of her" into a place of freedom 
from man and man worship and creed worship, to a place where 
you can worship God and be taught of God; come out where you 
can grow in grace. 

Many will and have said-are there not many "good people" still 
in the church?— and because of them we cannot condemn it— 
neither will we leave it. Ah but Jesus condemns it and says— "I 
will spew thee out of my mouth."— (Rev. 3:16.) The call comes 
to all these "good people" and will test their goodness. If not 
obedient, they are not reckoned good in God's sight, but as 
partakers of Babylon's sins, and they shall be sharers in her 
plagues. Let not these be stumbling blocks in the way of your 
obedience; consider God's call to you as imperative as though 
you were the only jewel to be saved. 

The call now is, come— from "the housetop," "the bed" and "the 
mill": The message is, "gather my saints (holy ones) together, 
(out from among the tares,) unto me; those who have made a 
covenant with me by sacrifice. "-(Psa. 50:5.) Those who 
sacrifice all in willing obedience are his "jewels." 



R248 : page 7 



THE NEW VERSION. 

The revised version of the New Testament recently published to 
the world by the translators, has excited very general attention 
and criticism among all interested in God's word, as it should, 
being so important. 

Doubtless by this time most of you have examined it and are 
able to judge of its points of merit and demerit for yourselves. 

While it could have been improved upon by more radical 
changes, yet it could have been far worse: and it certainly is in 
many respects much superior to the old version. 

We might offer commendation of their course in omitting 
certain interpolations -passages not found in ancient 
manuscripts, etc., but this is needless for of course it was their 
duty to eradicate all words of men. We regret to notice that all of 
these interpolations have not been excluded -perhaps the most 
important of these stumbling blocks being the first clause of 
Rev. 20:5-"The rest of the dead lived not again until the 
thousand years were finished" -already referred to in these 
columns. 

We notice that the words— Christ and Baptize are left 
untranslated as in the old version; these are Greek words 
transferred into our language and it would have been a help to 
the general reader had the English of them been given, viz.: 
anointed and immersed. The Greek word hades left untranslated 
in the new version, is certainly better than to have it as in the old 
version rendered hell, which to the general reader conveyed 
anything but the correct meaning- though all scholars well 
understood it to mean death or the condition of death. 

We have heretofore called your attention to the fact that the 
Greek words, kosmos, oikoumenee, and aion, are in the old 
version all translated by the English word, world, which does 
great violence to their meaning and grossly misleads the reader. 
We are very much surprised to find that the new translation 
leaves them just the same: we are at a loss to see how men of so 
much learning could do so by mistake, for doubtless each of 
them would if asked, particularly answer that kosmos signifies 
the world of mankind, or present order of things -that 
oikoumenee signifies the habitable 

R248 : page 8 

earth or land; while aion means an age or period of time. It is 
because of the mistranslation of this last word that so many have 
been led to expect "the end of the world" at the second advent of 
Jesus, instead of the end of the gospel age, and hence they are 
expecting "a wreck of matter and a crush of worlds" instead of 
the ending of one age and gradual beginning of another which is 
now in progress. Can it be that the learned translators feared that 
articles of human creeds would have been exposed as false and 



erroneous by a proper rendering? Only error requires covering — 
truth courts the light and always shines the brighter for it. 

The Greek word psukee signifying existence or being is in Matt. 
16:26 rendered life- "What shall a man be profited if he shall 
gain the whole world and forfeit his life—or what shall a man 
give in exchange for his life?" This is certainly a great 
improvement over the much misunderstood word soul. Had 
psukee in every case, as here, been translated life or better- 
being, it would have helped people in the understanding of 
God's word, but, at the same time it would have dissolved some 
of the mysteries with which the traditions of men— the church 
creeds— have surrounded the nature and destiny of man-and that 
might destroy confidence in those creeds-hence psukee is 
generally translated by the mysterious word soul as before, the 
above exception and a few others being made because it would 
here have been very absurd to translate it soul and would have 
conflicted with the very idea the creeds and traditions seek to 
uphold- viz.: that soul is a thing in a man yet separate from him. 
From the orthodox (?) standpoint how absurd it would sound to 
say "Whosoever would save his soul shall lose it."— (Luke 9:24,) 
or to translate the word psukee, soul in Matt. 10:39, or Mark 
8:35, and Luke 17:33. Yet in these the same word occurs which 
elsewhere is translated by the mysterious word soul. 

Another word left by the new version as it was in the old is 

R249 : page 8 

GODHEAD, 

of which H. V. Reed in the Restitution pointedly says: 

"The reader has been led to infer that this was among the most 
approved and clearly stated ideas of the original scriptures. 
Nothing can be more unfair. The word godhead is not good 
English: it means nothing in itself and conveys no idea to the 
reader. What is a godhead? The idea in the original is simple and 
beautiful. We will note the three texts wherein it occurs. Acts 
17: 'Being, therefore, already offspring of God, we ought not to 
be supposing that which is Divine to be like unto gold, or silver, 
or stone, etc. (Rotherham.) Rom. 1:20; 'For his unseen things 
from a world's creation are to be clearly seen by the things made 
being perceived, both his eternal power and divinity.' 
(Rotherham.) Col. 2:9: 'For in him (Christ) dwelleth all the 
completeness of the Divine nature in a body.' The word godhead 
like the word trinity, carries with it the idea of a society, which 
is not the idea of the original. Had the word been left out of the 
revised Testament it would have removed another impression 
from the 'three-in-one-God' theory. Modern criticism has forced 
certain interpretations from the sacred texts, and it will be a long 
time before doctrinal harmony and Biblical exegesis will 
expurge from the creed of man the theories of endless misery, 



the destruction of our globe, and the heathen dogma of the God 
society, or trinity. No effect on the part of authorized versions 
will succeed in bolstering up theories which are contrary alike to 
sound reason and the Scriptures of truth." 

Taken as a whole, however, the new version is as good as we 
could expect: it is better in fact than we did expect, for well we 
all know that a man's creed or belief as to the general teachings 
of the word, must have an effect and bearing upon his 
translation of any particular passage which in his judgment 
would cause it to conflict with the general teachings. Then too, it 
is almost impossible to translate word for word from the Greek 
to the English language and if this were accomplished as is 
attempted with considerable success in the translations known as 
"Rotherham's, Young's and The Diaglott it produces a reading 
so peculiar and rough that it would not meet with acceptance by 
the general readers and any attempt to give a smooth English 
reading gives opportunity and license for the use of the 
translator's personal views on the passages translated. 

We say then: Thank God for the "New Version;" it is a step 
nearer pure light and perfect truth at least; it will serve too to 
draw the attention of all to the basis of all faith-God's Word- 
and away from church creeds -the traditions of men-the sandy 
foundation upon which the faith of most of the nominal church 
is at present resting. 

But as every progress in knowledge is a step toward freedom 
and a blow to bondage so is this comparatively good work, to 
prove a powerful element in the storm which already begins to 
sweep over the nominal church of all denominations, and which 
eventually will sweep away all refuges of lies (Isa. 28:17)~all 
the falsities and errors of those who exalt themselves, their 
words and their churches which they have organized and rule: 
instead of exalting the Lord and His words and His church 
(whose names are written in heaven) which He organized at 
Pentecost and the rule of which He has not given to another. 



R249 : page 8 



CHART SUPPLEMENT. 



We present to each of our readers with this issue, a "Chart of 
the Ages," (unfortunately printed June, instead of July 
supplement) with the suggestion that you hang it in some 
convenient place where it will be often in your sight; that its 
diagram of the narrow way to life, may be a constant and helpful 
reminder to you of the way our Leader trod; that thereby you 
may be enabled to make your calling and election sure. 

We hope too, that you will so place it, that it will be an object of 
interest to all who may visit you, and that you will so familiarize 



yourself with it as to be able to explain its teachings to them; 
thus each reader will be a preacher of the "narrow way to life" - 
to Glory, Honor and Immortality, so soon to close; and also of 
the plan of God for the world's salvation, which is only just 
beginning. May God make you able ministers of his word. 

The Chart should have your careful attention and study for at 
least one month: for this reason, and to allow needed time for 
other parts of the service, this paper and chart supplement will 
constitute the July and August issue. Therefore you may expect 
nothing more until September. 

Subscribers living in this city (Pittsburgh) will please call for 
their charts at the office, and thus save postage. 

Failure to receive your chart (or at any time, your paper) should 
be reported at once. 



R249 : page 8 

CONCERNING TRACTS. 

We have a few thousand tracts of Nos. 3, 4 and 5 which may be 
had for gratuitous distribution, by any who may write for them. 
No. 7 is not yet published. Other Nos. are exhausted. 

We have a number of inquiries relative to tract No. 6, (written 
by Bro. A. D. Jones) asking whether the editor's views are in 
harmony with those expressed in that tract. To which we answer 
that it is quite possible for different persons to have somewhat 
different ideas regarding the manner of the unfolding future, 
though they be entirely agreed with reference to the work of the 
past, present and future. We are for instance, not much in 
sympathy with the idea that the "Perihelion of the planets" is to 
bring "a carnival of death," and for this reason have refrained 
from mentioning the harrowing details furnished by astrologists 
as the probable result. It may be that such a dreadful scourging 
is to come upon the world so soon, but from our understanding 
of prophecy we expect that the carnival of moral pestilence, 
spiritual famine, and death will come first, upon the nominal 
church~the sort of "pestilence" and "arrows" referred to in Psa. 
91 from which nothing will shield but the "truth." (vs. 4.) 

But while we do not expect such literal plagues, we do not 
venture to gainsay the astrologers and their predictions; it is 
possible that both astrology and scripture may be correct 
concerning the coming events, but our confidence and sole 
reliance is on the latter. To compare notes we suggest that 
Scripture indicates that the nominal church is to be given over to 
tribulation and be shown no favor from October of this year; and 
every thing seems ripe for just such a thing: On the other hand 
the astrologers began as far back as 1871 to predict what would 



occur in 1880 and 1881. But though the largest planet Jupiter 
has already reached the point of perihelion (more than nine 
months ago) and though Jupiter and Saturn were in conjunction 
six months ago, yet there is nothing except unusual rain storms 
thus far to justify the awful pictures drawn. 



R298 : page 8 

PRACTICAL PREACHING. 

It is objected that practical preaching is the right kind of 
preaching, and that prophecy is not practical. Is this true? It is 
not true. The preaching of the Ten Commandments, the social 
virtues, and the neighborly and moral duties may be called 
practical preaching by some, but it is not so in the Christian 
sense of the word. The most successful preaching is the 
preaching of the cross in which Paul gloried, and the crown for 
which he waited. The two advents are the poles around which 
the orb of duty rolls—the strong foundation on which the 
morality of the new man reposes. Faith lays hold of the cross, 
the fountain of divine mercy, and out of love to Him that first 
loved us, brings forth in the heart and life of the believer the 
fruits of righteousness. Hope looks forward to the crown, and 
the kingdom, and the promised inheritance, to nerve us for the 
trials and duties of life, and make us victorious over all our 
spiritual enemies. This is practical religion. Doctrine is the root 
and basis and motive of practice; and in the whole range of 
theology there is not a more practical doctrine than the second 
advent -no, not one. I challenge you to show me a duty of 
which it is not in one way or another made the motive. 

Read, and consider the following texts of Scripture. It is the 
motive for patient waiting, 1 Thess. 1:10; for divine hope, Titus 
2:13; for moderation in all things, Phil. 4:5; for prayer to be 
counted worthy to stand before the Son of man, Luke 21:36; for 
long-suffering patience, James 5:8; for heavenly-mindedness, 
Luke 21:34; for perseverance in spite of persecution, 1 Pet. 1:7; 
of godliness and holy conversation, 2 Pet. 3:1 1,12; it is the 
motive for earnest preaching, 2 Tim. 4:1-3; for fighting the good 
fight of faith, 2 Tim. 4:7,8; for reverence and godly fear, Heb. 
12:26-28; for sobriety and watching unto prayer, 1 Pet. 4:7. This 
is practical preaching; but if you preach these duties without the 
Advent, which is their chief motive and strength, you are asking 
the people for bricks without giving them the straw-the steam is 
taken from the engine and the train stops. -Messiah's Herald. 

If the belief of the coming of the Lord has so much power to 
mould and influence the child of God, what indescribable power 
and influence should and does the belief that he has come-is 
now present a spiritual being-the "harvest" now progressing 
under his supervision as the chief reaper, and the gathering of 



the ripe wheat now being in progress and soon to be finished 
and the righteous then made to shine forth as the Sun in the 
kingdom of their Father- what effect as a separator and 
sanctifying power, should this truth have we enquire? What 
preaching can be so powerful? 



R249 : page 8 

CORRESPONDENTS' QUESTIONS. 

Ques. BROTHER RUSSELL- Will it be the work of the 
Millennial age to restore mankind to perfect human being or will 
they be raised from the tomb perfect men— justified to perfect 
life by Jesus' ransom? 

Ans. It will be the work of the entire age to bring mankind to 
perfection of human being: It is called "the times (years or age) 
of restitution" -though all may not reach perfection at the same 
time, yet all who do not then sin against light-the sin unto death 
(second death), will be perfected during that age. 

They are justified in the sight of God (the Father) by the death of 
Jesus for their sins, therefore, the Father's law no longer 
condemns them to the tomb and Jesus by purchase has the 
control of them and during the Millennial age will "restore all 
things;" and when all are brought into harmony and perfection- 
at the end of that age— the Son also delivers up the kingdom to 
God even the Father -(1 Cor. 15:28.) 

Q. When will they who know their Master's will and do it not be 
beaten with many stripes? 

A. The beating referred to (Luke 12:47,48) has reference not to 
the world but to Jesus' disciples (servants) who will be living in 
the end or "harvest" of this age. The "little flock" will be 
"accounted worthy to escape all" while the greater part of Jesus' 
servants because not in harmony with his plan, etc., will go 
through the great time of trouble which closes this age and 
introduces the Millennial age-some of these will pass through a 
severer ordeal than others, (many or fewer stripes) as they had 
neglected knowing and doing the Master's will. But the principle 
will apply during the next age also. 



pagei 

FOOD 

FOR 

THINKING CHRISTIANS. 



WHY EVIL WAS PERMITTED AND KINDRED TOPICS. 



"To make all see, what is the fellowship of the mystery, which 
from the beginning of the world hath been hid in God." 
"Wherein he hath abounded toward us in all wisdom and 
prudence; having made known unto us the mystery of his will, 
according to his good pleasure which he hath purposed in 
himself: —that in the dispensation of the fullness of times, he 
might gather together in one, all things in Christ." Eph. 1:8, and 
3:4,5,9. 



SEPTEMBER. (SPECIAL NUMBER.) 

"ZION'S WATCH TOWER," 

PITTSBURGH, PA. 

1881. 

page ii 

PREFACE. 

THE design of this pamphlet is, first to supply to such Christians 
as are alive and fully consecrated, and hungering and thirsting 
after a fuller knowledge of "Our Father" and his plans, what we 
believe to be "meat in due season;" leading such to perform all 
their consecration vows: secondly, to awaken those who are 
asleep in Zion-showing those who are not truth-hungry, what 
they are too much occupied with worldly plans to know, viz., 
that they are starving for the "good word of God," though they 
say- We are "rich and increased in goods and have need of 
nothing." 

I love to tell the Story! 
More wonderful it seems, 
Than all the golden fancies 
Of all our golden dreams: 



I love to tell the Story! 
It did so much for me; 
And that is just the reason 
I tell it now to thee. " 

It is our part, under heavenly direction, to thus scatter the food- 
the seeds of thoughts; it is God's part to water and give the 
increase—in some thirty, some sixty, and in some a hundred-fold 
to his praise. We leave the results with him. 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

R250 : page 1 

PART I. 



WHY EVIL WAS PERMITTED. 

A DIALOGUE. 

B.--GOOD evening, Brother A.: if you are at leisure I would 
like to have some conversation with reference to the Bible. 

A.--I am at leisure, my brother, and such a conversation should 
be of interest and profit to both of us. Have you struck a new 
vein of precious metal in the mine of truth? 

B.-Well, no; I cannot say so. The fact is, I am somewhat 
perplexed to know whether the Bible is really a mine of truth or 
not. There are many beautiful truths taught in the Bible which 
commend themselves to my judgment, and if I could only have 
my mind clear on some points, I would gladly accept the whole. 
It seems, too, that there must be some way out of my difficulties, 
if I could only find it, for surely the book is stamped with a 
wisdom higher than human, and my difficulty may arise from a 
failure to comprehend it more fully. 

A. -Well, my brother, it gives me great pleasure to meet with an 
honest inquirer after truth. You are anxious, then, to find the 
connecting links in the great chain which binds the interests of 
humanity to the throne of God. We believe that all Scripture is 
given by inspiration of God, and that the Spirit will guide us in 
the understanding of it. If it should please him to use me as his 
mouth-piece it will be a great privilege, and if I can render any 
assistance it will afford me pleasure. 

R250 : page 2 

B.-Well, can you explain why evil was permitted? If God is 
infinite in power, wisdom, and goodness, why did he permit his 
fair creation to be so marred by sin? After creating our first 
parents perfect and upright, why did he permit Satan to present 
the temptation, or why allow the forbidden tree to have a place 



among the good? Could he not have prevented all possibility of 
man's overthrow? 

A.--I see just where your difficulty lies, and I think I can make it 
very plain to you. It pleased God for the joy it gives him to 
dispense his goodness, and to exercise the attributes of his 
glorious being, to create various orders of intelligent beings. 
Some he has endowed with greater capacity than others; but 
each he made perfectly adapted to his sphere. We are acquainted 
with many forms of life in our world, but above all others stands 
man, the masterpiece of God's workmanship, endowed with 
reason and intelligence superior to all others, and given the 
dominion over all. He was made upright and perfect; God 
pronounced him "very good" --a perfect man- physically, 
mentally, and morally, yet unacquainted with evil and lacking 
experience. Had evil never been placed before him he could not 
have resisted it, and consequently there would have been no 
virtue nor merit in his right-doing. I presume I need scarcely 
remark here that not the fruit of the tree but the act of 
disobedience caused man's fall. 

B.-But could not God have made man unchangeably perfect? 

A. -No; to have done so would have been to make another God. 
Unchangeableness is an attribute only of an infallible, infinite 
being-God. He who cannot err must, of necessity, be all-wise, 
all-powerful, and consequently eternal. 

B.--I had never thought of it so. 

A. -If an intelligent being is to be made at all, he must be made 
liable to change; and, as he was created pure, any change must 
be from purity to sin. He could not even know the meaning of 
good unless he had evil to contrast with it. He could not 

R250 : page 3 

be reckoned as obedient to God unless a temptation to 
disobedience were presented, and such an evil made possible. 

B.-But could not God, with whom we are told "all things are 
possible," have interfered in season to prevent the full 
accomplishment of Satan's designs? 

A.-You say "all things are possible" with God. I trust you 
remember that it is all possible things that are possible with him. 
"It is impossible for God to lie."-Heb. 6:18. "He cannot deny 
himself."— 2 Tim. 2:13. He cannot do wrong. He cannot choose 
any but the wisest and best plan for introducing his creatures 
into life; and we should bear in mind that the fact of God's not 
interfering with the introduction and development of sin is one 
of the very strongest of reasons for believing that evil is 
necessary and designed ultimately to work good. 

C. -Brother A., may I interrupt you here to ask, why, if it was 
proper and wise that Adam should have a trial under the most 



favorable circumstances, as a perfect man, should not all his 
posterity have a similarly favorable trial? We all know that we 
are born with both mental and physical ailments and 
imperfections. Why did not God give us all as good a chance as 
Adam? 

A. -If you or I had been in Adam's place, we would have done 
just as he did. Remember, he had known God only a little while. 
He found himself alive—perhaps God told him he was his 
Creator, had a right to command his obedience, and to threaten 
and inflict punishment for disobedience. But what did Adam 
know about the matter? Here was another creature at his side 
who contradicted God, telling him that he would not die from 
eating the fruit; that God was jealous, because eating of this fruit 
would make him a God also. Then the tempter exemplified his 
teaching by eating of it himself, and man saw that he was the 
wisest of creatures. Can you wonder that they ate? No; as a 
reasoning being he could scarcely have done otherwise. 

C.-But he should have remembered the penalty- what a terrible 
price he must pay for his disobedience— the wretchedness 

R250 : page 4 

and death which would follow. If I were so placed, I think I 
should make more effort to withstand the tempter. 

A.-Wait, Brother C; you forget that Adam, up to this time, was 
totally unacquainted with wretchedness and death. He could not 
know what wretchedness meant; he never had been wretched. 
He did not know what dying meant; and, if you or I had been 
there, controlled by an unbiased judgment, we would have done 
just as Adam did. The reason you think you could withstand 
better is, that you have had experience with evil, and have 
learned, in a measure, what Adam up to that time had not 
learned in the smallest degree,— viz., to know good from evil. 

C.-O, I see. Then it is because we would have done just as 
Adam did; that God is justified in counting us all sinners, that 
"by one man's disobedience the many were made sinners," and 
"by the offence of one, all were condemned" (Rom. 5:18,19), 
and so "the wages of sin (death) passed upon all," and through 
or "in Adam all die." 

B.-Do I understand you to say that God does evil that good may 
come? 

A.— By no means. God did no evil, and he permitted it only 
because it was necessary that his creatures should know good 
from evil; that by being made acquainted with sin and its 
consequences -sickness, misery, and death— they might learn 
"the exceeding sinfulness of sin," and having tasted that the 
bitter "wages of sin is death," they might be prepared to choose 
life and to understand the wisdom and love of God in 
commanding obedience to his righteous laws. 



B.-But did not God implant in his creature that very thirst for 
knowledge which led him to an act of disobedience in order to 
gratify it? Does it not seem, too, that he wanted him to become 
acquainted with evil, and, if so, why should he attach a penalty 
to the sinful act, knowing that a knowledge of evil could be 
obtained in no other way? 

A. --We can see readily that a knowledge of evil could be 

R250 : page 5 

obtained in no way except by its introduction; and, remember, 
Adam could not have disobeyed if God had given no 
commandment, and every command must have a penalty 
attached to give it force. Therefore, I claim that God not only 
foresaw man's fall into sin but designed it: it was a part of his 
plan. God permitted, nay, designed man's fall; and why? 
Because, having the remedy provided for his release from its 
consequences, he saw that the result would be to lead man to a 
knowledge, through experience, which would enable him to see 
the bitterness and blackness of sin- "the exceeding sinfulness of 
sin," and the matchless brilliancy of virtue in contrast with it; 
thus teaching him the more to love and honor his Creator, who is 
the fountain and source of all goodness, and to forever shun that 
which brought so much woe and misery. So the final result is 
greater 

R251 : page 5 

love for God, and greater hatred of all that is opposed to him. 
The best armament against temptation is knowledge. 

C.-Your reasoning is clear, forcible, and, would seem to me, 
plausible, were it not that this experience and knowledge came 
too late to benefit the human family. Adam failed from want of 
knowledge and experience to maintain uprightness of character - 
-his posterity, though possessing that knowledge and experience, 
fail to attain uprightness from lack of ability occasioned by his 
sin. 

B.--I can see no objection to your view, that evil was permitted 
because necessary to man's development and designed for his 
ultimate good, were it not as Brother C. suggests-mankind will 
never have an opportunity to make use of the experience and 
knowledge thus obtained. But, Brother A., what did you mean a 
few minutes since when you said God had a remedy provided 
for man's release from the effects of the fall before he fell? 

A. -God foresaw that having given man freedom of choice, he 
would, through lack of knowledge, accept evil when disguised 
as an "angel of light;" and, also, that becoming acquainted with 
it, he would still choose it, because that acquaintance would 

R251 : page 6 



so impair his moral nature that evil would become more 
agreeable to him and more to be desired than good. Thus 
permitted to take his own course, man brought upon himself 
misery and death, from which he could never recover himself. 
Then the voice of infinite love is heard: "Behold the Lamb of 
God that taketh away the sin of the world. " This is Christ Jesus, 
and the death of Christ for man's sin was a part of God's plan as 
much as man's fall. He is "the Lamb slain from the foundation of 
the world. " His death for our sins was purposed by God before 
man fell; yes, before man was created. 

B.--I begin to see a harmony and beauty connected with the 
introduction of evil which I had not suspected. May we not 
reasonably say that God could not have displayed those qualities 
of his nature so attractive to us~mercy and pity~nor could his 
great love have been made so apparent had not the occasion for 
their exercise been presented by man's necessities? 

A.--I am glad that you have suggested this thought. It is true, 
that though "the Lord is very pitiful and of tender mercy," yet 
neither of these would have been seen had there not been a 
sinner requiring them; and while "God is love," and always has 
been the same, yet it is true that "in this was manifested the love 
of God, and hereby perceive we the love of God, because he 
(Christ) laid down his life for us." And do you not see that in the 
arrangement of the whole plan the wisdom of God is beautifully 
shown? Let me say further, that as we proceed, we shall find 
God's justice made to shine because of the introduction of evil. 
God might have told his creatures of these attributes, but never 
could have exhibited them had not sin furnished an occasion for 
their exhibition. 

B.--I am becoming anxious to see the outcome. You have 
suggested that Christ is the remedy for man's recovery from the 
effects of the fall, and that it was so arranged and purposed by 
God before creating the race, but you have not shown how the 
recovery is effected. 

A.--I am glad that you have not lost sight of the real object 

R251 : page 7 

of our conversation. The answer to this question will involve the 
consideration of two points: -First, What was the penalty 
pronounced and inflicted? and, Second, What was the remedy, 
and how applied? May I ask you to state in Scripture language 
what penalty God pronounced on Adam's sin? 

B.--I believe it reads, "In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shalt 
surely die." But he did not die for nine hundred and thirty years. 

A. -You quote correctly. The marginal reading will help you 
over the difficulty of his living nine hundred and thirty years. It 
is a more literal rendering of the Hebrew text: "In the day thou 
eatest thereof, dying thou shalt die, "--i.e., from the moment he 



should disobey God, death would have dominion over him- 
would have a claim and right to him, and would begin its work. 
It was only a question of time how soon it should lay him low. 
Elements of disease infested all nature with which he came in 
contact, since separated from Eden and its trees of life. 

We all are in a dying condition, partially dead; mentally, 
morally, and physically. From the moment of birth, and before 
it, we have been in the clutches of death, and he never lets go 
until he has conquered. Man, by means of medical aid, attempts 
resistance; but, at best, it is but a very brief struggle. Adam, 
because physically perfect, could offer great resistance. Death 
did not completely conquer him for nine hundred and thirty 
years, while the race at the present time, through the 
accumulated ills handed down through generations past, yields 
to his power on an average in about thirty-two years. 

C.-We are, then, so to speak, overshadowed by death from the 
cradle to the tomb, the shade increasing each moment until it is 
blackness complete. 

A. -Yes; you get the thought. As David expresses it in the 
twenty-third Psalm: "I walk through the valley of the shadow of 
death." The further we go down into this valley the darker it 
becomes, until the last spark of life expires. 

R251 : page 8 

B.--I understand you to believe that diseases of the various 
kinds are but the mouths of death by which we are devoured, 
since we were placed within his reach by Adam's sin? 

A. -Yes; every pain and ache we feel is evidence not that death 
will get hold of us, but that he now has us in his grasp. Adam 
and all his race have been in death ever since he disobeyed. 

C.-We frequently speak of death as the "Angel God has sent," 
"the gate to endless joy," etc., and yet I confess I could never 
regard it except as an enemy, and such it would really seem to 
be. 

A.-Nowhere in Scripture is it represented as our friend, but 
always as an enemy of man, and consequently the enemy of 
God, who loves man; and we are told that "for this purpose 
Christ was manifest, that he might destroy death and him that 
hath the power of death, -that is, the devil." 

B.-If death is the penalty for sin, has not mankind paid that 
penalty in full when dead? Might he not be released from death 
the moment after dying, yet fully meet the demand of justice? 

A. --"The wages of sin is death, "--not dying, but "death" - 
forever. As well say that a man condemned to imprisonment for 
life, had received the full penalty in the act of going into prison, 
as that man received his penalty in the act of going into death. 
By disobedience man fell into the hands of Justice, and, though 



God is merciful and loving, there can be no warfare between his 
attributes. Mercy and love must be exercised in harmony with 
justice. "God is just," and "will by no means clear the guilty." 
Man was guilty, and must therefore be dealt with by justice. 
Justice cries, Your life is forfeited, "dying thou shalt die." Man 
is cast into the great prison-house of death, and Justice, while 
locking him in, says: "Thou shalt by no means come out thence 
until thou hast paid the uttermost farthing." 

B.-Do I express the same idea by saying that man forfeited his 
right to life by his disobedience, and, consequently, God, in 

R251 : page 9 

justice, recognizing and enforcing his own law, could not permit 
him to live again unless he could meet the claims of justice? 

A. -The idea is the same. Man is the debtor, and unless he can 
pay the debt he cannot come out of the prison-house of death- 
cannot have life. He cannot pay this debt, and consequently 
cannot release himself. But man's weakness and helplessness 
gives occasion for the display of God's mercy and love in Christ 
Jesus, for "When there was no eye to pity, and no arm to save," 
God devised a way by which he could be both just and merciful; 
and so, "while we were yet without strength, in due time Christ 
died for the ungodly." 

C— How for them? His death does not prevent men from dying. 

A. -It does not prevent their dying, but it does prevent their 
continuance in the prison-house of death. He came to "open the 
prison doors and set at liberty the captives." This he does, not by 
opposing God's justice, but by recognizing it, and paying that 
which is due. He has a right to set those prisoners free. In his 
own death~the just for the unjust-he ransomed us, as it is 
written, "I will ransom (purchase) them from the power of the 
grave;" "I will redeem them from death;" "for ye were bought 
with a price, even the precious blood (life) of Christ." 

C.--I understand you to mean, that as Jesus came into the world 
by a special creative act of God, he was free from the curse 
which rested upon the balance of the race, therefore not liable to 
death. As the second Adam he was tried, but came off 
conqueror. "He was obedient even unto death;" but his right to 
life not having been forfeited, either through Adam's sin or his 
own, death had no claim upon it. He, therefore, had an 
unforfeited life to offer Justice as a ransom for the forfeited life 
of mankind. 

A. -Yes, as he himself said, "My flesh I will give for the life of 
the world. "--John 6:51. He must have a right to continuance of 
life, else he could not give it. He did not conquer nor overthrow 
Justice, but recognizing the justice of the law of God 

R251 : page 10 



in the forfeit of the sinner's life, he purchased it back with his 
own, and thereby obtained the right to "destroy death, "--the 

R252 : page 10 

enemy who for a time is used as the servant of Justice. 

B.-Then Justice accepted the life of Christ as a substitute for the 
sinner's life. But it seems unjust to make the innocent suffer for 
the guilty. 

A. -It would be unjust to make or compel such suffering, but 
"Christ gave himself for us." "He for the joy that was set before 
him endured the cross." 

C.-But how could the life of one purchase the life of many? 

A. -By the rule of 

SUBSTITUTION. 

As Adam was substituted for the race in trial, and through his 
failure "death passed upon all men," and all were counted 
sinners, even before birth, so the obedience of death in Christ 
justified all men to a return to life. Paul so expresses it in Rom. 
5:18, [Em. Diaglott]: "For as through the disobedience of ONE 
man, the many will be constituted sinners, so also through the 
obedience of the ONE, the many will be constituted (reckoned) 
righteous;" and, "as through one offense, sentence came on all 
men to condemnation (condemning them to death), so also, 
through one righteous act, sentence came on all men to 
justification of life," justifying their living again. 

B. -Shall we understand, then, that the resurrection of the dead 
is optional or compulsory on Justice? 

A. -Christ having "tasted death for every man," it is certainly 
compulsory on Justice to release the prisoners held for sin. 
Christ's sacrifice having been accepted as "the propitiation 
(settlement) of our sins, and not of ours (believers) only, but also 
for the sins of the WHOLE WORLD," all must go free, because 
God is just to forgive us our sins."— 1 John 1:9. 

B.-Does this imply universal, eternal salvation? 

A. -No, it implies the saving or salvation of all men from the 
Adamic death, but as many of them will be liable to the "second 

R252:pagell 

death," on account of their own sin, it cannot be eternal 
salvation. The second Adam will eventually restore to the race 
all that it lost by the first Adam's sin. 

C.-Was everlasting life one of the things possessed by Adam 
before he sinned, and which he lost in death; and is it to be 
restored to mankind through Christ's ransom? 



A. -Yes; his continuance of life, if obedient, is implied in the 
threatening of death if disobedient. Adam, when created perfect, 
was possessed of a perfect body, and with perfect arrangements 
for the continuance of the perfect life, in the trees (woods) of 
life, in the garden. This kind of life would have lasted forever 
had he continued obedient, hence was everlasting life, 
conditioned only on obedience. This was lost, and is to be 
restored to all mankind, -viz., perfection of being, or life and 
perfect provision for its everlasting continuance in harmony 
with God. 

C.-Then this salvation cannot be what Paul refers to, saying, 
"the gift of God is eternal life. " 

A. -Natural (human) life-ever lasting- was originally a gift from 
God, but its restoration is not, strictly speaking, a new gift; 
rather it is an old gift returned. Life once possessed was lost, and 
is to be restored because purchased— paid for-by the death of 
Christ. The restored race, brought back to where they were 
before the fall, will have the advantage of knowing from actual 
experience the character and results of sin, which plunged our 
race in ruin. Then, with the knowledge of sin and its miserable 
results, gained during the present time, they may be considered 
superior to all temptation and sin, and, therefore, not liable to 
death. They will enjoy everlasting life in the same sense that 
Adam possessed it before the fall, and that angels now possess 
it, -viz., the right and means of continuing their life (by eating, 
etc., Psalm 78:25), as long as they continue obedient to God's 
laws. This is not the same, however, as Immortality— the new 
gift of God [see "The Narrow Way to Life, "-page 134] which 
the Scriptures assert to be possessed by God our Father 

R252 : page 12 

and our Lord Jesus Christ only, and promised to those of the 
Gospel church, who overcome and become his Bride. This new 
gift was never known of before this Gospel age, "Which in other 
ages was not made known unto the sons of men as it is now 
revealed unto his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit." - 
(Eph. 3:5; see also 1 Cor. 2:10, and 1 Pet. 1:12.) It "is now made 
manifest by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who hath 
abolished death (obtained the right to do so by giving "his life a 
ransom for all"), and hath brought Life and Immortality to light 
through the Gospel. "-2 Tim. 1:10. 

Yes, our Lord made both things possible, the restoration of Life 
to mankind in general, and the attainment of the superlative 
degree of life-Immortality-by those who overcome and 
become his bride. It is of this great prize set before believers of 
this Gospel age that Paul speaks, saying: "God having provided 
some better thing for us." (Theirs was good and grand, but the 
bride's portion is better.)-Heb. 11:40. 



The character and exclusive application of this promise of the 
divine, incorruptible, immortal principle of life to the "little 
flock," the "bride," is shown in the following and other 
Scriptures, — 1 Tim. 6:16: God "only hath immortality:" a life 
incorruptible, independent of any support, eternal (the word 
eternal merely expresses duration, nothing more: God is both 
eternal and immortal. — 1 Tim. 1:17.) In John 5:26, Jesus gives 
his own definition of immortality, claiming that the Father gives 
it to him. "As the Father hath life in himself, so hath he given to 
the Son to have life in himself." He thus became a partaker of 
the divine (Jehovah's) nature, a son of God~the "only begotten" 
on that highest plane. And it is to partake of this same gift of 
God- "glory, honor, and immortality" -that his Bride is called. 
According to his promise she is to become "partaker of the 
divine nature," also-the same high plane of sonship- "joint heir 
with Jesus." She is to have within her "a well of water (life) 
springing up" (John 4:14), while the rest of mankind may come 
to the fountain to drink. —Rev. 7:17, and 

R252 : page 13 

22:17. Paul says of the overcoming church, "This mortal must 
put on immortality. "— 1 Cor. 15:53. 

Thus we see that the new gift is that held out for the bride- 
immortality-divinity: while that which the world will get will 
be the restoration of the former life. When the world is restored 
to perfect human life, possessing the knowledge of good and 
evil, as perfect obedience will be expected of them as was 
required of Adam. 

C— You seem to think there are no conditions to salvation, while 
the Scriptures mention them frequently. 

A. -There are conditions laid down for attaining the high calling 
to joint-heirship and dominion with Jesus and immortality, but 
none for the recovery of the race from the fall, except the 
righteousness and acceptableness of the substitute. 

C.-If ransomed, why do they remain in death, and others die, 
since Christ has paid the price? 

A. -But the price is not yet fully paid. To have a clear 
understanding of God's plan, we must recognize the distinction 
which he makes between the world in general and the Church, 
or called-out ones of the present time. God loves the world, and 
has made great and rich provisions, as we have seen, for their 
coming in his due time, to a condition of perfection and 
happiness, but, in the meantime, while they are getting their 
experience with evil, God calls out "a little flock," to whom he 
makes "exceeding great and precious promises," conditioned on 
their living separate from the balance of the world- "overcoming 
the world, "-viz.: that they may become "children of God," 



"partakers of the divine nature," the "bride," and "joint heirs," 
with his only begotten Son, Jesus Christ (anointed). 

With her Lord, the wife becomes a part of the Christ-the 
anointed "body." She now fills up the measure of the afflictions 
of Christ, which are behind.— Col. 1:24. With him, she bears the 
cross here and when every member of that body is made "a 
living sacrifice," has crucified the fleshly human nature, then the 
ATONEMENT sacrifice will be finished, and the bride, 

R252 : page 14 

being complete, will enter with her Lord into the glory which 
follows, and share with him in the "joy that was set before him," 
and which he set before her-of blessing all the families of the 
earth, thus completing the AT-ONE-MENT between God and 
the redeemed race. And, "as in the first Adam (and Eve-they 
being counted as one-Gen. 5:2) all die, so in Christ (Jesus and 
his bride made one-Eph. 2:15) shall all be made alive." 1 Cor. 
15:22. Jesus, the head, atoned for his body, his bride, and his 
righteousness is imputed to her. Being thus justified, and 
considered holy in God's sight, she is permitted to have 
fellowship with him in his sufferings that she may also share 
with him in his glory. [See Tract No. 7, Work of Atonement- 
Tabernacle Types.] 

Behold what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us 
(believers), that we should be called the children of God, and if 
children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs with JESUS 
CHRIST, our Lord, if so be that we suffer with him."- Rom. 
8:17. 

B.-It is very clear to my mind, that a false idea of substitution 
has obtained among Christian people, from a supposition that it 
represented God as a vindictive, vengeful tyrant, angry because 
man had sinned; refusing to show mercy until blood had been 
shed, and caring not whether it was the blood of the innocent or 
the guilty, so long as it was blood. I doubt not many Christians 
have been led to look upon substitution as a God- dishonoring 
doctrine, even though there are many scriptures which are found 
difficult to otherwise make use of, as, "He tasted death for every 
man;" "My flesh I will give for the life of the world;" "Without 
the shedding of blood (life) there is no remission 

R253 : page 14 

of sins;" "Redemption through his blood;" "While we were yet 
sinners, Christ died for us;" "We were reconciled to God by the 
death of his son;" and many other texts to the same effect. It was 
not by his leaving the glory which he had, nor by his keeping the 
law, nor by his being rejected of the Jews, a man of sorrows and 
acquainted with grief, nor by his resurrection, 

R253 : page 15 



nor by work he has since accomplished, but, "by his DEATH 
that we are reconciled to God." 

I now see him as mankind's substitute, suffering death, the 
penalty which the justice of God had inflicted upon us. I can see 
"the exceeding sinfulness of sin" in God's sight, the perfection of 
his justice, and his great wisdom in so arranging it all, that man's 
extremity was made the occasion for the manifestation of "the 
great love wherewith he loved us" when "he gave his only 
begotten Son," and "laid upon him the iniquity of us all," as well 
as the love of Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might 
redeem us from all iniquity, (buy back to us all we had lost by 
iniquity). I feel to exclaim with Paul, "O! the depth of the riches 
both of the knowledge and wisdom of God." 

C.-Do you understand the Scriptures to teach that all mankind 
will reach and maintain the perfection of life which Adam lost— 
which you called "everlasting life?" 

A. -It would seem as though such love, when seen, would beget 
love and obedience; but we are assured there is a second death, 
and while those who become subject to it, will not compare in 
numbers with the saved, yet, there will be some, who will not 
reach perfection, even at the end of the thousand years, who 
being incorrigible will be cast into the lake of fire (the second 
death.) 

God made provision before our creation for the recovery from 
the first death, (the present Adamic death,) but, if after 
experience with evil and a knowledge of good, they do not 
appreciate good, they will die for their own sin (not Adam's). 
There is no recovery from the second death—Christ will not die 
for them again. Justice and love can do nothing more for them. 

C.-Do you not understand that some are condemned to the 
second death during the Gospel Age? 

A.— Yes, in 1 John 5:16, and in Heb. 6:4-6, we are informed that 
some commit this sin now, but from the conditions mentioned, 
they are evidently few. Only those who have been brought to a 
knowledge of God and his good word and have 

R253 : page 16 

received the Holy Ghost-in a word, Saints are the only ones 
who could commit it-those who have already received all the 
benefits of ransom from sin, etc., and who know it. If these, 
being washed, like the sow, willingly go back to the wallowing 
in the mire of sin, they commit the sin unto death. 

I do not mean simply backsliding, but open apostasy and 
rejection of Jesus' work of ransom and purchase as explained by 
the Apostle. 

And now there is another thought I would like you to notice: 
Jesus not only ransomed his bride from death, but as her head 



becomes her leader, example, forerunner, and captain of her 
salvation to the spiritual condition and divine nature. The death 
and resurrection of our Lord are inseparably joined: the death 
was necessary as our ransom, to release us from the 
condemnation of sin, and to justify us before God; the 
resurrection was necessary that through our Lord's guidance, 
grace and strength bestowed through the Spirit we might be able 
to walk in his footsteps as he hath set us an example- "being 
made conformable to his death." 

B.--I see a force, then, in Paul's expression, Rom. 5:10: 
"Reconciled by the death-saved by the life. " His death justified 
us to human life, but his example and aid enable us to "become 
partakers of the divine nature" and life immortal. 

C. -If justice could not let mankind go free from death, how 
could Jesus be permitted to live if he became man's substitute? 
Must not his life be forever forfeited? 

A. -It was forever forfeited-he never took the same life again. 
He was quickened (made alive) to a higher life by the Father. He 
was "put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit" to a 
higher plane, a spiritual body. As we shall be, he, our leader, 
was "sown a natural body, raised a spiritual body." Had he risen 
a fleshly being, with fleshly life, we could not go free. It would 
have been taking back our "ransom"- our "price." As Paul says, 
"He took upon him the form of a servant (flesh) for the suffering 
of death." He had no need of 

R253 : page 17 

it further; he left it. "He made his soul (life) an offering for sin:" 
"My flesh I will give for the life of the world. "-John 6:51. It 
was given forever. "This man, after he had offered one sacrifice 
for sins forever, sat down on the right hand of God." Heb. 10:12, 
having received a higher life. 

B.-This change, then, accounts for his acting so strangely after 
his resurrection-appearing in different forms-as the gardener to 
Mary, and "afterwards in another form to two of them," etc. His 
appearing in their midst, the doors being shut, and anon 
vanishing out of their sight. I often thought it peculiar. But did 
not his fleshly body disappear from the tomb? 

A. -Yes; "His flesh saw not corruption." What became of his 
flesh, I know not any more than I know what became of the 
various bodies in which he appeared after his resurrection, and 
of the various fleshly bodies in which angels appeared at various 
times. "They saw not corruption;" but, remember, it was not the 
atoms of matter which composed the body-(and which are 
continually changing)-these atoms did not sin, and were not 
cursed nor forfeited by the fall. It was the flesh life, and Christ's 
laying down his flesh life, effects the ransom. 



C.-Now, another point: Are all our sins, actual as well as 
imputed, forgiven? 

A. -While all are justified from Adam's sin unconditionally, yet, 
where knowledge of right is possessed, obedience is expected as 
far as they are able to obey. Failure in this respect is the 
occasion for their being beaten with many or few stripes in the 
age to come; while the "little flock" who now believe into and 
are baptized into Christ, become members of his body, are by 
their faith justified from all things (Acts 13:39), will not be 
beaten with stripes in the world to come. True, they now receive 
"chastisement whereof all are partakers," but not as a penalty; 
only as the "rod and staff" of Christ, the Shepherd, to guide his 
sheep. 

Thus the sins of the "Church of the First-born" are passed 

R253 : page 18 

over, (not imputed), and she is justified, not from death only, but 
"from all things." 

This is beautifully pictured in the law by the Passover. Wherever 
in that night the lamb was eaten, and his blood sprinkled, the 
first born was passed over-spared. -Ex. 12. So, during this 
night— the Gospel age— Christ, our Passover (lamb) is sacrificed, 
and we "keep the feast. "— 1 Cor. 5:8. We feed on our Lamb with 
some of the "bitter herbs" of affliction to sharpen our appetite. 
All such are passed over. This type shows the special value of 
Christ's death to his body, "The Church of the First-born." Thus, 
"God is the Savior of all men, especially of those that believe. "- 
1 Tim. 4:10. 

C.-Does not the race get back, in the second Adam, spiritual 
life? 

A.-Certainly not; Adam was not a spiritual but a human being, 
consequently had human life and powers, which were "very 
good." Believers of this Gospel age only are warranted by the 
word of God in expecting a change from human to spiritual 
conditions-spiritual bodies with spiritual powers "like unto the 
angels," and "like unto Christ's glorious body." This spiritual 
condition will be ours "in the resurrection." Those who hope to 
obtain this new nature are influenced by those hopes and 
promises during the present life, and endeavor to live in 
harmony with that new nature. These are said to be "begotten of 
the Spirit through the word of truth that they should be (at birth- 
-resurrection) a kind of first fruits of his (God's) creatures." - 
Jas. 1:18; Rev. 14:4. Because of this begetting we speak of them 
as already spiritual beings, though really such in embryo only. 
Those of our race not begotten of these promises, etc., will never 
be spiritual beings, but as we have seen will be restored to 
human perfection. 



C.--I have heard frequently your views of restitution, and saw 
some force and considerable beauty in them, but I never before 
saw how absolutely certain man's restoration to life is. I see now 
that the same justice of God, which could in no case clear 

R253 : page 19 

the guilty, could not permit man's release from death until the 
price of his ransom had been paid. The very purity of this 
justice, as well as the love of God in providing the ransom, 
assures us that the penalty or price being paid, every man must 
ultimately be released from death. And, Brother A., from one of 
your remarks I get a beautiful thought, -i.e., That the world's 
redemption from sin and restoration from death, has been 
awaiting for 6000 years the coming and work of THE CHRIST 
(head and body). For over 4000 years it awaited the coming and 
sacrifice of the Head, and for nearly 2000 years it has also been 
awaiting the completion and sacrifice of the body. When the 
body is complete, sacrificed and united to the Head, then 
follows the glorious restoration of the fallen race. Oh, how 
grand and glorious it seems ! How like a God of infinite wisdom 
and love. 

B.-Yes, yes; it lifts a load from my heart, as I think how God's 
word is its own interpreter, and shows forth his great, loving 
plans for all our race. And yet, we can scarcely realize its truth, 
though thus supported by his Word and commended 

R254 : page 19 

of our judgment. I presume it is because from infancy we have 
been bound by false ideas. 

A. -And how it seems to unfold itself now, just at the time most 
needed, as the offset of the arguments of infidels; to give 
confidence and strength to God's children, who are being forced 
out of, and separated from the worldly-minded churches of 
today. I consider it a strong evidence that the Gospel age is 
ending, and that, therefore, this message of "Restitution," not 
due during the age, is put into our mouths now. Thus, God is 
gradually revealing himself through his plans, and the more we 
know of him, the more we will love and honor him. 

C.-One other thought I would like to suggest. Paul speaks of 
being made a spectacle to angels. Can it be that angels are 
learning the dreadful effects of sin, from seeing man's 
experience with it, and the love, mercy, justice, and power of 
God, in rescuing man from it? The thought presented to my 
mind is, that this terrible fall, with all its bitter consequences, 
together 

R254 : page 20 

with this glorious plan of the ages for the restoration of the 
fallen race, and the introduction of the new creation, of which 



Jesus is the head, is intended for the instruction and benefit of all 
God's intelligent creatures, as well as for mankind. 

A.--A very good thought. We know that angels are intensely 
interested in watching the unfolding of the plan. We read in 1 
Peter 1:12, "Which things the angels desired to look into," and 
again (Heb. 1:14), "Are they not all ministering spirits sent forth 
to minister for those who shall be heirs of salvation?" Probably 
they are learning for the first time the immensity of God's love, 
and wisdom, and power-the exceeding beauty of holiness, in 
contrast with sin, and the lesson of the necessity of entire 
obedience and complete submission to the will of the one great 
Master and Father of all, as was beautifully exemplified in his 
dear Son, our Lord Jesus Christ. 

C.~What we have seen relative to evil in man— how and why it 
came-when and how it will be eradicated, its usefulness, yea, 
necessity, as a protection against future sin, etc., seems not only 
satisfactory, but a grand solution of a question which has long 
perplexed me and many others of God's children. Now let me 
ask, can we go further and learn God's plan relative to Satan, the 
tempter? 

A. -Our only source of information on the subject is the Bible, 
and its accounts, while brief, are to the point, and furnish us all 
requisite information. Scriptures refer to evil spirits as "legion," 
or a multitude under a head or prince called Satan. They were at 
one time angels of God. 2 Peter (2:4) and Jude (6) speak of them 
as~"The angels who kept not their first estate" (of purity and 
sinlessness) whom God "cast down to Tartarus and delivered 
into chains of darkness." 

It is a fundamental law of God's universe, governing all his 
creatures, that "The soul (being) that sinneth, it shall die"-- that, 
in a word, God would supply life to no creature that would not 
live in harmony with his righteous laws: and though in 
conformity to this universal law, all the rebel angels were from 

R254:page21 

the moment of rebellion doomed to die, and must ultimately die, 
yet God, who we are told "makes the wrath of man to praise him 
and the remainder (of man's wrath) he will restrain, has acted 
upon the same principle with the rebel angels. He uses them as 
his agents in the sense that they accomplish (probably 
unknowingly) a part of his plan, and give mankind the 
knowledge of evil and its bitter results-sickness, pain, and death 
of mind and body. And because of this work which they are 
designed to accomplish, God, the Father, "who only hath 
immortality" (1 Tim. 6:16)— life in himself— the fountain of all 
life continues for centuries to supply life to these, condemned to 
death. 



I presume that the rebel angels thought that they were immortal 
beings, and that while God could give life to any creature, he 
could not take it away again, and probably with pride 
engendered by this thought of their own hold on life and their 
supposed inherent greatness, they may have meditated and 
attempted "a usurpation" of God's authority. 

B.-We can see the folly of presuming that he who created and 
gave life, could not by the same power remand any of those 
beings again to the same elements from which he created them. 

A. -Their rebellion was followed not by death, but by an 
expulsion from God's presence [to "Tartarus"~which probably 
signifies our earth]. This we can imagine a source of trial to the 
sinless angels. If God had said sinners should die, and these 
having sinned did not die, it would appear as though God had 
been misrepresenting his power. He had power to cast them out 
of his presence, but apparently lacked power to destroy them. 
Here was apparently a rival government nearly as strong as 
God's, and any who loved evil might desert Jehovah's hosts and 
join those of Satan. 

When man was created and placed in Eden, a marvel of 
perfection and beauty, but on a different plane of being from any 
previous creation, and with one power possessed by none other - 
-the power to propagate his own species, can we wonder if 

R254 : page 22 

Satan felt disposed to capture this wonderful creation for allies 
and subjects? This he did attempt, and approached as a friend 
who was truly interested in them, and desired their welfare, 
saying -Why not eat of the "tree of knowledge of good and 
evil," and be very wise? They said that God had charged them 
not to eat of it, and had cautioned them that if they ate they 
would die—lose life and return to the dust from whence they 
were taken. Ah, my dear friends, says Satan, be not deceived; 
God has told you an untruth; let me assure you, that you will 
"not surely die;" you are immortal beings and can no more die 
than God himself. Let me convince you that God is deceiving 
you, because the Lord God doth know that you would become 
as gods, knowing good and evil; therefore, he seeks to prevent 
your progress and knowledge by this threat of death. Then Satan 
ate and died not, and this seemed to corroborate his statements 
and to make God a liar. I doubt not that Satan thought he told 
the truth when he said man had immortality and could not die. 
His own experience had evidently been such as to lead him to 
suppose God could not withdraw life when once given. And the 
fact that Adam, after sinning, was shut out from fellowship and 
communion with God, but did not instantly die, seemed but a 
corroboration of Satan's own previous experience. 

It was not long, however, until death made its appearance, and 
gave evidence that man was "mortal" (Job 4:17), proving the 



word of God true and Satan's statement false. We can imagine 
the awe and terror of the rebel angels as they saw lifeless Abel, 
and realized that their theories as to the endlessness of life were 
thus proved false. As they began to see the power of God to 
destroy as well as to create, they realized that the penalty against 
them as sinners (death) would sometime be fulfilled. That they 
now realize that their end is destruction, is evidenced by the 
words of the legion to Jesus~"We know thee.... Art thou come to 
destroy us?"— Luke 4:34. 

Though now convinced of God's power, they are still his 
enemies, and use their power to oppose God's plan, etc. ; and 
they 

R254 : page 23 

are permitted to exercise great power, and seemingly to triumph 
over God's plans and people, but it is only for a time, thank God, 
and their power is limited; so far can they go and no further. 

The untruth which deceived in Eden— "Thou shalt not surely 
die"~has been the teaching of the devil through all generations 
since. He has taught it to all heathen peoples, and among those 
who are God's children~Christians~he has succeeded in getting 
many to believe him instead of God. But since death has come, 
he offsets the logical conclusions by saying that the real being is 
not dead; that merely the house has died, and that the being 
himself you cannot see, that he is immortal—indestructible. 
Upon this falsehood he has built up in the minds of Christian 
people the belief in a place of endless torment for the supposed 
endless being, which doctrine is a blasphemy on the character of 
Jehovah and a contradiction of his word, which repeatedly 
declares that "the wages of sin is death" (not life in torment), 
and "the soul (being) that sinneth, it shall die" (not live in 
misery). 

By these doctrines and teachings Satan causes the statements of 
God's word to sound like mockery when it declares- "God is 
love"- "God so loved the world," etc. But while Satan may have 
supposed that he was opposing Jehovah by making the pathway 
which leads by Faith to glory, rugged and steep and hard to 
climb, yet we can see that God is still making use of evil to 
accomplish his plans; for the "narrow way," and careful walk 
and great faith are essential elements in the development of the 
little flock, to whom it is the Father's good pleasure to give the 
kingdom" -"The Christ (anointed) of God." 

Every truth of God seems to be opposed with a specious error, 
and every error of Satan's which we receive is a hindrance to our 
reception of some truth of God; and likewise every word of 
God's truth which we get a firm hold of, repels at once the error 
of the enemy. Let us give the more earnest heed to the word of 
God "which is able to make us wise unto 



R254 : page 24 

salvation" (the great salvation promised to the overcomers- the 
Bride). 

Soon Satan's power must wane. When in God's plan evil has 
served its designed purposes, the Lord will take to himself his 
great power and reign (Rev. 1 1:17), and the rule which Satan 
now bears over those who do his will, will be overthrown, and a 
new age ushered in, the law and controlling power of which will 
be righteousness—a great contrast, indeed, with "the 

R255 : page 24 

present evil world" (age). This taking of control is described by 
Jesus in a parable-Mark 3:27. And again, in Rev. 20:2, it is 
represented in a pen picture as a binding of Satan with a strong 
chain of power for a thousand years. When bound he has not yet 
met his doom-destruction-but will merely be restrained from 
deceiving the nations until the end of the millennial age. Then 
all mankind having come to know good and evil, and having 
been restored to perfection of being, should and could resist all 
temptation, and if Satan were again to present temptation, they 
should oppose it and him, else they are as guilty as he. And so 
we read, Satan is again permitted to try the restored perfect 
human family, who now know by experience what sin is, and 
what God's love is; and, strange as it may seem, a number 
follow and join the rebellion of the angels- yet we cannot doubt 
that the number will be small in comparison with the numbers 
who shall live in harmony with God. 

The agency of evil being then ended, all evil will be wiped out; 
and "every knee shall bow, and every tongue confess (Jesus) to 
the glory of God the Father. "-Phil. 2:1 1. As Paul declares 
(writing of Christ and his body-church): "The very God of peace 
shall bruise Satan (crush the serpent's head- destroy him) under 
your feet shortly."— Rom. 16:20. Paul again declares that the 
destruction of Satan and the evil which he has caused, was the 
object of Jesus' coming into the world and dying— "That through 
death he might destroy him that had the power of death, -that is, 
the devil."-Heb. 2:14. 

John also adds his testimony that "For this purpose the Son 

R255 : page 25 

of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the 
devil"-all evil (1 John 3:8). 

C.-How wonderful it seems! To think that God has for over six 
thousand years permitted not only men, but angels, to 
misunderstand his great wisdom, power, and love that in due 
time those attributes might shine with ten-fold brilliancy. This 
furnishes us a key, too, to our Christian experience. How often, 
while endeavoring to walk in Jesus' footsteps, and to overcome 



evil with good, we are misunderstood and our purposes 
maligned. "The world knoweth us not because it knew him 
not."-- 1 John 3:1. 

B.--I want to say to you before leaving, that I am much rejoiced 
to see clearly as I now do, why God permitted evil; that it was 
not, that he had elected ninety to hell to each one chosen for 
glory, and introduced evil as a pretext to justify their damnation: 
nor, on the other hand, was it because God could not help its 
introduction, and lacked wisdom to foresee, and power to avert 
it; but that he arranged for its introduction, and our recovery 
from it as the embodiment of WISDOM, LOVE, and MERCY. 

A. -What a privilege is ours, dear friends, to be living during the 
fulfillment of the "Seventh Trumpet," during which "the mystery 
of God shall be finished. "--Rev. 10:7. As the mystery and cloud 
of error and evil begins to roll away, and we get a glimpse of our 
Father's loving plans, how it rejoices and refreshes our hearts to 
see him as, indeed, a God of Love. Let us lift up our hearts and 
rejoice, as we see that the glorious Millennial day is dawning, 
and that soon- 

"His truth shall break through every cloud 

That vails and darkens his designs." 

In the light of the unfolding plan, Cowper's lines seem almost 
an inspiration: 

R255 : page 26 

God moves in a mysterious way, 
His wonders to perform; 
He plants his footsteps in the sea, 
And rides upon the storm. 

Deep in unfathomable mines 
Of never-failing skill, 
He treasures up his bright designs, 
And works his sovereign will. 

Ye fearful saints, fresh courage take, 
The clouds ye so much dread 
Are big with mercy, and shall break 
In blessings on your head. 

Judge not the Lord by feeble sense, 
But trust him for his grace; 
Behind a frowning providence 
He hides a smiling face. 

His purposes will ripen fast, 
Unfolding every hour; 
The bud may have a bitter taste, 
But sweet will be the flower. 



Blind unbelief is sure to err, 
And scan his word in vain; 
God is his own interpreter, 
And he will make it plain." 



page 26 



May we not with the angels sing "Glory to God in the highest, 
on earth peace, good will toward men:" 

Tell the whole world these blessed tidings, 
Speak of the time of rest that nears; 
Tell the oppressed of ev'ry nation, 
Jubilee lasts a thousand years. 

What if the clouds do for a moment 
Hide the blue sky where morn appears: 
Soon the glad sun of promise given, 
Rises to shine a thousand years. 

A thousand years earth's coming glory- 
Tis the glad day so long foretold: 
Tis the bright morn of Zion's glory, 
Prophets foresaw in times of old. " 



R255 : page 27 



PART II. 



WHY WILL THERE BE 
A SECOND ADVENT? 

THAT our Lord intended us as his disciples, to understand, that 
for some purpose, in some manner, and at some time, he would 
come again, is, we presume, admitted and believed by all 
familiar with the Scriptures. 

When he said, "If I go away, I will come again," we believe that 
he certainly referred to his second personal coming. Some think 
he referred to the descent of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost; others, 
to the destruction of Jerusalem, etc. ; but all apparently forget the 
fact that in the last book of the Bible, written more than sixty 
years after Pentecost, and twenty-six years after Jerusalem's 
destruction, he that was dead, and is alive, speaks of the event as 
yet future, saying: "Behold, I come quickly, and my reward is 
with me." And the inspired John replies: "Even so come Lord 
Jesus." 

Quite a number think that when any are converted, that forms a 
part of the coming of Christ, and that so he continues coming 
until all the world is converted. Then, say they, he will have 
fully come. 



These evidently overlook the fact that the world will not be 
converted when he comes; that the Bible, our only guide on the 
subject, declares that, "In the last days perilous times shall 
come, for men shall be lovers of pleasure, more than lovers of 

R255 : page 28 

God;" that "evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, 
deceiving and being deceived;" and that Jesus gave special 
warning to his little flock, saying: "Take heed to yourselves, lest 
that day come upon you unawares, for as a snare shall it come 
upon all them" (not taking heed) "that dwell upon the face of the 
whole earth, and they shall not escape." 

Again, we may rest assured that when Jesus said, "All the tribes 
of the earth shall mourn and wail because of him when they see 
him coming," he did not refer to the conversion of sinners —Do 
the tribes mourn and wail because of the conversion of a sinner? 
And if it refers, as almost all admit, to Christ's personal presence 
on earth, it teaches that all on earth will not love his appearing, 
as they certainly would do if all were converted. 

These expect that through the efforts of the Church, the world 
will be converted, and thus the millennial age be introduced, at 
the close of which the Lord will come, wind up earthly affairs, 
reward believers and condemn sinners; that to convert the world, 
bind Satan, make "the knowledge of the Lord to fill the whole 
earth," and "nations to learn war no more," are the work of the 
Church in her present mortal condition. When she has 
accomplished this great and difficult task, Jesus comes to wind it 
up, etc. 

They have much Scripture, which taken disconnectedly, seems 
to favor this view. But even this, we believe, when God's word 
and plan are looked at as a whole, will be found to favor the 
other view,~viz., that Christ comes to reign before the 
conversion of the world; that the Church is now being tried, and 
that the reward promised the overcomers is, that they shall share 
in that reign: "To him that overcometh, will I give to sit with me 
in my throne."~Rev. 3:21. "And they lived and reigned with 
Christ a thousand years. "--Rev. 20:4. 

There are two texts in particular used by our post-millennial 
brethren, to which we would refer: --"This Gospel must first be 
preached in all the world for a witness. Then shall the end 

R255 : page 29 

come." They claim this to refer to the Gospel's converting the 
world before the end of the Gospel age. We pre-millennial 
believers claim, that witnessing to the world does not mean 
converting the world, but as it reads, to witness or testify. 

This witness has already been given. In 1861 the reports of the 
Bible societies showed that the Gospel had been published in 



every language of earth; not that all earth's myriads had received 
it. No; not one in a hundred of the thirteen hundred millions 
have ever heard the name of Jesus. Yet the text is fulfilled: the 
Gospel has been preached to every nation. 

We understand that the main and first object of the Gospel in the 
present age is, "To take out a people, for his name"~the Church- 
-who at Christ's coming are united to him, and receive his 
name.-- Rev. 3:12. 

The second text is: "Sit thou on my right hand, until I make 
thine enemies thy footstool. "--Matt. 22:44. The thought 
generally gathered from this Scripture is, that in heaven God has 
a 

R256 : page 29 

throne on which he sits continually, and that when "Christ sat 
down on the right hand of the Majesty on high," he sat down 
also upon the same throne. This is a misconception. The throne 
of God referred to is not a material one, but refers to his 
supreme authority and rulership, for "heaven is my throne and 
earth is my footstool," and Paul says, "God hath highly exalted 
him [Jesus] and given him a name above every name." He hath 
given him authority (above every other) next to the Father. If 
Christ sits upon a material throne until his enemies are made his 
footstool [all subdued], then, of course, he could not come until 
the Millennium has been fully inaugurated. But if it means the 
exalting to power, it would not interfere with his coming and 
subduing all things unto himself. 

To illustrate: King William is on the throne of Germany, we say, 
yet we do not refer to the royal bench, and as a matter of fact, he 
seldom occupies it. We mean that he rules Germany. 

Right hand signifies the chief place, position of excellence or 
power, and the words of Jesus to Pilate agree with this thought: 

R256 : page 30 

"Hereafter ye shall see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand 
of power, and coming in the clouds (storm clouds of trouble. - 
Zeph. 1:15) of heaven. "--Mark 14:62. He will be on the right 
hand when coming, and remain at the right hand during the 
Millennial age. On both views of the subject able arguments are 
possible, yet both cannot be true. We purpose, therefore, to take 
a glance at the general 

PLAN OF SAL VA TION, 

to see which view is in harmony with it. In so doing, we shall 
find the relation and bearing of both the first and the second 
comings, and know where to locate them. 

First, then, Has God a plan? All must agree that he has, although 
almost all are inclined to think and talk of his dealings as though 



he were dealing by a rule of chance, and governed entirely by 
circumstance. No; he that would condemn a man for building a 
tower without first counting the cost, shall he build and people a 
universe without counting the cost? No, brethren; "Known unto 
the Lord are all his ways from the beginning. " God has a plan, a 
purpose, and we know that all his purposes shall be 
accomplished. But how shall we find that plan? It is revealed to 
us in his word. "Search the Scriptures." Compare Scripture with 
Scripture, for 

God is his own interpreter, 
And he will make it plain. 

We are too much inclined to ask— What does my church say?~ 
upon any question, instead of- What saith the Scriptures? Too 
much disposed to consult men's theological opinions, rather than 
God's Word. With the thought, then, that "the Scriptures are able 
to make us wise," that "the testimonies of the Lord are sure, 
making wise the simple," let us examine. 

We have learned in the foregoing chapter Why evil was 
permitted. Its existence is attributed in Scripture to the devil. 
Evil continues because Satan's power is continued. It will last 

R256:page31 

throughout the present age, because the devil is the prince [ruler] 
of this world.— Eph. 2:2. He will continue as its ruler as long as 
he can, or until he is bound. He cannot be bound until a stronger 
than he takes the control out of his hands. 

God, of course, can control him; and of Jesus it is written, "All 
power in heaven and in earth is given unto me." 

But while Jesus has all power, for wise purposes he has not 
made use of it, permitting evil to reign and measurably control 
the world, and permitting the devil to be "prince of this world. " - 
-John 14:30. But the time is coming when "He shall take to 
himself his great power, and reign," exalting his Church, giving 
her "power over the nations," so that, instead of, as now, being 
"subject to the powers that be," she shall "rule the nations." But 
when will he thus assume control? When the Gospel Church, 
"His body" (Greek-Ecclesia), is complete. (Evil now being 
permitted for the trial and perfecting of the saints.) This 
completion of the Church is attained under the sounding of the 
seventh trumpet. -Rev. 11:15. Here the mystery [church] of God 
is finished, and "the kingdoms of this world become the 
kingdoms of our Lord and his anointed" [church]. Now, we 
inquire, is this transfer of authority 

FROM SATAN TO CHRIST 

caused by the conversion of the nations to Christ through 
preaching the Gospel? We answer, No. At this time the nations 
are not converted (vs. 18), "And the nations were angry, and thy 



wrath is come." If converted, they would not be thus hostile, 
neither would God's wrath come upon them. On the contrary, 
God teaches in many Scriptures that a great time of trouble will 
come upon the nations. "He cometh with clouds" -indications 
of storm— trouble. "Come, behold the desolations which the Lord 
hath made in the earth. He maketh wars to cease unto the ends 
of the earth." This is the way God tells us he will make wars to 
cease. The next clause informs us that then he will be exalted 
among the heathen and in 

R256 : page 32 

all the earth. -Psa. 46:10. This chastisement of nations will be 
for their good, and is necessary to them as is the chastisement 
which God now inflicts upon his children, and it will have a 
good effect, for we read, When the judgments of the Lord are 
abroad in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn 
righteousness. -Isa. 26:9. It is in this new dispensation that, with 
evil restrained-Satan bound— "the knowledge of the Lord shall 
fill the whole earth as the waters do the sea."-Isa. 1 1:9. The 
conversion of the world, instead of being due now while the 
devil is the prince of this world, will be, David says, "When the 
kingdom is the Lord's and he is the Governor among the nations; 
[then] all the ends of the world shall remember and turn to the 
Lord, and all nations shall come and worship before him. -Psa. 
22:27,28. 

During the infancy of the human family— say from Adam to 
Moses-God treated his creatures like very young children. So 
far as we know, they had very little knowledge of their Creator's 
power or character. They had scarcely any revelation, the 
exception being the few cases where God favored certain 
persons, as Abraham, Lot, and others, communicating to them 
by angels, giving to Eve and to Abraham peculiar promises, 
which they could only vaguely comprehend. 

The next age was to the Jewish nation a schooling season, 
during which God taught them to respect his promises and laws. 
They were yet minors, under age, therefore were treated as 
children, but kept under the Law, their schoolmaster. -Gal. 3:24. 

While the Word of God was being written and committed to the 
Jews for keeping, etc., the remainder of the world seems to have 
been left in the darkness of heathenism. They bowed down to 
wood and stone, destitute of truth as they are to-day. 

In Scripture the period from Adam to the flood is called "the 
world [age] that was. "-2 Pet. 3:6. From the flood to the second 
coming of the Lord, "the world that now is," and "the present 
evil world," vs. 7, and the next grand era is called "the world to 
come."-Heb. 2:5. 

R256 : page 33 

"The present evil world," Gal. 1:4, contains three 



SEPARATE AGES. 

The Patriarchal, lasting from the flood to the death of Jacob; the 
Jewish Age, lasting from the death of Jacob to the death of 
Christ, when he gave them up, wept over them, and said: "Your 
house is left unto you desolate;" the Gospel Age, lasting from 
the resurrection of Christ, when he became "the first born from 
the dead, and the beginning of the new creation," until the full 
company of "the Church of the First-born" is complete, at his 
coming. The time of the sounding of the seventh trumpet, the 
resurrection and reward of prophets, saints, etc. -Rev. 11:18. 

We know not how many ages may be in "the world to come;" 
but that there is more than one we are sure, for Paul speaks of 
"the ages to come."~Eph. 2:7. The first of these alone is dealt 
with in Scripture—the Millennial age, during which we live and 
reign with Christ. --Rev. 20:4. 

Having this outline, let us look more particularly at God's doings 
and sayings, and, first, it will astonish you, doubtless, until you 
reflect, when I say, that according to his word, God has not 
exhausted his resources for the world's salvation; that, in short, 
he is not now trying to save the world, nor has he been during 
past ages. What has he been doing? "Taking out a people- 
Church- for his name. " Don't think this wonderful, as it is only 
putting in a striking form, what all Calvinists believe, among 
whom are Baptists, Presbyterians, and others,- viz., That God is 
now electing, or choosing his Church out of the world. Yes, and 
all our brethren who believe in free grace must admit, that if all 
his purposes shall be accomplished, and "God's word shall not 
return unto him void;" if these Scriptures are true, God did not 
purpose the conversion of the world during the past six thousand 
years, else it would be accomplished. Neither did he send his 
word to convert the world up to the present time, else it did not 
prosper in the thing whereto 

R256 : page 34 

he sent it.-Isa. 55:11. These two views have been a dividing 
point in the churches for centuries,-viz.: 

ELECTION and FREE GRACE. 

We believe the Scripture to teach both, but that it requires the 
observance of Heaven's first law-order, to rightly divide the 
word of truth on this subject. 

First, we will glance at Election. During the age preceding 

R257 : page 34 

the deluge, there is no Scriptural account of God's giving 
mankind any law, nor any but very little light of revelation. One 
promise shines out; the Seed of the Woman was to bruise the 
Serpent, and even this required future revelation in order to be 



comprehended. God had, however, a few patriarchs or servants, 
who had light above the masses as lamp-posts in a dark way. 

The Patriarchal age had increase of light. It is now revealed that 
this seed is not only to crush evil [the serpent], but to "bless all 
the families of the earth;" still God's Church is represented by 
single individuals only, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, etc. 

These patriarchs were elected—chosen. "God called Abraham 
and said, " etc. Not his kin, but Abraham alone was chosen; he 
had many sons and daughters, but only Isaac was chosen. "In 
Isaac shall thy seed be called." Of Isaac's two sons only one was 
chosen, "as it is written," Rom. 9:11,13, "Jacob have I loved, but 
Esau have I hated," (loved less). God chose before they were 
born, "that the purpose of God according to election might 
stand." Now, remember, I do not say that God elected one to go 
to heaven and the other to go to hell: no, far from it. That is the 
common misconception of the Scriptural, and when properly 
understood, beautiful doctrine of Election. 

At Jacob's death another advance step in God's plan is taken, and 
typical or fleshly Israel is formed. From this time one man no 
longer represents God in the world; but a nation, all the sons of 
Jacob and their posterity. And now we have an elect nation or 
church, and God gives all his special blessings to it. Other 

R257 : page 35 

and larger nations -Egypt, Chaldea, etc., are passed by, left 
without light and without knowledge, while these are given to 
Israel. "What advantage then hath the Jew? Much every way, 
chiefly because to them were committed the oracles (laws and 
testimonies) of God." This is Paul's statement. God speaking to 
them, says: "You only have I known of all the families of the 
earth. "-Amos 3:2. This people alone was recognized and thus 
continued until Christ came. Yes, and after it, for during his 
ministry he preached to them, and would not suffer his disciples 
to do otherwise, saying as he sends them out, "Go not into the 
way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye 
not." Why so, Lord? "I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the 
house of Israel. "-Matt. 15:24. All his time was devoted to them 
until death, and here was his first work for the world-the first 
display of his free and all abounding grace— 

GOD'S GRANDEST GIFT, 

not for Israel only, but for all, for "Jesus Christ, by the grace of 
God, tasted death for every man." And now, also, in the Gospel 
age, a certain sort of election obtains. Some parts of the world 
are more favored with the Gospel (which is free to all who hear) 
than others. Contrast yourself, with your privileges and 
knowledge, with the heathen man who never heard the call. 
When this called-out company (called to be "sons of God," 
"heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, our Lord") is 



complete, then the plan of God for the world's salvation is only 
beginning. Not until then will "THE SEED" "bruise the serpent's 
head," and "bless all the families of the earth." For the seed is 
not Christ, the head, alone, but the Church, which is his body, as 
Paul informs us, Gal. 3:16,29, "Which seed is Christ... and if ye 
be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs, according to 
the promise." The same company are to bruise the serpent. - 
Rom. 16:20: "The very God of Peace shall bruise Satan under 
your feet shortly." 

R257 : page 36 

THE GOSPEL AGE. 

The Gospel age makes ready the chaste virgin (church) for the 
coming Bridegroom. When ready, the Bridegroom comes, and 
they that are ready are united to him. The second Adam and the 
second Eve become one, and then the glorious work of restoring 
mankind begins— "the time of restitution of all things which God 
hath spoken. "--Acts 3:21. In the next dispensation, new heavens 
and new earth, she is no longer the espoused Virgin, but the 
Bride. THEN "the Spirit and the Bride say come, and whosoever 
will, let him come and drink of the water of life freely. "--Rev. 
22:17. 

As Adam, the beginning of the fleshly race, was composed of 
man, and the helpmeet taken from his side, as it is written, 
"Male and female created he them, and he called their name 
ADAM"~Gen. 5:2; so the "Second Adam," of whom Paul says 
the first "was a figure," or type (Rom. 5:14), has a helpmeet 
taken from his side (redeemed by his blood), and when she is 
fully formed and perfected, the Bridegroom comes, and they go 
in to the marriage; they become one, "the new creation of God"- 
-(Read Eph. 5:25,30,32), making in "Himself of twain (Jews and 
Gentiles) one new man." The Church is composed of both.— 
Eph. 2:15. This new man we have found to be the seed "to crush 
the serpent's head,"— "the seed of Abraham," "in whom all the 
families of the earth shall be blessed." The Gospel age, so far 
from closing the Church's mission, was only a school of 
affliction to enable her, as well as her head to be touched with a 
feeling of earth's infirmities, that she also might sympathize with 
mankind, and during the Millennial age assist them, when "the 
knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth," scattering the 
darkness of sin and ignorance, causing "wars to cease unto the 
ends of the earth." These are the "times of restitution," which 
Peter says are due when Christ comes. -Acts 3:17,19. For this 
"the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until 
now, waiting for the manifestation 

R257 : page 37 

of the sons of God."— Rom. 8:22,19. These sons are not now 
manifest. There are among Christ's flock many "wolves in 



sheep's clothing." Among the wheat there are many tares; but 
when in "the harvest" ("the end of the age"), they are separated, 
then shall the righteous shine forth (be manifested) as the sun in 
the kingdom of their Father-and then to the groaning creation 
(mankind) shall this "Sun of Righteousness arise, with healing in 
his wings." 

But let us leave this bright and pleasant picture of the coming 
day, of which with the poet we could say: 

"Haste thee along, ages of glory, 

Haste the glad time when Christ appears," and turning, look at a 
dark picture. Have you ever asked yourself, while rejoicing in 
the glorious opportunities to be offered to mankind during the 
Millennial age, 

WHAT ABOUT THOSE WHO HAVE DIED 

before the plan of God has thus reached its fullness? There have 
lived on earth since creation (six thousand years), about one 
hundred and forty-three billions of human beings. Of these the 
very broadest estimate that could be made with reason would be, 
that less than one billion were Saints of God—the Church- the 
Bride. What of the one hundred and forty-two billions who died 
out of Christ? What is their condition? 

Atheism answers: They are eternally dead. There is no hereafter. 
They will never live again. 

Calvinism answers: They were not elected to be saved. God 
foreordained and predestined them to be lost-to go to hell -and 
they are there now, writhing in agony, where they will ever 
remain without hope. 

Arminianism answers: We believe that God excuses them on 
account of ignorance, and that if they did the best they knew 
how, they will be as sure of being a part of the "Church of the 
First-born" as is Paul himself. 

R257:page38 

To this last view the great majority of Christians of all 
denominations hold, from a feeling that any other view would be 
irreconcilable with justice on God's part. 

But, we inquire, what do the Scriptures teach on this last point? 
That ignorance is a ground of salvation? No; the only condition 
known in Scripture is FAITH. "By grace are ye saved through 
FAITH." Justification by faith is the ground-rock of the whole 
system of Christianity. When, on the day of Pentecost, Peter was 
asked-"What must we do to be saved?" -he answered, "Believe 
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and be baptized, and thou shalt be 
saved." 



Again he says, Acts 4:12, "There is none other name under 
heaven given among men whereby we must be saved," than the 
name of Jesus. 

Paul reasons that a man must hear the Gospel before he can 
believe: "How shall they believe on him of whom they have not 
heard?" This-God's plan-that men shall be saved on account of 
faith, Paul says was to the Jews a stumbling-block (because they 
expected salvation as a reward of keeping the Law) and to the 
Greeks (the worldly-wise) foolishness. But, nevertheless, it has 
"pleased God, by the foolishness (in the eyes of men) of 
preaching to save 

THEM WHICH BELIEVE." 

I want to Scripturally close you in to the thought, that all who 
have not heard could not believe, and not believing, could not be 
a part of the Bride of Christ. But you object: Paul, in the first 
two chapters of Romans, teaches, "that these having not the law, 
are a law unto themselves," and that this law, which their 
conscience furnishes, is sufficient to justify them. No, I answer; 
you understand Paul differently from what he intended. Paul's 
argument everywhere is that "all the world is guilty before 
God." "For if I had not known the law I had not known sin." 
"For by the law is the knowledge of sin." The law given to the 
Jew revealed his weakness, and was intended 

R257 : page 39 

to show him that he was unable to justify himself before God. 
"For by the deeds of the Law shall no flesh be justified in his 
(God's) sight." As the law thus condemned the Jews, so Paul 
says it is with the Gentiles also. Though ignorant of the 

R258 : page 39 

Law, they had light enough of conscience to condemn them. 
(All the light the Gentile could have would not justify sin; it 
would all the more condemn them, as the written law did the 
Jew.) "That every mouth may be stopped and all the world may 
become guilty before God," Rom. 3:19, in order that eternal life 
may be seen to be "the gift of God, through Jesus Christ, our 
Lord," to every one that believeth. 

Well, you answer, the Bible to the contrary, I believe and insist 
that God won't damn the world for ignorance. Now, let us see. 
Do you practice what you declare? Why do you assist in sending 
missionaries to the heathen, at a cost of thousands of valuable 
lives and millions of money? If they will all be saved, or even 
half of them, through ignorance, you do them a positive injury in 
sending them a preacher to tell them of Christ, for we know that 
only about one in a thousand believes when the missionaries do 
go to them. If your idea be correct, it were far better that no 
missionary should ever be sent. Before, nearly all saved; now, 



because of knowledge, nearly all lost. In the same way we might 
reason that if God had left all in ignorance, we would all have 
been saved. Then instead of the Gospel being good news, it 
would be more properly named bad news. 

No, my brethren; you do believe that "there is no other name 
given whereby we must be saved." Your actions speak the 
loudest and speak rightly. 

Now, suppose we look at these things just as God tells us of 
them, and leave the clearing of his character to himself. 

WHAT HAS BECOME OF THE ONE HUNDRED 
AND FORTY-TWO BILLIONS? 

First, we answer, that you may be sure they are not now 
suffering in hell, because not only do the Scriptures teach that 

R258 : page 40 

full and complete reward is not given to the Church until Christ 
comes, "when he shall reward every man," but the unjust are to 
receive their punishment then also. Whatever may be their 
present condition, it cannot be their full reward, for Peter says: 
"God knoweth how to reserve the unjust unto the day of 
judgment to be punished," and he will do so. But the thought of 
so many of our fellow creatures at any time being lost, without 
having had the knowledge which is necessary to salvation, 
seems terrible, indeed, to all who have a spark of love or pity. 
Then, too, there are a number of Scriptures which it seems 
difficult to harmonize with all this. Let us see in the light of his 
dealings how we shall understand the statement, "God is love," 
or, "God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son 
that whosoever believeth in him might not perish." 

Ah, Lord, it seems to poor, frail humanity that if you loved the 
world so much, you might have made provision, not only that 
believers might be saved, but also that all might hear. 

Again we read: "This is the true light that lighteth every man 
that cometh into the world." Lord, all our reasons seem to say, 
not so. We cannot see how Jesus lighted more than a few of 
earth's billions. Yonder Hottentot gives no evidence of having 
been so enlightened, neither did the Sodomites and myriads of 
others. 

Once more we read: "Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted 
death for every man." How, Lord, we ask? If he tasted death for 
the one hundred and forty-three billions, and from other causes 
it becomes efficacious only to one billion, is not his death 
comparatively a failure? 

Again: "Behold, I bring you glad tidings of great joy, which 
shall be to all people." Surely it is to but a little flock that it has 
been glad tidings, and not to all people. 



Another is: "There is one God, and one Mediator between God 
and man-the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for 
all." A ransom! Then why should not all have some benefit from 
Christ's death? 

R258:page41 

Oh, how dark, how inconsistent do these statements appear 
when we remember that the Gospel Church is "a little flock." 
Oh, how we wish it would please God to open our eyes that we 
might understand the Scriptures, for we feel sure that did we but 
understand, it must all seem clear; it must all declare in sweetest 
harmony, "God is Love." Oh, that we had the key! Do you want 
it?~Are you sure you do? It is the last text we quoted: "Who 
gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time." Due 
time! Ah, now we see! God has a due time for everything. He 
could have testified it to this one hundred and forty -two billions 
in their lifetime. Then that would have been their due time; as it 
was not so, their due time must be future. We know that now is 
our due time, because it is testified to us now. Christ was a 
ransom for you before you were born, but it was not due time 
for you to hear it until years after. So with the Hottentot; he has 
not heard it yet, and may not in this life; but in God's due time 
he will. 

But does not death end probation?~one inquires. There is no 
Scripture which says so, we answer, and all the above and many 
more Scriptures would be meaningless or worse, 

IF DEATH ENDS ALL 

to the ignorant masses of the world. The only Scripture ever 
quoted to prove this generally entertained view, is, "As the tree 
falleth, so it lies." If this has any relation to man's future, it 
indicates that in whatever condition of knowledge or ignorance 
he enters death, he remains the same until raised up again. 

But can knowledge ever reach these billions in their graves 
while dead? No; God has provided for the resurrection of them 
all. For "as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made 
alive." As death came by the first Adam, so life comes by the 
second Adam. Everything that mankind lost in the first, is to be 
restored in the second. Hence, the age following Christ's second 
coming is spoken of as "the times of restitution," -Acts 3:21. 

R258:page42 

Life is one of the things lost, and is to be one of the things 
restored. When restored to life with the advantage of experience 
and knowledge of evil, which Adam had not, he may continue to 
live eternally on the original condition of obedience. Perfect 
obedience will be required, and perfect ability will be given 
under the righteous reign of the Prince of Peace. Here is the 
salvation vouchsafed to the world. This enables us to use 



another text, which is little used except by Universalists, and 
although not Universalists, yet we claim the right to use all 
Scripture. It reads: "We trust in the living God, who is the 
Savior of all men, specially of them which believe." Here are 
two classes of saved ones-all (the world) and believers. All are 
saved from the Adamic death and believers of the present 
Gospel age receive the special salvation. 

When the first-mentioned class (the world) are saved from the 
weakness, degradation and death to which all are now subject - 
when they by reason of Christ's ransom are, during the 
Millennial age restored to human perfection, enlightened by 
truth and brought to a knowledge of the love of God; if then they 
will not live in harmony with the law of God's kingdom-Love - 
they will be "destroyed from among the people. "-Acts 3:23. 
This is the second death. 

Now, we see that "the testimony in due time," explains all of 
those difficult texts. In due time it shall be "glad tidings of great 
joy to all people." In due time, that "True Light shall lighten 
every man that cometh into the world," and in no other way can 
these Scriptures be used without wresting. We take them to 
mean just what they say. Paul carries out the line of argument 
with emphasis in Rom. 5:18,19. He reasons that as all men were 
condemned to death and suffered it because of Adam's 
transgression, so also Christ's righteousness justifies all to life 
again. All lost life, not of their own will or choice, in the first 
Adam; all receive life at the hands of the second Adam, equally 
without their will or choice. When thus brought to life, having 
the love of God testified to them, their probation, 

R258:page43 

THEIR FIRST CHANCE, 

begins. We do not preach a second chance for any. Since all 
believers are now "called in one hope of their calling, "-viz.: to 
be the Bride of Christ, and since this company will be completed 
at the end of this age, it could not be a second chance for any in 
the next age, for there is to be but one Bride of Christ. 

Peter tells us that the "restitution is spoken of by the mouth of 
all the holy prophets." They do all teach it. Ezekiel tells us of the 
valley of dry bones, "This is the whole house of Israel;" and God 
says to them, "I will bring you up out of your graves and bring 
you into your own land." To this Paul's words agree, Rom. 
1 1 :25,26. "Blindness in part is happened to Israel until the 
fullness of the Gentiles (the elect company 'taken out of the 
Gentiles,' the Gospel church) be come in, and so all Israel shall 
be saved," or brought back from their cast-off condition. For 
"God hath not cast off his people whom he foreknew." They 
were cut off from his favor while the bride of Christ was being 
selected, but will return to favor when that work is 



accomplished. -Vs. 28 to 33. The prophets are full of statements 
of how God will "plant them again, and they shall be no more 
plucked up." This does not refer to restorations from former 
captivities in Babylon, Syria, etc., for the Lord says, "In that day 
it shall no more be a proverb among you 'the fathers ate a sour 
grape, and the children's teeth are set on edge;' but every man 
shall die for his own sin."~Jer. 31:29,30. This is not the case 
now. You do not die for your own sin, but for Adam's~"As in 
Adam all die. " He ate the sour grape and our forefathers 
continued to eat them, entailing further sickness and misery 
upon us. The day in which "every man shall die for his own sin," 
is this Millennial or Restitution day. But, when restored to the 
same conditions as Adam, will they not be as liable to sin and 
fall again as he was? No; they will be liable, but not as liable; 
they will have learned in their present 

R259 : page 43 

lifetime the lesson which God designs to teach all, --viz., "The 

R259 : page 44 

exceeding sinfulness of sin." They will then be prepared to 
appreciate the good and shun the evil, and the Gospel Church 
then glorified will be, "the kings (rulers) and priests (teachers)" 
of that new age, for "Unto the angels hath he not put in 
subjection the world (age) to come, whereof we speak? etc. This 
restoration to perfect manhood will not be an instantaneous act 
accomplished in their resurrection, but a gradual work after their 
resurrection, requiring for its accomplishment all of the 
Millennial age- "Times of Restitution." And during that time, 
they shall be rewarded for the "cup of cold water" given (Matt. 
10:42) or "beaten with many or few stripes" (Luke 12:47), 
according to their improvement or neglect of the measure of 
light enjoyed during the Gospel age. 

There will be something to be gained, and therefore to be sought 
for by mankind during the next age: Raised to a measure of life, 
the means of reaching perfection as men will be supplied them, 
yet they will never reach that condition, unless they put forth 
effort to obtain it, and make use of the means provided. When 
made perfect they will have everlasting life, in the same sense 
that Adam had it, and that angels now have it, i.e., on condition 
of obedience to God's law. 

But are we sure that God intends these blessings for any but the 
"people whom he foreknew"~the Jews? Yes. He mentions other 
nations also by name, and speaks of their restitution. Let me 
give you an illustration that will be forcible. 

THE SODOMITES. 

Surely, if we find their restitution foretold you will be satisfied. 
But why should they not have an opportunity to reach 



perfection? True they were not righteous, but neither were you 
when God gave you your opportunity. Jesus' own words shall 
tell us that they are not as guilty in his sight as the Jews, who 
had more knowledge: "Woe unto thee, Capernaum, for if the 
mighty works which have been done in thee had been done in 
Sodom, it would have remained unto this day." Thus Jesus 
teaches us 

R259 : page 45 

that they had not had their full opportunity. "Remember," Jesus 
says of the Sodomites, that "God rained down fire and destroyed 
them all." So if their restoration is spoken of in Scripture it 
implies their resurrection. 

Let us look at the prophecy of Ezek. 16:48, to the close. Read it 
carefully. God here speaks of Israel, and compares her with her 
neighbor Samaria, and also with the Sodomites, of whom he 
says, "I took away as I saw good." Why did God see good to 
take away these people without giving them a chance, through 
the knowledge of "the only name?" Because, it was not their due 
time. They will come to a knowledge of the truth when restored. 
He will save them from death's bondage first, and then give 
them knowledge as it is written. "God will have all men to be 
saved, and to come to a knowledge of the truth."~l Tim. 2:4. 
When brought to the knowledge, then, and not until then, are 
they on trial for eternal life. With this thought and with no other, 
can we understand the dealings of the God of love with those 
Amalekites and other nations, whom he not only permitted but 
commanded Israel to butcher. "Slay Amalek utterly-leave 
neither man, woman nor child." "Spare not the little ones." How 
often my heart has ached, and yours, too, as we sought to 
reconcile this apparent wantonness on God's part with the 
teachings of the new dispensation, "God is love," "Love your 
enemies," etc. Now we can see, that the entire Jewish age was a 
type of the higher Gospel age; Israel's victories and conquests 
merely pictures of the Christian's battles with sin, etc. These 
Amalekites, and Sodomites and others were used to illustrate, or 
to be "examples" "for our admonition." These people might just 
as well die so, as of disease and plague, and it mattered little to 
them, as they were merely learning to know evil, that when on 
trial "in due time," they might learn good, and be able to 
discriminate and choose the good and have life. 

But let us read the prophecy further. After comparing Israel with 
Sodom and Samaria, and pronouncing her worse, vs. 53, 

R259 : page 46 

says: "When I bring again the captivity of Sodom and Samaria, 
then will I bring thy captives in the midst of them. " [In death all 
are captives, and Christ came to "set at liberty the captives and 
to open the prison doors" of the grave.] In vs. 55, this is called 
"a return to 



THEIR FORMER ESTA TE, " 

-restitution. But some one who cannot imagine how God really 
could be so good or just, suggests: God must be speaking 
ironically to the Jews, and saying he would just as soon bring 
back the Sodomites as them, but has no notion of either. Let us 
see. Read vss. 61,62. Nevertheless, "I will remember my 
covenant with thee; I will establish it to thee." "Yes," says Paul, 
"this is God's covenant with them— they are beloved for the 
fathers' sakes. For the gifts and callings of God are without 
repentance."— Rom. 11:27,29. The sixty-third verse concludes 
the argument, showing that the promised RESTITUTION is not 
based on the merits of the Jews, Samaritans or Sodomites- 
"That thou mayest remember, and be confounded, and never 
open thy mouth any more, because of thy shame, when I am 
pacified toward thee, for all that thou hast done, S AITH THE 
LORD GOD." When God signs his name to a statement in this 
way, I must believe it— "Saith the Lord God." And no wonder if 
they are confounded when in the ages to come he shows forth 
the exceeding riches of his grace. Yea, many of God's children 
will be confounded and amazed when they see how "God so 
loved THE WORLD." They will be ready to exclaim with 
brother Paul: "Oh, the depth of the riches both of the wisdom 
and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, 
and his ways past finding out." 

But some will inquire, How comes it that this has not been seen 
long ago? We answer, God gives light and knowledge to his 
people only as it is due. The world was left in almost entire 
ignorance of God's plan until the Gospel age, when Christ came, 
bringing life and immortality to light through the Gospel. The 

R259 : page 47 

Jews up to that time supposed that all the promises of God were 
to and for them alone, but in due time God showed favor to the 
Gentiles also. Christians generally have supposed that God's 
blessings are all and only to the Church, but we begin to see that 
God is better than all our fears; and, though he has given the 
Church the "exceeding great and precious promises," he has 
made some to the world also. 

"The path of the just is as a shining light, that shineth more and 
more, unto the perfect day," and the fact that it now shines so 
brightly, and that we are able to see more of the beauty and 
harmony of God's word, is strong presumptive evidence that we 
are in the dawn of that glorious Millennial day, when "we shall 
know even as we are known." 

But we promised to harmonize those doctrines of the Church 
generally supposed to conflict, -viz., CALVINISM, or Election, 
ARMINIANISM, or Free Grace. Perhaps you already see how 
they harmonize themselves by simply recognizing the order of 



the ages, and applying each text to the place and time to which it 
belongs. Let me, then, point out to you 

THE INCONSISTENCY OF EITHER CALVINISM 
OR ARMINIANISM 

when separated from each other. In doing so, we do not wish to 
reflect on those who hold these doctrines. We shall merely call 
your attention to features which their warmest advocates must 
confess to be their weak points. 

First—Calvinism says: God is all- wise; he knew the end from the 
beginning; and, as all his purposes shall be accomplished, he 
never could have intended to save any but a few—the true 
Church-the little flock. These he elected and predestined to be 
eternally saved; all others were equally predestined and elected 
to go to hell, for "known unto God are all his works from the 
beginning of the world."— Acts 15:18. 

This has its good features. It shows, and properly, God's 
Omniscience. This would be our ideal of a GREAT God, were 

R259 : page 48 

it not that three essential qualities of greatness, viz., MERCY, 
LOVE and JUSTICE are lacking, for none of these qualities find 
place in bringing into the world one hundred and forty-two 
billions of creatures damned before they were born, and mocked 
by protestations of love. No, no. "God is love;" "God is just;" 
"God is merciful." 

Second— Arminianism says: "Yes, God is love," and in bringing 
humanity into the world he meant them no harm— only good. 
But Satan succeeded in tempting Adam. Thus, "sin entered into 
the world, and death by sin, " and ever since, God has been doing 
all he can to deliver man from his enemy, even to the giving of 
his Son; and though now, six thousand years after, the Gospel 
has only reached a very small portion of those creatures, yet we 
do hope and trust that within six thousand years more, through 
the energy and liberality of the Church, God will have so far 
remedied the evil introduced by Satan, that all may at least know 
of his love, and the knowledge of God be co-extensive with the 
knowledge of evil. 

The commendable feature of this view is, that it accepts the 
statement that "God is love." But, while full of loving and 
benevolent designs for his creatures, he lacks ability and 
foreknowledge adequate to the accomplishment of those loving 
designs. 

While God was busy arranging and devising for the good of his 
newly-created children, Satan slipped in, and by one stroke 
upset all God's plans, and in one moment brought sin and evil 
among men to such an extent that, even by exhausting all his 
power, God must spend twelve thousand years to even reinstate 



righteousness to such a degree that the remainder of the race 
who still live will have an opportunity to choose Good as readily 
as Evil; and the one hundred and forty-two billions of the past 
six thousand years, and as many more of the next, are lost to all 

R260 : page 48 

eternity, in spite of God's love for them, because Satan 
interfered with his plans as God had not foreseen. Thus Satan, in 
spite of God, gets thousands into hell to one God gets to glory. 

R260 : page 49 

This view must exalt men's ideas of Satan, and lower their 
estimation of him who "Spake and it was done; commanded, 
and it stood fast." 

But how refreshing it is for us to turn from these fragments of 
truth, as separately considered, and 

SEE HOW HARMONIOUS 

and beautiful they are when united. How, during the present and 
past ages God is electing or gathering, by the preaching of his 
word, the Gospel Church. How he wisely permitted evil to come 
into the world, in order that he might develop his church, which, 
thus "being made perfect through suffering," might be prepared 
for her glorious work in the future; and how the masses of 
mankind, though not now on probation, are nevertheless getting 
a knowledge and experience by contact with sin, which he 
foresaw they would be the better off; and, furthermore, how he 
took occasion, in connection with this, his plan, to show us his 
great love, by so arranging that the death of Christ was 
necessary to our recovery from sin, and then freely giving him, 
"to be a propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also 
for the sins of the whole world," and then in the next 
dispensation— 

"THE NEW HE A VENS AND EARTH, " 

(Rev. 21:1-9-10, and 22:17)-when "the Spirit and the Bride say 
come, and whosoever will may come and take of the water of 
life freely," he will show his "Free Grace" in fullest measure. 

This period of his presence and reign is commonly known 
among Christian people as the Millennium, which means one 
thousand, and which is applied to the time future, "when the 
earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters 
cover the sea" (Isa. 1 1:9), and none need to say unto his 
neighbor, "Know thou the Lord?" "All shall know him," etc. The 
time when there shall be no more curse (Rev. 22:3), "when the 
desert shall blossom as the rose (Isa. 35:1), and "streams 

R260 : page 50 



shall break forth in the deserts" (Isa. 35:6), when "the tabernacle 
of God will be with men and he shall dwell with them" (Rev. 
21:3), when Satan shall be restrained and righteousness shall 
control. "Then nation shall not lift up sword against nation," 
"nor learn war any more;" but "they shall beat their swords into 
plow-shares, and their spears into pruning-hooks" (Micah 4:3). 
Glorious prospect for the world! 

Haste thee along, ages of glory, 

Haste the glad time when Christ appears ! 

Is not this the teaching of God's word? Men never would have 
thought of such a glorious plan of salvation. Truly God has said: 
"My ways are not your ways, nor my thoughts your thoughts." 
Hereafter when we address him, "Our Father," may it call to our 
mind that his love and compassion are far greater than the pity 
of our earthly parents; and while we study his words more and 
more, and seek to "grow in grace, and in the knowledge and love 
of God," let us ever remember that- 
Blind unbelief is sure to err, 
And scan his word in vain. 
God is his own interpreter, 
And he will make it plain. 

Having seen how much of the great plan of God awaits the 
coming of Christ for its accomplishment, and having, we trust, 
found why Christ comes, can we help loving his appearing? 



R260 : page 50 

THE UNPARDONABLE SIN. 

"WHOSOEVER speaketh a word against the Son of Man it 
shall be forgiven him; but whosoever speaketh against the Holy 
Ghost it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither 
in the world to come. -Matt. 12:32. [The word here rendered 
world, as in many other places, should be rendered age, and is so 
rendered in all new translations.] 

R260:page51 

This text teaches first that there is such a thing as forgiveness of 
sins both in the present Gospel age and in the coming- 
Millennial —age. The basis of all forgiveness of sins, is in the 
fact that "Christ died for our sins." 

Secondly, it teaches that some sins are possible, which God will 
not reckon as a part of the Adamic sin which passed upon all 
men and which is to be forgiven all men. If men looked at Jesus 
and ignorantly supposed him an impostor and blasphemed him, 
it would be excusable and forgivable as a result of the fallen 
nature. Even should they blaspheme the name of God, and say 
they believed in no such being, etc., this too might be forgiven 



for the same reasons. But when God's power (the Holy Ghost) 
was manifested in doing them good as it was manifested through 
Jesus, there certainly was no excuse for even the most depraved 
of men ascribing those good works to an evil power-Satan. And 
this is just what Jesus tells them, that such conduct cannot be 
classed as a part of the general human depravity, and it therefore 
cannot be forgiven. 

The light was shining so clearly, that though their eyes were 
nearly blinded by sin, they could not help realizing some of the 
light as Jesus manifested some of "the powers of the world (age) 
to come." As he said to them on another occasion, their "stripes" 
(punishment) in the next age will be in proportion as they have 
been able to comprehend and do justly and have not so done. 
They whose moral sight and hearing have been totally destroyed 
by Adam's sin and its results (if any such there be- the Lord 
knoweth) will have no stripes in the future, will be forgiven 
fully. They who see a little and could obey a little and do not so 
do, shall be forgiven the things they did not see and could not 
do, but will be beaten (punished) with a few stripes for the few 
things they saw, and could, but did not do. They who saw more 
and whose ability to perform was less impaired by the fallen 
nature, and who fail to do according to their ability, are to be 
beaten with many stripes. 

Now notice that all who receive "stripes" receive them for 

R260 : page 52 

unpardoned sins, for if the sins were pardoned they would not be 
punished for them. In our earthly courts if a man had trespassed 
against the law in two ways, and the penalty of the first crime 
was imprisonment for five years, and for the second six months; 
if it could be shown that he was not really to blame for the first 
crime, but was forced into it by circumstances over which he 
had no control, but the second crime was measurably under his 
control, the decision of the court would be "guilty" on both 
charges: but he would be pardoned on the first charge and not on 
the second; the result would be that he would serve the six 
months' punishment. 

Here are two earthly crimes, one pardonable and one 
unpardonable. So it is with God's law; all are sinners and 
condemned --guilty— on account of Adam's sin, but the full 
ransom from that sin has been paid, and so though condemned 
before the court of heaven, it is announced that all of our 
imperfections traceable to that cause are freely and fully 
forgiven. But neither more nor less is pardonable. All sins 
against light and ability are unpardonable, cannot be forgiven at 
any time, and hence must be punished. The world will have 
many such sins to be punished in the age to come, and they 
receive in some instances much punishment in the present life 



and age. In a word, all punishment indicates unpardoned sin, for 
if it were pardoned it would not be punished as well. 

Paul tells us of extreme cases of this sort of unpardonable sin. 
Men of the world who have a little light we have seen can 
commit it, but when a man becomes a Christian and has the eyes 
of his understanding opened— when he is brought from the 
condition of darkness and ignorance, into the light of the 
knowledge of the Lord, to then "sin willfully" is terrible indeed. 
Due and full allowance is made for all our weaknesses and 
imperfections which come to us through our fallen nature, and 
which clog and hinder our doing as we should wish to do-our 
Father's will: but no more. If we cease to desire to do God's will, 
we cut loose from our Lord and begin to walk according to our 
own 

R260 : page 53 

will as natural and no longer spiritual beings. This is the thing 
pictured by the proverb: "The dog is returned to his vomit, and 
the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire."-- 2 Pet. 

2:22. 

In Heb. 6:4-6, Paul assures us that any Christian who has 
reached a full and mature development in the spiritual life, 
having "been enlightened," "tasted of the heavenly gift," "been 
made partaker of the Holy Ghost," "tasted of the good word of 
God" —if such shall fall away, it is impossible to renew them 
again unto repentance. Why? Because this is an unpardonable 
sin. But can they not be punished for this sin and thus be free 
from it in time? No, with the above description of the Apostle, 
we understand that these had enjoyed all the blessings due them 
on account of Christ's ransom: i.e., they were reckoned of God 
justified from all sin, as new creatures had been brought to a 
condition of enlightenment and knowledge of the Lord's will, 
and then, had deliberately and willfully acted contrary to it. We 
do not refer to a child of God stumbling or being overcome of 
the old nature for a time, but as expressed in Heb. 10:26-"if we 
sin willfully after that we have received the knowledge of the 
truth, there remaineth no more (a) sacrifice for sins, but a certain 
fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation which shall 
devour (destroy) the adversaries." 

In a word, we understand Paul to teach that the class here 

R261 : page 53 

described have received all the benefits due them through 
Christ's ransom, and that their willful sinning against 
knowledge, etc., places them in the same position as Adam 
occupied when he sinned; the penalty of all such willful sin is 
death. In Adam's case it was the first death. In the case of these 
it is the second death. They had been reckoned dead as 
Christians, and then reckoned of God alive as new creatures, and 



now they die for their own willful sin— the second death. There 
is neither forgiveness nor excuse for such sin; they must have 
the full penalty and die. They have lightly esteemed the ransom 
after they knew of it, and thus have "trodden under foot the Son 
of God 

R261 : page 54 

and counted the blood of the covenant wherewith they were 
sanctified (set apart as new creatures) an unholy (ordinary- 
common) thing, and done despite (disrespect) unto the spirit of 
(favor) grace." 

These have no hope; they could not be recovered from the 
second death in any other way than as Adam and his children 
were redeemed from the first death-i.e., by some one dying for 
their sin as Jesus died for Adam's sin. Will Jesus die again for 
them? No, "Christ being risen dieth no more; death hath no more 
dominion over him." Nor could there be any object in bringing 
such to life again; having had full redemption, and having come 
to know both Good and Evil, if they love evil rather than good 
and willfully do it, let them be deprived of life. All will say it is 
love on the part of our Father to deprive them of life, which, if 
continued, would be only of injury and evil both to themselves 
and others. 

It will readily be seen that this sin to this last mentioned extent - 
punishable with the second death-could not possibly have been 
committed prior to the Gospel age, since not until Pentecost did 
the Holy Ghost come as a teacher to guide the church into the 
truth.-John 16:13. It had in past time been active through holy 
men of old, as they— "spoke and wrote as they were moved by 
the Holy Ghost," but it moved them to write but not to 
understand. It came upon the prophets as servants to 
communicate; it comes to us as a seal of sonship, and to enable 
us as sons to understand our Father's will. -Rom. 8:14. 
Consequently in previous ages none ever "tasted of the good 
word of God," or "became partakers of the Holy Ghost," etc., 
and consequently none who lived in past ages could sin away 
forever all hope of a future life. 

The millions of past ages never have been recovered from the 
first death (Adamic) in any sense, and must be so recovered 
before it will be possible for them to commit the "sin unto 
death."-Heb. 6:4,6. That Israelites, Sodomites, Egyptians, and 
others have not fully lived up to the knowledge they possessed 

R261 : page 55 

we doubt not, and they will doubtless, therefore, have "stripes" 
in the coming age for sins not pardoned by Jesus' ransom. 

We are glad to say that we believe very few have ever 
committed this "Sin unto death;" that very few ever possessed 



the knowledge, etc., specified by the apostle, we feel sure; and 
that is the specified condition. 

There's a wideness in God's mercy, 
Like the wideness of the sea; 
There's a kindness in his justice 
Which is more than liberty. 



R261 : page 56 

PART III. 



HOW WILL CHRIST COME? 

TO ALL who "love his appearing" and have read with interest 
the foregoing chapter, the manner in which our Lord will come 
becomes a subject of great interest, and now invites your 
attention. 

At his first advent he came in a body of flesh prepared "for the 
suffering of death: " at his second advent he comes in glory 
(Mark 13:26) in his glorious body (Phil. 3:21), a spiritual body.- 
-1 Cor. 15:44-49. 

But what is a spiritual body? What powers are theirs, and by 
what laws are they governed? We are here met by the objections 
--we have no right to pry into the hidden things of God -and 
"Eye hath not seen, ear heard, neither have entered into the heart 
of man the things which God hath prepared for them that love 
him." To both of these propositions we assent, but believe we 
cannot find out by studying God's Word what he has not 
revealed; and our investigation will be confined to the Word. 
The above quotation of Scripture (1 Cor. 2:9) refers to the 
natural or carnal man, and by reading it, in connection with the 
three verses which follow, the objection vanishes; for, says the 
apostle, "God hath revealed them unto us by his spirit," which 
was given to us believers-the church- "that we might know the 
things that are freely given to us of God. " And in the last clause 
of vs. 13, he gives us the rule by which we may know, —viz., 
"Comparing spiritual things with spiritual." We 

R261 : page 57 

are very apt to change this rule, and compare spiritual things 
with natural, and thus get darkness instead of light. Let us now 
use the apostle's rule. 

There is a spiritual body as well as a natural body; a heavenly, 
as well as an earthly body; a celestial as well as a terrestrial; a 
glory of the earthly, as well as of the heavenly. The glory of the 
earthly, as we have seen, was lost by the first Adam's sin, and is 
to be restored to the race by Jesus and his bride during the 



Millennial reign. The glory of the heavenly is as yet unseen, 
except as revealed to the spiritual, "new creatures "--to the eyes 
of faith, by the Spirit, through the Word. They are distinct and 
separate.-- 1 Cor. 15:38-48. We know what the natural, earthly, 
terrestrial body is, for we now have such; it is flesh, blood, and 
bones; for, "that which is born of the flesh is flesh," and since 
there are two kinds of bodies, we know that the spiritual is not 
composed of flesh, blood, and bones, whatever it may be; it is a 
heavenly, celestial, spiritual body, --"That which is born of the 
spirit is spirit." But of what material a spiritual body may be we 
know not, for "it doth not yet appear what we shall be; but.. .we 
shall be like him" —Jesus. 

THE SECOND BIRTH. 

Jesus was raised from the dead a spiritual body; this was his 
second birth. First born of the flesh a fleshly body-for, "as the 
children are now partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself 
likewise took part of the same."— Heb. 2:14. He was "Put to 
death in the flesh, but quickened [made alive] by the Spirit." He 
was raised a spiritual body. He was the "first born from the 
dead," "the first-born among many brethren." The church are 
those brethren and will have a second birth of the same kind as 
his, -i.e., to spiritual bodies by the resurrection, when we shall 
awake in his likeness— being made "Like unto Christ's glorious 
body." But, this second birth must be preceded by a begetting of 
the spirit-at conversion-just as surely as a birth of the flesh is 
preceded by a begetting of the 

R261 : page 58 

flesh. Begotten of the flesh— born of the flesh— in the likeness of 
the first Adam, the earthly; begotten of the spirit— in the 
resurrection born of the spirit, into the likeness of the heavenly. 
"As we have borne the image of the earthly, we shall also bear 
the image of the heavenly. " We may, then, by examining facts 
recorded of Christ, after his resurrection, and of angels, who are 
also spiritual bodies, gain general information with regard to 
spiritual bodies, thus "comparing spiritual things with spiritual." 

First, then, angels can be, and frequently are, present, yet 
invisible. "The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them 
that are his, and deliver eth them;" and "Are they not all 
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be 
heirs of salvation?"-Heb. 1:14. Are you begotten of the spirit, 
an heir of salvation? Then doubtless they have ministered to 
you. Have they ministered visibly or invisibly? Undoubtedly the 
latter. Elisha was surrounded by a host of Assyrians; his servant 
was fearful; Elisha prayed to the Lord, and the young man's eyes 
were opened, and he "saw the mountains round about Elisha full 
of chariots of fire and horsemen of fire" (or like fire). Again, 
while to Balaam the angel was invisible, the ass's eyes being 
opened saw him. 



Second, angels can, and have appeared as men. The Lord and 
two angels so appeared to Abraham, who had a supper prepared 
for them, of which they ate. At first Abraham supposed them to 
be "three men, " and it was not until they were about to go that 
he discovered one of them to be the Lord, and the other two 
angels, who afterward went down to Sodom and delivered Lot.~ 
Gen. 18:1. An angel appeared to Gideon as a man, but afterward 
made himself known. An angel appeared to Samson's mother 
and father; they thought him a man until he ascended up to 
heaven in the flame of the altar. -Judges 13:20. 

Third, spiritual bodies are glorious in their normal condition, 
and are frequently spoken of as glorious and bright. The 
countenance of the angel who rolled away the stone from the 

R261 : page 59 

sepulchre "was as the lightning." Daniel saw a glorious spiritual 
body, whose eyes were as lamps of fire, his countenance as the 
lightning, his arms and feet like in color to polished brass, his 
voice as the voice of a multitude; before him Daniel fell as a 
dead man.— Daniel 10:6. John, on the Isle of Patmos, saw 
Christ's glorious body (Rev. 1:14), and describes the appearance 
in almost the same language— His voice was as the sound of 
many waters, his eyes as lamps of fire, his feet like fine brass as 
it burns in a furnace (so bright that you can scarcely look at it). 
John falls at his feet as dead; but he said to him, fear not; "I am 
he that was dead; behold I am alive for evermore." Saul 

R262 : page 59 

of Tarsus saw Christ's glorious body. It shone above the 
brightness of the sun at noonday. Saul lost his sight and fell to 
the ground. 

We have thus far found spiritual bodies truly glorious; yet, 
except by the opening of our eyes to see them, or their appearing 
in the flesh as men, they are invisible. This conclusion is further 
confirmed when we examine the more minute details connected 
with these manifestations. The Lord was seen of Saul alone, 
"they that journeyed with him.. .seeing no man."-Acts 9:7. The 
men that were with Daniel did not see the glorious being he 
describes, but a great fear "fell on them, and they ran and hid 
themselves." Again, this same glorious being declares: (Daniel 
10:13) "The prince of Persia withstood me one and twenty 
days." Daniel, the man greatly beloved of the Lord, falls as dead 
before this one whom Persia's prince withstands one and twenty 
days. How is this? Surely, he did not appear in glory to the 
prince. No; either he was invisibly present with him, or else 

HE APPEARED AS A MAN. 

Jesus is a spiritual body since his resurrection. He was "raised a 
spiritual body," consequently the same powers which we find 



illustrated by angels—spiritual bodies, should be true also of 
him, and such was the case. If Jesus had revealed himself 

R262 : page 60 

to his disciples after his resurrection as the angel did to Daniel, 
the glory of the spiritual body would undoubtedly have been 
more than they, as earthly beings, could bear. They would 
probably have been so alarmed as to be unable to receive 
instructions. [We understand that the glorifying, spoken of was 
accomplished after he ascended to the right hand of the Majesty 
on High (John 7:39), refers to the installation into the majesty of 
power. When the Scriptures speak of a glorious spiritual body, 
the glory, grandeur of the person is referred to, and not the glory 
of power or office.] During the forty days of his presence before 
ascension, he appeared some seven or eight times to his 
disciples; where was he the remainder of the time? Present but 
invisible. Notice, also, that in each instance, he is said to have 
appeared, or he showed himself, language never used of him 
before his change from a natural to a spiritual body; now, as 
angels do, he appeared, etc. 

Remember that the object of Jesus' appearing to them was to 
convince them that "he who was dead is alive forevermore;" that 
they might go forth as "witnesses." Being a spiritual body, it was 
simply a question of expediency which way he could best 
appear to them-i.e., in which way would his object in appearing 
be best accomplished. He could appear as a "flame of fire," as 
the angel of the Lord had appeared to Moses "in the burning 
bush." Thus, Jesus might have appeared to and talked with the 
disciples, or he might have appeared in glory as the angel did to 
Daniel, or as he afterward did to John and to Saul of Tarsus. If 
he had so appeared, they would doubtless also have had "great 
fear and quaking," and would have fallen to the ground before 
him, and "become as dead men;" or he could do as angels had 
done, and as he had done with Abraham (Gen. 1 8) when he 
appeared as a man. This last he saw to be the best way, and he 
did appear as a man. But notice, they did not see him after his 
resurrection as before his death. First he appeared to Mary as the 
gardener, and she "saw Jesus standing and knew not that it was 
Jesus." "After that he appeared in 

R262 : page 61 

ANOTHER FORM unto two of them as they went into the 
country" (Mark 16:12). They knew not that it was Jesus until he 
revealed himself in breaking of bread; then he vanished from 
their sight. Notice, it was in "another form," and, consequently, 
not the same one in which he appeared to Mary. 

Again, some having given up all hope of being any longer 
fishers of men, had gone again to their nets. They had toiled all 
night and caught nothing. In the morning Jesus is on the shore 
within speaking distance, but they "knew not that it was Jesus." 



It was another form. He works a miracle, giving them a boat-full 
of fish in a moment. John, the loving disciple, remembers the 
feeding of the three thousand and five thousand, the strange days 
in which they were living, and that Jesus had appeared to them 
already. He seems at once to discern who gave the draught of 
fishes and said: "It is the Lord." He recognized him not by the 
natural eye, but by the eye of faith, and when they were come to 
shore "None of them durst ask him, Who art thou? knowing 
(feeling sure from the miracle, for they saw not the point of the 
nails) that it was the Lord" (John 21:1). Thus did Jesus appear to 
his disciples at different times, to make of them witnesses of his 
resurrection. He was present, but unseen, during most of those 
forty days, appearing, in all, perhaps not more than seven times. - 
-John 20:26, and 21:14. 

We presume that it was to guard against the idea that he was a 
fleshly body that he appeared in various forms and in 
miraculous ways, coming into their midst, the doors being shut, 
and vanishing from their sight. He not only showed that he had 
undergone a change since death, but he illustrated his own 
teaching to Nicodemus, that every one born of the Spirit ("That 
born of the Spirit is Spirit") can go and come like the wind. 
"Thou canst not tell whence it cometh and whither it goeth, so is 
every one that is born of the Spirit" (John 3:8). So did Jesus go 
and come. "But some doubted" -some wanted to thrust their 
hands into his side, and put their fingers into the print of 

R262 : page 62 

the nails; and Jesus thus appeared. Whether it was the same 
body that had been crucified, or one like it, we know not, nor 
does it make any difference; in any case, it was not his body, for 
he had been "quickened of the Spirit" —a spiritual body- "sown 
a natural body, raised a spiritual body," and none of the various 
forms or bodies in which he appeared were his body. They were 
only vails of the flesh which hid or covered the glorious spiritual 
body, just as angels had often used the human form to vail 
themselves when appearing to mortals. 

One point which seems to confuse is, that Jesus ate and drank 
with the disciples and said, "Handle me, for a spirit hath not 
flesh and bones, as ye see me have." 

Jesus affirms just what we have claimed, that the body they saw 
and handled, and which ate with them, was not his spiritual 
body, for he says: "A spirit hath not flesh and bones." Look back 
to the time when the Lord and two angels appeared to Abraham 
(Gen. 18). Jesus had not then left "the form of God," and taken 
the form of a servant. He was a spiritual body then, and it had 
not flesh and bones, but he then used the human form as a vail. 
He ate and drank and talked, and could have said to Abraham: 
Handle me; this body which you see is "flesh and bones." No, 



the disciples did not see Christ's glorious spiritual body, but they 
saw the fleshly "forms" in which he appeared. 

St. Paul teaches us (1 Cor. 15:44,45) distinctly that Christ was 
raised from the dead a life-giving Spirit [pneuma, the same word 
used by our Lord]. But where did he get the various bodies in 
which he appeared, and where did they go when their work was 
accomplished? They did not see corruption; neither did those 
bodies which the angels used see corruption. Our only answer is, 
"Thou canst not tell whence it cometh nor whither it goeth." But 
we all believe other things which we cannot fully understand. 
We cannot understand how a grain of wheat grows, yet we know 
it does grow; we know not how Jesus turned the water into wine, 
or healed the sick, or raised the dead. Yet we 

R262 : page 63 

believe that he did these things. Can you tell where he got the 
clothes he wore after his resurrection? "They parted his raiment 
among them, and for his vesture they cast lots "--the old were 
gone, and the linen clothes lay in the sepulchre. Is it more 
difficult for spiritual beings with their powers to create a 
covering of flesh than a covering of cloth? No; the same power 
can and did do both. 

Thus we have found Jesus' spiritual body and those of angels 
glorious, yet invisible to mortals: with power to manifest the 
glory, or to appear as men, or in any form they may choose. In 
the resurrection the overcomers-the Bride-shall be "like unto 
Christ's glorious body." "We shall be like him, for (not until 
then) we shall see him as he is" (not as he was, for "though we 
have known Christ after the flesh, yet now, henceforth, know we 
him no more" [after the flesh] (2 Cor. 5:16). Such a spiritual 
being was Christ at the time of his ascension; and, with what we 
have learned of the powers of that spiritual body, we are now, 
we hope, prepared to inquire: 

HOW WILL HE COME AGAIN? 

Briefly stated, we believe the Scriptures to teach that our Lord 
will never again appear as a man; that at his second coming he 
will be invisible to mankind; that none will ever see him except 
the Church: "Without holiness no man shall see the Lord;" that 
the Church will not see him until changed from natural to 
spiritual bodies; that then "we shall see him as he is" [not as he 
was], for "we shall be like him" [not he like us, as at the first 
advent]. But, while none are to see him with their natural eyes, 
all are to recognize his presence and his power ("the eyes of 
their understanding being opened"). Hence we read: "Every eye 
shall see (optomai -recognize) him." 

There will be, we understand, various orders and times of 
recognizing him by various classes of humanity. The first class 
to recognize his presence, the Bible teaches, will be those 



Christians who live in most intimate communication with him, 
and 

R262 : page 64 

who are the most separate from the world. These, by the eye of 
faith, through the word of truth, will recognize him as present. 
These, called "a little flock," the "overcomers," the Bride, etc., 
will be the first to be informed of his presence. We have a "sure 
word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well that you take heed, as 
unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day (of the 
Lord) dawn." "If thou shalt not watch,... thou shalt not know 
what hour I will come upon thee." This "little flock" will be 
changed-made like unto Christ's glorious 

R263 : page 64 

body. 

Then commences a time of trouble on the worldly-minded 
Church, and on the world, in which the Lord makes known his 
presence and power, by causing the overthrow of all systems of 
error, in Church and world. 

Though all this uprooting and overturning of governments, etc., 
will be accomplished in a manner considered perfectly natural, 
yet it will be so thorough, that ultimately all will realize that 
"The Lord reigneth," for "he shall be revealed (made known) in 
flaming fire." (Judgments.) And in due time, "all that are in their 
graves" shall also be brought to life (during the Millennial age), 
and recognize Christ; for "Unto him every knee shall bow." 
Thus "every eye shall see him; and they also which pierced 
him." 

Now let us examine the subject more in detail. 

The second advent, like the first, covers a period of time, and is 
not the event of a moment. The first lasted nearly thirty-four 
years, and the events connected with it— his birth, baptism, 
sorrow, death, resurrection, etc., as mentioned by the prophets, 
all took place at the first advent. The second advent, as we shall 
see, lasts much longer. It includes the Millennial reign, and 
prophecy covers all the prominent features of that reign. He 
comes to reign-must reign until he has put down all enemies; 
the last being death.-l Cor. 15:25,26. 

In the application of prophecy to the events of the first advent 
we recognize order. Christ must be the "child born and son 

R263 : page 65 

given" "before the man of sorrows and acquainted with grief." 
He must die before he could rise from the dead, etc. So also in 
studying prophecy, referring to the second advent, we must 
recognize order; we must judge of the order somewhat by the 
character of the event. As the wife is the glory of the husband, 
so the Bride is the glory of Christ, for we are to be "partakers of 



the glory that shall be revealed (1 Pet. 5:1,10), and as the "glory 
shall be revealed in us" (Rom. 8:18), we know that Christ could 
not come in the glory of his kingdom [church] until he has first 
gathered it from the world. In harmony with this thought we 
read- When he shall appear, we "also shall appear with him in 
glory. "-Col. 3:4. 

The prophets foretold the sufferings of Christ [head and body] 
and the glory that should follow. ~1 Peter 1:11. If the sufferings 
were of the whole body, so is the glory. We suffer with him that 
we may be also "glorified together. "--Rom. 8:17. "Enoch 
prophesied, saying-the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his 
saints," [gr. hagios, never translated angel] (Jude 14). Again 
(Zech. 14:5), we read— "The Lord my God shall come and all the 
saints with thee." Thus we learn that when he appears in glory 
we are with him, and of course, we must be caught to meet him 
before we could appear with him. We understand that this 
appearing of the saints in glory, as already expressed of the 
Lord, will be a manifestation not in person but in power. 

We have evidence to offer, proving that he comes unknown to 
the world; but attempt to answer two supposed objections first, - 
viz.: "This same Jesus shall so come in like manner as ye have 
seen him go into heaven," (Acts 1:11), and "The Lord himself 
shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the 
Archangel and the trump of God; and the dead in Christ shall 
rise."-l Thes. 4:16. These texts are supposed to teach that 
Christ will come in a manner visible to the natural eye, while the 
air is rent with the blast of the Archangel's trumpet, at which, 
mid reeling tombstones and opening graves the dead 

R263 : page 66 

will be resurrected. It certainly has that appearance on the 
surface, but look at it again: Would that be coming in like 
manner as they saw him go? He did not go with the sounding of 
a trumpet and outward demonstration. It does not say, you shall 
see him coming, nor that any one would see him, but— he shall 
come. When he arrives it will be privately. He comes to 
organize the Church as his kingdom, to set it up. He comes to be 
glorified in his saints in that day.-2 Thes. 1:10. The world saw 
him not after his resurrection; they did not see him ascend, as he 
said, "Yet a little while and the world seeth me no more." 

And "he shall so come in like manner"— unknown to the world. 
Nor will they see (recognize) him in his second advent until his 
Church is gathered, for when he shall appear "we also shall 
appear with him." What, then, does the trumpet mean? Let us 
see. We are to be rewarded "at the resurrection." As we will not 
be rewarded twice, nor resurrected twice, we conclude that the 
"Trump of God" (1 Thess. 4:16) and the "Last Trump" (1 Cor. 
15:52) are the same, differently expressed. 



The same events are mentioned as occurring at each~i.e., the 
resurrection and reward of saints. And for the same reason we 
believe the "Trump of God" and "Last Trump" to be the 
"Seventh Trump" of Rev. 11:15. The "Seventh Trump" is the 
"Last Trump," and is called "the Trump of God," possibly 
because introducing the special judgments of God connected 
with the setting up of his kingdom. 

These trumpets evidently are the same-but what? The seventh 
angel sounded. A sound on the air? No, not any more than the 
six which preceded it. They are each said to sound, and Sir Isaac 
Newton, Clarke, and all commentators of note, agree that five or 
six of these trumpets are in the past. They have been fulfilled in 
events upon the earth, each covering a period of time. They 
certainly must all sound before the resurrection, for that is under 
the seventh. If 

R263 : page 67 

THE SEVENTH TRUMP 

were to make a sound on the air, it would be out of harmony 
with the other six of the series. That it covers "the great day of 
his wrath"— the time of judgments upon the kingdoms of the 
world-the pouring out of the "seven vials" of his wrath-the 
"time of trouble such as was not since there was a nation"— 
seems evident, for we are told, in the same sentence, of the 
wrath of God coming on the nations. -Rev. 11:15,18. 

We see, then, that the sounding of the trumpets, and so coming 
in like manner, do not conflict, but rather add force to the fact 
that he comes "unawares," "as a thief," and steals away from the 
world "his treasure-his jewels." Remember, too, that this is 
Christ the spiritual body, that could not be seen without a 
miracle; that was present, yet unseen, during thirty-three days 
after his resurrection. 

But will the world not see the saints when gathered or 
gathering? No; they are changed (in the twinkling of an eye) 
from Natural to Spiritual bodies, like unto Christ's glorious 
body, and in the instant of their change will be as invisible as he 
and angels. But those who arise from their graves? No; they 
were sown (buried) natural bodies; they are raised spiritual 
bodies- invisible. Won't the world see the graves open and the 
tombstones thrown down? A spiritual body (remember, we are 
comparing spiritual things with spiritual, not natural) coming out 
of the grave will not make any more of a hole in the ground than 
Christ's spiritual body made in the door when he came and stood 
in their midst, "the doors being shut. "-John 20:19,26. But do 
not forget that only the Church are raised spiritual bodies-all 
others, natural fleshly bodies, as Lazarus, etc. 



PRESENCE OF CHRIST BEFORE THE 
RAPTURE OF THE CHURCH. 

Christ's personal presence and ministry of three and a half years 
at the first advent, as well as the three and a half years 

R263 : page 68 

which followed his ministry, is termed "the Harvest." It was the 
harvesting of the Jewish or Law age. Christ was present as the 
chief reaper—his disciples as under-reapers. Their work was 
separating of wheat from chaff, and the gathering of the wheat 
into the higher or Gospel dispensation. That harvest was the end 
of that age. Jesus said to his disciples, "Lift up your eyes and 
look on the fields, for they are white already to harvest." "I send 
you to reap that whereon ye bestowed no labor; other men (the 
prophets) have labored and ye are entered into their labors. "- 
John 4:38. That work was not general, nor for the world. He 
confined his labors to Judea, and the work to them did not cease 
until five days before his death, when he rode on the ass into the 
city, wept over it, gave them up, and said: "Your house is left 
unto you desolate." After his resurrection he sends the disciples 
to "preach the Gospel to every creature, beginning at 
Jerusalem." Nor were they suffered to preach to the world in 
general until the seven years of harvest-work to that Jewish 
people was fully accomplished, as God had promised. -Daniel 
9:27. "He (Jesus, chief reaper) shall confirm the covenant with 
many for one week" (seven years), in the midst of the week 
making all sacrifice to cease— by offering himself the true 
sacrifice. But the harvest or reaping done in the end of the 
Jewish age was confined to them as a people. The oracles of 
God had been committed to them as a people; wheat was sought 
among them, but as a nation they proved to be mainly chaff. The 
wheat was garnered (brought into the Gospel church) and the 
chaff burned (nation destroyed), and thus their harvest ended. 

During the Gospel age, the church does not reap, but sows the 
seed. Paul plants, Apollos waters, God gives increase, etc. But 
there is to be a harvest in the end of this age, as illustrated in the 
parable of the tares and wheat, and taught in the explanation of 
the same.— Matt. 13. Notice that both wheat and tares are in the 
kingdom of heaven-the church-and that this parable, as also 
the other six of the series, relating to "the kingdom 

R263 : page 69 

of heaven"— the church— refers not to the non-professing world, 
but to two classes in the church. 

The Son of Man planted the church pure, good seed. During the 
days of the apostles there were special "gifts of the Spirit," such 
as "discerning of spirits," etc., by which they were able to 
prevent tares from getting in among the wheat-hypocrites 
getting into the church, -(instance, 1 Cor. 5:3. -"Simon Magus" 



R264 : page 69 

-"Anannias and Sapphira," etc.); but when the apostles were 
dead, "while men slept," the enemy began to sow tares among 
the wheat. Paul says that the mystery of iniquity had begun to 
work even in his day; now they grow side-by-side in all the 
churches. Shall we separate them, Lord? No; we might make 
some mistake, pull up wheat and leave tares. "Let both grow 
together until the Harvest." "The harvest is the end of the 
world," [aion-age.] "In the time of harvest I will say unto the 
reapers-the reapers are the angels-gather together first the 
tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them; but gather the 
wheat into my barn." 

Notice, this Harvest is the end of this age, yet, like the one 
ending, the Jewish age, it is a period of time— "In the time of 
harvest." Secondly, there is order-"Gather first the tares." There 
will come a time, then, in the end of this age, when the reapers- 
angels— will be present doing some sort of a separating work in 
the Church, yet an invisible presence and work. If the work of 
binding, gathering, etc., were a visible work by visible agents, 
two would not be found in the field, mill and bed when the hour 
for translation comes and the one is taken and the other left.— 
Matt. 24:41. 

Again, before the living are gathered, the dead in Christ must 
have risen, whether it be but a moment before; "the dead in 
Christ rise first— then we which are alive," etc.— 1 Thess. 4:16. 
This harvest is not of the living only, but also of "the dead in 
Christ," "those that sleep in Jesus." The angels gather the living, 
but our Lord, who is the chief reaper here (as he was in the 
Jewish harvest), gathers or raises the dead. "I will raise 

R264 : page 70 

him up;" "I am the resurrection and the life;" and in harmony 
with this thought we find that in Rev. 14:15— "One like unto the 
Son of Man, seated on a cloud," reaps the earth. (Here, two 
harvests, or two parts of one harvest, are shown; the second 
being the casting of the "vine of the earth" into the wine-press of 
his wrath-time of trouble.) The special point to which your 
attention is called, however, is the fact that this harvest will go 
on without outward demonstration, the chief and under-reapers 
being present but unseen. 

Some may have confounded these remarks on the presence of 
Christ in a spiritual body with the presence of the spirit of 
Christ, but they are quite distinct. The latter never left the 
church; consequently, in that sense, he could not "come again." 
Of his spiritual presence he said: "Lo, I am with you alway, even 
unto the end of the world" -age. We refer to the personal 
presence which did go away, and was to come again-a spiritual 
body. 



The Greek word generally used in referring to the second advent 
--parousia, frequently translated coming— invariably signifies 
personal presence, as having come, arrived, and never signifies 
to be on the way, as we use the word coming. This fact is 
recognized by many who are looking for the Lord; but the error 
under which the church in general is laboring, is that of 
supposing that presence implies sight-manifestation- 
appearance. In the Greek, however, other words are used to 
express revelation, appearing and manifestation, viz.: phaneroo- 
-rendered shall appear in "When he shall appear, etc." and 
apokalupsis -rendered, shall be revealed in 2 Thes. 1:7. "When 
the Lord Jesus shall be revealed." 

These and other texts teach us that our Lord will reveal or 
manifest himself to the world in such a manner that "Every eye 
shall see-[<9/?/ t <9ma/-recognize] him" -"Be revealed in flaming 
fire," [judgments]. But what we now claim is, that before he is 
thus revealed, he will be present unseen, (by all except the 
Bride, who will see— recognize him— because of the eyes of her 

R264:page71 

understanding being opened by the anointing of truth-see Eph. 
1:17-19), doing a work and gathering his Bride, or body, to 
himself. 

We have Christ's own words to prove that he will be present in 
the world, and the world for a time will know not of it. In Matt. 
24:37, we read: "As the days of Noah were, so shall also the 
parousia (presence) of the Son of Man be." The presence of 
Christ is not compared to the flood, but to the days of Noah, the 
days that were before the flood, as verse 38 shows; as then they 
ate, drank, married, etc., and knew not, so shall also the presence 
of the Son of Man be. The resemblance here mentioned is that of 
not knowing-they will not know of the presence of Christ. They 
may have been wicked then, and doubtless were, and may be 
similarly wicked in his presence; but wickedness is not the point 
of comparison; as then they ate, drank, married— proper enough 
things to be doing, not sins; so shall it be in Christ's presence. 
Now look at Luke 17:26, "As it was in the days of Noah, so 
shall it be also in the days of the Son of Man." Verse 27 tells us 
how it was in the days of Noah, they were eating, drinking, 
marrying, etc. "So shall it be in the days of the Son of Man." 
Surely the days of the Son of Man are not before his days, any 
more than the days of Henry Clay could be days before he was 
born. No, the more we examine the more we are convinced that 
the world will go on as usual, and know not until the "harvest is 
past, the summer ended," and they are not in the ark, not with 
the little flock "accounted worthy to escape," the time of trouble 
coming upon the world.- Luke 21:36. There will be no outward 
demonstration, until the church is gathered, whenever that takes 
place-soon or in the distant future. 



We think we have good solid reasons, not imaginations, nor 
dreams, nor visions, but Bible evidences that we are now "in the 
days of the Son of Man:" that "the day of the Lord" has come, 
and Jesus, a spiritual body, is present, harvesting the Gospel age; 
yet, as he has said, the world seeth him no more; they 

R264 : page 72 

eat, drink, etc., and "know not." This day of the Lord in which 
"he will show who is that blessed and only potentate, the Lord 
of Lords, and King of Kings," is already dawning, but the 
majority of the church, as well as the world, are asleep; and to 
them-the day "so cometh as a thief in the night." "But ye, 
brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should come upon 
you as a thief." "We are not of the night, therefore let us not 
sleep as do others." Not the worldly-wise, but those humble 
ones, wise from heavenly instruction, are meant when it is 
written, "the wise shall understand." But "if thou shalt not watch 
thou shalt not know what hour I will come upon thee. " "Take 
heed lest your hearts be overcharged with... the cares of this life, 
and so that day come upon YOU unawares."-- Luke 21 :34. 

We have seen that in his days of presence it will be as it was in 
Noah's days~the world will know not. -Matt. 24:37; Luke 
17:26. We are told that the day of the Lord is a day of trouble, a 
day of clouds, and thick darkness. -Zeph. 1:15; Joel 2:2. We are 
told also that "as the lightning which shineth," (not as the 
shining, but as the invisible electric fluid which causes the 
shining) "so shall the Son of Man be in his day."-- Matt. 24:27; 
Luke 17:24. Now if he is to be as lightning, and his day a day of 
clouds, as the above texts assert, are they not in harmony? In the 
natural storm when we see flashes from lightning and hear peals 
of thunder, it gives evidence to us that atmospheric changes are 
taking place, and that the vitiated and corrupt "air" is to be 
changed, and we rejoice that it will be pure after the storm. 

We now find a harmony in the account of our gathering. As we 
found "the voice of the archangel" and "the trump of God" were 
symbols of the closing epoch of this age and its troublous 
events, so now we find "the clouds" to symbolize the gathering 
of the trouble in that epoch; "the lightning" to symbolize or 
illustrate our Lord's presence "in his day," and that "air" is used 
as the symbol of the spiritual throne from which Satan 

R264 : page 73 

("the prince of the power of the air,") is to be deposed, and to 
which our Lord and his joint heirs are to come. 

The great time of trouble, as a storm, has been, and continues 
gathering over earth. The air, in which Satan, "the prince of this 
world (age,) rules, becomes more and more vitiated until the 
storm breaks. The prince of darkness now works in the hearts of 
the children of disobedience to the accomplishment of his own 



will, viz., in oppressing and opposing justice and truth to the 
affliction of mankind. The clouds are gathering, and men's 
hearts are beginning to fail for fear of the approaching storm- 
"for fear of those things that are coming on the earth." Soon it 
will break in all its fury. But though it fills all hearts with fear 
and dread, in its final results it will prove a great blessing to the 
earth, (mankind,) displacing the present "powers of the air," 
("powers of darkness, "--"spiritual wickedness in high 
(controlling) places, ")~and giving place to earth's rightful ruler- 
Jesus and his Bride, also spiritual beings (powers of the air.) 

So, after the storm, shall the "Sun of righteousness arise with 
healing in his wings," and the kingdom of darkness shall give 
place to the kingdom of light, and mankind will rejoice in the 
pure air and cloudless sunlight of that perfect day. 

Notice, also, that all the flashes of lightning come from among 
the clouds, and become more and more vivid as the storm 
increases. How the various Scriptures interpret each other: "As 
the lightning, so shall the Son of Man be in his day." "Behold he 
cometh with clouds." "The day of the Lord is a day of trouble, of 
clouds and thick darkness." "He maketh the clouds his chariot." 

We conclude, then, that if "he cometh with clouds" of trouble, 
etc., we shall be "caught away in clouds" [diaglott] of the same 
sort, after he has thus come. If prepared, we shall be caught to 
meet him during the gathering of the trouble, before the storm 
bursts. 

David [anointed] was doubtless a type of the church in her 

R264 : page 74 

deliverance, as pictured in the song (2 Sam. 22,) in which he 
says (vs. 10): "He bowed the heavens also and came down and 
darkness was under his feet.... He was seen upon the wings of the 
wind, and he made darkness his pavilions round about 

R265 : page 74 

him... and thick clouds of the skies.... He sent forth and took 
me;... He delivered me from the strong enemy" [death]. -Luke 
21:36. Yes, our Lord when he has come and made trouble and 
darkness his pavilion, takes his Bride— delivers her from the 
strong enemy of the fleshly nature, death, into the perfection of 
the new divine nature-like unto Christ's glorious body. Lord 
help us to be ready for the change that we may be thus "caught 
away." 

Forever with the Lord, 

Amen, so let it be; 

Life from the dead is in the word- 

'Tis immortality." 



R265 : page 74 



SPIRITUALISM. 

WHEREVER we find a counterfeit we may rest assured there 
exists a genuine. If there were no genuine gold dollars, there 
could be no base imitations or counterfeits. Then, too, the base 
or spurious article must appear very much like the genuine, or it 
would not be a counterfeit. 

This is what we claim relative to what is at the present time 
called "Spiritualism" -that it is a counterfeit of the true, as taught 
in the Bible. 

Whoever has carefully searched the Scriptures cannot have 
failed to see that, while God throughout all past ages has 
condemned evil and sin in their various forms, and warned his 
children, both "Israel after the flesh" and also the spiritual 
children (the Gospel age Church), of the danger and bad results 
of evil, yet he has nevertheless permitted evil and good to stand 

R265 : page 75 

side-by-side before the people for their choice. If we take heed 
to his Word we may discern which is evil, and, by obedience to 
that Word, shun the evil and choose the good. 

God is the head and fountain of goodness and truth, and the 
Scriptures teach that Satan is the head and fountain of all evil 
and error~"the father of lies" (deceptions). Both of these are 
spiritual beings. "God is a spirit," and Satan, as we have 
heretofore shown, was once an angel of God~the chief or prince 
of "those angels which kept not their first (sinless) estate." 
These, though cast out from God's presence, are not yet 
destroyed; they still possess their angelic nature, though through 
sin they have become evil "angels;" consequently they still are 
spiritual beings (not human), and have the same powers as they 
ever had, and as good angels have, except that God has put them 
under certain limitations and restraints which we shall more 
fully discuss farther along. 

If we trace them through the Scriptures we shall find that these 
fallen spiritual beings have continually made use of their 
spiritual-supernatural-powers to lead mankind astray into 
disobedience of God and injury to themselves. 

Spiritual beings, as we have heretofore shown, possess powers 
greater and higher than humanity. We have seen, from the 
statements relative to good angels, that they can be present in 
our midst without our being conscious of their presence. (The 
angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him.~ 
Ps. 34:7. Are they not all ministering spirits sent forth to 
minister for those who shall be heirs of salvation?~Heb. 1:14.) 

These, we have seen, have power to appear as a flame of fire 
(the angel of the Lord so appeared to Moses in the bush-Exod. 
3:2), and they can and have appeared as men. 



Some other powers of angels can be discovered by examining 
the record; for instance, the angels who delivered Lot and his 
family from Sodom had power to smite the rioters of Sodom 
with blindness. -Gen. 19:11. An angel "did wondrously before 
Manoah;" another performed a miracle before Gideon. -Judges 
6:21, 

R265 : page 76 

and 13-19. The angel of the Lord delivered the apostles from 
prison, and yet left the prison-doors unmolested; again, an angel 
delivered Peter from prison, the doors opening of their own 
accord. -Acts 5:19-23, and 12:8. On many occasions they made 
known to men things which were about to come to pass, etc. 

Now, the evil angels- "the devil and his angels "-have by nature 
the very same powers, but are restrained. So much of evil as can 
be overruled for good, and tend to the development of 
experience and the education and discipline of the "heirs of God, 
joint heirs with Jesus Christ"-is permitted, and the remainder 
restrained. As God through his Spirit and influence works in and 
through men who give themselves up to his control, so does 
Satan operate in and through those who "yield themselves as 
instruments of unrighteousness unto sin." "His servants ye are to 
whom you render service." As Jesus said to some, "Ye are of 
your father the devil, for his works ye do." 

As "God in times past spake unto the fathers through the 
prophets," who were his mouthpieces, so Satan spake through 
his agents and agencies. His first agent was the serpent-it 
became his agent in beguiling Eve into disobedience. Satan 
manifested his powers through the Magicians and Soothsayers 
of Babylon, and remarkably in those of Egypt, where God's 
powers were manifested through Moses and Aaron before 
Pharaoh, while Satan's powers, of a similar kind, were used to 
oppose the truth for a time. Here these two spiritual powers were 
strikingly manifested; both did miracles -things which men 
alone could not do, but which men possessed of evil and good 
powers did do.-Exod. 7:11-22, and 8:7-18. "There were false 
prophets also among the people," who evidently spoke by an 
inspiration, or power in them almost like the real prophets of 
God; these were the counterfeits. (See 2 Peter 2:1; Jer. 23:21.) 

We are aware that to the worldly mind it seems superstitious to 
believe that men and women may be so given over of 
themselves 

R265 : page 77 

to Satan, and so controlled by him as to be wizards and witches; 
but they are recognized as such in the Scriptures, and we believe 
it. Israel was commanded to put such to death.- Exod. 22:18; 
Lev. 20:27, etc. Manasseh, king of Judah, made Judah to err, 



etc.; he "used enchantments and used witchcraft, and dealt with 
a familiar spirit and with wizards."-- 2 Chron. 33:6. 

Take a concordance and see how much God says against 
wizards, witches, and "they that have familiar spirits "--mediums 
of the devil for communication with mankind. It was the claim 
of these mediums of "familiar spirits" that they held 
communication with the dead and received their information 
from them. In this claim they contradicted the plain statements 
of God's Word, which assure us that the dead could not furnish 
any information. (See Job 14:10-21; Eccl. 9:10.) 

But this was merely another way in which Satan sought to 
continue the lie imposed upon Eve in Eden. ["He is a liar from 
the beginning," said Jesus.] God had said that if disobedient they 
should die. Satan contradicted this statement—claimed that man 
had naturally Immortality, and could not die, and that God was a 
liar. Ever since, he seeks to uphold the statement, "Ye shall not 
surely die. " Full well does he know that if people realized that it 
was the "spirits of demons" who spoke to them through the 
mediums, they would shun them; hence the claim that it is dead 
people (not dead, but more alive than ever) who communicate 
the information. 

An illustration of this sort is given in 1 Saml. 28. Saul, king of 
Israel, had become wicked, and God would no longer 
communicate with him through the prophets. He was engaged in 
a war with the Philistines, and a great battle was about to be 
fought. He wanted council and desired to know what would be 
the outcome. Since the Lord would not answer him, he sought 
out one of the condemned and forbidden class, a medium, a 
woman who had a familiar spirit-the witch at Endor. 

All are familiar with the story, (1 Saml. 28:3-20), how that 

R265 : page 78 

the medium pretends ignorance as to her visitor, knows what 
Saul desires, gives a description of Samuel, etc. Then follows an 
account of the coming defeat of Saul's army and the death of 
himself and his sons. The fact that these things occurred just as 
foretold by the medium, has been thought by some to be a proof 
that Samuel really furnished the information. But, Satan could 
foretell those things as well as Samuel could were he alive. Not 
that Satan is a prophet, nor that God reveals coming things to 
him, but he is a student of God's Word and a believer of it. 
"Devils also believe and tremble. "~Jas. 2:19. The defeat of Saul 
and accession of David to the throne had been foretold by the 
prophet and both Saul and Satan knew it, and Satan had learned 
that every word of God is sure. 

Besides we should not forget the words of the apostle, that he 
that hath the power of death is the devil. —Heb. 2:14. Since he is 
executor of the death penalty, and must have the permission to 



execute from God, (Job 1:12), is it strange that he knew that he 
was to have power over the lives of Saul, his sons, and many 
others on the next day? No, it is the reasonable inference. 
Certainly we should not for a moment suppose that God (or 
Samuel, if he could) would recognize, or use any means of 
communication which he had prohibited on pain of death, and 
condemned as wicked. Read 1 Chron. 10:13. 

Coming further down the stream of time, we learn that the same 
wicked spirits continued to operate in the same manner. The 
Lord, while still permitting them, warns the people against such, 
saying, "they shall say unto you, 'seek unto them that have 
familiar spirits (spirit mediums) and unto wizards that peep and 
mutter.' (But) should not a people seek unto their God? For [why 
should] the living [go] to the dead? To the law and 

R266 : page 78 

to the testimony, [the Bible], if they speak not according to this 
Word it is because there is no light in them."~Isa. 8:19. God 
warns people not to believe any one whose teachings are 
contrary to the Word, no matter what powers they may exercise. 

Coming down to the days of Jesus and the apostles, we find 

R266 : page 79 

that Satan still operated in much the same manner, as well as a 
variety of other ways. Among the more notable instances [not to 
mention the numerous cases of casting out of devils, etc., by 
both Jesus and the disciples] we might remind you of the 
experience of Philip and Peter with Simon the sorcerer. —Acts 
8:7,9-24. "Unclean spirits crying with loud voice came out of 
many that were possessed;... but there was a certain man named 
Simon which... used sorcery and bewitched the people... to whom 
they all gave heed... saying, this man is the great power 
(medium) of God." Thus did Satan use his power to delude the 
people. 

Paul and Barnabas had an experience with another of these 
mediums of the devil, named Elymas, who withstood them. Paul 
addressing him said, "O full of all subtilty and all mischief, thou 
child of the devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, wilt thou not 
cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord?"~Acts 13:10. And 
he was blinded immediately. Again, Paul and Silas met a female 
medium at Phillippi. "A certain damsel possessed with a spirit of 
divination... which brought her masters much gain by 
soothsaying." But Paul "turned and said to the spirit [Satan] I 
command thee in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her. 
And he came out the same hour."-- Acts 16:16,18. 

And so ever since, Satan has kept up his practices with various 
changes of method to suit the circumstances; sometimes with 
characteristic devilishness, at other times in the garb of religion, 
"for Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light, 



therefore it is no great thing if his ministers [mediums] also be 
transformed as ministers of righteousness. "~2 Cor. 11:14. In our 
day, when knowledge is so great, and morality (called 
Christianity) so popular, Satan must, if he would continue to 
oppose truth, take the religious cloak; and so he does. Today 
Spiritualism ranks itself among the religious sects. ["The 
synagogue [church] of Satan," truly.] 

Spiritualism, though refined and modernized, is yet the same 

R266 : page 80 

that it ever was, in ages past. Its object is not the inculcation of 
truth, nor of love for God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ. 
They claim that Jesus was a fine medium and taught and used 
spiritualism in his day as well as he understood it. They do not 
outwardly profess to oppose the Bible and its teachings, but they 
do so really, both teaching and practicing the very things therein 
condemned, and still seeking to prove by their enchantments 
that men are not dead, thus endeavoring to uphold Satan's first 
falsehood. -Gen. 3:4. 

They still possess supernatural powers, too, just as in the days of 
Saul, and Paul, and Moses. While we do not question that some 
of the things claimed to be done are mere deceptions, yet we 
know of many things done by them, where no deception was 
possible. Among those who believe "in this way" we know of 
several who once were mediums of the devil and did "those 
things whereof they are now ashamed." These, when coming to 
a knowledge of the truth, are thankful for their escape from that 
"snare of the devil." Spiritualism hates the light, and their 
wonders are done under cover of their favorite principle- 
darkness. Their work of proselyting, too, is dark, covered- 
secret. Jesus gives us a word of wisdom on this subject. "Every 
one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh to the light 
lest his deeds should be reproved."— John 3:20. 

Though working stealthily, their numbers are large and embrace 
many of the influential of earth-judges, senators, etc. The queen 
of what is known as the greatest Christian kingdom of earth, on 
whose possessions the light of day is said never to set, called the 
"Christian Queen," is known by many to be a "Spiritualist." It is 
coming before people in a way that commands attention, and 
those who do not realize it to be the work of Satan, are almost 
sure to regard it as a power of God. 

The Rev. Joseph Cook, justly celebrated for his able defense of 
the Bible and its Author, against the attacks of atheists and 
infidels, such as Huxley, Darwin, Arnold, et al., has lately had 
his attention aroused to the recognition of the growing influence 

R266:page81 

of "Spiritualism," and having investigated the subject to some 
extent, he recently delivered a lecture on the subject, in which he 



expressed his belief that many of their tricks and performances 
are done by no human power, and are actually supernatural. He 
does not pretend to say how, or by what power, but claims that 
not only himself, but some of the profoundest scientific minds of 
Germany have reached the conclusion that Spiritualism cannot 
be condemned as false by any scientific tests yet applied to it. 

Nor is this power of Spiritualism difficult to account for if we 
take the Bible as our authority and recognize it as the work of 
Satan, whom Jesus designates "the prince of this world."~John 
14:30. "The prince of the power of the air (spiritual power) the 
spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience."-- Eph. 
2:2. And the same book is our authority for saying that 
"Spiritualism" has not yet reached the climax of its power; its 
powers are to increase wonderfully. Paul says, (1 Tim. 4:1,) 
"Now the spirit [of God] speaketh expressly that in the latter 
times some shall depart from the faith giving heed to seducing 
[deceiving] spirits and doctrines of devils." Jesus says, "They 
are the spirits of devils working miracles, which go forth unto 
the kings of the whole world to gather them to the battle of that 
great day of God Almighty. "--Rev. 16:14. 

2 Peter (2:4,) and Jude (6,) tell us, that when cast out of God's 
presence as evil angels, they were bound by "chains of 
darkness" "unto the judgment of the great day." Many Scriptures 
have shown us that the closing part of the Gospel age is to be 
upon the living a time of trial and trouble, preparing them for the 
coming Millennial reign of Christ, and is called "the day of the 
Lord"~"the great day"~"the great day of his wrath," etc. We 
understand, then, that Satan and his angels have been limited; 
might not appear except through human beings who willingly 
gave themselves up to be "possessed of devils" or became his 
"mediums." He has thus been confined or chained. But we claim 
that this "day of the Lord"~day of the "presence of 

R266 : page 82 

the Son of man" -has already commenced, that the Scriptures 
prove it to be so; and if the chains of darkness restrain Satan 
until "the great day," we should expect that very soon those 
chains will be loosed and no longer restrain. (Any who expect 
soon the loosing of those powers should, to be consistent, 
recognize both "the day of the Lord" and the trial as 
commenced.) 

The facts correspond to this exactly. "Spiritualists" claim that 
they are having more power to show their wonders, daily; and 
they claim now (one case very recently) that the spirits can 
materialize in broad daylight; and they promise wonderful 
revelations and manifestations very soon. Now, materialization 
of a spiritual being, just as they claim, has been possible all 
along to the angels of God, of which we have many records- 
angels on many occasions appearing as men. Jesus, as we have 



seen, when born of the Spirit at his resurrection, a spiritual body, 
("that which is born of the Spirit is spirit," was, as all other 
spiritual beings, (good and evil) invisible to human sight, and in 
making known his resurrection to his disciples he appeared in 
various fleshly "forms" materialized. —Mark 16:12. These are the 
powers which Satan has desired, but could not heretofore use, 
because bound or limited, but which he will have when the 
judgment (trial) of "the day of the Lord" begins. (Which we 
believe is now.) 

The trial of this "day" causes not only a "time of trouble" and 
distress among nations, but it includes a trouble or fire upon the 
living phase of the church. This church trouble comes first, and 
we believe began in the spring of 1878, and is to result in the 
purifying of faith; and will bring those who continue to bear the 
name of Christian to the firm foundations of the teachings of the 
Word of God. For all the errors of human traditions shall be 
consumed as dross, wood, hay, stubble, in the fire (trial) of this 
day. The apostle says, "think it not strange concerning the fiery 
trial which shall try you (the church) as though some strange 
[unforetold] thing happened unto you."~l Pet. 4:12. For the fire 
of that day shall try every man's work of what sort 

R266 : page 83 

it is: "He that hath built [his faith] with gold, silver, and precious 
stones [the truths of God's Word] the same shall remain. (His 
faith will not be destroyed.) But if any man build with wood, 
hay, stubble, (the teachings and creeds of man,) the same shall 
suffer loss," etc.~l Cor. 3:12-15. 

This trial is "the trial of your faith," and in this "day of the Lord" 
not only does the light of truth shine strongly and beautifully, 
showing us the great prize of our high calling as we never saw it 
before; revealing to us the present King, who causes us to sup 
with him and feeds us with his truth which is "meat in due 
season," giving strength needed in this day; but it is also a day 
for the increase of the powers of evil, that the separation 
between the wheat and tares (the children of the kingdom and 
the children of the wicked one, Matt. 13:38,) may be complete. 

Because of this struggle between truth and error, the real and the 
false, Spiritualism, etc., Paul says, "My brethren, be strong in 
the Lord and the power of his might. Put on the whole armor of 
God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the 

R267 : page 83 

devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood [not against 
human beings, but against evil spiritual beings] but against 
principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness 
of this world, (Satan~the prince of this world)~John 14:30, 
against spiritual wickedness in high (controlling) places. 
Wherefore, [on this account] take unto you the whole armor of 



God, that ye may be able to withstand [the spiritual wickedness- 
-the devil's wiles] in the evil day [this day of the Lord's 
presence- day of trial.]... Stand, therefore, having your loins girt 
about with truth and having on the breastplate of righteousness, 
etc." -Eph. 6:11-14. 

This same day of trial is referred to in Psalm 91, where only 
those who have made God's "truth their shield and buckler 
[support] are able to withstand the snares of the devil, the 
'arrows' of infidelity, and the moral 'pestilence' of Spiritualism, 
while thousands shall fall at their side. " 

R267 : page 84 

In God I have found a retreat, 
Where I can securely abide; 
No refuge, nor rest so complete, 
And here I intend to reside. 

The pestilence walking about, 
When darkness has settled abroad, 
Can never compel me to doubt 
The presence and power of our Lord. 

A thousand may fall at my side, 
Ten thousand at my right hand,- 
Above me his wings are spread wide, 
Beneath them in safety I stand. 

His truth is my buckler and shield, 
His love he hath set upon me; 
His name on my heart he hath sealed, — 
E'en now his salvation I see. 

Songs of the Bride. 

There are portions of Scripture which seem to teach that during 
this "Day of the Lord" there will be manifestations of the saints 
as men in fleshly bodies-those who have been changed to 
spiritual bodies like unto Christ's glorious body-and that they 
will appear as he "appeared" after his resurrection, and do a 
work of teaching as he taught the disciples, opening men's 
understandings that they might understand the Scriptures. 

We have seen that the coming of Moses, the first and second 
times, to deliver Israel from Egypt, was a type of the two 
comings of the Lord. The second time he came with power, and 
"Aaron, the saint," was his mouthpiece before Pharaoh-during 
the signs, etc. So we expect, that the living representatives of the 
church, will sometime be used as the mouthpieces of their Lord 
before the world [Egypt in type]. As there in type Jannes and 
Jambres, and the other magicians under Satanic power, opposed 
and hindered for a time the effect of the wonderful powers 
wrought through Aaron, so we anticipate that in the antitype, 
when the 



R267 : page 85 

living church is used as the Lord's mouthpiece, they will be 
withstood and their teachings controverted by the same spiritual 
wickedness --"Spiritualism"— which will seek to do the same 
things and partly be able. Paul seems to refer directly to this in 2 
Tim. 3:1-8, when, after saying, "In the last days [of the age] 
perilous times shall come," etc., he adds: "Now, as Jannes and 
Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth ...but 
they shall proceed no further; for their folly shall be manifest 
unto all men as theirs also was." 

We suggest again, then, that every counterfeit is a proof of a 
genuine; second, that none but valuable things are counterfeited; 
and third, that a counterfeit must resemble the genuine very 
closely, or it would not deceive. Already, Spiritualists are 
talking much as we do, of "the good time coming," the "glorious 
day," and even declare that Jesus is present, etc. This is an old 
practice with our opponent. At the first advent the devils knew 
Jesus, and, crying out, said: "Thou art Christ, the Son of God;" 
and he, rebuking them, suffered them not to speak, "for they 
knew that he was Christ. "--Luke 4:41. (See also Paul's 
experience, Acts 16:17.) Yes, "the devils also believe and 
tremble."— James 2:19. And no doubt they would fain call some 
of us Spiritualists, both for the purpose of bringing to their credit 
our knowledge of God's Word and plan, and to seek to offset the 
value and effect of our Bible teaching, by claiming us as one 
with themselves. 

But, beloved, "believe not every spirit, but try the spirits 
whether they be of God" or of Satan. "By their fruits ye shall 
know them. " That system, by whatsoever name it calls itself, 
whose time and talent is spent in doing useless and foolish 
things, and making use of supernatural power to obtain money; 
which appeals merely to the human credulity, and neither seeks 
nor develops an increase of faith and love toward God and men; 
ignores Jesus and the plan of salvation; repudiates the Bible; 
whose tendency is toward things earthly, sensual, devilish- 

R267 : page 86 

"Free-loveism," etc. -is not of God, but bears unmistakable signs 
of Satan being its author. 

On the contrary, a system based not on forbidden and pretended 
communications with the dead, but upon the Word of God only; 
whose teachings tend to the glory of both the Father and his Son, 
our Lord; which seeks to unfold to those who have "ears to 
hear" and "eyes to see" the glorious beauty and grandeur of 
God's plan of salvation, of which Jesus is the recognized 
foundation; which tends not to the ignoring of any part of the 
Word, but to a searching of the Scriptures daily; which tends 
toward and teaches that the prize of our high calling is 
obtainable only by patient perseverance in well-doing-the death 



of the old nature and newness of life as a new creature in Christ 
Jesus, bears unmistakably the stamp of God, and is of God- for 
it speaks according to his Word. ==================== 

R267 : page 87 

PART IV. 



THE DAY OF JUDGMENT. 

VERY confused notions are held by many as to the work of 
judgment in the future age. The popular idea on the subject 
being something like this: 

The Father, robed as a judge, with stern aspect, is seated on a 
great white throne. By his side stands the Savior with loving 
eyes and pleading face. The world of mankind is marshaled 
before him. They come up in close ranks, and with downcast 
faces toward the Judge. The very large majority are commanded 
to depart toward the left. Trembling with despair they hurry 
away, and are at once seized by a guard of demons, and swiftly 
dragged, shrieking with terror, down~down~down. In the 
advancing throng, there comes now and then one, who is at once 
recognized by the Savior as a true Christian, and introduced to 
the Father as such, who welcomes him to the right hand, where 
he is immediately crowned, and seated with the angels to view 
the remainder of the solemn scene. This separating work is to 
continue until all who have ever lived have passed the tribunal; 
the whole period of time occupied, being something less than 
twenty-four hours, thus constituting "the day of judgment." The 
greater number of these, it is generally thought, have already 
been once judged (at death) and allotted to their final destiny in 
heaven or hell, but for some inconceivable reason they are 
brought again before the judgment seat, and are again remanded 
to their former condition. 

R267 : page 88 

While some features of this picture are drawn from symbolic 
Bible imagery, the conception as a whole is very far from being 
a scriptural one. As to the gathering of the world before the 
Judge in a kind of military review, and the immediate separation 
of the classes, while it is the likeness in the figure, it is of 
necessity as far from the real as a type is from its antitype. 

THREE GREA T PERIODS OF SEPARA TION 

are, we think, clearly revealed in God's Word: "The separation 
of the chaff from the wheat," Matt. 3:10,12; "the tares from the 
wheat," Matt. 13:37,43; and "the sheep from the goats," Matt. 
25:31. 



The first separation is in the past, occurring in the "harvest," or 
end of the Jewish (aion) age. Jesus himself, while on earth, 
thoroughly purged the floor of the Jewish house, gathered the 
wheat into the Gospel church, and cast the chaff into a fire, 
which, culminating at the destruction of Jerusalem, burns even 
yet against the Jew. So far from marshaling that nation in rank 
and file before him, they were not even aware of the test then 
made, and were condemned because they knew not the time of 
their visitation. -Luke 19:44. 

The second great separation was due to take place at the end of 
this aion [age], i.e., closing period of the Gospel dispensation. 
This work has actually been going on in our midst, and the 
world and worldly church know nothing of it. So in the last great 
harvest in the age of judgment: God's truth, the two-edged 
sword, will quietly, but surely, do the dividing work; and that 
Word not spoken but written, will plainly manifest the sheep and 
the goats. 

R268 : page 88 

THE TERM "DAY" 

in Bible times, as now, was frequently used to cover a long but 
definite period; as, for instance, "The day" in which "Jehovah 
God made the earth and the heavens." Gen. 2:4. "The day of the 
temptation in the wilderness." Heb. 3:8. [40 years.] "The day of 
salvation." 2 Cor. 6:2. [Gospel dispensation.] 

R268 : page 89 

As to the period comprised in "the day of judgment," if the 
student will but faithfully use a reference Bible or a 
concordance, and find the amount and kind of work to be 
accomplished "in that day," he will soon be glad to accept of 
Peter's explanation of it, that "one day is with the Lord as a 
thousand years;" and believing the Revelation of Jesus Christ, 
rejoice in the promise there given, to "reign with him a thousand 
years." As to 

THE KIND OF JUDGING 

which is to be carried on, we must consult the Word if we would 
get the truth. Turn to the book of "Judges," and we find that after 
the death of Joshua, the Israelites forsook Jehovah, and 
worshipped Baal. To bring them to their senses, their enemies 
were allowed to triumph over them. When they repented, 
"Jehovah raised up judges, who delivered them out of the hand 
of those that spoiled them. " For instance, "When the children of 
Israel cried unto Jehovah, Jehovah raised up a deliverer Othniel. 
And the spirit of Jehovah came upon him, and he judged Israel, 
and went out to war, and prevailed, and the land had rest for 
forty years," until Othniel died. Thus it continued through the 



period of the judges until Samuel, who "judged Israel all the 
days of his life." When Samuel had grown old, the Elders of 
Israel asked him for "a King to judge us like all the nations. "--1 
Sam. 8:5,20. 

A judge then, in those days, was a person eagerly sought after; a 
ruler to be desired; who would deliver his people from 
oppression, administer justice to the wronged, and bring peace 
and joy to those over whom he exercised authority. 

The world, and even the Church, at the present day, led astray 
by an unscriptural theology, puts far away the idea of Christ's 
presence to judge [rule] the world as something to be dreaded by 
all. Not so the heaven inspired prophets of old. To them it was 
one grand and glorious epoch, for which, as Paul said, "creation 
groaneth." 

Listen to David and the sweet singers of Israel, in the first 

R268 : page 90 

psalm sung by the first divinely-appointed choir, at the home 
bringing of the ark: 

Let the heavens be glad, 

And let the earth rejoice: 

And let men say among the nations, Jehovah reigneth. 

Let the sea roar, and the fullness thereof: 

Let the fields rejoice, and all that are therein. 

Then shall the trees of the wood sing aloud, 

At the PRESENCE of JEHOVAH, 

BECAUSE HE COMETH 

TO JUDGE THE EARTH. 

O give thanks unto Jehovah, for he is good, 

FOR HIS MERCY ENDURETH FOREVER." 

We might multiply quotations like the above, but they ought to 
be familiar to the faithful student of the Word. 

WHY 

did "all the holy prophets since the world began" long for "that 
day" when the Anointed should be present to rule, to reign, to 
judge? 

WHY does all Christendom of this age shrink at the bare 
mention of that day? Because they do not comprehend the 
nature of the work of that day, nor the grandeur of its results, 
while the prophets spoke as they were moved by the Holy Spirit 
of God, who knew what he himself had planned and purposed. 

IN "THE DA Y OF THE LORD, " 

as in the days of creation, there is an evening and a morning. So 
the Jews kept their time: beginning their day with evening. It is 



God's order-first the cross, then the crown. The night was forty 
years long to the children of Israel. To the Gospel church it has 
been many centuries. So the nations in the coming age must first 
run the race before they receive the prize for which they run. 
And during their trial, as in ours, there must be "weeping for a 
night; but joy cometh in the morning." 

R268:page91 

Many, who have failed to "search the Scriptures," as 
commanded, have seen only this night of darkness; and it has 
hung before them like a funeral pall, cutting off the light of 
glory beyond. 

A DARK NIGHT 

is indeed closing over a sleeping church and a blind world, 
during which many woes will be poured out upon them. But 
when they have well learned the lesson of obedience through 
suffering, as all past overcomers have, they reap a blessed 
reward. 

The day of judgment, then, divides itself into two parts. First, a 
"time of trouble," during which the nations will be subdued, and 
humbled, and taught the lesson of Nebuchadnezzar their type, 
"that the Most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it 
to whomsoever he will." Secondly, a morning, in which the Sun 
of righteousness will rise with healing in his wings, driving 
away the mists of ignorance and superstition; destroying the 
miasma of sin, and bringing light and life and love to the 
downtrodden sons of men. During the first-named period, such 
scriptures as the following have a fulfillment: 

"Behold, the day of the LORD cometh, cruel both with wrath 
and fierce anger, to lay the land desolate: and he shall destroy 
the sinners thereof out of it. For the stars of heaven and the 
constellations thereof shall not give their light; the sun shall be 
darkened in his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her 
light to shine. [Symbolical of a spiritual night.] And I will 
punish the world for their evil and the wicked for their iniquity; 
and I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease, and will lay 
low the haughtiness of the terrible. "— Isa. 13:9,1 1. "Ask of me, 
and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the 
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Thou "shalt break 
them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a 
potter's vessel. "-Psa. 2:8,9. 

Unquestionably the kingdoms of this world are loyal to their 
prince. They are mainly controlled by evil, selfish, corrupt men, 

R268 : page 92 

the agents and representatives of the "Prince of darkness," who 
do his will. 



When the new Prince takes control, the dominion is to be given 
into new hands, and the Lord proclaims: "I will overthrow the 
throne of kingdoms and I will destroy the kingdoms of the 
Gentiles. "--Hag. 2:22. 

Thus by "breaking in pieces "--throwing down~"the kingdoms of 
this world become the kingdoms of our Lord and his Christ," 
who shall reign forever. -Rev. 11:15. Under the new rule there 
will be new rulers, and we read, "The saints of the most High 
shall take the kingdom, (dominion) and possess the kingdom 
forever. "--Daniel 7:18. Again, "All nations, tongues, people, 
etc., shall serve and obey him." At present they do not, and they 
must be brought, by chastisement, to submission; and this is 
accomplished in "The day of the Lord." The overthrow of 
nations and society will necessarily involve individual trouble. 
But, "When the judgments of the Lord are in the earth the 
inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness."-- Isa. 26:9. 

"That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day 
of wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess. I 
will bring distress upon men, and they shall walk like blind men, 
because they have sinned against the Lord. Neither their silver 
nor their gold shall be able to deliver them, in the day of the 
Lord's wrath."~Zeph. 1:15. "Therefore wait ye upon me, saith 
the Lord, until the day that I rise up to the prey: for my 
determination is to gather the nations, that I may assemble the 
kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, even all my 
fierce anger: for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of 
my jealousy. For then I will turn to the people a pure language, 
that they may all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve him 
with one consent. "--Zeph. 3:8. So extreme is the trouble here 
described, that the world is said to be burned up by the Lord's 
anger-yet it has a good effect, for after all the indignation 
against and destruction of governments, the people remain. 

R268 : page 93 

[The destruction is one of governments,] and having 
experienced the misrule of the "Prince of this world" they are 
prepared to have the Lord take "his great power and rule," and to 
"serve the Lord with one consent." 

Rev. 6:15, figuratively describes that time of falling of 
kingdoms when every mountain (kingdom) and island shall be 
moved. The kings and chief ones, as well as bondmen, will 
recognize in this trouble that "the great day of his wrath is 
come," and will seek to make alliances and to hide themselves 
from the sure coming storm. They will seek to be covered and 
protected by the great mountains (kingdoms) of earth and to be 
hid in the great rocks of this world's societies, (Masonic, Odd- 
Fellows, etc.;) but they shall not be able to deliver them in the 
day of the Lord's anger, for "all the kingdoms of the world shall 
be thrown down," and instead of these mountains (kingdoms) 



"the kingdom of the Lord becomes a great mountain, and fills 
the 

R269 : page 93 

whole earth. "--Daniel 2:35,45. Malachi 4:1 describes the coming 
day of trouble and sees the anger of the Lord there displayed - 
"the fire of God's jealousy." "Behold the day cometh, that shall 
burn as an oven; and all the proud, and all that do wickedly shall 
be stubble, and the day that cometh shall burn them up." Here 
the wicked are symbolized by stubble, God's wrath by fire, and 
the righteous by "calves of the stall." Vs. 2. 

"The heathen raged, the kingdoms were moved: he uttered his 
voice, the earth melted;... Come, behold the works of Jehovah, 
what desolations he hath made in the earth. He maketh wars to 
cease unto the ends of the earth: he breaketh the bow, and 
cutteth the spear in sunder; he burneth the chariot in the fire. Be 
still, and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the 
heathen, I will be exalted in the earth. "~Psa. 46:6,10. How does 
he make wars to cease? Evidently by the "desolations" above 
mentioned. The nations will be so satiated with bloodshed; and 
by bitter experience, will so realize the misery of injustice, and 
oppression, and sin, that they will loathe themselves and their 
ways, and will willingly turn and seek for 

R269 : page 94 

purity and peace. But to produce this effect, the command will 
first go forth: "Proclaim ye this among the Gentiles: Prepare 
war, wake up the mighty men, let all the men of war draw near; 
let them come forth: 

BEAT YOUR PLOWSHARES INTO SWORDS, 

and your pruning hooks into spears: let the weak say, I am 
strong. "--Joel 3:9,10. The dreadful lesson of the exceeding 
sinfulness of sin, will be learned in time, and well learned, for 
"thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power. "-Psa. 
1 10:3. Then after they have been brought to a condition of 
willingness to let "this man (the Christ of God) reign over 
them, " we find as a result of his judgeship, they shall 

BEAT THEIR SWORDS INTO PLOWSHARES, 

and their spears into pruning hooks: nation shall not lift up 
sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more." - 
Isa. 2:4. 

The preceding verses tell us when this blessed time will come, 
and also other events in this glorious day of Christ's presence, as 
judge over all the earth. "It shall come to pass in the last days, 
that the mountain [government or kingdom] of the Lord's house, 
['whose house are we'-Heb. 3:6.] shall be in the top of the 



mountains, [place of power], and shall be exalted above the 
hills, [kingdoms of earth], and all nations shall flow unto it. And 
many people shall go and say, come ye, and let us go up to the 
MOUNTAIN of Jehovah, to the HOUSE of the God of Jacob; 
and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: 
for out of Zion [the New Jerusalem—heavenly government] shall 
go forth the law and the word of Jehovah from Jerusalem" 
[restored earthly Jerusalem and her priesthood. ]~Isa. 2:3. 

At this time (end of "time of trouble,") the nations will have 
been subdued, and gladly they will submit to the righteous 
control of the new heavenly kingdom; and here is the 
introduction of the Millennial reign. Notice, they say: "Come, let 

R269 : page 95 

us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, "--or, let us submit to the 
new kingdom of God,~"and he will teach us of his ways, and we 
will walk in his paths." After the terrible experience of the time 
of trouble, they will be glad to forsake their own ways. How 
gladly will they then learn that his "ways are ways of 
pleasantness, and all (his) paths are peace." Here will be the 
silver lining of that dark storm-cloud of the "day of wrath" - 
"When the judgments of the Lord are in the earth, the 
inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness. "~Isa. 26:9. 

Behind a frowning Providence 
He hides a smiling face. 

During the one thousand years thus introduced, Satan is bound, 
evil restrained, that the people may be deceived no more, and 
the Lord and his Bride (the saints), as kings and priests, shall 
rule and teach them. None need then say to his neighbor: Know 
thou the Lord? for all shall know him, from the least to the 
greatest. The way of life will then be so plain that the wayfaring 
man, though a fool, shall not err therein. Yes, God's Word will 
then be an open book to all the world, and all its present 
seeming contradictions will then shine forth as beautifully 
harmonious as they now do to us, who have come to understand 
the glorious plan of the ages. 

A thousand years of such ruling and teaching! How it will lift 
from the redeemed world the curse—ignorance, misery and 
death; restoring perfection, harmony, peace and beauty. This 
thousand years is the time, during which all the nations are 
gathered before the judgment seat of Christ. It is their judgment 
day— one thousand years. 

During all that time, God's truth, as a two-edged sword, will be 
quietly, but surely as now, doing a separating work, dividing the 
sheep from the goats,-Matt. 25:31-46. The great mass of 
mankind will learn God's ways, and delight to walk therein. 
These he calls his sheep-followers, and during the age they are 

R269 : page 96 



gradually gathered to his right hand-place of favor-and in the 
end of the age the Lord thus addresses them: "Come ye blessed 
...inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of 
the world. " 

The earthly kingdom or dominion was intended and prepared for 
human (earthly) beings. It was given originally to the earthly 
Adam. ["Let him have dominion over the beasts of the field, the 
fowl of heaven, and the fish of the sea."] He was to be the Lord 
of Earth, governing it in harmony with the heavenly 
government. This dominion he lost through disobedience and 
sin, and it passed under the control of "him that hath the power 
of death, that is, the devil"— the prince of this world, "who now 
ruleth in the hearts of the children of disobedience." This 
dominion, purchased or redeemed for mankind by Jesus (and his 
body,) is to be restored to them, when they have been restored to 
the perfect condition, where they shall again be in harmony with 
God's government, and be able to wisely exercise the governing 
power. To these the Lord will say, "Come, inherit the kingdom 
prepared for you. " [Let no one confound this earthly dominion 
with the spiritual-heavenly kingdom inherited by Jesus and 
shared by his Bride— the overcomers of the Gospel Age. "To him 
that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne. "] 

Why, say they, are we considered worthy of such honor? 
Because, replies the King, you have done good unto some of 
these -God's children- "my brethren" -your neighbors and 
brethren also-and thus have showed your ready obedience to 
the one great law of the heavenly kingdom which includes all 
others- Love. But there will be some, even in that glorious time 
of favor and blessing, who will not have this man (Christ) to rule 
over them, and who show their indisposition to do God's will by 
neglecting others and selfishly gratifying their own desires. But 
one will (the will of God) is to regulate and continually control 
the universe, and that will or law is expressed in one word- 
LOVE— for "God is Love," and "Love is the fulfilling of the 
Law." 

R269 : page 97 

During the Millennial reign Christ "puts all enemies under his 
feet" -puts down all rule, authority and power opposed to God, 
ultimately destroying "the goats." "These shall go forth into 
aionion cutting off;" [death] (Matt. 25:46, Diaglott), i.e., these 
shall be forever cut off from that life which they had a second 
time forfeited. They had been redeemed from the Adamic death 
by the precious blood of Christ, but having despised the 
privileges thereafter offered under his kingdom, "there 
remaineth henceforth no more sacrifice for sins." The 
destruction of Satan is due at the same time.— Rev. 20:10 and 15. 

Thus, with all things subjected to the will of God, the Son shall 
deliver up earth's dominion to God, even the Father, (1 Cor. 



15:28), whose will then will be "in all," and done in earth as in 
heaven. 

Then the first dominion, lost by Adam, will have been restored 
in the Second Adam, (the spiritual), and the restored race will be 
so in harmony with God as to rule their dominion in accordance 
with his law— LOVE. 

A better illustration of man's dominion over earth, yet 
subservient to the laws of God's kingdom, cannot be made than 
that which is afforded in the government of this country. Each 
State is permitted to govern itself-make its own laws, etc., so 
long as it is in harmony with the government of the United 
States. Just so the dominion of Earth, which has been preparing 
for mankind since the foundation of the world, will be restored 
to him, when he is prepared to rule it in harmony with the 
heavenly kingdom— which kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, 
enduring throughout all generations. -Psa. 145:13. 

They shall have everlasting life, as Adam had it, viz., so long as 
they remain obedient to God's will, which will be ever, since 
they will have learned the evil effects of any other way than his. 

With these thoughts of the "Day of Judgment" and its beneficial 
results to mankind, we are prepared to read intelligently Psalm 
47, which we quote :— 

R269 : page 98 

"JEHOVAH REIGNETH; 

Let the earth rejoice; let the multitude of isles be glad. 

Clouds and darkness are round about him: 

Righteousness and judgment [justice] the establishment of his throne. 

R270 : page 98 

A fire goeth before him, 

And burneth up his enemies round about, 

His lightning [truth] enlighteneth the world: 

The earth [nations] saw and trembled. 

The hills [earthly governments] melted like wax at the presence of Jehovah. 

At the presence of the LORD of the whole earth. 

The Heavens [immortalized saints in heavenly places] declare his righteousness, 

and all the people see his glory. 

Zion heard and was glad: 

And the daughters of Judah rejoiced, 

Because of thy JUDGMENTS, O Jehovah." 



WOULD THERE BE ROOM FOR THEM ON THE 
EARTH IF THE BILLIONS OF THE DEAD WERE 
RESURRECTED? 

This is an important point. What if we should find that while 
the Bible asserts a resurrection for all men, by actual 
measurement they could not find a footing on the earth-what 
then? It is frequently asserted, by people who should know 
better, that the earth is one vast cemetery. Now let us see; figure 
it out for yourself and you will find this an error: you will find 
that there is room enough for the "restitution of all things, which 
God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets. "--Acts 
3:21. 

Let us, in this calculation, assume that it is six thousand years 
since the creation of man, and that there are one billion four 
hundred million people now living on the earth~(the largest 
estimate.) Our race began with one pair, but that none should 
think us illiberal, let us calculate that there were as many people 
then, as now~(one billion four hundred millions,) and further, 
that there never was less than that number at any time. (Actually 
the flood reduced the population to eight persons.) 

R270 : page 99 

Again we will be liberal and estimate three generations to a 
century, or thirty-three years to a generation, while, according to 
Gen. 5, there were but eleven generations from Adam to the 
flood, a period of one thousand six hundred and fifty-six years, 
or about one hundred and fifty years to the generation. 

Now let us see: six thousand years are sixty centuries; three 
generations to each would give us one hundred and eighty 
generations (since Adam.) One billion four hundred million to a 
generation would give two hundred and fifty-two billion as the 
total number of our race from creation until now, according to 
our liberal estimate, which is probably about twice the actual 
number. 

Where shall we find room enough for this great multitude? Let 
us measure the land. The State of Texas (United States) contains 
two hundred and thirty-seven thousand square miles. There are 
twenty-seven million eight hundred and seventy-eight thousand 
four hundred square feet in a mile, and, therefore, six trillion six 
hundred and seven billion one hundred and eighty million eight 
hundred thousand square feet in Texas. Allowing ten square feet 
as the surface covered by each dead body, we find that Texas, as 
a cemetery, would at this rate hold six hundred and sixty billion 
seven hundred and eighteen million eighty thousand bodies, or 
nearly three times as many as we calculated had lived on the 
earth. 

A person, standing, occupies about one and two-third square feet 
of space. At this rate the present population of the earth (one 



billion four hundred million) could stand on an area of eighty- 
six square miles; an area much less than that of the city of 
London, England, or the city of Philadelphia, United States. And 
the island of Ireland (area thirty-two thousand square miles) 
would furnish standing-room for more than twice the number of 
people who have ever lived on the earth, even at our liberal 
calculation. 



R270 : page 100 

PART V. 



"THE CHRIST OF GOD." 

THE word Christ or Kristos is a Greek word, introduced into 
our English language, but not translated into it. Its translation is, 
ANOINTED. 

"Unto us a child is born," etc., and "they shall call his name 
Jesus." The name Jesus means Deliverer or Savior, and the child 
was named in view of a work he was to do; for we are told, "he 
shall save his people from their sins." Jesus was always his 
name, but from the time of his baptism, when the Holy Ghost 
descended upon him and anointed him as the High Priest, 
preparatory to his making "the sin offering" on the cross, and 
thus accomplishing what is indicated by his name, his title has 
been "The Anointed, "--Jesus "the Christ (anointed) of God."— 
Luke 9:20. [Compare Acts 10:37,38.] 

Jesus was frequently called by this title instead of by his name; 
as English people oftenest speak of their sovereign as "the 
Queen," instead of calling her by her name- Victoria. 

But, as Jesus was in God's plan as the anointed one, before the 
foundation of the world, so too THE CHURCH of Christ, was 
recognized in the same plan; that is, God purposed to take out of 
the world a "little flock," whom he purposed raising above the 
condition of the perfect human nature, to make them "partakers 
of 

R270 : page 101 

the Divine nature." The relationship of Jesus toward these, is 
that of "Head over all, God blessed forever;" "for he hath given 
him to be head over the church (of the first-born) which is his 
body." As Jesus was foreordained to be the anointed one, so we, 
also, were chosen to the same anointing of the Spirit, as 
members in his body and under him as our head. And so we read 
(Eph. 1 :3:) "God hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in 
Christ according as he hath chosen us in him before the 
foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without 
blame before him in love; having predestinated us unto the 



adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself... wherein he hath 
made us accepted in the beloved." (See also vs. 20-23.) Again, 
(Rom. 8:29,) "Whom he did foreknow he also did predestinate 
to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he (head and 
body) might be the first-born (heir) among many brethren. " 

God's plan of saving the world by a "restitution of all things," 
waits until first, this bride of Jesus—these members of the Spirit- 
anointed body, shall be gathered out from the world according to 
his purpose. God's intention being to display to the world his 
wonderful and mighty "love wherewith he loved us," as we read 
(Eph. 2:7,) "He hath raised us up together... in Christ Jesus, that 
in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his 
grace (favor) in his kindness toward us in Christ Jesus;" for we 
are "elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father 
through sanctification (setting apart) of the Spirit unto obedience 
and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. "— 1 Pet. 1:2. This 
shows us that the election is not an arbitrary one. God elected, 
first, that Jesus should taste death for us, thus releasing us from 
death; second, that the knowledge of this redemption should be 
declared; third, that those who believe the proclamation should 
be invited or called to become "partakers of the Divine nature," 
"heirs of God, joint heirs with Jesus Christ their Lord, if so be 
that they suffer (death) with him that they might be also 
glorified together," (Rom. 8:17)— his purpose being, that when 
this "promised seed" is developed, that 

R270 : page 102 

in, through, or by it, "all the families of the earth shall be 
blessed."— Gal. 3:29. This seed is to crush the serpent's head, 
(Rom. 16:20,) thus destroying evil, and bringing about "the 
restitution of all things." 

To be thus a part of "The Seed," "The Christ," we must see to it 
that we comply with the conditions, [suffer death with him if we 
would be found in him,] thus making our calling and election 
sure. We make sure of our being part of the elect company by 
obedience to the call: for, "They that are with him are called, 
and chosen, and faithful. "-Rev. 17:14. Being faithful to the call 
insures our position among the chosen. "They that follow the 
Lamb whithersoever he goeth," in the future, are the same that 
bend every power and lay aside every weight to "walk in his 
footsteps" here. 

A beautiful illustration of our oneness with Jesus, as members of 
his body, is shown in the anointing of Aaron as high priest. All 
of the anointing oil [type of the Holy Spirit] was poured upon 
the head; the under priests stood by, their heads covered with 
bonnets, (Lev. 8:13,) indicating thereby that they were not the 
head. Aaron, who stood with uncovered head, was the head of 
their priesthood. They took part in the ceremony, and were 
anointed symbolically in him as members of his body, for the oil 



poured on the head ran down over the members of the body, as 
we read, (Ps. 133:2,) "It ran down the beard, even Aaron's beard: 
that went down to the skirts of the garments." So we, who claim 
not to be the head, but members in Christ's body, receive full 
anointing by the same spirit. "For as the body is one, and hath 
many members, and all the members of that body, being many, 
are one body; so also is Christ, for by one spirit are we all 
baptized into one body."~l Cor. 12:12. "As many of us as were 
baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into his death. "--Rom. 
6:3. 

Our oneness with Jesus, as members of the Christ— anointed 
body-may be clearly illustrated by the figure of the pyramid: 



R271 : page 103 




The topstone is a perfect pyramid of itself; other stones may be 
builded under it, and if built in exact harmony with all the 
characteristic lines of the topstone, the whole mass will be a 
perfect pyramid. How beautifully this illustrates our position as 
members of "The Seed" -"The Christ;" joined to, and perfectly 
in harmony with our head, we are perfect; separated from him, 
we are nothing. 

Jesus, the perfect one, has been highly exalted, and now we 
present ourselves to him, that we may be formed and shaped 
according to his example, and that we may be built up as a 
building of God. In an ordinary building there is no "chief 
corner-stone;" but in our building there is one chief corner- 
stone, the "topstone," as it is written, "Behold, I lay in Zion a 
chief corner-stone, elect, precious "-"to whom coming as unto a 
living stone... ye also as lively (living) stones are built up a 
spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual 
sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. "-1 Pet. 2:4-6. 
And, very soon, we trust, the union between Jesus and the body 



will be complete, as expressed by the Prophet: "He shall bring 
forth the headstone, thereof, with shoutings of grace, grace unto 
it." 

And, dearly beloved, many blows and much polishing must we 
have—much transforming we must undergo, and much 
conforming unto his example, under the direction of the great 

R271 : page 104 

Master-builder; and in order to have the ability and ideality of 
the builder displayed in us, we will need to see that we have no 
cross-grained will of ours to oppose or thwart his will being 
done in us; we must be very childlike and humble- "Be clothed 
with humility, for God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to 
the humble. Humble yourselves, therefore, under the mighty 
hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time."-l Pet. 5:6. 



R271 : page 105 



"WRITE DOWN THE VISION AND MAKE IT PLAIN UPON TABLES, THAT EVERY ONE MAY READ IT FLUENTLY," 

HABAKKUK 2 2. 



THE 

TABERNACLE 

OF THE WILDERNESS 
THE HARMONY OF IIS TEACHINGS 




o 

Co 

n 

O 



CHART OF THE AGES. 

ILLUSTRATING THE PLAN OF GOD FOR BRINGING MANY SONS TO GLORY, AND HIS PURPOSE- 



"In regard to s 



administration of the fulness of the appointed times, to reunite all things tinder one Head, ever 
things in heaven and the things on earth— under Him." — Bph. 1:10 — Diaglott. 



mder the An< 



Its teachings a. , _ 

with the Chart of the .. c 
showing the same STEPS 

-ling fro 
to glory. 

The entire ground of the 
Tabernacle enclosure was called 
"Holy." Outside the court all 
was unholy, and is the equiva- 
lent of the unjustified plane in 
Chart of Ages. THE COURT 
enclosure parallels' the justified 
or PERFECT HUMAN plane. 
The "Holy" represents the 
condition of consecrated Chris- 
Hans. BEGOTTEN of the 
Spirit. The Most Holy, beyond 
the second veil, represents the 
PERFECT SPIRITUAL con- 
dition when "we shall be like 
HIM." The glory plane is 
still further along the grand 
climax- j>f hope, — "Glory, Honor 
and Immortality." 



J f 



PART VI. 



THE PLAN OF THE AGES. 

EXPLANATION OF THE CHART. 

KEY.--K, the plane of Glory; L, the plane of Perfect Spiritual 
Being; M, the plane of those Begotten of the Spirit; N, the plane 
of Human Perfection; P, the plane of Typical Perfection; R, the 
plane of Depravity and Sin. a, Adam; b, the World; c, Abraham; 
d, the World; e, Israel; f, a Time of Trouble; g, Jesus; h,i,k,l, 
Christ Jesus; n, the "Little Flock;" m, the "Great Company;" p, 
Justified Persons; q, Hypocrites; r, Christ; s, the "Little Flock;" t, 
the "Great Company;" t,u,v, "Babylon" Falling; S, the "Day of 
the Lord" Trouble; w,x, Christ and Bride Enthroned; y, the 
"Great Company" before the Throne; z, Israel Restored; W, the 
World; T, the "Gate;" U, the "Brazen Altar;" V, the "Laver;" X, 
the "Golden (Incense) Altar." 



In the chart illustrative of this topic, we have sought to aid the 
mind through the eye, to understand something of the 
progressive character of God's plan; also, the progressive steps 
which must be taken by all who ever attain to the divine nature. 

First, we have an outline of the various dispensations, A,B,C. 
The first (A) lasting from man's creation to the flood; the second 
(B) from the flood to the commencement of the Millennial reign 
at the second advent; and the third, or "Dispensation of the 
fullness of times," (C) lasting from the beginning of Christ's 
reign for untold ages~"ages to come."-- Eph. 2:7. 

These three great dispensations are frequently referred to in 
Scripture: A being called "the world that then was;" B is called 
by Jesus "this world;" by Paul "the present evil world;" by Peter 
"the world that now is." C is called "the world to come, wherein 
dwelleth righteousness," thus contrasting it with the present evil 
time. Now evil rules and the 

R271 : page 106 

righteous suffer, while in the world to come the rule is to be 
reversed; righteousness will rule and evil-doers will suffer, and 
finally all evil be destroyed, so that every knee shall bow and 
every tongue confess to the glory of God. 

Secondly, we find that the two last of these dispensations (B and 
C) are composed of various ages-each of which as a successive 
step leads upward and onward in God's plan. Age D was the one 
during which God's plan was represented and typified by such 
patriarchs as Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, etc. 



Age E is the Jewish age, or the period from the death of Jacob, 
during which all of his posterity are treated of God, as his 
especial charge—his favored people. To these he showed special 
favors and declared- "You only have I known (recognized with 
favor) of all the families of the earth. "-Amos 3:2. These as a 
nation were typical of the Gospel Church-the "holy nation-the 
peculiar people." The promises, etc., made to them were typical 
of "better promises" made to us. Their journey through the 
wilderness to the land of promise (Canaan) was typical of our 
journey through the wilderness of sin to the heavenly Canaan. 
Their sacrifices justified them typically and not really, "for the 
blood of bulls and goats... can never take away sin." But in the 
Gospel age (F) we have the "better sacrifices," which do make 
atonement for the sins of the whole world. We have the "royal 
priesthood," of which Jesus is the chief, or "head," composed of 
all those who offer themselves to God "living sacrifices," holy 
and acceptable, through Jesus Christ. In the Gospel age we find 
all the realities of which the Jewish age and its services and 
ordinances were but a shadow -the Law being "a shadow of 
good things to come."— Heb. 10:1. Theirs was all typical, ours is 
all real. 

The Gospel age (F) is the period during which the body of 
Christ is called out of the world, is shown the crown of life and 
the exceeding great and precious promises whereby (by 
obedience to the promises and high calling) they may become 
partakers 

R271 : page 107 

of the divine nature. —2 Pet. 1 :4. Evil is still permitted to reign 
over or rule the world, in order that by contact with it, these may 
be tried to see whether they be willing to give up the human-a 
living sacrifice-being made conformable to Jesus' death, that 
they may be also in his likeness in the (First) resurrection. G is 
the Millennial age (one thousand years,) during which Christ 
Jesus shall reign and rule and thereby bless all the families of 
the earth, accomplishing the "restitution of all things spoken by 
the mouth of all the holy prophets."- Acts 3:19-21. With this 
age sin and misery and death shall be forever blotted out, for "he 
must reign until he hath put all enemies under his feet.... The last 
enemy that shall be destroyed is death"— the Adamic death. 
During this reign and associated in it with Jesus, will be the 
church called the Bride— his body— "To him that overcometh 
will I grant to sit with me in my throne even as I overcame and 
am set down (during the Gospel age) with my Father in his 
throne." Blessed privilege to be thus intimately associated with 
our Lord in the great work of blessing all men-as "kings and 
priests unto God." H shows "ages to come;" ages of perfection, 
blessedness and happiness for all, but regarding the work of 
which Scripture is silent. 



The "HARVEST" at the end of the Jewish age was a period of 
forty years, lasting from the beginning of Jesus' ministry, when 
he was anointed of God by the Spirit (Acts 10:37,) and began his 
ministry (A.D. 30,) until the destruction of Jerusalem (A.D. 70.) 
In this harvest the Jewish age ended and the Gospel age began. 
There was a lapping of the ages, as you will note, by careful 
examination of the diagram. 

The Jewish age ended in a measure when, at the end of Jesus' 
three and one-half years' ministry, he gave them up, saying: 
"Your house is left unto you desolate. "--Matt. 23:38. Yet, there 
was favor shown them for three and one-half years after this by 
the confining to them of the Gospel call, in harmony with the 
prophet's declaration (Dan. 9:24-27,) regarding seventy weeks 
(of years) of favor toward them; and "in the midst of the 

R271 : page 108 

(seventieth) week," Messiah should be cut off (die), but not for 
himself ("Christ died for our sins:") and thus did he cause the 
sacrifice and oblation to cease in the midst of the week-three 
and one-half years before the expiration of the seventy covenant 
weeks. When the true sacrifice had been made, of course, the 
typical ones would no longer be recognized by Jehovah. 

There was then a more complete sense in which that Jewish age 
ended with the end of the seventieth week or three and one-half 
years after the cross~(after which the Gospel was preached to 
the Gentiles also-beginning with Cornelius. )-See Acts 10:45. 
This ended their age so far as the Jewish church 

R273 : page 108 

was concerned; but their national existence terminated in the 
great time of trouble which soon followed, resulting in the 
destruction of their city and nation. 

In that "harvest" the Gospel age had it beginning also: this age is 
designed for the development and trial of "the Christ of God"- 
head (Jesus) and body (the church.) It is the Spirit dispensation, 
hence, it is proper to say that the Gospel age began with the 
anointing of Jesus (our head) "by the Holy Ghost, with power," 
(Acts 10:38; Luke 3:22; 4:1,18,) at the time of his baptism; 
while in another sense we might say that it commenced at 
Pentecost, three and one-half years later, when the Spirit came 
upon his body, which is the church. 

A "HARVEST" will constitute the closing period of the Gospel 
age, during which there will again be a lapping of ages-the 
Gospel age ending and the Restitution or Millennial age 
beginning. This age closes by stages, as did its pattern or 
"shadow" -the Jewish age. As there, the first seven years of the 
harvest were devoted in an especial sense to a work in and for 
the Jewish church and were years of favor; so here we find a 
similar seven years marked as having the same meaning and 



bearing upon the Gospel church, to be followed by a period of 
trouble (judgments -seven last plagues, etc., called "fire,") upon 
the nations of the world as a punishment for wickedness, and as 
a preparation for the reign of righteousness; of which more 
again. 

R273 : page 109 

THE PATH TO GLORY. 

K,L,M,N,P,R, each represent different planes. N is the plane of 
perfect human nature (sinless, undefiled.) Adam was on this 
plane before he sinned; from the moment of disobedience he fell 
to the depraved or sinful plane, R. The world has been on that 
same plane since-fallen far below perfection of manhood. P 
represents the plane of typical justification, reckoned as effected 
by sacrifices of the "Law;" but it was not actual perfection, for 
"the Law made nothing perfect." 

N is not only the plane of human perfection, as represented by 
the perfect man, Adam, but it is the plane occupied by all 
justified persons. "Christ died for our sins according to the 
Scripture," and in consequence every believer in Christ-all who 
accept of his perfect and finished work as their justifier, are, 
because of their faith, reckoned of God, justified or perfect men 
-as though they had never been sinners. In God's sight then, all 
believers in Christ's sacrifice are on the N plane, viz., human 
perfection. This is the only standpoint from which man may 
approach God, or have any communion with him. All on this 
plane (N) God calls sons (human sons-Adam before sin was 
thus a son, Luke 3:38.) 

During this Gospel age God has made an offer to the justified 
human beings, telling them that on certain conditions they may 
cease to be earthly, human beings and become heavenly spiritual 
beings-like unto the angels-like unto Christ's glorious body. 
Some believers— justified persons— are satisfied with what joy 
and peace they have, through believing in the forgiveness of 
their sins, and heed not the voice which calls them to come up 
higher; others moved by the love of God, as shown in their 
ransom from sin, say, "Lord what wilt thou have me to do?" To 
such the Lord answers through Paul:— "I beseech you brethren, 
by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living 
sacrifice; holy, acceptable to God, your reasonable service."— 
Rom. 12:1. Paul, what do you mean by our giving ourselves 
living sacrifices? I mean that you shall consecrate and give 
every power, 

R273 : page 110 

which you possess, to God's service, that henceforth you shall 
live not for self, nor for friends, nor family, nor for the world, 
nor for anything, but for and in the service of him, who bought 
you with his own precious blood. 



But Paul, surely God would not accept of blemished or 
imperfect sacrifices, and since we all became sinners through 
Adam, we cannot surely be sacrifices, can we? Yes, beloved, it 
is because you are holy that you are acceptable sacrifices, and 
you are holy and free from sin, because God has justified you 
from all sin freely through Christ's death. 

As many as obey the call of Paul, rejoicing to be accounted 
worthy to suffer reproach for the name of Christ-those who 
look not at the things that are seen, but at the things that are not 
seen-at the "crown of life," at "the glory that shall be revealed 
in us," at "the prize of our high calling— in Christ Jesus "--these 
consecrate themselves wholly to God and are from that moment 
no longer reckoned men; but, as having been begotten of the 
Holy Ghost through the word of truth-no longer human, but 
henceforth spiritual children; they are now one step nearer the 
prize than when they first believed. But their spiritual being is 
yet imperfect; they are begotten, but not yet born of the spirit. 
They are embryo spiritual children on plane M- the plane of 
spiritual begetting. Because begotten of the spirit, therefore they 
are no longer reckoned human, but spiritual; for the human 
nature once theirs-once justified, they have now given up, or 
reckoned dead-a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable and accepted 
of God. They are now new creatures in Christ Jesus, old things 
(human hopes, and will and all) are passed away and all things 
are become new, for "ye are not in the flesh but in the spirit, if 
so be that the spirit of God dwell in you."- Rom. 8:9. If you 
have been begotten of it, "ye are dead and your life is hid with 
Christ in God." 

Plane L represents perfect spiritual being; but before plane L is 
reached, the conditions of your covenant must be carried out. It 
is one thing to covenant with God that you will be 

R273 : page 111 

dead to all human things, and a further thing to perform that 
covenant throughout your earthly career, -keep your body under 
(dead); keep your own will out of sight, and perform only the 
Lord's will. The entrance upon plane L is called birth, or a full 
entrance into life as a spiritual being-like unto Christ's glorious 
body, and like unto the angels. We cannot enter on that plane 
until the entire church is gathered in from the world -when "the 
dead in Christ shall rise first," (this corruption must put on 
incorruption— immortality.) Then we, which are alive and 
remain, (not having entered the tomb) shall be changed in a 
moment— made perfect spiritual beings like unto Christ's 
glorious body (for "this mortal must put on immortality.") Then, 
that which is perfect being come, that which is in part (the 
begotten condition with the various hindrances of the flesh, to 
which we are now subject) shall be done away. 



But there is a still further step to be taken beyond a perfection of 
spiritual being-viz., to "the glory that shall follow" -plane K. 
We do not refer to a glory of person, but to a glory of power or 
office. The reaching of plane L brings us to a full personal glory, 
i.e., to be glorious beings like unto Christ's glorious body. But 
after we are thus perfected, and made entirely like our Lord and 
head, we are to be associated with him in the glory of power and 
office-to sit with him in his throne, even as he after his being 
perfected at his resurrection, a glorious being, was exalted to the 
right hand of the majesty (glory) on high: so we shall enter in 
everlasting glory— plane K. 

Now notice carefully the chart, while we look at illustrations on 
the path to glory. (A pyramid is a perfect figure or shape, hence 
we use it to represent perfect beings, in the chart.) 

(a) represents Adam; he was a perfect being and hence a 
pyramid. Notice that he is on plane N, which shows that Adam 
was a perfect man (before he sinned). 

Below him (b) is an imperfect or topless pyramid, it represents 
the world of mankind, which sin had degraded; notice the plane 
on which it stands— R, the "Depraved Plane." 

R273 : page 112 

(c) represents Abraham (whom we use as an illustration of 
several other persons.) Abraham was a member of the depraved 
human family, and should be on plane R; but Paul tells us that 
Abraham was justified by faith, that is, he was reckoned of God 
a (sinless) perfect man, because of his faith. This, in God's 
estimation, lifted him up above the world of depraved sinful 
men to plane N: and though actually still imperfect, he was 
received into the favor that Adam had lost, viz., communion 
with God as a "friend."— James 2:23. All on the perfect (sinless) 
plane (N) are friends of God, and he friend of theirs; but sinners 
(plane R) are at enmity against God— "enemies through wicked 
works." 

(d) represents the world of mankind after the flood still on plane 
R-still at enmity, where they continue until the Gospel church is 
selected and the Millennial age begins. 

(e) represents "Israel after the flesh" during the Jewish age, 
when the typical sacrifices of bulls and goats cleansed them, not 
really, but typically; "for the Law made nothing perfect."- Heb. 
7:19. Because they were typically justified, but not actually so, 
we put them on plane P. The plane of typical justification, which 
lasted from Mount Sinai until Jesus made an end of the Law, 
nailing it to his cross. There ended the typical justification by 
the institution of the "better sacrifices" than the Jewish types, 
which actually "take away the sin of the world," and "make the 
comers thereunto perfect." 



(f) represents the (fire) trial through which fleshly Israel went 
when Jesus was present, sifting them and taking out of their 
nominal church the wheat or "Israelites indeed, in whom was no 
guile, " and especially after the separation of the wheat when he 
"burned up the chaff (refuse part of that church and nation) with 
unquenchable fire," (a time of trouble, etc., which they were 
powerless to avert. )~See Luke 3:17; also, 21:22; and 1 Thess. 
2:16. 

(g) represents Jesus (at thirty years of age) a perfect man, he 

R274: page 112 

having left the glory of the spiritual condition and become a man 
in order that he (by the grace of God) should taste death for 
every man. God's law requires an eye for an eye, a tooth 

R274: page 113 

for a tooth, and a life for a life; it was necessary that a man 
should die for mankind or the penalty (man's death) would not 
be paid: hence the death of an angel would no more pay the 
penalty and release man, than the death of "bulls and goats, 
which can never take away sin." Therefore, the first-begotten of 
God became a man, that he might give that which would redeem 
mankind. He must have been a perfect or sinless man, else he 
could do no more than any member of the fallen race to pay the 
price. He was "holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from 
sinners." He took the same form or likeness which the sinners 
had~"the likeness of sinful flesh"— the human. 

Being found in fashion as a (perfect) man, he humbled himself 
and became obedient unto death. He presented himself to God at 
baptism— "Lo I come in the volume of the book it is written of 
me, to do thy will, O God." When he thus presented himself- 
consecrated his (human) being, his offering was holy (pure) and 
acceptable with God, who showed his acceptance by filling him 
with his spirit and power— when the Holy Ghost came upon him, 
thus anointing him, thus he became the "Christ." [The word 
Christ meaning anointed.] 

This filling with the spirit was the begetting to a higher form of 
being, which he should receive when he had fully accomplished 
the offering— sacrifice of the human nature. This was a step up 
from human conditions, and is shown by pyramid h, on the 
spirit-begotten plane, M. On this plane (M) Jesus spent three and 
a-half years of his life— until it ended on the cross. Then, after 
being three days dead, he was raised to life —quickened of the 
spirit to the perfection of spiritual being, (i plane L) for now he 
was born of the spirit- "The first-born from the dead." "That 
which is born of the spirit, is spirit;" Jesus, therefore, at and after 
his resurrection, was a spirit-a spiritual being, and no longer a 
human being in any sense. 



True, after his resurrection he had power to, and did appear, as a 
man, in order that he might teach his disciples, and prove to 
them that he was no longer dead; but he was not a man, and 

R274: page 114 

no longer was controlled by human conditions, but could go and 
come as the wind (even when the doors were shut) and none 
could tell whence he came nor whither he went,— "so is every 
one that is born of the spirit."~John 3:8. 

From the moment of consecration (baptism) the human had been 
reckoned dead-and there the new nature began (begotten) plane, 
M,) which was completed at the resurrection, when he reached 
the perfect spiritual plane, L-raised a spiritual body. 

Forty days after his resurrection Jesus ascended to the majesty 
on high-the glory plane, K, (see pyramid k.) During the Gospel 
age he has been in glory, 1, "set down with the Father on his 
throne," and during this time he has been the head over his 
church on earth, -her director and guide. During all this Gospel 
age the church is in process of development, discipline and trial 
to the intent, that in the end, or harvest of the Gospel age, she 
may become his bride and joint-heir. Hence she has fellowship 
in his sufferings, that she may be also glorified together with 
him, (plane K,) when the proper time shall come. 

The steps of the church to glory are the same as those of her 
leader and Lord, Jesus (he hath set us an example that we should 
walk in his footsteps,) except that she starts for glory from a 
lower plane. Jesus, we have seen, came to the plane of human 
perfection, N, while all of the Adamic race are on a lower plane, 
R,~the plane of sin and enmity against God. The first thing then, 
for us to do is, to be justified, or get upon plane N. How is this 
accomplished-is it by good works? No, sinners can do no good 
works; we could not commend ourselves to God, so God 
commended "his love toward us (sinners, on the depraved plane, 
R,) in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us." Then 
the condition, upon which we come to the justified or perfect 
human plane, is that Christ died for our sins, redeemed us and 
lifted us up to the perfect plane. But, have we nothing to do with 
the matter? Nothing whatever, except to believe it. "We are 
justified (lifted to plane N) by faith." And "being justified by 
faith, we have peace with God," (Rom. 5:1) 

R274: page 115 

and are no longer enemies, but justified human sons, on the 
same plane as Adam and Jesus, except that they were actually 
perfect, while we are reckoned so, of God, and know it, because 
God's word tells us so; "ye are justified freely from all things." 
We stand in God's sight absolutely spotless, because Jesus' robe 
of righteousness cover all our imperfections. 



But remember that while justification is a blessed thing, it does 
not change your nature-you are still a human being, and unless 
you proceed you will never be a spiritual being—never be 
anything but a human being. You are saved from the wretched 
state of sin and alienation from God, and, instead of being a 
human sinner, you are a human son, and now because you are a 
son, God speaks to you as such, saying, "My son, give me thy 
heart:" that is, give yourself, all your earthly powers, will, 
talents-your all to me (as Jesus hath set us an example) and I 
will make you a son on a higher plane than the human; I will 
make you a spiritual being (i.e. a being with a spiritual body) 
like the risen Jesus- "the express image of the Father's person." 
If you will give up all of the earthly and consecrate it entirely to 
me and use it up in my service, I will give you a higher nature 
than the rest of your race-I will make you "partakers of the 
divine nature"— make you "heirs of God and joint-heirs with 
Christ; if so be that you suffer with him, that you may be also 
glorified together. "-Rom. 8:17. 

Do you value this prize set before us in the Gospel? Then lay 
aside every weight and run with patience the race, that you may 
win it. Works were not called for in lifting you out of sin. No, 
Jesus did all the works that could be done to that end, and lifted 
you by faith to plane N. But now, if you would go further, you 
cannot go without works: true, you must not lose your faith, else 
you will lose your justification; but being justified you are able 
(through the grace given unto you by your begetting of the 
Spirit) to have works, to bring forth fruit; and God demands it. 
He demands that you shall show your appreciation of the grand 
prize by giving all that you have and are 

R274: page 116 

for it, not to men, but to God— a sacrifice holy and acceptable to 
him-your reasonable service. When you present all these things, 
say: Lord, how would you have me deliver these things to you? 
Examine the Word for God's answer and you will probably hear 
his voice instructing you to deliver your all to him as Jesus and 
as Paul did, viz., by "doing good unto all men as you have 
opportunity, especially to the household of faith." Serving them 
with spiritual or natural food, clothing them in Christ's 
righteousness or with earthly raiment, as you may have ability or 
they have necessity. Having consecrated all, you are begotten of 
the spirit-you have reached plane M, and now, through the 
power given unto you, if you will use it, you will be able to do 
all of your Covenant and to come off conquerors, and more than 
conquerors through (the power or spirit of) him who loved us 
and bought us with his own precious blood. Thus walking in the 
footsteps of Jesus- 
Ne'er think the victory won, 
Nor once at ease sit down; 



Thine arduous work will not be done 
Till thou hast gained thy crown. 

The crown will be won when you, like Paul, "have fought a 
good fight and finished the course." You may not get the prize 
as soon as the race is finished and won, but may wait perhaps, as 
Paul did, until the entire body of Christ is complete, as he said: 
There is laid up for me a crown of righteousness which the Lord, 
the righteous Judge, shall give me at that day: (the day of the 
Lord--) and not to me only, but unto all those also who love his 
appearing. —2 Tim. 4:8. [We hope and believe that we shall not 
be obliged to wait in death as did Paul, but that we are living in 
the days of the completion of the church, which is the body of 
Christ, and shall be among those who shall not sleep in death, 
but be changed in a moment as Paul says: "Behold, I show you a 
mystery- we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed. "— 1 
Cor. 15:51.] 

R274: page 117 

Those of this class who sleep (a little flock) accounted worthy 
of THE resurrection (first) shall be raised spiritual bodies (vs. 
44) —plane L. And we (of the same class— overcomers) who are 
alive and remain-shall be changed-to the same plane of being 
[L] viz., spiritual: like unto Christ's glorious body. No longer 
weak, earthly, mortal, corruptible beings, we shall then be fully 
born of the spirit; heavenly, spiritual, incorruptible, immortal 
beings. "That which is born of the spirit is spirit. "-"I shall be 
satisfied when I awake in thy likeness." 

We know not how long it will be after our perfecting as spiritual 
beings (plane L) before we shall be glorified (plane K) with him: 
united with him in power. This uniting we understand to be the 
"marriage of the Lamb" to his Bride, when she shall thus— enter 
into the joys of her Lord. 

Look again at the chart-n, m, p, q, represent the nominal church 
as a whole, all claiming to be the body of Christ, n and m are 
both on the spiritual begotten plane-M. Both of these 
companies have existed throughout the Gospel age; both 

R275 : page 117 

have covenanted with God to become living sacrifices; both 
have been "accepted in the beloved" and begotten of the spirit as 
new creatures; but the difference is this: n represents the 
company who are fulfilling their covenant and are dead with 
Christ to earthly will, and aims, and all. They will be the 
overcomers— the Bride— the Body who will sit with Jesus in his 
throne, in glory-plane K, when the Gospel age is ended. These 
are a "little flock" to whom it is the Father's good pleasure to 
give the kingdom.— Luke 12:32. m represents the larger 
company of the spirit-begotten children; they have covenanted, 
but, alas ! they shrink back from the performance of it -they 



shrink from the death of the human will, etc. ; but God still loves 
them and therefore will bring them by the way of trouble and 
adversity- (ultimately resulting in the destruction of the human 
will)~to plane L-the perfect, spiritual plane. But they have lost 
the right to plane K-the throne of glory— because they were not 
overcomers. Notice that in the case of both of 

R275 : page 118 

these companies, the earthly nature must be destroyed; but in the 
case of the "great company," m, it is taken from them, while in 
the case of the "little flock" it is, as it was, with Jesus, the 
example— a willing sacrifice. Oh, if we prize our Father's 
approval, if we desire our Lord's smile, if we desire to be 
members of his body— his Bride— and to sit on his throne, we 
must fulfill our covenant of sacrifice! I beseech you, brethren, 
by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living 
sacrifice— holy, acceptable unto God, your reasonable service. 

p represents the majority of the nominal church. You will notice 
that they are not on plane M, but on plane N; they are justified, 
but not sanctified (not entirely consecrated to God,) not 
begotten, therefore, as spiritual beings at all. They are higher 
than the world, because they accept of Jesus as their ransom 
from sin, but they have not come high enough to be a part of the 
real church-the spiritual family, and unless they progress and 
sacrifice the human, they will never be anything but human, and 
in the resurrection they will be in the likeness of the earthly 
man, Adam, whereas those who sacrifice the human, will be in 
the likeness of the Lord- like unto Christ's glorious body, q 
represents a class connected with the nominal church who never 
did believe in Jesus as the sacrifice for their sins and who 
consequently are not justified-not on plane N. They are "wolves 
in sheep's clothing "-they are in no sense a part of the church- 
they belong to plane R, are part of the world and are out of place 
in, and a great injury to, the church. 

Thus, in a mixed condition, the church has existed throughout 
the Gospel age: as our Lord had foretold-the kingdom of 
heaven (church) is like unto wheat and tares in a field (the 
world) -"Let both grow together until the harvest. In the time of 
harvest I will say unto the reapers (the angels,) gather together 
the tares and bind them in bundles to burn (destroy) them, but 
gather the wheat into my barn.-Matt. 13:38,41,49. 

These words of our Lord show us that while he purposed that 
both should grow together during the age, he also purposed 

R275 : page 119 

that there should come a time of separating between these 
different elements. This division comes in the end of the age, for 
"the harvest is the end of the age. "-Vs. 39. 



During the Gospel age the seed has been growing and tares 
(counterfeits) also~"the good seed is the children of the 
kingdom" —the spiritual children-classes n and m-while "the 
tares are the children of the wicked one"— all of class q, and 
many (if not all) of class p-for no man can serve two masters - 
and "his servants you are to whom you render service." As class 
p does not consecrate its service to the Lord, doubtless it gives 
much of its time and talent really in opposition to God, and 
hence in the service of the enemy. Now notice on the chart the 
"harvest," or end of the Gospel age; notice the two parts into 
which it is divided-seven years and thirty-three years, the exact 
parallel of the Jewish age and harvest. This "harvest," like the 
Jewish one, is to be a time of trial and sifting, first upon the 
church, and afterward a time of wrath or pouring out of the 
"seven last plagues" upon the world, and such of the church as 
are not separated as wheat during the first seven years. The 
Jewish harvest is the "shadow" or pattern on the fleshly plane, of 
all that the Gospel church enjoys on the spiritual plane. (The two 
cherubim which were types, also teach this equality and likeness 
of the two ages. They were "of equal size and of equal 
measure.") 

The thing which tried (fleshly) Israel was the "stone of 
stumbling and rock of offence"— Jesus was present as the Lord 
of their harvest, (the disciples being reapers under his direction.) 
The truth as to his presence was the sickle, and it separated the 
"Israelites indeed in whom was no guile" from the nominal 
Jewish church, (and the true wheat there were but a fragment 
compared to the professors.) So, also, in the harvest of this age; 
Jesus comes a second time, not again a fleshly being, (not again 
to sacrifice,) but a spiritual body, to "take to himself his great 
power and reign" -blessing thereby all the families of the earth. 
(As already shown, spiritual bodies are invisible to humanity 
unless a miracle be performed.) 

R275 : page 120 

The second advent of Jesus, leaving the plane of glory, K, and 
coming to the unglorified spiritual plane, L, is shown by figure 
r. As has been stated heretofore, we believe that the prophets, 
etc.,* teach that we are now in the "harvest" of this age; that our 
Lord has come, and the work of harvest, or separating wheat 
from tares, has been progressing since A.D. 1874. The first work 
of the Lord in this harvest will be to separate the true from the 
false, and the truly consecrated children from the unconsecrated 
ones. This work we believe is now going on. 

The nominal church, because of her mixed condition, the Lord 
calls confusion, or "Babylon;" and during this harvest he 
purposes ripening, separating, and perfecting the different 
classes in the church- wheat will be separated from tares, and 
ripe wheat from unripe, etc. Class n are a "first-fruits," of the 
wheat, and, after being separated in the spirit of their minds, will 



in his due time become his Bride and be caught away to be 
forever with her Lord~and like him. The separating of the little 
flock from Babylon is shown by figure s. She will ultimately 
become one with Jesus and bear his name and share his glory. 
The glorified Christ, head and body, is shown by figure w. 
Figures t,u, and v represent the "Babylon" -nominal church 
falling-going to pieces during "the time of trouble," or "day of 
the Lord." Though this may seem to be a dreadful thing, yet it 
may be shown to be of great advantage to all the true wheat. 
Babylon falls because she is not what she claims to be. "Babylon 
is fallen, is fallen, and become the habitation of devils, and the 
hold of every foul spirit and a cage of every unclean and hateful 
bird."— Rev. 18:2. The church nominal contains many, many 
hypocrites, who have associated themselves with her because of 
her honorable standing in the eyes of the world, who, by their 
conduct, etc., are gradually making Babylon a stench in the 
nostrils of the world. The Lord always knew of them, but let 
them alone until the harvest, and now will "gather out of his 
kingdom 

R275 : page 121 

(church) all things that offend and them which do iniquity, and 
cast them into a furnace of fire (trouble).... Then shall the 
righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father." 
Matt. 13:41. The trouble coming upon the church will, we 
believe, be occasioned by the overspreading of Infidelity and 
Spiritualism, both of which will be trials, because the church 
holds so many doctrines contrary to God's Word. And every one 
who has built his faith upon Christ with anything else than the 
truths of the Word-gold, silver, precious stones, will find 
himself sorely beset during this time of wrath (fire); for all 
errors of men- wood, hay, stubble- will be consumed, s, 
represents those who built with truth-gold, etc., and 
consequently were separated from Babylon, t, represents the 
"great company," on the plane M-begotten of the spirit- wheat 
not fully ripened at the time of the gathering of the first-fruits 
(s.) They built upon the rock, Christ Jesus, but with wood, etc., 
of human creeds and isms. Such shall suffer loss (in this fire,) 
but himself shall be saved (so as by fire.)— 1 Cor. 3:10-15. They 
lose the prize of the throne; but, as already shown, themselves 
shall be saved and reach the full birth of the spirit, become 
spiritual beings -plane L. [Several Scriptures seem to teach that 
this company will not reach perfection on the spiritual plane L, 
until the "harvest"-and its trouble are over; while the little 
flock, s, are evidently changed before the "seven last plagues" 
are poured out, as they have some work to do in connection with 
their execution.] To return to the "great company," t: they were 
the Lord's, but they were so overcharged with the affairs of this 
life, the world and a worldly church, that, while the Bride was 
being separated from Babylon, their ears were dull of hearing; 
they came not out when the cry was made: The harvest is come- 



-"Babylon is fallen... come out of her my people that ye be not 
partakers of her sins, and receive not of her plagues. "--Rev. 
18:2-4; (vs. 21) And she shall be cast as a great millstone into 
the sea~(the world on plane R.) A view of this company (t) 
during the trouble, after the Bride company (s) has been taken 
and the "marriage 

R275 : page 122 

of the Lamb is come," is furnished us in Rev. 19:2,5-7. It is after 
"Babylon" has fallen to pieces, and they are liberated from her 
chains and influences, and come to realize that tares and earthly 
organization never were God's church; but, that he always had in 
view the true members of Jesus' body~"whose names are 
written in heaven." (Vs. 5), "A voice came out of the throne (w) 
saying: Praise our God all ye his servants and ye 

R276 : page 122 

that fear him, both small and great;" then the answer of the 
"great company," t (after Babylon, the harlot church-church and 
world united, an improper union, called harlotry— has been 
judged, see vs. 2), saying, "Alleluia, for the Lord God 
omnipotent reigneth (they recognize the reign as commenced- 
by the overthrow of 'Babylon the great') let us be glad and 
rejoice and give honor to him, for the marriage of the Lamb is 
come, (Greek past tense-is accomplished) and his wife hath 
made herself ready." They will, no doubt, be greatly dismayed 
to realize that the Bride has been completed and united to the 
Lord, and that they, because blinded and overcharged, have lost 
that great prize; but seemingly (the beauty of God's plan, which 
they now begin to discern as one of love, both for them and for 
all the world of mankind, quite overcomes their grief, and they 
shout, Alleluia!— the glorious reign of righteousness is begun.) 

Then, too, note the abundant provision of the Lord: the message 
is sent to them— though you are not of the Bride, you may be 
present at the great celebration- "Blessed is he that is called to 
the marriage supper of the Lamb," (vs. 9.) This company is 
called to make use of the Lord's chastisements and to come fully 
into harmony with him and his plan, and they shall ultimately 
reach the position next to the Bride-on the spiritual plane L. 
The time of trouble, as it will affect the world, will succeed the 
fall of Babylon and will be an overturning and disintegration of 
all human governments and of society, preparing the world for 
righteous and equitable government. During the time of trouble, 
fleshly Israel, which was cast off until the fullness of the 
Gentiles should be come in, will be restored to 

R276 : page 123 

God's favor, because the Gospel church, or spiritual Israel, will 
be completed. These, during the Millennial age, shall be the 



chief nation of earth-at the head of all on the earthly plane of 
being- "a praise in the whole earth." 



*The Chronology, time proofs, etc., can be had in a book 
entitled "Millennial Day Dawn," soon to be published from this 
office. 

Their restoration, as well as that of the world in general, will be 
a gradual one, requiring all of the Millennial age to fully 
accomplish it. During that thousand years' reign of Christ, death 
will be gradually swallowed up or destroyed. Its various stages- 
sickness, pain and weakness, as well as the tomb, will gradually 
give place before the Great Restorer's power, until at the end of 
that age the great pyramid of our chart will be complete, x. The 
Christ-the head of angels and men, next to the Father, y. The 
great company, spiritual beings, like unto the angels, z. Israel 
after the flesh at the head of earthly creatures, and W, the world 
of men restored to perfection of being like the head of the 
human race, Adam (before sin.) The world, as we have already 
seen, are to be resurrected, or again brought into existence, the 
penalty for their sin being paid for them in Christ's death. Their 
bringing again into being will be a restoring, and will be due 
during the Millennial age-the times (years) of restitution. -Acts 
3:21 . It requires all of the Millennial age to accomplish the work 
of restoring to the perfection of manhood. They will then be like 
Adam, except that they will have enjoyed a greater range of 
knowledge than he possessed, both of Good and Evil. They will 
be mentally in the image of God; for this is a part of God's plan, 
that under the new covenant he will take away the stony heart 
out of their flesh, (not take away their flesh and make them 
spiritual beings,) and give them a heart of flesh— again as 
Adam's, an image of God. "This is the covenant I will make with 
them after those days, saith the Lord, I will put my laws in their 
hearts, and in their minds will I write them. "-See Heb. 10:16; 
Jer. 31:29; Ezek. 36:26-32. Sin is now written on the hearts of 
all humanity: This must first be blotted out and the former 
image-the law— of God reinstated before men will be perfect 
men. This work is called 

R276 : page 124 

restitution, and this God hath promised to men. When restored 
they will be in no danger of falling, because no longer liable to 
mistake evil for good-knowing both. In Rev. 20:9, we learn that 
some will be destroyed in the end of the Millennial reign, 
because when presented full opportunity to become perfect men, 
and in harmony with God and his law of love, they chose evil. 
Such die the second death, from which there is no resurrection, 
nor restitution. When we look at our Father's great plan for the 
exaltation of the church, and the blessing through her, of Israel, 
and all the families of the earth, by a restitution of all things, it 



reminds us of the song of the angels: "Glory to God in the 
highest; on earth peace, good will toward men!" That will be the 
consummation of God's plan- "the gathering together of all 
things in (under) Christ." O the height and depth, the length and 
breadth, of the love of God which passeth all understanding! 
Who will say that God's plan has been a failure then? Who will 
say that he has not overruled evil for good and made both the 
wrath of man and of devils to praise him? 

THE TABERNACLE OF THE WILDERNESS 

teaches the same general lesson as the chart of the ages, and we 
place it alongside, that the different planes or steps to the Holy 
of Holies may be duly noted and appreciated. Outside the court 
of the tabernacle lies the whole world in sin~on the depraved 
plane. Entering through the "gate" into the court we become 
believers or justified persons. Those who go forward in 
consecration, press to the door of the tabernacle, and, entering 
in, become priests-are strengthened by the "shew-bread," 
enlightened by the candlestick, and enabled to offer acceptable 
sacrifices to God, by Jesus Christ, at the "Golden Altar." (Notice 
the corresponding planes, M and N, on the chart.) Finally, when 
sacrifices are all over, in the resurrection, they enter the perfect 
spiritual, or most holy place (plane L), and then are associated 
with Jesus in the glory of the kingdom. "Praise ye the Lord!" 



R276 : page 125 

part vn. 



THE RESURRECTION. 

THE death and resurrection of a human body as a thing distinct 
and separate from the intelligent being, is never mentioned in 
the Scriptures. We never read that Abraham's body died, nor that 
Jesus' body died, nor that any one's body died. 

Being signifies existence, and there can be no being or existence 
without life and body both. Withdraw life, and the being or 
existence ceases, for life is but a power or principle, the same in 
the lower animals as in man—the difference in qualities between 
man and the brute consisting not in a different kind of life, but in 
a different kind of body. 

Any being is properly called a soul or person. This is the 
Scriptural sense and usage of the word soul, so little understood; 
viz., Being (life and body combined). Thus we read of the 
creation of Adam- "And the Lord God formed man of the dust 
of the ground and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life 



(ruach-the same breath said to be given to beasts, birds and 
fishes) and man became a living soul," (being.)--Gen. 2:7. 

We cite a few illustrations out of a multitude showing the Bible 
usage of the word soul, showing that it signifies being. Lev. 5:2, 
"If a soul (being-person) touch any unclean thing he shall be 
unclean." Vs. 4, "If a soul (being) swear." Vs. 15, "If a soul 
(being) commit a trespass." Lev. 22:11, "If the priest buy any 
soul (being) with his money." Prov. 6:7, "If he steal to satisfy his 
soul (being) when he is hungry." Jesus said, "My soul (being) is 
exceeding sorrowful even unto death." Matt. 26:38, "Thou shalt 
love the Lord... with all thy soul" (being.) Matt. 22:37, The rich 
man said, "Soul (being, self), thou hast much goods laid up for 
many years; take thine ease, eat, drink and be merry. But God 
said... fool this night thy soul (being, existence) will (cease) be 
required of thee. "--Luke 12:19. "For what is a man profited if he 
shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul (existence, 
being,) or, What shall a 

R276 : page 126 

man give in exchange for his soul?" (being, existence.)~Matt. 
16:26. How many illustrations of this Scripture are furnished us 
in every-day life: Men labor for wealth, to gain as much as 
possible of the whole world, only to find when they are rich that 
wealth has come at the expense of health. How many of those 
who spend their life in laying up earthly treasure, find that their 
very being-existence-has been sacrificed in gaining the wealth. 
Then what would they not give to get back again health, etc.? 
They lavish their wealth upon physicians, traveling, etc., but it is 
of little use: They made a poor exchange, when they gave their 
being for money. Some "purified their souls (beings -lived 
more purely) in obeying the truth."-l Pet. 1:22. "The law of the 
Lord is perfect converting (changing) the soul" (Being). -Psa. 
19:7. Other souls (beings) were subverted, turned from the truth 
by error. Acts 15:24, Other, unstable souls (beings, persons,) 
were beguiled. -2 Pet. 2:14. 

With this view of the meaning of the word soul, viz., that it 
includes all being or existence (a combination of life and body), 
let us inquire-what dies— the principle of life, or the body? We 
answer, neither; the life principle is one which pervades all 
creation, just as does electricity. This principle of life pervades 
and is an essential element of all being, in tree, in fish, in fowl, 
in beast, in man, in angels, and in the fullest degree in God, who 
is its source or fountain. This principle cannot be said to die; 
though, if it be withdrawn from any creature to whom God has 
given it, that creature will die-cease to have being. Thus the 
breath of life is taken from beasts, birds, fish, and man. 

R277 : page 126 

Neither can it be properly said that the body dies, since, 
separate from the principle of life, the body never had life, and 



consequently could not die. The body, without the spirit (of life), 
is dead, and that which is dead cannot die. 

WHA T THEN IS DEA TH--WHA T DIES? 

We answer, the being dies-ceases to have being or existence. 
Death is the dissolution, or separation of the things which, 
combined, constitute being, -namely, life and body. Thus when 
the spirit of life returns to God, who gave it (all nature is his 
reservoir of life), then the being is dead, and soon the body will 
return to the dust, "from whence it was taken." We see clearly, 
then, that not the body, but the being-called in Scripture soul- 
dies. Let us notice some instances in which this is stated in so 
many words: Job 31:39, (marginal reading,) "Cause the soul of 

R277 : page 127 

owners thereof to expire" -(dissolve, die.) "Their soul dieth in 
youth, etc." Job 36:14, margin, "To deliver their soul (being) 
from death and to keep them alive in famine."— Psa. 33:19. "He 
spared not their soul (being) from death" (dissolution.)- Psa. 
78:50. He keepeth back his soul (being) from the pit" (deaths- 
Job 33:18. "He shall deliver his soul (being) from the grave. "- 
Psa. 89:48. All souls (beings) are mine... the soul (being) that 
sinneth it shall die."-Ezek. 18:4. It was the soul (being) of Jesus 
which was given for our ransom. "Thou shalt make his soul 
(being) an offering for sin".... "He shall see of the travail of his 
soul and be satisfied." "He hath poured out his soul (being) unto 
death."-Isa. 53:10-12. But, (Acts 2:31,) "His soul (being) was 
not left in hell," (hades-the condition of death.) He was raised 
to being again, but a being of a higher order -having a grander 
than human form or body- "Put to death in the flesh, but 
quickened by the spirit." And now we come to the point- What 
will be raised up, in the resurrection? The body, says some one. 
Not so; I answer, it is the BEING that God promises to raise up. 
It once existed, and lost existence, and is to be raised up to 
existence or being again. Men can resurrect a body from the 
tomb (that is, bring a body out of a tomb to the surface); but 
only God's power can resurrect or bring to existence again a 
being who has died. We see then that resurrection means the 
restoring of being. Now, "with what body do they (these beings) 
come" (into being again)? is a question asked by Paul.— 1 Cor. 
15:35. [We have seen that being is made up of two elements- 
body, and spirit of life; hence, if restored to being, they must 
have some sort of bodies provided them.] Paul proceeds to tell 
us, that, while each must have a body, yet in the resurrection all 
beings will not have the same kind of bodies. He says that there 
are two general sorts or kinds of bodies-the earthly or natural 
bodies, and the spiritual-heavenly bodies. There are perfect 
illustrations of these two kinds of bodies: Adam was the head of 
the earthly, human family, and a pattern of the perfect human 
being. Christ Jesus, at his resurrection, was the first born from 



the dead to the perfect new nature, the spiritual, and he, "thus 
born of the spirit, is spirit. "--John 3:6. His is a sample or 
illustration of a perfect spiritual being. 

All humanity belongs to one of two classes: either they are 
natural men—the ADAMIC SEED, or they have been begotten 
of the spirit through the word of truth and have given themselves 
up to Christ, that the will of God might be done in them; this is 
the newly begotten man; he belongs to the SPIRITUAL SEED. 

R277 : page 128 

Now, says Paul, "God giveth it a body as it hath pleased him and 
to every seed his own body." That is, those who have, during the 
present life, become partakers of the divine nature, must needs 
have a divine form-a "spiritual body," "like unto Christ's 
glorious body," while those who have not thus changed nature 
would have no change of body. When again brought into being, 
they will have natural, human bodies. 

The resurrection, which some will have, to spiritual conditions 
of being-with spiritual bodies—is in Scripture designated as 
special, by calling it "the first resurrection," first in importance - 
-chief. It is also frequently designated by the article THE (very 
noticeable in the Greek text; but less so in our English 
translations); for illustration— notice the following instances, 
(Luke 20:35,) "They that shall be accounted worthy to obtain 
that world and THE resurrection neither marry nor are given in 
marriage." Again, Paul always taught that there would be "a 
resurrection, both of the just and the unjust," yet he says: If by 
any means I might attain unto THE resurrection. -Phil. 3:11, 
(the first-to spiritual condition and being.) Again he designates 
this resurrection to spiritual being as "his resurrection," because 
Jesus was the first one so raised to spiritual being. "That I might 
know him, and the power of HIS resurrection (i.e., that I might 
be raised as he was raised). Then follows an account of how he 
might attain to that glorious resurrection to spiritual being, viz., 
"knowing the fellowship of his sufferings and being made 
conformable unto his death."— Phil. 3:10. 

None will attain to this chief resurrection, except they 
consecrate themselves entirely to God's service. "We beseech 
you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that you present 
your bodies (and all their powers, talents, reputations -all) a 
living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, your reasonable 
service. " 

So shall you be among those who shall be in THE first 
resurrection, for "blessed and holy are all they that have part in 
THE FIRST resurrection: on such the second death hath no 
power; but they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and reign 
with him a thousand years. "-Rev. 20:6. We can know little 
about the perfection, and grandeur, and powers of those who 
shall become spiritual beings, except that they will be "like unto 



Christ's glorious body. "--Phil. 3:21. As the apostle says: It doth 
not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when he shall 
appear we shall be like him."~l John 3:2. What an answer is 
this to those who claim that nothing is real, but a flesh-and-bone 
body ! Who would insist that Jesus, after his resurrection, 

R277 : page 129 

was the very same flesh and bones he was before he died? Was 
that a glorious body? No, that was the body he took for the 
suffering of death~but being put to death in the flesh, he was 
quickened by the spirit, "a life-giving spirit."— 1 Cor. 15:45. 
Now he is the express image of the Father's person. Is the Father 
and Creator of all things simply a great man? Nay, verily, "God 
is a spirit." "It doth not yet appear, what... but we shall be like 
him." Away with that grossness of materialism, which can 
realize nothing higher than the natural, human plane! Let us take 
Paul's account. There are human natural bodies and there are 
spiritual bodies. Both will be glorious, but the glory of the 
human, earthly, (terrestrial,) is one thing, and the glory of the 
spiritual, heavenly, celestial, is quite another and quite a 
different thing. —See 1 Cor. 15:40. The restored world of 
mankind shall be indeed glorious men, like the perfect head of 
the human race, but that glory will not compare with "the glory 
that shall be revealed in us," who have given up the human 
nature and become partakers of the divine nature, into the 
perfection of which we hope soon to be ushered. Like the 
earthly one (Adam) such will they be also that are earthly 
(human) —Like the heavenly one, (Christ, when "born from the 
dead,") such will they be also that are heavenly (now begotten to 
the heavenly nature by the word of God through the spirit, then 
to be born into the perfection of that being), vs. 48. 

Paul gives us a slight account of the great change from natural to 
spiritual, which awaits those who have part in THE first 
resurrection: Vs. 42 informs us, "Thus is THE resurrection of 
THE dead: It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it 
is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, 
it is raised in power; it is sown an animal body, it is raised a 
spiritual body." [Diaglott.] 

ORDER IN RESURRECTION. 

All of God's works and plans are full of order: It has well been 
said-Order is heaven's first law. While there shall be a 
resurrection both of the just and unjust, and all shall be made 
alive, and while some shall be made alive as perfect spiritual 
beings, and others in the likeness of the earthly one, Adam, yet 
there are times and seasons and orders for all this, as Paul says: 
"But every man in his own order, Christ the first fruits— (Jesus 
the head and we the "members of his body"-yet "all ONE 
body" -The head raised one thousand eight hundred years 



R277 : page 130 ago, the body very soon, we trust,) afterward 
they that are Christ's at his (parousia) presence—the "great 
company." 

These are the first orders and include all of those who are of the 
spiritual family, but there are others-every man in his own 
order-and when all of these orders are complete (Paul mentions 
only those in which the church's interest centered), when all 
have been brought to life and perfection either on the human or 
spiritual plane (except those who die the "second death"), "then 
(at the end of the one thousand years reign of Christ and the 
saints) cometh the end," "when he shall have put down all rule 
and all authority and power." For he must reign until he hath put 
all enemies under his feet-'The last enemy that shall be 
destroyed (during that one thousand years reign) is death" 
(Adamic) in all its forms; sickness, and pain, as well as the 
tomb,— "Then the end" will have come— the end of sin on earth, 
the end of the great work of ransoming mankind and bringing 
them into full harmony with their Creator. Then -the Son shall 
deliver up the kingdom- dominion of earth to God even the 
Father; that God may be all-and his will done in all. —See vs. 
23-28. 



R278 : page 130 

REVELATION 20:5. 

THE first clause of this verse, viz. -"the rest of the dead lived 
not again, until the thousand years were finished, "-has been the 
cause of much confusion and error among Christians. It is out of 
harmony with the teachings of both the Old and New 
Testaments, inasmuch as it places and fixes the resurrection of 
all except those who have part in the "first" (or resurrection to 
spiritual being) beyond and after the Millennial (one thousand 
years) reign of Christ and his Bride, while all other Scriptures 
assert that all the families of the earth are to be blessed during 
that reign; that it is for this purpose of blessing all mankind, 
Jesus "takes his great power and reigns;" that the period of the 
reign is the "Times (years) of Restitution spoken by the mouth 
of all the holy prophets," which are due to commence not at the 
end of the one thousand years, but at its beginning- at the 
second coming of Christ. -Acts 3:19-21. 

The Scripture we have just been considering (1 Cor. 15:23-28) 
asserts most positively that it is during and not after his reign 
(one thousand years) that Christ will put down all enemies and 

R278: page 131 

destroy the last enemy, death (Adamic). If death is destroyed 
during the reign, how would it be possible for any to be held by 
it until after the thousand years were finished? 



Now, thank God, we can see clearly the cause of this inharmony 
--(probably because now is the due time~the book of 
Revelations has not been until recently understood). While every 
word of God is good, not so every word of man, and we now 
find that the above words of Rev. 20:5-"The rest of the dead 
lived not again until the thousand years were finished"-- are 
man's words and not God's. 

During the "dark ages" of Papacy's reign came the "great falling 
away" (2 Thes. 2:3,) from about the year 300 to 1600 A.D. 
During that carnival of heresy several portions of the Bible were 
so altered as to appear to give support to Papacy's teachings- 
(this was in the early part of her reign, for afterward she 
endeavored to destroy the Scriptures under the pretence that she- 
-the church-through her ministers was a higher authority.) 

The finding in recent years of two very ancient MSS. reveals to 
us several interpolations of words and verses which we earnestly 
hope the new version (soon to be published) will omit, they 
being not God's words, but man's. 

These interpolations (not very numerous) are of a more or less 
serious character, the following being probably the most 
important, viz., the portion of Rev. 20:5, now under 
consideration; and John 21:25; and the words "For thine is the 
kingdom, the power and the glory forever. Amen" -in Matt. 
6:13; also the words "in heaven the Father, the Word and the 
Holy Ghost; and these three agree in one; and there are three 
that bear witness in earth" -parts of 1 John 5:7,8. 

It may not be generally known that Papacy had succeeded in 
destroying nearly all Greek copies of the New Testament. After 
"The Reformation" had made the words of Jesus and the 
apostles to be once more reverenced and esteemed among 
believers, as of greater authority than "the voice of the church," 
our present "authorized version" (authorized by King James of 
England,) was published in the English language A.D. 161 1 . At 
the time of its arrangement and publication, but few Greek MSS. 
were known to exist, and only eight were used in the preparation 
of the "Latin Vulgate" from which it was translated, and none of 
those were older than the tenth century. Since then some six 
hundred and sixty MSS. have come to light, among them two 
very ancient ones written between the third and fourth centuries- 
-the "Vatican MS. No. 1209," and the 

R278 : page 132 

"Sinaitic MS." (the latter-the very oldest— was found complete 
A.D. 1859). These MSS. are especially valuable because written 
before such gross errors had crept into the church and the 
"falling away" had reached its climax. 

It is by the light shed by these ancient MSS. that we are enabled 
to separate between the Word of God and that of men, and to 



learn that the texts referred to (and some others) are 
interpolations and not a part of the divinely inspired Scriptures. 

As to the motives and errors which may have led to these 
unwarranted interpolations of the text, we may be able to offer a 
suggestion, viz., the last mentioned (1 John 5:7,8) was probably 
intended to give authority and sanction to the doctrine of the 
"Trinity." As to the interpolation in Matt. 6:13, and Rev. 20:5, 
we may each be able to offer a reason, when it is remembered 
that Papacy claims that it is now the reigning kingdom of God- 
that the Millennial (one thousand years) reign of Christ and his 
saints over earth has been fulfilled by Papacy's reign as~ 
Mistress of the world. As we understand it, their claim is that 
since 1793 A.D. is the "little season" in which the devil is loosed 
(Protestantism being his agency for deceiving), a fulfillment, 
they claim, of Rev. 20:9. 

Holding this error, is it surprising that they wanted something 
added to the prayer- "Thy kingdom come" -so as to make it 
appear to justify the thought that it had already come? This is 
the thought conveyed in the words added- "For thine is the 
kingdom, and the power, and the glory. Amen." 

With this teaching, that the Papal dominion constituted the reign 
of Christ over the nations, yet possessing no power to resurrect 
the dead, is it strange that they desired to have some Scripture 
say that "The rest of the dead lived not again until the one 
thousand years were finished"? (The first resurrection they 
spiritualized.) 

From our standpoint we recognize the Papal system as being the 
counterfeit of the true church which in due time shall be exalted 
to "power over the nations," not to bind men with chains of 
ignorance and superstition, but to bless all the families of the 
earth. When the true King shall— "take to himself his great 
power and reign" then we can truly say, "Thine is the kingdom, 
the power, and the glory forever." 

The words, "The rest of the dead lived not again until the 
thousand years were finished"-are not found in any MSS. 
written previous to the fifth century, and if we notice the 
connections in which they are found, we will see that they are as 

R278 : page 133 

much out of harmony there as we have just seen it to be 
incongruous with the general teachings of other parts of the 
Bible. The succeeding clause of the same verse is by this 
interpolation forced to say that "this (after the one thousand 
years) is the first resurrection." Now read verses 4-6, omitting 
the interpolated clause, and we have harmony and sense-'They 
lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years: This is the first 
resurrection; on such the second death hath no power, but they 



shall be priests of God and of Christ and shall reign with him a 
thousand years." 



R278 : page 134 

PART VIII. 



THE NARROW WAY TO LIFE. 

"Enter ye in at the strait gate, because strait is the gate and 
narrow is the way that leadeth unto life, and few there be that 
find it; for wide is the gate and broad is the way that leadeth to 
destruction, and many there be which go in thereat."-- Matt. 
7:13,14. 

ALL life is the same. It all issues from the same fountain. God 
is that fountain. In him, and in him only, is life unlimited, 
exhaustless, ever-continuous and uncontrolled by any 
circumstances. The name, which describes this perfection of life, 
is Immortality. It signifies death-proof, consequently disease and 
pain-proof. Many, who have not closely noted the scriptural use 
of the word immortal, have used it with reference to man and to 
angels, but Scripture ascribes it to God, the Father, only, as we 
will prove shortly. 

The sun is the great fountain of light to earth, illuminating all 
things, yet it causes many varieties of color and shades of light, 
according to the nature of the object upon which it shines. The 
same sunlight shining upon a diamond, a brick, and upon 
various kinds of glass, produces strikingly different effects. The 
light is the same, but the objects upon which it shines differ in 
their capacity to receive and transmit it. So, too, with life. It all 
flows from the one inexhaustible fountain, and is all of the same 
kind. The oyster has life, but its organism is such that it cannot 
make use of much life, just as the brick cannot reflect much of 
the light of the sun. So with each of the higher grades of life in 
beast, fish and fowl. Like the various kinds of glass under 
sunlight, so these various creatures show forth differently the 
various qualities and powers they possess, when life comes in 
and animates their bodily powers. And as the diamond is so 
perfect in its nature, and so adapted that it can receive fully and 
reflect, so as to look as though it possessed within itself the 
light, and were itself a miniature sun, so with mankind, one of 
the master-pieces of God's creation, made only "a little lower 
than the angels." This perfect creature was made so complete in 
his 

R278 : page 135 

organism (before sin marred it) as to be able to receive and 
retain life, and never grow dim. Adam was formed grandly and 



perfectly, and filled with life. He was more grand than any other 
earthly creature, because of the grander organism, mental and 
physical. Yet let us remember, that, as the diamond could reflect 
no light, except when shone upon by the sun, so man could 
possess and enjoy the life given him only so long as he was 
supplied from the fountain-God. Man is no more a fount of life 
than a diamond is a fount of light, and one of the very strongest 
reasons for knowing that we have no exhaustless supply of life 
in ourselves is, that since sin entered, our race has lost life. 
Millions have gone and are going down into death. God 

R279 : page 135 

had arranged that man should have access to life-giving trees, 
and that, by continually partaking of their fruit, he should 
continually live,~"eat, and live forever. "--Gen. 3:22. 

Sin entering, our race lost its right to life, and was shut away 
from the trees of life (plural). And the glory and beauty of 
humanity is dependent on the supply of life, just as the beauty of 
the diamond is dependent on the supply of sunlight. When sin 
deprived humanity of the right to life and its supply was 
withheld, immediately the jewel began to lose its perfection of 
brilliancy and beauty, and finally it is deprived of its last vestige 
in the tomb. "His beauty consumes away like a moth."-- Psa. 
39:1 1. And so "In Adam all die." But God has provided Christ a 
ransom for sin, and soon in [by] Christ shall all be made alive- 
be brought back to the original perfection of the race. As the 
diamond loses its beauty and brilliancy when the light is 
withdrawn, but is lighted up again with the sunrise, so mankind 
loses life when God withdraws life from him. "Yea, man giveth 
up the ghost [life], and where is he?" -Job 14:10. "His sons 
come to honor, and he knoweth it not, and they are brought low, 
but he perceiveth it not of them."— Vs. 21. "For there is no work, 
nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave whither 
thou goest."-Eccl. 9:10. But the jewel is to have its beauty 
restored, and is again to reflect perfectly the Creator's image, 
"when the sun of righteousness shall arise with healing in his 
wings." Because of the sin-offering and sacrifice of Christ, all 
shall go forth from this condition of death. "All that are in their 
graves shall come forth." There shall be a restitution of all 
things, a restoring to the condition (as at first) when man can 
receive back again, and richly enjoy life as it is provided for him 
in full measure from the fountain— God. 

But we asserted that we would prove scripturally that divinity 

R279 : page 136 

is the only fountain of life, and that all other forms of life- 
angels, men, fish, birds, beasts, etc., -are only vessels which 
hold each its full, all differing in capacity and quality, according 
to the will of the Maker. First, then, we read that God "only hath 
immortality. " [The fullness of life which could not cease under 



any circumstances.] — 1 Tim. 6:16; and 1:17. "Who only hath 
immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach 
unto; whom no man hath seen, nor can see." "Unto the king 
eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor and 
glory for ever and ever." 

Secondly, we learn that the Father, who alone possessed this 
quality originally, has bestowed it upon our Lord Jesus Christ - 
his son- "the first-born of every creature;" "the only begotten;" 
"the express image of his Father's person;" he who was "made 
so much better than the angels;" "for unto which of the angels 
said he [the Father] : Thou art my son; this day have I begotten 
thee."~Heb. 1:4,5. This one, we are told, partakes of the Father's 
nature, and consequently of the same principle of immortal life. 
So we read~"As the Father hath life in himself, [God's life is in 
himself, and not drawn from other sources, or dependent upon 
other things,] so hath he given to the Son to have life in 
himself. "--John 5:26. 

Thus we see that immortality is possessed only by Father and 
Son. But amazing news!~God purposes to call out of the human 
race a few, a "little flock," who by obedience to certain 
conditions, shall become "sons of God," and these, instead of 
continuing to be of the human nature— men—shall become "new 
creatures;" "partakers of the divine nature." These, when born 
from the dead in the resurrection (as Jesus was) will have the 
divine form (body), being made "like unto Christ's glorious 
body;" (and he is "the express image of the Father," as above 
quoted) not a natural body, but a spiritual body, for "it is raised a 
spiritual body," and "that which is born of the spirit is spirit." 
We shall be changed, but "it doth not yet appear what we shall 
be, but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like 
him" who is "the express image of the Father's person," and 
share in the "glory to be revealed." Nay, more, not only will 
these be in the divine form and nature, but being of that nature, 
they will possess the same perfection of life— Immortality. 
Hence we read: "And this is the record that God hath given unto 
us eternal life, and this life is in his Son"— "He that hath the Son 
hath life; he that hath not the Son hath not life" (immortal).— 1 
John 5:11. 

R279 : page 137 

Again it is written: "Thou hast given him (Jesus) power over all 
flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou (the 
Father) hast given him.— John 17:2. "And this is the promise 
which he hath promised us, even eternal life."— 1 John 2:25. And 
though it is promised as a gift, yet it is only to a certain class 
that he ever agreed to give it, viz., to those believers in Jesus 
who by patient continuance in well-doing SEEK for glory, 
honor and IMMORTALITY. "-Rom. 2:7. To those who flee 
from iniquity and "follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, 
love, patience, meekness"— who "fight the good fight of faith 



(and thus), lay hold on eternal life, whereunto thou art also 
called." --1 Tim. 6:12. 

But the way is a difficult one, hard to walk in. Just how difficult 
the way is, may be judged from Jesus' words: "Strait is the gate 
and narrow is the way that leadeth unto life, and few there be 
that find it" (life). It is not only to believe on him, but to follow 
him, and obey his voice- "My sheep hear (obey) my voice and I 
know them and they follow me, ("take up their cross and follow 
me,") and I give unto them eternal life." John 10:28. Yes, dearly 
beloved, if we would be of those who receive immortality, let us 
seek it earnestly. Let us have our "fruit unto holiness (entire 
consecration) and the end thereof (will be) everlasting life."— 
Rom. 6:22. 

The new, divine nature begins with us here, when, after belief 
on Jesus as the ransom from sin, we covenant with God that we 
will "die with him that we may also live with him." From that 
moment we are recognized as God's children, and "he sends 
forth his spirit into our hearts," "whereby (we) are sealed 
(marked off as separate from the world) unto the day of 
redemption." This is our new life begun. By this new life we are 
to crucify the old will— our will as natural men— and while in the 
world "to live according to God in the spirit." The spirit in us is 
the germ of immortality. Thus we even now are partakers of the 
divine nature, but the fullness is to be reached when we enter 
into life. We are now begotten of the spirit by the word of truth 
that we should be a kind of first fruits, but we do not reach birth 
until we are raised (from the dead) spiritual bodies. Our new 
nature lives in these mortal bodies as in a house- "But we know 
that if our earthly house of this (building) were dissolved, we 
have a building of God," etc. -our spiritual, immortal condition. 

But, beloved, the new life would be easily choked, and Paul 
assures us that when thus begotten of the spirit through the 

R279 : page 138 

truth, "if we live after the flesh we shall die (lose our life 
principle), but if we through the spirit do mortify (put to death) 
the deeds of the body (human nature) we (as new creatures) 
shall live;" for the sons of God are all those led by the spirit of 
God. -Rom. 8:13,14. The work of crucifying must take hold 
upon all our actions- "For he (begotten of the spirit) that soweth 
to the flesh (lives in wilful sin) shall of the flesh reap corruption; 
but he that soweth to the spirit shall of the spirit reap life 
everlasting."— Gal. 6:8. It is a rugged, steep, narrow way that 
leads to life, and were it not that strength is furnished us for each 
successive step of the journey, we never could reach the goal; 
but our Captain's word encourages us-"Be of good cheer, I have 
overcome," "my grace is sufficient for thee." The whole race 
was in the broad road and going down to destruction -death- 
until Jesus opened the narrow way, bringing life and immortality 



to light through the Gospel; i.e., he made it possible for us to 
reach it, by paying our ransom on the cross and making us free 
from sin, and becoming also our example and leader into the 
divine life. 

Thus he opened up for us a new and living way through the vail, 
that is to say, his flesh.~Heb. 10:20. As we have seen, we were 
created on the perfect natural plane (represented in Adam) and 
no higher hope than that of being natural men was ever held out, 
until Jesus paid our ransom price-that is to say, his flesh, and 
opened up this new way (though a narrow, difficult one) by 
which believers could go beyond the vail-beyond the natural 
condition into the spiritual. ["For the things that are seen are 
temporal-natural-but the things that are not seen are eternal. "- 
2 Cor. 4:18.] 

We can hardly impress too strongly the fact that all of the 
promises ever held out to the Jews, during previous ages, were 
only such as pertain to the natural man-i.e., natural life, 
prosperity and blessing. The first offer of anything spiritual was 
made by Jesus to those who believe on him during this Gospel 
age. These are promised, that in the resurrection they shall be 
spiritual bodies-'That which is born of the spirit is spirit." But 
notice that though this promise of spiritual instead of human 
existence is to all believers, yet there is a still higher promise 
made to some of the believers, viz., Immortality. There is a vast 
difference between everlasting life and immortal life; the first 
signifies an ever-continued existence, which may be dependent 
on circumstances, as for instance, angels and men. Adam, if he 
had kept his first estate of sinless perfection, would 

R279 : page 139 

have "lived forever;" and angels, though of a higher nature than 
human, have life continued to them on the same conditions of 
obedience; and some of them, "those angels who kept not their 
first estate" of purity and sinlessness ("the devil and his angels") 
are to be destroyed-have life taken from them. 

It will be seen then, that everlasting life may be enjoyed by 
creatures of God on either the natural or the spiritual plane, and 
that the condition upon which it may be enjoyed is everlasting 
obedience to the author and fountain of life-God. 

R280 : page 139 

This everlasting life is guaranteed to all creatures who use their 
life in harmony with God's will. It was on this account the world 
needed both, a Redeemer to pay for them the price of sin-death, 
and a Restorer to bring them again to the condition of perfection 
enjoyed by Adam, in which it was possible to render perfect 
obedience to God's will; which ability to obey was lost through 
sin. 



Now let us notice the difference between everlasting life and 
immortal life. Immortal life is everlasting, but it is more: it is a 
life which cannot cease under any conditions; a life power 
inherent in the being possessing it, not supplied by food or other 
conditions, as is all other life, both of angels and men. "Man did 
eat angel's food."~Psa. 78:25. --"Of every tree of the garden thou 
may est freely eat. "--Gen. 2:16.) In a word, as already 
scripturally expressed, it is to have "life in himself," to be a 
fountain of life~a means of supplying life to others. 

With this, which we believe to be a scriptural definition of 
immortality, who for a moment would wonder that it was 
originally possessed only by God the Father~"the King eternal, 
invisible, the only wise God," "who only hath immortality?" (1 
Tim. 1:17, and 6:16,) or that in due time it was bestowed upon 
our Lord Jesus, as we read~"As the Father hath life in himself, 
(immortal,) so hath he given unto the Son, that he should have 
life in himself." Jesus, before he "took the form (nature and life) 
of a servant," and "was found in fashion as a man," was, we 
understand the Scriptures to teach, a spiritual being— i.e., a 
spiritual, and not a human body. He was the chief est of all God's 
creatures- "the beginning of the creation of God."-Rev. 3:14. 
Yet, to our understanding, he did not, at that time, possess 
immortality; though, like angels and all intelligent beings living 
in obedience to the Creator, he was guaranteed everlasting life 
as long as obedient. 

This life, which, according to God's plan, he had a right to 
possess, he desired to give as a ransom for ours. But how 

R280 : page 140 

should he do it? If he died, a spiritual being, it would have done 
us human beings no good whatever. It was a human, and not a 
spiritual being, which was condemned to death, and God's law 
of "an eye for an eye" and a "life for a life," demanded a human 
sacrifice for human sinners. Nay; had ten thousand spiritual 
beings died, that could never have redeemed mankind, any more 
than could ten thousand "bulls and goats, which can never take 
away sin."— Heb. 10:4. Neither a higher nor a lower order of 
beings could redeem; it required a man to redeem mankind. 
Therefore, this spiritual being changed his condition of existence 
from the spiritual to the human, and on earth was known as 
Jesus. It was not a death of the spiritual being, but a 
transferrence of life from a higher to a lower plane of existence— 
the perfect plane of being, which Adam had forfeited by sin.* 

The penalty of Adam's sin was death (everlasting,) and when 
Jesus took his place he became subject to that penalty-eternal 
death. Jesus, as a man, then, in order to redeem man must give 
up forever his human existence. This giving up was at the time 
of his baptism, and his death was typified in that act. But after 
giving up, or consecrating his life as a ransom, he was three and 



a half years in actually giving it up-spending it in the service of 
others and finally ending it on the cross. When he consecrated 
himself unto death (at baptism), he received his begetting of the 
spirit to the new life—the divine, immortal life; and at his 
resurrection he was born to that new nature and life, a spiritual 
body, and never again took the human, which he had given as "a 
ransom for many." In all of this he is the pattern, or leader of all 
the "little flock," who consecrate and sacrifice the human, and 
"become partakers of the divine nature." 

Thus "Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures"- "A 
body hast thou prepared me for the suffering of death," etc., 
"and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself unto 
death, even the death of the cross." Thus he died as a man for 
mankind, or as Paul expresses it: "Since by man came death, by 
man came also the resurrection of the dead."— 1 Cor. 15:21. He 
died the just [man] for the unjust [men] that he might bring us to 
God.-l Pet. 3:18. We next notice, that the thing given for the 
life of the world, was the life of Jesus (the man): "For 

R280 : page 141 

the Son of Man came... to give his life a ransom for many" 
[lives]. -Mark 10:45. Notice again that the life Jesus gave was 
all the life he possessed-it was his life. In the parable of the 
treasure hid in the field, (Matt. 13:44) "the Kingdom of Heaven 
is likened unto a treasure hid in a field ['the field is the world' of 
mankind— the bride of Christ, the hidden treasure,] which, when 
a man [Jesus] hath found, he goeth and selleth all that he hath 
and buyeth that field." Jesus gave his all and so must those who 
would be joint-heirs with him, walk in his footsteps and sacrifice 
earthly life. 



*Such a transference, or change of life, from one condition to 
another, will occur, when "we, who are alive and remain, shall 
be caught up to meet the Lord," "changed in a moment" from 
human to spiritual conditions. In Jesus' case the life was 
transferred from a higher to a lower plane of being; in our case, 
it will be from the lower to the higher. Our life will be 
swallowed up of immortality, or perfection of life. 

Now, as an immortal being cannot die, it seems clear that Jesus 
did not have immortality when he died. It would be impossible 
for an immortal being to suffer pain or to die. But Jesus assures 
us that "the Father hath given unto the Son that he should have 
life in himself."* When was it given unto him? Paul tells us it 
was after he died,— at his resurrection. Hear him: "Christ Jesus, 
who being in the form of God [a spiritual being] thought it not 
robbery to be equal with God; [to speak of himself as being a 
member of God's family-the Son of God"- John 10:35,36] but 
made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a 
servant, and was made in the likeness of men. And being found 



in fashion as a man, he humbled himself and became obedient 
unto death, even the death of the cross. "WHEREFORE, 
[because of this obedience-death on the cross, etc.] God also 
hath highly exalted him, and given him a name, which is above 
every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, 
both of things in heaven and things in earth, and things under the 
earth, ['they that are in their graves'-the dead], and that every 
tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of 
God the Father. "-Phil. 2:6-1 1. "That all men might honor the 
Son, even as they honor the Father."- John 5:23. 

From this and other Scriptures it seems evident, that, while Jesus 
had held a very high position in the spirit world before taking 
the human nature and form, yet the position occupied by him 
since he ascended up on high, is a much higher one- "Him hath 
God highly exalted," etc., -and the word wherefore, (on this 
account) used by Paul, clearly shows that the high exaltation 
came as a reward for the self-sacrifice and obedience even unto 

R280 : page 142 

death. This high exaltation consisted in part of the glory of 
power, which will be fully displayed and exercised during the 
Millennial age. But who can doubt that one of the chief elements 
of that high exaltation was immortality, heretofore possessed 
only by "the King of kings and Lord of lords, the only wise 
God?" 



*Jesus, after he had consecrated himself and had been begotten 
of the new, divine nature, spoke of the new life which was 
promised him, and which he received fully at the resurrection as 
though he had already received it; just as it is said of us-"He 
that believeth...hath everlasting life." 

This mighty one-Jehovah— received our Lord, the perfect one, 
whose life and death were one grand expression of love to God 
and to men, into oneness of life, as well as of glory and power 
with himself, which would imply his becoming the son of God, 
with power, (in a higher sense than before) and a partaker of the 
divine nature. How fitting, too, that he, whose work it is to 
restore the human race again to perfection of earthly being, 
should be a fountain of life! 

Every action should have a motive; and when Jesus came into 
the world and died for our sins, it was the result of one or more 
motives. And so we find Paul, in exhorting the church to a life 
of self-sacrifice, pointing to the prize of our high calling as a 
motive or incentive to energy and perseverance; and he refers to 
Jesus as our example, saying: "Consider him that endured - 
...looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith; who, 
for the joy set before him, endured the cross, despising the 



shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God."— 
Heb. 12:2,3. 

The joy set before our Lord was threefold: first, to ransom a race 
of beings from sin and death, and restore them to the perfection 
of their being; second, as a reward for his faith in God's promise, 
and obedience to his will, he would be exalted to the right hand 
(chief place) of power, and have inherent life ("life in himself,") 
the divine degree-immortality; third, he might bring some of 
the human race to the higher plane of being -the spiritual. To 
these he would be both redeemer from death and leader-to as 
many as believed on him, "to them gave he power to become the 
sons of God."-John 1:12. These could also become partakers of 
the divine nature (2 Pet. 1 :4), be associated with him as his 
Bride-become heirs of God, and joint-heirs with himself. -Rom. 
8:17. But how should these ever be counted worthy of exaltation 
to such a position of glory and honor, side-by-side with him who 
is the express image of the Father's person? By following in his 
footsteps: he became the leader of a "little flock" of believers, 
who, after being redeemed by his sacrifice, should, by following 
his example— giving up the human life, will, ambition, etc., and 
walking after 

R280 : page 143 

the law of the spirit, be counted worthy to become his Bride. 
These suffer with him, that they also may be glorified together 
(with him.)— Rom. 8:17. Yes, this was a part of his mission, and 
therefore a part of his joy-to bring up some of the human family 
to the divine nature. So we read: "It became him (God) 

R281 : page 143 

for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing 
many sons unto glory, to make the captain of their salvation 
(Jesus) perfect through suffering. "-Heb. 2:10. Jesus must go 
through the most severe trials to prove his obedience to the 
Father's will before being entrusted with the high honor of glory 
and immortality. And he came off victor— proved his perfection 
by obedience even unto death. He was tried and not found 
wanting; "tried in all points, like as we are, yet without sin;" he 
won the "prize of his high calling-the joy set before him." 

At the resurrection of Jesus we reach a point of time where two 
beings possess the principle of immortality-the Father and the 
Son. Now we learn that this principle of immortality is promised 
also to the Bride of Christ. Who then will constitute the Bride? 
Jesus tells us, "many are called and few are chosen." Paul 
estimates that many run, though few so run as to obtain the prize 
of the high calling; yet Jesus assures the little flock who do so 
run that "it is the Father's good pleasure to give [them] the 
kingdom." Not all believers then, nor even the majority, but a 
"little flock" who overcome the world, will constitute the Bride- 



-the Lamb's wife- "To him that overcometh will I grant to sit 
with me in my throne. "--Rev. 3:21. 

We have already seen that the Gospel church, when fully 
developed, will be composed of two classes. These two classes 
will embrace all who have believed in Jesus as the sin-bearer, 
and have consecrated themselves to his service—all who, during 
the Gospel age, have been begotten to a newness of life by the 
spirit through the Word, except a very few mentioned by Jesus, 
John and Paul as those who sin against the Holy Ghost, which 
sin hath never forgiveness. Paul, in Heb. 6:4-6, describes those 
committing this sin as having been once enlightened and having 
tasted of the heavenly gift and of the good word of God, and the 
powers of the world to come, and being made partakers of the 
Holy Ghost, (i.e., begotten by the holy spirit); nevertheless they 
crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh and put him to an 
open shame.. .(Heb. 10:29) counting the blood of the covenant, 
wherewith they were sanctified an unholy thing, and doing 
despite unto the spirit of grace. In a word, these are open, wilful 
apostates (not weak, backsliding Christians, 

R281 : page 144 

whose love is chilled for a time by contact with the cold world.) 
These apostates will die the second death, but all others of the 
church being begotten of the spirit, will in due time, at the 
resurrection be born of the spirit to spiritual conditions-spiritual 
bodies. But many, though believers, have not continued to grow 
up into Christ, but have remained children, consequently were 
too weak to overcome the world. They are bound by the world's 
customs, business, money-making, pleasures of this life, honor 
of this world, etc., and do not follow the "Captain of their 
salvation" in the "narrow way," and such must have much 
scourging and discipline before the fleshly nature is subdued; 
such must go through a time of trouble-be "delivered over to 
Satan [evil] for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit [new 
nature] may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus." 

This class constitute the majority of all the Christian church - 
the "great company who come up [to the spiritual condition] out 
of [through] great tribulation and wash their robes and make 
them white in the blood of the Lamb. "-Rev. 7:14. The few, the 
"little flock" will win the prize for which all are called to run. 
The prize of our high calling is, to become "heirs of God, joint- 
heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord," or as again expressed: We 
"seek for glory, honor, and immortality. "—Rom. 2:7. If you 
would realize its grandeur, think for a moment that this is the 
same prize for which Jesus ran; the same joy that was set before 
him-Glory, Honor, and Immortality. He has been exalted, and 
now of the many called to share with him, in the honor and 
glory of his exalted position, the few who will be chosen, are 
making their calling and election sure by walking in "the narrow 
way"— "the way their leader trod." And we repeat, only the few 



win that prize for which all seek-glory, honor and immortality. 
"If we be dead with him [to the fleshly nature] we shall also live 
with him. "--Rom. 6:8. As Jesus said: "To him that overcometh 
will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame 
and am set down with my Father in his throne. "--Rev. 3:21. 

These overcomers who worship not the symbolic beast or image 
(Rev. 20:4) constitute the first resurrection, of which Jesus was 
the first-fruits: "Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first 
resurrection; on such the second death hath no power [because 
they are immortal], and they shall be priests of God and of 
Christ and shall reign with him a thousand years. "--Rev. 20:6. 

Here, then, are the conditions upon which we may attain to 

R281 : page 145 

the highest position in the gift of God. Nor should we be 
surprised that the way that leads to life is narrow, when we 
realize the grandeur of the life to which it leads. The masses of 
the church, as we have seen, walk not in the narrow way and 
consequently do not receive the prize of our high calling. 
Though begotten of the spirit, they try to walk upon a middle 
road; they try to keep both the favor of God and the favor of the 
world, forgetting that "the friendship of the world is enmity 
against God," and that the instructions to those running the race 
for the prize are "Love not the world," "Seek not honor one of 
another, but that which cometh of God only." 

These, who, as we have seen, "love the present world," receive a 
scourging and purifying by fire of trouble, and are finally 
received into the heavenly— spiritual condition. They will have 
everlasting life as angels have it, but will lose the prize of 
Immortality. These shall serve God in his temple, and stand 
before the throne, having palms in their hands (Rev. 7:9-17); but 
though that will be glorious, it will not be so glorious as the 
position of the "little flock" who shall be kings and priests unto 
God, seated with Jesus in his throne as his bride and joint heir, 
and with him crowned with Immortal, divine life. 

The balance of our race now thronging the broad road to death 
are to be restored because their guilt and sin are atoned for and 
will be remitted. As through the disobedience of one man all 
were placed upon the broad road and swallowed up of death, so, 
through the obedience of one (Christ), all will be forgiven and 
brought back to life. But when brought back to "their former 
estate"— the perfection of the original-they will not have life in 
the same sense that the Divine family will have it. Theirs will 
not be life in themselves, but supplied life. The restored race 
will, no doubt, live eternally. God will supply the means of 
continuing their life as long as they are obedient, and that, we 
are told, will be forever. Doubtless their present experiences 
with sin will prove a blessing throughout eternity. 



The words Incorruptible, Incorruption, Immortal, and 
Immortality are translations of the Greek words athanasia, 
aphtharsia, and aphthartos. (These words have the same 
significance, viz., "Incapable of corruption-decay-death." 
"Having unlimited existence. "--Webster.) These occur in all 
only eighteen times, in Scripture and are always used in 
connection with God or the saints, and are never associated in 
any way with angels, mankind, or lower orders of creation. 

With a glimpse of this "crown of life which fadeth not away" 

R281 : page 146 

and the honor and glory associated with it, who will say that our 
all-wise Father has made the pathway too difficult? Its 
difficulties will act as a separating principle to separate and 
refine a "peculiar people," "a little flock," to be "heirs of the 
kingdom," "heirs of glory," heirs of God and joint heirs with 
Jesus Christ our Lord~if so be that we suffer (death) with him. 

As we toil upward on the narrow way, angels look on amazed at 
the grandeur of the plan which is able not only to rescue a fallen 
race from death, but to display "the exceeding riches of God's 
grace and loving-kindness towards us who are in Christ Jesus. "- 
Eph. 2:7. And it will yet be more clearly seen in the ages to 
come. Yes, when the plan was first foretold through the 
prophets, angels desired to look into it and to know concerning 
the time, and manner of time of its fulfillment (see 1 Peter 1:12), 
and an "innumerable company of angels" still watch our 
progress and gladly become "ministering spirits," "sent forth to 
minister for those who shall be heirs of salvation" (Heb. 1:14), 
and soon be their rulers: for, "know ye not that ye shall judge 
(govern) angels?"~l Cor. 6:3. The Father, too, who has called 
us with so high a calling, looks upon us with loving sympathy, 
and desires that we make our calling and election sure by 
complying with the conditions. And there is another who 
watches us with intense interest: it is he who redeemed us from 
death by his own precious blood and invited us to become his 
Bride and joint heir. If he loved us with such love while we were 
yet sinners, judge of his love now that we are his betrothed. He 
knows all about the narrow way- was tempted in all points as we 
are, without yielding, and now he stands ready to succor and 
strengthen us as we need and ask his help. 

In view of all these things, let us, brethren and sisters, "come 
boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy and 
find grace to help in every time of need, " while we fight the 
good fight of faith (warfare of the new against the old nature) 
and lay hold on eternal life. 



R282 : page 146 



THE BROAD ROAD TO DESTRUCTION. 

THE road is so steep that when once we are fully started upon 
it, it seems almost impossible to avoid running headlong to its 
end. Six thousand years ago, Adam, (and we in him as a race of 
human beings,) was driven from the garden of Eden, because of 
sin, and sentenced to destruction; God's law being that any 

R282 : page 147 

creature who will not live in harmony with his law shall not live 
at all. "The soul (being) that sinneth, it shall die."~Ezek. 18:4. 
Thus God drove us out from the life-giving trees of Eden, 
saying: "Dying thou shalt die." And as a sinner condemned to 
destruction, our father Adam started forth upon the "broad road" 
which leads to it. Slowly he walked in that way; he hasted not to 
its end for nine hundred and thirty years. As years rolled on, and 
the path became more and more smoothly worn, the race sped 
more rapidly to destruction. The way becomes daily more 
glazed and slimed and slippery with sin, and the various 
appliances for hastening men to death, in use by "him that has 
the power of death, that is, the devil. "— Heb. 2:14. And not only 
is the way more slippery, but mankind daily loses the power of 
resistance, so that now the average length of human life is about 
thirty years. We get to the end of this broad road nine hundred 
years quicker than did the perfect man. In fact, so weak and 
degraded has our race become, that its condition is painfully 
described as "prone to sin as the sparks to fly upward." So, then, 
as we look about us, we can pity, as well as abhor, the murderer, 
the licentiate, the thief, the liar, and the drunkard. We abhor the 
sins, but we pity the poor fellow-being so degraded as to be 
under their control, and God loves and pities them too; and 
hence he has made provision (as other Scriptures have shown 
us) whereby Christ died for and redeemed all on this broad road, 
and in due time will restore them to their first (Adamic) estate. 
But let us, if we see the "narrow way," walk in it, and thus be 
prepared and permitted to share in the work of restoring all 
things. 



R282 : page 148 

PART IX. 



THE THREE GREAT COVENANTS. 

A COVENANT is an agreement. God, who knows the end from 
the beginning, never made a covenant which he could not and 
will not fulfill. Covenants may be conditional or unconditional: 
where a conditional covenant was made, i.e., where each party 
to it was bound to do certain things, it was customary to appoint 



a mediator-a person who stands between and whose business it 
is to see that both parties keep their covenant. God has made 
several covenants, but three in particular, which we wish now to 
consider briefly. These are, first, the "covenant with Abraham;" 
second, the covenant of "the Law;" third, the "New covenant." 

The first one reads: "In thee and in thy seed shall all the families 
of the earth be blessed." This covenant we understand to cover 
two classes-Abraham and his seed through Isaac, and he whom 
Abraham typified- Jehovah and his seed through Jesus. The 
blessing comes first through the God-seed-Christ and his 
brethren, the church, reaching, blessing and restoring the fleshly 
seed first, and through them extending to and blessing all the 
families of the earth. Thus we see how the blessing will "be sure 
unto all the seed."— Rom. 4:16. Now, we inquire, are there any 
conditions to this first covenant? If there are-it is possible that 
Abraham and his seed might fail to keep their part and so the 
conditions and covenant being broken, God may never fulfill 
that covenant. But, we answer, there were no conditions. God 
did not say, Abraham, if you and your seed after you will obey 
me, I will do thus and so, but he simply tells Abraham what he 
intends doing. That covenant then cannot pass away, nor be 
altered, nor added to, --(Gal. 3:15,17,)— it must be fulfilled just as 
it reads. The seed must come and the seed shall bless all the 
families of the earth. How much this is in harmony with the 
teaching of a "restitution of all things!"— Acts 3:21. If further 
evidence that this first covenant was unconditional be desired, it 
is found in the fact that no mediator was appointed; none was 
needed since there was only one party 

R282 : page 149 

(God) who covenanted anything-Gal. 3:20. That covenant was 
confirmed by an oath.-Heb. 6:13-18. The second covenant we 
wish to consider is "the Law. " It was delivered to Israel at 
Mount Sinai. Unlike the first, it had conditions-if Israel would 
obey the Law, they should be "a peculiar treasure above all 
people:" for, says God, "all the earth is mine, and ye shall be a 
kingdom of priests and an holy nation."— Exod. 19:5. Then 
follows the words of their covenant.— Exod. 20 to 23. Moses 
declares, (in harmony with Gal. 3:17,) "The Lord made not this 
covenant with our fathers [Abraham, etc.] but with us, even us 
who are all here alive this day. The Lord talked with you face to 
face in the mount out of the midst of the fire, and I stood 
between the Lord and you at that time."— Deut. 5:2-5. 

The whole world were sinners but knew not to what extent; they 
knew not that they were so depraved that they could not keep 
God's law perfectly. And it was God's object in making the Law 
Covenant, to prove to Israel their own imperfection and inability 
to live in harmony with God. Therefore he said to them, after 
making the conditions of the covenant and when the people had 
accepted it, "Ye shall therefore keep my statutes and my 



judgments which if a man do he shall live. "--Lev. 18:5; see also 
Rom. 10:5, and 7:7,12,13,16. 

Therefore, when God made this second covenant, he knew that 
Israel would never realize the promises therein given, because 
they would not be able to keep it-all being sinners-for "by the 
deeds of the Law shall no flesh be justified. " "That no man is 
justified by the Law is evident. "--Gal. 3:11. But the Law was of 
some service to them, in that it furnished a check upon idolatry 
and immortality, and thus as a schoolmaster, it prepared them 
for Christ and the new covenant. -Gal. 3:19, and 4:1. 

The Law Covenant was ordained in the hands of a mediator - 
Moses; and that covenant and its mediator were a shadow, or 
type of the future "New covenant" and its mediator-Christ. 
Moses typically bought all Israel with the blood of the bullock 
and goat, which typically represented his own blood— life. He 
typically bought them and left them the conditions of the Law as 
a legacy. For a covenant is of force after men (the ratifiers or 
mediators) are dead.... "When Moses had spoken every precept 
to all the people, according to the Law, he took the blood of 
bulls and of goats, with water and scarlet wool and hyssop, and 
sprinkled both the book— (the Law)-and all the people, saying: 
this is the blood of the covenant which God hath enjoined unto 
you."-Heb. 9:16-20. When Jesus came he was born into the 

R282 : page 150 

world- "under the Law," and by perfect obedience to it he 
became the heir of all the earthly promises contained in that Law 
covenant-but more, he was begotten of God and was the Seed 
of Abraham, and as such was heir of the first covenant also. - 
Gal. 3:16. In the person of Jesus then, the second (Law) 
covenant passed away, being fulfilled: and the first- 
(Abrahamic)— covenant began to be fulfilled: for it will not be 
completely fulfilled until "all families of the earth" are blessed 
by Christ. 

This blessing of mankind is made the basis of a "New 
Covenant" between God and man. This, like the "Law" 
covenant, has conditions, some of which bind God and some 
bind mankind. Mankind will be required to keep God's perfect 
Law. [He could not give an imperfect one— the Law given to 
Israel was "holy and just and good. "-Rom. 7:12.] Any other 
Law would be unjust and bad then; consequently, God must give 
in substance the same Law which Jesus said was briefly 
comprehended in this: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with 
all thy heart, with all thy mind, with all thy soul, and with all thy 
strength, and thy neighbor as thyself." So far as man's 
obligations are concerned then, they will be the same under the 
"New" that they were under the Law covenant; the difference 
consisting in this, that under the "New" God will actually take 
away man's sins instead of typically (as under the Law.) When 



God actually takes man's sins away and its penalties (mental and 
physical imperfections and death) then, and not until then, will 
they as perfect men be able to keep God's perfect Law. 

"Behold the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a New 
Covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of 
Judah....This shall be the covenant that I will make with the 
house of Israel after those days, saith the Lord: I will put my law 
in their inward part and write it in their hearts, and I will be their 
God and they shall be my people, for I will forgive their 
iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more." "In those days 
they shall say no more, the fathers have eaten a sour grape, and 
the children's teeth are set on edge, but every one shall die for 
his own iniquity. "~Jer. 31:29. "And in that day, I will make a 
covenant for them with the beasts of the field and with the fowl 
of heaven, and with the creeping things of the ground, and I will 
break the bow and the sword and the battle out of the earth. "- 
Hos. 2:18. See also Jer. 32:37-41; Ezek. 37:12,14,26. It may 
easily be seen that these conditions are not yet fulfilled. The 
sour grape of sin still sets all mankind on edge~the law of sin, 
the stony heart, still remains in mankind: 

R282: page 151 

God has not yet taken it away and given them instead a heart of 
flesh (perfect manhood) with his law~Love~graven thereon. 
The beasts and fowl are not yet in harmony with man. He was 
given dominion, glory, and honor, but through sin lost it almost 
entirely; but soon he will be restored, and all nature will 
recognize in man her ruler. But it may be asked-Upon what 
conditions will God take away and blot out man's 
transgressions? We answer, unconditionally: according to the 
provisions of the 

R283 : page 151 

first covenant, a seed was to come, and secondly it was to bless 
all. The blessing is the removal of man's load of sin, through the 
death of the seed, who died the just for the unjust. This (third) 
"New Covenant" like its shadow, the Law, has a mediator, 
because there are conditions, and two parties to the covenant. As 
under the Law Covenant Moses was the mediator, so is 

"JESUS THE MEDIATOR OF 
THE NEW COVENANT, " 

and to him God looks for the fulfillment of the Law; and to him 
Israel and the world look for ability to comply with its 
conditions, viz., restitution. As the mediator, or testator then, 
Jesus must die to leave mankind the legacy-of forgiveness and 
restoration promised in the New Covenant. He did thus die and 
bought all with his own precious blood, and soon is to 
commence the great work of applying the blood-cleansing from 
all sin. As typically Moses took the bunch of hyssop and scarlet 



wool, and therewith sprinkled of the ratifying blood both the 
book (Law) and all the people, (Heb. 9:19,) so with the New 
Covenant, it must be ratified with blood, and the mediator gives 
his blood (life) and then (soon we believe) he will begin the 
work of sprinkling with this cleansing blood and with the pure 
water of truth. He will sprinkle both the book (Law) and people, 
bringing the people into harmony with God's law— "Love." No 
longer will their teeth be set on edge; no longer will they, when 
they would do good, find evil present with them; then, all shall 
know the Lord from the least to the greatest, and the knowledge 
of the Lord shall fill the whole earth. 

But does some one inquire why the new covenant did not at 
once go into effect as soon as the mediator died? Why were not 
all the people sprinkled as soon as the blood was shed? 

Ah! dear friends, that is the most wonderful part of it all: that is 
the part which shows "the exceeding riches of God's grace"- 
"his loving-kindness toward us, in Christ." This is what Paul 
repeatedly speaks of, as the "mystery" hid during previous ages, 
viz., "Christ in you the hope of glory."— Col. 1:27. Jesus died 

R283 : page 152 

for and is to bless and restore all men; but before entering upon 
the work of restoring, he publishes among the great mass (all of 
whom he ransomed) the news of their ransom, and to all who 
have an ear to hear it he extends the privilege of taking up their 
cross and following him— of sharing with him in suffering evil 
for good, and promises these that if they do walk in his footsteps 
they shall be not only sharers of the sufferings, but also of the 
"glory that shall follow." "To him that overcometh will I grant to 
sit with me in my throne." We shall become heirs of God, joint- 
heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord, if so be that we suffer with 
him, that we may be also glorified together."— Rom. 8:17. 

This is the reason why the Gospel age intervenes between the 
death of Jesus and the blessing of the world: it is an age of 
death, an age during which we may if we will- "fill up what is 
behind of the afflictions of Christ. "-Col. 1 :24. We are then, 
joined with Christ in the sacrifice of the human life-"dead with 
him," and so far as the world is concerned, they are still waiting 
until the little flock— the members of the body of the mediator or 
testator (Christ) are "dead with him. " We believe the sacrifice to 
be almost ended, and soon all who have shared death with him 
as members of his body shall be joined with him in the glory of 
power and share in the glorious work of applying the blood- 
cleansing the people. Moses did the sprinkling in the type and it 
will be the Great Prophet and Mediator in the antitype. "A 
prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your 
brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things 
whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come to pass that 
every soul which will not hear that prophet, shall be destroyed 



from among the people. "--Acts 3:22. This prophecy belongs to 
the "times of restitution of all things," and is quoted by Peter as 
applicable there. 

That prophet, or teacher- "the Christ "--head and body, is now 
being "raised up" (to power), and soon the work of sprinkling 
and cleansing humanity begins; and the soul (person) who will 
not then obey and be cleansed shall be destroyed. In that age, the 
sinner a hundred years old will be cut off, though at that age he 
would be but "a child. "— Isa. 65:20. 

In a sense, the operation of the new covenant begins with the 
Gospel church, and lifts us from the plane of degradation and sin 
to a justified or reckoned-perfect condition, from which we can 
go forward in the "narrow way" becoming heirs of the first 
covenant. -Gal. 3:29. Let us briefly review these covenants as 
they are illustrated in a type or allegory. --(Gal. 4:22-31.) Paul 

R283 : page 153 

explained that Abraham's wife, Sarah, was a type of the first 
covenant made with Abraham, referring to "the Seed." As years 
rolled by, and no child came, they began to look for a fulfillment 
in some other way, and Hagar takes the place of a wife and 
bears a son, who apparently is to be the heir. So the original 
promise of God meant Christ, but he was not born until "due 
time," and in the meantime "the Law" was given from Sinai, 
apparently taking the place of the first covenant, and under the 
law covenant a fleshly seed was developed-fleshly Israel. But 
the first, or Sarah, covenant had not failed, and after the Hagar 
covenant had borne fleshly Israel (typified by Ishmael), the true 
seed of Abraham and heir is born, under the first (or Sarah) 
covenant; i.e., Christ Jesus and the members of his body- 
spiritual Israel. This is as far as Paul carries the type, because 
speaking only of the two seeds, natural and spiritual, and the two 
covenants under which they come into existence. But as we find 
that God is to make "a new covenant," "after those days," we 
naturally inquire: Why was not this new covenant typified by a 
wife as well as the other two? And upon examination we find it 
was so illustrated. Turning to Gen. 24:67, we read how Isaac 
receives Rebecca into Sarah's tent, and she becomes his married 
wife, (illustrating how our heavenly Bridegroom will receive his 
Bride at the end of her journey, and bring her into possession of 
and associate her with himself, in the enjoyment of all things 
promised in the first (or Sarah) covenant.) Then we read after 
Isaac's marriage: "Then, again, Abraham took a wife, and her 
name was Keturah," thus illustrating as plainly as a type can, the 
"New covenant." 

Each of the first two covenants bore but one offspring. The first, 
the "heir of all things," (Christ Jesus and we his Bride,) and the 
second, fleshly Israel, beloved for the Father's sake. But the 
New Covenant (Keturah) bears six sons, which, taken with the 



one of Hagar, would be seven— a complete number-representing 
that all the fleshly children would be developed under the Hagar 
and Keturah, or "Law" and "New" Covenants. 

The name Sarah means Princess; Hagar means flight or cast out; 
Keturah means incense or sweet; all of which are significant. 
Oh, how our covenant-the Royal-looms up above all the 
others ! Let us not forget that we must die with Jesus, if we 
would LIVE and share in the glorious work of sprinkling and 
cleansing the world in the next age. "That by means of death 
...they which are called might receive the promise of eternal 
inheritance. "-Heb. 9:15. 



R283 : page 154 

PART X. 



AN EXPLANATION OF SOME SCRIPTURES 
FREQUENTLY MISCONSTRUED 

THE RICH MAN AND LAZARUS. 

THIS parable recorded in Luke 16:19, is generally regarded as 
being the utterance of our Lord (though nothing is said of his 
having uttered it), and we so regard it. 

The great difficulty with many is, that though they call it a 
parable, they reason on it, and draw conclusions from it, as 
though it were a literal statement and not a parable. To think of 
it as a literal statement involves quite a number of absurdities; 
for instance: that the rich man went to hell because he had 
enjoyed many earthly blessings and have nothing but crumbs to 
Lazarus. Not a word is said about his wickedness. Again, 
Lazarus is blessed, not because he is a sincere child of God, full 
of faith and trust-not because he was good, but simply because 
he was poor and sick. If this be understood literally, the only 
logical lesson to be drawn from it is, that unless you are a poor 
beggar, full of sores, you will never enter into future bliss, and if 
now you wear any "fine linen" and "purple," and have plenty to 
eat every day, you are sure to go to hades. Again, the place of 
bliss is "Abraham's bosom," and if the whole statement is literal, 
the bosom must be literal, and would not hold very many of 
earth's millions of sick and poor. But why consider the 
absurdities? All unprejudiced minds recognize it as a parable. 

As a parable, how shall we understand it? We answer, that a 
parable is one thing said, another thing meant; we know this 
from some of the parables explained by Jesus. For instance, the 
parable of the "Wheat and Tares." From his explanation we 



learn that when in that parable he said wheat, he meant "children 
of the kingdom;" when he said tares, he meant (to 

R283 : page 155 

those who would understand the parable) "the children of the 
devil;" when he said reapers, angels were to be understood, etc. 
(See Matt. 13.) So you will find it in every parable explained by 
our Lord; the thing said is never the thing meant; consequently 
in this parable "a rich man" means something else. Lazarus and 
Abraham's bosom are not literal, but represent some class and 
condition. In attempting to expound a parable such as this, an 
explanation of which our Lord does not furnish us, modesty 

R284 : page 155 

in expressing our opinions regarding it is certainly appropriate. 
We therefore offer the following explanation without any 
attempt to force our view upon the reader, except so far as his 
own truth-enlightened judgment may commend them, as in 
accord with God's Word and plan. To our understanding "the 
rich man" represented the Jewish nation. At the time of the 
utterance of the parable, and for a long time previous, they had 
"fared sumptuously every day"~being the especial recipients of 
God's favors. As Paul says: "What advantage then hath the Jew? 
Much every way; chiefly, because to them was committed the 
oracles of God. "--[Law and Prophecy.] The promises to 
Abraham and David invested this people with royalty, as 
represented by the rich man's "purple." The ritual and (typical) 
sacrifices of the Law constituted them, in a typical sense, a holy 
nation-righteous-represented by the rich man's "fine linen." 
[Fine linen is a symbol of righteousness. —Rev. 19:9.] 

Lazarus represented the Gentiles-all nations of the world aside 
from the Israelites. These, at the time of the utterance of this 
parable, were entirely destitute of those blessings which Israel 
enjoyed; they lay at the gate of the rich man. No rich promises 
of royalty were theirs; not even typically were they cleansed; but 
in moral sickness, pollution, and sin they were companions of 
"dogs." Dogs were regarded as detestable creatures in those 
days, and the typically clean Jew called the outsiders "heathen" 
and "dogs," and would never eat with them, nor marry nor have 
any dealings with them. -John 4:9. As to the "eating the crumbs 
(of favor) which fell from the rich man's table" of bounties, 
Jesus' words to the Syro-Phoenician woman give us a key. He 
said to this Gentile woman- "It is not meet (proper) to take the 
children's (Israelites) bread and give it to the dogs" (Gentiles); 
and she answered, "Yea, Lord, but the dogs eat of the crumbs 
that fall from their master's table. "-Matt. 15:27. Jesus healed 
her daughter, thus giving the desired crumb of favor. But there 
came a time when the typical righteousness ceased— when the 
promise of royalty ceased 

R284 : page 156 



to be theirs, and the kingdom was taken from them to be given 
to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. -Matt. 21:43. The 
rich man died to all these special advantages and soon he (the 
Jewish nation) found himself in "gehenna fire"~a cast-off 
condition, in trouble, tribulation and affliction, in which they 
have suffered from that day to this. 

Lazarus also died: the condition of the Gentiles underwent a 
change, and from the Gentiles many were carried by the angels 
(messengers, apostles, etc.) to Abraham's bosom. Abraham is 
represented as the father of the faith-full and receives to his 
bosom all the children of faith- who thus are recognized as the 
heirs to all the promises made to Abraham. For the children of 
the flesh, these are not the children of God, but the "children of 
the promise are counted for the seed" (children of Abraham) 
"which seed is Christ," and "if ye be Christ's then are ye 
(believers) Abraham's seed (children) and heirs according to the 
(Abrahamic) promise. "--Gal. 3:29. Yes, the condition of things 
then existing terminated by death-at the death of Jesus~"for if 
one died for all, then were all dead." There the Jew was cast off 
and has since been shown "no favor," and the poor Gentiles who 
before had been "aliens from the commonwealth (the promises) 
of Israel and without God and having no hope in the world, " 
were then "brought nigh by the blood of Christ" and "reconciled 
to God."— Eph. 2:13. If the two tribes living in Judea (Judah and 
Benjamin) were represented by one rich man, would it not be in 
harmony to suppose that the five brethren represented the 
remaining ten tribes, who had "Moses and the Prophets" as their 
instructors? The question relative to them was doubtless 
introduced to show that all special favor of God ceased to the 
ten tribes, as well as to the two directly addressed. It seems to us 
evident, that Israel only was meant, for none other nation than 
Israel had "Moses and the prophets" as instructors. 

In a word, this parable seems to teach precisely what Paul 
explained in Rom. 11:19-31. How that because of unbelief, the 
natural branches were broken off, and the wild branches grafted 
in to the Abrahamic promises. In the parable, Jesus leaves them 
in the trouble, and does not refer to their final restoration to 
favor, doubtless because it was not pertinent to the feature of the 
subject treated; but Paul assures us, that when the fullness of the 
Gentiles-the Bride-be come in "they (the Israelites) shall 
obtain mercy through your (the Church's) mercy. " He assures us 
that this is God's covenant with fleshly Israel (they lost the 
higher— spiritual-promises, but are still the possessors 

R284 : page 157 

of certain earthly promises) to become the chief nation of earth, 
etc. In proof of this statement, he quotes the Prophets, saying: 
"The deliverer shall come out of Zion, (the glorified church,) 
and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob," (the fleshly seed). 
As concerning the Gospel, (high calling) they are enemies, (cast 



off) for your sakes: but as touching the election, they are 
beloved for the fathers' sakes. "For God hath concluded them all 
in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all. O the depths of 
the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! "--Rom. 
11:30-32. 



HAVING A DESIRE TO DEPART AND 
BE WITH CHRIST. 

Paul was a prisoner at Rome, awaiting freedom or death, he 
knew not which. He had, since entering the ministry, gone 
through an eventful career and endured much suffering. He 
recounts to the Philippian church that, though he has suffered 
much, it has resulted in the furtherance of the gospel. Therefore 
he rejoices. Then he muses, wondering whether it is the will of 
God that he continue to live, preach, write, and suffer, and thus 
be a blessing to the church, or whether he has done his work and 
will rest in death, being at the same time an illustrious martyr. 
And he asks himself, as it were, the question: Which would you 
prefer to do if it were left to your decision? and concludes that 
he would not know which of the two things to choose; but he 
knows of a third thing which he would be in no doubt about if 
he were at liberty to choose it. He is in a strait between two, 
having a desire for the third. 

The "Emphatic Diaglott" translates the passage thus: "Christ will 
be magnified in my body by life or by death. Therefore for me 
to live is Christ, and to die is gain. But if to live in the flesh, this 
to me is a fruit of labor; and what I should choose I do not 
exactly know: I am indeed hard pressed by the two things. I 
have an earnest desire for the RETURNING and being with 
Christ, since it is very much to be preferred. "--Phil. 1:23. 

An explanatory foot-note says, relative to the Greek Analusia, 
rendered returning, as above: Analusia, or the returning, being 
what Paul earnestly desired, could not be death or dissolution, as 
implied by the word depart in common version, because it 
seemed a matter of indifference to him which of the two—life or 
death— he should choose; but he longed for the analusia, which 
was a third thing, and very much to be preferred to either of the 
other two things alluded to. The word analusia occurs in Luke 
12:36, and is there rendered return. "Be you like men waiting for 
their master when he will return," etc. 



R284 : page 158 

PART XL 



COUNTING THE COST. 
HOW MUCH WILL YOU GIVE? 

DEAR friends we are not going to pass around the contribution 
box now, but thinking this to be an all-important question, one 
upon which depends, perhaps, as much the interest of every one 
of us, as any question we could propound, let us each for 
himself carefully consider-How much will you give for the 
gospel of Christ? But do you say, is it not a free gospel? Does 
not the prophet say "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the 
waters, and he that has no money come ye, buy, and eat; yea, 
buy wine and milk without money and without price?" Yes, that 
is a correct quotation, but there is nothing in the passage quoted 
to indicate that a man who has money can have the gospel and 
still keep his money; those who are to have it without money are 
those who have no money to pay. But sincerely, my brother, my 
sister, my friend, HOW MUCH will you give for the gospel? It 
is exceedingly valuable and you should not expect to get it for 
nothing, you should not be willing to take it for nothing if you 
could, neither can you expect to give an equivalent for it, for "its 
price is beyond rubies, and all the things thou canst desire are 
not to be compared unto it." 

Now if you have some faint idea of its value, perhaps you will 
be willing to make some offer for it. Offerings are in order for it 
now, this is "the acceptable (receivable) year of the Lord," and 
we are close to "the day of vengeance of our God: " and if you 
want a chance in the high calling, you need to be quick and 
prompt about it; we expect the quota under this call will soon be 
filled, and hope you will not be among the number who will 
"stand without knocking and saying open unto us," when it will 
be forever too late. Again we ask, How much will you give? 

R284 : page 159 

Suppose we consider the word give first in the sense of yielding, 
"give ear," are you willing to give your attention and thought to 
this gospel? Are you willing to bend your mind to it? Are you 
willing to carefully, prayerfully and persistently consider it? Are 
you willing to give it all the thought which you have hitherto 
given to matters of little or no importance? Consider it well; 
think of the hours you have spent reading works of fiction, wit 
and humor, perhaps in playing some sort of game for diversion, 
or even in reading history or secular news, mainly for the 
purpose of being considered "well informed," or possibly for the 
purpose of being qualified for some position of honor (worldly) 

R285 : page 159 

or fame. Are you willing to give way, to give that attention to 
the gospel that you have to these? Do you answer in the 
affirmative? That is well so far, but that is not enough. Are you 
willing (notice, these questions are for you to answer to yourself 
in the present tense, not to-morrow) to give in the sense of 



quitting; are you willing if this gospel requires it, to give place 
to principles which will antagonize those which you have 
hitherto entertained? Are you willing to have a radical change 
made in your mind, and in your manner of reasoning, i.e., so that 
instead of reasoning from an earthly or natural standpoint, it 
shall be from a spiritual or gospel standpoint? Earthly wisdom 
would reason, "if thine enemy hunger let him starve," and 
everything else on the same line, but heavenly wisdom waits to 
have our heavenly Father who understands all the weaknesses of 
our natures, and all the influences that have been brought to bear 
upon us, adjust matters for us, instead of taking them into our 
own hands and managing from an earthly plane, and with 
earthly wisdom; that is to say, looked at from an earthly 
standpoint, we resign our own wisdom and become fools for 
Christ's sake. You think that is giving considerable do you? 
Well it is, but you cannot become a vessel fit for the master's use 
without. Are you willing? Yes. Very well, that is good, but that 
is not enough, for this gospel very likely will reveal to you that 
very many things which you have hitherto considered harmless 
in their nature are really very injurious to you, and you will be 
called upon to give in the sense of abandoning, i.e., to let go of 
in the sense of never taking hold again-a long good-by~to the 
things you once loved; among them may be earthly hopes and 
expectations; this heavenly wisdom will teach you that all these 
are transitory and vain, and that the more you depend upon them 
the more you will be deceived by them, and the greater will be 
your disappointment, for your expectations will fail to be 
realized, and 

R285 : page 160 

your hopes will be blasted. You will find everything turned 
around under the influence of the gospel, and that the things 
which are highly esteemed among men are abominations in the 
sight of God. -Luke 16:15. Notice the words "highly esteemed 
among men;" earthly things needful for our physical well-being 
are not to be despised, nor will heavenly wisdom prompt us to 
despise them, nor are they the things referred to as highly 
esteemed among men, for men will sacrifice these for worldly 
honor and wealth. If you will give way to the influences of the 
gospel upon you, you will be led to abominate that which is 
HIGHLY esteemed among men. 

Let us see what things are highly esteemed among men; what do 
they make the greatest sacrifice for? Probably the greatest effort 
that men make is to be worshipped; honor, fame, a name among 
men; not so much to be superior as to be regarded superior. To 
have men cast out your name as evil, that is a terrible thing for a 
man who knows nothing of the gospel of Christ; to lose his 
reputation is one of the greatest, if not the greatest, calamity that 
can befall a man; he will not mind as much the loss of his 
character, but the loss of his reputation is most terrible to the 



man of the world, for if you lose this you will lose your worldly 
friends mostly; some of them will stand by if you have plenty of 
money, but it will take a great deal even of money to hold many 
friends after your reputation is all gone: so if you relinquish your 
reputation for the sake of the gospel (nothing else should induce 
a man to part with it) you will be doing pretty well, you will be 
giving considerable. Do you think you can do it? Y-e-s? Well, 
can you not say it with emphasis? "By the grace of God I will!" 
That is good. You are giving yourself poor, after the wisdom of 
this world, aren't you? Never mind, look not at the things that 
are seen; they are temporal. But you have not given enough yet- 
Have you any money? (No, we are not going to pass the 
contribution box now.) Yes, some. Well much or little you will 
need to give it, not to pay for the gospel, but out of gratitude and 
that it may be sent to others, and there are some of the Lord's 
brethren living near your house that are hungry or sick and need 
help, so your (?) money will be needed, and with it will go those 
few friends who stuck by you for your money's sake after your 
reputation was gone; you found by bitter (blessed) experience 
that a great share of your friends left you when your reputation 
did, and now the rest of your worldly friends will go and you 
will be left alone. Will you do it? "Yes, by the grace of God I 
will!" The sting of death 

R285 : page 161 

(to the world) is past, isn't it? How much easier it is to say yes, 
now. Praise the Lord! But you have not given enough yet. 

Now, my dear friend, you are not far from the kingdom. Will 
you sacrifice your ease, your comfort, yea, life itself if called 
upon? Will you let it be worn out, or burnt out, or in any way 
used up for the sake of the gospel of Christ? You will? Thank 
God! I am so glad; you will be so rich. Now let us look over this 
covenant. You have given your attention, your time, your mind, 
your reputation, your friends, your money, your life—seven 
items. You have given yourself poor indeed, haven't you? I 
acknowledge the fact: it is so, poor, very poor, and you have 
done this willingly. It makes me think of something I have 
heard, and while I am looking at you your countenance seems 
changed; you remind me of some one I have known. Ah, it 
comes to me now! Jesus of Nazareth was his name; why, how 
much you resemble him; you must be his brother. "You know 
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet 
for our sakes he became poor, that we through his poverty might 
be rich."— 2 Cor. 8:9. Why, you have done just as he did and just 
what he intended when he said: "I have given you an example 
that ye should do as I have done to you. "-John 13:15. Well, that 
is the best kind of will you could make, and I am glad to greet 
you as my brother; I also having done the same things— "for 
which cause he is not ashamed to call us brethren." -Heb. 2:1 1. 
You can afford to be poor and go about in disguise for awhile, 



now, inasmuch as you are an heir of the kingdom. "Hearken, my 
beloved brethren, hath not God chosen the poor of this world, 
rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he hath promised 
to them that love him?"— James 2:5. And now you will learn 
faster and be able to prepare yourself for regal employment in 
the royal family; for "if any man will (wills or wishes to) do his 
will, he shall know of the doctrine."-- John 7:17. You now 
belong to that company so aptly described by the poet when he 
said: 

What poor despised company 
Of travelers are these, 
Who walk in yonder narrow way, 
Along the rugged maze? 

Ah, these are of a royal line, 
All children of a King, 
Heirs of immortal crowns divine, 
And lo, for joy they sing! 



R285 : page 162 



page 162 



Why do they, then, appear so mean? 
And why so much despised? 
Because of their rich robes unseen 
The world is not apprized! 

But why keep they that narrow road, 
That rugged, thorny maze? 
Why, that's the way their leader trod; 
They love and keep his ways. 



What! is there, then, no other road 
To Salem's happy ground? 
Christ is the only way to God; 
None other can be found. " 



"ASK AND YE SHALL RECEIVE." 

To as many as have carefully read this little pamphlet and 
become deeply interested in the subjects as herein presented, we 
would say: If you want further reading-matter on these subjects, 
write to us. If you are desirous of having preaching on these 
glorious themes, let us know, and we will endeavor to have the 
want supplied. If you want some of 

These Pamphlets Free for your Friends, 

whom you think would be interested in reading them, write, 
stating how many you can use judiciously. 



We expect to issue soon a FREE TRACT, entitled, "THE 
TABERNACLE AND ITS TEACHINGS: "-Ask and ye shall 
receive. 

Address, "ZION'S WATCH TOWER," No. 101 Fifth Avenue, 
Pittsburgh, Pa., U.S.A. 



R286 : page 1 

VOL. III. 
PITTSBURGH, PA., OCTOBER AND NOVEMBER, 1881. 

NOS. 4 & 5. 

(TEN PAGES.) 



pagel 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he can not and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS :~Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send 
paper-money or three cent stamps to the amount of two dollars 
by mail at our risk. Larger amounts by Check, P.O. Money 
Order or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 



R286 : page 1 

TERMS AS BEFORE. 

We were too hasty in the matter of discarding the old terms 
from our paper as mentioned in the July number. 

The government law regulating postage supposes that any paper 
offered gratis is an advertisement only, and will allow none such 
to go at newspaper rates, but charge four times as much for 



postage on them. By taking off the price we came in conflict 
with that law, and it cost us over eighty dollars for the lesson on 
the July issue. 

We visited the Postoffice authorities at Washington, but could 
obtain no deviation from the law, and consequently are obliged 
to put some price on the paper, as before. 

We can and do say this, however, there will be a special fund for 
the payment of subscriptions of all who want the WATCH 
TOWER but cannot afford to pay for it. To all such we say: 
Send your names, and the Lord will supply your subscription 
money. You need not be troubled about the matter. 



R286 : page 1 



JEHOVAH'S FEET. 



"Thus saith Jehovah, Heaven is my throne and earth is my foot- 
stool." Isa. 66:1. [Literal Hebrew trans.] 

The word feet is sometimes used in Scripture, as in this text, to 
represent permanent establishment, or rest. Stephen, after 
quoting the above (Acts 7:49), adds the words: "What is the 
place of my rest"~residence? 

Jehovah used his footstool before sin entered, but since then he 
has removed his presence and allowed sin to reign and Satan to 
be "The prince (ruler) of this world." (John 14:30.) In a typical 
way he established his presence among the Israelites in the 
Tabernacle and Temple, and in a higher and better sense, his 
presence has been in the Gospel church as in a shifting tent or 
Tabernacle, all through the Gospel age, but soon the Temple 
glory or his presence in the Glorified church— head and body- 
will be manifested to the world. And in that glorious reign of the 
Christ complete, typified by Solomon's peaceful reign, and 
under the shadow of that glorious temple with all its attendant 
power and glory, of which that made with hands was a type, all 
the families of the earth shall be blessed, and brought into 
complete harmony with God and all sin and every opponent of 
right, having been destroyed-then the knowledge of the Lord 
will fill the whole earth; the wilderness shall sing and the 
solitary place be glad. Then, all the ends of the earth (people) 
shall have remembered and turned to the Lord, and the glory of 
the Lord shall fill the whole earth. 

Thus it is that Jehovah prepares and cleanses his footstool to 
place his feet there, that his presence may abide with the 
restored race of men and be their joy and blessing; and thus we 
read the declaration of Jehovah (Isa. 60:13): "I will make the 
place of my feet glorious." 



In harmony with this same thought we find in Zech. 14:3,5, a 
description of when and how, Jehovah will establish his feet, or 
residence. This Scripture as well as some of those above quoted, 
which we have applied to the Father ~Jehovah~are often 
misapplied to our Lord Jesus; and while Jesus and his church 
will doubtless be the active agents of Jehovah in subduing all 
things (Phil. 3:21), yet the fact remains, that the work here 
mentioned is Jehovah's, and the Hebrew text leaves no question 
about it. 

We will quote and apply this prophecy: "Then shall the Lord 
[Jehovah] go forth and fight against those nations, as when he 
fought in the day of battle." The scene is laid in "the time of 
trouble," probably near its close, (perhaps, as we read the 
prophecy, about 1914 A.D.) It is surely during "the day of the 
Lord" (verse 1) when the first return of Israelites to Palestine 
will have taken place [a second and greater returning mentioned 
by the prophets evidently will not take place until after the time 
of trouble.] The Israelites will have been in comparative peace 
and security there and measurably free from the trouble which, 
meantime, will have been disturbing and overturning and 
impoverishing the nations of the earth. Their wealth and 
prosperity excite the cupidity of the nations, which we read 
come up against "my people Israel dwelling safely in their own 
land.. .to take a spoil and a prey." (Ezek. 38:8,12.) 

The battle at first goes against Israel, as described in verse 2; 
then, the time having come for a manifestation of God's justice 
against the nations and his favor to his anciently favored people, 
He manifests his power and fights against the nations, not by 
Jesus and the saints appearing on a mountain with carnal 
weapons, but we read "as he (Jehovah) fought in the day of 
battle." Jehovah fought Israel's battles anciently without being 
seen by other than the eyes of their understanding. 

Thus the Angel of the Lord slew (with death) the hosts of the 
Assyrians (Isa. 37:36); put to flight the Midianites (Judges 7:21), 
and "smote great nations and slew mighty kings." (Psa. 35:10.) 
And "as" he fought for Israel then, so he is to do again at their 
deliverance. The deliverance will be so great and marked, that 
they will recognize God's power and favor, and being blessed by 
being brought to a condition of nearness to God, in prayer and 
supplication, they will come to a full recognition of the fact, that 
as a people, they had rejected and pierced their Redeemer. 
"They shall look upon (recognize) him whom they have 
pierced," and shall all mourn because of Him. (Zech. 12:8,10.) 

Verse 4: "And His (Jehovah's) feet shall stand (be established) in 
that day upon the Mount of Olives." This is another picture of 
the establishment of Jehovah's dominion. As the above 
description showed us how it will be manifested to Israel that 
God's arm is ruling, now we get the inside or spiritual view of 
the kingdom's establishment, and appropriately, symbols are 



used in the description. The feet of Jehovah standing or resting- 
the Mt. of Olives— its location to the east (or sun-rising) of 
Jerusalem (the peaceful habitation) -the division of the 
mountain into two parts-the valley formed into which Israel 
will flee, &c; these all we understand to be symbols; as also the 
reference in verses 6 and 7 to the day of the Lord being a dark 
day. It remains dark until the close of this period of trouble, or 
until the evening of that dark day, then— "at evening it shall be 
light;" that is when the day of wrath is over the Sun of 
Righteousness will arise with healing in his wings-blessing and 
restoring morally and physically. 

A mountain is a symbol of a kingdom, and Mt. Olivet would 
signify Kingdom of Light and Peace. Then, in this "day of the 
Lord," already begun, Jehovah will establish himself in a 
Kingdom of light and peace. This, we believe, will be 
accomplished through his representative, Jesus, who takes his 
great power and reigns. The organization of his church-the dead 
by resurrection and the living members by change to the same 
condition (spiritual bodies), we understand to be the 
organization of the kingdom whose exaltation to power, 
invisibly smites and consumes evil systems and governments. 
(By the teaching of the Word, we understand that this 
organization of the kingdom began in 1878, and will be 
complete when the living members are "ready.") 

This kingdom once established is Jehovah's foothold, and is to 
be the source of government from which shall emanate the laws, 
etc., for the guidance and blessing of mankind. (Another figure 
being Mt. Zion.) 

The division of the mountain into two parts represents the two 
phases of the kingdom of God: one the higher, spiritual, 
invisible kingdom, composed of Jesus and the Gospel church; 
the other the earthly phase of the kingdom, composed of 
perfected fleshly beings, visible to humanity- Abraham, Isaac 
and Jacob and all the prophets, and all those of past ages 
justified by their faith. 

The valley represents a place of favor and protection, made and 
guaranteed by both the heavenly and earthly phases of kingdom 
power; and into this place of protection and safety Israel is 
represented as fleeing. Then they shall recognize him whom 
they have pierced. 

The earthly phase of the kingdom will thus be seen to be 
essentially Israelitish, and according to the promises of God, 
ungodliness shall be turned from Israel (Rom. 1 1 :26) and they 
shall come to the inheritance of the land, and promises 
vouchsafed to Abraham; and then the fleshly seed of Abraham 
will be used as the agents of Jehovah in carrying to the world the 
blessings purchased by Christ, the higher, spiritual seed of him 
whom Abraham typified-Jehovah. 



This earthly part of the kingdom is to spread and increase until it 
fills the whole earth and is under the whole heaven, and the 
kings of the earth shall bring their glory and honor into it-by 
coming into harmony with its laws. 

These two parts of the kingdom will be in perfect harmony; the 
earthly being under the control and direction of the heavenly. 
The law shall go forth from Mt. Zion, the spiritual phase, and 
the word of the Lord from Jerusalem," the earthly phase. (Isa. 

2:3.) 

Though in due time there will be an earthly element of the 
kingdom visible to humanity, which shall be a praise in the 
whole earth, yet in the 

R287 : page 1 

inception of the kingdom it will not have this double character. 
[Jehovah's feet stand on the Mount of Olives as one at first, 
before its division.] And so we read that when demanded of the 
Pharisees when the kingdom of God should come, Jesus 
answered and said: The kingdom of Heaven cometh not with 
observation, neither shall ye say, Lo here! or lo there! 

R287 : page 2 

for behold it will be in your midst. (Luke 17:20.) That is to say- 
the kingdom of God will be among but invisible to men in its 
coming. It is only after it has come and done a work, that the 
visible phase is due- during the Millennial age. 

It is for this kingdom in both its phases (especially the spiritual, 
where our inheritance is) that we pray "Thy kingdom come; Thy 
will be done on earth as it is in heaven. " Oh, may the time soon 
come when Jehovah's feet will be established and his footstool 
made glorious ! 



R287 : page 2 



THE FEET OF CHRIST. 



"How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of Him that 
bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace, that bringeth good 
tidings of good, that publisheth salvation: that saith unto Zion, 
Thy God reigneth." Isa. 52:7. 

Among the many beautiful and appropriate figures used to 
represent the "little flock" and their union with Jesus, is that of a 
human body- Jesus the head, and the true church the members 
of the body. 

Sometimes, as in 1 Cor. 12:13-27, all the parts are represented in 
any assemblage of the church, the hand and foot, &c, as well as 
the various excellent qualities which belong to the head- 
hearing, seeing and expression. Thus the head of the church is 



present with the members of his body whenever two or three or 
more of them meet-in his name; and the body is complete and 
as effective for growth in Grace, Knowledge and Love (and far 
more so) as if hundreds of unbelievers and merely nominal 
Christians were present. When thus spoken of the more able and 
intelligent ones are mentioned in contrast with the less brilliant 
by calling one class head (Eye, Ear, etc.,) and the other class 
feet. (vs. 21). Thus mentioned the word feet will be seen to 
mean the lowest members which require the especial assistance 
of the others. 

But another sense in which feet may be understood, is as 
indicating the last part, or completion of the body. So to speak 
The Christ has been in process of development during the 
Gospel age-the head first and we, the living, representing the 
feet, last. This certainly is not an unreasonable deduction, and 
there are several texts which seem to indicate that the last 
members of the overcoming band, are mentioned especially 
under the term "feet"~not in the sense of degraded but as the 
last-or end of the "little flock." 

The Scripture above cited is of this character, and while Paul 
quotes a part of it (Rom. 10:15) "How beautiful are the feet of 
them that preach the Gospel of peace and bring glad tidings of 
good things," and while it has undoubtedly been true of all the 
members of the Body of Christ, that they were the bearers of 
glad tidings, and that to all who received the message their 
footsteps were welcome, yet it is true also that the proclamation 
of many of the sweetest notes of the glad tidings of restitution, 
are reserved until now during the sounding of the seventh 
trumpet. (Rev. 10:7, Rom. 16:25) when the mystery of God is 
finished, which he hath kept secret from the foundations of the 
World. 

Truly ours is a choice and favored day compared with any age 
of the church, for though God's Word has always been a lamp to 
enlighten "the body" all through the dark night, yet it is true, that 
in an especial sense it is giving light to the "feet," as we read: 
"Thy word is a light to my feet." Living in the time of the 
fulfillment of so much prophecy we walk in the blazing light of 
our lamp, and on us and our day the eyes of all "the body" 
throughout this age have anxiously rested; and of our day~"The 
day of the Lord," and our gathering together unto him, both Paul 
and Peter wrote more frequently than of their own day. Hence it 
need not surprise us, if under the figure of "feet" the Prophets 
mention us. 

There is one part of the text above quoted, which certainly was 
never applicable to any but the present members; this part Paul 
omits, because it was not applicable until now, viz.: "That saith 
unto Zion thy God reigneth. " 



As we saw in the July number, in the application of Isa. 61 by 
Jesus, he used such part of the quotation as was applicable to his 
preaching and left unquoted the words- "the day of vengeance 
of our God," because the proclamation of the day of vengeance 
was not due until our day, and therefore while the whole 
message referred to, has been proclaimed by the Christ, yet only 
the feet have been privileged to utter it all. So with the Scripture 
now under consideration; Jesus and the Apostles had a great and 
important part in proclaiming "the good tidings of good," but 
only the feet of him have been privileged to say "unto Zion thy 
Godreigneth." 

The beauty of the feet's position, and the honor connected with 
their proclamation does not appear to the eyes of the World. Oh 
no, none of the members of the Christ have been of earth's 
heroes or wise, but in their eyes "we are counted fools." No, it is 
from the spiritual standpoint of God and of those who have ears 
to hear, that the tidings bearers are esteemed. We rejoice then in 
our privilege as being among those who announce to Zion these 
tidings that the kingdom began in 1878. 

At present our tidings can only be received by faith in the same 
authority on which we base our statements -the Word of God- 
consequently, not many are now able to hear. But soon there 
will be abundant evidence of the truth of the statement in the 
crumbling and falling of the various systems of iniquity-both in 
the uprooting of the blasphemous heresies of the church, Roman 
Harlot, and Protestant daughters; and afterward, in the judgment 
and chastisement of the nations of earth, who through these false 
teachings, have established oppressive governments, which the 
harlot churches assure them are Christian governments, telling 
the people they are of God's appointment and are the "Kingdoms 
of our Lord and of His Christ." 

Receiving their original right (?) of ruling, from Papacy, these 
kingdoms are to-day recognized and blessed by all the 
daughters. But these are all parts of that great system of Anti- 
Christ, or opposition to the real church and Kingdom of God 
mentioned by Paul (2 Thes. 2:8) which the Lord shall consume 
by the spirit of his mouth (truth) and destroy by the bright 
shining of his presence. 

Truth, the spirit of the Lord's mouth, may come through a 
thousand channels, even blasphemous infidelity may be one of 
the agencies, and we believe it is the truth uttered, though mixed 
with error and blasphemy, which is the secret of power against 
Babylon, for it strikes her on her time honored and festering 
sores of error. It is truth with respect to human rights and 
equality, which is now moving Communists, Nihilists and 
Socialists to resist oppressive governments, and which will in 
time overthrow them; and truth it is, which will prepare the 
world for the blessed reign and rule of the kingdom of God, 
though in the development of truth, in its various branches, both 



the nominal church and the world must pass a terrible baptism of 
trouble: -Yet in it all, truth will be conqueror and come off 
victorious, because now, the rule and government has been 
assumed by "Him whose right it is." He has taken to himself his 
great power and his reign is commenced, consequently we may 
soon expect the wrath and angry nations of Rev. 11:18. 

How clear it is then, that the declaration to Zion, "Thy God 
reigneth," is due now before the feet are joined to the body in 
Glory, and before the judgments of the Lord go abroad; for then 
it will need no proclamation; it will be manifest to all by the 
outward signs that the kingdom is set up-even the tribes of the 
earth shall then see-recognize-that the great day of his wrath is 
come. 

It is the feet of the Christ that bring the glad tidings, though 
others may echo and re-echo the glad song. 

Again, David who often represents or personifies The Christ, 
says: Jehovah -"Brought me up out of a horrible pit (depth of 
confusion) out of the miry clay, and set my feet upon a rock and 
established my goings." (Psa. 40:2.) We might make a similar 
application of this scripture. The whole body of the Christ 
(except the head) was down in the pit of confusion and mire of 
sin; all through this Gospel age Jehovah has been lifting them 
up, or taking out a people for his name-separating such from 
the world and mire of sin; and last to be lifted up are the feet, 
and truly the feet have been placed upon the rock of truth. 

While the whole body has had truth as a basis of faith and trust, 
yet undoubtedly the feet are more firmly established by it, than 
any previous part of the body, because we live in the time where 
the light of all past ages centers and the mystery of God is 
finished. 

How firm a foundation ye saints of the Lord, 
Is laid for your faith in his excellent Word. 

Again, while it is true that all members of the body, sung a new 
song of praise to God when lifted from the depths of confusion 
and mire of sin, yet it is especially true of the feet-the song of 
praise breaks forth as soon as the feet touch the solid rock of 
truth and realize that- 

R288 : page 2 



There's a wideness in God's Mercy 
Like the wideness of the Sea. 

They can now sing with double joy the restitution song- 
All nations which thou hast made 
Shall come and worship before thee. 



And as we saw some time since (Article- "Having Harps of 
God,") the position of the feet and their song are beautifully 
described in symbol, in-Rev. 15:2-4. 

Again, we find a striking reference to the feet of the Christ in 
Psa. 91:11-12 "He [Jehovah] shall give his angels charge over 
thee to keep thee in all thy ways: They shall bear thee up in their 
hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone. " 

This prophecy by David refers to the Christ as a whole; its 
personal application by Satan was rejected by Jesus as a 
misapplication of Scripture (Luke 4:12) but when we apply the 
reference to "foot," to the feet or last part of the body of Christ, 
all is harmonious. The stone referred to, we understand to be the 
same as that of Isa. 8:14, viz.: That Jesus is the stone of 
stumbling. 

Jesus at the first advent was a stone of stumbling before the feet 
of the nominal Jewish church, and they stumbled over him 
because, being out of harmony with God, they could not see in 
him the Messiah. In their pride of heart, they, especially the 
Pharisees and Doctors of Divinity, were sure that Messiah 
would come in their way, and own and accept of them as a 
people. They stumbled and were broken as an institution. But 
the real feet of the real Jewish church-the "Israelites indeed"- 
these received the present Messiah and were blessed and lifted 
up by that "stone" to the higher plane of the Gospel church. "To 
as many as received him, to them, gave he liberty to become 
sons of God." (The Jewish house was the house of servants -the 
Gospel house a house of Sons.) 

As there was a stone and stumbling there, in their "harvest," or 
end of their age, so the parallelism which we find associating the 
Gospel age with its shadow, the Jewish age, demands that the 
stone should be present in the path of the Gospel church, to be 
either accepted or rejected; and if the parallelism continue (as 
we see it has) then we should expect that here the feet of the 
nominal church would stumble as its shadow did, and for the 
same reasons. And so we find it, the living generation of the 
nominal church-the feet, have failed to discern the presence of 
the Lord-"they knew not the time of their visitation" -and all 
but the true feet of the true body have stumbled as it is written, 
He shall be for a stone of stumbling and rock of offence to both 
the houses of Israel. To "Israel after the flesh" he presented 
himself in the flesh, and to the spiritual Israel he presented 
himself a spiritual body -to each on their own plane. 

But we cannot for a moment doubt, that as Jesus at the first 
advent took special care to make himself known to every 
"Israelite indeed" and gave such, clear evidences (while to 
others he spoke in parables and dark sayings) (Psa. 78:2) so here 
at the second advent, every one wholly consecrated to God, (not 
to churches and creeds) and as such a part of the true feet, are to 



be made aware of that presence, and consequently do not 
stumble over it. This special care for all such, is what is referred 
to by the text considered- "He shall give his angels charge, &c, 
lest thou dash thy foot against a stone. " 

Only the feet could stumble over such a stone, and the stone of 
stumbling was not in the path of the members of the body which 
preceded us. And when we look back and see how closely "the 
lamp" was put "to the feet" and how it was kept trimmed and 
burning that its light shone out brightly, revealing to us the stone 
which nominal Zion stumbles over and is shipwrecked upon, but 
which to us is a tried stone, elect, precious, the head of the 
corner or the chief stone of all in the glorious spiritual Temple, 
we thank God for His care over us, and rejoice that we are 
counted worthy to be members of that company, which in the 
eyes of the world has no beauty that they should desire it, but 
which is as a root out of dry ground—the feet of Him that 
bringeth glad tidings, that saith unto Zion Thy God reigneth. 



R288 : page 3 



OUR NEW NAME. 



"And this is the name wherewith SHE shall be called, The Lord 
our Righteousness." - Jer. 33:16. 

Thy name Oh! Heavenly Bridegroom, 
Can we ever hope to bear? 
Shall we see thy matchless glory, 
And in thy kingdom share? 

With smiles of loving welcome, 
Wilt Thou say to us well done? 
When our pilgrim days are ended, 
And our race for life is run? 

Yes, I hear Thee sweetly saying, 
In words of love divine, 
"If now with me thou'lt suffer, 
My glory shall be thine. 

If now with me thou'rt crucified 
New life to Thee I'll give, 
And through eternal ages, 
My bride shall with me live. 

Oh glorious fount of blessing, 
We will haste without delay, 
Our little all, to Thee to give, 
Who dost such joys repay; 



We care not Lord for earthly fame, 
Its honors, or its pride, 
But let us bear Thy sacred name, 
And own us as Thy bride. 

Thy name above all others grand, 
Which Thy waiting bride shall own; 
When Thou shalt call her to thy side 
And share with her Thy throne; 

Through realms of fadeless glory, 
Shall all its power confess; 
And every tongue on earth shall praise, 
"The Lord our righteousness." 



Mrs. A. Agens, N.J. 



R288 : page 3 

"AND THE DOOR WAS SHUT." 

For the sake of the many new readers of the WATCH TOWER, 
it may not be amiss to give a general review of the steps of faith 
by which the Lord has been leading us as a people, during the 
last seven years, and in a general sense during the preceding 
thirty -five years. 

The parable of "The Ten Virgins" (Matt. 25) seems to have been 
given as a pen picture of some of the important events connected 
with the close of the Gospel Age. The introduction of the 
parable shows this, for after recounting to the disciples (Matt. 
24) some of the signs of the ending of the Gospel Age and the — 
parousia-presence of the Son of Man, which verse 37 assures 
them will be a presence which the world cannot recognize, then 
follows the parable, connected with the preceding statements by 
the word then. "Then shall the kingdom of heaven (church) be 
likened unto ten virgins which took their lamps (Bibles) and 
went forth to meet the Bridegroom" (i.e.,) they went forth or 
separated themselves because of their belief that the 
Bridegroom, Jesus, was about to come. 

While we are neither "Millerites" nor "Adventists," yet we 
believe that this much of this parable met its fulfillment in 1 843 
and 1 844, when William Miller and others, Bible in hand, 
walked out by faith on its statements, expecting Jesus at that 
time. They were composed like all other earthly companies of 
two or more classes; one class had the Spirit in their hearts as 
well as its light in the Word (oil in their vessels and in their 
lamps) others had only the light of the Word (oil in the lamp). 

The disappointment of that company of Christians (which was 
composed of many of the best Christians from all 
denominations) all are well aware of, but it was foretold in the 



parable: "While the Bridegroom tarried they all slumbered and 
slept." As a general arousing of the church to the investigation 
of God's Word had attended the preaching of Mr. Miller, and the 
Word was more studied than ever before, especially the 
Prophecies, so when his calculations seemed to end in such 
bitter disappointment, a spirit of drowsiness followed; some 
slumbered, some slept, and many vagaries—dreamings incidental 
to sleep soon sprung up. 

The next important step of the parable (verse 6) is the midnight 
cry. The night of the parable was the time during which the 
disappointment lasted and the sleeping occurred, and was to end 
with joy in the morning, when, the tarrying being ended, the 
Bridegroom would be present. 

As the former movement in the parable had been represented by 
Miller and others, so to this second movement we give a similar 

application. A brother, B of Rochester, was, we 

believe, the chosen vessel of God through whom the "Midnight 
Cry" issued to the sleeping virgins of Christ, announcing a 
discrepancy of thirty years in some of Miller's calculations, and 
giving a rearrangement of the same argument (and some 
additional), proving that the night of the parable was thirty years 

R289 : page 3 

long, and that the morning was in 1873, and the Bridegroom due 
in that morning in 1874. 

We do not here give the time, arguments or proofs. They are 
familiar to many, and can be had in more convenient shape. We 
merely notice here that the Bible chronology, first dug from 
Scripture by Bo wen, of England, which shows clearly and 
positively that the 6,000 years from Adam ended in 1873, and 
consequently that there the morning of the Millennial day (the 
seventh thousand) began, in which a variety of things are due. 
The establishment of the kingdom of Christ, the binding of 
Satan, the restitution of all things, and the blessing of all the 
families of the earth, are all due. And if all these things are due 
during this thousand years which commenced in 1873, surely 
one of the first things due and on which the others all depend, is 
the coming of the Bridegroom, who must first exalt his church 
[establish his kingdom] before it can bless, restore or bind. 

Bro. B first began to preach the message, and soon 

started a paper, which he appropriately called "The Midnight 
Cry," the circulation of which soon ran up to 15,000 copies a 
month, and served to arouse many of the drowsy to a fresh 
examination and trimming of their lamps. These began again to 
search the Scriptures for the time of the Bridegroom's coming. 

But the disappointment had served an intended purpose in 
casting a reproach on the subject of "time," and the prudent ones 
had reached the worldly-wise conclusion that having been 



disappointed once and consequently had the finger of scorn 
pointed at them, they would be more prudent in future, and not 
expose themselves to contempt; so there was a division of the 
company; some could see it and others could not. ("Thou hast 
hid these things from the (worldly) wise and prudent, and hast 
revealed them unto babes.") Some rejoiced in the midnight 
message that the Bridegroom was due in 1 874, and were able to 
find the evidences in the light of their lamps; others admitted 
that though Scripture contained a great deal of "time," yet they 
were so fearful and prudent that their lamps would give no light. 
Thus they said: "Our lamps are gone out." Thus one separation 
took place. 

When 1 874 came and there was no outward sign of Jesus in the 
literal clouds and in a fleshly form, there was a general re- 
examination of all the arguments upon which the "Midnight 
Cry" was made. And when no fault or flaw could be found, it 
led to the critical examination of the Scriptures which seem to 
bear on the manner of Christ's coming, and it was soon 
discovered that the expectation of Jesus in the flesh at the 
second advent was the mistake; that the human nature had been 
taken for the purpose of giving a ransom for humanity, and that 
the human nature remains a sacrifice forever; that Jesus, though 
put to death in the flesh, was quickened or made alive in spirit- 
Sown a natural body, raised a spiritual body, &c, and that all 
spiritual bodies can be present unseen. Soon too, under critical 
examination Matt. 24:37 and Luke 17:26,30 were seen to teach 
positively that "in the presence" of Christ, "in his days," the 
world would be ignorant of the fact, and be attending to their 
affairs as usual. Then the words of Paul: "Ye brethren are not in 
darkness that that day should come upon you as a thief," 
indicated that the church should possess a light on the subject 
while the world would be in ignorance. Peter's words, too, were 
in harmony: "Take heed to the sure word of prophesy, which 
shines as a light in a dark place. " 

When this was seen it was apparent at once that the "time" 
element of the Scriptures was intended only for those who 
would walk very close to the Lord and feed on his Word, and 
not to scare the world into repentance. How necessary too, if the 
manner of Christ's coming was such that the world would not 
know, but would eat, plant and build as usual, that there should 
be some source of information to the waiting virgins, else they 
too, would be in darkness. How reasonable, too, that the 
knowledge of Christ's presence should be presented to the 
household of faith in the same way all other blessings had been 
received, viz.: by faith in the statements of the Word of God. It 
is thus they knew of their justification from all sin; thus they 
heard the call to become the Bride and joint heirs; thus they see 
the crown of life and all the exceeding great and precious 
promises-and thus they receive the knowledge of the presence 



of the Bridegroom-by faith built on the statements of God 
through Jesus, the apostles and prophets. 

This increase of knowledge, led to still greater faith in the 
"time," for it was evident that the Lord was leading, and every 
item of light added increased brightness to others. It was the 
same light and the same oil shining more and more. 

It was evident, then, that though the manner in which they had 
expected Jesus was in error, yet the time, as indicated by the 
"Midnight Cry," was correct, and that the Bridegroom came in 
the Autumn of 1874, and he appeared to the eyes of faith- seen 
by the light of the lamp-the Word. Afterward it was seen that 
the thirty years of tarrying between 1 844 and 1 874 was the exact 
parallel to the thirty years of tarrying at the first advent, from the 
time the wise men visited the babe until Jesus stood on Jordan 
and was anointed with the Holy Ghost for his work, at thirty 
years of age. (Acts 10:38.) 

This and other points of similarity brought attention to the fact 
that the Jewish and Gospel ages had been parallels in their 
general details, both being of the same length, and both ending 
with comings of Jesus and the closing period in each case, called 
a "harvest," or end of the age. Examination of the Word 
disclosed the fact that God had so ordered the Jewish age and 
people, &c, as that they were made a pattern or "shadow" on a 
fleshly plane, of things to take place in the Gospel age on a 
higher plane. The fact that the "time arguments" proved this 
parallelism was additional evidence that they were correct, and 
these wonderful parallelisms soon became one of the leading 
evidences that we are in the "Harvest," or end of the Gospel age, 
and that the Reaper is present, separating with the sickle of truth 
the wheat and tares. As there were seven years of "favor" to the 
Jews from the time Jesus' ministry began (the 70th week of 
Daniel 9:27), followed by thirty-three years of trouble called 
fire, so here we see the parallel of seven years of favor to 
October 3d, 1881, to the Gospel church, to be followed by 
trouble called "fire," which will consume the dross of Babylon 
and purify those of God's children in and contaminated by her. 

To return to the parable. If these movements were of God, and if 

Bros. Miller and B were his instruments, then that 

"Midnight Cry," based on the prophetic and other statements 
and evidences, was correct, and the "Bridegroom came" in 1874. 
We believe that Midnight Cry was of God, and was fulfilled by 
the Bridegroom's coming, not because Bros. Miller and 

B claimed it, but because the Word of God supports 

it. 

How firm a foundation, ye saints of the Lord, 
Is laid for your faith in His excellent Word. 

The next step in the parable, after the Bridegroom comes, is an 
assembling in his presence of those who are to be united to him 



and to become his bride. "The Bridegroom came, and they that 
were ready went in with him to the marriage" (verse 10.) The 
going in, like all other features of the parable, is a work of time, 
and we understand that it has been in progress during the seven 
years from 1874. Those who went in with him must all have 
recognized his presence; they include, we believe, saints out of 
all denominations who had made themselves living sacrifices to 
God (not sacrifices to sectarian churches and creeds -so many 
do this and call it sacrificing to God). Such as sacrificed self and 
became as little children, we believe the Lord has led during the 
past seven years, to a knowledge of the Bridegroom's presence, 
and as they accepted it, they "went in with him to the marriage." 
The marriage has not yet taken place. It could not until all had 
gone in. 

The seven years which ended October 3d, 1881, were years of 
favor during the presence, that of the living generation all of 
readiness of heart might become members of the little flock and 
enter into the joys of our Lord's presence. If our application of 
Scripture be correct, the favor has now ended, and in the 
language of the parable, "the door was shut"; and to those who 
have never fully consecrated and sacrificed self to God, we 
cannot any longer hold out the great prize of our high calling, 
viz.: to be members of the Bride of Christ, joint heirs of Glory, 
Honor and Immortality. 

But, thank God, we do not have it to say that the door OF 
MERCY has closed. Oh, no! "His mercy endureth forever." And 
while we call it the door of favor, yet we understand 

R289 : page 4 

the Word to teach that God has many favors to many classes of 
His children. He has favors and mercies for those who have 
covenanted and failed to make living sacrifices of themselves. 
He has mercies and favors for Israel according to the flesh, and 
still other blessings for "all the families of the earth." But the 
favor or opportunity of being members of the Royal family and 
partakers of the Divine nature is the chief prize, and those who, 
during the Gospel age, have won this prize by so running as to 
obtain must first be crowned before the other favors and 
blessings can be given to the other classes-these with Jesus, 
their head, constituting the seed in whom all the families of the 
earth shall be blessed. 

It is not ours to say which, individually, are shut out, but we 
believe that none were shut out who up to that time, had made 
an entire consecration to God. 

Does some one inquire: Why has the "marriage" not taken place 
if all 

R290 : page 4 



have gone in and the door is shut? We answer that we have not 
expected the "marriage" as soon as the door would shut, this 
parable and other Scripture illustrations seeming to demand a 
waiting time after the door was shut before the union with the 
Bridegroom. Suppose it were an earthly marriage, and the 
announcement was made that the door would open at 2 P.M. and 
close at 4 o'clock. Some would come early and others later; on 
arrival there would be more or less preparation to make, and 
when, at 4 o'clock, the door closed, it is only reasonable to 
suppose that some time would intervene before the ceremonies. 
So here the "gathering together unto Him" of those who have 
made a covenant by sacrifice (Psa. 50:5), i.e., their going in to 
the marriage, has been in progress for seven years, and each, as 
he entered the wedding apartments, has become exercised in 
having his garments without spot and wrinkle before him— our 
Bridegroom, and our efforts extend to all who enter, for the 
Bride is to "make herself ready." (Rev. 19:7.) And if some came 
in very recently they, as members of the prospective Bride, 
require time and help to make them ready; besides who will say 
that others who have been rejoicing in the presence of the 
Bridegroom and waiting for the marriage; may not yet need the 
application of water (truth) and washing by water through the 
Word. (Eph. 5:26.) 

Let us then not forget nor neglect these two things: First, to see 
that our own sacrifice is complete; and, second, to help one 
another to prepare for the great climax of our hopes; for who 
will say that though the door may be closed so that none will be 
allowed to enter, some may not be cast out "into outer darkness" 
if they be not ready for the marriage. 

The next item to be noticed in the parable is that afterward came 
the other virgins, saying (after the door was shut: "Lord, Lord, 
open unto us." This, if we read the parable aright, indicates that 
after the door is shut, and apparently before the marriage takes 
place, some who now scoff at the idea of the Lord's presence 
will come to see differently, and entreat that they be admitted to 
be part of the Bride. 

From other Scriptures it seems evident that their knowledge of 
the presence of the Lord came not from the light shining from 
the lamp of prophecy, but rather from the judgments upon the 
nominal church, which we believe are now fully due, and will 
soon come. These judgments will prepare them for truth by 
convincing them of the multitudinous errors of doctrines and 
systems in Babylon. If our inferences here be correct, that these 
will come to knock because of judgments manifesting the 
presence of the Lord, and if this knock is prior to the marriage, it 
would seem as though the marriage is some time after the door 
closes. How long—weeks or months— we at present have nothing 
to indicate, but we shall see from other types, &c, other things 
due here. 



The Lord's answer to those knocking too late, we understand to 
mean: "I do not recognize you as part of my Bride; my espoused 
one has come in with me. I have only one bride. They must go 
through the time of trouble, and if they will may be of the great 
multitude, who come out of great tribulation, who shall be 
before the throne and serve God." (Rev. 7:9.) 

This will be a glorious place and portion, though not so glorious 
as that of the Bride, to sit with him on His throne. 



R292 : page 4 

THE TEMPLE BUILDING TYPE. 

In a previous number, we called attention to what we believe to 
be a type, viz.: The temple. The church of Christ is repeatedly 
mentioned under the figure of a temple. Jesus spoke to the Jews 
concerning the temple of his body, saying, destroy this temple 
and in three days I will raise it up. We understand of course that 
he referred to his own resurrection, which would be in three 
days after death; yet we believe that his words referred also to 
his body, the church, and were a sort of prophetic forecast. 
Dividing the 6000 years from Adam to 1 873 into large days or 
periods of 1000 years each, we have six days of a great week. 
When Jesus uttered the words quoted, 4000 years (4 days) were 
past and he was in the fifth. Since 1873, we are in the seventh 
thousand years, or seventh day. Count the fifth, sixth and 
seventh and we have the third day or epoch from the time Jesus 
uttered the words. 

During these years the church of Christ has been subject to 
death, and on the third day, the day or period already entered 
upon, this temple is to be reared up and glorified, to be the place 
of blessing to the world. 

We make a similar application of Luke 13:32,33. "Go ye and tell 
that fox, behold I cast out devils, and I do cures to-day and to- 
morrow, and the third day I shall be perfected." In fact, Jesus as 
the head represents the whole Christ so thoroughly, that 
whatever might be said of him could be applied on a still larger 
and grander scale, to the body and seed of which he is the head. 

Both Peter and Paul refer to this temple type, saying that we as 
living stones are built up a spiritual house, which building fitly 
framed together groweth into a holy temple. (1 Pet. 2:5 and Eph. 
2:21.) And looking back, we not unreasonably suppose, that as 
Solomon himself was a type of Christ, so his great temple may 
have been a type or symbol of the greater temple of living stones 
which Jesus has been building during this Gospel Age. 

As the stones underwent much cutting and polishing and fitting, 
from the time they left the quarry, so those who are to be of the 



living stones in the greater temple, must undergo much fitting, 
shaping, etc., from the time they leave the quarry before they are 
laid in the temple. 

In the typical, there came a time when no more stones were 
quarried for the temple, though doubtless the quarrying 
continued, the stones afterward being designed for other 
buildings; so here there came a time when no more stones were 
selected for the temple, or highest position. Though God still 
calls, it is for other than temple stones, for when a temple is 
complete, it would only mar it to add to perfection. 

Since we believe that the living stones for the temple are 
selected and the temple is nearly or quite finished, we ask 
ourselves—what next? This was the question which Solomon 
must have asked as the temple was finished. The next thing was 
to have Jehovah come into it with his glory; so here we now 
wait for the glory to be revealed in us. 

The fact that the glory did not instantly fill the temple when 
complete, should teach us that we need not expect the glory as 
soon as "the door" closes and the antitypical temple is complete. 

An account of what was done in the typical temple when it was 
finished, and before it was glorified, is recorded, in 2 Chron. 
5:11,14. The Priests assembled at the door of the temple with 
trumpets, then came some of the Levites which were singers. 
The Priests sounded the key note on the trumpets and the 
Levites joined in to sing in harmony: It took some time before 
the harmony was perfect, but as soon as they were "as one" 
(perfectly in harmony) then, the glory of the Lord filled the 
temple. This we would interpret as teaching that the Priests (the 
little flock who are to be glorified) will give the key note of our 
song to a representative part of the great company (Levites) 
before they, the priests, are glorified. 

It is only a part of the Levites who compose the singers, and 
they are clothed in white robes and have cymbals, and psalteries, 
and harps (2 Chron. 5:12). So we understand that, for a part of 
the great company who are already arrayed in white robes of 
justification through Jesus' merit, and who now have the harp of 
God (the Word of truth) and are now trying to get harmonious 
strains of music from it, hearkening diligently unto the trumpet 
voice of the priest company which daily sounds louder and 
clearer, for the bringing of these into harmony with the priests, 
the glory of the Lord waits. 

The trumpet should now give no uncertain sound; the white 
robed company are beginning to tune their harps in harmony 
with its strains, and soon "as one" we will sound the praises of 
him "whose mercy endureth forever," and the glory of the Lord 
will fill the temple. 



The character of the song to be taught and learned, is 
Restitution, if we may judge from the line of it given us viz.: 

For He is good, 

For His mercy endureth forever. 

This temple type then teaches us that we are to continue our 
efforts to teach the Restitution Song to all who wear the white 
robes of Christ's righteousness, and that we may expect a 
considerable measure of success to attend our efforts before our 
glorification. This would seem to teach too, that the priests 
would reach a harmony in their trumpeting before the glory. 



R290 : page 4 

A SHORT SERMON FROM 
A FAMILIAR TEXT. 

"God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that 
whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have 
everlasting life." John 3:16. 

We learned this text so long ago, some of us in childhood, and 
have heard it so often, that we are now apt to read or hear it 
without noticing its breadth and depth. 

"God so loved." 

Is this true? Orthodoxy says it was Jesus that so loved the world. 
The Father did not love them; no, he was angry- very angry- 
with them, because Satan was too smart for him [We feel 
ashamed to have to write such an idea] ; but Jesus loved us, and 
threw himself between us and his angry Father, and thus 
received the fatal blow; at least it would have been fatal to us, 
but Jesus being God could not really die, and so arose when he 
wished to. 

How much better to believe that "God commendeth his love 
toward us, in that while we were yet sinners [enemies, verse 10] 
Christ died for us." Rom. 5:8. "Herein is love; not that we loved 
God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation 
for our sins." 1 John 4:10. 

"God so loved the WORLD." 

What! the world? the whole world? This would be blessed news 
indeed, if true. How is it? Babylon teaches that only those who 
believe before the second coming of Christ— probably not one in 
one thousand of the world's inhabitants so far-can be saved. 
God's word tells us that through the Abrahamic seed shall "all 
the families of the earth be blessed." Gen. 12:3. What if the 
promise has not been fulfilled as yet? Can we not wait God's 
time? Paul tells us that God "will have ALL men to be saved 
[from the Adamic death] and to come unto a knowledge of the 



truth." What truth? That Christ Jesus "gave himself a ransom for 
ALL, to be testified in due time." 1 Tim. 2:4,6. 

"He gave his only begotten Son." 

This phraseology brings us into conflict with an old Babylonian 
theory, viz.: Trinitarianism. If that doctrine is true, how could 
there be any Son to give? A begotten Son, too? Impossible. If 
these three are one, did God send himself? And how could Jesus 
say: "My Father is greater than I." John 14:28. 

"Whosoever believeth in him. " 

Whatsoever is not of faith is sin; and the promises are only to 
believers. But does it seem reasonable that God so loved the 
world and yet made provision for only one out of a thousand, 
allowing the rest to remain in heathenism, to perish? The Word 
says: "How then shall they call on him in whom they have not 
believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they have 
not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher?" Rom. 
10:14. They could not, but our loving Father has provided a 
preacher in that glorious Anointed One-Head and body—who is 
the true Light which lighteth EVERY MAN that cometh into the 
world." And thus shall all men "come unto a knowledge of the 
truth." Understanding this Paul could say: "The Scripture, 
foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, 
preached before the gospel [good news] unto Abraham, saying: 
"In thee shall all nations be blessed." Gal. 3:8. 

This is good news indeed. 

R290 : page 5 

"Should not perish, but have everlasting life." 

Babylon would paraphrase this sentence thus: "Should not live 
forever in hell, but have everlasting life in heaven. " Webster 
gives the primary meaning of "perish" as "to die, to lose life in 
any manner." But, says some one, Jesus did not speak English, 
and the translators may not have given us a good equivalent for 
the Greek. Well, Liddell and Scott define the original word "to 
destroy utterly, kill, slay, murder." The text really defines its 
own meaning by placing "perish" as the opposite of "life." Life, 
everlasting or eternal, is promised only to the pure. Our Father 
intends to have a clean universe, and has commissioned the Son 
to do the work for him. This he will do, throwing light into 
every dark corner, washing, scouring and polishing every vessel 
that can be made available for the Master's use, hanging every 
one in its proper place, sweeping out and "utterly destroying" 
the rubbish, but evidently saving and blessing with life 
everlasting by far the greater portion of mankind, so that the 
saved will be the rule, and the lost, the exception-else would 
Satan triumph over God, which is impossible. 

W. I. MANN. 



R290 : page 5 



IN THE VINEYARD. 



To strengthen and encourage the lonely and isolated ones, we 
want to give a brief account of how the work in general is 
progressing. It is our common work and common interest. Many 
of you are apt to think that our glorious glad tidings are 
preached and known only by an occasional one, just as Elijah 
thought when he said: "I only am left alive and they seek my 
life"; but what saith the Word of the Lord to him? "I have left 
me seven thousand in Israel... which have not bowed the knee to 
Baal." (1 Kings 19:18.) Even so now also there are more than 
two or three who worship Jehovah and His Christ only, and are 
controlled only by His Word; and now there doubtless are 7,000 
or more who neither worship the Papal "Beast" nor the 
Protestant "Image." (Rev. 13.) 

THE TRACT WORK, 

you will remember, was begun in a small way some time since, 
and afterward the "ZION'S WATCH TOWER TRACT 
SOCIETY" organized. First, we proposed to publish a quantity 
of the 32-page tracts, but soon concluded to make one large tract 
or pamphlet of 164 pages, which would give a general idea and 
outline of what we see to be God's glorious plan, and gave it the 
title: 

R291 : page 5 

"FOOD FOR THINKING CHRISTIANS: WHY EVIL 
WAS PERMITTED, AND KINDRED TOPICS." 

We thought to publish 300,000 copies of this pamphlet, and so 
far as possible to put them in the hands of thinking Christians 
everywhere. But we soon saw that, though very large, the 
quantity would not be sufficient, and it was increased to 500,000 
copies. These were printed in various cities of Pennsylvania, 
New York and Ohio. These have nearly all been distributed in 
the medium and larger cities, and at the principal camp 
meetings, Brothers Adamson, Keith, Keim, McGranor and 
others, being still engaged in the work of distribution. Only 
about 65,000 yet remain. 

But the way seemed to open yet wider, and Bros. Sunderlin and 
Bender were sent to Great Britain to publish the same pamphlet; 
three hundred thousand copies were published, and before you 
read this will probably be in the hands of the churchgoers of the 
principal cities there. 



In the meantime another avenue of spreading the truth opened 
up. The manager of the principal paper of New York City 
agreed to send a copy of the tract to their entire list of 
subscribers, and several other papers of Chicago, Boston, 
Philadelphia and New York favored us similarly in the work, for 
which they have our sincere thanks. [We omit the names of the 
papers only to save them inconvenience from applications from 
others. They say they have never before granted such privileges 
to any.] 

For this work we had the same matter that was in the tract put 
into newspaper shape, and as such it constituted the September 
number of the WATCH TOWER-thus, doubtless, you have all 
read the tract. So to those who may have wondered why the 
increased size, change of form, &c, of your last paper, this will 
explain. 

As we were reaching Christians in the cities with the pamphlets, 
we sent the papers only with weekly and monthly journals, and 
hope thus to have reached many Christians in country districts. 
We sent out in this way over 400,000 copies. Thus you see that 
from an apparently small beginning, the tract work has spread to 
the immense proportions of 1,200,000 copies, or about 
200,000,000 pages in four months, or about eight times as much 
(in number) as were distributed by the American Tract Society 
in the last year. The work has employed hundreds of men, 
women and boys in preparation and distribution, nearly 500 
boys being employed to distribute in London, and about 300 in 
New York— other cities in proportion. The distribution was 
made in the larger cities at the church doors on Sundays. 

The work we believe to be the Lord's, and that its results will be 
far-reaching we cannot doubt. Letters come pouring in from 
every quarter -many of them are very rich and sweet, and 
indicate that the same heavenly manna which has been so 
refreshing and strengthening to us, has the same rich flavor to 
many others when they taste of it. Some are from scattered ones 
who have been digging in the Word, and were reaching after 
these things. Some from parties who say they had been drifting 
into, or were quite in, Infidelity, because never had they been 
able to see anything reasonable, harmonious or worthy of a God 
of Love in the teachings of the Bible, as interpreted by the 
creeds of the various sects. Nearly all ask for more for their 
friends. A few, even, come from "class leaders" and pastors, 
asking them for their people, but very few; we have no reason to 
expect many from "those that give suck"; alas! they feel that 
they are "rich and increased in goods, and have need of 
nothing," and are too busy giving the "milk of the Word" to have 
any time either to eat stronger meat or provide it for others. 

The work has been so much greater than we had anticipated, and 
seemingly was impelled by an unseen hand and at such a special 
time, too, that we cannot doubt that it is all of the Lord, and it is 



probably designed as a ripener to some grains of "wheat," to 
prepare them as a part of the "first fruits" of the wheat or 
spiritual harvest-members of the Bride of Christ; and also, one 
of the many instruments to be used in the overthrow of 
"Babylon" and the deliverance of God's children within her. But 
while an unseen hand seemed to impel the onward progress of 
the work, another unseen hand seemed at work seeking to thwart 
our purposes, but "if God be for us, who can be against us?" In 
his strength one could chase a thousand opposers, and two put 
ten thousand to flight. 

We shall endeavor monthly to keep you informed as to the 
general outlook over the field, as seen from ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER, and shall be glad of information from any of our 
readers. We are expecting great things in the near future. If our 
position be correct, we may expect "Zion's travail" to commence 
at once. [Keep in memory the distinction between real and 
nominal Zion, the word Zion being used instead of the word 
Church-so we speak of the real and the nominal Church-or 
nominal Zion being now termed, in Scripture, "Babylon." The 
true Zion, the first-born, the heir, the Christ, has been delivered. 

THE WORKERS. 

Brother Adamson is now in Illinois and Iowa distributing 
pamphlets from city to city, and preaching as he goes. An 
extract from a letter in another column, shows that he is 
enjoying the work. The Lord give him grace for every time of 
need-though showing him how great things he must suffer for 
the truth's sake. 

Brother Keith has been similarly engaged in central 
Pennsylvania and New York, and has had good success, and still 
continues. The Lord feed him abundantly with truth, that he may 
go from strength to strength -mighty in the Scriptures. 

Brother Jones also gave valuable assistance in the tract 
distribution. He has now removed to New York City, and is 
doubtless preparing something valuable for the readers of the 
first number of his new paper, elsewhere referred to. The Lord 
lead him to his praise. 

Brother Paton has been laboring recently in Detroit and in the 
neighborhood of his home, Almont, Mich. He is, we suppose, 
busily engaged writing for Bro. Jones' new paper, to which, we 
believe, he will be an occasional contributor. He is busy also 
collecting names for the new paper. The Lord hold him in his 
powerful hand and overrule all things for His good. 

Brother McGranor is distributing tracts, and as he goes 
preaching in Ohio and western Pennsylvania. The Lord has been 
blessing him greatly. The Lord enrich him and honor him by use 
in His service. 



Brother Keim is attending to the tract work and preaching in 
New Jersey and Delaware. The Lord bless him and fill his 
mouth with the sweet things of His Word. 

Brother Sunderlin is being tried in patience; for while he 
delights in the work and is anxious to be constantly in it, he is on 
a sick-bed. He was attacked with rheumatic fever and obliged to 
return home from the tract work in Great Britain just as he had 
the pamphlets ready for distribution. The Lord comfort and 
sustain and smile upon him in his affliction, and in His own 
good time restore him to us and the work. 

Brother Bender is still in England busy with the tract 
distribution. We make a few extracts, in another column, from a 
letter recently received, written before the general distribution 
had taken place, which may interest you. The Lord guide him 
with wisdom, and while blessing others may he have an 
abundant blessing. 

Others might be mentioned, but we refer only to those who are 
connected with the work in a very prominent way. Time and 
space would fail us to refer to those who in towns, villages and 
cities are engaged in helping the twos, threes, twelves and fifties 
to the food so richly provided in His Word by our Lord. Some, 
in a still more private way, are using their every talent in setting 
forth God's great unfolding plan of Love-calling attention to his 
provision of a "Narrow way to life" for a few and promised 
"Restitution" to human perfection for the many. The work of 
these may not be heralded or known on earth, but it is all 
recorded in the "Book of Remembrance." Their faithful 
performance of their consecration vows of self-denial and self- 
crucifixion is well known to the Lord, and will be rewarded 
exceedingly abundantly more than we can ask or think—when 
the Bridegroom shall say: "Thou hast been faithful over a few 
things, I will make thee ruler over many things; enter thou into 
(share) the joys of thy Lord." Among this last class are many 
noble women, who are unobtrusively exerting their quiet 
influence unknown to the many, yet owned and loved of God. 
Oh! the jewels, the jewels! how brightly they shine, lighted up 
by the light of the Lord's face shining upon them and changing 
them daily from glory and beauty of resemblance to the head, to 
yet more glory and beauty until, the work done, and the Bride 
made ready, they shall be made like unto Christ's glorious 
spiritual body- 

"How beautiful are the feet of Him. " 

We believe that every member of this body of Christ is engaged 
in the blessed work, either directly or indirectly, of giving meat 
in due season to the household of faith. "Who then is that 
faithful and wise servant whom his Lord hath made ruler over 
his household," to give them meat in due season? Is it not that 
"little flock" of consecrated servants who are faithfully carrying 



out their consecration vows— the body of Christ- and is not the 
whole body individually and collectively, giving the meat in due 
season to the household of faith-the great company of 
believers? 

Blessed is that servant (the whole body of Christ) whom his 
Lord when he has come (Gr. elthon) shall find so doing. "Verily, 
I say unto you, that he shall make him ruler over all his goods." 
"He shall inherit all things." 

R292 : page 5 

The "evil servant" who says: My Lord delay eth his coming, and 
forgetting his consecration vows, begins to eat and drink with 
the drunken (partake of the spirit of the world) shall have no part 
with the faithful overcomer. (Matt. 24:46-50.) 

In conclusion, let each remember that the work is the Lord's; 
that our Captain's eye is upon each of us, and that his wisdom 
has appointed to each a place in his vineyard, however 
prominent or obscure (1 Cor. 12:18); and with this thought let us 
study to show ourselves approved workmen that need not to be 
ashamed. 

Let us be careful in sounding the trumpet, remembering that 
others will be preparing to "sing" in harmony. See "The Temple 
Type." Our every expression should be with care, and all our 
influence on the side of truth, so the trumpet shall give a clear 
sound. 



R309 : page 6 

AN OPEN LETTER. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: 

If an obscure yet deeply interested reader of the W.T. may find 
space in its columns, I would like to address a few thoughts to 
other members of the little company, now waiting for the happy 
moment of union with our Lord. As I write, the thoughts seem to 
come with solemn force, that the time draws very near. Are we 
ready— are we seeking in every way possible to remove every 
little spot, and smooth every little wrinkle out of our own and 
each other's robes? 

How important this moment ! I have a word to the dear brethren 
who labor among us and are over us in the Lord: We esteem you 
very highly in love, for your works' sake, as Paul says is fitting. 
We examine with close scrutiny your words and 
communications, as they come through the TOWER from time 
to time, for we realize that God hath set you as watchmen upon 
the walls of Jerusalem, which should never hold your peace day 
nor night, until he make Jerusalem (the heavenly and earthly) a 
praise in the whole earth. (Isa. 62:6,7.) 



And again the Prophet says, Hearken to the sound of the 
Watchman's trumpet. (Jer. 6:17.) In accordance with the 
command of the Prophet Joel (2:1) you have been blowing the 
trumpet in Zion, and sounding an alarm in God's holy mountain 
(among the true church of Christ) and some have heeded the 
call. Some have heeded in time to become members of the Bride 
of Christ, but still the trumpet is to sound until a company shall 
be developed, who will be the virgins, her companions that 
follow her. (Psa. 45:14.) Dear Brethren, let the trumpet give no 
uncertain sound, for in the words of Paul (1 Cor. 14:8) "If the 
trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to 
the battle?" We realize that there is a danger in the pathway of 
the preaching brethren, which does not beset other members of 
the body, and we have thought we have noticed a little tendency 
on the part of some as they have come amongst us, to be 
overcome in a measure by it—that is, the question that arose 
among some in the early church as to which should be greatest. 
Yes, here is a little mote of pride that renders uncertain to some, 
the otherwise clear trumpet tones of truth. O how sad that a little 
pride should crop out even here! Even our earnest brother Paul 
must have felt the power of this temptation, when he "feared 
least having preached to others, he himself might become a 
castaway," and said, "Let him that thinketh he standeth take 
heed lest he fall." 

It does seem that certain scriptures teach, that if the desire to 
sustain a human reputation were all sacrificed, and if the human 
will were all dead, and the divine mind and will were the only 
one alive, the watchmen here would all see eye to eye: For the 
Prophet says, the watchman lift up the voice, together they cry 
aloud, because eye to eye they see, in Jehovah's turning back to 
Zion. (Isa. 52:8.) We recognize the present as the time of 
Jehovah's returning favor to Zion (the Jewish people). 

Again we are told (John 16:13) "The Spirit... will guide you (the 
Church) unto all truth (i.e., all truth due) and he will show you 
things to come" as well as things now due. 

Will he guide a part of the church into truth and a part into 
error? No, the promise is that all shall be guided into truth. 
"Now (says Paul) I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that 
there be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly joined 
together in the same mind and in the same judgment." (1 Cor. 
1:10.) Is such a thing possible? Why not possible if the same 
spirit (the Spirit of God) dwell in us richly—if the one mind 
enters and animates these bodies in which the human mind and 
will are dead? If that were true, how could we have any other 
than the same mind, the same judgment. 

Again he tells us (chap. 3:3) that if there is division among us, it 
is because we are carnal, and walk as men. (Read to vs. 10.) 
Therefore, "there should be no schism in the body... and whether 



one member suffer all the members suffer with it, or one 
member be honored, all the members rejoice with it." (1 Cor. 
12:24,25.) Dearly beloved, "Think the same thing, having the 
same love, united in soul, minding the one thing; doing nothing 
from party-spirit or vain glory: but in humility esteeming others 
as excelling yourselves; not each one regarding his own 
interests, but each one also those of others. Let this disposition 
be in us which was also in Jesus Christ." (Phil. 2:2,5, Diaglott.) 

Do any inquire within themselves, who shall be greatest? Jesus 
replies that none shall have part in the kingdom, except the 
humble and that their rank and honor in the kingdom will be 
proportionate to their humility and service here (Matt. 18:3 and 
23:1 1). Neither be ye called Masters, for one is your Master, 
even Christ; but he that is greatest among you shall be your 
servant. And whosoever shall exalt himself, shall be abased, and 
he that abaseth himself shall be exalted." 

Now a word to the flock: Let me inquire: how readest thou 
God's word, and the messages sent through the columns of the 
W.T. from month to month to help you to its understanding? Do 
we look into the glass and go away and forget what manner of 
man we are? Do we read God's word carelessly, or do we study 
it diligently, using the help provided? Our brethren spend 
thought, and time, and means, in endeavoring to assist us to such 
an understanding of the truth as will arm us against error: Do we 
spend an equal amount of time and effort in the study of the 
truth presented? Nay-do we spend as much time in the study of 
one issue of the paper, as it must require to write one of the 
articles in it. 

I fear sometimes that we do not half appreciate the value of the 
untiring zeal of these dear brethren in the Lord, in calling our 
attention to the blessed doctrines of God's word, and in helping 
us to put on the whole armor of God, that we may be able to 
stand in this evil day. Many are weak and easily carried about 
with every wind of doctrine and the cunning devices of crafty 
men (Eph. 4:14) simply because they have been negligent in the 
improvement of opportunities presented, for growth in 
knowledge and grace. 

For myself I can say, the W.T. has been a means of incalculable 
blessing to me. Reasoning as it does from the Scripture, 
comparing the law and the prophets with the statements of Jesus 
and the Apostles, and unraveling the symbols of Revelation. In 
studying its pages before an open Bible, my faith has come to 
stand, not in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. Is a 
new doctrine presented? I hear the voice of the Prophet- "To 
the law and to the testimony; if they speak not according to this 
word, it is because there is no light in them." But thank God, 
when I turn to the law and to the testimony, I find them speaking 
according to that word, and walking in that light; and their light- 
-our light- shines more and more. The old light is not 



extinguished when new light comes, but every added ray 
increases the glory. 

We would find great advantage many times, in critically reading 
and re-reading many of the subjects treated in the paper. We 
cannot make these subjects our own with one reading, 
"Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things 
which we have heard, lest at any time we should let them slip"— 
(Heb. 2:1) remembering that God hath given prophets, 
evangelists, pastors and teachers, for the perfecting of the saints, 
for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of 
Christ, till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the 
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the 
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. (Eph. 4:1 1-13.) 

May God bless and keep us all in perfect peace, having our 
minds stayed on him. 

READER. 

[Words fitly spoken— they command our attention and respect. 

EDITOR.] 



R298 : page 6 

FROM BRO. J. B. ADAMSON. 

DEAR BRO:— Your letter received. I shall try to go on in strong 
faith in all circumstances, believing the "many and exceeding 
precious promises" "so Christ shall be magnified in my body" 
by life or by death. Am working more each day, for delivering 
personally, calls for more preaching to twos and threes, and is 
very precious to them and me. I avoid those "wise" men who 
know it all, whose creed is all and in all for them, and go to 
those really truth hungry, among whom I find Christ's most 
precious people and also many infidels. Some days do not get 
far and then have appointments for the evening. Truly the views 
we hold are true Gold to a large and increasing class. Most 
timely was the tract project from every point of view. As the 
poor teaching and want of teaching among the clergy increases, 
many look out to gather rays of light. I am asked to come 
Sunday at one o'clock to make the third meeting with an 
intelligent couple, members of the M.E. church who let me talk 
by the half hour and hour, seeming to drink in the doctrine and 
rejoice in it. Last night I spent an hour with them before prayer- 
meeting when I was asked to go along and testify there of these 
precious things. I had to remind them I dare not do so fully, and 
of the opposition and even abuse I met almost everywhere. I 
may give you some incidents in detail again that will rejoice 
your heart. 



Found the free Methodist's very fair. The treatment better than I 
got anywhere else. Gave the pamphlet to sixteen preachers and 
one hundred of the most intelligent of the church membership, 
attending the conference from all over the state, beside in a large 
number of cases, also adding a word that will make the book 
more living for the personality attaching to it. That is the reason 
I talk to so many that I give the books to; so I get their attention 
to the book more fully. Am generally asked for explanations of 
our views, and though neither powerful nor eloquent of speech, I 
get attention to the book by complying. Thank God for the wider 
field thus opening. May the will of God be done in poor me, and 
His name get honor and blessing forever. 

Yours in Christ, 

J. B. A. 



R293 : page 6 

FROM BROTHER J. J. BENDER. 

EDINBURGH, SCOTLAND, 

October 1st 1881. DEAR BRO. RUSSELL. 

Having but a few minutes to post a letter in time to meet steamer 
leaving Liverpool today, I write in haste a few words. Arrived in 
Glasgow on Wednesday, and spent the day in hunting up some 
party, but could find none. Advertised in paper my wants and 
left for Edinburgh, Dundee and Aberdeen, to extreme north, 
intending to distribute at each place. I succeeded without delay 
and returned in the night to Glasgow, having 1 8 replies to my 
advertisement. The first I called upon I made a contract with, 
and came here again to hear from London, but received no letter. 
I telegraphed to learn how things were getting along, and 
enclosed find a favorable reply. So far- 



100,000 pamphlets for London, 
30,000 pamphlets for Glasgow, 
20,000 pamphlets for Edinburgh 
10,000 pamphlets for Dundee, 
5,000 pamphlets for Aberdeen. 

I will now go to Carlisle and New Castle next, which will be 
distributing on my way down as near right geographically as I 
can to Liverpool, Manchester, Hull, Leeds, etc. Think I can get 
through all well. 

I had time to call on Mr. Robert Young, critical translator of the 
Bible and author of "Young's Analytical Hebrew and Greek 
Concordance," and I asked his opinion of the text in 2 John 7, in 
regard to the Coming of Christ in the flesh, and he says that 
there is no doubt about the passage referring only to Christ's first 
Coming. I mentioned the quibble regarding the Rochester phase 
of it, and he said: "O no, no, it means only the first Coming." 

Am enjoying good health, of which you may inform any 
inquiring friends and trust you are enjoying the same. 

Working in hope that the labor bestowed will fall upon good 
ground, and produce many fold to the glory of God. 

Yours truly, 

J. J. BENDER. 



R292 : page 6 

WORDS FROM BRO. SUNDERLIN. 

DEAR BRETHREN AND SISTERS, 

I was lately passing along the streets of a large city, when my 
attention was attracted to a fine large engraving hanging in one 
of the shop windows. (It was in Fleet street, London.) It 
represented a scene in one of the ancient Isthmian games. Two 
persons nearly divested of apparel, with distended muscles, 
occupied the course, stretching every nerve, while around, 
evidently excited with deep interest, was the "great cloud of 
witnesses." 

They were well along in the course but the attention of the one 
somewhat in advance of the other is diverted for a moment by a 
flower or some shining object that has been 

R292 : page 7 

thrown into the arena by some one of the many witnesses, by 
which they are "compassed about." 

An effort is made to grasp it, evidently the prize for which they 
are running is lost by this one, and no trace of sympathy is 
noticeable on the countenances of the spectators, but great 



rejoicing is apparent among the multitude, at the persistency 
with which the victor has reached the goal, ignoring every thing 
else, keeping the prize only in view and finally won it. I thought, 
that is a true picture of the Christian race which Paul has so 
faithfully and vividly painted in words, and which we see acted 
upon the stage of life. But how appropriately and timely the 
emphasizing of the thought just now. How faithfully that little 
shining object, whatever it may be, represents the besetments in 
the path of the one who is running for the prize of our high 
calling. 

How insignificant compared with the prize and the honor at the 
end of the course. But unless watchful we shall hesitate; one 
moment may cost all, and may make delay sufficient to reach 
the judge's stand too late. 

What's that in your path? A little worldly praise? Disdain to 
notice it, it is of no value whatever; you are worse off with it 
than without it. At another point do you see an avenue to 
wealth? Never mind; it would not be abiding if you had it. Press 
on. 

Again; do you begin to think of some of the "weights" of value 
(?) left behind, fearing you will never see them again? Don't 
think of them only to hope you will never be encumbered with 
them more. Do you say or think: "I fear this race will be the 
ruination of all my worldly prospects?" Of course it will so far 
as having any pleasure in them is concerned. 

You will be a very foolish man to divide your energies now, or 
thoughts either. Press on. 

But do you say: "Why, there's my reputation right there in the 
dust." Poor fellow! how sorry I am you noticed it; but it's only 
the reputation you once had. Don't you know that none of those 
who are noted racers on this course have any 

R293 : page 7 

reputation. The greatest racer who ever stepped on it "made 
himself of no reputation." 

But do you say: "This awful run will be the death of me?" Yes; 
of course it will; but you are a poor culprit under sentence of 
death any way, and if you undertake to save your life you will 
lose it, but run yourself to death and you'll have a life that is life 
everlasting, and more- immortal. Don't be foolish now. Press 
on. 

A heavenly race demands thy zeal 
And an immortal crown. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. London, England. 

[The above was written by our brother before illness had quite 
prostrated him and compelled his return. -EDITOR.] 



R293 : page 7 



'WHO CAN HEAR IT?" 



An idea sometimes becomes so imbedded in our minds, so 
much a part of ourselves, as that we can scarcely part with it. 
Yet how many of our ideas we have found it necessary to 
modify, the reason doubtless being that now we see as through a 
smoked glass, dimly. To very many it becomes a trial to have a 
long-cherished theory interfered with; but to all who have the 
childlike spirit of Christ, viz.: a readiness to take the Father's 
word unhesitatingly (not man's word), to such there is no 
trouble, for they say: I know nothing at all on the subject, and if 
I have received an idea unsupported by God's word I don't want 
it. I want truth, not my own ideas; give me truth, no matter what 
idol it may overthrow. 

To such only, we have a word to say touching the long- 
cherished idea, that some of those now living would never die a 
physical death. We want to say to you that the Scriptures upon 
which that idea has been based, when critically considered to not 
(in our judgment) support the thought; and other Scriptures seem 
to teach positively that all who will be members of the body- 
Christ, must like their head, example, forerunner, die physically. 
Carefully examine the subject in the light of the following 
remarks on texts usually regarded as the basis of the idea that we 
will be exempted from physical death, and should you find any 
other texts which you consider evidence of the old idea, please 
inform us. 

In 1 Thes. 4:15,17, we read- That we which are alive and 
remain unto the coming (parousia— presence) of the Lord shall 
not prevent [hinder] them which are asleep. For the Lord... shall 
descend... and the dead in Christ shall rise first: Then we which 
are alive and remain shall be caught up together [or also] with 
[or to] them, &c." 

Now we do not claim that anything here mentioned, indicates 
that the saints who remain over to this time of the Lord's 
presence will die; but we do claim that nothing in this text 
teaches that their human bodies will not die. This Scripture does 
not mention what change they will undergo before being joined 
to the Lord; in fact the change is not mentioned here at all. But 
the same apostle elsewhere informs us that a change must take 
place, because "flesh and blood" cannot inherit the kingdom of 
God-we must all be "changed" to spiritual bodies. 

Let us next look at 1 Cor. 15:51, for it mentions the change 
particularly, and let us notice carefully whether Paul says we 
shall be changed without dying, as we have always supposed he 
does. We read: "Behold I show you a mystery; we shall not all 



sleep but we shall all be changed. In a moment, in the twinkling 
of an eye;... the dead shall be raised incorruptible and we shall be 
changed. " We received our impression that our earthly body 
would not die, from the above statement regarding sleep, but 
who cannot see that the human body might be dissolved and we 
the new creatures be delivered from it and so quickly clothed 
upon with our spiritual body, that not a moment for sleep would 
intervene. If time should intervene between the dissolution of 
our earthly house (human nature) and the receiving of our 
spiritual body we should be obliged to sleep, as the Apostles and 
"all who sleep in Jesus." But that sleep has always been an 
undesirable thing; therefore with the apostle we can say that we 
are anxious, not to be unclothed (asleep without either human or 
spiritual body) but we prefer if the will of God be such, that we 
should be of the class alive when the Lord has come, so that 
instead of being even for a moment in the unclothed (or sleep) 
condition, we might be clothed upon, or receive that spiritual at 
the same moment we part with the old human house. And this in 
substance Paul here states-all will not sleep for to some the 
change will be in a moment, in an eye twinkling. 

One thing is sure, we must leave the flesh sometime, and 
whenever or however it may be, it will be the death or 
dissolution and end of the human to all who become full 
recipients of the divine. 

Now notice the words of Jesus, concerning John. John, we have 
long since seen to be a type or representative of the last part of 
the church— those who are alive and remain unto the presence of 
the Lord and who shall be changed. Jesus said of our 
representative, John: "If I will that he tarry till I come what is 
that to thee, " Peter? Then went that saying abroad among the 
disciples, that that disciple should not die; howbeit Jesus said 
not that he should not die but, if I will that he tarry till I come," 
&c. (John 21:22.) Just so, dear brethren, it has been with the 
company typified by John; the saying has gone abroad and has 
been generally received that this part of the church will not die: 
Howbeit when we examine the evidences, we find that neither 
Jesus nor the apostles said we should not die, but that we would 
tarry till the Master's presence and be changed in a moment and 
not sleep. 

Now notice the positive teaching that all of "the body" will die 
and then mark the necessity of death. It was no less an authority 
than Paul who said: If we be dead with him we shall also live 
with him; and if we have been planted in the likeness of his 
death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection- 
desiring therefore to be made conformable unto his death. 

Does some one object that these words are applicable to the 
daily life of Paul and of us and suggest that we are to be "living 
sacrifices." Very true, so we have taught and so we still believe, 
but while our dying commences at our consecration, it does not 



end there. As in the case of our "Captain," it does not end until 
the human is dead. While we begin, as "living sacrifices," yet 
when the sacrifice is finished, all that is human is dead. The 
thing that dies at once, is the human will, and when this is 
accomplished we reckon ourselves dead; but the death actually 
is in progress day by day until the sacrifice is complete. We 
cannot receive the spiritual mind unless we surrender the human 
mind or will, so also we cannot receive our spiritual body unless 
the earthly body is surrendered. Remember that Jesus said to all 
the churches: "Be thou faithful unto death and I will give thee a 
crown of life. " 

It is in harmony with these thoughts that we understand the 
words of Jesus (John 11:26): "Whosoever liveth (at this time) 
and believeth in me [or is one of the faith-ful] shall never die." 
The class referred to are reckoned dead to the human will, 
nature, hope, etc., and are alive toward God as new creatures. 
Such 

R294 : page 7 

new creatures who are now living will not sleep— will not die, 
but immediately -in the twinkling of an eye will be transferred 
to their new body like unto Christ's spiritual body. What matters 
it to us, if the earthly house of this building be dissolved in 
death, we shall not be unclothed but clothed upon with an 
heavenly one. 

Now as we have seen that in Jesus' case, the human was 
surrendered to death forever, (He was "put to death in the flesh 
but quickened in spirit"), and that had he taken back the human 
nature it would have been taking back our ransom price, so we 
have seen that it is a privilege granted to us as his body, to fill 
up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ—to share in 
the world's redemption, with him who loved us and bought us 
with his own precious blood-to suffer with him, being made 
conformable unto his death. In a word, if Jesus must needs be 
obedient even unto death, and if he says to us: "Be thou faithful 
unto death," who shall say that the dissolution or death of the 
human being is not necessary? 

Well, says one, then you are not now expecting translation, but 
death. No, we reply, we as new creatures who are living in this 
favored time of the Lord's presence expect to be translated-or 
changed to our own spiritual condition, but we expect the 
change to take place at the moment of the death of the "earthen 
vessel" —we will not be obliged to sleep as did the new creature 
Paul and others, but will be "changed in a moment." 

We believe that translation in this manner is now due, and shall 
not be surprised to hear of some going thus beyond the second 
vail into the "Most Holy" condition-the perfect spiritual. 



We are on the race course for life, and must be faithful unto 
death if we would receive the Crown of Life. "Whosoever shall 
seek to save his life shall lose it, and whosoever shall lose his 
life shall preserve it." (Luke 17:33.) 



page 7 

THE Jewish Chronicle says: "The prosperous Jews form but a 
small portion of our brethren. Those who are comfortable and 
content are comparatively few. These, perhaps, would be loth to 
leave their assured and luxurious homes to find a new country 
and a new civilization. But those who are oppressed and 
unhappy, long for the advantages which reconsolidated 
nationality would give them. Oppression and persecution has 
kept our people, as a body, alive and homogeneous. The more 
the Jew is downtrodden the more he clings to the faith of his 
fathers and its observances. Liberated, and anxious to compete, 
socially, with his fellow countrymen, he throws over the 
restrictions which are deeply respected by those whom he would 
conciliate by their abandonment, with the simple result of 
making himself appear contemptible and sycophantic. It is 
oppression, and not prosperity, which will lead us back to our 
proper place in the Holy Land." 



R298 : page 7 

NO BACK NUMBERS. 

The demand recently has exhausted our supply of back numbers 
of the WATCH TOWER except a few of the July number. 

For the benefit of our many new readers we will republish a few 
articles which appeared in our columns about a year or two ago. 
Among others in next number will be an article on "The Beast 
and Image of Rev. 13." 



R308 : page 7 

OUR LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS. 

From the fact that our contributors were not always "Regular 
Contributors," and also because there exists no special necessity 
for such list, it is discontinued. Hereafter correspondents' names 
will appear in connection with their articles. 



R294 : page 8 

ANOTHER PAPER. 



Many have been the requests to have the WATCH TOWER 
oftener than once a month, and now it would seem they may 
have almost their wish. 

Such will doubtless be glad to learn that our Bro. A. D. Jones 
(formerly of this city, but who has recently removed to New 
York City, where he can be within easier access of some 
companies of those who read the WATCH TOWER), purposes 
starting a new paper, to be devoted in some measure to the same 
topics we have been considering in this paper. 

The new paper will be called, "Zion's Day Star," and has our 
best wishes; may it honor our Father and be an able messenger 
of the glad tidings to many. It will be a monthly, and the same 
price as the WATCH TOWER. All desiring it should address A. 
D. JONES, Cor. 27th and Broadway, New York City. 



R298 : page 8 



YOUR LETTER. 



We have been so much engaged by the tract work during the 
past three months that the issuance of the last two numbers of 
the W.T. has, of necessity, been considerably delayed. Our 
apology must be found in article under the head of "In the 
Vineyard." 

To many who may have written important letters or ones 
requiring some answer, the same apology must be offered. The 
distribution of the pamphlets and papers have brought from their 
readers hundreds of letters, asking questions or requesting back 
numbers of the paper, etc. We answered quite a good many of 
these, but they come so fast, and our time has been so limited, 
that nearly a thousand letters and postal cards have now 
accumulated-unopened and unread, and probably your letter is 
among them. 

The Lord has provided more office help (for it is difficult to get 
suitable assistance), and we hope to get ahead of the work 
before long. 

Let us here remark that we do not send receipts for regular 
subscriptions -the amount is too small. You know when and 
what you send, and we keep a careful record of all receipts. If 
subscriptions are lost in the mail we will be responsible for it, 
and be the losers. If your paper fails to come to hand any month, 
inform us by card if you have paid in advance, or if, as one 
unable to pay, you have requested to be put on the "Lord's poor 
list." 



R294 : page 8 



THE CHART OF THE AGES. 

At a considerable cost, besides five cents apiece postage, we 
sent our readers (in July) as a supplement, a "Chart of the Ages" 
(the same which appeared in our last issue, only larger), suitable 
for hanging in a sitting room. 

We fear that by many it has not been thoroughly studied, and 
because we know of nothing which would give you so clear a 
conception of the plan of God, we again direct your attention to 
it, and suggest that you study it three, four or ten times until you 
get every point clearly and indelibly fixed in your mind and 
heart, and it cannot fail to be a great blessing to you. 

In the last paper (and also in the pamphlet) you have the same 
explanation of the chart which is found on the back of the large 
one, which will be found a more convenient form for study. 

A reader asks regarding the extreme right of the chart~"The 
Tabernacle" —whether by the line which is shown as running 
through the center of the "Most Holy," we are to be understood 
as teaching that heaven is divided into two parts? 

[Will questioner read explanations with more care? It required 
careful thought to state them, and must have the same careful 
thought to read and understand them.] 

We would answer assuredly not, and if you had studied with 
more care the chart and its explanation, you could have drawn 
no such conclusion. The line which is shown to run through the 
"Most Holy" is the same which passes all along the upper part of 
the chart, and is explained to be (plane K) an illustration of the 
condition or plane (not place) of Glory. But as many have a very 
incorrect idea as to the meaning of the different parts or places 
of the typical Tabernacle, we want simply to suggest to you that 
none of those apartments indicate places. They are places in the 
type, but conditions in the antitype. 

The "Most Holy" represents the perfect, spiritual and glorious 
conditions -planes K and L. The "Holy" represents the 
consecrated condition in which we are now as priests 
ministering before God, offering up sacrifices on the Golden 
Altar, a sweet incense, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, and 
eating of the spiritual food and being enlightened by the Golden 
Lamp-the Word of God. We are there now in condition, but not 
in place; there is no such place where we will need a Golden 
lamp, etc., for when we are perfected and go beyond the Vail we 
shall know as we are known and not need the light of the lamp- 
Word. We repeat, we are now in the condition typified by the 
"Holy," just as we expect shortly to be in the condition typified 
by the "Most Holy." 

"The Court" represents the condition (not place) of justification 
by faith-the justified human. 



"The Camp" represents the condition (not place) of the World 
busy with its own pleasures and affairs. 

All these are conditions, as much as, when Paul says: "Let us go 
to him without the Camp," (referring to the sacrifices for sin- 
the bullock, Christ, and goat-the Church). He refers to our 
being cast out from, and dead to the World—he refers to a 
condition into which we are to go and not to a place. 

The confusing idea as to place has been obtained by many from 
Paul's expression that Jesus did not enter the Tabernacle (Holy 
and Most Holy) made with hands—the type, but he entered the 
real-even "heaven itself." (Heb. 9:24.) Now, while not 
disputing the fact that there is a locality called heaven and that 
Jesus is there, yet the meaning of the word heavens here is 
spiritual reality, as contrasted with the earthly type. 

We think that Paul's statement and the type he was explaining 
referred to Jesus' having gone first into the condition represented 
by the Holy, in which condition he ministered and offered 
sacrifices before God during his three and a half years' ministry, 
and then at his resurrection, his entering the "Most Holy" or 
perfect spiritual condition-afterward proceeding to the Glory 
plane in that Most Holy spiritual condition. 

This is shown by the connections, for Paul says (Heb. 8:5) that 
the earthly Tabernacle, etc., served as an example and shadow of 
heavenly (spiritual) things, and (9:23) that though the pattern or 
typical Tabernacle was sprinkled by the blood of bulls and 
goats, yet the heavenly (spiritual) must have better sacrifices. 
Therefore Christ Jesus entered not the literal (neither do we) but 
the real or spiritual. (So do we as members of the same body 
following our fore-runner.) Both of the above words rendered 
heavenly (Greek, epouraneous) are the same exactly that Paul 
uses in describing our position when he says (Eph. 2:6) that God 
hath quickened us (Ye are alive toward God) and made us sit 
together in heavenly (spiritual) places in Christ Jesus. 

Thus we see that as Jesus went into these heavenlies in their 
proper order -into the first during the three and a half years of 
self-sacrifice, and into the other (the perfect spiritual condition) 
at his resurrection, so we are to do as followers of our 
forerunner. And those who are living the consecrated life (living 
sacrifices) toward God, are now in the first of these "Holy" or 
spiritual conditions, and, like our leader, will enter into the 
other, the "Most Holy," when at resurrection (or change) we are 
made like unto Christ's glorious body. 

The force of this is more clearly seen when we notice Paul's 
statement in Eph. 1:20. Here Paul asserts that at his resurrection 
Jesus was exalted by God far ABOVE all powers, etc., and 
placed at his right hand (choicest condition of favor) in THE 
(chief) heavenly place. The Greek word heavenly, here used, is 
emphatic, and signifies the chief heavenly condition, which is in 



perfect harmony with what we have already seen, viz.: that Jesus 
(as we are) had been in a heavenly condition during three and a 
half years before, but at resurrection he had reached THE 
heavenly or perfect spiritual condition. 

Let us remind you that here also, the word rendered heavenly is 

the same word used with reference to our position as spiritually 

begotten- new creatures. This text affirms that at resurrection 

Jesus entered THE epouraneous (heavenly, spiritual condition), 

while now we are in an epouraneous condition as asserted by 

the Scripture above referred to (Eph. 2:6), and in due time we 

hope to reach THE epouraneous condition and be like him. 



R295 : page 8 

THE EKKLESIA. 

This is a Greek word which is translated church. In the N.T. it 
signifies a company, assembly or body of people bound or 
compacted together. 

To-day there are many organizations claiming to be the church, 
and having various bonds of union; but we wish to know, upon 
the authority of God's Word, what ekklesia, body, or church 
Jesus established, and what are its bonds of union; secondly, we 
wish to show that every Christian should belong to that church; 
thirdly, the injurious effects of joining the wrong ekklesia or 
church; and fourthly, having joined the right church, what are 
the results of losing our membership. 

First then, the church which Jesus began to gather during his 
ministry, and which was recognized by the Father at Pentecost 
after their ransom price was paid, was the little company of 
disciples who had consecrated earthly time, talents and life a 
sacrifice to God. They were organized and bound together as 
members of one society, and as such had laws and government, 
and consequently a head or recognized ruling authority. The 
bonds were bonds of love and common interest. Since all were 
enlisted under the captaincy of Jesus, the hopes and fears, joys 
and sorrows, and aims of one were those of the other; and thus 
they had a far more perfect union of heart than could possibly be 
had from a union on the basis of any man-made creed. Thus 
their organization was of the Spirit; their law for the government 
of each was love, and all as a whole were put under obedience to 
the "law of the Spirit" as it was expressed in the life, actions, 
and words of their Lord. Their government was the will of him 
who said, "If ye love me keep my commandments." 

Thus we see the early church organized, governed, and in 
perfect unity and harmony under the rulership or headship of 
Jesus. Contrast this church organization with what now affects 
to be a continuance of the same-viz.: the various 



denominational organizations, each of which binds its members 
to a mental union on the basis of some creed or dogma of its 
own (many of them anything but lovely) and each having its 
own laws. 

These laws emanate from their heads or rulers and law-givers; 
so it is clearly seen that these present day churches have and 
recognize as heads, or directing, ruling powers over them the 
ancient founders of their various creeds while their clergy in 
conferences, councils, synods and presbyteries, interpret and 
enforce the "traditions of the elders" which "make void the 
Word of God. " These take the place of the true head of the 
church~Jesus~and the true teacher and guide into all truth, the 
Holy Spirit. Hear the Prophet Isaiah express it, (chap. 9:15.) 
"The ancient and honorable, he is the head, and the prophet that 
teacheth lies, he is the tail. " 

Will they own this to be so? No, for Babylon the great-the 
mother of harlots, and all her daughters, the complete nominal 
church in this evil day, represented in Isa. 4:1 as the seven 
women, take hold of the one man (Christ Jesus) saying: "We 
will eat our own bread (which the world supplies) and wear our 
own apparel (the filthy rags of their own righteousness), only let 
us be called by thy name, to take away our reproach." And so 
they assume the name of Christ and call their organizations 
Christian churches. Theirs is a union of hands but not a union of 
hearts. 

"These are hard sayings, who can receive them?" But these are 
not our sayings: it is the warning voice of the "sure word of 
prophecy... whereunto ye do well that ye take heed." And it is a 
loving voice for again our Lord declares: "As many as I love, I 
rebuke and chasten." 

There are two senses in which the true church of Christ may be 
considered: All who like the early church were fully consecrated 
to the doing of our Father's will, amenable only to Christ's will 
and government, recognizing and obeying none other -these 
saints from the beginning of the Gospel Age down to its close, 
when all of this class are sealed and the door to the high calling 
closes, constitute the "CHURCH OF THE FIRST BORN," 
whose names are written in Heaven. These are all one in aim, 
hope and suffering, and in due time will be joint-heirs with Jesus 
Christ to the great inheritance —heirs of the kingdom which God 
hath promised to them that love him. 

R295 : page 9 

The other sense in which this same class is recognized, is, by 
counting a part for the whole, thus all the living of this class 
may be spoken of as the church; or again any part of this class of 
living followers who may meet together may properly be called 
the church; for by the word of Jesus we know that wherever two 
or three are assembled, he will be among them, consequently 



that would be a church meeting-an assembly of the "church of 
the First Born." The general assembly will be when all the 
church are made like, and glorified with, their head— Jesus. 

Such then is our definition of the church of Christ; it is perfectly 
illustrated by Paul (Rom. 12:4,5) when he compares the church 
to a human body. In this figure, Jesus represents the head, and 
all who are his, constitute the body, over and through which, the 
head rules. Jesus has been, and always will be the head over his 
church as a whole; he is likewise the head and ruler of the entire 
living church, and in every assembly where two or three meet in 
his name he is the head, ruler, and teacher. If it be asked: In 
what sense does he teach?~we answer, by exercising the 
qualities of the head, or teacher; using one or more of those 
present in unfolding truth, strengthening faith, encouraging 
hope, inspiring zeal, etc., just as the head of your body can call 
upon one member to minister to another. But here a word of 
caution: -If one becomes as useful an instrument as a right hand, 
take care that you aspire not to become the head. Be not puffed 
up; pride will paralyze and render useless: "Be not ye called 
Rabbi (Master, teacher) for one is your Master (head) even 
Christ and all ye are brethren." And let not the least member 
despise his office, "for if all were one member where were the 
body?" "Nay those members of the body which seem to be more 
feeble are necessary"~"God hath set the members every one of 
them, in the body as it hath pleased him." 

How simple, beautiful and effectual is God's plan of 
organization. 

This brings us to our second proposition, viz.: that all Christians 
should be joined to this organization. In the light of what has 
just been said as to the class constituting the church which Jesus 
organized, it is evident that if you have given up all your will, 
talent, time, etc., you are recognized by Jesus as a follower, and 
member of the ekklesia, or body of which he is the head, whose 
names are written in heaven. Thus we join Jesus' church and 
have our names recorded as members, by consecration. But says 
one: must I not join some organization on earth, assent to some 
creed and have my name written on earth? No, remember that 
Jesus is your pattern and teacher, and neither in his words nor 
acts will you find any authority for binding yourselves with 
creeds and traditions of the elders, which all tend to make the 
word of God of none effect (Mark 7:13) and bring you under a 
bondage which will hinder your growth in grace and knowledge, 
and against which Paul warned you to "Stand fast therefore in 
the liberty wherewith Christ hath made you free, and be not 
entangled with the yoke of bondage." (Gal. 5:1.) 

But say some: If it is not proper to unite with any of the present 
nominal churches, would it not be well to form a visible 
organization of our own? Yes, this is what we have—an 
organization modeled after that of the early church. We think we 



have come back to primitive simplicity: The Lord Jesus alone is 
our head or lawgiver, the Holy Spirit is our interpreter and guide 
into truth; our names are all written in heaven; we are bound 
together by love and common interest. 

Do you inquire—how shall we know one another? We reply, 
how could we help knowing one another when the Spirit of our 
Master is made manifest in word and act, and manner and look? 
Yes, the living faith, the unfeigned love, the long-suffering 
meekness, the childlike simplicity coupled with the constancy 
and zeal of maturity, make manifest the sons of God, and we 
need no earthly record, for the names of all such are written in 
the Lamb's book of life. 

Do the sick need visiting or assistance? -these stand ready with 
consecrated time. Does the Lord's work require money ?-these 
stand ready with consecrated means. Does his work bring upon 
them the reproach of the world?-these have also sacrificed 
reputation-all— all to God. 

But again, do you inquire how shall we deal with one who walks 
disorderly in our midst; if we have no organization such as we 
see about us, how can we free ourselves from such, as the Lord 
requires us to do? We answer: Do just as Jesus and Paul 
directed. 

Now, as in the early church, there are various degrees of 
advancement among the individual members, and Paul says (1 
Thes. 5:14) some are feeble minded, comfort them; some are 
weak, support them; but while you should be patient toward all, 
warn the disorderly (those who are drifting away from the true 
spirit of Christ). Don't mistake the disorderly for the weak, and 
comfort them; nor for the feeble-minded, and support them, but 
patiently, lovingly, warn the disorderly. Whom does he call 
disorderly? Doubtless there are many ways of walking 
disorderly, but in 2 Thes. 3:1 1, he speaks of some who work not 
at all, but are busy-bodies, and says they should do as he did- 
work that they be not chargeable to any; and if any will not work 
neither should he eat. Thus he said he did, that he might be an 
example to others. Then again, vs. 14: If after you have warned 
such a one and he "obey not company with him, that he may be 
ashamed. Yet count him not an enemy but admonish him as a 
brother." 

Again Jesus gives explicit directions where there is a matter of 
offence between two brethren, Matt. 18:15,17 -If thy brother 
shall 

R296 : page 9 

trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between him and 
thee alone; if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother; but 
if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that 
in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be 



established. And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the 
church: (the company of brethren who assemble together) but if 
he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thee as an heathen 
man and a publican. 

If, under the organization of our head, we heed his commands, 
which we will do if we love him, how few will be the 
misunderstandings and difficulties among the brethren. This 
organization has its evangelists, pastors and teachers appointed 
and directed by the Lord. They need no laying on of hands by 
the so-called Apostolic succession; for the "Spirit of the Lord 
hath anointed" all the members of the body "to preach," etc., 
(Isa. 61:1) and it is the duty of every member of the body to 
exercise his office for the edification of the other members. 

How complete is the organization of the church of Christ with 
its heaven- written, love-bound and Spirit ruled membership, and 
how sad the error of mistaking the nominal for the real church? 

The importance of our fourth proposition need not be urged. It 
would indeed, be a dreadful calamity to lose our membership in 
the true church or body of Christ. And no member is out of this 
danger except when keeping a vigilant watch over the old 
nature, counted dead, lest it come to life again, and assert itself 
in the form of pride, selfishness, envy, evil-speaking— or what 
not? But if filled with love (the love that prompts to sacrifice) 
and clothed with humility, and under cover of the redeeming 
blood, we are safe in the church (body), having the assurance 
that it is our "Father's good pleasure to give us the kingdom." 

Yes, the kingdom is the glorious destiny of the true church-the 
"little flock"— now treading the pathway of humiliation and 
drinking the bitter cup of death. Oh, the glory that shall be 
revealed in us doth not yet appear except to the eye of faith, but 
the temptations and trials are very apparent on every hand. "Let 
us, therefore, fear lest a promise being left us of entering into his 
rest, any of you should seem to come short of it." (Heb. 4:1.) 

Thus Paul warned others and thus he feared, "lest (even after) 
having preached to others, he himself should be a castaway." (1 
Cor. 9:27.) We may have our names cast out as evil by those of 
the nominal church, and yet "rejoice and be exceeding glad 
because our names are written in heaven." They may frown 
upon you and despitefully use you and say all manner of evil 
against you falsely, or they may seek to win you back by 
flattery, saying they cannot afford to lose your influence-you 
could do so much good by remaining among them. Oh, how 
necessary in this evil day is the faith- 

That bears unmoved the world's dread frown, 
Nor heeds its flattering smile; 
That seas of trouble cannot drown, 
Nor Satan's arts beguile." 



Dearly beloved, let us again repeat the warning: "Stand fast in 
the liberty wherewith Christ hath made you free, and be not 
again entangled with the yoke of bondage"~not even in the 
slightest degree. 



R296 : page 9 

THE EVERLASTING FATHER. 

"His name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, The Mighty 
God, The Everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace." (Isa. 9:6.) 

Two of these titles of our Lord Jesus have rather bewildered 
many of His children, and the churches in general holding to the 
Papal heresy of a triune God~or three Gods in one, equal in 
power, glory and all other respects, have rather been interested 
in adding to the bewilderment than in explaining the text. 

Not to go into the subject in great detail, we would mention a 
few thoughts on the titles-Mighty God, and Everlasting Father. 

The English word God, as found in the Old Testament, is the 
translation of several Hebrew words -sometimes one, sometimes 
another. In this instance it is the word El. El signifies strong or 
powerful, consequently is applicable to any powerful being and 
especially so to the most powerful-the Almighty Jehovah. 

That the word is thus used may be readily seen by any one who 
will carefully note the following texts, in which the English 
translations of the Hebrew word El are in italics: 

"It is in the power of my hand." (Gen. 31:29)— "there shall be no 
might in thine hand." (Deut. 28:32) -"neither is it in our power." 
(Neh. 5:5) -"like the great mountains." (Psa. 36:6)-"in the 
power of thine hand to do it." (Prov. 3:27)- "pray unto a god 
[mighty one] that cannot save. "-(Isa. 45:20)-" who among the 
sons of the mighty." (Psa. 89:6) -"God standeth in the 
congregation of the mighty" [the saints]. (Psa. 82:1)-" Who is 
like unto thee O Lord [JEHOVAH] among the Gods" [mighty or 
ruling ones]. (Exod. 15:ll)-"Give unto the Lord [JEHOVAH] 
O ye mighty." (Psa. 29:1) -"The mighty God [ruler] even the 
Lord" [JEHOVAH]. (Psa. 50:1.) 

Notice the above texts carefully and critically and all will agree 
that the context in every case shows the meaning of the Hebrew 
word El to be powerful one. How clearly it is stated in the last 
three quotations that JEHOVAH is the chief "el" and ruleth over 
all other ^/-powerful ones. And it should be known to all, that 
JEHOVAH is the name applied to none other than the Supreme 
Being -our Father, and him whom Jesus called Father and God. 
(John 20:17.) The meaning then of the words "Mighty God" in 
our text, is, -He shall be called the mighty powerful. And so he 
is, for to him the Father has given all power in earth and heaven- 



-(Matt. 28:19, and 11:27.) "He is Lord of alT-next to the Father 
for "The head of Christ is God." (1 Cor. 1 1:3.) They are one in 
mind, purpose, etc., because Jesus gave up his own will and took 
the Father's (John 5:30) just as we must give up our will, mind, 
spirit and receive the Father's if we would be made heirs of God, 
joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord. Does any one ask further 
proof of a distinction of persons? If so we request such to read 
Matt. 22:44~Jesus' application to himself of Psa. 110:1, 
remembering that the words used by David, translated Lord 
[Master] are totally distinct and entirely different words, the first 
one being Jehovah, and the other adon. We give Young's 
translation of this verse- 

"The affirmation of Jehovah to my Lord- 
Sit at my right hand, 
Till I make thine enemies thy footstool." 

Now let us notice the second appellation --"Everlasting Father." 
This in the Hebrew signifies just what it does in the English, 
viz.: a father forever. The word father signifies cause or 
authorship of being-or life giver. So that Isaiah's declaration 
means that Jesus shall be hereafter known as an author of life— 
or life giver to some one. Next we inquire to whom will he give 
life? and Paul answers "As in Adam all die so in Christ shall all 
be made alive. " This teaches then that Christ becomes the Father 
of the entire race. Next we ask what kind of life or nature will 

R296 : page 10 

Christ give the race? And the answer is, a perfect human nature, 
and hence an eternal human life— just what they lost through 
Adam's transgression. So Paul tells us (Rom. 5:18,19) "As 
through one [person's] offence sentence came on all men to 
condemnation [condemning all to a loss of life] so also, through 
one [person's] righteous act sentence came on all men to 
justification of life. [That is, through the obedience of Christ the 
death penalty is to be removed— in his death it was paid and all 
men shall have a right to life again— the same life and nature 
once possessed, then lost, which has been redeemed or 
purchased back.] "For as through the disobedience of one man 
the many were made sinners [and because sinners deprived of 
life,] so also, through the obedience of the one [Christ] the many 
[the same number] will be constituted [made] righteous." And 
being no longer sinners they will no longer be subject to the 
penalties of sin— sickness, pain, DEATH. 

We see then that the special work of Christ for the human race 
was the counteracting or rolling back of sin and its penalty- 
death (the loss of life). In this, he is the Great Physician or 
Restorer; and the age during which this (result of his death on 
their behalf,) will be accomplished is called "The times [years] 
of restitution" -or giving back-of the blessings lost through the 
entrance of sin. Human life was the principal thing lost and it 



Jesus is to give back— and in so doing he shall (future) be called 
the "Everlasting Father." 

Adam was so created that he might be the father or life giver to 
a race of human beings. Through disobedience he lost his own 
right to life—became a dying sinner. He could only give to his 
posterity what he possessed-a dying nature-and consequently 
none of the race ever attained perfect life. Thus Adam failed to 
become in the proper sense a father or life giver. It is because 
Christ will accomplish this work of life giving in which Adam 
failed, that he is called the "Everlasting Father." 

R297 : page 10 

But does some one inquire, Is not Jesus a spiritual being and of 
the divine nature since his resurrection? Yes. Then would not 
any life imparted by Him be of the same nature as his own, viz.: 
Divine and Immortal? By no means, Jehovah is the life giver, or 
father of all creation; yet all creation is not possessed of the 
Divine nature. Besides we must not deal in inferences while we 
have clear teachings of Scripture to guide us in this matter. If 
Jesus be the Father or giver of the Divine nature to the world in 
the next age, he must be equally so to his church of this Gospel 
age. How is this— is Jesus ever called our Father? No, he is 
called our "Captain," "Leader," "Forerunner," "Master," "Head," 
"Lord" but never is he called our Father. On the contrary, Jesus' 
own teachings and that of the Apostles, is that Jehovah is the 
only Father or Giver of the Divine nature, that the God and 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is our Father and hath begotten 
us (1 Pet. 1:3)— that as He raised up Jesus to the Divine nature 
and likeness He would raise up us also by His Spirit. 

It was Jesus himself who taught us to pray "Our Father." (Luke 
11:2.) Who also said: "Glorify your Father which is in heaven." 
(Matt. 5:16) "Be the children of your Father, (vs. 45.) "Pray to 
thy Father in secret and thy Father which seeth in secret shall 
reward thee." (Matt. 6:6.) "Your Father knoweth what things ye 
have need of," etc., etc., Who said again, "I ascend to my Father 
and to your Father to my God and your God." (John 20:17.) 

Again Jesus made a very emphatic statement of our dear and 
close relationship to him and to The Father when he said- 
"Whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven 
the same is my brother, and sister, and mother." (Matt. 12:50.) 
"Call no man Father on the earth for one is your father even God 
and all ye are brethren." (Matt. 23:9.) And Paul assures us that 
"Both he that sanctifieth (Jesus) and they that are sanctified (the 
"body") are all one, for which cause he is not ashamed to call 
them brethren." (Heb. 2:11) 

Do these statements seem out of harmony with that other 
statement of Jesus (John 10:27,28), "My sheep hear my voice 
and I give unto them eternal life"? We think not, for while it is 
thus expressly stated that we are begotten of God— that he is our 



Father, and that "God hath both raised up the Lord and will also 
raise up us also by his own power," (1 Cor. 6:14) it is also stated 
that "He which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise up us also by 
Jesus." (2 Cor. 4:14) The harmony of these Scriptures shows 
that Jehovah is our Father~life-giver~though he has used the 
Spirit and the Word as his agents in our begetting, and will use 
Jesus as his agent in our birth or resurrection. 

But though accepting the statements of our Lord on this subject 
as conclusive, yet we desire to understand if we may, how Christ 
will be the "Everlasting Father" to the world, while Jehovah is 
the Father of the "little flock" who shall with Jesus inherit the 
kingdom; assured, that every such distinction has a reason, 
which, if understood, should shed some light upon the general 
plan. 

First then, we remark that Jesus did a work for his church, 
without which they never could have received either the 
begetting or birth to the Divine Nature, i.e., he redeemed our 
human nature. Like all others of the human race, the church 
were sinners, and like all others of the race, we were redeemed— 
or justified, by the precious blood (life) of Christ. No one is 
justified to the Divine Nature by Christ's death-no, it was 
human life that was lost through Adam, and to human life all are 
justified by Christ. It was because it was a human nature that 
was lost that Jesus left the glory he had with the Father, and took 
upon Him the human nature-that he might give or sacrifice it as 
a ransom for our human nature. In a word, it must be evident to 
all that Jesus' death is the basis or cause of a restitution of the 
human nature, but not a cause of the giving of the Divine 
Nature. 

Secondly, we remark that the Divine nature is Jehovah's gift- 
given as a reward of obedience (even unto death) to those who, 
by patient perseverance in well doing seek for it- "Glory, Honor 
and Immortality." 

Paul informs us that it was because of obedience even unto the 
death of the human, that God highly exalted Jesus, or made him 
a Divine being. (All spiritual beings do not possess the Divine 
nature- Angels for instance.) And the promise held out during 
the Gospel age, under which the "Bride" or "Body" of Christ is 
called out of the World is, that if we follow in Jesus' footsteps, 
we shall attain to the same prize and experience the same high 
exaltation from the human nature to the Glory, Honor and 
Immortality of the Divine— as members of a body under Jesus 
our head. 

The conditions of this high exaltation are so severe, that though 
many are called, few will be chosen, because only a few will 
make their calling and selection sure by so running as to obtain 
that great prize. (1 Cor. 9:24.) It is an extraordinary prize, and it 
is no easy race as all the runners testify from the head all down 



through this age. Yet, though difficult we run it with joy for the 
same reasons as the "head"~who for the joy that was set before 
him, endured the cross despising the shame. (Heb. 12:2.) 

Brother Paul tells us that the exceeding great and precious 
promises of the Word were given us, that by these (the strength 
and encouragement which they would afford us, as they did 
Jesus, to be "obedient even unto death") we might become 
partakers of the Divine nature. (2 Pet. 1:4.) 

Let us glance at a few of these exceeding great and precious 
promises: 

Jesus says: "To him that overcometh, I will grant to sit with me 
in my throne" (Rev. 3:21). 

To him that overcometh, I will give power over the nations, and 
he shall rule, etc., ...even as I received of my Father. (Rev. 2:27.) 

Paul says: "If we suffer with him we shall also reign with him." 
(2 Tim. 2:12.) "If we be [become] dead with him [dead to the 
World and to our own will-alive to the will of God] we shall 
also live with him." (2 Tim. 2:11.) If we seek Glory, Honor and 
Immortality, patiently and perseveringly we shall gain the prize. 
(Rom. 2:7.) Then again, he says that Christ is a son over a house 
of sons, whose house are we, if we hold fast to the end of the 
Gospel age, when the house will be finished. (Heb. 3:6.) 

Peter mentions this special prize which is for the overcomers of 
this time saying: "Blessed be that God and Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ who, according to his great mercy hath begotten us, 
again, to a living hope (through the resurrection of Jesus Christ 
from the dead) to an inheritance incorruptible [immortal] 
undefiled [pure] and unfading, preserved in heaven for 
you,... that the proof of your faith... may be found to, [or result in] 
praise and glory and honor at the revelation of Jesus Christ." (1 
Pet. 1:3-7. Diaglott). 

Our Father might have asked our sacrifice without telling us 
how great should be our reward, but he knew that the influence 
of these exceeding precious promises was needful, that we 
might properly value the titles and honors of earth, and be 
enabled to count them all but loss and dross for the excellencies 
promised us as members of the body of the Christ. 

Thirdly, we notice that all of these promises designed to help to 
the Divine nature (2 Pet. 1 :4) belong to the Gospel age. They 
will all be fulfilled when the church—or body is exalted to glory 
with the head— set with him on his throne. Read each of these 
again carefully and any others and see that none of the 
exceeding precious promises belong to the next age; all are 
confined by the context, to this age. To those who have 
covenanted to sacrifice the human, "now is the acceptable time"- 
-and to such only is the Divine nature given. True there are 
promises and great ones to mankind, to be fulfilled in the next 



age during the reign of The Christ head and body, but these are 
all earthly promises and will not compare with our heavenly 
ones. Among these, are the promises to Abraham, Isaac, and 
Jacob, Israel and the nations, all of whom are to be blessed 
under our spiritual Kingdom which will be the agency and 
power through which they will be restored to human perfection 
and happiness; as Paul expresses it: "God having provided some 
better thing for us, that they without us should not be made 
PERFECT." (Heb. 11:40). 

We see then, that the Divine nature comes to the church, as to 
Jesus, as a reward from the Father Jehovah for the race of faith 
well run, for the crucifixion-sacrifice, of the human nature. 
Does some one ask: Was not our human nature condemned to 
death already as sinful, and if so how could it be accepted of 
God as a sacrifice? Ah! that was where we were blessed in 
Jesus, the same as the World, i.e., his death paid our penalty and 
justified us. Had it not been for our ransom, we should have had 
nothing to sacrifice and could never have received the divine 
reward; but being justified we could present our justified 
humanity "a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God." (Rom. 
12:1.) Our human nature having been redeemed by our Lord's 
death, must in the sight of Jehovah, be just as pure and perfect as 
was the human nature of Jesus, for his perfectness was imputed 
to us. Consequently, being justified by faith, we may run the 
race as acceptably as did our Lord. And though the race is a 
difficult one we are not alone in it as he was for he was a 
solitary traveler and "of the people there was none with him," 
while we have in each other helps by the way; and in Him as our 
Leader and "Fore-runner" a perfect example, and above all his 
watchful eye to guide and direct our course and to give "help in 
every time of need," as we climb after him. "Few there be that 
find this narrow difficult way. It is "a little flock to whom it is 
their Father's good pleasure to give the Kingdom." 

We conclude then that the titles, Mighty God, and Everlasting 
Father, are titles which fully understood, are very appropriate to 
Our Lord Jesus 

R298 : page 10 

Christ. And we might add that so perfectly is his Bride-body- 
church, associated with him, both in filling up the measure of 
the sufferings- being joined in sacrifice and also in the Glory 
that shall follow, that the same titles are applicable to the 
Church as his body-for "He that hath freely given us Christ, 
shall he not with him also freely give us all things?" "Therefore 
all things are yours, and ye are Christ's and Christ is God's." 

After the sacrifice— soon follows the power which will, under 
him as our head, constitute the whole body of Christ the 
"Mighty God" (el- powerful one) to rule and bless the nations- 
and the body with the head, shall share in the work of restoring 



the life lost in Adam, and therefore be members of that company 
which as a whole will be the Everlasting Father to the restored 
race. 



R299 : page 1 

VOL. III. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., DECEMBER, 1881. 

NO. 6. 



pagel 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he can not and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS :~Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send 
paper-money or three cent stamps to the amount of two dollars 
by mail at our risk. Larger amounts by Check, P.O. Money 
Order or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 



FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers 
will be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or 
postage stamps as we can make no use of them. Remittances 
may be made by Postal Money Orders. 

N.B.-This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who 
will send a card yearly requesting it. 



R308 : page 1 

NOTICE THE WRAPPER. 

All persons who have not written to us for the last eighteen 
months, requesting the continuance of ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER, will find a red & besides their address, on the wrapper 
of their paper this month. This signifies that their names will be 
dropped from our list, unless heard from at once. This will 
include many of the poor list; but we desire to hear from all once 
a year, as we do not wish to send the TOWER where not valued 
enough to ask for it. Attend to this at once. Should an error 
occur please inform us immediately. 

WE hope to issue the Tabernacle tract before January 1882. Be 
patient brethren. 



R299 : page 1 



THE CREATIVE WEEK. 



We read in 1 Tim. 6:20, "O Timothy, ...babblings and 
oppositions of science, falsely so called." This passage the 
church nominal has ever been ready to quote when an 
investigation of nature's laws seemed to develop ideas or 
theories at variance with her cherished opinions; forgetting 
sometimes to obey the equal injunction. "Prove all things, hold 
fast that which is good." Paul did not blow hot and cold. In the 
first place he did not say "science." The word he used means 
knowledge or wisdom in a more general sense. Secondly, he 
clearly indicates that it must first be proved to be a vain 
babbling under the name of wisdom before it is rejected. 

Strange to say the church [falsely so called] professing to walk 
in the light and in the knowledge of God instead of being a 
leader in the advancement of true science and philanthropy, has 
not only been a dead load dragging behind, but has often bitterly 
opposed every advancing step. 

The telescope and microscope were denounced as instruments of 
unholy prying into God's secrets. Astronomy, Geology and 
whatever truths there may be in the Evolution theory, have been 
violently assailed; while religious intolerance, human slavery 
and the divine right (?) of kings has been defended supported 
and duly prayed for. 

Scientists however, have but little room for boasting as regards 
intolerance. They have denounced each other and frequently 
claimed what was afterwards proved untrue. The study of nature 
without a knowledge of nature's God frequently leads to the 
wildest conceptions. We must first see light in his light to see 
clearly. Then, a looking down through nature-after having 
looked up to nature's God-expands the heart and mind; and fills 



us not only with admiration, but with adoration as we catch the 
panoramic glimpse of the glory, majesty and power of our 
transcendent Creator. The God of the Bible is also the God of 
nature; and if we do not see perfect harmony we may set it down 
that we misunderstand either the word of inspiration, or the 
lesson of creation. 

The Bible has nothing to fear from mature science; on the 
contrary, scientific investigation and research are daily adding to 
the proof of the authenticity and reliability of the Scriptures. 

We wish at this time to look into the subject of Cosmogony; or 
the science of the origin and formation of the earth. Many 
suppose, that the history of creation as given in the first chapter 
of Genesis, is utterly at variance with the teachings of Geology. 
This is not the case. Some of the most eminent Geologists 
believe "that the word of God, properly interpreted, is in 
harmony with the teachings of their science... also, that the 
divine word explains the divine work, while the divine work 
confirms the divine word." Prof. Silliman says, "Every great 
feature in the structure of the planet corresponds with the order 
of events narrated in the sacred history." "This history furnishes 
a record important alike to philosophy and religion; and we find 
in the planet itself, the proof that the record is true." Prof. Dana 
declares, "In this succession, we observe not merely an order of 
events, like that deduced from science; but there is a system in 
the arrangement, and a far reaching prophecy, to which 
philosophy could not have obtained, however instructed. " He 
further says, "No human mind was witness of the events; and no 
such mind in the early age of the world, unless gifted with 
superhuman intelligence, could have contrived such a scheme, 
or would have placed the creation of the Sun, the source of light 
to the earth, so long after the creation of light, even on the fourth 
day, and, what is equally singular, between the creation of plants 
and that of animals, when so important to both; and none could 
have reached to the depths of philosophy exhibited in the whole 
plan." 

The conflict between the champions of Genesis and Geology has 
been mainly in reference to the length of time consumed in the 
work of creation. 

Most geologists reckon time only in millions of years; while 
many Bible students as devotedly claim for the Mosaic account 
six literal-or 24 hour-days. As to the latter theory, while we do 
not doubt God's ability to create the earth and its inhabitants in 
that very short period, yet we do know that such unnatural haste 
has not been, in other things, his practice. Those who understand 
the plan of the ages will see this. 

Besides, the scriptural use of the word "day" will not support 
such a conclusion. It is used there as we often use it now, in an 
accommodated sense. For instance; "The day of temptation in 



the wilderness;" (forty years.) Heb. 3:8. "In that day;" "The day 
of the Lord;" (1000 years); and many others. As if the Lord 
would guard his people against such an error he ends the 
description of creation in these words: "These are the 
generations of the heavens and of the earth... in the day that the 
Lord God made the earth and the heavens." Here the whole 
period is called "the day." So indeed the period of re-generation 
under the second Adam is called "the day of Christ." 

The length of the day of creation is a question which heretofore 
no one has been able satisfactorily to answer. Many Bible 
students think that because Peter says "One day is with the Lord 
as a thousand years" that each day of creation must be of that 
duration. Peter however was speaking of the period between the 
day of creation and the day of the Lord; his language can fully 
apply, only to that period; and is without doubt very strong 
inferential proof of the theory that the period from the dominion 
of the first Adam to that of the second will be six thousand 
years, to be followed by the "Millennium" or the seventh 
thousand as the antitype of the Jewish Sabbath. 

There are good reasons why we should expect the creative days 
to be different from the thousand year days, which Peter speaks 
of. Let us not forget however, that Peter links them together; but 
we will refer to this again. 

While we do not see evidence to warrant the need of such 
enormous periods as some geologists claim, yet we do think that 
six thousand years (a thousand years to each day) are altogether 
too short for the amount of change, development, &c, 
accomplished in the preparation of the earth for man. 

Some geologists have claimed thousands of millions of years 
since life began. "Sir Wm. Thomson has reduced the estimate on 
physical grounds, to one hundred millions of years as a 
maximum." [Dana]. As a few hundred millions is only a 
difference of opinion among these savans, it might be well to 
leave about that much off from some of their calculations (?). 
The mode of reckoning used, and the reliability of the data will 
be understood from the following remarks of Prof. Dana. "In 
calculations of elapsed time, from the thickness of formations, 
there is always great uncertainty, arising from the dependance of 
this thickness on a progressing subsidence, [regular sinking of 
the land.] In estimates made from alluvial deposits, [soil, etc., 
washed ashore or deposited by a stream] when the data are 
based on the thickness of the accumulations in a given number 
of years-say the last 2000 years-this source of doubt affects the 
whole calculation, from its foundation, and renders it almost, if 
not quite, worthless.... When the estimate detritus [fine 
scourings] discharged by a stream, it is of more value. But even 
here there is a source of great doubt, &c." 



A question of the first importance in our investigation is this: At 
what point in past history did the six days work of Gen. 1 begin? 
Was it at the beginning of the creation of the universe, as some 
have conjectured? Was it at the moment of origin of our earth as 
a distinct planet? Or was it when God began the special work of 
preparing it for the habitation of man? A work which we believe 
has not been done as yet in any other sphere. We think it was the 
latter period. We have no knowledge of the time occupied in 
creating or evolving the untold myriads of Suns with their 
satellites; some of them so far away that light (moving 191,000 
miles per second) takes millions of years to come to us; thus 
proving that they were flaming suns millions of years ago. 

Scientists claim, without seeming objection, that our earth was 
once a globe of molten material of which only the crust has yet 
cooled. That 

R299 : page 2 

as the cooling process went on the vapors condensed, 
completely covering the earth in an ocean of water which was 
mixed with, or held in solution and suspension, much that now 
forms the surface of our earth. In the course of time by 
earthquake upheavals (caused by the cooling and contraction of 
the earth's crust) the land appeared above the ocean's surface. 
The work of assorting the different layers or strata of minerals 
and rocks had now begun and has evidently been going on ever 
since. The dashing of the waves of that turbid ocean against the 
upheaved continents, assisted by the acids, &c, believed to be in 
the water, evidently wore down the original rocks, forming 
boulders, pebbles, sand, &c, depositing each in layers, to be 
again upheaved and worked over until satisfactory 

R300 : page 2 

to the plan of the great Architect. It is not known how soon plant 
life began, as the earliest was probably not fitted to survive and 
was evidently destroyed in the grinding of the great mill. 

We think the beginning of the six days work was at a point when 
the earth was so far cooled that it was covered with an ocean of 
water, but before the first continent appeared above the surface 
of the shoreless sea. While the scriptures clearly teach that God 
is the Creator of all things we think that Gen. 1 , describes only 
the preparation of the earth from this period onward; and does 
not even allude to the creation of the starry heavens; so that 
previous time, either geological or astronomical, is not included 
in the six days. 

"In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth." The 
heavens here alluded to are terrestrial; as- "the birds of heaven," 
"rain from heaven," "clouds of heaven," &c. 

This is in harmony with Ex. 20:1 1 . "In six days the Lord made 
heaven and earth the sea and all that in them is." The latter 



clause means birds, beasts, fish, &c. On the first day, only the 
sea appeared; on the second, the heavens were formed; and on 
the third, the earth or dry land was brought to view. It is claimed 
that the word "create" in Gen. 1:1, rather means to shape, form 
or make, out of that previously created, (as in Ex. 20:1 1, above). 

Vs. 2. "Now the earth was waste and empty; and darkness was 
over the face of the deep: and the Spirit of God was brooding 
over the face of the waters." This verse shows us the condition 
of the globe when this special work began, and it evidently 
corresponds to the earliest geological era; (the Azoic). As the 
hen broods over her nest of eggs, developing the life by the 
imparted warmth, so the Spirit is represented as vivifying the 
inanimate waters. This impartation of new life or energy would 
undoubtedly affect the electric conditions of the earth and 
LIGHT would be the seeming result. 

Vs. 3. "And God said, Let there be light; and there was light." 
What Prof. Dana predicates of the beginning of activity in 
matter would, we think, be true in the beginning of a special 
moving. He says, "In such a beginning, the activity would show 
itself instantly, by a manifestation of light, since light is a 
resultant of molecular activity. A flash of light... would therefore 
be the first announcement of the work begun." This would of 
course be some kind of electric light, earthly, not heavenly, as 
the globe was then wrapped in dense clouds of steam from the 
heated waters. It may have been like the Aurora Borealis 
(Northern Lights) or the Zodiacal light. 

We have not room in this article to follow in detail the work of 
each day, we can only notice a few points in passing. 

On the second day the watery vapors were lifted above the 
firmament or expanse which was called heaven. That might 
occur in this way. In that early period the ocean contained a 
large quantity of carbon, phosphorous and other elements in 
solution. As formations took place gases combined from these 
elements would escape into the air, saturating it with carbonic 
and other acids. This very heavy (carbonic acid) gas would 
make the air so buoyant that the lighter clouds would rise far up 
into it; probably much higher than they are now, as the most of 
the carbonic acid has since been absorbed by the wonderful 
plant life that afterwards formed our vast coal beds. 

Skeptics and Infidels have objected to the idea that the sun, 
moon and stars were not created until the fourth day. 

The objection is reasonable, but it is based on a misconception 
of the Scriptural statement. The earth had been revolving around 
the sun for ages and Moses is evidently alluding simply to their 
first appearance to the earth, and their appointment as the 
recorders of passing days and years. 



Apparently God had another reason for now revealing the Sun. 
Plant life as then existent could live without light, but animals 
have eyes, and God is about to introduce these. Why had not the 
Sun given light to earth before? The ocean was once a boiling 
sea. Still earlier all the water of Old Ocean was in a state of 
vapor; and the clouds enveloping the earth must have been 
simply immense. Not until the earth had so far cooled that the 
larger part of these clouds had disappeared by condensation in 
the sea could the heavenly bodies possibly be seen; and this was 
evidently not until the fourth day. 

About this time it is thought the great coal beds were formed. 
Coal is made from dense forests of trees and plants which grew 
ages ago, and which after having formed a thick bed was broken 
down and covered by the sea with a layer of stones, sand, clay, 
etc. Above this a new forest sprang up to be again covered and 
laid away safely to cake into coal for the use of generations of 
men who existed then, only in the plan of God. 

This would seem to have taken a long time, and so we think it 
did, (In Nova Scotia no less than seventy-six successive forests 
have grown after and above each other,) but not so long as it 
would now require. The earth was then one vast hot-bed. (These 
deposits are found in the Arctic regions.) Plants which now 
grow only a few inches or a few feet high, even at the equator, 
grew then forty, sixty and eighty feet high, and two or three feet 
in diameter. Probably in that warm virgin soil and moist and 
richer atmosphere these forests had an almost mushroom-like 
growth. Evidently then, there can be no just comparison made 
between the far past and the present, neither can we measure 
past ages by present rates of development. 

Is there then no way of measuring these days of creation? Yes! 
we think there is. We believe we have found the key. There are 
seven days: Each must be of the same length: If we can find the 
length of one we will know the length of all. 

We have just found, that we do not know the duration of the first 
six: How is it with the seventh? We know when it began, can we 
find where it ends? At the close of the creation God made one 
who, in the likeness of himself, should have dominion over all,— 
an image or miniature of God. Then God began his rest. Adam 
fell and the power passed into the hands of "the Adversary." (In 
accordance with Jehovah's original plan) Jesus has purchased 
the "Inheritance" and is preparing for the overthrow of the 
usurper. When he takes his great power he will reign until he has 
put all enemies under his feet. This is the work of the Millennial 
age. When he has restored all things, he delivers up the kingdom 
to God the Father who again resumes the reins of government. 
How long does God rest-as to the affairs of this world? Seven 
thousand years. ["The Father judgeth no man, but hath 
committed all judgment unto the Son."] 



We turn again to the words of Peter. His subject is the history of 
the period of time from "the generation of the heavens and the 
earth to their re-generation. He says: "One day is with the Lord 
as a thousand years." He teaches then, that the week of the law, 
was typical of the grand period of 7000 years of man's allotted 
history. Six thousand years of toil under the bondage of sin and 
Satan, to be followed by one thousand years of peace, rest and 
heavenly communion. But when this Sabbath shall end-as it 
must-is there another weary week of toil to begin again? No ! 
thank God the cycle is complete. The Jewish week was a 
glorious type; gracious even in its keeping, for man and beast: 
and it has a worthy antitype. But what of that grander cycle, of 
which the seven days was but a typical part-the seven times 
seven, that ushered in the Jubilee? 

If the seventh period of creation in which the Father rested is 
seven thousand years long-as shown above -so are the other 
six periods; and so we have seven times seven thousand years, 
even forty-nine thousand years, bringing us to the fiftieth 
thousand the antitype of all chronological antitypes, the great 
grand JUBILEE. 

God's purposes will ripen fast, 
Unfolding every hour; 
The bud may have a bitter taste, 
But sweet will be the flower. 

W. I. MANN. 



R300 : page 2 

VIEW FROM THE "TOWER." 

The work of the Lord still prospers -favorable and encouraging 
reports from all parts of the field. All the workers are well, etc., 
except our dear brother Sunderlin, who still suffers intense pain, 
confined to his bed. 

The Lord provide for each of us the experiences he sees us to 
need, preparing us for the kingdom. 

The letters keep pouring in from all parts of the U.S. and Great 
Britain, and give evidence that the Lord has been using the little 
books as His agent to awaken his children to fresh interest in His 
plans and work. 

The letters average about 40 to 50 a day, and nearly all represent 
true hearts overflowing with love and gratitude for God's 
goodness, in permitting them and us, to see so much of His 
grandly unfolding plan of love, for man's salvation. 

We wish all could read these letters, if we had more room we 
would frequently refresh you with others like the two which we 
publish in part below. 



These letters have just come to hand and we cannot resist the 
desire to add to and refresh your joy and comfort, in the rough 
pathway to glory. The first is from a minister. We omit all 
names. 



R301 : page 2 

NOTTINGHAM, ENGLAND, November 8th, 1881. 

MY DEAR SIR~Permit me though a stranger to assure you, that 
I can never feel sufficiently thankful that out of the thousands of 
copies of your book, "Food for Thinking Christians" distributed 
in this town~a copy fell into my hands: apparently it was the 
merest accident; but really I regard it as a direct providence. It 
has thrown light upon subjects which have perplexed me for 
years; and has made me feel more than ever, what a glorious 
book the Bible is, how worthy of our profoundest study. At the 
same time, I came from the study of your book with the 
conviction that a very large proportion of the Theology of our 
Churches and Schools, is the merest scraps of human notions, 
and that our huge systems of Theology upon the study of which, 
some of us have spent so many laborious years-only to be the 
worse confused and perplexed— are infinitely more the work of 
mistaken men, than the inspiration of the all- wise God. 

However, I may differ from the book in a few minor details, I 
found the main argument to be resistless, commending itself to 
both my head and my heart. Again let me thank you on my own 
behalf, for the good I have received. 

I find at the close of it, you make an offer to send copies to any 
who have reason to believe they can make a good use of them. 
In my church and congregation, there is a number of intelligent 
persons who are interested in the second coming, and who 
would be only too glad to read your book, I could distribute 60 
or 70 copies with advantage, you say, "ask and ye shall receive"- 
-I have faith in your generosity. Believe me to remain yours, 
Most faithfully . 



LOUISVILLE, KENTUCKY, November 22, 1881. 

GENTLEMEN-Having read with the most profound interest 
your publication entitled; "Food for Thinking Christians," and 
being fairly dazzled by the wonderful light it reveals on the great 
"subject," I find myself thirsting for more knowledge from this 
seemingly inspired pen. 

Therefore in accordance with the invitation extended by you on 
the cover of this little work I ask that you send me a few copies 
of "The Tabernacle and its Teachings," if in print. 

With reference to the first named book, permit me to say, that I 
have never yet read or heard anything equal to that little volume 



in its influence upon my heart and life; and to my mind, it 
answers most grandly and conclusively the great question, "Is 
life worth living." Such views as it sets forth, are bound to find 
response in the minds and hearts of all unbiased thinking 
Christians, for they bear the stamp of something greater than 
mere human conception. I only wish we could hear it from the 
pulpits; but I think this must shortly follow. It is good seed and 
in its "due time" will come forth. Believe me, I am 

Very Truly Yours . 

R301 : page 3 

"A LITTLE WHILE." 

A little while, our fightings shall be over; 

A little while, our tears be wiped away; 

A little while, the presence of Jehovah 

Shall turn our darkness into Heaven's bright day. 

A little while, the fears that oft surround us 
Shall to the memories of the past belong; 
A little while, the love that sought and found us 
Shall change our weeping into Heaven's glad song. 

A little while! His presence goes before us, 
A fire by night, a shadowy cloud by day; 
His banner, love-inscribed, is floating o'er us; 
His arm almighty is our strength and stay. 

A little while! Tis ever drawing nearer— 
The brighter dawning of that glorious day, 
Blest Savior, make our spirits' vision clearer, 
And guide, oh, guide us in the shining way. 

A little while! Oh, blessed expectation! 

For strength to run with patience, Lord we cry; 

Our hearts up-leap in fond anticipation. 

Our union with the Bridegroom draweth nigh. 

Selected. 



R301 : page 3 



"YE ARE GODS." 



"I have said ye are Gods; and all of you are children of the Most 
High. But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the princes" 
[literally heads]. Psa. 82:6. 

Our high calling is so great, so much above the comprehension 
of men, that they feel that we are guilty of blasphemy when we 
speak of being "new creatures "--not any longer human, but 



"partakers of the divine nature." When we claim on the 
scriptural warrant, that we are begotten of a divine nature and 
that Jehovah is thus our father, it is claiming that we are divine 
beings-hence all such are Gods. Thus we have a family of 
Gods, Jehovah being our father, and all his sons being brethren 
and joint-heirs: Jesus being the chief, or first-born. 

Nor should we wonder that so few discern this grand 
relationship, into the full membership of which, we so soon 
hope to come. The apostle tells us that "the natural man 
receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God ...neither can he 
know them because they are spiritually discerned." (1 Cor. 
2:14). Just so it was, when our great Head and Lord was among 
men: He, having consecrated the human at 30 years of age was 
baptized of the spirit, and became a part-taker of the divine 
nature. When Jesus said he was a son of God the Jews were 
about to stone him, reasoning thus, that if a son of God, he was 
making himself to be also a God, or of the God family. [Just 
what we claim "Beloved now are we the sons of God"~"The 
God and Father of our Lord Jesus hath begotten us."] (1 John 
3:2 and 1 Pet. 1:3). 

Jesus does not deny that when he said he was a son, it implied 
that he was of the divine nature, but he quotes to them the above 
passage from the Psalms as being good authority and it seems as 
though it satisfied them, for they did not stone him. Jesus said, 
"Is it not written in your law, I said ye are Gods?" Then he 
proceeds to show that the "Gods" there mentioned, are the ones 
who receive obediently his words and example, and concludes 
his argument by asking whether if God calls such ones as 
receive his (Jesus') teachings, Gods, whether they think that he 
the teacher, whom the Father had specially set apart as the head 
of those Gods could be properly said to blaspheme, when he 
claimed the same relationship as a son of God. (John 10:35). 

These sons of God, like him from whom they heard the word of 
truth by which they are begotten, are yet in disguise; the world 
knoweth us not for the same reason that it knew him not. Our 
Father puts no outward badge or mark of our high relationship, 
but leaves each to walk by faith and not by sight all through the 
earthly pilgrimage—down into death. His favor and love and the 
Glory and Honor which belong to our station, we can now see 
by the eye of faith, but soon it will be realized in fact. Now we 
appear like men, and all die naturally like men, but in the 
resurrection we will rise in our true character as Gods. 

It doth not yet appear 
How great we must be made; 
But when we see him as he is, 
We shall be like our Head. 

How forcibly this is expressed by the prophet and how sure it is 
too, Jesus says-It cannot be broken: "I have said ye are Gods, 



all of you sons of the Most High. But ye shall die like men, and 
fall like one of the princes." [lit. heads— Adam and Jesus are the 
two heads.] 

Then the whole family— head and body are addressed as one, as 
they will be under Christ their head, saying -"Arise O God, 
judge [rule, bless] the earth: for thou shalt inherit all nations." 
The Mighty God, the everlasting Father of the nations, is Christ 
whose members in particular we are. He it is that shall inherit all 
things and He it is that promised his body that they too should 
have power over the nations, and of whom Paul says "Know ye 
not that the saints shall judge the world?" 

How forcible this scripture in connection with the thought that 
all must die like men-like the (last) one of the heads. [See 
article "Who Can Hear It. "-November Number, 1881, Z.W.T. 



R302 : page 3 

IMPORTANCE OF BAPTISM. 

Before considering what constitutes Scriptural baptism, let us 
inquire whether it is essential. We have no hesitation in saying 
that it is indispensable, and that no one will have a part in the 
"little flock" or will be of "The bride, the Lamb's wife" who has 
not been baptized. Further, we have scriptural proof that all who 
are baptized shall be saved, that all such shall be in the "first 
resurrection." Let us hear Jesus' words- "He that believeth and is 
baptized shall be saved." But Paul is yet more explicit and says: 
[Rom. 6:3-8.] "For if we have been planted together in the 
likeness of his death we shall also be in the likeness of his 
resurrection." Notice that the subject is baptism; and that there is 
not an if, nor a but, nor any other contingency mentioned than 
baptism. How important then that we know what it is and 
understand how it should be performed. 

The meaning of the Greek word Baptizo is to bury, immerse, 
cover up, submerge. Now apply this significance to the word 
baptized; then associate it with yourself and you find that you 
are to be buried or submerged. But into what are we to be 
immersed -into water? No, we answer: Paul tells us that those 
who are really baptized "were baptized into Jesus Christ." The 
true baptism then is to be submerged, covered up, or immersed 
into Christ. If immersed into Christ we lose ourselves; we will 
no longer do our own will or way, for that will is buried. We 
have a new will or mind; it is the mind of Christ. "Let the same 
mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus." If we have been 
baptized into Christ it is that we may be members of His body, 
the church. And since "He is the head of the body, the church," 
[Col. 1:18] it follows that the only controlling authority for those 
who are members of that body is the will of Christ Jesus the 



head. This is complete immersion into Christ, and who will 
doubt that if thus dead to self and the world and alive only as a 
member of his body, obeying no will but that of "the head," we 
say who can doubt, that if thus immersed we shall be in his 
likeness in the resurrection; that if we thus know him, we shall 
also know the power of his resurrection. [Phil. 3:10.] 

The baptism of which Paul speaks then, cannot mean water 
baptism. No, thousands are so immersed who will not be in his 
likeness in the resurrection. But baptism into water is a 
beautifully expressive type of the real baptism into death. By it 
we emphasize our covenant to die to the world and earthly 
conditions, to rise to "walk not after the flesh but after the 
spirit." Jesus so used it and it is so beautifully expressive of our 
hope and covenant, that if there was no divine injunction as to 
its performance, as there is, we should still feel it a privilege to 
show forth our planting (burying) together, in the likeness of his 
death and our expectation of being in his likeness in the 
resurrection. 

When Cornelius had received the Holy Spirit Peter inquired. 
Can any man forbid water that these should be immersed? And 
so we ask, who can say aught against water being thus used as a 
type of our death and resurrection? And we might put the 
question in another form for some: Can any man refuse to thus 
show forth his death if he has indeed died to the world? We 
think not. That which hinders many in the public illustration of 
the death they profess is we fear, generally pride, fear of mental 
or uttered reproach of fellow disciples and of the world. But 
dear fellow disciple reflect that these objections to water 
baptism indicate that the true essential baptism has never fully 
taken place. You may be partly dead, and may have given up 
part of your own will, but when fully crucified you will say with 
Jesus, "I delight to do thy will, O Lord." I count all things but 
loss and dross that I may win Christ-the great prize. 

The true baptism then, is to be submerged, covered up, or 
immersed into death; to which every member of the Christ is 
appointed~i.e. the eternal death of the human nature. And thus 
by this voluntary baptism into this eternal death, we as new 
creatures begotten again of God (1 Pet. 1:3) become members of 
the body of The Christ-the body anointed, dedicated or set apart 
for the work of redeeming and restoring a fallen race. From the 
moment we covenant to be thus baptized, until the human body 
is laid in the dust and the death of the human completed, the 
work of baptism is in process. The "new creature" is to reckon 
the old creature dead; so, completely ignoring its will, and 
letting the holy spirit—mind -will of our Father bring even these 
mortal bodies, into active service to his glory. "Let (this) same 
mind (spirit, disposition, will of our Father) be in you, which 
was also in (the head of the) Christ-Jesus our Lord." If thus as 
human beings, we die daily until ultimately dead, and if as "new 



creatures" we are begotten again of God and are daily growing 
up into his likeness, can we doubt the truth of Paul's statement, 
that in the resurrection we shall be born in the likeness of our 
head and fore-runner- Jesus, who is the brightness of our 
Father's glory and the express image of his person. [Rom. 6:5; 
Heb. 1:3.] 

It is a difficult matter to attain to the prize of our high calling. 
While many— "a great company" (Rev. 7:15) shall stand before 
the throne in glory, only "the body" of overcomers are to sit with 
him "in the throne." Rev. 3:21. It is only Him that overcometh 
that "shall inherit all things" and be "joint-heir with Jesus." Not 
to the "great company" of "the household of faith" is the 
promise of the kingdom given, but to the "first-born" of the 
heavenly family- Jesus the head, the "church of the first-born" 
the body. To this first-born is the promise made: "Fear not little 
flock it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom. 

This is the prize and all Christians are in the race course. The 
overcomers will all ultimately reach the completeness of the 
"Divine nature," but it requires the putting forth of every effort 
in the race if we would win that prize and be found in Him as 
members of the body of the first-born and "heirs of all things." 
Therefore Paul exhorts [not the world, but Christians] to "so run 
that we may obtain" [the prize of our high calling.] "Let us lay 
aside every weight and the sin that doth so easily beset and run 
with patience the race set before us." They that run but do not so 
run as to win, "suffer loss," the loss of the prize which they 
would have obtained had they been willing to "lay aside every 
weight." They shall suffer loss but themselves shall be saved so 
as by fire. [By coming through "the great tribulation."] Their 
lives shall be saved but that for which they were working shall 
be lost. 

Yes, beloved, it is a prize such as never before has been and 
never again will be offered and what wonder if it is very 
difficult of attainment -if it be "Through much tribulation (even 
unto death) ye shall enter the kingdom. " Dying (being baptized 
into Christ's death) is not simply "putting away the filth of the 
flesh," denying ourselves only such things as are sinful? No, that 
would not be "being made conformable to his death." "In Him 
[Jesus] was no sin," consequently he could not put to death a 
sinful nature. But while his nature was pure and his every desire 
was to do things right and proper for him as a perfect man, yet 
he yielded his rights and will as a natural man for us. For 
instance as a holy undefiled one, he had a right to seek his own 
ease and pleasure but instead of so doing, being filled with the 
holy spirit of the Father, he was moved with the Father's 
compassion toward the people and went about spending his life 
for the sinner's benefit, taking our infirmities and bearing our 
sicknesses, and on more than one occasion he might have said: 
"Virtue [power, vitality] is gone out of me." 



Yes, he went about doing good, spending his perfect life powers 
for the good of sinners, because he was full to overflowing of 
the perfect love. Finally after having thus shared our sorrows 
and our griefs, He bought us and paid the price of sin [death] for 
us, that we sinners might be accounted righteous, and therefore 
have again the right to live. His righteousness was laid on them 
and their sins were laid on him. He bore the heavy load which 
sunk his human 

R302 : page 4 

nature in eternal death. This was the great, grand, culminating 
expression he gave of his love. Surely he might have kept this 
life which he gave. It was not like ours, forfeited; as he himself 
testified: "No man taketh it from me; I lay it down of myself '-- 
Even now I could ask the Father and he would give me more 
than twelve legions of angels; but these things to which he had a 
perfect right he gave up freely. 

Now it is his death, that we are to be conformed to. True, it will 
include the giving up of the sins or "filth of the flesh," and the 
"denying of ungodly lusts," etc., but, thus far it is simply duty. 
You only give up things you never had a right to, there is no 
sacrifice in that. If we would be made conformable unto his 
death, it must be by the giving up of things not sinful, and to 
which we have a right, as justified men. Jesus did not his own 
will, but the will of him that sent him, and we must "Let the 
same mind be in us which was also in Christ Jesus our Lord." 
Sin and suffering are still in the world and the disciple of Jesus 
most willing to "spend and be spent," to "labor and suffer 
reproach," making "himself of no reputation," most closely 
follows him "who has set us an example that we should walk in 
His footsteps." 

When asked of the two disciples whether they might sit on the 
right and left hand in the kingdom he answered: "Ye know not 
what ye ask; are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, 
and to be baptized with the baptism that I am [to be] baptized 
with?" Jesus shows what cup he meant when in the garden he 
exclaimed, "Father, if possible, let this cup pass from me. " He 
shows the baptism referred to also, that it was not the baptism of 
John in Jordan, but of death when he says, "I have a baptism to 
be baptized with; and how am I straightened till it be 
accomplished!" (Luke 12:50.) 

Such, baptized into Christ's death will not make earthly ease and 
comfort their aim, but will seek to "do good unto all men as they 
have opportunity especially to the household of faith." Their 
self-denial and God-likeness will seek to benefit and lift up the 
physical man; and how much more will it lead to self-sacrifice 
in order that others may be helped on to the divine life. Thus it 
was that the apostles spent themselves that they might declare 
"the unsearchable riches of Christ. " It was for this cause that 



Paul says: "I now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up 
that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for 
his body's sake, which is the church." Jesus left a measure of 
suffering, for his church as his body to complete, or fill up, and 
Paul was zealous to bear as much of it as possible. Glorious 
ambition to spend his life in bearing the glad tidings of the 
"High calling" to those who would receive it. This is the 
ambition which Jesus both exemplified and commended, saying, 
"He that would be greatest among you let him become servant 
of all." 

If we thus live a divine life and crucify and ignore the human 
life, we shall be considered "a peculiar people zealous of good 
works," and we will thus be so very different from the ideas of 
the natural man, that we must needs remember Jesus words- 
"Marvel not if the world hate you, ye know that it hated me 
before it hated you." "The disciple is not above his Lord." "If 
any man will be my disciple let him deny himself and take up 
his cross and follow me." Self-denial means much, and will 
never be experienced except as we crucify the human nature 
with its affections and desires. 

We see then, that to be baptized into Jesus' death, is not an 
instantaneous act, but a life work. 

When we first come to God through Jesus we covenant with 
Him that we will take up our cross and follow him through evil 
and good report, whether it brings the favor or frown of our 
fellows. Jesus tells us it means, the loss of the friendship of the 
world, the gain of the friendship of God, the loss of worldly 
honor, the gain of heavenly honor, the loss of earthly life and 
earthly nature, the gain of the divine nature and the divine image 
~a spiritual body like unto his glorious body. He illustrated his 
teaching on the night he was betrayed. He took bread and brake, 
saying, this is my body broken for you, eat ye all of it. The bread 
symbolized Jesus as the truth. "I am the truth"— "the heavenly 
manna." After supper he took the cup of wine saying, This is my 
blood of the new covenant shed for many for the remission of 
sins; drink ye all of it. The wine symbolizes the blood and after 
we have tasted of the truth (bread) and seen that the Lord is 
gracious he says, Here is the cup of my sufferings and death, 
drink ye all of it-you must share this cup of suffering if you 
would share my glory. Yes, says Paul, if we suffer with him we 
shall also be glorified together. (Rom. 8:17.) 

This covenant of death we make with God when we first come 
to him and He says He will, from the moment of covenant 
forward, reckon us dead indeed to the world and sin, although 
the entire life is to be a time of crucifying, or putting to death up 
to the time we die actually. God's part of the covenant is, that 
these who thus die shall have part of the divine nature, and from 
the moment we make this covenant, He seals it by giving us the 
Holy Spirit as a guide and comforter; which is an earnest of our 



inheritance. The full inheritance we shall receive when all the 
"little flock" have crucified themselves. Notice then, that we 
first covenant to die, etc., and then receive of the Spirit's 
begetting power giving us spiritual life, whereby we can carry 
out our part of the covenant. 

But as crucifying is a lingering death, so our dying is well 
expressed thus. It is hard to die in any sense, but it is especially 
hard to be dead to the world, its opinions, pleasures and wishes, 
while still in it—in the world but not of it-separate from sinners. 
Often will we need to "look unto Jesus the author (and soon to 
be) the finisher of our faith." We will often need, as Paul said, to 
"consider Him who endured such contradiction (opposition) of 
sinners against himself lest (we) be weary and faint in (our) 
mind." "Be not weary in well-doing, for in due time we shall 
reap if we faint not." 

No words that we can use can express so forcibly as do Paul's, 
the necessity of this immersion into Christ's death. "What things 
were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ. [Paul was fitted 
for a high social and political position, both by birth and 
education.] Yea, doubtless I count all things but loss for the 
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom 
I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but 
dung that I may win [a position in the body of] Christ, and be 
found in him" -"That I may know him and the power of his 
resurrection -(experience the same resurrection as Jesus to a 
spiritual body and immortal life-the first resurrection) and the 
fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his 
death, if by any means I might attain unto THE (first) 
resurrection." (Phil. 3:8-11.) "For if we have been planted 
together in the likeness of His death we shall be also in the 
likeness of His resurrection." (Rom. 6:5.) 

Let us, dearly beloved, see to it, that we not only bury ourselves 
and our wills in Christ's, but also keep our bodies under-dying 
daily until fully delivered into the blessed kingdom -which 
deliverance we believe to be so very nigh at hand. 



R303 : page 4 

THE BLESSED DYING. 

"Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth: 
Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors; for 
their works follow with them." Rev. 14:13. 

Uniformly throughout the Bible, except in this one instance 
death is represented as a dreadful disaster, a terrible enemy, a 
devouring monster, and the grave as a great prison, permitted of 
our loving Heavenly Father, only because men had become 
sinners and must be destroyed. And the great hope held out 



before the world has been, that Christ having given himself a 
ransom for the sinners -having "tasted death for every man-the 
just for the unjust, will soon commence the great work of 
destroying death by restoring all mankind to life. Thus will he 
"swallow up death victoriously." (1 Cor. 15:54.) 

When he has exalted his church to the glory of kingdom 
(symbol, mountain,) power, then, he will spread before all 
people a great feast, and through this kingdom (mountain) he 
will destroy the vail of ignorance and the covering of death-i.e. 
"He will swallow up death in victory." Isa. 25:6-8. Then, he will 
break open and abolish the great prison house of death and set at 
liberty all the captives. Of this deliverance to the captives and 
opening of the prison doors to them that are bound Jesus 
preached, saying, "The day is coming in the which all that are in 
their graves shall hear the voice of the son of man and come 
forth." (John 5:28.) 

Paul recognizes death as the greatest of all enemies, and 
speaking of Christ's millennial reign he says, "He must reign till 
he hath put all enemies under his feet: The last enemy that shall 
be destroyed is death. (1 Cor. 15:25,26.) It is the same apostle 
who, speaking of the object of Jesus coming into the world and 
dying for our sins, says that he took the human nature that 
"through death he might destroy him that had the power of 
death, that is the devil." (Heb. 2:14.) It is also affirmed that he 
will open the prison doors of them that are bound (captives of 
death) and proclaim liberty to the captives. (Isa. 61:1.) 

In view of the general expression of enmity to death, in the 
Scriptures, the above solitary text speaking of it as a blessing, is 
rather peculiar until we notice, that the application is limited by 
the word "henceforth." Not always, but henceforth death may be 
a blessing. But notice another limitation; it will not henceforth 
be a blessing to all mankind, but only to those in the Lord- 
members in particular of the body of Christ, the little flock to 
whom it is the Father's good pleasure to give the kingdom-to all 
others death will continue to be an enemy until its final 
destruction in the Millennial reign. (Hos. 13:14.) 

Again, it is unusual to speak of those already dead as dying; but 
the spirit uses this seemingly incongruous expression, evidently 
desiring to limit the application of the death blessing to a certain 
class "Blessed are the dead (dead to the world- crucified with 
Christ-"ye are dead and your life is hid with Christ in God,") 
who die in the Lord from henceforth. " 

Now, we are full of interest to know when, from what time 
forward, will it be blessed for the special class mentioned, to 
die. These words were written for our edification and we should 
be able to know when they apply: especially if we are in the 
Lord and dead to the world; for it was part of our Master's 
promise, that the spirit should guide us into an understanding of 



the truth and show us things to come. (John 16:13.) If as we 
believe the last members of the body of Christ are now living- 
"The feet of him"— it is time that we had an understanding of this 
passage which clearly refers to the feet. 

R304 : page 4 

We look backward at the context, to ascertain if possible when 
this blessing is due. The seven preceding verses give, we think, 
very clear testimony on the subject. They mention three specific 
messages which must be proclaimed in the church (symbol, 
heaven) which, we believe, have been in process, during the first 
seven years of harvest just ended, from 1874 to 1881. The first 
message embodies not only the agelasting good news (Gospel) 
but also the time element. "The HOUR of his judgment is 
come." This is precisely what was preached by quite a goodly 
number of us, viz: that the glad tidings of great joy should yet be 
unto all people, and that the "harvest" or time of trial (judgment) 
commenced with 1 874, and would last for forty years, the first 
seven years being specially devoted to the church for the 
harvesting of the first-fruits. 

You will recall that up to 1878, though Restitution was the key 
note, and entire consecration was always urged, yet the time 
element was one of the most prominent features always. Since 
1878, however, though the same time element is recognized in 
all our preaching and teaching, and is repeatedly referred to as a 
proof of our position, yet the direct teaching of time has almost 
stopped among all the preaching brethren- and this too, without 
any preconcerted arrangement, and without any other reason, 
than that other elements of truth came into greater prominence. 

It was in the spring of 1879, that seeing clearly the parallelism 
between the nominal Jewish church and the nominal Gospel 
church, we were enabled to know just where the latter was 
finally rejected of the Lord and spewed out of His mouth (Rev. 
3:16) no longer to be his mouthpiece. We saw that this was due 
in 1878, as the parallel of the rejection of the Jewish church, 
when Jesus just prior to his crucifixion, wept over them and 
said, "Your house is left unto you desolate"-The Jewish church 
was there likewise cast off, or spewed from his mouth. 

We were led to see very clearly that the nominal church of the 
Gospel Age, is the Babylon (confused, mixed condition, of 
worldly-mindedness and luke warm Christianity) described in 
Rev. 18:2-4. 

This spewing out, or casting off, of R304 : page 5 

the nominal church, as an organization in 1878— we then 
understood, and still proclaim to be the date of the 
commencement of Babylon's fall, as recorded there. And since 
then we feel ourselves led of the spirit, through the unfolding of 
this portion of the word of truth to say in the name of the Lord, 



to all God's true children in Babylon: "Come out of her my 
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins and receive not of her 
plagues." (vs. 4.) This seems to accord wonderfully with the 
second message~"Babylon is fallen." (Rev. 14:8.) 

The third message (vs. 9-11) concerning the worshipers of the 
Beast and his Image-showing the nominal church in the colors 
in which the Word of God paints it, pointing out, how all who 
remain in her either in spirit or name, in opposition to the word 
of God, saying, "Come out of her" will be subject to torment and 
vexation so long as they are worshiping creeds and doctrines 
and organizations of men. The remembrance of which distress 
(smoke of torment) will never be forgotten. 

As with the preceding two, so with this third message-it could 
not have been more accurately fulfilled than it was. [And here 
we would remark, that the resemblance of the teachings of our 
company, to the descriptions now being considered, was only 
noticed about six months ago.] The meaning of the symbols of 
Rev. 13. The beasts and image we first published in the January 
1880 number of this paper [We will republish it for the benefit 
of new readers— in our next number.] All three of these messages 
yet continue, and will doubtless continue to be repeated by 
others so long as they contain truth due to the Lord's children; 
but as special messages in the sense referred to in the prediction 
of the Revelator they have all been given, and we are in the time 
of patient waiting for our "change" described in vs. 12. And here 
it is, just now— 1881, that for the first time we are able to read 
understandingly the words "Blessed are the dead, who die in the 
Lord from henceforth." Evidently the blessing is to the members 
of the Christ now living. 

But we inquire, in what respect will death be a blessing to us 
now, that it has not always been to other members of the body. 
We answer, the difference is that we shall not sleep, but we will 
be instantly invested with our heavenly— spiritual bodies, being 
changed in a moment dropping all that is human and earthly and 
being clothed upon with our heavenly condition. In the case of 
Jesus, there were nearly three days of sleep-the unclothed 
condition between the times when the earthly body was resigned 
and the heavenly body was received-Paul and others have been 
nearly two thousand years waiting "unclothed" or "asleep in 
Jesus" and this is one of the principle reasons why death was 
undesirable even to Christians: We don't wish to be unclothed 
even for a moment, but we do desire to be clothed upon or to 
have the change an instantaneous one. (1 Cor. 15:52.) 

Herein consists the blessing to those of the body now taken. 
Death of the human will be instantaneous with the perfecting of 
the divine nature, hence it will be a blessed "change." "Yea, 
saith the spirit that they may rest from their labors; for their 
works follow with them." 



To the class thus "blessed," there will be no interruption of 
work. Already dead to the world and alive toward God, their 
work is in harmony with the kingdom work now going on, and 
they merely step to their higher plane of "divine" perfection and 
power and there continue the same work. It is only the labor 
(toil,) incident to the mortal body-the frail "earthen vessel" 
which ceases. Not so highly favored in this regard was the lot of 
any of the members of "the body" which preceded us. Quite a 
period elapsed in Paul's case between sufferings and glory. 
When he had fought a good fight and finished his course he 
looked forward, not to a change in a moment, but to a sleep from 
which he would be wakened to receive his reward in the 
kingdom. So he expresses his hope, "Henceforth there is laid up 
for me a crown of life which the Lord, the Righteous Judge shall 
give me at that day." (2 Tim. 4:8.) 

"How beautiful are the feet of Him, " how many favors and 
blessings are for us. Truly, "Blessed are the dead who die in the 
Lord from henceforth: Yea, saith the spirit, that they may rest 
from their labors and their works follow with them." Rejoice 
and be exceeding glad-but 

Ne'er think the victory one, 
Nor once at ease sit down; 
Thine arduous task will not be done, 
'Til thou hast gained thy crown. 

The human must be entirely sacrificed before the divine is 
perfected- "Be thou faithful unto death and I will give thee a 
crown of life," are the words of our Lord and Forerunner in 
whose footsteps on the narrow way, we must follow to gain the 
prize of our high calling- "Glory Honor and Immortality." 

What harmony there now appears in this text when thus 
explained in harmony with the article "Who can hear it?" in our 
last number. 



R310:page5 

PREACHERS CALLED BY THE WORLD. 

At an anniversary meeting recently held in Music Hall, Boston, 
a very learned and popular minister addressing the laity and 
speaking of the clergy, said: 

"You created us by the power of your own aptitude for religion; 
we didn't make ourselves, we didn't call ourselves; the laity, the 
world, humanity called for priests and for ministers, ...and will 
have them. " 

Paul says, "For there will be a time when they will not endure 
wholesome teaching, but having itching ears, they will, 
according to their own lusts, heap to themselves teachers; and 



from the truth indeed they will turn away their ears, and be 
turned aside to fables." 2 Tim. 4:3,4. (MacKnight's translation.) 

This prophecy expresses exactly the same condition of the 
Christian Church in the "last days" or closing of this age as was 
expressed by this D.D., who truthfully represented the present 
condition of the great body of all the professed church. The 
gospel makes provision for a class of teachers called and 
qualified of God to teach the people revealed truths, and by this 
mould their character and form their religious tastes. But instead 
of this, the carnal and unregenerate, by their fleshy lusts or 
"itching ears," reject gospel truth which condemns their self- 
indulgence and demand quieting teaching. By the gospel rule the 
people will be lead and their characters moulded by inspired 
truth taught them by God's true servants; but in the latter case 
the unregenerate people will control the teachers, so that none 
will be allowed to teach religion only such as the people shall 
select, and they will teach such things and only such as the 
people shall approve. 

In this case a man will be allowed to preach only what the public 
sentiment approves, which will become the standard by which 
the preacher will be accepted or rejected, instead of his 
conformity to the Word of God and a holy life. -Selected. 



R304 : page 5 



THE ANTICHRIST. 

2THESS.2. 



B.-Good evening, brother A., I have wanted for some time to 
inquire your views of the "Man of Sin"-- "The Antichrist." Who 
is he, what is he, and when will he come; or has he already 
come? 

A.--I shall enjoy a conversation with you on this subject; it is 
one deserving of careful thought and is mentioned by Jesus 
himself, as well as by his apostles and prophets. I presume I 
need not make mention of the various theories held by Bible 
students on the subject. Many believe that Jerusalem and the 
temple will be rebuilt soon, and that some literal man will 
oppose and exalt himself above all that is called God, or that is 
worshipped, so that he, as God, will sit in the temple of God 
showing himself that he is God. (2 Thes. 2:4.) He is expected to 
be able to perform "signs and lying wonders" -to deceive all the 
world into the idea that HE is God, and to have them give 
homage and worship to him. 

There are various conjectures as to who may be, this "Man of 
Sin." It has been claimed for Napoleon Boneparte, and each of 
his successors to the title to the throne of France, and now for 



Prince Jerome Boneparte. Others quite recently have given up 
expecting so much of a development of power from a broken 
down dynasty, and claim, with positiveness, that it is the present 
Pope. 

B.-It would be a very remarkable thing to have occur in this 
nineteenth century. It might have been possible in some heathen 
land, hundreds of years ago, but I could not make myself believe 
that such things are even possible now. No, the tendency of the 
press and of science is to ignore God altogether, and in the face 
of the wonderful evidences of His creative power might, to 
deny, entirely, the Lord, in whose praise "Day unto day uttereth 
speech, and night unto night showeth knowledge." Ps. 19:2. 

R305 : page 5 

A.--I fully agree with you. It would be much easier to turn the 
world to Atheism than to Idolatry, especially the worshiping of a 
man the tendency is the very reverse. This is one reason why I 
could not look for a personal "Man of Sin." 

Paul had always exhorted the church to look and wait for "The 
day of the Lord," yet in 2 Thes. 2:3, he tells them "That day 
shall not come except there come a falling away first, and that 
Man of Sin be revealed. " As I believe the Word to teach that we 
are now living in "the day of the Lord," you see it is both natural 
and consistent in me to look backward for the "Man of Sin" and 
to expect to be able to recognize him, for Paul says he must be 
revealed, or his real character shown and seen, before the "Day 
of the Lord," by those in the church who sleep not as do others. 
We understand Paul to refer to a false system which would 
develop in the church. As one error after another crept into the 
church, they gradually brought about the "falling away." The 
church fell from her position of trust in, and support on the 
promises of her absent Lord, and began to love the world and 
the things of the world. She began to look to the world for the 
fulfillment of the precious promises of kingdom, glory and 
honor. The narrow path was too steep and rough; she coveted 
the world's ease and abundance, and the more bold element 
formed the plan of so arranging church customs and laws, that 
the world's affections were captured, and instead of persecuting, 
the Roman Empire embraced the church and seated her in 
power. Doubtless she thought to use the power and influence of 
her new friend— Rome— to the honor of the Lord to whom she 
was betrothed, but soon she began to "glorify herself and to live 
deliciously with the kings of the earth" and "her sins reached 
unto heaven." Rev. 18:5-7. 

B.-You speak of it as a woman; if this is the same which Paul 
wrote of, why did he term it "The Man of Sin"? 

A. -It requires two to make one as Adam and Eve became one 
and "God called their name Adam: " And as Jesus and his bride 
are to become one and together be known as "The Christ"-the 



one seed in whom all the families of the earth shall be blessed, 
(Gal. 3:29), so in this case of Anti-Christ: They would be virgin 
(church) of Christ, became united to the world in unholy love- 
they twain became one~"The Man of Sin." 

From little to much the hold of the church on the Roman Empire 
increased -or rather they blended- until Papacy (the name of 
the church kingdom system,)— "The Man of Sin" wielded the 
chief power and control of the world. It (He) claimed to be the 
kingdom of God over the kingdoms of the world. They claim 
that when the kingdoms of earth accepted Papacy's overruling 
authority the scripture (Rev. 11:15,) was fulfilled which says: 
The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our 
Lord and of His Christ-(The Lord's anointed-the line of 
Popes). 

They claimed the various titles and honors due to the true Christ. 
Surely that system-Papacy-being a usurper which sought and 
appropriated the titles and honors of the true anointed-the true 
Christ, is emphatically His opponent as signified by the name 
Anti-(against) Christ. 

B.-But, can we say that Papacy denies God or Christ? Are the 
words— "Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is 
called God or that is worshipped" -applicable to Papacy? 

A. -Yes, as Paul said of some: "They profess that they know 
God but in works they deny him." Their words say that they are 
the true and only kingdom of God; but their works show that 
they have always been in opposition to the real kingdom, of 
which it is but a base though skillful counterfeit, by attracting 
attention to the false as the kingdom already come. We refer to 
the Papal system, not to individual Roman Catholics. 

If you are not familiar with 

THE CLAIMS OF PAPACY 

you cannot see how it exalts itself and opposes God. It claims 
that its representative the Pope is "King of Kings and Lord of 
Lord's"-"The 

R305 : page 6 

Prince of the Kings of the earth." As Christ's vicegerent he is the 
Pa-pa -Pope or Father of mankind, i.e., "The everlasting 
Father"-"The Prince of peace. "-"The Mighty God" (or ruler). 
All these and every other title announced by the prophets 
relative to The Christ in glory during the Millennial reign, are 
considered proper and applicable to the Pope whom they claim 
to be Christ's vicar or instead of Christ. 

Do the scriptures declare the reign of Christ over the nations for 
a thousand years, and that he must reign until he shall put all 
enemies under him? Papacy claims that when exalted to power it 



did put down all enemies and that for a thousand years it did 
reign over the kingdoms of earth. (Generally dated I believe 
from A.D. 792 to 1792. They claim that the Millennial reign of 
Christ and his saints, Rev. 20, there took place and that the 
period since the overthrow of Papacy's dominion (1798,) is the 
little season mentioned in verses 3,7 and 8 during which the 
"devil is loosed," viz: Protestantism and all infidelity to Papacy. 

During her reign over earth's king's she did "rule with a rod of 
iron," claiming that it was the fulfillment of Psalm 2:6-12. [Read 
it.] Special emphasis was given to verses 10-12, "Be wise now 
therefore O ye kings... .Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye 
perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little." 

To fulfill this, the kings of earth were obliged to kneel before the 
Pope and kiss his great toe to receive his blessing and their 
crowns. (On one occasion, to show the superiority of the Pope- 
that he was indeed "King of Kings," the crown after being 
placed on the head of the prostrate king by the Pope's hand, was 
kicked off with his foot, then lifted between his feet and thus put 
on the king.) For centuries no king reigned in Europe without 
this appointment and blessing of the Popes. To offend was to 
forfeit their titles and thrones. 

Thus, by claiming God's honors and worship, Papacy exalted 
itself and opposed God. To illustrate the claims of Papacy let me 
quote a few of its "great swelling words." 

It was the boast of Gregory II. that "all the kings of the west 
reverence the Pope as a God on earth." An oft accepted title was 
"Our Lord God the Pope. " At the Lateran council, the Pope was 
addressed thus: "Thou art another God on earth." 

Pope Martin said: "The greatness of Priesthood began in 
Melchisedec, was solemnized in Aaron, continued in the 
children of Aaron, perfectionated in Christ, represented in Peter, 
exalted in the universal jurisdiction and manifested in the Pope. 
So that through this pre-eminence of my priesthood-having all 
things subject to me, it may seem well verified in me, that was 
spoken of Christ, 'Thou hast subdued all things under his 
feet.'... I am all in all and above all, so that God himself and I the 
vicar of God have both one consistory [co-equal, or on the same 
footing.]... Wherefore, if those things that I do be said not to be 
done of man but of God, WHAT CAN YOU MAKE OF ME 
BUT GOD? Again, if prelates of the church be called and 
counted of Constantine for Gods, I then being above all prelates 
seem by this reason to be ABOVE ALL GODS. Wherefore no 
marvel if it be in my power to change time and times, to alter 
and abrogate laws, to dispense with all things, yea with the 
precepts of Christ." 

It is marvellous that any one can doubt, that the above was the 
blasphemous utterance of Anti-Christ. 



B.-It would appear that in olden times the Popes had made 
great pretensions. I confess that I could not expect to ever find a 
greater or more blasphemous system to call the Man of Sin or 
Anti-Christ. 

A. -Yes; and brother, though less outspoken, because they have 
less power and the people have more knowledge, they make the 
same claims still. You will remember that the late Pious IX. 
promulgated the dogma of his own Infallibility. And the present 
Pope, Leo XIII. claims to be "The Lion of the tribe of Judah. " 
This, like other titles belonging to the true Christ, is claimed by 
the Anti-Christ, as you will see by this extract from the 
Pittsburgh Dispatch of June 14, 1879: "A rich American, now 
residing at Rome, desiring to possess the bust of Leo XIII. , 
engaged the services of the celebrated sculptor, Tadolini. The 
latter, not content with the simple portrait of the Holy Father, 
went to the Vatican and asked permission of Leo XIII. , to 
reproduce his features from the original. The Pope consented. 
When the work was finished, Leo congratulated the artist, who 
asked him to trace a word on the still fresh clay. His Holiness 
took the burin from the sculptor, and wrote with a smile, 'Leo de 
tribu Juda.'" ["The Lion of the tribe of Judah."] What 
blasphemous assumption! 

B.-It does seem very clear when so put together; but how about 
the remainder of the verse?-- "Who sitteth in the temple of God, 
showing himself that he is God." How could Papacy fulfill this? 
The temple at Jerusalem had been destroyed hundreds of years 
before Papacy's rule. 

A. -The temple of God is the dwelling or abode of God. Once 
He dwelt in the Jewish temple, but at the death of Jesus the vail 
of the temple was rent in twain and the glory of the Lord 
departed, and from that time it ceased to be, really, the temple of 
God. For fifty days there was no temple on earth; but, "When 
Pentecost was fully come," the Lord descended by his spirit, and 
his glory and presence filled His New Temple, the gospel 
church. "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God?" 1 Cor. 
3:16; Eph. 2:21,22. There has been no other temple since, and 
there never will be another, for this 

R306 : page 6 

one is an everlasting habitation. Any building which men may 
put up at Jerusalem might be called a temple, but it would not be 
THE temple of God. The "Man of Sin, "-Papacy -did take his 
seat in God's church (temple), and used in a blasphemous 
manner the titles and honors of the "King of Kings." 

Paul tells us that the errors which led to this falling away from 
the truth, had begun to operate in the church even in his day. (2 
Thes. 2:7). It increased more rapidly when the church's 
"candlestick" was removed,-when the special "gifts of the 
Spirit" in healing, discerning of spirits, etc., ceased. These let, or 



hindered the more rapid development of error in the Apostolic 
days. Another hindrance was the pagan empire, and not until its 
decline could Papacy be exalted. 

B.-It does seem to be a wonderful counterfeit of the true 
Kingdom of God, and I see some force in the Spirit's calling it 
(vs. 11) strong delusion that they should believe a lie. 

A. --We find a clearly drawn 

Picture of the Counterfeit of God's Kingdom in Rev. 12. 

A. -This chapter is quite peculiar, and is generally thought to be 
a picture of the establishment of the true kingdom-some 
claiming that the "manchild" mentioned, is Jesus, others that it is 
the church at the time of translation. But the first view involves 
an absurdity; for then the woman must be the Jewish church: 
The last view is inconsistent because of the 1260 years 
mentioned. I shall be glad of a clearer understanding of this 
symbolic picture. 

A. -For this reason it has been considered one of the most 
difficult chapters of this difficult book. Let us examine 
carefully: The picture begins prior to Papacy's development. 

"The woman clothed with the Sun" represents the Gospel church 
covered with the precious promises of God and the glorious 
light of truth. "The moon under her feet," is the reflection of the 
Sun's brightness: so "The Law" was a shadow or reflection of 
the Gospel light. It was light, but not the real-only reflected 
light. The woman was "not under the Law (Moon) but under 
Grace" (Sunlight); yet she was supported by the teachings of 
The Law and rested on the foundations of the apostles and 
prophets." 

The diadem of twelve stars, represents the twelve apostles. 

The great red dragon-represents the Pagan Roman Empire [The 
seven heads, representing Rome's successive and distinct forms 
of government, and the ten horns, the divisions of power-these 
being mentioned to identify it (Rome) as the same beast, or 
government described by Daniel, and elsewhere in Revelation. 

"In heaven," symbolizes the place of control or rulership. Both 
woman and dragon are said to be in heaven -the woman, or 
church in spiritual control-the dragon, or empire in political 
control of the world. 

If we locate it aright, the woman is seen in this vision about 308 
A.D., and has been in the "Smyrna" stage as described in Rev. 
2:8-10. It has just been passing through a long series of 
persecutions from the "dragon" (Roman Empire). The continued 
persecution causes some to relax their vigilance for the truth, 
and a spirit or desire to please and get into favor with the 
persecuting "dragon" comes over some of the bright ones in the 
church. So we read, the tail of the dragon drew the one third of 



the stars; they became his followers or servants which of course 
tended to degrade them. The long desired favor of Rome came 
at last by the conversion of Constantine, A.D. 313, and there we 
believe the labor pangs of tribulation ceased and Papacy was 
born; i.e. there the blending of church and state commenced. It 
was not yet the "Man of Sin," in the same sense that a child is 
not a man; but it was the beginning, of what resulted in Papacy- 
"The Man of Sin," the man-child was born. 

Roman favor was so sweet to the church after so many years of 
persecution, that they were ready to make religion any and 
everything to suit the views of their new half-pagan friend 
Constantine. With his favor, the open opposition of others 
measurably ceased. Thousands, yes millions were brought into 
the church from Paganism. But the change was mostly in name, 
for the pagan priests became Christian priests and the pagan 
holidays came to be called by Christian names -Christmas being 
one of these holidays kept sacred to the memory of a great 
Goddess-since called the celebration of Jesus' birth though 
actually nearly three months astray. 

The church knew that the promise of her Lord was, that he 
would end her persecutions by delivering her and that she 
should be exalted to the control of all the kingdoms of the world. 
And some were so rejoiced at the favors of Rome, that no doubt 
they fancied that in this way God would give them the kingdoms 
of the world promised. 

Persecuted and reviled, she was pained to be delivered, and 
longed for the completion of the promised "Seed of the woman 
which should bruise the serpent's head. " Her anxiety and desire 
in this direction produced a pre-mature birth- "The Man of Sin" 
(the papal hierarchy) being the offspring. This "male child," at 
first a weak one (A.D. 314), was gradually "caught up unto God 
and to his throne," or exalted to the position and titles, homage 
and praise of the true "seed," so that "He as God sat in the 
temple (church) of God, showing himself that he is God. " And 
within three hundred years he did "Rule the nations with a rod of 
iron." 

"And there was war in heaven;" there was a conflict or 
controversy between the two elements-the church and the 
empire— when this son of the church attempted to take the ruling 
position. This conflict and casting down of the dragon or civil 
power, continued for several hundred years, or until about A.D. 
752, when "In the pontificate of Zachary, the German court 
decided that no Metropolitan could enter upon his functions 
without the approval of the Pontiff." "In the same year, Pepin 
asked the sanction of the Pope to ascend the throne of France." 

"Michael and his angels "-the Papacy and its supporters-fought 
against the dragon-pagan rulers, etc., -and the great dragon was 
cast out of heaven. This conflict between Papal and Pagan 



power resulted, as we have seen, in the gradual overthrow of the 
latter. 

B.-But does it not seem a forced construction to suppose 
Michael to symbolize the "Man of Sin?" Is not this the same 
Michael referred to in Dan. 12? If it is a symbol in one case, is it 
not in the other? 

A. -No; the account in Dan. 12 is a literal statement. The 
resurrection and other matters there mentioned are literal, but 
not so Rev. 12. The woman, dragon, tail, stars, horns, etc., are 
all symbols, and it would be out of order to have a real Michael 
fight a symbolic dragon. However, it seemed puzzling at first to 
know why this name should be given to Antichrist, but on 
turning to a dictionary we find that the meaning of the word 
Michael is~"Who as God." It is quite remarkable that the 
meaning should be in such close accord with Paul's description- 
"He as God sitteth in the temple of God," (2 Thes. 2:4.) When 
the dragon was cast out of heaven (out of the ruling position) it 
left this one ("Who as God,") in control, or in the heavens, and 
from him issues the "loud voice" (great proclamation) of verses 
10 to 12. That is, Papacy claimed that when it assumed control- 
"The kingdom of God and the power of his anointed," had come 
to the world. They claimed that they had overcome by the blood 

R306 : page 7 

of the Lamb, their lives and testimonies. They claim that their 
victory was the result of the firm stand of the ("Smyrna") 
church, which just previously had suffered so much persecution. 
"Therefore, rejoice ye heavens." (Let Papacy and all connected 
therewith rejoice.) "Woe to the inhabitants of the earth, etc." As 
the church had once been persecuted when Paganism reigned, so 
now when she reigns she makes the Pagans and heretics suffer. 
This, Papacy claims as the Millennial reign, during which it 
broke in pieces the kingdoms with the rod of iron. 

B.~But it is the dragon that causes the woe, not the church. 

A. -Remember that the dragon represents Rome, and that the 
same dragon has various heads. (See Rev. 17.) Here it had fully 
taken on its fifth head-Papacy. It was the same Rome under a 
new rulership, or head, and the same power which had 
previously persecuted the church,- the Empire and its army- 
under the new ruler it persecuted pagans and heretics. 
Remember, therefore, that hereafter the dragon represents the 
empire or military power under the control of its ecclesiastical 
head. This military power must be made use of by its new head, 
and its force was directed against the woman and against the 
remnant of her seed, [who joined not in the apostasy], which 
keep the commandments of God and have the testimony of 
Jesus." ["The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy."] 
Among those of the church who did not join, were some, whose 
descendants in after years were known as Waldenses, 



Huguenots, etc. These doubtless knew from the prophetic word, 
not only that the "same Jesus" would come again "to be glorified 
in his saints," but also that there should "first come a great 
falling away, and That Man of Sin be revealed~the son of 
perdition, "--before 

R307 : page 7 

the day of the Lord. And they probably recognized Papacy in its 
true light as Antichrist. 

To the woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that she 
might fly into the wilderness [lit., the place deserted] -into her 
place. (Verse 14.) 

The Wilderness, symbolizes disrespect -outcast condition, 
while "City" represents the reverse viz: popularity, honor, 
respect, dominion, kingdom. The Lord Jesus left his church in 
the Wilderness condition, saying; "In the world ye shall have 
tribulation"~"Marvel not if the world hate you," etc., but 
promised that in due time he would come again, take her out of 
the ignoble condition, and exalt her to honor, respect, dominion 
in the kingdom with himself, i.e. he would take the church out of 
the Wilderness into the City condition. This city condition, is 
beautifully represented by a symbol of a glorious New 
Jerusalem City. (Rev. 21:2.) 

It was not wrong for the church to long for the coming bliss of 
the New Jerusalem condition, but becoming impatient she left 
the Wilderness and wandered off toward the World's city and 
had joined with them. Thus leaving "her (our) place." She 
succeeded in getting a footing and in partly remodelling the city, 
but she merely made it a "Babylon" (confusion -mixture of 
church and world) city and of course could not make it a "New 
Jerusalem" government. 

When the apostasy got under way some of the church realized it, 
as, but a Babylon condition and to such the "two wings" were 
given to help them back to their proper wilderness condition 
separate from the world and from Babylon- "Without the camp" 
(city). 

The two wings we understand to be the same as the two 
witnesses elsewhere mentioned, viz: The Word of God-Old and 
New Testament Scriptures. The Scriptures showed them that the 
present is the time to suffer with Him, if we would (future) reign 
with Him-the real Bridegroom and King of nations. 

She was nourished during the long reign of Papacy from A.D. 
538 to 1798 or 1260 years, [three and a half times or years- 
symbolic time]. The true church though so much smaller - 
always a little flock— was scarcely worthy of the historian's 
notice as compared with Papacy, yet God knew all the true ones 
and fed them and they became so strong as to be willing to seal 
their faith with their blood -thousands, yes millions being put to 



death by Papacy-so that she is represented symbolically as 
being "drunk with the blood of the saints and martyrs of Jesus." 
(Rev. 17:6.) 

"The dragon (Empire, under its Papal head) cast out a flood of 
waters (people-army) after the woman to destroy her, but the 
"earth (the world in general) helped the woman" by absorbing 
the waters (army). The army formerly used in conquest was used 
in hunting down "dissenters" and "heretics" and had it not been 
that frequent troubles from other sources, (earth) demanded 
attention, the army might have exterminated the true church. 

Now, brother B., can you see the Man of Sin? 

B.-Yes, yes! It seems very clear and plain now. But what does 
Paul mean by saying "Then shall that wicked (system) be 
revealed." (2 Thes. 2:8) 

A. -The Greek word here translated "revealed" is apo-calupto 
and signifies to uncover, to remove a disguise. Papacy had 
deceived the whole world into the belief that it was the kingdom 
of God; and the counterfeit was so perfect that only the few in 
the wilderness knew its real (Anti-Christ) character: but bye and 
bye the Lord raised up Luther and others of his time, who pulled 
off the mask -uncovered- "revealed" Papacy in its true light as 
The Anti-Christ- the "Man of Sin" a base counterfeit of the real 
kingdom and reign of the true Christ. This was the point and 
edge of Luther's and in fact of all the preaching of the 
Reformation times, and resulted in the "taking away of his 
(Papacy's) dominion to consume and to destroy it unto the end. " 
(Dan. 7:25-27.) 

The most of the church, have again left the wilderness condition 
since 1798, and are mingling with the world and therefore find 
less fault with Papacy than heretofore. Such must get out of 
Babylon themselves into the separate or wilderness condition 
before they can get a good view of the harlot or her daughters. 
(Rev. 17:3,5.) 

B.-Now as to the final end of this deceiving system of Anti- 
Christ; it will come to a sudden end, will it not? 

A.— No, Paul says: "Whom the Lord will consume with the 
Spirit of His mouth." To consume is to waste gradually. The 
Spirit of His mouth is His Word— the truth. This agency for the 
consuming of Papacy has progressed for about three hundred 
years, or since God's Word began to be published -A.D. 1526, 
and particularly since 1801, when it (God's Word— the "two 
witnesses") was exalted to heaven -the place of esteem or 
reverence: about which time also, the "dominion" or temporal 
power began to be taken away. 

Papacy has ever realized that "The Sword of the Spirit which is 
the Word of God" would be its destroyer and has sought in 



every way to keep it from the people, and would to-day, as in 
past ages, burn every Bible if it could. 

Its civil power has long been wasting or consuming, but 
ecclesiastically it still lives and must yet, with Protestantism and 
the kingdoms of earth, play an important part in the opposing of 
the establishment of the real Kingdom of God: But it shall be 
destroyed, and Paul tells us it will be during the presence of the 
Lord— "Whom the Lord shall... destroy by the Epiphania [light 
revealing] of the parousia [presence] of himself." 

B.~Your view then is that Papacy will be destroyed by the 
increase of light and truth during the presence of the Lord~"the 
day of the Lord" in which we are now living. 

A. -Yes; Papacy has been losing its power gradually: The 
Spanish Inquisition— the last of its kind was abolished in 1870. 
We understand from Scripture that the Lord is now present 
gathering or separating from the nominal mass of Christians, the 
Bride-some from the sleeping and some from the living 
generation of the church. These will soon all be associated with 
him in kingdom work, the first part of which will be the 
overthrow of all injustice, oppression, and error and 
consequently the overthrow of all the systems and institutions 
which uphold these. 

The setting up of this kingdom will of course, involve the 
overthrow of all the kingdoms of earth, as they are all-even the 
best of them-founded on injustice and unequal rights and the 
oppression of many and favor of the few-as we read: "It shall 
break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms and it shall 
stand forever. 

This will involve the various sectarian churches (Babylon) for 
all are bound and committed to the support of these kingdoms 
upon which they lean; and which they have claimed to be- 
"Christian governments" and have recognized as of divine 
appointment, instead of as Beastly governments permitted of 
God only until Christ's time for taking his great power and 
exercising the control of earth-the fifth universal Empire. (Dan. 
7:17,18,23,27.) 

The marshalling of the Lord's army, is even now (in his 
presence) in progress. The light shining from his presence is not 
only preparing the living of the "little flock" for joint heirship in 
the kingdom, but it is awakening and gathering other classes 
totally different in character, hopes and aims— the Lord's great 
army for the destruction of wrong and oppression, viz: The 
Communists, Nihilists, etc., now organizing for the overthrow of 
despotism. Light— knowledge —is the agency used to enlist 
these, and it will continue to shine out until every dark and 
wicked system is shown in its true light. Thus will mankind be 
prepared for the reign of righteousness when "a king (Christ) 



shall reign in righteousness and Princes (the Saints) shall 
execute judgment (justice) in the earth." (Isa. 32:1.) 

B. -Thank God for His Word. How we should prize it. It is the 
light which dispels error and scatters the power of darkness. I 
have noticed of late that while the nominal Christian professor 
becomes the more skeptical, the more matured and most earnest 
children of God are searching as they never did before. 

Ours is indeed a glorious hope and it behooves us to "so run that 
we may obtain" the prize of our high calling; overcoming the 
world ("dragon") by the blood of the Lamb and the Word of His 
testimony, that it may be ours to share in the real kingdom of the 
real Christ, of which Papacy has been an abominable counterfeit 
--Anti-Christ. 

A. —Yes, and brother we have now two, far more subtle enemies 
than the "dragon" (world) to overcome they are mentioned in the 
succeeding chapter, Rev. 13, viz: "The Beast and His Image"- 
both, of course symbols. Should you desire, we will sometime 
again examine that chapter of symbols together. 

B.-Let us have that at our next meeting. I notice that in Rev. 
20:4, we are told that those who will have part in the kingdom of 
Christ and its Millennial reign "did not worship the Beast or his 
Image, or receive his mark or the number of his name. " 

We should understand the Beast and Image symbols to be able 
to appreciate this message. 



R308 : page 7 

RESTORING SOLOMON'S TEMPLE. 

Some time since, Abdul Aziz, the then ruler of the Turkish 
Empire, at the instance of Emperor Francis Joseph, of Austria, 
began the work of restoring the ruins of "Solomon's Temple," in 
Palestine. The work moved but slowly however, and was finally 
discontinued some five years ago. Probably from lack of funds. 

The recent pilgrimage of the Austrin Archduke Randolph to the 
Holy Land, has however, given the enterprise a fresh impulse, 
and the present Sultan Abdul Hamid, has given the necessary 
orders for the resumption of the work. 

In the great square fronting the Temple stands the famous 
Mosque of Omar, which derives a revenue of about $75,000 a 
year from Pilgrim contributions and various sources. 

To insure the success of the Temple restoration, the Sultan has 
decided that this revenue shall henceforth be used to defray the 
expenses of the work. 



R309 : page 7 



OUT OF BABYLON. 

The churches as organized and operated to-day are very little 
aid to the true followers of Jesus~are they not really the reverse, 
a hindrance? 

Along with precious truth, they mix so much error received 
through Papacy -they have so much human dross and alloy 
mixed in with the Gold of God's word, that "the fine gold is 
become dimmed." The spectacles through which every 
consistent member must look at God's character and plans, are 
so colored as to misrepresent him. Its creeds and doctrines- like 
the iron shoes of China, hinder the growth and strength of those 
members confined. 

Come out into full freedom from all such shackles-into the 
liberty of conscience, liberty not only to study, but to believe 
God's word though it overthrows all the creeds and traditions of 
men-your rightful liberty as sons of God—the "liberty 
wherewith Christ hath made us free" and be not again entangled 
with any yoke of bondage. We are scarcely aware, of the slavery 
into which long years of 

R309 : page 8 

obedience to man's traditions has brought us. Slavery both of 
thought and action. We desire to see all free, not to do evil, nor 
to neglect God's service and worship, but free to engage in it 
more fully, and as he directs in His Word. 

Many are the letters coming to us touching this point and asking 
how, they should withdraw- "take a letter," or what? We 
answer, take no 

R310:page8 

letter, the desire to hold a name in good and regular standing is 
the trouble of many. They have some reputation at stake and 
they fear to lose it. They want to carry before the world, the 
honor attaching to a nominal church membership, that they may 
be respected instead of despised and rejected of men. Yet they 
sing lustily:— 

Standing by a purpose true, 
Heeding God's command, 
Honor to the faithful few! 
All hail to Daniel's Band! 

Dare to be a Daniel, 
Dare to stand alone! 
Dare to have a purpose firm, 
Dare to make it known! 

They talk and sing about freedom and many believe themselves 
free, but like children used to an apron string they fear to stand 
alone; they must have some sectarian yoke of bondage-or they 



would not feel comfortable. Poor creatures, many of us were 
born into the bondage of creeds and cannot appreciate liberty. 

"Search the Scriptures" said Jesus, come out, follow me and ye 
shall not walk in darkness— nor lack for food. Ye shall know the 
truth and the truth shall make you FREE. (John 8:32.) 

We append a copy of a letter handed recently by a sister of this 
city to the church with which she had been for some 16 years 
connected. It is well enough worded to be used as a model for 
others. It may assist some, hence we publish it here. 

BRETHREN: -Believing that we are in the harvest of the 
Gospel Age as spoken of in Matt. 13:30, when the reapers are 
separating the wheat from the tares, which the Lord has 
permitted to grow together during the age, and also that the 
nominal church of all denominations is represented by the wheat 
and tares in the field— in which both have been growing, and 
that its mixed condition of worldly-mindedness and lukewarm 
Christianity is displeasing in the sight of our Lord, I have 
heeded the counsel of his Word (Rev. 3:18) to buy of him 
"GOLD tried in the fire"-truth that will stand the test of all 
opposition, and for it have concluded to sell all that I once found 
dear-my reputation and my friends if need be-my time, my 
talents, my means, my all. 

This mixed condition of truth and error, worldliness and 
lukewarmness, etc., I believe to be the Babylon described in 
Rev. 18, in which are still some of the Lord's dear children. To 
all such he says, (vs. 4) "Come out of her MY PEOPLE that ye 
be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her 
plagues." 

In obedience to this command, I ask to have my name taken off 
the list of membership of the nominal church. It is written in the 
Lamb's book of life and that is enough. 

In withdrawing my name I do not withdraw my affections from 
you, but would if I could have you all "as ripened wheat," 
gathered into the barn-condition of safety, rather than bound 
with the bundles of tares for the burning- with the "fire of God's 
jealousy." 

Let me urge you each to a deeper consecration and a more 
thorough searching of the Scriptures. 

Though in this step I may be misunderstood, I am nevertheless 

Yours happy in the Lord . 

R310:page8 



KNOWLEDGE IS LIBERTY. 

When Luther discovered how fully Papacy filled the picture 
given by Paul, in 2 Thes. 2:3-8, and the symbols of Rev. 17, he 
felt justified by that knowledge, in publicly denouncing that 
system. The knowledge gave him the liberty to thunder the truth 
of God with all its power against the Vatican. God gave the 
liberty by giving the knowledge and Luther would have been 
unworthy the knowledge and the honor of being the Lord's 
mouthpiece, had he been too cowardly to speak, though Papacy 
was the only system then recognized and respected by the world. 

Knowledge of the truth and Law was the ground of Jesus' liberty 
in denouncing the Doctors of divinity in his day, as "blind 
guides," etc. When Paul was before the council and High priest 
on trial, (Acts 23:3,) though he might have known the title from 
the robes of office which all high priests wore, yet he answers 
that he did not know that he was God's high priest. And it is 
evident that he was right, for when Jesus became the anti-typical 
High Priest (Heb. 7:26,28) the type must have ceased in God's 
estimation, just as when the true Lamb of God became our 
Passover (1 Cor. 5:7) the typical lamb ceased to be so esteemed 
by God or any of His children who recognized its fulfillment. So 
too, it was Paul's knowledge of Christ's having made an end of 
the Law, that gave him liberty to announce the end of the 
necessity of circumcision in the flesh, and that authorized him to 
say of the Jewish holy days and Sabbaths that they were merely 
shadows. (Col. 2:17.) 

And some wonder at our liberty in speaking of many things 
similar to the above, viz: That as an organization, the nominal 
Gospel church is rejected of the Lord as was her type the Jewish 
church; that we speak so confidently of the tribulation coming 
upon her and apply the words "Come out of her my people that 
ye be not partakers of her sins and receive not of her plagues;" 
that we apply some of the symbols of Revelation without a 
question to her; that we so unhesitatingly and fully accept the 
exceeding great and precious promises of Glory, Honor, 
Immortality and Divinity. They wonder that we brethren, are not 
in darkness as most are, relative to "the day of the Lord" in 
which we live (1 Thes. 5:4); that we lay any claim to a 
knowledge of "things to come" (John 16:13) which Jesus told us 
would be an evidence of our being sons, led by the Spirit of 
God. 

But the liberty which we exercise is inspired by a knowledge of, 
and belief in the word of God. "Ye shall know the truth and the 
truth shall make you FREE." (John 8:32.) And as in Luther's and 
Paul's day, so now, those too indolent or too cowardly to express 
truth which they see, prove both by word and act that they are 
unworthy of the knowledge and consequently they are left in 
darkness. Jesus says "Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of 
my words in this adulterous and sinful generation; of him also 



shall the son of man be ashamed when he cometh in the glory of 
his Father with the holy angels." (Mark 8:38.) 



R308 : page 8 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

Bro. R., Do the Scriptures teach that we shall have perfect 
physical restitution, before the twinkling of an eye change? 

A. No. We have never seen any Scripture which teaches that 
those who become new creatures will ever be restored to the 
perfection of the old or human nature. By nature we are 
depraved human beings. Since Jesus has paid our ransom price, 
he that believeth is justified~or imputed to be perfect; in this 
reckoned or imputed perfect condition, he is invited to present 
his "body a living sacrifice" to God's service and will, and is 
assured that it (though actually imperfect) will be "acceptable to 
God," who reckons us as justified. Now if we accept this 
invitation and sacrifice the human (will and body) what shall we 
have? A perfect human being restored to us? Oh no; something 
far better is promised, viz: In the resurrection such shall be like 
unto the angels-Like unto Christ's glorious body. 

Restitution, is promised to the world, and we rejoice that the 
time for their receiving it is even now at hand and that they shall 
have so grand a blessing as to be made perfect men, but to those 
who can walk by faith (not by sight) and can during this Gospel 
Age realize their justification by the precious blood of Christ 
and who then consecrate and crucify the human, (with all its 
prospects here and hereafter) to such, God has promised the 
divine nature and image, which is a prize so much greater, as not 
to be comparable. 

Such as have started on the "narrow way" for the divine are 
going in exactly the opposite direction to the perfecting of the 
human. The divine can only be obtained by the death of the 
human. But "few there be that find it." Alas, too many are 
striving for the perfecting of the flesh, hoping thereby to reach 
the divine nature; but just as soon might a man living in Utica, 
N.Y., expect to reach Albany by walking toward Chicago-it is 
the opposite direction. 

When we covenanted that we would suffer with Jesus that we 
might reign with him— become dead with him that we might live 
with him on the higher spiritual plane, we started by reckoning 
the flesh dead and the Spirit alive as a new creature. This was 
right and must be fully carried out until the death is no longer 
reckoned but actual and until the SPIRITUAL LIFE is perfected. 

We that are in this (earthly) tabernacle do groan, not that we 
would be unclothed, but clothed upon with our house which is 



from heaven (our spiritual body). But we don't want and have no 
need of a perfect house of earth and none is mentioned as being 
for us. 

"Having begun in the Spirit are ye now made perfect in the 
flesh?" (Gal. 3:3.) Having begun to reckon ourselves new 
creatures shall we change our hope and be perfected as human 
beings? God forbid. 

To your second question, "What will be the power of the perfect 
church and how exercised?~we answer, that being begotten of 
the Spirit we shall if we follow on be born of the Spirit. The 
spiritual seed will have "a spiritual body," the natural seed "a 
natural (human) body"-- "To every seed his own body." 
Speaking of the change coming to those who have part in the 
(first) resurrection, Paul says, It is sown mortal, in dishonor, and 
weakness, a natural body; it is raised in the power of glory, 
honor, and Immortality~a spiritual body. (1 Cor. 15:38,42-44) 
So giving us a faint glimpse only, of the perfected spiritual 
church's power. 

Their work as members of the spiritual "seed" is to bless all the 
families of the earth. (Gal. 3:29.) 

Q. Bro. R., If your exposition in last number, of the passage- 
"We shall not all sleep "--is correct wherein consists the mystery 
mentioned? (1 Cor. 15:51.) 

A. It is so great a mystery, that few seem able to realize, that if a 
member of the body of Christ die now, instead of sleeping even 
for a moment, he is changed to a spiritual body in an instant-in 
the twinkling of an eye. 

It is of these only, that the words "O! death where is thy sting? 
O! grave where is thy victory?" (1 Cor. 15:55) are fully 
applicable. 

In the case of Jesus even, the grave had a victory for nearly three 
days, and death had a sting which made our dear Lord cry in 
agony— "My God My God, why hast thou forsaken me?" And 
death has had a sting and the grave a victory all down through 
the age until now. Now the grave will get no victory over us, for 
into it, will merely be dropped the robe of flesh-the used up 
"earthly house," while we (as spiritual new creatures) shall not 
sleep, but will be "changed in a moment." 

Thus also the sting of death is all removed; for, of the class 
mentioned, it will be true that- 

"Death is the gate to endless joy." O death where is thy sting? O 
grave where is thy victory? "Blessed are the dead who die in the 
Lord from HENCEFORTH." 

The whole church and finally the world get "victory" over the 
grave by a resurrection. And all will have the sting of death 
withdrawn "through our Lord Jesus Christ." But behold I show 



you a mystery—over us "who are alive and remain" the grave 
will not have any victory, no not so long as "a moment" or "a 
twinkling of an eye." 

Dear Bro. Russell, I want to make an inquiry relative to the 
thought advanced in last number of the paper, viz: That all the 
members of the body of Christ must die physically; and that the 
translation takes place in the "moment" of death. [And I must 
say, that it seems reasonable, and in general harmony with the 
Scriptures so far as I have studied.] 

My question is, Does not this application interfere with the 
Elijah type, at which, for some time we have looked with 
interest? Elijah did not die; and if he is a type and we the 
antitype, it would seem to teach that we should not die. 

A. "Ye, are not in the flesh but in the Spirit;" and if Elijah is a 
type (as we feel sure he is) his actions, translation, story, etc., 
must be typical of us as spiritual-new creatures (and not of the 
old human creature). 

Thus considered, you will find the type in perfect harmony with 
our deductions. We as new creatures, are to be "caught away" 
from earthly conditions, earthly body and all- "changed" to 
perfect spiritual bodies "in a moment." Elijah was certainly not 
in any sense a type of the natural man. We must not forget to 
count ourselves as God counts us, viz: New creatures, partakers 
of the divine nature (already dead as human beings and already 
alive toward God and only waiting to have our existence 
perfected as spiritual beings by being clothed upon with our 
heavenly body. 



