VOL. XIV. JUNE 15, 1893. NO. 12. 

BAPTISM AND ITS IMPORT. 



THAT our Lord and his apostles practised 
and enjoined upon all their followers— 
"even to the end of the world" or present 
dispensation— an outward rite called baptism, 
in which water was used in some manner, cannot 
reasonably be questioned. This was not 
only the case during our Lord's ministry in 
the end of the Jewish age, but also under the 
Spirit dispensation after Pentecost, as is abundantly 
proved by the Scriptural record.— Acts 2:41; 
8:12,36,38; 9:18; 10:47,48; 16:15,33; 
18:8; 19:3-5; 22:16. 

Nor is it correct to assume, as some do, that 
baptism belonged among the ceremonies of the 
Jewish Law, and that it, with all other features 
of that Law, ended at the cross (when our 
Lord "made an end of the Law, nailing it to 
his cross"); for baptism was not a part of the 
Jewish Law. The washings enjoined in the 
Law, performed at the laver in the court of the 
tabernacle, were neither immersions nor sprinklings, 



but simply cleansings, and were not 

practised upon the people. The one tribe of 

Levi alone had access to the court of the tabernacle 

and to the laver which stood between the 

gate and the tabernacle.— Exod. 30:18-21. 

Nor will it do to say, with others, that the 
apostles, on coming out of Judaism, erred for a 
while; that they failed at first to discern that the 

R1540 : page 179 

real baptism was that of the holy Spirit at Pentecost, 
and improperly kept up the water baptism 
after the Jewish age, to which it belonged. 
In this, as in the matter of not eating with the 
uncircumcised, they claim Peter erred, and 
others of the apostles with him to some extent. 
They claim, too, that Paul confesses to an error 
when he says (1 Cor. 1:14-16), "I thank 
God that I baptized none of you, but Crispus 
and Gaius...and the household of Stephanas;" 
also when he says (Col. 2:20,21), "Why, 
as though living in the world, are ye subject to 
ordinances— touch not, taste not, handle not." 

Thus an apparently strong argument is built 
up, the fallacy of which many do not discern. 
This is the result of a too superficial examination 
of the subject, and a jumping at conclusions 
from certain texts whose connections have not 
been thoroughly studied nor understood. 

As already shown, baptism was not a feature 
of the Law Covenant; hence it was not at all a 
part of that which our Lord ended and cancelled 
at the cross. It is a great mistake to 
class baptism, which is a symbol of the New 
Covenant, with the "ordinances" of the Jewish 
Law Covenant mentioned by the Apostle. 
(Col. 2:20,23.) In verse 14 he shows that he 
refers to ordinances that were against the Jews, 
i.e., which restricted their liberties. Can any 
one say this of baptism? In what sense is it 
against any one? 

What the Apostle does refer to as the Law 
"ordinances," contrary to or against the Jew, 
were ceremonies and fastings, celebrations of 
the new moons and sabbaths, (verse 16), and 
particularities about the eating of clean and 
unclean animals, the wearing of clothing made 
of linen and wool mixed, etc. These ordinances 
included not only those originally introduced 

R1540 : page 180 

by Moses, but also others subsequently 
added by the Scribes and Pharisees who sat 
"in Moses' seat." (Matt. 23:2.) These forms 



and ceremonies had become so complex and 
bewildering a mass that those who attempted a 
strict observance of them found them extremely 
burdensome— a yoke of bondage. Our Lord 
referred to the same bondage and weariness 
(Matt. 23:4); and, again (Matt. 11:28-30), 
to the same class he held out grace instead of 
the Law, as the only way of life, saying, "Come 
unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden 
[with the Law's unprofitable and multitudinous 
ordinances— which, because of your weak, fallen 
condition cannot profit, but only annoy and 
weary you, and are therefore 'against' you], 
and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon 
you, and learn of me; for I am meek and 
lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your 
souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden 
is light." 

It is furthermore evident that baptism is not 
one of the ordinances referred to in Col. 2: 14, 
when we read to the contrary in verse 12, that 
we who are buried with Christ in baptism are 
therefore (even if Jews formerly under the Law 
Covenant) not liable or subject to the ordinances 
of verse 14. Thus baptism is placed in 
contrast with the ceremonies of the Law. 

The idea that baptism does not belong to 
the Gospel age, but ended at the cross, is again 
proved erroneous by the fact that it was after 
his resurrection, during the forty days before 
his ascension, that our Lord, while giving 
special instruction concerning the new dispensation, 
or Gospel age, specially mentioned baptism 
as the outward symbol by which believers 
were to confess him— "even to the consummation 
of the age" then just begun.— 
Matt. 28:18-20. 

And those who claim that proper baptism is 
that of the holy Spirit only, and that water 
baptism is therefore wrong, should be effectually 
silenced and converted from their error 
by the Master's commission to his Church to 
preach and baptize to the end of the age. For 
how could the disciples baptize any one with 
the holy spirit? Surely that is God's part. 
On the other hand, the Lord's words could not 
have meant that his followers should teach all 
nations, and that those who believe would be 
baptized with the holy spirit by God, for then 
why would he give particular directions to the 
disciples as to how it should be done— "In the 
name [or by the authority] of the Father, and 
of the Son, and of the holy Spirit"—? It is 
evident that our Lord's directions refer to the 
symbol, to water baptism only; because we can 
do no more for others than to teach and symbolically 



to baptize them: we cannot believe 

for them, nor make them believe; neither can 

we consecrate for them, nor make them consecrate. 

But we can teach them, and, when 

they believe for themselves and consecrate for 

themselves, we can baptize them in water. 

And by this act they confess their faith in 

Christ's death and resurrection, and their own 

consecration to be dead to the world and alive 

toward God, that in due time they may share 

in Christ's resurrection. 

Furthermore, God specially recognized water 
baptism under the Spirit dispensation by in 
some cases withholding certain "gifts" (miraculous 
manifestations conferred upon believers 
in the beginning of this age, for the purpose 
of manifesting God's approval of the teachings 
of the gospel) until the water baptism had 
been properly performed (Acts 19:3-6); as in 
another case the gifts were bestowed first, to 
teach Peter that water baptism and every other 
feature of the gospel favor were open to the 
Gentiles. --Acts 10:44-48. 

When the Apostle Paul thanked God that 
of the Corinthian Church he had baptized only 
afew(l Cor. 1:11-17), he was not assuming 
that he had since become wiser than to do 
so again— wiser than the Master who commanded 
his disciples to teach and to baptize 
unto the close of the age— but for totally different 
reasons: reasons which only those who 
read the entire epistle to the Corinthians connectedly 
can recognize. He had heard that the 
church at Corinth was split into factions, divisions 
(literally, sects), some calling themselves 
Paulites, others Apollosites, others Peterites and 
others Christians. He was sure he had in no 
way aided such sectarianism, and was glad he 
could say, I never authorized you to call yourselves 

R1540 :page 181 

by my name. Were you baptized into 
the name of Paul, or into the name of Christ? 
Since the majority were Paulites, and since 
Paul had founded the church at Corinth, it 
might appear to some that he had been seeking 
to make converts to himself— Paulites instead 
of Christians; and, as it resulted thus, he was 
glad to have it to say, that very few of those 
calling themselves Paulites had been baptized 
by him, as he said— "Lest any should say, I 
baptized in mine own name." 

The great Apostle has been ignominiously 
styled "The blear-eyed Jew," and there is 
little room for doubt that, after he was struck 



down in the way to Damascus (Acts 9:4,8), he 
never fully recovered his sight. This "thorn" 
(figurative) he besought the Lord thrice to remove, 
but it was left as a reminder of previous 
error, and hence served to keep Paul humble 
in the service of that Master whom he had 
once persecuted. (2 Cor. 12:7.) It was probably 
because of this difficulty that, when on 
trial, he did not recognize the High-priest, 
whom he would otherwise have known by his 
peculiar garb (Acts 23:5); and for the same 
reason that all of his epistles were written by an 
amanuensis— except one, and that one of the 
shortest of them, closing with a statement which 
indicated that he could write only with difficulty 
and that his readers could appreciate this, 
knowing his disadvantages. He says: "Ye 
see how large [with what large characters- 
indicating that he could not see to write a fine 
hand] a letter I have written unto you with 
mine own hand." (Gal. 6:11.) Again, when 
wishing to mention their love for him, and 
their willingness to do for him the most useful 
service, he says to them (Gal. 4:15), "I bear 
you record that, if possible, ye would have 
plucked out your own eyes, and have given 
them to me." And it was evidently for this 
same reason that Paul never baptized any of 
his converts when he could avoid it— when 
others were present who could see to the service 
better than he. 

Even had Paul's sight been good, the facts 
that he was a more able preacher than others, 
and that many could baptize as well as he, 
would have been sufficient reasons for his 
course; for it was thus with the Master, as we 
read (John 4:1,2), "Jesus made and baptized 
more disciples than John; though Jesus himself 
baptized not, but his disciples." Judging 
from his unfitness for performing baptism, and 
his talent for teaching, Paul concluded that 
preaching, and not baptizing, was his special 
mission (1 Cor. 1:17), though his own record 
shows that, when occasion required and no 
one else was convenient to render the service, 
he did not allow even his own unfitness to hinder 
or prevent this obedience to the Master's 
precept and example. 

WHO ARE TO BE BAPTIZED? 



Our Lord authorized first the teaching of the 
gospel, and then the baptism of such as believed 
in him as the Redeemer, and accepted the gospel 



call to become his followers. The apostles 
followed this rule, and we have no testimony 
anywhere that they baptized others— neither 
unbelievers, nor infants, nor idiots. True, it 
is recorded that several "households" were 
baptized, and from this it is argued that probably 
there were infants in some of those families, 
and that therefore it is probable that 
infants were baptized, though none are mentioned. 
But, we answer, some families contain 
idiots, and some families number one or more 
unbelievers; shall we therefore conclude without 

R1541 :page 181 

other evidence that the apostles disregarded 

our Lord's command, and baptized unbelievers? 

Nay, verily! It is far more reasonable to conclude 

that in the few cases where households 

are mentioned they consisted of only adult believers; 

or that, since the custom or general 

usage would prevent misunderstanding, it was 

proper enough to say "household," even if 

there were in them children too young to be 

"believers," and who therefore would be understood 

as not included among those baptized. 

THE FORM OF BAPTISM. 



The Greek language is remarkable for its 
clear and definite expression of thought, and it 
was therefore well fitted to give expression to 
divine truth. Its flexibility is well illustrated 
in the following words, each expressing a different 

R1541 :page 182 

shade of thought, yet all having a similar 
significance. Thus cheo signifies to pour; raino, 
to sprinkle; louo, to wash or bathe; nipto, to 
wash a part of the person; bathizo (from bathos, 
the bottom), to immerse or plunge deep; rantizo 
(from raino), to sprinkle or shed forth; 
bapto, to dip or dye; baptizo, to dip, immerse 
or cover. 

This last word, baptizo (rendered baptize in 
the common version Bible), is used by our Lord 
and his apostles when referring to an ordinance 
which they practised, as well as enjoined upon 
all followers of the Lamb. From this word, 
selected from among so many others of various 
shades of meaning, it is clear that a sprinkling 
or even a washing of a part of the person was 
not the thought, but an immersion or covering 



of the whole person— whatever it implies. Immersed 

is the correct translation; for baptized, 

as rendered in our common English Bibles, is 

not a translation at all, but a mere transfer of 

the Greek word into the English. Immersed 

is the English word which corresponds in 

meaning to the Greek word baptize 

Not only does the Greek word signify to 
bury, immerse or cover, but the connected 
Scripture narrative of itself, without the particular 
strictness of the Greek word used, would 
imply that the baptism was one of immersion 
and not of sprinkling. The English, as well 
as the Greek, shows that our Lord went down 
into the water and came up out of the water. 
And the Apostle Paul frequently speaks of baptism 
as a burial, which would be a very inappropriate 
figure with any other form than that 
of immersion. 

It has been suggested by some that in the 
case of the jailor who believed and was straightway 
baptized (Acts 16:33) the baptism could 
not have been by immersion, because he and 
the others could not have left the jail for the 
purpose; but, on the contrary, it is now known 
that at that time the jails were provided with 
bathing reservoirs, most suitable for the immersions. 
And, furthermore, it is to be remembered 
that of John the Baptizer it is 
written, "John was baptizing at AEnon near to 
Salim, because there was much water there." 
(John 3:23.) No one can for a moment suppose 
that if John sprinkled his converts, the 
largeness of the water supply would have been 
a consideration. It was probably at a pool in 
the river Jordan. 

It is generally admitted by scholars that immersion 
was the common practice of the early 
Church; but with the beginning of the third 
century came great confusion on this as on 
other subjects. On the one hand some placed all 
the value upon the form, some even insisting 
on three immersions, because our Lord had said 
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and 
of the holy Spirit, not seeing that in the name 
of simply signifies in recognition of; others 
claimed that as our Lord's head bowed forward 
in dying on the cross so they should be immersed, 
not as in a burial, but face downward; 
others insisted that the baptized must be nearly 
naked, as our Lord was when he died; and 
still others went to an opposite extreme, and, 
while holding that a form was all important, 
claimed that the exact form was unimportant, 
and for convenience substituted sprinkling. 

This latter finally became the standard mode 



in the church of Rome, from which it reached 
Protestants. Immersion, however, is still the 
recognized form in the oriental churches. As 
we shall show presently, all these errors as to 
form, resulted from losing sight of the real 
significance of baptism. A claim frequently 
made, but not generally appreciated by those 
who make it, is that the Greek word baptizo, 
though it generally is used in referring to some 
thing or process (as the dying of cloth) which 
requires dipping, has been found in classical 
Greek writings used in places where the evident 
thought was that of washing without dipping. 
To this we answer that the word baptizo 
is not limited to a certain form of action, but 
rather carries the broad idea, to cover. And, 
so far as the word goes, the entire person is 
baptized if the entire person is wet, or covered 
with water in any manner.* But if the entire 



*An illustration of this use of the word is found in 
1 Cor. 10:1,2. The Apostle declares that all Israel were 
baptized (immersed) into Moses, and gives as the form, 
that they were covered with water (though not wet); the 
walls of the sea being on either hand and the clouds of 
water over head. 

R1541 :page 183 

person to be baptized should be wet, or covered 
with water, who will claim that dipping 
was not the original as well as the easiest 
method of doing this? 

WHO MAY IMMERSE? 



No limitations are mentioned in the Scriptures 
as to who shall perform this ceremony 
of baptizing believers in water, though only 
the Church was ever commissioned, either to 
teach or to baptize. Although knowledge on 
the part of the one performing the ceremony is 
not required, it is, of course, desirable; but 
both faith and knowledge are necessary on the 
part of the one immersed. Sometimes the one 
performing the ceremony may be far inferior 
in every way to the one for whom it is performed 
(Matt. 3:14); and he might even, if necessary, 
be a believer not of the Kingdom or Church 
class. (Matt. 11:11.) Certainly all who are 
authorized to teach, are equally authorized to 
baptize; and that includes every true follower 



of Christ— "even to the end of the age," according 
to the general call to the ministry, 
commission and ordination of Matt. 28:19,20 
and John 17:14-23. And this commission 
evidently does not exclude from this service 
the females of the "body of Christ" (Gal. 3:28), 
only that modesty, convenience, etc., indicate 
that they should avoid such public services 
except in rare cases of necessity. 

THE SIGNIFICATION OF IMMERSION. 



In considering the signification of immersion, 
the change from the Jewish to the Gospel dispensation 
must be recognized. The Jews, by 
their covenant, the Law, occupied a relationship 
toward God very different from that of the 
Gentiles (who were without God or hope— 
Eph. 2:12); for, by God's arrangement, they 
were recognized and treated, under the provisions 
of the typical sacrifices, as though they 
were justified from Adamic guilt and penalty, 
and were, as a nation, consecrated to God, and 
treated as though they were to be made the 
Bride of Christ. The provision, too, was that 
when the true Lamb of God should come those 
truly consecrated among them, "Israelites indeed," 
might, by accepting the true Lamb and 
true sin-sacrifice and atonement, enter upon 
actual justification, and carry with them their 
former consecration. In other words, an Israelite, 
consecrated indeed, living at the close 
of the Jewish age, when the real sacrifice for 
sins was made by our Lord, would be treated 
as though he had always had the reality, whereas 
really he had up to that time only a typical 
justification. 

Therefore, in the opening of the Gospel age, 
Jews were not preached to in the same manner 
as Gentiles. The latter were told:— Ye who 
were once aliens and strangers have been 
brought nigh, and may now have access to God 
and may enter into covenant relations with him. 
Therefore, come to God by Christ who has 
abolished distinctions between Jews and Gentiles, 
not by taking favors from the Jews, but 
by ushering believers, whether Jews or Gentiles, 
into the blessings and favors of the New 
Covenant, which the Law Covenant merely 
typified. (Eph. 2:13-19.) The Jews were told 
the opposite: "Ye are the children of the 
prophets, and of the covenant which God made 
with our fathers.... Unto you first, God, 
having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to 



bless you, in turning away each of you from his 
iniquities." "Repent, and be baptized, each 
one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the 
remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift 
of the holy Spirit; for the promise is unto you 
[belongs to you], and to your children."— Acts 3:25,26; 
2:38-41. 

The point to be noticed is that Israelites 
were already consecrated, and heirs according 
to the Law Covenant; and the only reason 
they, as a nation, had not been merged at once 
out of the Jewish typical state into the Gospel 
realities, as the apostles and other individuals 
had been, was that they had not been living up 
to their covenant relationship. Hence they 
were told to repent or turn back into the true 
covenant relationship with God, and to enjoy 
their privileges as children of the covenant. 
They had sinned in not living up to what they 
could of their covenant, and they were to show 
that they renounced their previous state of sin 
by immersion— washing away their transgressions 

R1541 :page 184 

in symbol, after praying in the name of 

Christ. (Acts 22:16.) In like manner baptism 

by John, and by Christ's disciples when confined 

to the Israelites, signified repentance for 

covenant violations, and a return to covenant 

relationship, and was intended as a preparatory 

work; for those who fully received John's testimony, 

and reformed, and became Israelites 

indeed, did receive Christ, and did pass into 

the higher favors of the Gospel age.— John 5:45-47; 

Matt. 21:31,32. 

To these, already children of the covenant 
and already heirs of the promised blessings, 
water baptism meant a renouncing of sins of unfaithfulness, 

R1542 : page 184 

and more: it meant their renunciation 

of the national sin of crucifying Christ— 

for the rulers representing that nation had said, 

"His blood be upon us and upon our children." 

Hence Peter exhorted, saying, "Let all the 

house of Israel know that this Jesus whom you 

crucified, God hath made both Lord and Messiah." 

And when, in view of this national 

sin which each shared, they inquired, "Brethren! 

What shall we do?" Peter answered, 

"Reform and be immersed, each one of you, 

in the name of Jesus Christ, for the forgiveness 

of your sins [and specially for your share 

in this national sin of crucifying Messiah], and 



ye shall receive the gift of the holy Spirit." 

(Acts 2:36-39.) To those who accepted, it 

meant not only a renunciation of their national 

error of crucifying Christ, but a stepping out 

from the dispensation and control of Moses into 

that of Christ. Because in acknowledging 

Jesus to be the true Messiah, they were acknowledging 

him to be the long promised 

Savior, Lawgiver and Teacher greater than 

Moses and typified by him. 

But baptism could not mean repentance in 
either of these senses to the Gentiles who had 
never been under the Jewish Covenant, and 
who had no direct responsibility for the death 
of Christ. Hence (after the "elect remnant" 
of Israel had been received, and the Gospel 
message went to the Gentiles, to select out of 
them the number necessary to complete the 
body of Christ) in the epistles to the Gentile 
churches we hear no further exhortation to be 
baptized as a sign of repentance, or as a symbol 
of washing away of sins. And since we by 
nature are not Jews, but are of the Gentiles 
whose fathers were aliens and foreigners so far 
as God's covenants and promises were concerned, 
therefore, we should not apply to ourselves 
that idea of baptism which was applicable 
only to the Jews, but that idea which the 
Apostle unfolds in Rom. 6:3-5; Col. 2:12. 

The full import of baptism, the reality, of 
which immersion in water commanded by our 
Lord is the symbol, is clearly shown by the 
Apostle in the above cited passages. "Know 
ye not that as many of us as were immersed 
into Christ were immersed into HIS DEATH? 
Those who know this fully, and they alone, 
truly appreciate the water immersion commanded, 
and its weighty and appropriate 
significance. 

"IMMERSED INTO CHRIST." 



They who see the "high calling" of this 
Gospel age— to joint-heirship with Christ Jesus 
our Lord, as members in particular of the 
"body of Christ," of which the Redeemer is 
Head and Lord— know that our attainment of 
that high honor depends upon our acceptableness 
as members in that body of Christ. (Rom. 12:1; 
8:17,18.) They also know that no one 
is "called" or invited into this "body of 
Christ"— "the Church of the firstborn"— except 
those who already are believers, who own 
Christ as their Redeemer or Justifier, and who 



are therefore justified freely from all things by 

faith in his blood. Such, and not sinners, are 

invited to become join t-sacrificers and joint-heirs 

with Christ. Under the Law, the blemished 

of the flock were not acceptable on the 

Lord's altar, typifying God's rejection during 

this age of all imperfect offerings. Our Lord 

was the actually spotless, unblemished, perfect 

Lamb of God, sacrificed for our sins; and in 

inviting some to join him in sacrifice, and 

afterward in glory and honor, the Father accepts 

only such as are first made "whiter than 

snow," and who, because of faith in and acceptance 

of the redemption which is in Christ 

Jesus, are reckoned perfect, and hence are acceptable 

to God as join t-sacrificers. 

R1542:page 185 

"WERE IMMERSED INTO HIS DEATH." 



This is given as the true significance of water 
immersion. The real baptism, therefore, is 
this immersion into a sacrificial death with 
Christ; and the water immersion, though a 
beautiful figure which graphically illustrates the 
real baptism, is only its figure or symbol. 

But how much is meant by the expression, "immersed 
into his death?" In what way was our 
Lord's death different from that of other men? 

His death was different from that of other 
men in that theirs is a penalty for sin, while his 
was a sacrifice for the sins of others, to release 
others from their penalty— death. We, with 
all others of Adam's family, involuntarily share 
Adam's death— the wages of sin. And we, with 
all the Adamic family, were redeemed by 
Christ's death, and granted a right to a probation 
for a restoration to all the human rights 
and privileges which Adam lost for us. We who 
believe this good news accept those redeemed 
rights and privileges even now, and begin (by 
faith) to enjoy them, believing that what 
Christ died to secure, and has promised to give, 
is as sure as though already possessed. We 
have joy and peace in believing these "good 
tidings of great joy, which shall be unto all 
people;" and by faith we already reckon ourselves 
as in possession of those good things 
which, at the second coming of our Lord Jesus, 
are to be brought unto all who hate sin and 
love righteousness. 

It is when we are in this justified condition, 
repossessed of the human rights lost through 



Adam, but redeemed by Christ, that the call 

or invitation is extended to us to become something 

far higher and far grander than perfect 

men fully restored to the likeness of God in the 

flesh (though that is so grand that only few appreciate 

it): we are invited to become joined 

with the Redeemer in the glories and dignities 

of the divine nature (2 Pet. 1:4), and co-workers 

with him in the great work of the 

Millennial age— the work of restoring the obedient 

of the race of Adam to perfection and 

to all "that which was lost" in the fall. 

But the invitation to share this great dignity, 
far above angels (Heb. 1:4; Eph. 1:21; 1 Cor. 6:3), 
is accompanied by certain conditions and 
limitations. This prize is not given because of 
works, for no works which could be conceived 
could purchase or earn so high an exaltation 
as that offered. The offer is a favor, unmerited 
by anything which we have done, or can do; 
and yet the conditions may be said to be the price, 
or cost to us, of the prize offered. It is not, 
however, an equivalent or corresponding price. 
The price to us is a mere pittance in comparison 
to the value received, and "not worthy 
to be compared with the glory which shall be 
revealed in us." And when we consider that 
we had nothing to give, until first purchased by 
the precious blood of Christ, it will be clearly 
seen that the high honors to which we are called 
are not of works of our own, but of grace, 
through Christ. For even our pittance was 
forfeited by sin, and had first to be redeemed, 
before it could be accepted. 

The requirements or conditions, attached to 
the invitation to share with Christ the coming 
glories and dignities, are plainly stated:— Each 
one accepting it must share his death, be immersed 
or buried into his death, if he would 
be of that "little flock" of joint-heirs, the 
"body of Christ,"— otherwise called "the 
Bride, the Lamb's wife." To be sharers in 
his death means that as our Redeemer spent 
his life, not in (even lawful) self-gratification, 
but consumed it in the interest of truth and 
righteousness, in opposing sin and in doing 
the work and executing the plan of the 
Father, so we must use our time, talents, energies, 
rights and privileges. Redeemed by him 
and given to us, we not only consecrate all these 
to the Father's service, but we must use them 
faithfully even unto death— as he hath set us the 
example— walking in his footsteps as nearly as 
possible. If thus we be dead with him, we shall 
in due time live with him (Rom. 6:8); if thus 
we suffer with him, and in the present life endure 



afflictions even unto death (whether the 
death of the cross or some other form) for 
righteousness' sake, we are counted as sharers of 
his death; and all who share "his death" will 
also share "his resurrection."— See Phil. 3:8-11. 

As "his death" differs from the Adamic 
death, so "his resurrection" differs from the 

R1542:page 186 

restoration resurrection which he has secured 

and will make possible to all men. His resurrection 

is in Scripture pointed out as different 

from that of the world redeemed by him. It is 

emphasized in the Greek— "the resurrection," 

and also designated the "first [chief] resurrection." 

His resurrection was to the divine or 

immortal nature, a spiritual body. And so many 

of us as are immersed into Christ— immersed 

into his death— shall also obtain a share 

in "his resurrection"— "the resurrection"— 

as described in 1 Cor. 15:42-53. We, who 

have borne the image of the earthly father, 

Adam, who also lost it for us, have again received 

it by faith in Christ's sacrifice, and have 

now surrendered it, as joint-sacrificers with 

him of human nature. Thus we become partakers 

of a new nature, and shall, in the resurrection, 

bear the image of that new, divine 

nature.- 1 Cor. 15:49. 

Note how pointedly the same writer mentions 
this in the passage under consideration. 
"Therefore we are buried with him by baptism 
into death: that like as Christ was raised up 
from the dead by the glory of the Father, even 
so we also should walk in a new life. [Our new 
natures are reckoned as begun now, and are to 
be perfected at our resurrection in the Lord's 
likeness.] For if we have been planted together 
in the likeness of his death, [then] we 
shall be also [sharers] in the likeness of his 
resurrection."— Rom. 6:4,5. 

It is evident, then, that baptism in water is 
the symbol of a complete and, to those who 
would be joint-heirs with Christ, an indispensable 
self-sacrifice; an immersion with our Lord into 
his death; an immersion which began and is 
counted from the moment the justified believer 
consecrated himself and surrendered his will to 
God, though to secure the prize promised it 
must continue until the close of the earthly life. 
It was from this standpoint that our Lord spoke, 
when he said, "I have a baptism to be baptized 
with, and how am I straitened till it be accomplished. 
(Luke 12:50.) He had already 



R1543 : page 186 

performed the symbol at Jordan, but he was 
now referring to the consummation of his baptism 
into death. His will, surrendered to the 
Father's will and plan, was already buried; but 
as the dark hour of Gethsemane and Calvary 
drew near he longed to finish his sacrifice. It 
was from this same standpoint that he spoke of 
baptism to the two disciples who asked to sit, 
the one at his right hand and the other at his 
left, in the kingdom. "He answered and said 
unto them, Ye know not what ye ask— Are ye 
able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, 
and to be baptized with the baptism that I am 
baptized with?" (Matt. 20:22.) He referred 
here to the baptism into death, and showed 
that none need expect to share the kingdom 
except those who share this baptism of death. 
Thus the Apostle's explanation of the symbol 
exactly concurs with that of our Lord. 

These are not two baptisms— one into water 
and the other into Christ's death— but one. 
The immersion into water is the symbol or 
shadow of the immersion into death. If there 
is a shadow, there must be a substance; and a 
clear, strong light falling upon a substance 
produces a shadow of it. It is for the instructed 
child of God to distinguish between 
the substance and the shadow, and by recognizing 
their relationship to see in the two parts 
"one baptism." Since the two parts were recognized 
as one baptism by the Apostle, it is 
doubtful if any one fully appreciates the ONE, 
TRUE BAPTISM without seeing both the substance 
and the shadow. 

Recognizing the true import of baptism, we 
see that, next to faith in Christ, it is the one 
important and essential step by which the 
Church glorified shall be entered; for only 
such as are conformed to, and have fellowship 
in, our Lord's death will, as "members of his 
body," share the first or chief resurrection, to 
be with and like the Head. It is not surprising 
that some have mistaken the shadow or 
symbol for the real, and made it a test of membership 
in the church upon earth: this is but 
a natural mistake. All who see the real immersion, 
as well as the symbol, and yet ignore the 
latter, should carefully examine themselves to 
see that their wills in this matter are really 
dead and buried in the will of Christ. And 
if they refuse obedience to the Lord's word 
and example in this, they should make unquestionably 
sure to themselves the strength and 
validity of any arguments to the contrary, by 



which they set these aside. 

But some inquire, Is it necessary for me to 
be immersed in water, if I am confident that 
I am fully consecrated— immersed into Christ? 
Would the Lord reject me for so small a matter 
as a failure to go through a form? 

Do not forget that the present age is not one 
of commands and compulsions. God does not 
command and compel the obedience of his 
Church. This is a time in which, as a great 
favor, believers are privileged to offer their wills 
and their all in self-sacrifice to God. It is 
'the acceptable year of the Lord"— the time 
in which God is pleased to accept our sacrifices 
(through Christ) and to give us certain exceeding 
great rewards promised to those who 
surrender their little all, and who thus become 
followers in the footsteps of the High Priest of 
our order.— Heb. 3:1. 

R1543 : page 187 

Those who see this clearly know that the 
Body of Christ has not been given a law of 
commandments, nor been dealt with as were 
the Jews; for "Ye are not under law, but under 
favor." Theirs was the house of servants, and 
it is proper to command servants; but, if we 
are new creatures in Christ, we belong to the 
"house of sons" (Heb. 3:5,6); and God 
deals with us as a true Father with true sons. 
True sons, and the only ones whom he will acknowledge, 
possess the spirit of adoption, 
the spirit of obedience, the spirit of sons, and 
need not to be commanded and threatened; for 
such, both by word and deed, and in matters 
both small and great, declare, "I delight to do 
thy will, O my God." For such, no self-denial 
is too great, and no act of respect and obedience 
too small; and, ignoring pride and all 
human philosophies and expediencies as unworthy 
to be weighed at all in opposition to 
the Father's wisdom, these learn that to obey 
is the best of sacrifice.— 1 Sam. 15:22. 

No, God will not compel you to be immersed, 
either really or symbolically. These 
opportunities to sacrifice convenience, worldly 
opinion, etc., are privileges which we should 
highly esteem and covet, because by these we 
are able to show the Lord the depth and sincerity 
of our love and the reality of our consecration. 
It is on the basis of this and hundreds 
of other little things that we are now being 
tried— to see if we are as earnest as we have 
professed to be. If we are ashamed to confess 
Christ before men by the very simple way 



which he arranged, we may well expect that he 

would be ashamed to call us overcomers and 

joint-heirs, and to confess us as faithful followers. 

He could not do so honestly and truthfully, 

and hence we may be sure he will not do 

so. And if, after we see how much our Lord 

has done for us— first, in our redemption, and, 

secondly, in the great offer of the crown and 

divine nature— we allow a trifling sacrifice of 

contemptible pride to hinder us from a small 

act of obedience which our Redeemer and benefactor 

requested, our own self-contempt and 

shame should prevent our taking crowns and 

places (even if offered them) with the little 

band of faithful overcomers who valiantly sacrificed 

much, and thus proved that they loved 

much. 

While therefore we do not say that none will be 
of the "little flock" except those who have been 
immersed into water, as well as into the death 
of Christ, which it so beautifully symbolizes, 
we do say, that we do not expect to find in that 
"little flock" a single one who has seen water 
immersion to be the will of God, and who has 
refused to obey. Let us remember that obedience 
in a small matter may be a closer test 
than in a large one. Had Satan attempted to 
get Eve into the sin of blaspheming the Creator, 
he would have failed; had he attempted to induce 
her to murder Adam he would have failed; 
hence the test of obedience in a very small 
matter was a much more crucial test. So now 
God tests our professions of love and devotion 
and obedience most thoroughly by some of the 
smallest matters, of which the symbolic immersion 
is one. God's decision is, He that is 
faithful in that which is least will be faithful 
also in that which is greater. 

Though "Baptists" do not generally grasp 
the full import of immersion, but look at the 
water rather than the death which it symbolizes, 
yet the holding of the symbol has been 
valuable, and shows the Lord's wisdom in 
choosing the symbol; for even the truth with 
reference to the symbol has been unpopular, 
ever since its rejection by Antichrist centuries 
ago, and in very many cases has it required 
the true consecration, the true burial of the will 
into Christ's will, before the believer was willing 
to brave the scorn of the world by obedience 
to an unpopular ceremony. 

Even those who practice sprinkling, and 
that upon unintelligent (and hence unbelieving) 
babes, hold that baptism is the door into 
the Church of Christ, and none of the nominal 
churches receive into membership others than 



those who have gone through some ceremony 
called "baptism." They thus receive infants 
into their churches, on the ground that only 
church members will be saved from everlasting 
torment. True, this like other doctrines is 
little taught in our day, and is fast losing its 
influence over the people, yet millions of parents 
to-day believe that their children would 
be consigned to everlasting torment if they 
should die without being sprinkled with water 
in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit. 
Especially do Romanists, Episcopalians and 
Lutherans fear an omission of this sort, and 
some Presbyterians and Methodists no less so. 
An illustration of this, and one which shows 
the power these errors put into the hands of 
the priestly or clerical class, came under our 
observation in this city about nine years ago. 
The parents of the infant were Lutherans, but 
had a disagreement with the pastor of the congregation 
about non-payment of church dues 
and non-attendance at meetings. The child 
grew seriously ill, and the father and mother 
by turn went many times to implore the cold 
hearted, error teaching, hireling shepherd to 
come and sprinkle their babe and save it from 
the eternal damnation he had taught them 
would otherwise be its portion. But he refused 

R1543 : page 188 

to come, telling them that they deserved the 
punishment. After further effort they secured 
another priest "just in time" to allay their 
groundless fears. 

Thus it is evident that no matter how careless 
they may be as to the exact form, all the 
principal sects view baptism as the door into 
the church, the door of salvation, the door into 
the body of Christ, as truly as do Baptists. 
We, on the contrary, hold that neither the 
sprinkling with water nor the immersion in 
water is the door into the "body of Christ," 
now being elected or chosen out of the world; 
but that the immersion into Christ's death, 
which begins in full consecration, is the door 
by which justified men become members of the 
Body of Christ which is the Church. We insist 
that all who thus become members of "THE 
CHURCH whose names are written in heaven," 
should, as soon as the precept and example of the 
Lord and the apostles, and the appropriateness 
of the symbol, are seen, make haste to show 
their obedience and consecration before men. 

BAPTISM AND THE TABERNACLE. 



The true baptism is illustrated in the Jewish 
Tabernacle, but not by the Laver which stood 
in the Court full of water, at which the priests 
washed their hands and feet. No, that is a 
symbol of the cleansing effect of the truth 
upon the outward conduct of believers in general. 
It symbolizes the putting aside of filthy 
practices— lying, stealing, etc., and the putting 
away of filthy communications out of our 
mouths,— slanders, envy, strife, backbiting, 

R1544 : page 188 

etc.,— a cleansing as proper for the natural man 
as for the consecrated saints. 

The vail at the door of the Tabernacle represented 
the same thought as baptism— namely, 
death. When the priest passed the first vail, it 
represented him as passing out of sight, buried 
from the outward things; and his shut-in condition, 
was enlightened only by the lamp and 
supplied by the shewbread— representing the 
spiritual nourishment and enlightenment granted 
all who are immersed into Christ. 

The second vail represented the end of the 
reckoned death in actual death; and the Most 
Holy represented the full fruition of all the exceeding 
great and precious promises made to 
those who become new creatures in Christ 
Jesus by sharing his death and also his resurrection. 
In the Most Holy comes the full realization 
of what the Holy gave but a foretaste. 
Thus we see that a complete immersion or 
burial from sight was necessary to reach the 
Most Holy. And as the Tabernacle had but 
the one entrance, it clearly teaches that none 
can attain that state or condition which it typified 
(the divine nature) without first passing 
through the first vail, representing consecration 
or death to the world, which baptism in water 
also beautifully illustrates. 

For a full explanation of the significance of 
the entire Tabernacle service, see Tabernacle 
Shadows of the Better Sacrifices. 

WHO MAY BE IMMERSED. 



In John's baptism of the Jews into reformation, 
he demanded of some that they should 
first show by their lives that they had reformed 
before they went through the symbol of reformation. 



In the use of baptism after Pentecost 

however, the only condition imposed was faith 

in Christ. It seems to have been taken for 

granted that none but true, sincere persons 

would thus profess faith in and allegiance to so 

unpopular a leader as the crucified Christ. 

But the water immersion, though it was a public 

profession of Christ by the one immersed 

was not necessarily an endorsement of such by 

the apostles and the Church. The Church could 

not and did not decide whether the one symbolically 

immersed had been really immersed 

into Christ. The symbol indicated this; and 

they explained the symbol, and urged all that 

had consecrated in symbol to see that they 

were really dead to the world and its plans and 

aims, and alive toward God and his plan. 

This is evident from some instances, as that 
of Ananias and Sapphira and Simon the sorcerer. 
(Acts 5:1-10; 8:13,20-23.) To the 
latter, though he had been baptized, the Apostle 
declared, "Thou art in the gall of bitterness, 
and in the bond of iniquity." So, now 
we do not need to decide for others who may 
wish thus to confess Christ (except it be very 
evident that they do it as an intended mockery). 
It is their act alone, and represents their conscience 
toward God; and the knowledge of ignorance 
of the one performing the symbol cannot 
affect the matter either favorably or unfavorably. 
The real baptism is that which cannot be 
seen, except in its influence upon the conduct; 
and the real church which is joined is the Church 
whose names are written in heaven, whose members 
cannot be positively known until the close 
of this age, when they shall be glorified with the 
Head. 

THE MANNER OF THE SYMBOL. 



The immersion, since it symbolizes a burial 
should be backwards, in water sufficient for the 
purpose, and convenient as circumstances will 
permit. It should not be done with secrecy 

R1544 : page 189 

it is intended as a public confession of faith, and the 
only form of such public confession, used by 
the early Church, of which we have any record. 
Yet its publicity should be to fellow-believers 
rather than to the world. Hence, while it 
should in no way be kept secret from the world, 
it is unnecessary to give public notice except 



to the fellow-believers of the Church. In fact, 
so solemn is the occasion to the Church, who 
realize its deep significance, that the presence 
of the worldly, unless they be seekers after God 
and therefore more than mere curiosity seekers, 
is not desirable. Such public notice, we gather 
from the record, was the custom in the early 
Church. 

Some think that because John the Immerser 
and the Lord's disciples baptized publicly in 
the river Jordan, therefore all should be immersed 
in public view in a river. But let it be 
remembered that the whole Jewish nation was 
the Church according to their Law Covenant; 
therefore public view was public to the professed 
Church of that time. As for the river Jordan, 
John and the disciples evidently used it as the 
most convenient place at their service. If the 
river was an important factor, why not the same 
river— Jordan? 

It should be noted that when the eunuch believed 
and was immersed, only Philip was present; 
when the jailer believed and was immersed 
(Acts 16:33), it was not in a river, but in a 
bath or some other convenient arrangement 
in the prison. And we know that the ruins 
of the church buildings of the first two centuries 
show that they had special, annexed 
buildings prepared for the convenience of 
immersions. 

The form of words used by the apostles and 
the early Church is not given, which shows that 
the form of words used is much less important 
than the act, and the meaning which it expresses. 
We may gather, however, from Acts 2:38; 
8:16; Rom. 6:3; Gal. 3:27 and 1 Cor. 1:13, 
that baptism "into Christ," into the name 
of the Lord Jesus, was the thought; and that it 
was expressed in words. We may also presume 
that our Lord's words, "Baptizing them in the 
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the 
holy Spirit, were not disregarded, but somehow 
expressed on such occasions. The thought is, 
that believers, by immersion into Christ's death, 
are joined to Christ as members of the little 
flock "which is his body;" and that their right 
or privilege to be thus accepted in the Beloved 
is in the name or by the authority of the Father, 
through the merit of the Son and by the impartation 
to such of the holy Spirit of truth. 
We now give the form of words which it is our 
custom to use on such occasions, and our general 
procedure, for the convenience and satisfaction 
of those who may have occasion to use 
the suggestion. 

We first have, privately, some assurance on 



the part of all who are about to be immersed, 

that they recognize the death of Christ as their 

ransom price, and that they are already consecrated 

wholly to his service, and desire to 

now confess all this in the symbol which Christ 

enjoined. Then, the announcement having been 

publicly made before the congregation, we meet 

at an appointed time and place for the service; 

and there, after briefly explaining the real immersion 

and its water symbol, offering thanks 

to God for the privilege of thus following 

in our Lord's footsteps, and expressing our 

trust in his promises to give grace and strength 

sufficient to enable those who have consecrated 

all to his service to be dead indeed to the world 

and its aims and ambitions, and alive only to 

God's service and the study and carrying out 

of his plans; and after specially requesting a 

blessing upon those about to symbolize their 

covenant, we receive the candidates in the 

water. Then (in the usual manner, with one 

hand in front, at the throat, and the other at 

the back of the neck) we say, if the name of 

the candidate be John,— "John, in the name 

of the Father and of the Son and of the holy 

Spirit— by this authority— I baptize thee into 

the name of Christ." We then let him down, 

backward (as a corpse), until immersed, covered 

completely; then raise him to his feet. 

After again changing our clothing in the provided 

rooms, we meet in the presence of the 

congregation (who, meantime, worship God in 

prayer, songs of praise, etc.), and with convenient 

words we extend to the newly immersed 

ones the right-hand of fellowship in the name 

of the great Head of the Church, and on behalf 

of the entire church whose names are written 

in heaven; exhorting that they walk worthy 

of the name of Christ which they have confessed 

and taken; and that they run earnestly in the 

race for the prize of the high calling which they 

have publicly entered. 

THE FAMILY NAME. 



It is evident that all through the Gospel age 
baptism into Christ has symbolized union with 
him and membership in the one body— the 
bride. But now in the harvest or lapping of 
the Gospel and Millennial ages, a new question 
arises, viz., While it is still appropriate for all 
of this class who have not done so, to confess 
Christ by this symbol, what about others, of 
the restitution class, who shall now confess 



R1544 : page 190 

Christ and desire to consecrate themselves— 
to relinquish their wills and have the will of 
Christ only? Seeing that such will sooner or 
later apply for baptism as a symbol, and that 
it would be a proper symbol of consecration 
for others as well as for the body of Christ, and 
that it is not incumbent upon us to decide to 
which class those belong who apply to us for 
immersion— the question arises, Would the same 
form of words be appropriate for both? 

We answer, Yes; for though the class referred 
to will not be of the bride of Christ, they will 
be of the Christ family— children of the Christ; 
and it is proper for children to bear their father's 
name. Christ is to be the "Everlasting 
Father" or life-giver to the restored human 
race; and hence it will not be improper for 
them also to take his name. Therefore, as we 
now view it, it will be proper to baptize such 
into the name of Christ; and we doubt not that 
all of the world who shall come into harmony 
and receive the gift of life from the Life-giver 
in the next age, will also be known as Christians. 
As before pointed out, however, the 
words of the immerser cannot affect favorably 

R1545 : page 190 

or unfavorably the interests of the immersed: 
the importance rests in the obedience of the 
act and what it signifies of consecration to the 
one immersed. 

BAPTISM OF THE HOLY SPIRIT AND OF FIRE. 



We need not examine this subject at length 
here; it was discussed in our issue of June '92. 
We merely remark that the immersion in holy 
Spirit which began at Pentecost, is not symbolized 
by water baptism: it follows, but is totally 
different from an immersion into Christ's death, 
which the water immersion symbolizes so 
perfectly. 

BAPTIZED FOR THE DEAD. 



"Else what shall they do which are baptized 
for the dead, if the dead are not to be raised 
at all? [If there is no resurrection baptism is 



a symbol of nothing further than the death of 
our mortal bodies.] Why then are they baptized 
on behalf of them?-- 1 Cor. 15:29. 

This has been considered a very obscure passage, 
because the real meaning of immersion 
(as symbolic of death) has been generally lost 
sight of. Some have been led to the absurd 
conclusion that early Christians were immersed 
for or instead of their dead, unbelieving friends 
and relatives— supposing that Paul here referred 
to and commended so senseless a thing. On 
the contrary, the Apostle here refers to the 
fact, then well understood, that each one of 
those who had been immersed had symbolized 
his own death— had cast his lot among those 
dead with Christ, to share his sacrificial death 
(giving his life in the service of the truth— with 
Christ— Col. 1 :24), in prospect of a glorious 
resurrection to share with the Redeemer the 
work of blessing and restoring the world. 

Paul is combating and disproving the theories 
of some who were teaching that there would be no 
resurrection. He appeals to various arguments 
to prove the falsity of such teaching. He proves 
that the dead can be raised by divine power by 
the fact of Christ's resurrection (1 Cor. 15:12-18); 
and then, in the verse under consideration, 
he shows how absurd it is for those 
who by immersion have symbolized their consecration 
to death to disbelieve in a future life. 
He asks such doubters of a resurrection, Why, 
then, were you baptized for the dead, if you 
hope for nothing? Wiser and better far it 
would be, if there is to be no resurrection of 
the dead, that we should make the most of the 
present life, enjoying all its pleasures, instead 
of consecrating ourselves to death in baptism 
and then living a life of self-sacrifice, which is 
a daily dying. 

But, in this as in all things, the beauty and 
harmony only appears from the true standpoint. 
Those who regard sprinkling as baptism can 
see no meaning in the passage; neither can 
those who deny water baptism interpret it without 
giving the inference that this great, inspired 
Apostle was foolish. Neither can those who 
see the symbolic water immersion, only, appreciate 
the passage. Its beauty and force can 
only be discernible from the standpoint herein 
set forth, viz., a recognition of the death 
with Christ to self-will, to the world and to all 
worldly interests, and also of the water immersion 
as its proper, appropriate and provided 
symbol. In conclusion we quote the inspired 
record. 

Peter said: "Can any man forbid water?" 



(Acts 10:47.) Paul said: "So many of you 

as were immersed into Jesus Christ, were immersed 

into his death. ...For if we have 

been planted together in the likeness of his 

death, we shall be also in the likeness of his 

resurrection." (Rom. 6:3-5.) "Then they that 

gladly received his word were immersed,... 

and they continued steadfastly in the apostles' 

doctrine and fellowship."— Acts 2:41,42. 



page 191 

STUDIES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF 

OUR READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1545 :page 191 

PAUL CALLED TO EUROPE. 



III. QUAR., LESSON I., JULY 2, ACTS 16:6-15. 

Golden Text:— "Go ye, and teach all nations, baptizing 
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of 
the holy Spirit. "-Matt. 28:19. 

In considering the narrative of this lesson, 
the main points to be observed are the influence 
of the holy Spirit in directing the 
course of the gospel, and the evident watchfulness 
of the Apostle for such direction. 
While neither Paul nor the other apostles 
sat in idleness waiting for extraordinary or 
miraculous leadings of the Spirit of God, 
they were mindful of such indications when 
the Lord's will was so expressed. But, ordinarily, 
they expected to make use of their 
own judgment enlightened by their knowledge 
of the truth and of the objects to be 
accomplished by its promulgation. And if, 
in the use of their own best judgment, they 
made a mistake, and the Lord, by some 
special providence or vision or impressive 
dream, indicated otherwise, they carefully 



followed such leadings. 

Thus, for instance, Paul, using his judgment 
as a steward of the Lord (1 Cor. 4: 1), 
went, accompanied by Silas, through Syria, 
Silicia, Phrygia and Galatia, confirming the 
churches previously established there (Acts 15:36,40,41; 
16:1-6); and the Lord evidently 
approved their course so far, since he 
interposed no providential indication to the 
contrary, but blessed their efforts to the 
furtherance of the gospel. But, having gone 
thus far without any providential interference, 
and, in further use of his own best 
judgment, having planned to carry the gospel 
into Asia, the holy Spirit in some manner 
indicated that such was not the divine will 
at that time (verse 6); so the Apostle turned 
his course in a westerly direction, thinking 
to stop in Bithynia, a province of Asia Minor: 
but again God's power or spirit manifestly 
hindered; so he continued his journey 
to Troas, where, in a vision, the open door for 
him in Macedonia (Greece) was indicated. 

Thus, by divine direction, the course of 
the gospel was turned westward into Europe, 
instead of continuing in Asia as the 
Apostle had thought to do. And westward 
has been the general course of the Gospel 
since. Just why it was to be so, is nowhere 
stated; but in the light of the present day 
the reason is apparent. 

To the eastward lay India and China, whose 
people, bound by customs and superstitions, 
were, so to speak, confirmed in ancient error; 
while the conditions in Europe were 
quite the reverse. That was the formative 
period in Europe. The peoples of Europe 
were not old, established nations; and the 
unrest and change incident to those times, 
the rival ambitions which brought about 
great invasions and revolutions and changes 
of government, and the intermingling of the 
various peoples, produced mental activity 
and acuteness favorable to the consideration 
and appreciation of the gospel on the 
part of those who desired righteousness and 
truth. Mental lethargy, undue conservatism 
and superstition are obstacles to progress, 
and must be rudely handled before the truth 
can be received and appreciated. It is also 
noticeable that a very similar preparation 
was given to Israel, to fit them to receive 
the instructions of the Law and the prophets. 

It should be noticed, too, that God thus 
providentially sent the gospel message, not 
to the most debased and ignorant people of 



the world, but to the most civilized and best 
educated; for at that time Greece was the 
very center of learning, as Rome was the 
center of the political world. The gospel 
which God was sending, and which the 
Apostle bore, was "good tidings of great 
joy for all people;" it was a reasonable gospel, 
which would stand the light and criticism 
of the keenest philosophy, and did not 
need to seek out the degraded and superstitious 
classes or races of the world. 

While, as expressed in the golden text, it 
was a part of the divine will that ultimately 
this gospel should go to all peoples, yet it 
is clearly marked by God's providence that 
it is his will that it shall go to the less degraded 
first, and to the more degraded later. 

And the reasonableness of this is evident 
when we remember that God's plan is to 
select the Church, the Christ (Head and 
body), first, and then to use that Church as 
his agency for blessing all nations in the 
Millennial age. Hence, while our efforts 
should be to "do good unto all men as we 

R1545 : page 192 

have opportunity," it should be "especially 
to the household of faith" and to people best 
able, mentally, to appreciate the message. 

It is presumed by some, from the disagreement 
between Paul and Barnabas, recorded 
in the preceding chapter (verses 37-40), with 
reference to taking John Mark with them 
on this missionary tour, and which resulted 
in their separation, that both brethren were 
at fault, and that neither one manifested the 

R1546 : page 192 

spirit of Christ toward the other. This is 
probably based on the statement that the 
contention was sharp between them. But 
the expression does not imply that either 
one was abusive or unkind to the other; but 
rather, that both were positive in their mental 
decisions on the subject, and so expressed 
themselves and so acted. 

The difficulty, however, was on the part 
of Barnabas. Paul was the "Apostle to the 
Gentiles," the "chosen vessel" of the Lord 
to bear his name to the Gentiles; while 
Barnabas was honored in being his associate 
and helper in the work. Paul's course 
was the one that was being specially directed, 
guided and supervised by the Lord 



(notice specially chapter 16:9), and Barnabas 

should have recognized the apostleship of 

Paul, and, so far as his judgment would permit, 

he should have deferred to Paul's judgment. 

But, instead, he placed himself as the 

superior and director, and "determined to take 

with them John, whose surname was Mark." 

But Paul, remembering John's former unfaithfulness 

in forsaking them in the midst 

of the work, wisely deemed it inexpedient 

to trust him on this occasion, and objected. 

Instead of continuing in company and cooperation 

with this "chosen vessel of the 

Lord," and humbly deferring to his judgment 

in a matter where conscience was not at 

stake, or of trusting the Lord to correct the 

Apostle's mistakes, if he made them, Barnabas 

preferred to leave this favored position 

of service and to go out himself with John. 

The whole appearance favors the opinion 
of some that Barnabas let a little pride take 
root in his heart; that it was first manifested 
when he "determined" to take John with 
them, whether Paul approved the arrangement 
or not; and that it speedily grew until 
it separated him from the special privileges 
of service which he had hitherto enjoyed in 
company and co-operation with the Apostle. 
Another brother stepped into his place, and 
it is quite significant that we never hear of 
Barnabas again. He lost his opportunity, 
which, seemingly, he failed to appreciate because 
pride raised up a little root of bitterness. 

Having been joined by Timothy and Luke, 
the Apostle and Silas took ship for Macedonia, 
no longer in doubt as to the will of 
the Lord; and there they went to one of the 
chief cities— Philippi. Their first success in 
reaching hearing ears was on the Sabbath 
day, when they sought and found a company 
of worshipers at the river-side, to whom 
they preached the gospel (verses 12,13), 
some of whom, at least, received it gladly. 
And one of the specially interested ones is 
particularly mentioned as manifesting her 
love for the Lord and the truth by her works. 

There is in this account that which is indicative 
of a very proper and beautiful 
spirit on the part of both Lydia and these 
ministers of the gospel, in both the offer and 
acceptance of hospitality. Lydia evidently 
considered that it would be a great favor to 
entertain these representatives of the Lord 
—not because they wore fine clothing or 
bore titled names— but because they had 
borne to her a message from the Lord. 



Therefore she said, "If ye have judged me 
to be faithful to the Lord [and so worthy 
to entertain his ministers], come into my 
house and abide there." She wanted to 
show her love to the Lord by her works. 
It is manifest also on the part of these 
brethren, that they did not intrude, and were 
not in haste even to accept the proffered 
hospitality. They questioned the convenience 
and ability of the sister to thus entertain 
them; for it was not until she constrained or 
urged them that they accepted her invitation. 

From this lesson we learn: (1) To be careful 
observers of God's providential leadings 
while actively pressing on to do his service. 
(2) As the Apostle was left to use his judgment, 
and was only miraculously directed 
when he had no other means of judging the 
Lord's will, so we should expect with all 
God's people. And since now the Word 
of the Lord's testimony is complete, and 
helps for its study are multiplied, we should 
all the less expect miraculous interventions, 
visions and revelations from the Lord. Nevertheless, 
if we should have a striking dream 
seeming to admonish us of some neglected 
duty or opportunity, or reminding us of some 
Scripture teaching, let us profit by it thus— 
never, however, relying for counsel or faith 
upon anything but what can be proved by 
the Word of God. (3) The Lord himself exercises 
a supervision of his own work. 



page 194 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



HARVEST WORK BEFORE THE STORM. 



As the Lord is pleased to use the members of 
his body who are yet in the flesh to be his "reapers" 
and "messengers," it would seem that each 
one should be inspired with zeal, tempered with 
wisdom, to see that his part in this great work 
is faithfully done. All who are awake are beginning 
to recognize the harvest time— the 
"end of the age"— and to rejoice in the privilege 
of harvest work now under way. But all 
such have heard also "a consumption, even determined 
in the midst of the whole land." (Isa. 28:22.) 
Louder peals the thunder and darker 
grow the clouds. A great storm is near at hand. 
Though one may not know exactly when it 
will break forth, it seems reasonable to suppose 
that it cannot be more than twelve or fourteen 



years yet future. As the harvesters in the natural 
field often find it necessary to withdraw, as 
the clouds get very dark and the winds blow, 
so the reapers in this harvest may by and by be 
compelled to cease their active service. 

Some may be inclined to think that the harvest 
work is largely done; but probably the larger 
portion of this work is to be done in the coming 
six or eight years. "Pray the Lord of the 
harvest to send forth more laborers into his 
vineyard," and seek earnestly to be among them. 
True, a great work is being done. The books, 
the papers and the tracts sent out from the 
WATCH TOWER office are doing their part; but 
they need "living epistles" everywhere to introduce 
them to the people. Quite a number 
of colporteurs are now in the field, and others 
of the "wise" are working in various ways; but 
still as the fields ripen more laborers are needed. 

Another thought: Every practical tiller of 
the soil knows that just before a storm is an excellent 
time to sow certain kinds of seed, such 
as clover and timothy, which the storm will 
serve to wash down into the soil. Likewise, 
the precious seeds of truth, which may now be 
sown "broadcast" over the land, will, no 
doubt, by the storm that is coming, be settled 
down into the hearts of many; and after the 
storm is over will yield an abundant crop. 

Those experienced in the various ways of 
spreading the Truth will agree that the house to 
house canvass with MILLENNIAL DAWN is, in the 
present time, by far the most effective way of 
preaching the Truth. There are several reasons 
for this conclusion: (1) Babylon has preached 
the world "to death" with false doctrine. (2) 
Some of the people do not want to go outside 
of the churches, for fear they might hear more 
of the same kind of doctrine they are used to 
hearing inside. (3) Some do not know much 
about the truth, and are afraid. And some of the 
sincere and honest are inclined to think (rightfully) 
that there is not much Gospel preached 
by public speaking now-a-days. (4) Earnest 
truth-seekers are nearly always earnest readers, 
and though they may not have much confidence 
in ordinary books, they will keep on reading, 
hoping to find the Truth (God's plan) which 
will "satisfy their longings as nothing else can 
do." (5) A good colporteur can put into the 
hands of the people from five to six thousand 
volumes of DAWN in a year; and they will keep 
on preaching after he has gone to other fields. 
One with even a little talent for the work ought 
to dispose of three thousand volumes a year. 

In view of all these things may we not reasonably 



hope that inside of three years there 

will be at least ten times as many of the brethren 

and sisters out as actual colporteurs as there now 

are? Then let every one that is fully consecrated 

to the Lord see what he can do. Some 

can go themselves, and some can help others to 

go. But let all who can, by any reasonable 

sacrifice, seek to enter this harvest work. 

What if we do encounter some hardships! 
However, let no one think that it is a continual 
burden to be out in this work. The Master said, 
"My yoke is easy, and my burden is light: and 
this is true in whatever capacity we serve him. 

Dear brethren and sisters, let us all remember 
the words of the wise: "In the morning 
sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not 
thy hand; for thou knowest not which shall 
prosper, this or that, or whether they both shall 
be alike good." (Eccl. 11:6.) Thus we may each 
have the blessed assurance that we have done 
what we could to advance the interests of our 
Redeemer's Kingdom. S. D. ROGERS. 



R1546 : page 195 
