Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting June 14
Song 168
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Use the suggestions on page 4 (if appropriate for your territory) to demonstrate how to present the June 15 Watchtower and the June 22 Awake! In one presentation, show the publisher witnessing in business territory. Other realistic presentations may be used.
20 min: “Jehovah Helps Those Who Trust Him.”a When discussing paragraph 4, include comments on the December 1999 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 4, paragraphs 8-9, and the Ministry School book, page 67, paragraph 2.
15 min: Why Avoid the Abuse of Drugs? Audience discussion based on the Reasoning book, pages 106-9. The “recreational” use of drugs is common. Many insist that such use of drugs is not harmful; some even advocate legalization. Discuss how we might reason with such ones. Include comments in box on page 10 of November 8, 1999, Awake!
Song 179 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 21
Song 29
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: “The Angels Are Helping Us.”b Invite audience to comment on cited scriptures as time permits.
20 min: The Wisdom From Above Is Reasonable. (Jas. 3:17) Talk and audience discussion based on the Ministry School book, pages 251-2. What does it mean to be reasonable? Why is it important in our ministry? What can we learn from the apostle Paul’s example? How can publishers take into consideration the background of people in the local territory? How can we help Bible students to display reasonableness? Arrange in advance for one or two to relate experiences that show the benefits of a reasonable approach.
Song 53 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 28
Song 139
12 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for June. Using the suggestions on page 4 (if appropriate for your territory), demonstrate how to present the July 1 Watchtower and the July 8 Awake! In each case, have the publisher make a brief, friendly comment at the outset. Mention that doing so can help to put the householder at ease.
15 min: Local needs.
18 min: “The Congregation Book Study​—Why We Need It.”c Use the questions that are provided. Include comments on the article “Assist Your Congregation Book Study Overseer,” which appeared on page 1 of the November 2002 Our Kingdom Ministry.
Song 20 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 5
Song 3
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: What Will You Say? Talk and audience discussion. During July and August, we will be offering the Knowledge book and Require brochure. Review a few of the suggested presentations from the January 2002 Our Kingdom Ministry insert. Demonstrate one of the suggested presentations in the box “The Direct Approach” on page 6, including a brief consideration of one paragraph. Encourage all to be prepared to demonstrate our offer of a Bible study whenever the opportunity presents itself.
20 min: What Children Need From Parents. Talk and audience discussion based on Learn From the Great Teacher, pages 6-7. It is vital for children to learn the Bible principles governing true worship and to understand the key role played by parents in the training process. Discuss the suggestions made for studying the book. Invite parents to comment on how they have made use of the study aid. Have one or two children tell why they appreciate this publication.
Song 65 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

