Are You Looking for a Job?
NOT since the Great Depression have so many people been looking for a job. In West Germany, France, Australia, Denmark, Canada, Japan​—practically everywhere—​startling surges in unemployment have occurred. Only 12 million of an Indonesian work force of 44 million are said to be fully employed. Some 7.5 million Americans are looking for work.
Are you one of the increasing millions of unemployed?
In many industrialized countries temporary provisions are made for the jobless. In the U.S. alone, more than 6.3 million persons have been drawing unemployment benefits. But these payments last only a few months, or perhaps a year.
As their unemployment benefits run out, many thousands of jobless are now becoming desperate. In a letter to the editor published in the New York Times, one unemployed man wrote: “Every night for the past four months at 4 A.M. I have been waking up in a cold sweat with my stomach in knots. After looking into my wife’s sleeping face for an hour, I manage to fall asleep.”
Those in desperate need in the U.S. may be eligible for welfare assistance. But fear exists that, with so many receiving unemployment and welfare assistance, government funds for such programs may run out. Already nearly a million persons in New York city alone are on welfare, and the number is expected to increase dramatically in the next year.
To cope with the urgent need for jobs, the U.S. government recently created a public service employment program. But its inadequacy was illustrated in Atlanta, Georgia, where some 3,000 jobless lined up, many before dawn, to apply for 225 public service jobs. When a single door was opened at 8:15 a.m., the surging crowd smashed two plate-glass doors, and several persons required medical attention. Similar desperate rushes for few available jobs occurred in other cities.
Are there any jobs to be found?
Jobs Available, But—
Unemployment in New York city is even higher than in the nation as a whole. Yet many jobs there were going begging. One of the city’s largest employment agencies in January was even offering premiums such as radios, watches and hair dryers to anyone recommending an applicant who eventually was placed in a job by the agency. Why do available jobs go unfilled?
One reason is that the jobs do not pay enough. The owner of an employment agency, who said that he had many jobs but no takers, explained: “People tell me, ‘How can you live on this kind of money? I get more on unemployment insurance and I don’t have to pay carfare and buy lunches.’” However, when unemployment benefits start running out, people will be forced to take such lower-paying jobs and adjust their life-style accordingly.
Pointing to another reason why certain jobs go begging, a youth in Boise, Idaho, said: “People just don’t want them. Most of them are hard manual jobs.” Also, some persons consider the available jobs demeaning, beneath their dignity.
Perhaps the major reason, though, that jobs go unfilled is that applicants do not qualify for them. A worker at a New York employment placement center noted that there were openings for skilled machinists, auto-body repairmen, auto mechanics, furniture finishers, glaziers and screw-machine operators. Another placement center representative said: “There are still shortages of secretaries, stenographers and bookkeepers.”
However, simply hearing that jobs are available may be of little comfort if you are having trouble finding one. What can you do?
Be Willing to Learn, Be Flexible
The solution may be to learn another trade or skill. If the one for which you have been trained is affected, why not train to do another type of work?
There may be some course that you can take that will equip you for jobs that are available. Or the training may be received in another way, as a California man explains: “Usually persons in a certain trade don’t know anything else. However, friends can teach them their own trade. Thus those in janitorial work can teach ones who know only the construction trade and help them to earn enough to feed their families.” Such loving assistance is being given by many persons today who are truly interested in the welfare of their friends.
There is need, also, for those looking for work to be flexible, and to use initiative. What needs do persons have in your community? Can you offer a service that can fill those needs? This is something to consider, as a married couple in California observed:
“We have found that when some are saying that work is hard to find, or that there just isn’t any, they are generally referring to one type of work. We have found that we can find work to support our family by making ourselves available for any type of handyman work, such as painting, cleaning indoors and out, janitorial work, landscaping, and so forth.”
If your job hunting has not been successful in your own community, what about elsewhere? When a family man was laid off his job last November in Rapid City, South Dakota, he immediately applied at the state employment office. But he did not sit at home and wait for them to call. He returned, checking to see if they were considering his application. An opening was located in Pierre, South Dakota, over 150 miles away. What should he do?
The man, one of Jehovah’s witnesses, asked a local Christian elder: “Is there a congregation in Pierre?” He learned that there was a small one, and that it would appreciate help. Next the man discussed the matter with his wife. Then he traveled to Pierre, applied for the job and was hired.
How to Find Jobs
A key to finding a job is to keep looking. Regularly check the help-wanted ads in your local newspaper, and follow up prospects promptly. Also, visit employment agencies often. A California employment official advised: “The job hunter should be revisiting both public and private employment agencies so . . . often that the people there are sick of his face. Otherwise there’s little chance your name would even be pulled for an opening.”
But particularly, get the word around that you are looking for a job​—to relatives, friends, business acquaintances, everyone you can think of that may be of help. They may know of openings in the firms where they work or with other companies, or have acquaintances who know of job prospects. Check out any leads you get. Try to contact the person who is in position to hire you. Usually this is the best way to get a job. Why?
Because most job vacancies never get listed through traditional sources of information, such as classified ads or employment agencies. In fact, studies indicate that about 80 percent of all job openings are in the so-called “hidden job market.” So search out this “market.” Welcome any opportunity for a job interview that you can get. Then prepare for it carefully.
Learn beforehand as much as you possibly can about the business or company with which you seek employment. Determine how your abilities and skills can best be used in its operation. Then let these be known. Be prepared to show your prospective employer the value of your assets to his operation. Your knowledge of the company and interest in its operation will no doubt impress him, and perhaps get you a job.
Remember, you are trying to sell something​—yourself, your services. And so, besides your general intelligence and special aptitudes, your personal appearance also means a lot. The fact is, a person is not necessarily hired because he is the best qualified but because the employer likes the way he looks and what his attitudes are. So give attention to this.
Get sufficient sleep so that you are rested, alert and friendly when appearing for an interview. Your clothing, too, is important. It should be neat and clean. A conservative style of dress is usually best, rather than one that may detract in some way. Be confident, yet, at the same time, avoid a superior, know-it-all attitude.
During the interview, speak distinctly, directly and slowly. Do not look down or mumble, and do not chew gum. Be prepared to answer such questions as, Why are you out of work? Were you fired? Why? Be courteous and cooperative at all times.
Maintain Optimism, Hope
Repeated disappointments in your job search can be disheartening. But do not give up. Keep searching. The more contacts you make, the better chance you have of success.
While job hunting, many persons have also found it wise to avail themselves of all provisions to which they may be entitled, such as unemployment insurance or other benefits. “I made the mistake of waiting five months to obtain food stamps,” noted a jobless Utah man. “We should not have allowed pride to prevent us from taking advantage of this government service that we have paid for through taxes.”
True, times are difficult. But there is sound reason for optimism, even should unemployment grow much worse. For these critical times are evidence that soon now God will wipe out this unjust system and usher in his righteous new one. This hope can sustain us.​—2 Tim. 3:1-5; 2 Pet. 3:13.
“Have you beheld a man skillful in his work? Before kings is where he will station himself; he will not station himself before commonplace men.”​—Prov. 22:29.

