The “Opium War”​—A Lesson for Our Day
TAKING an honest look at the past often helps us better to understand the present. This is certainly the case with many of today’s world events.
There are broad trends in our time that are the direct result of past history. Among the many examples of such history that could be noted is the “Opium War,” fought in China more than a century ago.
How are events like that connected with our time? To understand this, let us first note just what the flow of world events is now.
World events are causing much concern to the leading nations of what is called “Christendom.” Of course, for decades several Communist nations, led by the Soviet Union, have presented a growing challenge to the West. But another trend has also been taking place.
In various parts of Asia, Africa and even Latin America now, many leaders and their peoples are displaying a growing opposition to the economic, political and religious practices of Western nations. Invariably, the actions of these lesser developed lands have the support of Communist China.
For example, many of them with valuable natural resources are now demanding much higher prices for their raw materials​—usually with Chinese backing. This works to the disadvantage of Western industrial lands.
Also, much of the West’s “culture” is being rejected in other countries. This is especially true of the religions represented by Christendom, her churches. Missionaries of such churches are often expelled from developing nations, or at least restricted in their activities. In China this has been almost total.
The trend against the interests of Western nations can also be observed within the United Nations. More and more of its members are speaking, and voting, against the domination previously exercised by Western countries. Here, too, Communist China backs this growing majority of opposing countries.
This trend has prompted deep concern by the United States and various European lands.
Why Is It Happening?
Why this turn of events, even within the ranks of the United Nations? Why have the major powers of Christendom lost so much influence?
Basically, it is as the Bible principle says: ‘You reap what you sow.’ (Gal. 6:7; Job 4:8) It is the consequence of alienating, not people and leaders only, but, more importantly, God Almighty himself.
Nor is the trend of world affairs something that has happened suddenly. It has been building up for a long time. For several hundred years before World War II, the nations of Christendom carved up most of Asia, Africa and Latin America. Although those places already had large native populations with their own cultures, they were forcibly subjected to the rule and culture of their conquerors.
True, the European nations did some good in those lands. But they also did much bad, often exploiting the native peoples and their resources. So, most of those people, in time, came to regard Europeans as undesirable outsiders.
Since World War II especially, many of those lands have gained independence. And they remember the humiliations of the past. Most have resolved to be masters of their own destinies instead of being colonies to European powers.
Hence, today we see 138 nations, the largest number ever, represented in the United Nations. Most of them are fiercely independent and demand control over their own resources, culture and politics.
An Example
China is an example of how foreign domination has soured various nations against Christendom. For thousands of years, China had its own culture. It developed its own economic and political systems. At times China reached a degree of civilization unsurpassed by any other nation during the same period.
The rule of China’s imperial dynasties lasted for centuries. At times their rule became ironfisted and corrupt, causing great suffering. In any event, the Chinese largely kept to themselves. Thus, until the last two centuries China had very little contact with the outside world, and almost none with Western nations.
But then, about two hundred years ago, Western powers began their penetration of China. These countries, principally those of Europe, exerted growing pressure to try to gain a foothold in China during the 1700’s. They gained that foothold, so that by the 1800’s their influence was a serious problem to the Chinese. The Encyclopædia Britannica states:
“Under regimes that often proved to be inefficient and corrupt, [China] remained helpless as foreign powers nibbled at its territory and resources and as its humiliated people struggled for bare subsistence.
“Although it was called an ‘independent country,’ its status and condition resembled that of a foreign colony.”
At first, Western penetration amounted to only a trading post established by Great Britain in Canton in 1715. Later, Britain was joined there by French, Dutch and American traders.
Western merchants wanted the riches of China. They also wanted to sell European products to the Chinese. In this way, the traders would have the money to purchase China’s goods. But, generally, China expressed little interest in Western goods. In a letter to Britain’s King George III, the Chinese Manchu emperor in the late 1700’s is said to have remarked:
“As your Ambassador can see for himself, we possess all things. I set no value on objects strange or ingenious, and have no use for your country’s manufactures.”
But then the Western traders found something they could sell to the Chinese: opium, a narcotic drug. It soon came to be one of the chief articles sent into China.
Seeing the bad effect that opium had on her people, China’s government banned its importation. While this made the drug illegal, it did not stop the traffic. Many traders began smuggling the opium into China, since they found it very profitable.
By 1839 the volume of opium being smuggled into China had increased vastly. What had once been a volume of only a few tons of opium a year now became a flood of several thousand tons a year. Who was doing this illegal importing? The book A History of the Far East in Modern Times states:
“The value of the opium imported alone exceed[ed] that of all of the commodities exported. Most of the opium came from India, some from Persia, and, toward the last, some Turkish opium was imported by the Americans.
“All of the nationalities represented at Canton . . . participated in the traffic, although here as in the general trade the English occupied a leading position.”
This publication adds: “It may be pointed out here that opium smoking was not a natural vice of the Chinese, but one that had been introduced into the country. . . . The foreign responsibility for the fostering of opium smoking by the Chinese cannot be overlooked, nor should it be minimized.”
It is not difficult to see why the Chinese regarded Westerners as barbarians. While the Europeans claimed that they were introducing a superior culture into China, along with missionaries of their churches, the Chinese viewed such as foreign conquerors.
All the events that had already taken place were enough to sour their Oriental mind against the nations of Christendom and their systems of culture, economics, politics and religion. Yet, there was more to come​—much more.
War Declared
The Chinese government now took further steps to try to halt this illegal opium traffic. They dispatched troops against the foreign merchants. Millions of dollars’ worth of opium was seized from British and other traders, and various restrictive measures were imposed on the foreigners.
These steps angered the traders, especially the British. They could see their very profitable opium trade, and others, being lost. Hence, in 1839 one of history’s most bizarre wars began. Britain declared war on China, demanding the right to sell opium to the Chinese people. Other privileges were demanded as well.
The war went badly for China. She was not equipped to defend herself against the weapons of the British. Hence, Britain easily won the “Opium War.” It ended in 1842 with the signing of the Treaty of Nanking.
The treaty was the first one to be imposed by force on China. But it was not the last. It started a chain of what the Chinese call the “unequal treaties.”
The Treaty of Nanking gave Britain trading rights at various Chinese ports. It gave to Britain the territory of Hong Kong, which became a British colony. China was also forced to pay Britain the cost of fighting the war. It even had to pay back the value of opium seized from the British.
Other European nations, and the United States, soon demanded concessions. The Chinese were powerless to resist. More warfare against China by outside nations led to new treaties. More ports and more privileges were given up: Britain added Kowloon to Hong Kong; Russia received territory to the north; other nations carved out their own areas of privilege.
Thus, Chinese sovereignty over its own land, cities and peoples was diminished. One treaty provided that the taxes that China could collect from foreigners on their trade would be very small, and could not be increased except by the consent of the foreign power involved, which was not very likely to be given. Also, there was a loss of judicial authority. For instance, if an American citizen committed a crime against a Chinese, he could be punished only by American authorities.
In all of this, what was the attitude of the missionaries and other representatives of Christendom’s churches? In the Roman Catholic magazine America, published by Jesuits, it is admitted that the churches failed the Chinese people. It spoke of their “mistaken alliance, in the missionary past, with the imperialist powers and their gunboat diplomacy, and unequal treaty rights.” It concluded: “The failure of the China mission has been in large part the responsibility of the missionaries and/​or Western Christians themselves.” Yes, the churches often had dealt arrogantly with China, and had supported the abuses of Western power.
More Losses
It is little wonder that The World Book Encyclopedia comments as follows regarding China’s attitude toward foreigners:
“By the 1890’s, many Chinese violently disliked all non-Chinese persons and nations, blaming them for the unequal treaties. Chinese rebels formed secret societies and pledged to end Western influence in China. These societies gained much support among the Chinese people.”
In 1899 these societies began a violent campaign against Westerners. This campaign also was directed against Chinese who had been converted to the churches of Christendom. It was known as the “Boxer Rebellion,” since, it is said, one of the leading secret societies, the Boxers, practiced ceremonial exercise that resembled shadowboxing.
However, the next year an international army, including American troops, moved in and crushed the “rebellion.” Heavy penalties were imposed on China. For example, in the heart of Peking a huge section was confiscated for use by foreign legations. No Chinese had the right to live there. The area was to be permanently garrisoned by foreign troops. In addition, China had to pay thirteen foreign countries hundreds of millions of dollars in penalties.
A Bitter Experience
To a large degree, what happened to China as a result of the “Opium War” and related events shaped the direction that China has taken in modern times. The Chinese hostility against the West today is directly related to the way Christendom behaved toward her in past times.
Many of the other radical forces now growing in strength and number within the United Nations organization are similar examples to Christendom of the truthfulness of the Biblical principle that ‘you reap what you sow.’ Such nations are taking a road of political and economic development that is unfavorable to Christendom.
Also, the moral and religious values coming from the West and its churches are largely rejected, linked inseparably in the minds of many people in those nations with the bitter experience of colonialism. As Creighton Lacy says in Christianity amid Rising Men and Nations:
“The whole heritage of Western colonialism has suddenly risen up to smite its perpetrators as nationalistic self-consciousness has burgeoned in Africa, Asia, and Latin America.
“As a result there is a widespread tendency to separate the technical advantages of Western culture . . . from the spiritual and ideological factors which determine ‘a way of life.’ . . .
“It is widely held that Western social and moral principles​—and thus the religious faith in which they are rooted—​are not superior to those of other societies. In fact, they may be held to be inferior.”
Christendom has indeed alienated hundreds of millions of people. Sadly, this has caused them to turn away from Christianity. They do not realize that what Christendom represents is not true Christianity at all but is hypocritical, detestable to God. In the case of China, this alienation has caused a nation of 800,000,000 people to turn against Christianity.
For all of this, Christendom will have to answer to God. And the clear evidence in fulfillment of Bible prophecy as seen in today’s world events shows that the time is fast approaching when God will demand that accounting.​—Matt. 7:15-23; Revelation, chap. 17.

