Jehovah Imparts Power
1 What is your impression of the apostle Paul? As we read the book of Acts, we appreciate how industrious he was in Jehovah’s service. How did Paul accomplish all that he did? He said: “For all things I have the strength by virtue of him who imparts power to me.” (Phil. 4:13) We too can benefit from the power Jehovah imparts. How? By taking advantage of six provisions that he makes for us to be revitalized and strengthened spiritually.
2 God’s Word: Just as we must eat food to maintain our physical strength, we must nourish ourselves with God’s Word in order to stay alive spiritually. (Matt. 4:4) The Bible provides the power to sustain us. To maintain our zeal and enthusiasm for the truth, we need to engage in meaningful personal study and meditation, daily if possible.​—Ps. 1:2, 3.
3 Prayer: It is important to draw close to Jehovah, particularly during times of special need. By means of his spirit, he gives energizing power to those asking him for it in prayer. (Luke 11:13; Eph. 3:16) The Scriptures encourage us to “persevere in prayer.” (Rom. 12:12) Do you do that?
4 The Congregation: We also draw strength and encouragement from congregation meetings and from the warm association that we enjoy there with our brothers and sisters. (Heb. 10:24, 25) When we are troubled, they help to raise us up and lovingly assist us.​—Prov. 17:17; Eccl. 4:10.
5 The Field Ministry: Regular participation in the ministry helps us keep focused on the Kingdom and its blessings. Our spirits are lifted when we help others learn about Jehovah. (Acts 20:35) Not all of us can move to serve where the need is greater or share in the full-time service, but we can in other ways have a meaningful share in the ministry.​—Heb. 6:10-12.
6 Christian Overseers: We benefit from the encouragement and the assistance that the elders provide. Jehovah has assigned them to shepherd the flock of God in their care. (1 Pet. 5:2) Traveling overseers build up the congregations they serve, even as Paul did in his day.​—Rom. 1:11, 12.
7 Examples of Faithful Ones: It is invigorating to consider the positive examples of faithful fellow workers, both ancient and modern. (Heb. 12:1) When you need to be revitalized, why not read one of the encouraging life stories in our magazines, an upbuilding report in the Yearbook, or some of the exciting accounts of the modern-day history of Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Proclaimers book?
8 One brother, now in his mid-90’s, accepted the truth as a young lad. While he was still a youngster, his faith was put to the test. First of all, some who had been actively associated with the congregation abandoned Jehovah’s organization. Then there was the house-to-house work, which he found difficult. Nevertheless, he always relied on Jehovah. Soon he was enjoying the ministry. And today? In spite of failing health, he is still a member of the Brooklyn Bethel family, serving on the Governing Body. He has no regrets about sticking to Jehovah’s organization.
9 A sister who is a member of the Bethel family in Britain was baptized when she was 13. She began pioneering with her brother the next year, and the year after that, her father was imprisoned because of his neutrality during World War II. She kept looking to Jehovah for power, and she continued serving the true God. In time, she married a faithful brother, and together they kept doing Jehovah’s will. After 35 years of marriage, her husband died suddenly. Again she drew strength from Jehovah, and she has kept going to this day, looking forward to serving forever as a member of Jehovah’s earthly family.
10 Jehovah assists and invigorates his faithful servants. “He is giving to the tired one power; and to the one without dynamic energy he makes full might abound.” We can tap into this limitless source of power by taking advantage of all six provisions mentioned above. Remember: “Those who are hoping in Jehovah will regain power. . . . They will run and not grow weary; they will walk and not tire out.” (Isa. 40:29-31) Paul leaned heavily upon Jehovah for strength, and so must we.

