Make Known Jehovah’s Name and Dealings
1 “Give thanks to Jehovah, call upon his name, make known among the peoples his dealings. . . . Let the heart of those seeking Jehovah rejoice.” (Ps. 105:1, 3) The psalmist who penned those words found great personal joy in telling others about Jehovah and his “dealings.” What dealings? Undoubtedly those associated with God’s glorious kingship and with “the good news of salvation by him.”​—Ps. 96:2, 3; 145:11, 12.
2 As we approach the 2001 Memorial season, we have many reasons to rejoice about Jehovah’s dealings with us. How so? The Lord’s Evening Meal is, without question, the year’s greatest observance for all true Christians. There is no other occasion like it in regard to importance, purpose, or procedure. This is a time for all of us to remember what Jehovah and Jesus have done to provide the means for our salvation. No wonder that during the Memorial season, we naturally expect to see a surge of activity in the field service, as we make known “the good news of salvation”!
3 Will You Auxiliary Pioneer? Last April a record number of 153,774 enrolled as auxiliary pioneers. This year, can we make March and April special months of increased activity in the ministry? March has five Saturdays, and April has five Sundays. By planning full service days on the weekends, many publishers who work full-time have found that auxiliary pioneering is within their reach. To meet the requirement of 50 hours a month, an auxiliary pioneer needs to average about 12 hours per week. Consider carefully the suggested schedules in the box on page 4. Will one of these fit your circumstances? If not, perhaps you can tailor your own schedule to auxiliary pioneer this March and April.
4 The elders should start now to build enthusiasm and support for increased service activity. Last year in one congregation where all the elders and ministerial servants enrolled as auxiliary pioneers, 64 of the 121 publishers pioneered in April! The congregation also delighted in seeing six unbaptized publishers begin reporting in March and April. Indeed, there is no better time for children and new ones to ask the elders if they qualify to begin sharing in the public witnessing activity.
5 Extra Effort Brings Blessings: Congregations that set special goals and put forth extra effort enjoy many blessings. Some congregations may give particular emphasis to covering seldom-worked territory, concentrating on alternative forms of witnessing, or highlighting telephone witnessing​—an effective means for contacting not-at-homes and residents who are inaccessible.
6 Should poor health or being up in age necessarily prevent anyone from being involved as much as possible in the service? Not in all cases. For example, an 86-year-old sister who has cancer auxiliary pioneered in April in spite of swelling in her legs. Telephone witnessing made it possible for her to have a full share in the service, increasing her praise to Jehovah. This had a stimulating effect on both her and the congregation.
7 Prepare Well for the Memorial: This year the Memorial falls on April 8. Since this is a Sunday, it should be possible for more to attend. We may have the largest attendance ever if we do our part by (1) being in attendance ourselves and (2) inviting others to join us at the Memorial. Whom should we invite?
8 Look through your personal field service records for the names of those who have shown some interest in the truth, even though you may not be calling on them regularly. Two or three weeks prior to the Memorial, concentrate on visiting all of these with the Memorial invitation. If your circumstances permit, offer to provide transportation for those who would like to attend.
9 In some congregations, not all of the printed Memorial invitations are used. Congregation secretaries should be sure to make the invitations available in ample time for all to be distributed. You may want to type or neatly print the time and location for the Memorial on the bottom of the invitation. Or you may include a handbill showing the Kingdom Hall address if that is where your Memorial will be held. As a reminder, in most instances Memorial invitations should be handed personally to the householder.
10 Remember Inactive Ones: It is a cause for rejoicing when a Bible student dedicates himself to Jehovah and symbolizes this by water immersion. Each year, though, some in our midst cease to associate with us, and they stop telling others about Jehovah’s name and dealings. We have good reason for concern. Although most inactive ones have not abandoned the truth, they may have stopped preaching because of discouragement, personal problems, or other anxieties of life. (Matt. 13:20-22) Those who are in a spiritually weakened condition need help to return to the congregation before they get swallowed up by Satan’s system. (1 Pet. 5:8) This Memorial season we want to make a special effort to help all qualified inactive ones get involved again in preaching the good news.
11 The congregation secretary should alert the book study conductors of any in their group who are inactive. The Congregation Service Committee will take the lead in arranging for shepherding calls to be made on all inactive ones. If it is determined that the individual would benefit from a personal Bible study, the service overseer will arrange for assistance, after consulting with other members of the service committee as to who would be best suited to conduct the study. Although it may not be necessary to have the study for a prolonged period of time, the one assigned to conduct it may report the time, return visits, and Bible study.
12 Last April a sister who was working from house to house offered the magazines to a young man on the street. He revealed that his wife was an inactive Witness. He asked where the Kingdom Hall was located and invited the sister to visit him and his wife. As a result, the couple attended the next meeting and agreed to a Bible study.
13 Get Ready for Increased Activity! The psalmist who declared that we should make known Jehovah’s name and dealings added: “Sing to him, make melody to him, concern yourselves with all his wonderful works. Make your boast in his holy name.” (Ps. 105:2, 3) Let us demonstrate our concern for Jehovah’s great name and his “wonderful works” by increasing our efforts in the ministry, making this the greatest Memorial season ever!
[Box on page 4]
Various Ways to Schedule 12 Hours per Week to Auxiliary Pioneer
Day                Hours
Monday        1    2    −    −
Tuesday       1    −    3    −
Wednesday     1    2    −    5
Thursday      1    −    3    −
Friday        1    2    −    −
Saturday      5    4    3    5
Sunday        2    2    3    2
Total:       12   12   12   12
Will one of these schedules work for you? If not, why not make your own schedule?

