Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting February 12
Song 6
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. The video The Bible​—Mankind’s Oldest Modern Book will be discussed at the Service Meeting the week of February 26. The discussion will be based on the questions provided on page 7 of this issue of Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: “Glorify Jehovah by Fine Works.”a Include comments from the Proclaimers book, page 187, paragraphs 2-3.
20 min: “How to Persuade Others.” A discussion between a Congregation Book Study conductor and a pioneer or an effective publisher, based on the article as well as selected points in the May 15, 1998, Watchtower, pages 21-3. Analyze the box on page 23, “Reaching Your Student’s Heart.” After isolating a false religious belief common in the local territory, discuss how to convince a person of what the Bible says on the subject.
Song 208 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 19
Song 221
 8 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
15 min: Local needs.
22 min: “Make Known Jehovah’s Name and Dealings.”b Elder reviews special plans being made locally for increased activity in March and April, including efforts to encourage as many as possible to auxiliary pioneer. Have some who pioneered last April tell of the satisfaction that doing so brought them. Focus on helping every qualified inactive publisher rejoin us in the service as well as on assisting children and other Bible students to qualify as unbaptized publishers.​—See the November 2000 Our Kingdom Ministry Question Box.
Song 27 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 26
Song 48
 8 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for February.
12 min: Suggested Presentations for the Knowledge Book. Do you have a presentation in mind for offering the Knowledge book in March? If you look at the back pages of past issues of Our Kingdom Ministry, you will find suggestions for the initial call, many of which have follow-up ideas for the return visit. Review two or three of these suggested presentations. (December 1995; March, June, November 1996; June 1997; March 1998) Demonstrate the two suggestions in the November 1996 issue for using a direct approach in starting Bible studies. Encourage everyone to put forth a special effort to start new studies.
25 min: “Building Appreciation for The Bible​—Mankind’s Oldest Modern Book.” Audience discussion using the questions provided on page 7. Highlight the fact that with over 100 million copies in whole or in part in 37 languages, the New World Translation is one of the most widely distributed Bibles. In April we will review the third video in this series, The Bible​—Its Power in Your Life.
Song 64 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 5
Song 81
 5 min: Local announcements.
18 min: “Jehovah Imparts Power.”c Draw comments from the audience on how the scriptures apply.
22 min: “Successful Telephone Witnessing.”d To be handled by the service overseer. Include the encouragement in the December 15, 1999, Watchtower, page 23, paragraph 17. Review the box “What Do You Say to an Answering Machine?” in the November 2000 Our Kingdom Ministry. Explain what territories have been made up for telephone witnessing. Have a few brief experiences related that show success in this work locally.
Song 108 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

