Our Readers Ask . . .
Will the Earth Always Produce Enough to Sustain Life?
▪ Our beautiful planet Earth has tremendous capacity for sustaining life. Yet, with the growing population and the alarming rate at which earth’s abundant resources are being gobbled up, you might wonder: ‘Could the unthinkable really happen? Will there always be enough food and resources?’
Reflecting on this question, we can be reassured by a promise God made to the human family more than 4,000 years ago: “For all the days the earth continues, seed sowing and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night, will never cease.” (Genesis 8:22) Thus, just as surely as we know that the sun will shine each day, we can be confident that the earth will never cease to produce what is needed to sustain life.
In a 2004 report entitled “Can the Planet Feed Us?” Alex Kirby, an environment correspondent, stated: “The world does produce enough to feed everyone. But the food is often in the wrong place, or unaffordable, or can’t be stored long enough. So making sure everyone has enough to eat is more about politics than science.” With proper oversight of the earth and efficient management of its resources, there should be no reason to fear a shortage. For example, in the days of ancient Israel, God gave clear direction regarding proper use of the land. As recorded at Leviticus 25:4, God told the Israelites: “In the seventh year there should occur a sabbath of complete rest for the land . . . Your field you must not sow with seed.” Although they were not to work the land every seventh year, God promised he would see to it that the people would rejoice over a bounty of good things and not be plagued with worry over a potential shortage.—Leviticus 26:3-5.
Even though some sincere efforts are being made today to reverse the damage to earth and its resources, many are concerned that such efforts are too little too late. The only permanent solution is found at Revelation 11:18. There the Bible states that Jehovah will “bring to ruin those ruining the earth.” Jehovah will not only eliminate the mismanagement of the earth and its resources but also ensure that the earth will produce abundantly for all its inhabitants. All obstinate disregard for God’s purpose and all exploitation of the earth for selfish personal advantage will be put to a stop. On the other hand, those who willingly support Jehovah’s rulership will experience the reality of the words found at Psalm 72:16: “There will come to be plenty of grain on the earth; on the top of the mountains there will be an overflow.”
In his infinite love and wisdom, Jehovah has purposed that mankind will live in and care for their home—a paradise earth. (Genesis 1:28) Under his rulership, obedient mankind will learn to utilize natural resources wisely, without depleting earth’s abundant storehouse. How grateful we are for such a loving Provider, who will satisfy the desire of every living thing!—Psalm 145:16.
[Blurb on page 22]
“Making sure everyone has enough to eat is more about politics than science”

