Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you should recognize these important points.
● What are the scrolls from which people will be judged during the 1,000-year reign of Christ?
They are the law books of Jehovah, setting forth his will for all people on earth during Christ’s millennial reign. People will be judged on the basis of the way they obey what is written in them.—P. 523.
● What did Jesus mean when he said that Jerusalem would be trampled upon “until the appointed times of the nations are fulfilled”?
He meant that the royal line of King David, which ruled from Jerusalem, would be kept low, inoperative, from 607 B.C.E. until he, Jesus, the permanent heir of David, would be enthroned as king in heavenly Jerusalem in 1914 C.E.—Pp. 612, 613, 616.
● What is the river of water mentioned at Revelation 22:1, 2, and when does it begin to flow?
The symbolic river pictures the entire provision Jehovah makes for obedient mankind to have everlasting life through Jesus Christ. Its flowing begins after Armageddon and the abyssing of Satan.—P. 636.
● How can it be said at Psalm 68:11 that “the women telling the good news are a large army”?
In ancient times Israelite women declared the good news of military victory over God’s enemies with dance, song and instrumental music. A great many modern-day women are declaring the good news of Jehovah’s kingdom and his deeds in his victorious march to Armageddon.—Pp. 652, 653, 655.
● What is depicted by the “fish” taken by the dragnet in Jesus’ prophecy at Matthew 13:47-50?
The symbolic fish that are sorted out and kept are those taken from mankind to reign with Christ in the kingdom of the heavens. The unsuitable fish that are thrown away are those Christians who prove unfaithful to the heavenly calling and the millions of people who stay in Christendom.—Pp. 685-687.
● In what sense do Jehovah’s witnesses advocate the saving of mankind by blood?
Not by medical blood transfusions, but by God’s way of using it, which is the sacrificial use of Jesus’ blood for the redemption of the world of mankind.—P. 726.
● With whom in modern times can the Gibeonites be compared?
With the “great crowd” who are full of faith that the Greater Joshua, Jesus Christ, can protect them through Armageddon.—P. 628.
● Why can it be said that the prophecy at Matthew 24:14 about the worldwide ‘preaching’ of the good news of the Kingdom does not include teaching?
The Greek word translated “to preach” means to make proclamation as a herald. So Jesus prophesied that the good news of the Kingdom’s establishment would be heralded world wide in our day. Teaching work is also being done but this is not what is referred to in this text.—Pp. 756-758.

