A Circuit Assembly to Help Us Safeguard Our Spirituality
 1. What is one provision from Jehovah to help us fulfill our commission to spread the good news?
1 Jehovah generously provides the information, training, and encouragement we need to share in the divine commission to spread the good news. (Matt. 24:14; 2 Tim. 4:17) Our annual circuit assembly is one such provision. A new program for the 2010 service year will develop the theme “Safeguard Your Spirituality,” based on Romans 8:5 and Jude 17-19. It is scheduled to begin the week of August 31, 2009.
 2. (a) In what ways will the circuit assembly be beneficial to us? (b) How have past circuit assemblies helped you in the ministry?
2 How Beneficial: The program will alert us to dangers, such as distractions that threaten to consume our time and divert our attention from what is truly important. We will learn how to counteract the spirit of permissiveness, and we will consider what characterizes a spiritual person. The Sunday symposium will show how individuals and family groups can take steps to strengthen their spirituality in the face of increasing pressures and serious tests of faith. The program will help us to safeguard our hearts, maintain our spiritual health, and keep clearly in mind the grand blessings that await those who safeguard their spirituality.
 3. When is your next circuit assembly, and what should be your resolve?
3 As soon as you learn when and where your next circuit assembly will be held, make plans to be present and attentive for all sessions both days. Be assured, Jehovah blesses the hands of the diligent one.​—Prov. 21:5.
 4. What are we sure to receive at our upcoming circuit assembly?
4 Indeed, Jehovah is the Provider of this good gift. The program prepared by the faithful slave class will be just what we need to carry on as Christian ministers. We are grateful to Jehovah for all his loving provisions helping us to “hold fast the public declaration of our hope without wavering.”​—Heb. 10:23-25; Jas. 1:17.

