Praise Jehovah Each Day
 1. What are God’s servants motivated to do, and why?
1 King David expressed his determination to praise Jehovah “all day long,” even to time indefinite. (Ps. 145:2, 7, 21) We too have good reason to praise Jehovah each day.​—Ps. 37:10; 145:14, 18; 2 Pet. 3:13.
 2. How may families praise Jehovah each day?
2 In Our Home: We have upbuilding printed material for meaningful spiritual discussions when considering the daily text, when enjoying Family Worship, and when preparing for congregation meetings. Many families make a practice of being together for at least one meal each day. That allows for unhurried, relaxed conversation and offers opportunities to praise Jehovah. Such informal discussions initiated by parents can be an important aid in bringing up their children in “the discipline and mental-regulating of Jehovah.”​—Eph. 6:4; Deut. 6:5-7.
 3. What opportunities do we have when with our brothers?
3 With Our Brothers: When in field service or at congregation meetings, we have excellent opportunities to praise Jehovah alongside fellow believers. (Prov. 15:30; Phil. 4:8; Heb. 13:15) Since we hold our love for Jehovah in common, it should be easy to include sincere expressions of appreciation for Jehovah’s goodness when talking with one another.​—Ps. 106:1.
 4. In what circumstances can you praise Jehovah?
4 When Speaking to Unbelievers: Although circumstances may not allow us to share in the public ministry each day, speaking even briefly to workmates, schoolmates, and others around us about Jehovah and his purposes can instill hope in honesthearted people. (Ps. 27:14; 1 Pet. 3:15) While traveling on an airplane, a sister was able to witness to a fellow passenger who felt so comforted and encouraged by what she heard that she gave the sister her address and phone number so that they could keep in contact with each other. As the world suffers from deepening trouble and worsening conditions, Jehovah’s people continue to bring to those with listening ears “good news of something better.” This offers others hope and causes them to praise Jehovah.​—Isa. 52:7; Rom. 15:11.
 5. Why is it our desire to praise Jehovah, and what might this accomplish?
5 How it must please Jehovah to hear his servants praising him each day! As with Jehovah’s visible creation that surrounds us, we too can bubble forth his praises each day in our homes, in the congregation, and when speaking with others who as yet have not become fellow praisers of Jehovah.​—Ps. 19:1-4.

