Appreciating the Significance of Current Events
1 “The scene of this world is changing.” (1 Cor. 7:31) This is reflected in fast-moving current events. Along with all that is happening within Jehovah’s organization, what does this mean to you personally?​—Luke 21:28.
2 The fulfillment of Bible prophecy in this 20th century confirms that the entire wicked system of things is in its last days. (Matt. 24:3-14; Luke 21:7-11) Jesus said that “this generation will by no means pass away until all things occur.” (Luke 21:32) Do you appreciate what this means for people in your territory who have not yet taken a stand on Jehovah’s side? If you do, what effect does this have on your field ministry?​—Luke 21:34-36.
3 Help Others While There Is Time: Jesus urged his disciples to take advantage of favorable conditions to let the good news be known. (John 9:4) The apostle Paul echoed the same admonition when he urged the brothers in Colossae to “go on walking in wisdom toward those on the outside, buying out the opportune time.”​—Col. 4:5.
4 Some have given heed to the apostle’s admonition to buy out the time and have become regular pioneers. Many youths have taken up regular pioneer service while still in school and have had good success in doing so. Youths in school can buy out opportune time to help classmates understand the significance of what is happening today and the bright hope for the future under God’s Kingdom.​—Eccl. 12:1.
5 We can make good use of our time in the field ministry during October by featuring the Awake! magazine at every opportunity. This publication gives insight into the real meaning of current events. Offer it to concerned people you find while working from house to house. Take the initiative to offer it to schoolmates or to people where you work. Highlight subjects that may be of particular interest to the people you know. For example, the October 8, 1991, Awake! contains articles about child abuse. This subject is of concern to many people.
6 How can the current Topic for Conversation be used? After introducing yourself, you could ask the householder: “Why do you think we encounter so many frustrating situations today?” After his response, you may add: “The Bible acknowledges that for many, life is hopeless and frustrating. Notice what is stated here at Ecclesiastes 2:17. [Read.] Do you agree with what is stated here? [Allow response.] What would you say will comfort a person dealing with many problems? [Allow comment.] Here is a scripture that gives us a positive outlook on life. [Read Psalm 37:39, 40.] This is why Jehovah’s Witnesses encourage Bible education. For example, notice the subject considered in our latest Awake! magazine.” Then, depending on the interest shown, you may determine if you should offer a subscription or individual magazines or if it would be more suitable just to leave a tract.
7 There is no doubt that these are thrilling times to be serving Jehovah. May this fact move us to make good use of opportunities this month to help more sincere persons see the real meaning behind current events.

