Congregation Book Study Arrangement
Part 4​—Continue Building One Another Up
1 Each one in a Congregation Book Study group can play a meaningful part in the spiritual development of others in the group. We all want to obey the Scriptural command to ‘incite others to love and fine works, especially as the end draws near.’​—Heb. 10:24, 25.
2 Assisting One Another: All can assist in creating a warm, friendly atmosphere at the book study. When each of us shows a personal interest in other members, it contributes to the closeness of the group. At Galatians 6:10 we are directed to “work what is good toward all, but especially toward those related to us in the faith.” For example, do you notice when some from the book study are ill and not at the meetings? Perhaps you could contact them by telephone or personally visit them. Such a spirit in a book study group draws the brothers closer together.
3 Do some need encouragement because of daily pressures, family responsibilities, or other problems? What can you do to help? Make a special effort to engage others in conversation at the meetings, not just greeting them. Some may tend to be shy but are looking for someone to talk with and would respond if approached. (uw pp. 137-8) The apostle Paul encouraged Christians to “speak consolingly to the depressed souls, support the weak, be long-suffering toward all.” (1 Thess. 5:14) If someone is ill or discouraged, how comforting it is when friends stop by to visit or offer assistance! Often, just knowing someone else cares is all that is needed.
4 We also want to cooperate with the field service arrangements. We should try to work with different ones in the group. (2 Cor. 6:11-13; 12:15) At times we may be asked by the book study conductor to assist someone. How do we respond? The book study group is greatly strengthened when publishers and pioneers work with one another in the various features of the preaching and disciple-making work.
5 Personal Example: There are other ways that you can contribute to the book study arrangement. Your good example is important. For instance, when you dress as you would to attend a meeting at the Kingdom Hall, you show respect. You set a positive example for those who may have developed the habit of dressing casually. Do you make it a practice to be on time so as not to disturb the meeting?
6 The Congregation Book Study arrangement is a loving provision from Jehovah that needs our full support. (Isa. 40:11) It is a place where we can get personal assistance and also contribute to the spiritual refreshment of others. Let all of us “keep comforting one another and building one another up” by fully supporting this arrangement.​—1 Thess. 5:11.

