Presenting the Good News​—By Using Publications Wisely
1 The special assembly day program for the 1991 service year featured a discussion on “Our Ministry​—Not Ordinary, but Holy.” It emphasized that our work is sacred and should not be taken for granted. Since the use of printed literature is an integral part of our ministry, this too should be treated with respect. Each of us can demonstrate the deep regard we feel by making wise use of our publications.
2 During the 1990 service year, the Society produced 678 million magazines and more than 51 million Bibles and bound books for use in the worldwide field. This represents a tremendous expenditure of dedicated resources, including time, energy, and money. The combined efforts of many volunteers result in the production of quality literature both for personal use and for distribution in the field service. What are some ways we can reflect heartfelt appreciation for our literature as we make the Kingdom message known to honesthearted ones?
3 Personal and Family Study: At Romans 2:21 the apostle Paul says: “Do you, however, the one teaching someone else, not teach yourself?” When we take the time to read, study, and meditate prayerfully on our Bible-based literature, we thereby personally demonstrate how much we prize Jehovah’s timely provisions of spiritual food through his steward class. (Luke 12:42) Whether by personal or family study, keeping abreast of revealed truths enables us to cultivate high regard for all that Jehovah has entrusted to our care. Children, too, should be properly trained to appreciate and care for their literature, not carelessly marking or defacing it. In addition, our literature should be properly stored so as to keep it clean and neat for use in the field.
4 Avoid Waste: To be of real benefit, our literature must get into the hands of truth seekers, that is, those who are genuinely interested in our message and work. (Matt. 10:11) We should therefore avoid giving away literature indiscriminately to those who have not manifested real appreciation for the Bible’s message. Waste can also occur if we allow magazines, books, or other literature to pile up at home.
5 Since the magazines are dated, we have a limited period of time to offer them as current issues. So a concerted effort on our part is needed to get out in the ministry and make these magazines available to interested ones. If we find that our magazines still tend to accumulate, perhaps it would be good to adjust our schedule to spend more time in magazine work. Or if this cannot reasonably be done, we should adjust our order. By following these suggestions, we show ourselves to be faithful stewards of God’s undeserved kindness.​—1 Cor. 4:2; 1 Pet. 4:10, 11; compare Luke 16:1, 10.
6 Jehovah has “laid up in trust” with his dedicated people a very weighty responsibility and work, including “belongings” over which his faithful “steward” has authority. (2 Tim. 1:12; Luke 12:42-44, 48b; 1 Tim. 6:20) With deep appreciation for our privileges in God’s service, may we continue to make wise use of our publications in presenting the good news to others.

