Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 5
Song 28
 7 min: Local announcements and Announcements.
20 min: “Rejoicing in Jehovah’s Bountiful Provisions.” Questions and answers.
18 min: Discussion of Topic for Conversation. Review presentation with audience and consider possible introductions and points to tie scriptures together. Have demonstration of suggested presentation. After introduction, publisher could say: “Due to the international tension and recent conflicts many concerned persons are wondering if the future of the earth is really secure.” (Ask householder for his personal viewpoint.) “The Bible foretold events of our day and indicated that many persons would be overwhelmed with fear.” (Read or quote Luke 21:26.) Show how many persons are becoming increasingly fearful. However, those who put their trust in God and his kingdom have basis for hope. (Read Psalm 119:90.) Highlight that God will not allow earth to be destroyed, but will bring an end to wicked system. His purpose for earth and mankind is nicely illustrated in Truth book on page 4. (Review illustration with householder.) This publication will assist sincere persons to learn more about God’s provision. Chairman encourages all to use new Topic for Conversation in offering Truth book during month. Also, illustrate how current magazines can be used to highlight this subject. Of special interest is the September 22 issue of Awake! that features the question “Will Life on Earth Be Ended in a Nuclear Holocaust?”
Song 58 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 12
Song 73
10 min: Local announcements and accounts report.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News—In School.” Questions and answers.
15 min: Discussion by service overseer based on Organization book, pages 121 and 122. Consider also how publishers may be able to start home Bible studies in Truth book. Include brief demonstrations. Stress goal of starting new studies this month. Invite some who have already started studies to relate their experiences. Refer to paragraph 7 of article “Rejoice in Jehovah’s Bountiful Provisions.”
Song 71 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 19
Song 15
 5 min: Local announcements.
15 min: “Are You Having a Share in Assisting Inactive Ones?” Question-and-answer coverage of material. Encourage all to show brotherly love toward the inactive ones they may visit and greet at Kingdom Hall. Highlight value of keeping positive attitude.
25 min: Manifesting Christian Manners. Elder reviews with audience participation the following points related to good manners:
(2 min.) Good manners have been defined as showing consideration in little things such as being punctual, asking before borrowing things that belong to others, giving thanks and saying “please,” and so forth. The basic underlying principle is love.
(10 min.) In the congregation: Families with small children show consideration for others by taking seats in the rear so as not to disturb others. When babies cry, consideration and good manners are demonstrated by parents if they temporarily withdraw from the main auditorium to calm the child. (Compare Matthew 7:12.) Christian manners rule out talking while the meeting is in progress, arriving late for meetings or allowing children to interrupt the meeting by frequent and unnecessary trips to the rest room or by their running at any time in the Kingdom Hall. (Eccl. 3:1, 7; 1 Cor. 14:40) When attending the book study, it would be appropriate to dress as when attending the regular meetings at the Kingdom Hall.
(8 min.) In field service: Christian manners require that one be presentable when in field service — neat, clean, shoes shined, hair combed, clothing pressed. A sincere and friendly smile and greeting are also part of Christian manners. (Luke 10:5) When preaching on busy streets it is necessary to be tactful, friendly, not shouting, not overly insistent, not interfering with the flow of passersby. When making return visits, show appreciation for the hospitality extended by maintaining a proper reserve, avoiding the tendency to become unduly familiar.—Phil. 1:27.
(5 min.) The fact that one means well and acts from pure motives does not justify forgetting about Christian manners. (Luke 6:31) Although some may feel that Christian manners are insignificant, they are vital.—2 Cor. 6:3-7.
Remind congregation of second Saturday magazine day and to bring brochure Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century to Service Meeting next week.
Song 55 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 26
Song 99
 8 min: Local announcements. Also remind publishers to continue efforts toward starting new home Bible studies in Truth book. How many have reached goal of conducting a new study this month? Relate brief experience as time allows.
15 min: “Directing Interest to the Organization—Part II.” Questions and answers. Encourage publishers to follow along in brochure as this information is considered. Have qualified publisher who is good teacher demonstrate use of material in paragraph 3 in encouraging Bible student to appreciate importance of attending congregation meetings.
12 min: Use for local needs or have talk on subject: “A Future for Today’s Youth” from Watchtower of June 1, 1982, pages 5-8. Encourage youth locally to develop wholesome goals.
10 min: Review subscription offer for October and highlight talking points from October 1 and 8 magazines that can be used in field service. Encourage all to participate in field service next Sunday, the first Sunday of the month.
Song 119 and prayer.

