Part II—Directing Interest to the Organization
1 It is the earnest desire of Christian teachers to help their home Bible students to acquire a spiritually solid foundation. This is accomplished by progressively studying God’s written Word, sounding its truths down into their minds and hearts. (Matt. 7:24-27) More is necessary than simply teaching doctrinal information. We must build appreciation for Jehovah’s organization so that our students will act upon what they have learned and become a working part of the Christian congregation. (Jas. 2:26) From time to time publishers contact the Society, asking for suggestions and printed material that they can use in helping their Bible students. As you will recall the August issue of Our Kingdom Ministry recommended using the brochure Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century. These can be ordered by the congregation if local supplies are depleted. Each brochure is placed on a contribution of 15c and is reported as a booklet placement. We suggest that you give consideration to using this brochure as it contains a wealth of information that can be used with both new and advanced students.
2 This 32-page brochure, first released in 1978, was designed to acquaint people with the organization and work of Jehovah’s Witnesses. It was offered to the public when released at the convention and later from house to house in 1979. It provides an excellent witness. You should take the initiative in placing copies with your Bible students, if you have not already done so. The Scriptural references, illustrations and text can all be of great assistance in reaching the hearts of sincere persons.
SPECIFIC POINTS TO USE
3 Let us consider material that may be especially effective with a new student. Congregation meetings play an important role in the lives of Jehovah’s people and so we want our students to attend these meetings with us as soon as possible. This subject is considered on pages 18-20 of the brochure. Each of the five weekly meetings is briefly described and Scriptural references are cited. You may find it helpful to read with the student the two paragraphs starting at the bottom of page 18. Highlight the direction given at Hebrews 10:24, 25 and Proverbs 27:17. Show the student the Kingdom Hall scenes on pages 19 and 20 that depict both the outside and inside appearance of a typical Kingdom Hall. Contrast this with most churches of Christendom. When considering this material, refer specifically to your local Kingdom Hall. If available, provide your student with a handbill showing the address and times of local meetings. Thereafter, in the weeks to come, you can progressively explain in detail the five weekly meetings, highlighting their purpose, how they are conducted, publications used, and so forth. You may want to concentrate on considering one meeting in detail each week, thus having sufficient subject material for a five week period. Do you not agree that such a program should assist your student to appreciate better the need to attend congregation meetings?
4 At an appropriate time you may take up with your student the matter of contributions. You may mention to him that Jehovah’s Witnesses gladly give of their time and resources in conducting free home Bible studies. But when it comes to support and maintenance of their organization, such as the local Kingdom Hall, expenses are involved. However, Jehovah’s Witnesses do not take up collections at their meetings, as do the churches of Christendom. A contribution box is provided at the meeting place and those attending may contribute if they so desire. This is entirely voluntary. Pages 29 and 30 of the brochure may be used as a basis for this discussion.
5 It may be explained that while Christians are not required to tithe they still have countless opportunities to honor God with their “valuable things.” (Prov. 3:9, 10) Review principles recorded at 2 Corinthians 9:7 and Luke 21:1-4 with the student showing that our giving is motivated by Christian love and that it is the spirit of giving that counts, not the amount given. Christian giving is a wonderful privilege that affords us the opportunity to display our love for Jehovah and for our brothers. Progressive Bible students will appreciate learning these things.
6 Are we as teachers doing all that we can to help our students gain appreciation for Jehovah’s organization? Could we do more? We encourage you to employ these suggestions, praying to Jehovah for his continued direction and blessing. Additional information on this subject will be forthcoming.

