Presenting the Good News—In School
1 “Praise Jehovah . . . you young men and also you virgins, you old men together with boys.” (Ps. 148:7, 12) While attending school youths have a splendid opportunity to praise the name of Jehovah. Among their classmates, as well as school teachers, a large field for witnessing is opened. At times it may seem difficult to witness to classmates or teachers. But there is no need to feel embarrassed or afraid. Jehovah has promised: “I am with you to deliver you.”—Jer. 1:8.
HOW TO WITNESS IN SCHOOL
2 Consider the following questions: ‘Do I take advantage of opportunities at school to speak about Jehovah’s purposes? Does my conduct reflect well on Jehovah, the God with whom others identify me?’—Ps. 145:21; Matt. 21:16.
3 Take advantage of opportunities when the subject of evolution is considered. Some youthful witnesses have used such occasions to place the publication, Did Man Get Here by Evolution or by Creation? with some of their teachers and classmates. They have used this book in class discussions in skillfully defending the Bible’s record of the creation account. Due to the prevalence of promiscuity and misuse of drugs in school, some Christian youths have successfully used the publication, Your Youth—Getting the Best out of It. This book considers a number of subjects that are of interest to youths.
4 Take the initiative in witnessing at school. Consider this experience of a Christian youth: “During free class periods I had many, many opportunities to witness, especially around holiday time. By leaving Bible publications on my desk where others could see them, many interested students approached me. The most rewarding experience involved my civics teacher. I had placed a publication with one of her students, and the girl was reading it in class one day when the teacher noticed it and asked where she had obtained the book.” Eventually a number of students began attending meetings at the Kingdom Hall and the teacher also progressed to the point of becoming a dedicated Witness! All of this occurred because an alert Christian youth took the initiative to witness in school.
5 In your daily conversations with classmates, you can often find an opportunity to discuss a Biblical topic. With the increasing of violence and the growing fear that a nuclear war may end all life on this earth, you can easily explain to your classmates God’s view of world conditions and the future of the earth. Remember that while you will want to be bold, it is vital to be tactful, showing consideration for the others’ viewpoints.—Col. 4:6.
6 Youths, do not minimize the fine contribution that you can make in praising Jehovah while in school. Be confident that God can use you too in the accomplishing of his purpose to have this good news preached earth wide.

