Rejoicing in Jehovah’s Bountiful Provisions
1 “Always rejoice in the Lord. Once more I will say, Rejoice!” (Phil. 4:4) Jehovah’s Witnesses are indeed rejoicing, due to the bountiful provisions that we have received during the 1982 service year. There is no doubt that Jehovah has blessed us abundantly.—Prov. 10:22.
2 Consider some of the provisions for which we can be thankful. Over 40,000 elders received further instruction at the Kingdom Ministry School and many of our regular pioneers were able to attend the Pioneer Service School during the month of August. We were privileged to hear the special talk “The Only Cure for Sick Mankind” and experience the joy of an all-time peak attending the Memorial celebration in April. There was also an all-time peak in publishers during the month of April. Then again, a fine provision has been made to aid many individuals who had become inactive through the years. But, without doubt, one of the outstanding highlights of the service year was the “Kingdom Truth” District Convention, with its fine releases. Yes, Jehovah has surely blessed his people.
WHAT WILL WE DO NOW?
3 As we all look back on the bountiful provisions that we have received from Jehovah during the service year just concluded, it is proper to ask ourselves, ‘What will we do now?’ Unitedly we will press on, even more firmly in our resolve to continue faithfully serving Jehovah. We will endeavor to apply the things that we have learned as well as make good use of the valuable information and literature received at the district conventions.
VALUE OF “TRUTH” BOOK
4 In thinking back over an extended period of time, we realize that the Truth book has been an outstanding provision from Jehovah. It has played a major role in the proclamation of the good news concerning Jehovah’s kingdom. Since its release in 1968, over 100 million copies in more than 116 languages have been produced by the Society. This has contributed to over one million publishers being added to our ranks since that time. After 14 years of use it is still an effective aid!
5 We will want to offer the Truth book enthusiastically to the public during September. There are several subjects that can be highlighted. Chapter 1 outlines the grand blessings from God that are so near at hand. Many honest-hearted persons are fearful of world developments and are looking for a remedy. God’s kingdom is the only solution and it is through this government that blessings will come to mankind. (Matt. 6:10; Dan. 2:44) Chapter 20 outlines the building blocks for a happy family life and should be of special interest to many families in our territory.
6 Chapters 2, 14 and 15 can be highlighted to show people why it is wise to examine their religion, how to identify the true religion and how they can get out from among the false ones. Babylon the Great will soon be destroyed and honest-hearted persons must act quickly if they are to be saved.
7 Be sure to follow through on all interest and placements, calling back with the purpose of starting a home Bible study. You may be able to use the very chapter that sparked the original interest. If you prepare well and seek Jehovah’s direction, he will bless your sincere efforts and you may soon be conducting a new Bible study in the Truth book.
8 Let us enthusiastically highlight the Truth book during September in helping sheeplike individuals to appreciate God’s purpose for man and the earth. As we begin the new service year and reflect on Jehovah’s bountiful provisions, we can truly exclaim, ‘Always rejoice in the Lord!’

