R5821 : page 1 

VOL. XXXVII. JANUARY 1 NO. I 
A. D. 1916-A.M. 6044 

CONTENTS 

Views from The Watch Tower ... 3 

Jehovah Chastening the World . . 3 

Jehovah's Act— His Strange Act . . 4 

Glorious Opportunities at Hand . . 4 

Smiting of Jordan by Elijah ... 4 

"Strong in Faith" 5 

Militarism and Navalism— How Long? . 5 

The Jews as War Sufferers ... 6 
A Token of My Covenant (Poem) ... 7 
1 9 1 5— Foreign Branch Reports ... 8 
He Ascended, Leading Captives ... 1 1 

Wrong Views of the Kingdom ... 11 

An Error— Christ's Kingdom Future. . 12 
The Spirit at Pentecost 13 

Meaning of Pentecostal Blessing . .13 

Gifts and Fruits of Spirit ... 14 
St. Peter's Pentecostal Sermon ... 14 

Divine Favor About to Return to Israel 1 5 

The Curse to be Rolled Away ... 15 

R5822 : page 2 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as FolIows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



THE EUREKA DRAMA VERY SUCCESSFUL 

The dear friends who are reporting on the EUREKA DRAMA 
are sending in excellent reports. The public are very appreciative 
of the DRAMA and many cards are being handed in. 
We regret, however, that we hear from only a small proportion 
of the DRAMAS that are in your hands. We hope that 
none of you are allowing this talent in your possession to lie 
idle. The winter season is a very favorable time, especially 
in country districts; and school boards will, doubtless, be very 
glad to cooperate by furnishing schoolhouses. Court-houses 
are also desirable. In many places where the law does not 
permit the showing of the moving pictures on Sundays, Picture 
Theatres are obtainable for the Free DRAMA at practically 
the cost of light and janitorage. 

In corresponding with us respecting DRAMA, please indicate 
on envelope, EUREKA DRAMA, or PHOTO-DRAMA. 



BROTHER RUSSELL AT THE TEMPLE 

Answering many inquiries, we announce that Brother Russell 
endeavors to serve at the New York City Temple on the 
first Sunday of each month. In the forenoon of such days 
there is a baptism service, with every provision for those finding 
it convenient to be immersed at that time. A Congregational 
Meeting for the consideration of the activities of 
the Church is appointed for the Saturday evening preceding 
the first Sunday of each month. This meeting is appointed 
for the Temple, W. 63d St., New York. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR FEBRUARY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
February follow: (1) 1 14; (2) 221; (3) 4; (4) 300; (5) 67; 
(6) 91; (7) 324; (8) 155; (9) 95; (10) 12; (11) 27; (12) 273; 
(13) 50; (14) 32; (15) 145; (16) 240; (17) 307; (18) 258; (19) 
18; (20) 194; (21) 281; (22) 296; (23) 7; (24) 44; (25) 130; 
(26) 176; (27) 108; (28) 170; (29) 3. 



STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 



THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE 
KEYS." PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION. 



SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages." gives an outline of the Divine 
Plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 



384 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. 1 l/2d.) 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage 
included. 

(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's Second Coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. 1 l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter on the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. 1 l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Battle of Armageddon," shows that the dissolution of 
the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 688 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6 l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man," treats an 
all-important subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 640 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6 l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week 
("Genesis 1 and 2"), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 750 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6 l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (2s. 6d.) 

Also published in foreign languages as follows: German and Swedish, 
six vols.; Dano-Norwegian, five vols.; Greek, four vols.; Finnish, 
three vols.; French, two vols.; Hollandish, Spanish, Italian, Hungarian, 
Polish, Arabic, Roumanian, Chinese, Japanese, one vol. each; bound in 
cloth, uniform with English edition, prices the same. 

For the Blind in American Braille, English Braille and New York Point. 



R5823 : page 3 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

NATURALLY enough, one influence of the 
great European war is to turn the minds of 
some toward religion and the consideration 
of a future life. The fact that sons, 
brothers and husbands are in danger or 
wounded or dead or prisoners in a foreign 



land— all of them beyond human protection 
—naturally turns the minds of many toward 
the Almighty Creator. Hence reports from 
the warring nations indicate an increase of 
religious sentiment— larger church attendance, more 
people praying, etc. 

To the extent that such religious activities are inspired 
merely by fear and helplessness, they of course amount 
to very little, for the public, mistaught, know not that 
there is no access to the Divine ear, no authority for 
prayer, no ground for claiming protection for loved ones, 
except through the great Advocate whom God has appointed. 
Neither do they understand that He is not the 
world's Advocate, but merely the Church's; and that no 
one is a member of the Church who has not, through 
knowledge of the Lord, through repentance, made a full 
consecration of himself to do the Lord's will. Hence, 
those not Scripturally informed— and they include the 
vast majority of all denominations of Christians— cry 
aloud to the Lord in their troubles; but in the absence 
of trouble or danger are worshipers at the shrines of 
pleasure, of wealth, of selfishness, of lust, or of appetite. 

We cannot hope that this class will receive any permanent 
benefit at the present time— any more than would 
the heathen. It will be a little later on in this great 
Trouble, in the revolution and anarchy which the Lord 
indicates will follow each other, that they will begin 
really to wake up and to realize that unless those days 
be shortened, no flesh would survive. ("Matthew 24:22".) 
Then they will begin to seek the Lord, not merely in a 
form of godliness, but with truly broken hearts. 

JEHOVAH CHASTENING THE WORLD 

The Lord's provision will then opportunely come to 
them. The Redeemer, through whose blood of the New 
Covenant there is to be a full atonement made, will then 
take to Himself His great power and reign as the Mediator 
of that New Covenant; and the glorious Millennium 
will be fully established. Under its beneficent arrangement 
the darkness of the present civilization and the 
gross darkness of the heathen will disappear before the 
rising Sun of Righteousness with healing in His beams. 

Then the Lord, who is now speaking to them in His 
anger, chastening in His sore displeasure, and revealing 
Himself in the flaming fire of the near future, will be 
ready to speak to their chastened hearts words of comfort, 
of mercy, which because of ignorance and superstition 
and misconception they are not able and willing 
to receive now. The Lord will turn unto His people the 
pure Message, that they may all call upon the name of 
the Lord to serve Him with one consent. ("Zephaniah 3:9".) 
Thus "the light of the knowledge of the glory of 
God will fill the whole earth"— ocean deep! ("Habakkuk 2: 14".) 
As a result of the heart-breaking experiences, 
followed by the greater knowledge, all knees will be 



bowing and all tongues will be confessing to the glory of 
God. And those refusing to come into harmony with 
that supreme and glorious Reign of Righteousness, we 
are told, will be sure to be destroyed from amongst the 
people.— v Acts 3:23". 

There is, however, another class of religious people, 
who undoubtedly are being influenced much more deeply, 
intelligently and profitably— true Christians, who in the 
past have been lulled to sleep, or who as babes in Christ 
have not been thoroughly nourished with the Word of 
Truth. These are now having their senses exercised as 
never before, and every day are getting more awake and 
inquiring what these things mean— things so different 
from what they have been taught and what they had expected. 
Already they are asking, "Where is the hope 
we had of the conversion of the heathen to the glorious 
standards of our Christianity?" They are inquiring, 
"Has there not been some mistake made when we called 
these kingdoms of Europe kingdoms of God and kingdoms 
of Christ— Christendom?" They are awakening to 
the fact that we have long been under a great delusion— 
that these kingdoms are merely kingdoms of this world; 
that the Prince of this world is still the ruler; that Messiah, 
the Prince of Light, is only now, and through this 
great tribulation, taking to Himself His great power to 
begin His Reign of Righteousness. 

It requires a little time for all this to germinate in the 
hearts of those who have been so seriously misinformed 
by the ministers and teachers whom they trusted. At 
first apathy, a feeling of doubt on every subject, comes 
into the minds of these people, but as they go to the Lord 
in prayer from earnest, consecrated hearts they are 
guided, enlightened. They find indeed that the faith they 
built was largely "wood, hay and stubble" material- 
human traditions, theories and creeds. The burning, or 
destruction, of these leaves them, however, that much 
better prepared for the erection of a better faith-structure 
of the gold, silver and precious stones of Divine promises. 

R5823 : page 4 

The burning of their "wood, hay and stubble" 
structure of errors, having been built upon "the Rock 
Christ Jesus," themselves "shall be saved so as by fire."— 
" 1 Corinthians 3:15\ 

JEHOVAH'S ACT-HIS STRANGE ACT 

Note the difference between this class and the one 
first mentioned, who have never really been consecrated 
to the Lord, but who are merely nominal Christians, children 
of error and typical "tares." The burning of their 
false faith will leave them nothing; for they never were 
properly on "the Rock Christ Jesus." It will reduce them 
merely to the level of the world, of which they have 
always been a part; but, misled by wrong teachings, they 



thought themselves Christians. And by many they were 
mistaken for Christians, even as tares may be mistaken 
for true wheat. 

It is this extraordinary effect of this Day of Wrath 
upon the world in general, and especially upon professed 
Christians, which the Lord evidently refers to through 
the Prophet Isaiah: "The Lord. ..shall be wroth, 
bring to pass His act. His strange act." ("Isaiah 28:21\) 
It will surely be a strange procedure on God's part, as 
viewed by those not taught of the Lord, when they shall 
see all the religious systems of the present time go down 
and the world heading straight for chaos. 

The cry of the people at that time will much resemble 
the cry of the Apostles, when on the Lake of Galilee 
the great storm arose. They came to Jesus in the hinder 
part of the boat, apparently asleep, crying, "Master, 
Master, carest Thou not that we perish?" Immediately, 
when they have learned their dependence upon the Lord— 
which many do not now very fully appreciate— immediately 
when they cry to the Lord from the depth of their 
hearts in astonishment and fear. He will be ready to 
answer them graciously and to deliver them. 

Man's extremity will be God's opportunity! As Jesus 
arose. He rebuked the winds and the waves; and immediately 
there was a great calm on the Lake of Galilee. So 
in the midst of the awful trouble and human perplexity— 

R5824 : page 4 

"men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after 

the things coming"— Messiah's Kingdom, "the desire of 

all nations," will take control of the situation; and immediately 

the storm of human passion and anarchy will 

cease. Then men will "beat their swords into plowshares, 

and their spears into pruning-hooks; nation shall 

not lift up sword against nation; neither shall they learn 

war any more."— "Isaiah 2:4"; "Micah 4:3\ 

GLORIOUS OPPORTUNITIES AT HAND 

Manifestly now, and increasingly so as the days go 
by, the minds of thinking people will be opening to a 
realization of the Truth. Now, as never before, they will 
need the Lord's saints to point them in the right direction 
—to bring the Scriptures to their attention and the 
various helps for Bible study which the Lord has been 
graciously providing, and which are already in the hands 
of many. As society and religious systems will be reeling 
as a drunken man, as the Bible explains, these undeveloped 
saints of God will need the very help we by God's 
grace are enabled to render them. Surely there never 
was so favorable a time as the present for rendering 
assistance to this class! More and more, as these find 
that they have been misled by the shepherds of the nominal 
systems, they will be as sheep without a shepherd. 

To those who have the knowledge of God, of His 



Word, of His Plan, the present and the near future offer 
certainly the most wonderful opportunities of which we 
could conceive. Whoever loves the Lord will love the 
brethren. Whoever would serve the Lord will be intent 
upon serving the brethren; and the more their need, the 
better the opportunity; and the greater our zeal, the 
greater the results for others, and the greater the blessing 
for ourselves. "He that reapeth receiveth wages, and 
gathereth fruit unto life eternal."— 'John 4:36\ 

It will be seen from this that, so far from thinking 
our work ended, we have wonderful expectations in respect 
to the year 1916. 

SMITING OF JORDAN BY ELIJAH 

We have already called attention, in STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES, Vol. II., to the fact that Elijah, the Prophet, 
typified The Christ— Jesus the Head and the Church His 
Body— in their fleshly experiences; and that the taking 
up of Elijah into heaven, typically represents the final 
passing of the Church from the earthly conditions to the 
Heavenly. We have seen, too, that when Elijah's time 
for translation came, he was sent from Gilgal to Bethel, 
from Bethel to Jericho and from Jericho to Jordan; and 
that these different points were measurably disappointing; 
yet that Elijah and Elisha were not discouraged, but 
went on— Jordan representing the end of the Times of 
the Gentiles, 1915. As Jordan was the last point to 
which Elijah was directed, so 1915 is the last point to 
which the Church has been directed. As Elijah went on, 
not knowing any further place, so the true Church is 
going on without any definite time-point before it. 

Soon the chariot of fire will separate the Elijah class 
from the Elisha class. The fiery chariot seems to mean 
severe trials or persecutions. A little later, the Elijah 
class will be taken up in the whirlwind. Elsewhere in the 
Bible a whirlwind is apparently used to symbolize the 
great time of anarchy. The lesson possibly is that the 
Lord's faithful of the Elijah class will be amongst the 
first in civilized lands to suffer some kind of violence 
through lawlessness and anarchy. 

We know not how soon this culmination may come, 
nor need we be concerned, since it is our Lord who is 
at the helm, and since we are expecting that He will 
require each one to be "faithful unto death." The thing 
which especially concerns us now is another part of the 
type: When Elijah and Elisha reached the bank of 
Jordan, Elijah took his mantle and, folding it together, 
smote the waters of the river; and they divided, and 
the two crossed dry-shod. What does this mean? What 
experiences are typified thereby? Apparently it refers 
to something in the immediate future— something which 
seemingly should be beginning at once. 

We may not be too sure of what is meant by this 
feature of the type. We are to remember, on the contrary, 
that Bible prophecies are rarely understood much 



in advance of their fulfilment. This was so at the Lord's 
First Advent. Prophecies were fulfilling on every hand, 
yet the disciples did not perceive them until later— as our 
Lord's death and resurrection. After His resurrection, 
He explained to His disciples many of the things; and 
we read that "then He opened their understanding, that 
they might understand the Scriptures." ('Luke 24:45 s .) 
It may be so here. We may witness a fulfilment of this 
feature, and not discern its application until completed. 
Our conjecture respecting the meaning of this picture 
is this: Elijah's mantle represented Divine Power operating 
through him; and similarly God's Power operating 
through His Elect now. In Bible symbology, water stands 
for Truth and also for people; and we see no reason to 
object to its standing for both of these in this picture— 
a division of the people through the proper and right 
dividing of the Truth. Jordan also signifies trial, test or 

R5824 : page 5 

judgment. Taking these three things in combination, we 
have a forceful figure. If the interpretation proves to 
be a correct one, it will mean something like this: that 
God somehow will exercise through His enlightened 
people a power which will have an effect of causing a 
division amongst the people in respect to the Truth, and 
which will be a test upon them in this dividing. 

Not knowing what will be the opportunities, nor what 
the method of exercising those opportunities, we must 
wait for the Lord and the leadings of His providences. 
But meantime, surely it is for the Elijah class to be thoroughly 
alert and actively interested, ready, watching, 
waiting for the Master's guidance! 

With these things before us, we urge all the Lord's 
consecrated people who have a knowledge of these things 
to "Gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope 
to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto you 
at the revelation of Jesus Christ." ( s l Peter 1:13 s .) We 
urge them not to become entangled in worldly matters, 
but to keep themselves in the love of God and in the service 
of God, the Truth, the brethren. 

We remember that after our Lord's crucifixion, many 
of His disciples were inclined to go back into the fishing 
business— a very natural course. We remember how the 
Lord gave them evidences, however, that His blessings 
could be with them, and they could continue to be 
"fishers of men"; and that all success depended upon 
Him; and that without Him they could do nothing. This 
lesson was deeply impressed upon those who first started 
in the fishing business. They toiled all night, but caught 
nothing, and in the morning saw Jesus on the shore with 
fish already cooked. Apparently they never forgot that 
lesson.— 'John 21:l-10 s . 

Deeply interested in all of the Lord's dear brethren, 
we have felt a sort of solicitude for them as we have 
noticed how some who have been zealous for the 



Colporteur work under much less favorable conditions 
than the present and the future are going into worldly 
business. We have probably one hundred less Colporteurs 
today than we had a year ago, although the financial 
conditions everywhere show that rather we should 
have twice as many Colporteurs today. It is not for us 
to complain— we are not complaining. We are merely 
calling attention in this general way, rather than in a 
private or personal way, to the fact that the love of some 
may be growing cool, and that they may thus endanger 
their gaining "a full reward." 

We may not know what power the Lord may put into 
our hands for causing a great division of the people in 
respect to the Truth. It may be a financial power, that 
was represented by Elijah's mantle in this case, or it 
may be something else. We are waiting to see. Meanwhile 
we are endeavoring to keep all the branches in all 
lines of the work well in hand, so as to be ready to smite 
when the opportune moment shall come. We trust that 
this is the spirit of all the Lord's dear people who are 
awaiting the Kingdom— a spirit of alertness, a spirit of 
zeal, and of energy, and of a sound mind— counting the 
things of this present time as "not worthy to be compared 
with the glory that shall be revealed in us."— 'Acts 20:24"; 
"Philippians 3:8"; "Romans 8:18". 

One of our arrangements for the near future is to set 
aside some of the Pilgrim brethren who have special ability 
for addressing the public, that they may give their 
time constantly in this direction, or to whatever extent 
the Lord may open the way— going from place to place 
in longer journeys to serve those classes which will indicate 
to THE WATCH TOWER Office their ability and desire 
to have public meetings in some of the best Auditoriums 
in each case. This will not interfere with other 
classes and their being served by other brethren— some 
of those brethren who have no special talent for public 
speaking, but who have exceptional ability for semi-public 
meetings and for parlor meetings, where they would be 
addressing chiefly the Household of Faith, versed in 
Present Truth. 

We remind all who have opportunity, or who can 
make opportunity for engaging in the Colporteur work, 
that there are millions of homes still not supplied with the 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES and many more millions 
which have not been blessed with the CREATION SCENARIO 
and the DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA. Here are fields of 
usefulness which must be gone over surely before we may 
hope to be taken in the whirlwind. Let us be alive to our 
privileges, our opportunities, that there may be no faintheartedness, 
but a zeal for God and His Message and for 
the brethren who need our help— yea, and for some who 
have a hearing ear and some who have been coming rapidly 
into the Truth within the last few months. With 
these things in mind, we have selected as our year's text 
for 1916 the following: 



R5825 : page 5 

"STRONG IN FAITH"- ROMANS 4:20" 

We have provided these in a cheap form that all who 
desire may have them. We can send two of the cards 
for five cents, postpaid, or any larger number at a proportionate 
rate. 

MILITARISM AND NAVALISM-HOW LONG? 

We own to a trepidation when writing on this subject. 
Our friends on both sides of the conflict, naturally 
enough, feel touchy. We have had three letters from 
Germans, claiming that we are prejudiced and do not 
give them justice. We have had four letters from our 
British friends, making similar complaint. We believe, 
however, that the majority of our friends on both sides 
do understand us; and we assume that the seven letters 
came from persons comparatively new in the Truth. 
Those familiar with our position need not to be told that 
we have no sympathy whatever with the German invasion 
of Belgian territory, even though they claim that Belgium 
was under-handedly associated with the Allies. We have 
no sympathy with acts of violence and murder in Belgium 
or elsewhere. We have no sympathy with the destruction 
of non-combatants and commercial vessels by 
submarines, even though the vessels did carry munitions 
of war. We have no sympathy with the dropping of 
bombs from the sky, either in London or Paris or in 
German and Austrian cities. We have no sympathy with 
the war at all. 

However, on the other hand, regarding the nations 
as not Christian, we are not surprised that they should 
be engaged in an immoral warfare. We are not surprised 
that under stress of apparent necessity for victory, all 
the nations engaged in this war are trampling upon the 
laws of nations, to which they all agreed. We can no 
more excuse the British, French, Russians and Italians 
for such violation of the rights of others than we can 
excuse the Germans, Austrians, Hungarians, Bulgars and 
Turks. We see wrongs perpetrated in every direction; 
Divine Laws entirely set aside by these so-called Christian 
nations— Christendom. 

Surely it is not in vain that the Scriptures say, "If 
thine enemy hunger, feed him"! ("Romans 12:20".) And 
when professed British Christians break and violate the 
Master's instructions, and try to starve the professed 

R5825 : page 6 

German Christians, we are not surprised that the latter 
retaliate in every way that they can— whether by Zeppelin 
raids or submarine raids or otherwise. These nations, 
from our viewpoint being unchristian nations, could have 
no higher motto than is expressed in the sentiment, "Necessity 



knows no law." The Germans decided that if 

the British starved their wives and babies and aged non-combatants, 

they would be right to retaliate by destroying 

everything British that they could reach, including non-combatant 

passengers on steamers. 

We see that it would have been wiser for the British 
to have kept the law of nations, and to have held to the 
instruction of Jesus; and yet, realizing that we are still 
under the dominion of the Prince of this world, Satan, 
and that he. as the god of this world, is still working in 
the hearts of the children of disobedience, nothing that 
they could do would much surprise us. Do we not know 
from the Scriptures that the heart of man is exceedingly 
sinful; that his anger, malice, hatred, envy, strife, bitterness, 
are works of the flesh and of the Devil; and that 
these are being manifest on every hand, notwithstanding 
the number of churches, preachers, etc.? 

St. Peter wrote of the followers of Jesus— the consecrated 
Church: "Ye are a Royal Priesthood, a holy nation, 
a peculiar people [a people for a purpose, Diaglott], 
that ye should show forth the praises of Him who has 
called you out of darkness into His marvelous light." 
(M Peter 2:9\) This New Nation— God's nation— is in 
the world, but not of it. Its members cannot be loyal to 
the prince of this world, and to the Prince of Glory, both. 
They must choose between the two. This will make them 
"peculiar" in the eyes of the majority of people, who do 
not understand the matter, but who believe the kingdoms 
of this world to be kingdoms of Christ— even though they 
be perplexed as to why one kingdom of Christ should 
seek to blow the other off the land and off the sea. 

All of the nations realize that they are impoverishing 
themselves of their best blood and virility and of their 
wealth— placing the grievous burden of debt upon generations 
yet unborn— unless their debts should be repudiated, 
which would mean revolution and anarchy, such as 
the Bible seems to foretell. No wonder there is a movement 
for peace in all these countries. It is a sad spectacle. 
How strange it must appear to them as well as to 
ourselves! The greatest nations are bleeding to death, 
severely wounded. More than twenty millions of men are 
now under arms and expense and are non-producers, 
besides the terrible loss already sustained through the 
wounds and death of nine millions. 

But will the nations be wise enough even now to turn 
from war? Their admirable courage and their inestimable 
pride seem to answer. Nay! And this seems to be in full 
accord with Bible prophecy. As we have pointed out for 
twenty-five years past, the war is to continue until more 
and more will be involved, and all the participants be 
weakened and made ready for the great earthquake of 
social revolution and the fire of anarchy which will follow 
that with horrible desolation. Verily, the Scriptures 
correctly declare, "Pride goeth before destruction, and a 
haughty spirit before a fall." ('Proverbs 16:18".) From 
history we may judge that the world aforetime was no 



less viciously intentioned, but that God's providence interfered, 
as though He said, "Thus far shalt thou come, but 
no further." ( v Job 38:1 P.) Now, however, we have 
apparently reached the time when the Lord is saying, 
"Let loose the winds of strife!" These winds are blowing 
more and more, and eventually are to become a great 
whirlwind of trouble, as pictured in the Scriptures. 

The possibilities of conflict are extending over to 
Persia, and thence down toward India. While all the 
nations will be glad to have peace, each is afraid to 
show a white feather for fear of the loss of prestige. The 
Spirit of the Lord is not anywhere manifest, nor should 
we expect it, for the time has come for all to realize that 
these great nations are not Christian nations, but merely 
kingdoms of this world and under the Prince of this 
world, who now "worketh in the hearts of the children 
of disobedience" to anger, wrath, hatred, envy, strife, 
bitterness. The primary element of the Lord's Spirit is 
humility: "Humble yourselves under the mighty hand of 
God, that He may exalt you in due time." (" 1 Peter 5:6\) 
This spirit the world does not recognize as its standard; 
and hence we do not see the Spirit of Christ, explained 
by the Apostle— "meekness, gentleness, patience, long 
suffering, brotherly-kindness, love."— 'Galatians 5:22, 23\ 

Indeed, we entreat all the Lord's dear people to remember 
that there are but the two great Masters; and 
that we have enlisted on the side of our God and His 
Christ, and are to prove loyal to these in the midst of a 
crooked and perverse people, blinded by the god of this 
world and filled with his spirit of pride, boastfulness, 
animosity, hatred and strife. It should be our desire to 
be neutral as between these contending factions of 
Satan's empire. We love them all; we wish for them all 
great blessings. We have a Message of hope for all who 
have ears to hear that eventually their extremity will be 
God's opportunity; and that Messiah's Kingdom will roll 
away the curse, and instead roll on to mankind the blessings 
of the Kingdom of God's dear Son. 

Let us never forget our neutrality. Let us be just 
toward all, kind, generous. Let us avoid as far as possible 
any discussion of these matters with those who would 
not be able to understand and appreciate our position. 
Otherwise, we would be doing what the Master admonished 
us not to do, when He said, "Cast not your pearls 
before swine; lest they trample them under foot and turn 
again and rend you." ("Matthew 7:6\) Our worldly neighbors 
have not the viewpoint that we possess, and cannot 
understand our arguments or reasons. In due time they 
will understand. Now the Lord's consecrated people 
should be unobtrusive, not strife-breeders, not partisans, 
not bigoted, but wonderfully sympathetic toward all, 
realizing the true situation, as others are not able to do. 

As the facts gradually leak out, it is noticeable that 
none of the nations at war possess all the virtues and 
none of them possess all the vices. As between the opposing 
forces in this great war, the dishonors are probably 



not unequally matched. While everybody noted the great 
injustice done to the Belgians in the German invasion, 
the very ones who were loudest in rebuking that injustice 
have been guilty of a similar invasion of a weak state— 
the invasion of Greece by the British and French, who 
crossed her territory to assist the Servians. And whatever 
may have been the atrocities of the Turks against 
the Armenians, whom the Turks claim were arming and 
entrenching against them, nothing could have exceeded 
the bestial ferocity of the Russians against the Jews, who, 
so far as we know, were seeking to be neutral. 

THE JEWS AS WAR SUFFERERS 

While people of all nations are suffering directly or 
indirectly from the present great war, the poor Jew seems 
to get the worst of it everywhere. He is to be found in 
all the different armies— sometimes as a volunteer, sometimes 
as a conscript. It appears that in Galicia, where 
the Jews are very numerous and where they are very 
thoroughly hated by the Russians and Cossacks, they 

R5825 : page 7 

have suffered tremendously— and are still suffering. The 
fortunes of war swept them from one side and then 
from the other— back and forth. Surely these poor people, 
of all the people of earth, will soon begin to pray, "Thy 
Kingdom come; Thy will be done on earth as in Heaven"! 

R5826 : page 7 

We give below an extract from the Maccabean, a 
Jewish journal published in New York City. It gives a 
little glimpse of the sufferings of the war-swept region— 
a glimpse which should horrify the most hardened. 
Surely the Lord is preparing the world to acclaim Messiah's 
Kingdom "the desire of all nations"! OHaggai 2:T .) 
The excerpt which follows gives the testimony of 
one of the distressed, a Rumanian Jew of Bukowina: 

"'Day before yesterday, early in the morning, the 
Cossacks fired my house until it burned like tinder. When 
they came to us into the mountains as victors, the sacking 
of houses was common enough. They simply took whatever 
they could lay hands on. But we didn't drain the 
full measure of evil until they returned beaten and in 
retreat. It was then that they overran us in hordes, drunk 
with rage. They demanded provender in a hurry, hay 
and oats for their horses, and food for themselves. First 
came the order to fire the house of the town judge. Then 
they dragged the Jewish inn-keeper into the street to 
dispatch him. One of the horsemen speared him with 
his lance, another finished him by shooting him through 
the head. Then the villagers came in a mass and begged 
to have their houses protected against looting. They 
were speared by the soldiers and knocked down. It was 



terrible. And with the inn-keeper slain, brandy was flowing 

freely from casks in an ownerless inn. The soldiers 

drank themselves into a state of furious madness, and 

then went into the houses to gratify their bestial lusts. 

To me they came as they did to the others— I don't know 

to how many houses in all. They outraged my wife in 

plain view of the children, and violated my little girl. 

They bound me with ropes and threw me under a bench, 

so that I might witness my shame without power of interfering; 

that I might be poisoned and not die; that I might 

live the most miserable of mankind. At last they fired 

our house. The women ran about distracted, wherever 

their feet would carry them. And when the conflagration 

ceased, when we saw our life's work laid in ashes, we 

went through a snowstorm into the wide world.'" 

"Multiply this experience with ten thousand, and 
scatter these ten thousand instances of Cossack rule over 
the whole of Galicia and Bukowina, and you will have 
a picture— a very imperfect one— of what these two 
provinces, and particularly its Jewish population, had to 
suffer under the sway of the Russian invasion. 

"In Jablowitza, Bukowina, a house was fired by the 
soldiers who strictly prohibited any salvage. Not to 
freeze to death during a cold night, the unfortunate 
owner, a Jew, took two blankets from out of the burning 
house. He was crucified by the soldiers, and a guard 
posted below the crucifix until he expired. In Fuczka 
several Jews were hanged, one of them because he 
wanted to save his wife from violation. In Storozynetz, 
south of Czernowitz, Isaak Fellermayer, a Jew, was 
dragged out of bed in the dead of night, by four soldiers, 
who, without stating any reasons, attempted to hang him. 
The rope broke and the soldiers cut his throat, gouged 
out his eyes, and threw the naked corpse into the snow. 

"The Russians in Galicia reintroduced into modern 
warfare the Tartar bestiality of using helpless human 
beings as a cover in marching against the enemy. To 
be sure, these human beings were Jews. Not prisoners, 
mind you, but non-combatants, not men only, but old men, 
young men, women and children of both sexes. It was 
at Nadworna where the unnamable, the indescribable 
portent took place. The Russians huddled together one 
thousand five hundred Jewish families— octogenarians, 
old women, young matrons with infants at their breasts, 
school children, pell-mell, some seven thousand souls in 
all, and drove them as a human cover against the Austrian 
battlefront, marching right in the track of their 
victims. There are no words in any language emphatic 
enough to characterize such an exploit. 

"Try and depict, if you can, the situation— strive to 
bring the unthinkable close to your imagination! Fifteen 
hundred families, seven thousand heads, none of them 
able to bear arms, all the capable having been mobilized 
long ago, a huge swarm of the old, the sick, of women 
and children. These Jews, incapable of bearing arms, 
had been tortured for months by all the miseries of war; 



they had suffered hunger and cold, the Russians had 
looted their dwellings, burned their houses, destroyed 
their property; they had robbed, scourged and tormented 
them. And now they were lashed to the shambles like 
oxen— forward! pashol! They are fired at from the rear 
with revolvers and machine-guns, their backs are 
scourged with the knout, their loins are pierced with 
Cossack lances and their skulls battered by the butts of 
Cossack carbines, and thus they are driven against three 
hundred volcanoes, roaring and belching fire all along 
the Austrian front. The Austrians hear the tremendous 
outcry of the victims, the groaning of the mutilated and 
the dying, but they cannot help their misery; they must 
keep on firing ceaselessly, for behind this human holocaust 
the enemy is crouching for a spring; if they cease 
firing, the Russians will be upon them and the battle 
lost. And in this manner seven thousand souls, men, 
women and children, are slaughtered on the battle-line 
between two contending armed forces, unarmed themselves 
and perishing without a fighting chance in a Tartar 
welter of execution en masse." 



"A TOKEN OF MY COVENANT" 

What shall I render unto Thee? 
What praise sufficient could there be 
For all Thy benefits toward me, 
O Thou Most High? 

I'll drink Salvation's cup today 
Which Thou hast poured. Be Thou my stay! 
Assist me as Thy saint to pay 
My Vows to Thee. 

Remembering Thy Heavenly call, 
I'll strive to be sincere to all. 
I pray for grace lest I should fall 

From simple Truth. 

In thought, in word, in all my ways 
Thy holy standard I would raise. 
Nor please, nor honor self, but praise 
My Worthy King. 

Today in matters small or great, 
I'll serve with faithfulness and wait 
For further joys. Oh, blessed state. 
Thus serving Thee! 

I'll strive to "choose things that excel;" 
All anxious care I'll seek to quell. 
And all discouragements repel. 
And be content. 



I'll neither murmur nor repine! 
I'll trust my heart to care Divine 
To make of it a sacred shrine 
Where Thou canst dwell. 

VIRGINIA NOBLE STEPHENSON. 



R5826 : page 8 

1915-FOREIGN BRANCH REPORTS-1915 

REPORT OF BRITISH BRANCH 

Dear Brother Russell:— 

It is our pleasure and privilege to send you another 
Annual Report of the British Harvest work. We are 
very thankful to the Lord for the continued opportunities 
of service during a time of uncertainty and of the world's 
strife. The accompanying figures show that the war has 
not shut the work down, though it has interfered with 
its progress. On a broad summary it may be said that 
our output of books and tracts for the year is about two-thirds 
of that of last year, and not much less than that 
of the year 1913. During the current year we have circulated 
in Britain 90,700 of the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
and 64,300 books and booklets (SCENARIOS, 
MANNAS, and the pamphlets, TABERNACLE SHADOWS, 
Hell, etc.). The free distribution of Volunteer matter, 
free SCENARIOS and B. S. M. amounts to nearly eleven 
million copies. 

COLPORTEUR WORK STIMULATED BY DRAMA 

The Colporteur work has been greatly aided by the 
PHOTO-DRAMA. Indeed had it not been for the DRAMA 
the output of books would, to all appearances, have been 
very much less. The regular Colporteur work lost some 
of its most successful workers soon after the outbreak of 
the war, when the first pinch of money was felt. We 
cannot but feel sorry for this, for the country recovered 
from its panic when the demand for war material began 
to be felt, and since then there has been plenty of money 
in circulation, and the people are perishing for need of 
the Truth. We still think there is plenty of room for 
good Colporteurs, and it is still true that ground already 
gone over can again be canvassed to advantage. 

The Volunteer work has gone on well. Of the various 
issues provided for this privilege of service, the friends 
have distributed about seven and a half million copies. 
There is, however, a drop in the numbers of B. S. M.; 
for the Class-extension work was almost discontinued 
after the war began and after the advent of the DRAMA. 
There are some indications of the work reviving. 

There have been 207 exhibitions of the PHOTO-DRAMA, 
and the recorded attendance is 593,659, and there have 



been signed cards at the Finales to the number of 26,860. 

The number of Associated Bible Classes has greatly 
increased during the year and appreciation of the Truth 
is being maintained in them. The younger brethren show 
keen interest in the glorious Hope and are making advancement 
in knowledge and piety, whilst those more 
advanced are remaining steadfast in the faith and are 
rejoicing continually. All the classes are receiving Pilgrim 
visits as regularly as the circumstances permit. 

Many newspapers continue to publish the sermons, 
and the message continues to do a good work, as is 
seen by many evidences. 

The office work continues brisk, as the above figures 
will show. The letters in and out for the year total 
53,995. There are prospects of work for some time to 
come before us, and we continue to serve and wait. 

Ever praying the Lord's blessing for yourself, we are, 
dear brother. 

Your servants in the Lord, 

MANAGERS OF BRITISH BRANCH. 



BRITISH BRANCH ACTIVITIES FOR 1915 SUMMARIZED 

Volumes of SCRIPTURE STUDIES 98,410 

MANNAS, SCENARIOS, etc 64,305 

Free literature, B. S. M., etc 10,784,87 1 

Letters received and sent out 53,995 



REPORT OF AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH 

Dear Brother Russell:— 

It is with gladness that we can again report a year of 
progress; in fact, it is the best year yet, and much better 
than could have been expected in many ways. The circumstances 
of the year have, of course, been exceptional 
all over the world; but besides the dislocation of trade 
and unusual conditions through the war. there was the 

R5827 : page 8 

severe drought to contend with. Thousands of cattle and 
sheep were lost, or sold to be slaughtered and put in the 
refrigerators; thus the price of meat was kept up. Expensive 
horses were simply given away to save them 
from starvation. Foodstuffs for cattle brought enormous 
prices, and of course provisions went to great prices; for 
instance, butter reached 60 cents a pound. There was 
lack of employment, and hard times seemed upon us. The 
war, however, has kept certain trades busy, such as clothing, 
munitions, etc. At the same time the war has taken 
many men out of the country; their wives and dependents 
being provided for, so much distress has been averted. 
Counteracting the scarcity of money and uncertainty of 



things, the Colporteurs have found that these strenuous 
times (this terrible war and universal trouble which so 
clearly mark the ending of the "Present Evil World" and 
the inauguration of "the World to come wherein dwelleth 
Righteousness") have made people begin to consider and 
inquire as to the Divine Purpose. Had not some of our 
best Colporteurs been taken from their work to help the 
PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION for a time, many more volumes 
would have been placed. 

ALWAYS OPPORTUNITIES IF WE WATCH 

We still have a noble band of Colporteurs, and the 
work goes well, even over ground which had been covered 
several times before. While some have seemed to slacken 
in their zeal, as though they had made up their minds 
that the work ought to stop now, because they had expected 
it would, others take the wiser view, namely, that 
it will be time to stop when we cannot go on. No doubt 
the Lord can and will stop the work in His own due time; 
but even if the general Harvest work should stop, it 
would seem that the Lord will never leave His people 
with nothing to do. Surely there will always be some opportunities 
of service if we watch for them! When the 
Harvest ends, it will soon be time to "turn the pure 
language [message] to the people," whoever may be here 
to do it.— "Zephaniah 3:9". 

"So on we go not knowing. 

We would not if we might; 
We'd rather walk in the dark with God, 

Than go alone in the light." 

PHOTO-DRAMA: In Australia there have been about 
286 exhibitions, with a total attendance of about 295,000. 
In New Zealand 63 exhibitions with attendance of about 
50,100. In Fiji, 25 with an attendance of 6,800. 

These figures may seem small to you as compared 
with the U.S.A. and England, but our conditions are so 
different. Our territory is larger than the U. S. A., and 
yet the population of Australia is only about five millions, 
a little more than the population of Greater New York. 

The one DRAMA operating in Australia has traveled 
some 5,000 miles to visit from Queensland to West 
Australia. Good work has been done, and while it is surprising 
how many can see it without seeming lasting 
good, yet there are some in every State now rejoicing in 
the Truth and giving evidences of thorough consecration 
as a result of this work. 

The friends everywhere have contributed to this feature 
of the work generously, and what is included in the 
statement does not take into account several hundred 

R5827 : page 9 

pounds which have been spent in this connection by the 



Classes. The Perth Class ultimately paid all the expenses 
of producing the DRAMA for West Australia; the Adelaide 
friends did the same for South Australia, and New 
Zealand practically did the same for that country. The 
other classes also did remarkably well according to ability. 

PATIENTLY WAITING FOR THE LORD 

Notwithstanding all the extra expense of the DRAMA, 
the contributions to the general Tract Fund and Good 
Hopes have been maintained; thus you will be pleased to 
see how much in earnest the Australasian brethren are. 

There has been considerable growth in grace as well 
as in numbers. While possibly one or two here or there 
may seem to have slackened in interest, because they expected 
to have been with the Lord by this time, it is 
beautiful to see in others the opposite effect, the mellowing 
of character, the submission to and patient waiting 
for the Lord, willing to serve Him either here or there, 
this or the other side of the veil, simply biding His time. 

There has been more than usual response to the general 
distribution of the papers, throughout the year, but 
if as you intimate, we are to make this Branch self-supporting 
in future, we may have to curtail our expense 
in this direction. However, it is good to realize that the 
Lord is overruling the work, and is able to provide what 
is necessary to the accomplishment of His will, and we 
desire to do no more than pleases Him. 

We desire a continuation of your prayers and the 
prayers of all the Lord's people, that we may have wisdom 
and Divine guidance as we seek to continue the work 
to the Lord's glory and to the assistance of the Body 
waiting for the Deliverance.— "Romans 8:23". 

With Christian love to yourself and all coworkers. 

Yours in the Service of Christ. 

AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH. 

P. S.-WATCH TOWER subscribers number 1,150. B.S.M. 
subscribers number 1,350. 

Many of the latter subscribe for hundreds and some 
for thousands of copies monthly. 

PHOTO-DRAMA is now having a splendid run at Sydney. 

SUMMARY OF AUSTRALASIAN WORK 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES (cloth) 37,419 

(paper) 3,026 

Booklets 3,517 



Total 43,962 

PEOPLE'S PULPIT (B. S. M.), free 1,192,930 

WATCH TOWER 6,411 



Total 1,199,341 

Letters received 4,388 

Letters sent out 5,315 



EXPENDITURES 

Deficiency to Brooklyn to October, 1914..oe 1482: 1 1: 2 

Cost of Free Literature 337: 2: 1 1 

Postage on same 39:12: 9 

Freight, postage, etc 70:18: 1 

General Expense: Gas, Rent, etc 43:15: 

Pilgrim and extension work 92: 9: 4 

PHOTO-DRAMA Operations 876: 3: 7 

«2942:12:10 

RECEIPTS 

Donations received: 

Tract Fund ce560: 3: 2 

Special for PHOTO-DRAMA 422:15: 5 

Deficit due to Brooklyn 1959: 14: 3 

ce2942:12:10 
SWEDISH BRANCH REPORT 

Dear Brother Russell:— 

As the season for our yearly balancing of accounts 
has come round again, and we— contrary to earlier expectations 
of many in our ranks— still are human beings, 
and still, while in this "weak" condition, have the blessed 
privilege to partake in the service of the Truth and in 
the wonderful joys and sufferings connected with that 
service, I have herewith the great pleasure of sending 
you some statements from the work accomplished through 
the Society's Swedish branch during the last year. 

Looking around us in this part today, we cannot but 
feel very, very humble and thankful indeed, seeing how 
merciful and good the dear Heavenly Father has been 
toward His people in this country, amongst whom we 
have the greatly appreciated privilege to serve as a representative 
of yourself— His chosen and faithful servant. 

The fact is, that in spite of the many hindrances and 
difficulties (financially and otherwise) directly and indirectly 
caused by the present European war, the Lord has 
held the "doors" of opportunity wide open for us during 
the whole year, and never in the past did so many of the 
Swedish people in one year have the true explanation of 
God's Word set before their minds. We have also in 
this year witnessed very encouraging proofs that this 
labor has not been done "in vain." A good number of 
the Lord's people in "Babylon," as well as some out of it 
all over the country, have got their eyes of understanding 
opened to see the wonderful Plan of God. Nearly a 
hundred of these have already symbolized their full consecration 
to the Lord and to obedience to His holy will. 

One of the primary means to accomplish these results 
was your wonderful PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION, which 



has been publicly presented in from one to five places at 

the same time on 279 days out of the 365 of the year, 

with a total attendance of more than 400,000. Although 

our economic circumstances caused the stopping of the 

DRAMA a few weeks ago, we have still a good hope, 

D.V., to be enabled to start this branch again very soon. 

The dear Colporteurs have also, by their energetic and 

faithful labor of love for the Truth, succeeded to such 

an extent that we have circulated 8,157 more cloth-bound 

copies of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES than we did during 

the previous year. One single Colporteur sister— physically 

not very strong— has sold 5,962 copies of the STUDIES 

this year. During the last three years and three months 

this same sister has sold 18,662 copies. 

The free Tract distribution, the Newspaper work and 
the regular Pilgrim service have also been carried on 

R5828 : page 9 

with the usual success. Six Swedish brethren have taken 
part in the Pilgrim service, and their work has been 
highly appreciated among the friends everywhere. The 
same can be said also respecting our Conventions, quite 
a number of which have been held in different parts of 
the country. Although a considerable decrease in the 
number of foreign subscriptions on the Swedish WATCH 
TOWER has taken place in the year, still the total number 
of its subscribers has not decreased in the least, but 
exceeds all previous figures. 

Our office work has grown immensely. As the book 
stock here was nearly exhausted just after October, 1914, 
we have during this year republished all six volumes of 
the STUDIES (in seven editions, or 73,500 copies), the 
MANNA book (4,000 copies), the DRAMA textbook (two 
editions, 13,000 copies), the free SCENARIOS (four editions, 
248,000 copies), pamphlets, etc. The correspondence 
has also grown to a considerable degree. The following 
figures will show you as to the exactness of these things. 

R5828 : page 10 

Respecting the future of our work, the outlook is (as 
we have chronologically passed our last Scriptural "landmark," 
and are surrounded by the roaring of the towering 
waves in the eddy of which present governments and 
institutions, already shaking and trembling, will soon be 
overthrown) more hidden than at earlier times, and our 
prospects are correspondingly in a still fuller degree built 
wholly and only on faith. Yet, we are of good courage, 
knowing that the Lord Himself shall never leave nor 
forsake any of those who are truly His, but shall overrule 
and make all things serve their highest and eternal 
interests, according to His own wisdom and love. Today 
the Truth friends in Sweden are not less (but probably 
more) determined than ever by the Lord's grace to remain 
faithful toward Him and His Cause, and to use all opportunities 



still remaining to proclaim His glorious Truth, 
until the final end, that we also, with yourself and all of 
His faithful followers, "in due time," may hear His 
blessed "Well done, good and faithful servants." 

We are continually more grateful than words can tell 
you, our beloved Brother Russell, for all the blessings 
and helps we have received through your faithful and 
important ministries in the Lord. You have indeed a 
large room in our hearts, and you are always with thankfulness 
and joy included in our prayers before the Throne 
of Heavenly Grace. 

Humbly but heartily conveying to you the warmest 
Christian love and greetings from all the Swedish 
brethren, I am 

Your brother and fellow-servant in the Lord, 
AUG. LUNDBORG. 

SUMMARY OF THE SWEDISH WORK 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, circulated at 

cost 41,280 

DRAMA SCENARIOS 1 1,993 

Various other books and booklets, MANNA, 

TABERNACLE SHADOWS, etc 7, 134 



Total 60,407 

EKO FRAN TALARSTOLEN (BIBLE STUDENTS 

MONTHLY), issued free 370,560 

Other free tracts and copies of the Swedish 

WATCH TOWER 69,286 

DRAMA SCENARIOS in Paper form, free 295,600 



Total 735,446 

Amounting in tract pages to 18,309,024 



Subscribers to the Swedish WATCH TOWER 2,363 

Sets of the SWEDISH TOWER, cloth bound 

and unbound 480 

Subscribers to EKO FRAN TALARSTOLEN 262 

Regular subscriptions for the Sermons in 

Swedish Newspapers 1,208 

Meetings held under the auspices of the 

Society 1,557 

Public PHOTO-DRAMA presentations 1,256 

Miles traveled in preaching tours 177,399 

Letters and cards sent out 10,104 

Letters and cards received 8,434 

Total number of various sendings out from 

the office 62,608 

EXPENDITURES 

Pilgrims, Conventions and 

other meetings Kr. 9,942.58 = $ 2,687.18 

Translations, printing, binding, 

paper, etc 51,835.43= 14,009.58 



Freight and postage 5,632.71= 1,522.35 

Helps to poor Colporteurs... 2,246.82= 607.25 

The newspaper service 1,444.30= 390.35 

Office expenses, rent, light, 

heat, etc 7,121.32= 1,924.68 

The PHOTO-DRAMA service 49,457.12= 13,366.79 



Total Kr. 127,680.28 =$34,508.18 

RECEIPTS 

Voluntary donations to 

Tract Fund Kr. 26,413.03 =$ 7,138.65 

Voluntary donations to 

DRAMA service 12,653.64= 3,419.90 

Swedish WATCH TOWER 

subscriptions 5,960.98= 1,611.08 

Sold books, pamphlets, etc.. 50,524.08 = 13,655.16 

Total Kr. 95,551.73 =$25,824.79 

Deficit 32,128.55= 8,683.39 

Kr. 127,680.28 =$34,508.18 



REPORT FROM FRANCE AND SWITZERLAND 

The Society's representative in its Geneva Office 
writes as follows: 

Dear Brother Russell:— It is with great joy and 
heartfelt gratitude toward our God and Father and toward 
our Savior Jesus Christ that I forward to you the yearly 
Report of the French work. We have learned in Christ's 
School to love our brethren. Our great wish is to progress 
in this line and, above all, to love the one whom our 
Savior has chosen as our Pastor to give us "meat in due 
season." We have at heart the French work, which we 
both cherish. It is, therefore, with special gratitude that 
we are able to thank our God, who has deigned to allow 
us to glorify His holy name amongst His French children, 
and to gather by means of the sharp sickle of Truth all 
those who are desirous of making a Covenant of Sacrifice. 
("Psalm 50:5\) This last year shows an increase in 
every branch, especially as regards public lectures, the 
total attendance being 30,795. Below find a statement of 
the Society's work during the past fiscal year: 

Letters and cards received 2,320 

Letters and cards sent out 1,397 

Volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES sold.... 854 

Various booklets sold 5,200 

Bibles and Concordances sold 102 

Free literature (B. S. M.) distributed 83,000 

Public meetings held 209 

Numbers in attendance 30,795 



Expenditures for public meetings 2,81 1 Frs. 

Total cash receipts 16,303.76 " 

Total expenditure 16,237 " 



Balance cash on hand 66.76 Frs. 



REPORT FROM BIBLE STUDENTS, HUNGARY 

Beloved Brother Russell:— 

I am very glad to write you, by the grace of the Lord, 
regarding the spreading of literature and books this year 
(1915), and of the many joys and blessings which God 
has bestowed on us in all the trials and testings of the 
past: 

SUMMARY 

Books circulated 1,650 

Booklets 600 

WATCH TOWERS 6,000 

BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY, etc 40,000 

The issuance of Vol. II.-THE TIME IS AT HAND 
(Hungarian)— is in progress. 

Incoming letters, 957; outgoing, 725. 

207 have made a covenant with our Lord. 

Public meetings held 90 

Parlor meetings 4,700 

Meetings in the country 30 

A good number of Rumanian publications were 
circulated. 

We have received the books sent, and are very 
thankful. 

With great love, hope and faithfulness. 

Your colaborer and brother, 

CHARLESZ SZABO 

R5828 : page 1 1 

JAMAICA MISSION REPORT 

Number Pilgrims at work 5 

Places visited (no classes) 7 

Public meetings held 17 

Total attendance 777 

Number semi-private meetings 300 

Total attendance 2,944 

Number parlor meetings 104 

Total attendance 810 

Number of miles traveled 3,471 

Volumes of STUDIES IN SCRIPTURES sold... 500 
Free matter-BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY 60,000 

R5829 : page 1 1 



WORK FOR THE BLIND 

GOULD FREE LIBRARY FOR THE BLIND, S. BOSTON, MASS. 
(WATCH TOWER Supervision.) 

Chapters of SCRIPTURE STUDIES loaned out. 1 0,654 
WATCH TOWERS, Pamphlets, and BIBLE 

STUDENTS MONTHLY 3,174 

Weekly Sermons 2,581 

Letters received 1,484 

Letters sent out 2, 176 

Sermons mailed to England 3,833 

Expenses $1,073.90 



R5829 : page 1 1 

HE ASCENDED, LEADING CAPTIVES 

—JANUARY 2.- ACTS 1:1-14\— 

FIVE SPECIAL POINTS OF THIS STUDY: (1) THE NUMBER 

OF APOSTLES LIMITED TO TWELVE; (2) THE IMPORTANCE OF 

THE KINGDOM TO COME; (3) IT WAS NOT THEN DUE 

TIME TO EXPLAIN THE TIME OF THE KINGDOM'S ESTABLISHMENT; 

(4) BEFORE THE KINGDOM WOULD COME 

THE DISCIPLES WOULD HAVE A GREAT WORK TO DO IN 

PROCLAIMING IT THROUGHOUT THE EARTH; (5) AS 

THE LORD'S ASCENSION WAS KNOWN TO FEW AND WAS WITHOUT 

COMMOTION, SO HIS SECOND COMING WOULD IN 

LIKE MANNER BE KNOWN TO FEW AND BE AS A THIEF. 

"When He ascended on High, He led a multitude of 
captives, and gave gifts unto men."— 'Ephesians 4:8\ 

OUR lesson is from the pen of St. Luke, as indicated 
by the first verse. ("Luke 1:3\) 
There are five special features to the Study. 
First is the declaration that the Apostles 
were only those whom Jesus had especially 
selected to that office— St. Paul, by Divine 
arrangement, subsequently taking the place 
of Judas. This is in contradiction to the 
claim of the Bishops of England and of 
Rome that they are Apostolic Bishops, with 
apostolic powers, but it is in full agreement with the Master's 
statement that all others claiming to be apostles are 
"liars."— v Revelation 2:2\ 

The second point of the lesson is that Jesus, before 
leaving His Apostles, instructed them concerning the 
Kingdom of God. This is in full accord with all the records 
of His previous teachings. Nearly all of His teachings 
were in respect to this wonderful Kingdom of God 



which will be established when He will come in power 
and great glory, and of which His invited disciples and 
followers are to be members— sharing His glory and His 
Throne, as His joint-heirs. 

The third point we notice especially is referred to in 
"Verses 6 and 7". The Apostles inquired respecting the 
Kingdom and the time for its blessing of Israel; but Jesus 
informed them that it was not for them to know the times 
and seasons respecting the Kingdom ("Acts 1:7")— that the 
matter was entirely in the Father's hands. The fourth 
point of our Study centers in "Verse 8", where the Lord 
declares that prior to the establishment of His Kingdom 
His Church would witness to it throughout the earth- 
after receiving the blessing at Pentecost. The fifth point 
of special notice centers in "Verse 1 1", in the statement of 
the angels, "This same Jesus. ..shall so come in like 
manner as ye have seen Him go into Heaven." 

WRONG VIEWS OF THE KINGDOM 

Peculiar and conflicting views respecting the Kingdom 
of God, the Kingdom of Messiah, are held by Protestants. 
Much more logical, but equally unscriptural, is the view 
held by Roman Catholics. The confusion of Protestants 
is lamentable. Some hold that somehow the Kingdom of 
God began at Pentecost; others hold that somehow it began 
when Jerusalem was destroyed; and yet all of them 
realize that the promises made by Jesus respecting His 
Second Advent must still be future. 

Roman Catholics hold that they set up the Kingdom of 
God about the year 800 A.D.; first, by dividing between 
clergy and laity, and exalting the clergy to be a special 
class; then, the Roman Church having great power, and 
the kings of earth being comparatively weak. Papacy established 
a spiritual rule over the kings and princes of 
the earth in the name of Christ— the Popes being recognized 
as Christ's vicegerants, as reigning instead of 
Christ, as His substitutes. 

The kings and princes of earth were informed that 
they might continue to rule the people if they would be 
obedient to the Papacy; that in that event they would be 
kingdoms of God; but that if they should fail to be 
obedient to Papacy, the latter would inform the people 
that such kings were no longer to be recognized, but were 
disowned by God's spiritual Kingdom, and would appoint 
other kings and other princes in their stead. The rulers 
of Europe readily assented to this partnership, by which 
the people would recognize them as having Divine authorization 
to rule. Matters have progressed in this way 
for eleven hundred years. Austria and Hungary still fully 
assent to the Divine power in Papacy— though others of 
the kingdoms of Europe have more or less broken the pact. 

Great Britain was one of the first to break with 
Papacy, under the leadership of King Henry VIII. He 
had a dispute with the Pope, and forthwith proceeded to 
organize the British people as another kingdom of God 



and the Church of England as a separate spiritual kingdom 
from Papacy; and the king himself and his successors 
became the heads of both the Church and the state. 
Lutheranism made similar progress in Scandinavia and 
amongst the German States. These acknowledged Lutheranism; 
and Lutheranism in turn acknowledged them as 
kingdoms of God. Thus today the kingdoms of this 
world are still kingdoms of God on the authority originally 
from Papacy and subsequently through Protestants. 

AN ERROR-CHRIST'S KINGDOM FUTURE 

All intelligent people. Catholics and Protestants, now 
perceive that a serious mistake was made— that the kingdoms 
of this world never were kingdoms of Christ, and 
that the name Christendom has been misapplied to them. 
That name signifies Christ's Kingdom; and it is very inappropriate 
to apply it to the warring nations of Europe, 
now seeking to blow each other off the face of the land 
and off the face of the sea. Moreover, the Apostle declares 
that "if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he 
is none of His," and tells us that the Spirit of Christ is 
manifest in meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, 
brotherly kindness, love.— 'Romans 8:9"; "Galatians 5:22,23'. 

We are sure that in all those warring nations there are 

R5829 : page 12 

saintly people who manifest the Spirit of Christ; but we 
are equally sure that the warring kingdoms themselves do 
not manifest this spirit, and are "none of His." On the 
contrary, they manifest what the Apostle styles, works of 
the flesh and of the Devil— anger, malice, hatred, envy, 
strife, bitterness. Bible students are convinced that the 
great war now started in Europe is the beginning of that 
great trouble which the Bible calls "Armageddon," and 
which the Bible declares will prepare mankind and usher 
them into the Kingdom of God's dear Son, which will be 
"the desire of all nations" ("Haggai 2:7"), and through 
which a Reign of Righteousness will be established 
throughout the whole earth. 

Jesus did not pretend to tell His people how long or 
how short the time would be before the establishment of 
His Kingdom. He declared the matter fully in the Divine 
care and not proper to be revealed to God's people then. 
But elsewhere He did tell them of certain indications that 
would be given them at the proper time, by which they 
would know, and be enabled to lift up their heads and rejoice. 
realizing that their deliverance was drawing nigh. 

Similarly we are not to understand that the Apostles 
expected Christ's Kingdom in their day, before their 
death. On the contrary, we remember that St. Paul, 
while foretelling his own death, declared that some of the 
Lord's people would not sleep in death, but would be alive 
at the Second Coming of Christ and be "changed in a 
moment, in the twinkling of an eye." ("1 Corinthians 15:51,52".) 



Similarly St. Peter, without attempting to 
tell of the times and seasons, declared that he put his 
message into writing and committed it to holy men for the 
benefit of the Church after his death.— ~ 2 Peter 1:15". 
Our Lord's words in Verse 8, to the effect that His 
followers would give a witness throughout the entire 
world, was a further demonstration that the Kingdom 
would not come in a few days or a few years, but would 
be long enough away to give opportunity for a full testimony 
of the Lord's favor to all people, nations, kindreds 
and tongues. And so it has been. 

"THIS SAME JESUS SHALL SO COME" 

Bible students are coming to notice the exact wording 
of the Scriptures more carefully than formerly. The 
statement that Jesus would so come again in like manner 
as they saw Him go into Heaven, has been generally 
taken to mean that Jesus would come a fleshly or human 
being. This would be a contradiction of the statement 
that He was put to death in flesh, but quickened, made 
alive, resurrected, in spirit. (" 1 Peter 3:18".) It would 
also contradict the Master's words that He was about to 
ascend up where He was before— to the spirit plane, or 
condition. It would also contradict His declaration, "Yet 

R5830 : page 12 

a little while, and the world seeth Me no more; but ye 
shall see Me."— "John 14:19". 

In a word, the entire tenor of Scripture is to the effect 
that when Jesus left the Heavenly glory and was made 
flesh, it was not the Divine intention that He should remain 
a fleshly being forever, but quite to the contrary— 
that He took this earthly condition for the suffering of 
death and would not need it afterward. Adam was a 
fleshly, human being; and, in order to be the Redeemer of 
Adam and his race, Jesus needed to be a perfect human 
being— "holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners." 
("Hebrews 7:26".) But there could be no reason why He 
must continue to be a fleshly being and out of touch with 
all the Heavenly conditions. 

When we remember that the perfect Adam was a little 
lower than the angels, we must see that the perfect man 
Jesus was also a little lower than the angels. But that He 
did not keep this lower condition is fully asserted by St. 
Paul, who, after telling about His faithfulness even unto 
death, declares, "Wherefore God hath highly exalted 
Him, and hath given Him a name above every name." 
("Philippians 2:9, 10".) The exalted Jesus is a spirit 
Being of the very highest order— "of the Divine nature" 
—who sat down at the Father's right hand, on the Father's 
Throne, waiting for the time when He would take His 
own Throne, establish the Millennial Kingdom and associate 
the Church with Him in His Throne as His Bride. 
"To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with Me in 



My Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down 
with My Father in His Throne."— "Revelation 3:21\ 

During the forty days after His resurrection, Jesus 
appeared and disappeared some ten or eleven times, mostly 
for a few moments each. Our lesson tells us that during 
these visits to His faithful He gave them instructions. He 
did not appear to them as a spirit being to strike them 
down with the glory of His presence, shining above the 
brightness of the sun, as He subsequently appeared to 
Saul of Tarsus. ("Acts 26:13".) On the contrary, He appeared 
as a man, sometimes in one form and sometimes in 
another form— as a gardener, as a traveler, etc. On two 
occasions He appeared in bodies similar to the one in 
which He had been crucified, showing the spear marks 
and the nail prints. These bodies were materialized in 
the upper room when the doors were shut; and of course 
clothing was materialized at the same time, for He was 
not naked. 

These manifestations of Jesus were for the purpose of 
demonstrating unquestionably to His disciples the fact 
that He was no longer dead. His appearance in different 
bodies was to prove that none of these bodies was His real 
spiritual body, but merely a manifestation. The Bible tells 
us of previous manifestations of the same kind when our 
Lord was a spirit being, before He became a man. Away 
back in Abraham's time, the Lord with two angels materialized 
and talked with Abraham and ate with him. 
("Genesis 18".) When Jesus arose from the dead, quickened 
in spirit. He had gotten back again to where He was 
before. The description of the resurrection change of 
the Church fits equally well to the Lord. He was sown 
in death— "in weakness, raised in power; sown in dishonor 
[a companion of thieves], raised in glory; sown an 
animal body, raised a spiritual body."—" 1 Cor. 15:42-44". 

"COME IN LIKE MANNER" 

It should be carefully noted that the angels did not 
say, "come in like form." The Lord departed from them 
in some kind of fleshly body, or form, which would enable 
them to see Him ascending into the clouds as they could 
not see His spirit body. The manner of Jesus' going did 
not appertain to His form. Our Lord's manner of going 
was quiet, secret, unknown to the world, known only to 
His disciples, without noise, without ostentation, without 
trumpets or bugles. He will so come in like manner- 
unknown to the world. He will be present as a thief in 
the night; and none will then know of His presence, except 
His disciples. 

How contrary all this is to what we once supposed, 
when we thought of our Savior as forever degraded to 
human conditions, which at their best are a little lower 
than the angelic! How sadly we misunderstood the matter 
when we used to sing: 

"Five bleeding wounds He bears. 



Received on Calvary; 
They pour effectual prayers. 
They strongly plead for me!" 

When we thus sang, we evidently did not understand the 

R5830 : page 13 

methods of the Lord's intercession for His saints any 
more than we understood His glorification as a spirit 
being, "far above angels." 

Now we understand that the seventh trumpet, with 
which He comes, is not a literal trumpet, but a symbolical 
one; and that like the preceding six, it makes 
no noise upon the air. Now we see that the world will not 
be conscious of the Master's Second Advent during the 
thief stage, nor until the Great Time of Trouble, when He 
shall be revealed in flaming fire, taking vengeance. 
("2 Thessalonians 1:9'.) What the world will then see will 
be the trouble; and gradually they will come to understand 
that the great King is identified with the trouble 
which will be making preparation for the establishment 
of the Reign of Righteousness by the overthrow of everything 
that is unrighteous. 



R5830 : page 13 

THE SPIRIT AT PENTECOST 

—JANUARY 9.- ACTS 2:1-13".— 

WHAT THE PENTECOSTAL BLESSING WAS-ITS IMPORTANCE 
TO THE CHURCH THEN AND NOW-THE LESSON IT TAUGHT- 
HOW UNDERSTOOD BY SOME AND MISUNDERSTOOD BY OTHERS. 

"Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that 
the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?"—" 1 Corinthians 3: 16". 

PENTECOST was a notable day in the Jewish 
calendar. It marked the fiftieth day in the 
harvest— after the gathering of the first ripe 
sheaf. Our Lord in His glorious resurrected 
condition was the Antitype of that 
sheaf, the First-fruit of God in the great 
Plan of Redemption. The first forty days, 
as we have seen, were used in giving occasional 
lessons to the disciples— helping them 
over the difficulties of their position, getting 
them properly started, with proper faith in the resurrection, 
to make a good witness and to gather out the Lord's 
jewels from amongst men. But when Jesus left them at 
the end of the forty days. He instructed them not to 
begin their ministry at once, but to wait until they would 
be endued with power from on High— by the Holy Spirit. 



Accordingly, they waited ten days, and then their waiting 
was rewarded by the outpouring of His Spirit upon 
them in the upper room on the fiftieth day, Pentecost. 
They did transact just one item of business during those 
ten days; but it was without authority from the Lord, and 
was never recognized by Him. It consisted in casting 
lots for a successor to Judas. As they cast lots on only 
two men, it followed that one of the two must be the 
choice of the lots. But the Lord never recognized the 
matter, and we hear nothing more of Matthias whom they 
chose. Instead, in due time God brought forth St. Paul 
—"not a whit behind the very chiefest of the Apostles." 

APPEARED IN GOD'S PRESENCE 

When our Lord ascended, the Apostle declares. He 
appeared in the presence of God for us— for His Church, 
for all who would comply with the terms and conditions 
of discipleship. ('Hebrews 9:24".) He did not appear 
for the world, but merely for us. He loved the world. He 
died for the world, and He is yet to bless the world; but 
the time for the blessing of the world must wait until 
first the Divine Program in respect to the Church shall 
have been carried out. 

How much of our Lord's time was spent in going to 
the Heavenly Throne, and how much of the ten days 
was necessary for the return of the Holy Spirit, we do 
not know; but we do know from the Apostle's words that 
the Holy Spirit sent forth upon the waiting disciples in 
the upper room was the testimony to them that Jesus' 
work was satisfactory to the Father, that the Father gave 
the Holy Spirit to Him for His Church, and that Jesus 
shed it forth.-" Acts 2:33". 

The events of that day of Pentecost were very valuable 
to the Church at that time, but have been equally 
valuable to all of the Lord's members. The Scriptures 
represent that all who are received into God's family 
receive a begetting of the Holy Spirit; and this begetting 
was what Pentecost meant to those waiting ones in the 
upper room. From that time onward they were sons of 
God; and "if children, then heirs, heirs of God and joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ" their Lord. ("Romans 8:17".) 
And so it is with us who have come into the Body of 
Christ since Pentecost. We do not receive special manifestations 
of Divine power, such as the cloven tongues 
that came upon those disciples; but we do receive from 
God the same Holy Spirit which they received. 

MEANING OF THE PENTECOSTAL BLESSING 

The Lord represents Jesus and His Church under the 
figure of a great Priest— Jesus was the Head of that 
Priest; the Apostles were the first members of the Body, 

R5831 :page 13 



under the Head; and all the Church of Christ from then 
till now are members in particular of the same Body, the 
same Church. The Holy Spirit came with an outward 
manifestation upon Jesus, the Head of the Church, that 
we might know thus that He was accepted by the Father. 
Then at Pentecost the Holy Spirit came with an outward 
manifestation upon the disciples, in order that they might 
know that they had been received into the same fellowship, 
as members of the same Body. 

But it was not necessary for us to have an outward 
demonstration today; for this pouring out of God's blessing 
was upon the Church as a whole; and as we come into 
the Church of Christ by a full consecration of our hearts 
to do the Lord's will, and with full trust in the work of 
Jesus, we receive the Spirit and are counted in as members 
of that Church Body, though without any outward 
demonstration whatever. 

We can see a necessity for the outward demonstration 
in the case of the Apostles for two reasons: First, they 
were Jews, and had believed in Jesus, had made their 
consecration and had been received into discipleship by 
Him. But the Father could not receive any into sonship 
until after Jesus had died. Additionally, the Father could 
not recognize any human beings as His children and grant 
them full forgiveness of sins, full reconciliation and an 
entrance into His family, until Jesus, as the great High 
Priest, had not only died, but had ascended up on High 
and proffered or made applicable the merit of His death 
on our behalf. And so we read respecting the Apostles 
before Christ's death: "The Holy Spirit was not yet 
given, because Jesus was not yet glorified."— s John 7:39 s . 

There had been no human sons of God recognized 
from the lime Adam, the first of these sons, sinned, until 
Jesus came as the Son of God. The Jews were members 
of the House of Servants, as we read: "Moses verily 
was faithful in all His House as a servant, for a testimony 
of those things which were to be spoken after; but 
Christ as a Son over His own House, whose House are 
we." (^Hebrews 3:5, 6 s .) The Pentecostal blessing, therefore, 

R5831 : page 14 

was the beginning of the recognition of the followers 
of Jesus as sons of God and heirs of God's promise. 

GIFTS AND FRUITS OF THE SPIRIT 

Another matter: At Pentecost the Lord gave gifts to 
the Apostles, and to the remainder of the Church through 
them. These gifts were represented in the ability to 
speak with various tongues and in power to perform 
miracles— heal the sick, etc. Evidently these gifts were 
necessary for the establishment of the Church; but they 
must have all expired when the Apostles, through whom 
alone they were bestowed upon others, fell asleep in death. 
But while God has not continued the gifts with the 



Church, He has promised something still better; i.e., the 
fruits of the Spirit. The fruits are more valuable than 
the gifts, because they represent character and not merely 
powers.— ' 1 Corinthians 12:31; 13\ 

The fruits of the Spirit are meekness, gentleness, 
patience, long-suffering, brotherly kindness, love; and 
these evidence that the individual possessing them has 
become a member of the Church of Christ, and has been 
begotten of the Holy Spirit. Much therefore as we rejoice 
that the Apostles had the gifts and afterwards cultivated 
the fruits, we are glad that we now have the fruits 
of the Spirit. 

One of the gifts of the Spirit was manifested by one of 
the Apostles immediately— the power of speaking with unknown 
tongues. They were all Galileans, and therefore 
used to only the one dialect. The testimony, however, is 
that under the Divine power of the Holy Spirit they spoke 
in various languages so that the people of the countries 
represented by those languages understood clearly and 
were astonished, saying, "Are not all these which speak 
Galileans, and how hear we every man in our own 
tongue?"-" Acts 2:7, 8\ 

We are not to understand that the miracle was in the 
hearing, but in the speaking. It was not that all the 
people from the different lands heard the same utterance, 
as though it had been in their own language, as stated for 
them, but that the different Apostles speaking these different 
tongues were all heard by the people and appreciated 
by the people who used those tongues. It was a 
miracle, surely, and had the designed effect. Not merely 
was it a convincing power and experience for the Apostles 
themselves and for the other believers of that time, but 
it became a witness to the holy Jews who had gathered 
at Jerusalem from all the nations of the world. 

These annual gatherings at Jerusalem were directly 
commanded by the Lord through Moses, and were observed 
by all the Jews who remained loyal to God and 
His Word. If they had moved into other countries and 
were located there for business reasons, they nevertheless 
came regularly every year to Jerusalem to worship 
the Lord. It was these reverential people who were especially 
blessed at Pentecost. For although some of the 
number tried to explain away the phenomenon by saying 
that the Apostles had evidently drunk too freely of grape 
juice, new wine, nevertheless, apparently the majority of 
those who heard were provoked with such an interpretation 
and took more readily to what the Apostles said, and 
realized in time that they were all telling the same 
glorious Message of the love of God, though telling it in 
various languages, so that all present might understand. 

A TEMPLE OF GOD 

The figure of a temple is variously used in respect to 
the Church. Each Christian is spoken of as being a 
temple of the Holy Spirit after he receives the begetting 



of the Spirit. Each congregation might be considered 
the Temple of God. And the Church as a whole when 
gathered to the Heavenly condition will be God's Temple, 
in that God will dwell in them. According to another 
figure, each Christian is a living stone in preparation for 
the great Temple of the future, now being chiseled, 
polished, made ready for his place in the Temple above. 

The thought is that as God in olden times was represented 
in the Tabernacle by the Shekinah glory of the 
Most Holy, and was also represented in the literal temple 
of Jerusalem, so He is represented now in all those who 
are begotten by His Holy Spirit, and will be represented 
further by all who walk in harmony with their spirit-begetting 
and continue to abide in the Lord's love. 



R5831 :page 14 

ST. PETER'S PENTECOSTAL SERMON 

—JANUARY 16.-' ACTS 2:21-39\— 

THE SIGNIFICATION OF PENTECOST-SPEAKING WITH OTHER 
TONGUES-ST. PETER'S EXPLANATION OF THIS-DAVID NOT 
ASCENDED TO HEAVEN-HE SPAKE NOT OF HIMSELF, BUT 
PROPHETICALLY OF JESUS' RESURRECTION-PRICKED TO 
THE HEART-OTHER FIGURATIVE EXPRESSIONS-NONE 
TO BE SAVED IN IGNORANCE, THOUGH JESUS DIED FOR ALL. 

"Whosoever shall call on the name of 
the Lord shall be saved."— v Acts 2:21\ 

TODAY'S lesson is a most interesting Bible 
Study; for it covers a wide range of Truth. 
The Apostles, in harmony with Jesus' instructions, 
had waited in the upper room for 
the Pentecostal blessing, as necessary to 
their qualification before beginning their 
great work as the representatives and 
mouthpieces of Jesus and Jehovah. It came 
on the fiftieth day after Jesus' resurrection, 
in harmony with the type.— 'Leviticus 23: 15-2T; 
"1 Corinthians 15:20". 

The Apostles received the begetting of the Holy Spirit 
and with it certain outward manifestations of miraculous 
power, which in turn they were privileged to communicate 
to all believers by the laying on of their hands. These 
special "gifts of the Spirit" were evidently intended to 
assist in the establishment of the Church and to mark 
the Apostles as the special representatives of God. These 
were but eleven in number, until St. Paul was received 
of the Lord, and became "not one whit behind the very 
chiefest of the Apostles." ("2 Cor. 12:1 P.) We have these 
Apostles still with us, represented by their teachings. 

Although, later on, certain Bishops of the Church 



claimed to be Apostles also, they never have had any authority 
according to the Bible, never have been able to 
convey any of the miraculous gifts and are referred to 
by Jesus as falsely claiming authority which they do not 
possess. (" Revelation 2:2\) With the death of the 
Apostles and the death of those to whom they had committed 
these gifts, all such gifts necessarily ceased, being 
supplanted by the fruits of the Spirit, developed through 
knowledge, faith and obedience. 

SYNOPSIS OF ST. PETER'S SERMON 

The eleven Apostles, exercising their gift of tongues, 
began to talk to the assembled crowd of Jews who were 
worshiping at Jerusalem— not merely residents of Palestine, 

R5831 : page 15 

but thousands from all parts of the world, gathered 

at Jerusalem at that season in harmony with the demands 

of the Law, to worship the Lord. From their 

dress, etc., the Apostles were recognized as Galileans. 

Much astonishment therefore was manifested when they 

were heard talking in the various tongues of the various 

nations. At first some thought that they were intoxicated 

and uttering merely peculiar sounds; but presently 

the multitude began to gather themselves to one and another 

of the Apostles as they heard their own language 

spoken. This not only called attention to the Apostles, 

but also manifested a Divine power and made their 

R5832 : page 15 

Message the more impressive. 

The essence of the preaching was that Jesus, who had 
been crucified, had risen from the dead and had now shed 
forth this miraculous power upon His followers. This led 
to the mention of the prophecy of David which foretold 
the resurrection of Messiah, saying, "Thou wilt not leave 
My soul in Sheol"-Hades. fPsalm 16:10'; 'Acts 2:27\) 
The Apostles pointed out that this was fulfilled in Jesus, 
in that God raised Him from the dead; but that it was 
never fulfilled in the Prophet David, who on the contrary 
was still dead in his sepulchre, awaiting resurrection. 
David, as a prophet, had merely foretold the resurrection 
of Jesus. 

With various details the preaching went on, explaining 
the righteousness of Jesus, the beauties of His teaching, 
the wickedness of those who had crucified Him without a 
cause, and showing how the entire Jewish nation was 
guilty before God, because as a people they were bound 
by their Law Covenant and the action of their officials 
had brought condemnation and guilt upon the whole 
people. Three thousand believed. The case was so 
plain that they were pricked to the heart— they realized 
that Jesus was the Son of God, and that a great crime 



had been committed in crucifying Him. With fear and 
sorrow they cried out, "What shall we do?" The answer 
was, "Repent"— God is gracious; He will forgive you. 
In further explanation, they were told that they and their 
rulers had done this wicked deed in ignorance, and that 
God would very graciously forgive those who would 
acknowledge their sin and call upon Him for forgiveness. 
They did so; they made a consecration of their 
lives to God, and became followers of Jesus. 

DIVINE FAVOR ABOUT TO RETURN TO ISRAEL 

The Bible declares that the Jewish people, because of 
their rejection of Messiah, were cut off from God's 
favor. Nevertheless the time is at hand when they shall 
be brought back again to the favor of God. Their eyes 
have been holden for more than eighteen centuries now, 
as are the eyes of the world in general. Only the few 
have the eyes of their understanding open to see the 
Truth respecting these matters. St. Paul avers this, saying, 
"The god of this world hath blinded the minds of 
them that believe not."— v 2 Corinthians 4:4\ 

But through the Prophet, God has assured us that in 
due time all the blind eyes will be opened and all the deaf 
ears will be unstopped. (" Isaiah 35:5'.) To the Jew first, 
and also to the Gentile, will eventually come a full 
knowledge of the grace of God through Christ. It will 
then be for them to accept or reject intelligently. The 
rejectors will be wicked in a sense that none of the world 
are wicked now, because their wrong-doings are largely 
based upon ignorance and superstition. When brought 
to the full light, their crisis, or judgment, will be to everlasting 
life if they accept and obey the Lord, or to everlasting 
death if they sin against and wilfully reject the 
light and opportunities of that blessed Millennial Day. 

Respecting the Jews in that coming time, it is written 
that they shall look upon Him whom they pierced, and 
mourn because of Him; and that the Lord at that time 
will pour upon them the spirit of prayer and of supplication. 
CZechariah 12:8-10\) But that return of God's 
favor to Natural Israel will not come until Spiritual Israel 
shall first have been completed. Bible Students believe 
that we are now at the dawning of the New Dispensation, 
that the Church class will soon be completed and 
glorified with the Savior in His Kingdom, and that then, 
forthwith, God's mercy will begin to operate toward the 
Jews again. This seems to be the clear teaching of 
St. Paul in "Romans 1 1:25-32". 

THE CURSE TO BE ROLLED AWAY 

Another item of special importance in the lesson is 
that the Hell to which Jesus went was not Hell-fire, 
but the grave, the state of death. God did not raise Him 
up from the Fire, but raised Him from the dead. We are 
to remember that this same word— Hell, Sheol, Hades— 



is used in the Bible respecting all mankind. All the good 
and the bad— old and young, male and female, of every 
nation— go down to the Bible Hell; and according to the 
Bible they sleep there, awaiting the resurrection Morning 
and the awakening of all the dead— "every man in 
his own order"— not all at once.— * 1 Corinthians 15:23". 
The Bible represents that we are now in a night time, 
in which Satan is "the prince of this world," and Sin 
and Death reign. But it pictures the New Dispensation 
of Messiah's Kingdom as the glorious dawning of the 
New Day of blessing for mankind, in which the curse of 
sin and death will be rolled away and the blessing of the 
Lord through Messiah's Kingdom will extend to every 
member of the race, giving all an opportunity for eternal 
life. This will not be the same opportunity that is granted 
to the Church at the present time— not an opportunity 
for glory, honor and immortality on the spirit plane, as 
the Church have— but an opportunity of returning to 
human perfection, to all that was lost in Eden and redeemed 
at Calvary. 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT-ITS BEAUTY 

Here we note the beauty of the 21st verse— our Golden 
Text. The death of Jesus guarantees that all who will 
call upon the Lord in sincerity of heart will be saved 
from sin and death. It guarantees that all shall be brought 
to the condition where they will understand sufficiently 
to desire to call for this blessing. The heathen, the majority 
of people of civilized lands, and the Jews, have no 
such hearing ears now. Only the few out of every nation 
have yet received this great blessing. Only these, brought 
back into relationship with God, have yet been rescued 
from their alienated condition; and they are to be ultimately 
saved in the First Resurrection, to glory, honor, 
immortality and a share in the Kingdom of Messiah. 
Through these, ultimately the blessing of light and knowledge 
and uplifting influences will reach every member 
of the race, to afford all an opportunity for life everlasting 
in a world-wide Eden. 



CASTLES 



Let them that would build castles in the air. 

Vault thither, without step or stair; 

Instead of feet to climb, take wings to fly. 

And think their turrets top the sky. 

But let me lay all my foundations deep. 

And learn, before I run, to creep. 

Who digs through rocks to lay his ground-works low. 

May in good time build high and sure, though slow. 

CHRISTOPHER HARVEY. 



page 16 

International Bible Students Association Classes 
STUDIES AND LECTURES BY MEMBERS OF THE PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 


