Exciting Changes for The Watchtower!
1 Earlier this year, congregations received a thrilling announcement: Starting in January 2008, The Watchtower will have two different editions, one for the public and the other for our Christian brotherhood! Perhaps you have been wondering: ‘How will the two magazines be different? What are the advantages of having separate editions? Are there any new features to look forward to?’
2 The Differences: The issue dated the first of the month will be known as the Public Edition. All the articles in this issue will be prepared with the public in mind. The issue dated the 15th of the month will be known as the Study Edition and will not be offered in field service. It will contain all the study articles needed for one month as well as secondary articles that are of particular interest to dedicated Christians. The Public Edition of The Watchtower not only will appeal to Witnesses but will especially appeal to non-Witnesses who may accept the Bible. Awake!, on the other hand, will still be aimed at a broader audience, including skeptics and those who profess a non-Christian religion.
3 The Advantages: In the Study Edition, it will no longer be necessary to explain terms like “pioneer” in ways that non-Witnesses can grasp. This edition can also contain pointed information prepared especially for Jehovah’s Witnesses and Bible students who are making spiritual progress. What about the Public Edition? Since the subjects and the style of writing will be directed toward the public, a non-Witness should enjoy reading the magazine from cover to cover. Of course, every Witness of Jehovah will benefit from reading each issue. Because we will be offering just one Watchtower with one Awake! in the field ministry each month, we will have an entire month to develop effective presentations.
4 New Features: Some exciting new features are planned for the Public Edition of The Watchtower. One feature will discuss basic Scriptural teachings in a very simple format. Another will show how the Bible can help families. Bible study projects will be outlined for young people. Each issue will have an article highlighting specific Bible passages that teach us about Jehovah as a person.
5 We pray that Jehovah will bless this new arrangement for The Watchtower. May that journal, along with Awake!, reach many more deserving ones with the good news.​—Matt. 10:11.

