Why We Go Back Again and Again
 1. What question arises regarding our preaching work?
1 In many places, we cover our territory quite frequently. We continue to go back to the same houses again and again, though the householder may have told us he is not interested. Why do we keep speaking to those who have not responded favorably in the past?
 2. What is the primary reason we persevere in the ministry?
2 Love for Jehovah and for People: The primary reason we persevere in the ministry is our love for Jehovah. Our heart moves us to continue telling others about our great God. (Luke 6:45) Our love for Jehovah impels us to obey his commands and help others to do the same. (Prov. 27:11; 1 John 5:3) Our enduring faithfully in this work does not depend upon the response of the people. Even when first-century Christians were persecuted, they continued preaching “without letup.” (Acts 5:42) When people refuse to listen, rather than allowing this to discourage us, we remain steadfast, demonstrating the depth of our love and devotion to Jehovah.
 3. How will love for people help us to continue preaching?
3 We also persevere because we love our neighbor. (Luke 10:27) Jehovah does not want any to be destroyed. (2 Pet. 3:9) Even in frequently worked territory, we are still finding those who want to serve Jehovah. For example, in Guadeloupe, where 1 out of every 56 people is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, 214 were baptized last year. Almost 20,000 attended the Memorial, about 1 for every 22 people in Guadeloupe!
 4. In what ways do territories change?
4 Changes in the Territory: The makeup of our territory is constantly changing. The next time we call where there was no favorable response, a different member of the family​—perhaps one who has never heard our message—​may open the door and listen. Or we may find new occupants who are interested. Children with opposed parents grow up and leave home. Such ones may be willing to hear the Kingdom message.
 5. What may cause people to become more receptive?
5 People also change. The apostle Paul was once “a blasphemer and a persecutor and an insolent man.” (1 Tim. 1:13) Likewise, many who are serving Jehovah today were at one time not interested in the truth. Some may have even opposed the good news at one time. As world conditions change, some opposers or those who were indifferent may be moved to listen. Others may be more responsive after experiencing a personal tragedy, such as a death in the family, the loss of employment, a financial problem, or a health issue.
 6. Why must we continue to preach with enthusiasm?
6 This system of things is winding down, but our work of preaching and teaching is speeding up. (Isa. 60:22) Therefore, we continue to preach with enthusiasm and strive to maintain a positive attitude. The next individual we speak with may listen. We need to keep on speaking! ‘By doing this we will save both ourselves and those who listen to us.’​—1 Tim. 4:16.

