“Happy Is the Man That Keeps On Enduring Trial”
1 All Christians have to face trials. (2 Tim. 3:12) Trials may come in the form of ill health, economic hardship, temptation, persecution, or in many other ways. Trials imposed by Satan are designed to slow us down, to cause us to neglect our Christian ministry, or even to stop us from serving God. (Job 1:9-11) How does enduring trials lead to happiness?​—2 Pet. 2:9.
2 Prepare for Trials: Jehovah has provided his Word of truth, including a record of Jesus’ life and teachings. By hearing Jesus’ sayings and doing them, we lay a solid foundation and thus prepare for adversity. (Luke 6:47-49) We also draw strength from other provisions​—our Christian brothers, congregation meetings, and Bible-based publications from the faithful and discreet slave class. We make liberal use of God’s gift of prayer.​—Matt. 6:13.
3 Jehovah has also given us a hope. When we build strong faith in Jehovah’s promises, our hope becomes “an anchor for the soul, both sure and firm.” (Heb. 6:19) In Bible times, ships never left port without an anchor, even in good weather. If a storm suddenly came up, dropping the anchor could prevent the ship from being blown against a rocky shore. Similarly, building faith in God’s promises now will stabilize us when storms of trouble occur. Difficulties can arise very suddenly. Though the preaching activity of Paul and Barnabas was initially well-received in Lystra, the situation changed quickly when Jewish opposers arrived.​—Acts 14:8-19.
4 Endurance Results in Happiness: Remaining steadfast in the ministry despite opposition gives us peace of mind. We rejoice when we are counted worthy to be dishonored in behalf of Christ. (Acts 5:40, 41) Enduring trials helps us to develop the qualities of humility, obedience, and endurance more fully. (Deut. 8:16; Heb. 5:8; Jas. 1:2, 3) It teaches us to rely on Jehovah, to trust in his promises, and to take refuge in him.​—Prov. 18:10.
5 We know that trials are temporary. (2 Cor. 4:17, 18) Trials provide us with opportunities to demonstrate the depth of our love for Jehovah. By enduring them, we can provide an answer to Satan’s accusations. Therefore, we do not give up! “Happy is the man that keeps on enduring trial, because on becoming approved he will receive the crown of life.”​—Jas. 1:12.

