Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., MARCH 15, 1917 


No. 6 


VIEWS FROM THE 

"THE WORLD ON FIBE" 

The Pittsburgh Press is numbered among the great newspapers
 that apparently see some things which will follow in 
the wake of the great European conflict, which now threatens 
to engulf all nations and lead up to the "Battle of Armageddon
" of Scripture. 

As God's people observe increasing signs of the presence 
of our invisible King, preparatory to the establishment of 
his kingdom on earth, they rejoice at each evidence of the 
world's recognition that mankind is passing through the "fire" 
of purification, which shall burn until the last vestige of 
evil and selfishness shall have been consumed and God's will 
is wrought on earth as completely as it is done among the 
heavenly hosts. 

Truly the nations have been entering one after another the 
great melting pot of divine displeasure! They are fulfilling 
prophecy with amazing rapidity and accuracy: "Behold, they 
shall be as stubble; the fire shall burn them; they shall not 
deliver themselves from the power of the flame; there shall 
not be a coal to warm at, nor a fire to sit before." (Isaiah 


WATCH TOWER 

47:14) "Except those days should be shortened, there should 
no flesh be saved." — Matthew 24:22. 

We print following the editorial to which we refer: 
CLEANSED AS BY WBE 
"Fire has from the dawn of human history been regarded
 as a purifying agent. There have been great 
religions of which fire has been the all-pervading symbol. 
When Persia dominated the world her religion was one 
known as fire-worship. Fire purifies, molds, supplies 
the heat which gives life. And its imagery has never 
lost its earliest symbolic force and meaning. 

PBRiamyg nr the flames of the worldCONFLAOEATION
 

"The great war which is raging in Europe today is 
consuming more than the mutilated bodies of millions of 
strong and brave young men. Along with this precious 
sacrifice, there are* perishing in the flames some of the 
most ancient and tragic of human errors. 

"The diabolic lie that kings rule by divine right is 
perishing in the flames of the world-conflagration. 


[6056] 


March 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(83-84) 


'The fantastic and preposterous fiction that war is a 
biological necessity involved by the working of the socalled
 law of the 'survival of the fittest' — this is another 
untruth which will not survive the holocaust. War does 
not promote the survival of the fittest biologically. The 
brave, the healthy, the strong are destroyed by war. The 
weak, the timid and the unfit are preserved by it to 
propagate their kind. 

"The priority given to material values over moral and 
spiritual values — this, too, will not stand after the fire 
has done its work. The hideousness of the commercial 
greed, the lust for power, which are at the bottom of 
exploitation, will have been stripped of all its concealment
 and men will know it for what it i&. Mankind will 
plainly perceive that war is no more a violation of the 
laws of God than is a social and industrial organization 
which sacrifices the mass of men for the few at the top. 
In fact, the great European statesman who was arguing 
for war on a certain occasion twenty years ago attempted 
no denial of the analogy. 'Business is war/ said he, and 
'war is business/ 

PLAIN VIOLATION OF THE OHABTEB OP GOD'S 
KINGDOM 

"When peace has been restored, the purifying fire 
through which the nations are passing will have left 
little of their former patience with a form of human 
society in which war, public and private, has been allowed 
such enormous latitude in plain violation of the provisions 
of the charter of the kingdom of God which was to be 
set up on earth by Jesus. 

" 'A new commandment I give unto you/ said the 
Christ, 'that ye love one another.' The kings who are 
making war, the magnates whose chief business in life 
is the accumulation of countless millions, alike have 
trampled upon this fundamental law of the new society 
even while taking his name upon their lips. And to the 
extent that the multitude have by their sympathy and 
toleration sanctioned the treachery, mankind as a whole 
shares in the guilt which so large a portion of the 
civilized world is now expiating. 

TBUTH AND JUSTICE SOON TO FLOWER 

"That the ordeal will leave mankind spiritually chastened
 one can hardly doubt. Its physical consequences 
are wholly bad. The tongues of flame have eagerly fed 
in amazing quantities on the best blood of the race. But 
in so doing they have burned into the race consciousness 
so deep a conviction of the wicked vanity of the exploiters
, whether financial potentates or kings, that never 
again in our time will any dare to preach the doctrine 
that might makes right, and never again will government, 
either economic or military, go as far as it has gone 
during the last half century in permitting the insane fury 
for wealth and power to set at naught the supreme value 
of all values — namely, the value of the common man. 

"The seeds of protest against the perversion of the 
Christian ideal and the non-fulfillment of the great Christian
 law of love and brotherhood will now begin to 
spring up and bear abundantly. The choking weeds of 
selfish and brutal exploitation have prevented the perfect 
flowing of the grain and meanwhile the millions have been 
ground into the dust. But the weeds have been scorched 
and withered away, and truth and justice will flower in 
their place. 'There is going to be a more equitable distribution
 of the profits of industry in Great Britain when 
the war is over/ Baid Lloyd George and Mr. Asquith, in 
England, recently, and the working classes will come 
into a larger portion of their own in every other country 
involved, unquestionably. 

"Jesus' 'Love one another/ is the key to all progress. 
The science which teaches anything else is not science 
but demonstrable error. Even the Tower animals do not 
make war on one another, at least within their own 
species. Horses run in droves. Cattle herd together. 
Even the wolves hunt in packs. Bees, ants, and wasps 
have a wonderful social organization, living in highly 
co-operative communities. 

" 'Whatever men/ says a biologist, 'have accomplished 
that was really worth while has oeen done, not by competition
, but by mutual aid. The attempt to justify the 
worst side of man's nature from biology fails entirely. 
Even nations represent attempts of mutual aid on a large 
scale. What we need now is mutual aid on a world scale 
and the recognition of the fact that all men are brothers 
and that their interests are in common, and not in competition
/ 


"There is sorrow unspeakable in the path of the purifying
 fire that has overtaken us, but the law of love will 
stand out commandingly above the ruin." 

4 TIG TEEE" BUDS AFTEE CENTURIES 

SUMMER IS NEAK 

Respecting preparations made in the Holy Land by the 
Turkish government to facilitate the rapid movement of 
troops and supplies for an invasion of Egypt, a correspondent 
of the New^Rotterdam Cowrant writes: 

"A veil of secrecy covered the events in this far-off 
corner of the world during the last two years, but now 
some of the things that have been done may be told. The 
war has created new life in the southern section of the 
Holy Land and the desert. Districts which formerly were 
as desolate as the Sahara in Africa are today covered 
with a network of roads. Hundreds of miles of railroads
 have been built and the creation of innumerable 
workshops and factories has brought prosperity to the 
inhabitants of the towns and villages. 

"Syria, Palestine and Sinai have progressed more since 
the war began than in fifty years of peace. The population
 is grateful for this and views the Turkish rule with 
different eyes than formerly, 

DESEET LOSES SOLITUDE 

"The Sinai Desert has lost the solitude which made 
it so inhospitable and dangerous. A new railroad line, 
which starts at Jerusalem and is 175 miles long, runs to 
within twenty-five miles of the Suez canal over Hebron, 
Beersheba and El-Awga. Connecting lines have been 
built under the direction of German engineers from the 
Hedjas railroad to Jerusalem and from Maan to Akaba. 
At the same time the Germans have completed the railroad 
which runs from Haifa to Nazareth and Jerusalem, and 
crosses Palestine from north to south. 

"Branch lines have also been built in the Sinai desert, 
and where the difficulties proved too great for Tailroad
 construction the Germans and Turks built modern 
highways for heavy transport automobiles. Over this 
network of railroads and highways large masses of troops 
and enormous quantities of war material could be transported
 from Constantinople to the Suez canal in a week, 
if the Turkish and German general staffs should decide 
to undertake the invasion of Egypt. 

WELLS NOW FLOWING OVEB PATCHED PLAINS 

"Aiding the railroad lines and automobile roads are 
many artesian wells, furnishing good water in unlimited 
quantities. Around these wells villages with all modern 
conveniences, cool and airy stone houses, ice plants, etc., 
have sprung up. In some districts the water furnished 
by the wells is so plentiful that it can be used for irrigation
 purposes. Where no water could be found it is 
provided by pipe lines laid from the nearest wells. 

"Along the main railroad line there are numerous hospitals
, and around them villages and towns have literally 
grown out of the earth. Some of these settlements have 
several thousand inhabitants. All of them are lighted 
by electricity, and they even have moving picture theaters. 

"The economic value of the work done in Palestine 
and the Sinai desert since Turkey entered the war cannot
 be overestimated. Along the railroad line from Jerusalem
 to Beersheba the land values are rising and the 
population grows. Hebron, which formerly was hardly 
more than a collection of ruins, has been transformed 
into a lively manufacturing town. 

TOWN COMES TO LIFE AFTEE TEARS OF SLUMBEB 

"Still greater is the change in Beersheba. This once 
large city, before the war was a heap of ruins and the 
whole population consisted of half a dozen Bedouin families
, housed in miserable mud huts. Toda^y the town has 
several thousand inhabitants, a railroad repair shop, 
three or four large factories, several big storage houses, 
auto supply stations and a military hospital. 

"El-Awga, the first oasis in the desert, is under cultivation
 again for the first time in centuries. When it was 
ascertained that the artesian wells would furnish sufficient 
water, a number of Turkish farmers flocked to this Bpot 
and started to remove the layer of sterile sand which 
covers the very fertile soil, 

"Thus the murderous war, which destroys the work 
and civilization of centuries in Europe, brings new life, 
■happiness and prosperity to a forgotten and forsaken 
little corner of God's earth." 


[6057] 


(84-8S) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. V. 


"KHO WLEDOE SHALL BE INCREASED" 

Readers of The Watch Toweb are deeply interested in 
all things confirming the prophecies respecting the presence 
of the Son of Man in the end of this age, Not only are 
"the signs of his presence" multiplying on every hand, but 
they are of such wonderful character as to amaze even the 
world. But while the promise is that the wicked shall not 
understand; that only the wise in the Lord shall comprehend
 the real meaning of these things, the evidences of the 
presence of our King — who has "come as a thief" — are such 
■that the time cannot now be far distant when "every eye 
shall Bee him." 

A letter received from one of the pilgrim brethren we regard
 of such interest to our readers that we publish it here: 
"Knowing your interest in everything that indicates 
that we are 'In the day of his preparation/ I am enclosing 
a newspaper announcement of a Canadian invention, which 
bids fair to become of vast importance, and especially to 
the farmer, who is about to come into his own. 

"Throughout Canada, the States and all over the world 
are immense stacks of straw (many millions of them), 
which hitherto have been useless, and were burned to get 
them out of the way. Now these are to bo very profitably 
utilized. A company has been organized here in Moose 
Jaw, capitalized for the purpose of manufacturing this 
invention and selling it to farmers. 

"Briefly the invention is this: The farmer can build 
a plant at a nominal cost which will generate gas from 
the straw. This gas will light and heat the home, furnish 
power for the threshing machine, or any other machine 
needing power, or, compressed in a tank similar to a 


Prestolite tank, will run the automobile at less expense 
by far than by present methods. Thirty minutes' work 
by a man, woman or child will generate 1,000 feet of gas, 
which is stored in a tank for future use; and the most 
'delicate' instrument necessary is a pitchfork. 

"This is not all. After the gas Is driven off (by fire) 
the coke-like refuse is utilized, and the products made from 
a ton of straw, aside from the gas, are worth $15. These 
consist of tar, oils and pitch; and lastly, that which remains
 is pressed into briquettes of coal, either hard or 
soft, which make the very best of fuel. It costs about 
$1.50 a ton to make this coal. 

"The installation expense is not high — a couple of 
ovens, a gas tank, a compressor for gas, one to compress 
the refuse into coal, and receptacles for the tar and oil. 

"This looks as though it would help solve the question 
of coal famines, strikes, and make a railway strike have 
less dangers, to the farmer at least. I visited the demonstration
 rooms, and saw all the processes. 

"Moose Jaw also has the distinction of having another 
boy inventor, who has perfected a wireless transmitter 
and receiver, so that nobody can steal the message ; nobody 
but the receiver at its proper destination can get it. 

"Moose Jaw is a homely name, but the town is not 
to be sneezed at. The States will have to 'wake up' or 
Canada will be ahead of them. 

"We rejoice in all these new evidences of the near 
approach of Christ's kingdom. 

"Great things we've seen and heard of, in the hundred 
years that are gone! But greater things we look for in 
the hundred years to come." 


THE MEMORIAL SEASON APPROACHING 


On Thursday, April 5th next, after 6* P. M., the beginning 
of the 14th day of Nisan, according to Jewish calculation, 
God's truly consecrated children who are following in the 
Master's footsteps and fully desirous of doing his will in 
the light of present truth, will celebrate the Memorial Supper. 
This season is especially sacred to Christians because it commemorates
 the death of the Lord Jesus and forcefully brings 
to mind that we are to die with him as a part of his sacrificial 
body— the church.— Eph. 1:22, 23. 

It was on the 14*h day of Nisan that the Master instituted 
the Memorial supper, According to Jewish time each day 
began at 6 P. M. It happens that on this year, Thursday, 
April 6th, 6 P. M. is the beginning of the day which marks 
the anniversary of that important event. 

THE WOBLD'S OBBATEST EVENT 

The days of the week just preceding the institution of the 
Memorial supper recorded events of great importance, culminating
 on the 14th day of Nisan with the greatest event of 
the world's history — the death of the Son of God, that he 
might thereby become the Redeemer of the whole world. The 
world knew nothing of the importance of passing events, and 
even the apostles comprehended them but vaguely. 

Likewise the importance of the present hour is not comprehended
 by the world and cannot be fully appreciated by 
any of us in our present state. The order of things that has 
existed for many centuries is now passing awaj with great 
confusion, and the body of Christ, the church, is being completed
 and the glorious kingdom is coming in. 

As we approach the Memorial of our Lord's death we 
should all have in mind the events just preceding that particular
 date. As our Lord was crucified on Friday morning 
—Nisan the 14th— the 10th of Nisan would begin at 6 P. M, 
the preceding Sunday. His triumphal entry into Jerusalem, 
therefore, was probably on Monday instead of Sunday, as 
generally accepted and observed and for that reason called 
Palm Sunday. Under the law the Israelites were required 
to take the paschal lamb into their homes on the 10th day of 
Nisan, preparatory to the Passover, to be celebrated on 
the 14th. 

It was the custom, at the inauguration of a king of Israel, 
for him to ride upon a white ass. On the 10th day of Nisan, 
Jesus, leaving the home of Mary, Martha and Lazarus, went 
as far as Bethphage, whence he sent his disciples to bring a 
young ass, on which he might ride into Jerusalem, ( Matthew 
21:1, 2.) He proceeded to the city amidst the plaudits of the 
people and offered himself as the King of Israel — the long 
promised Messiah. The populace scattered their clothing and 
palm branches before him, implying that the best of the earth 
was none too good for one so £reat. They cried out exultantly, 
"Hosanna to the Son of David; blessed is he that cometh in 


the name of the Lord!" Thus he was joyfully received^ and 
acclaimed by the people as King. The scribes and Pharisees, 
however, and those of the priestly order, did not believe in 
the Master, and thinking the procedure of the people sacrilegious
, they called upon Jesus to stop the shouting. Jesus 
replied, "If they -should hold their peace, the very stones 
would cry out." 

Jesus was making history that none but Jehovah and himself
 understood. The next day, which was Tuesday, he cursed 
the fig tree and thereafter it bore no fruit, thus in symbol 
signifying that the Jewish people as a nation were fruitless. 
On the same day he went into the Temple and turned out 
the robbers and money changers, thus picturing how every 
mean and selfish thought in the minds of his followers must 
be put away. Wednesday was an exceedingly busy day with 
our Lord, as appears from the record. He taught the people 
in the Temple; he gave them parables of warning relating to 
their covenant with God; he gave the parable of the wedding 

farment; he taught concerning the resurrection from the dead, 
[is authority was challenged and he confounded the wise men 
by his questions and argument. 

After this Jesus went out to the Mount of Olives, and 
seated there he delivered to his disciples that wonderful discourse
 recorded in Matthew 24, concerning events that would 
transpire, particularly in the end of the age, the fulfillment 
of which his followers today have the privilege of witnessing. 
On the same day he gave the parable of the Ten Virgins and 
referred to the judgment of the Lord during the Millennial 
reign, and while he was doing this a conspiracy was being 
prosecuted by the Pharisees to have him put to death. 

"MY TIME IS AT HAND" 

Thursday must have been a day of keen interest to all of 
the Jews, because, between that evening and the evening following
 (Exod. 12:6, margin), was the time for the slaying of 
the lamb and roasting it for the Passover. Six o'clock that 
evening would mark the beginning of the 14th day of Nisan 
(Friday), during which day the Passover lamb must be killed 
and eaten. As the day drew on Jesus said to his disciples, 
"My time is at hand/* He then gave directions to his apostles 
for the making ready of the Passover supper; "and the disciples
 did as Jesus had appointed them, and they made ready 
the Passover." 

It was incumbent upon the Lord, as a Jew under the law 
arrangement, and also upon his disciples, to observe the 
Passover supper. At the conclusion of the supper the Lord 
instituted a new thing. 

INSTITtTTIOX OF THE MEMORIAL 

The type of the slaying and eating of the paschal lamb 
was now about to be fulfilled. It would never be proper, there- 


[6058] 


M A *cri 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(86-87) 


fore, to have another observance of the Passover, thtt antitype 
being the sacrifice of Jesus as "the Lamb of God which taketh 
away the sin of the world." Our Lord there instituted the 
Memorial of the fulfillment of the type, by the breaking of 
bread, which he gave to his disciples, and by the drinking of 
the wine, which was to be a commemoration of hi a death. 

After they had withdrawn from the upper room, where the 
Memorial was instituted, Jesus and his disciples-^aside from 
Judas, who had withdrawn previously to betray the Master 
^-jourheyed across the city, over the brook Cedron, and to 
the Garden of Gethseffiane, where he said to his disciples, 
"Sit ye here while 1 go and pray yonder* And he took with 
him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to be sorrowful
 and very heavy. Then he saith Unto them, My soul 
is exceeding sorrowful even unto death; tarry ye here and 
watch with me. And he Went a little farther and fell on 
his face and prayed, saying, my Father, if it be possible 
let this cup pass from met Nevertheless* not as I will, but 
as thou wilt." 

Then came Judas with the mob. The Master Was apprehended
 and led into the city before Caiaphas, the high priest, 
where the scribes and elders were assembled to unjustly accuse 
him. Subsequently he was taken before Pilate, and. after 
passing through the experiences of a trial that was a farce, 
he was condemned to death without a cause, and in the morning
 he was crucified on Calvary 3 s hill between two thieves. 
The importance of that hour will never be known by all until 
the world has come to a full knowledge of what Jesus has 
done for the redemption of mankind. 

WHY JESUS DIED AT TEAT TIME 

The disciples expected the Master to set up his kingdom 
and that they would be a part of it. They were asking 
themselves, "Why should the Master die now?" They were 
perplexed; they " could not understand why he -should die. 
Jesus knew all about it. At Pentecost the diBciples began 
to understand; and today those who have been illuminated 
by the holy Spirit understand why it was necessary for him 
to die. But why should he die at that time? 

The Israelites had been for years in the land of Egypt, 
where they were in bondage. Year after year their tasks 
were increased and their burdens made grevious to be borne. 
God sent Moses to be their deliverer and Aaron to be his 
mouthpiece. Under the Lord's direction Moses and Aaron 
went before Pharaoh the ruler of Egypt and in the name of 
the Lord asked that the Israelites be released and permitted 
to leave Egypt. Time and again Pharaoh refused and God 
sent punishments upon him for refusing to let them go. 
Under the pressure of each plague Pharaoh declared that he 
would let the Children of Israel go, but each time he broke 
his word. God had overruled that this Pharaoh should come 
to the throne of Egypt at this time because of his wicked 
self-will and obstinacy. Nine plagues the Lord had sent upon 
the Egyptians, and nine times had relieved them of those 
plagues at the intercession of Moses, after Pharaoh had promised
 to let them go. Now God purposed to send the tenth 
plague, which would cause Pharaoh even to hurry the Israelites 
out of Egypt. 

Pharaoh was devoted to his son, his first-born. God directed 
Moses to prepare for the tenth and last plague, informing 
him that at midnight, on the 14th day of Nisan the death 
messenger of the Lord would pass through Egypt and every 
first-born of every family should die. He then told Moses 
of his provision to save all the first-born of Israel, should 
they be obedient to his arrangement, which was that on the 
tenth day of the month each household should take a lamb, 
and if any household was .too small his neighbor should join 
with Mm; that the lamb should he a male of the first year 
without blemish; that it should be kept in the house until 
the 14th day of Nisan, when it should be killed and the 
blood should be sprinkled upon the side door-posts and on 
the upper post; that the lamb should be roasted with fire; 
that no bones should be broken — it should be roasted whole; 
that it should be eaten with unleavened _ bread and bitter 
herbs; that those eating It should do so with their loins 
girded, their shoes upon their feet and staves in hand and 
that they should aat in haste; that when the messenger of 
the Lord should pass through Egypt, upon every house where 
the blood of the lamb had -been- sprinkled* according to 
directions given by the Lord, the first-borns should be passed 
over unharmed. 

THE BEGINNING OF THE IAW 

This time marked the beginning of the Law with Israel) as 
indicated by St. Paul. (Gal. 3:17; Exod. 12:41) Acting 
upon the Lord's instructions, Moses called together the elders 
of Israel and gave them directions as to what they should do. 


Accordingly the lamb was taken into the homes on the 10th 
day of Nisan; on the 14th day it was killed: and the blood 
sprinkled upon the door-posts and the lintel. The members 
of each family went into the house and closed the door and 
remained there under the protection of the blood until the 
messenger of the Lord should pass through Egypt, and while 
so remaining the first-born was immune from the deathpenalty
. The lamb was roasted and while they waited it was 
eaten with unleavened bread and bitter herbs. 

About midnight the first-born of all Egypt died. This included
 the first-born of the slave and the first-born of every 
Egyptian family and caste, even up to the first-born and beloved
 son of Pharaoh, the ruler of Egypt. Such great consternation
 prevailed amongst the Egyptians that Pharaoh 
immediately summoned Moses and Aaron to appear before him. 
(Exodus 12:30-32) Pharaoh not only promised to let the 
Israelites go, but commanded that they be driven out. Moses 
then led Israel out of Egypt and across the Red Sea, and 
they journeyed on toward Mount Sinai. 

ISRAEL USED OF JEHOVAH TO MAKE PICTURES 

St. Paul tells us that the things pertaining to the law 
were shadows of greater things to come. Looking, then from 
the type to the antitype, we find that all the things that 
transpired there were pictorial. The first-borns of Israel pictured
 the "church of the first-borns, which are written in 
heaven." Under the Jewish arrangement the first-born was 
the heir to the estate. In God's great plan the first-born, the 
church, are the heirs of God and joint-heirs with Christ Jesus; 
and during their journey along the narrow way they are the 
heirs of the exceeding great and precious promises. They are, 
while thus journeying, subject to the second death. Only the 
first-born ones, during the Gospel age, are subject to that 
death. But being under the protection of the blood of Jesus, 
and remaining there, they are safe from that death. It is 
only by losing the protection of the robe of Christ's righteousness
 that one becomes the victim of the second death, from 
which there is no recovery. 

According to God's plan, formed before the foundation of 
the world, Jesus was to be the antitypical Lamb to be slain 
for the cancellation of the sin of the world. (John 1:29) The 
door of the Jewish house being the way of entrance into the 
house, pictured the entrance to the house of the Lord. By 
sprinkling the blood upon the door-posts, Israelites signified 
that they had faith in God's promises. Spiritual Israelites 
enter the house of the Lord by faith in the blood of Christ, 
who declared, "I am the Door"; and so long as they remain 
under the protection of this blood they remain in that house. 
The passover night pictured the Gospel age, when sin and 
darkness are upon all mankind, and the sufferings and dangers 
through which the church of the first-born pass during this 
time, while being gathered from the world. 

The lamb was a beautiful representation of Jesus. The 
lamb is noted for its innocence and its defenseleBtnesa. The 
passover lamb was required to be a male without blemish. 
Of the Man Jesus the Scriptures declare that he was "holy, 
harmless, undefiled, and separate from sinners.'^ (Hebrews 
7:26) Christ Jesus was "a lamb without blemish and without 
spot, who verily was fore-ordained before the foundation of 
the world, but was manifested in these last times for you." 
(1 Peter 1:10, 20) "He is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, 
and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not 
his mouth." — Isaiah 53:7. 

Jesus must eat the Passover supper at the appointed time 
—the 14th day of Nisan— in order to fulfill the terms of the 
law. His disciples, being Jews, must likewise partake. At 
no other "time could Jesus have fulfilled the type. On that 
day he must die, and he did die on that day, as the 14th of 
Nisan began in the evening and lasted until the following 
evening. He instituted the Memorial as & remembrance of 
his death, on the day of his crucifixion. 

The Lord used the moon as a symbol of the Mosaic law 
or law dispensation. The Jews calculated their time according 
to the moon. On the 14th day of Nisan, at the time of the 
crucifixion of the LoTd, the moon was full and began to wane 
immediately thereafter. This illustrated how the Jewish nation
, at the time of the •crucifixion of Jesus, had reached the 
zenith- of its favor. That marked the gteat turning-point in 
Israel's- history. 

The purpose of the picture made by the slaying of the 
paschal lamb was to point the way to life. The purpose of the 
reality — the slaying of the antitypical Lamb, Hhe Lamb of 
God" — was to open the way to life. Our Lord Jesus "brought 
life and immortality to light through the Gospel." By keeping 
God's taw perfectly, and by his sacrificial death, Jesus made 
knowifc the, way whereby the human race may attain life; 


[6059] 


(87-88) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyk, N. Y. 


and by his resurrection he opened that way — "I am the Way, 
the Truth and the Life," 

THE HOUSEHOLD ESTABLISHED 
When Christ Jesus arose from the dead a divine being, 
he ascended up on high and appeared "in the presence of 
God for us" — the church class. The merit of hia sacrifice was 
to be used throughout the Gospel age for the benefit of the 
antitypical fiist-borns — "the household of faith." Pentecost 
marked the acceptance by Jehovah of the antitypical sprinkling 
of the blood, and the opening of the way for some to become 
members of the household. From then down through the age 
those who have exercised faith in the shed blood of Jesus, and 
who have presented themselves in full consecration to the Lord 
and have been accepted by Jehovah, have entered into this 
house, under the protection of the blood, and abiding there 
until the great night has passed, they shall be delivered into 
the glorious light of the kingdom — in the morning already 
dawning. — Heb. 3:6; Psa. 27:4; 46:5, margin. 

THE MEMORIAL INSTITUTED 

From the time of his death until he should come again it 
was the will of the Lord Jesus that his followers should remember
 him; that once each year they shoud commemorate 
his death — upon its anniversary. It would be manifestly 
improper to celebrate the death of the Lord more than once 
a year, or at any other time, because only at a certain time 
did he die. After partaking at this time of the typical passover
, Jesus instituted the Memorial supper, in order that all 
of his followers shoud have in mind the purpose of his death, 
their privilege of being broken with him, and his coming again 
to receive them unto himself, as he had promised. "And as 
they were eating, Jesus took bread and blessed it and brake 
it, and gave it to his disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is 
my body." That is to say, the bread represented his flesh, 
hia humanity, which was broken on behalf of the human race. 
"And he took the cup and gave thanks, and gave it to them, 
saying, Drink ye all of it, for this is my blood of the New 
Covenant, which is shed for many for the remission of sins." 
The cup here represented the pouring out of his life-blood 
as a great sacrifice on behalf of humankind. 

At the time Jesus spoke the words, the disciples could not 
understand the meaning thereof, for the reason that they were 
not spirit-begotten; none others than the spirit-begotten can 
understand. — 1 Cor. 2:14, 0, 10. 

BBEAD, BLOOD— JUSTIFICATION, IMMOETALITT 

The great Master said, "I am the living Bread which came 
down from heaven; if any men eat of this Bread, he shall 
live forever; and the bread that I will give him is my flesh, 
which I will give for the life of the world." (John 6:51) This 
represents our justification. Bating means to appropriate. 
When we appropriate to ourselves the merit of Christ's sacrifice
, by accepting him as our Redeemer in full consecration, we 
thereby are received by Jehovah and justified freely from 
Adamic condemnation. 

We read: "Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I 
say unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man and 
drink his blood, ye have no life in you; whoso eateth my 
flesh and drinketh my blood hath eternal life, and I will raise 
him up at the last day; for my flesh is meat indeed and my 
blood is drink indeed. He that eateth my flesh and drinketh 
my blood dwelleth in me, and I in him." Thus Jesus testifies 
that tfnless we pour out our blood with him, becoming jointsacriflcers
, and continue faithful as such until we are entirely 
poured out in death, we cannot have life within us; that is. 
inherent life — immortality. In corroboration of this St. Paul 
said: "If we be dead with him, we shall live with him; if 
we suffer (with him), we shall reign with him." 
OTTR PABTICIPATION 

In the celebration of the Memorial supper — the eating of 
the bread and the drinking of the winewwe not only commemorate
 the death of the Lord, but we likewise testify that 
we have entered into a covenant to be dead with him. The 
Apostle Paul gives us this thought when he says, "The cup 
of blessing for which we bless God, is i<* not a participation of 
the blood of the Anointed One 7 The loaf which we break, is 
it not a participation of the body of the Anointed OneT Because
 there is one loaf, we, the many, are one body, for we 
ill partake of Ike one loaf."— 1 Corinthians 10rl6\ 17.-— 
Diagtati 

During the Millennial age all mankind must eat of the 
Bread, antitypically speaking, by appropriating to themselves 
the merit of Christ's sacrifice as the great Redeemer of the 
world; and by thus doing they will be gradually brought 
up by restitution processes to the point of justification. During
 the Gospel, or sacrificial age, however, this appropriation, 
or eating, is by faith, and such are instantaneously brought to 


the point of justification at the time when thev make their 
consecration. Thus all who shall reign with Christ must now 
participate with him in the drinking of the cup; that is to 
say, all must pour out their life-blood, dying with Christ 
Jesus; and, as the bread was broken, even so must each be 
broken, die, as Jesus died. As the body is composed of many 
members, yet all one body, so the body of Christ is one, though 
composed of many members, all of which must partake of 
the Bread and thus be broken with Christ as members of his 
body, and pour out their lives in death as joint-sacrificers. — 
Isaiah 53:12. 

The Apostle testified further to this, saying, "For even hereunto
 were ye called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving 
us an example, that ye should follow his steps." {1 Peter 
2:21) 'Tor unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not 
only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake." — 
Phil. 1:29. 

HOW WE SHOULD KEEP THE FEAST 

St. Paul points out the necessity for previous preparation 
for the keeping of this Memorial* saying, "Your glorying is 
not good. Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the 
whole lump ? Purge out, therefore, the old leaven, that ye may 
be a new lump, as ye are unleavened. For even Christ our 
Passover is sacrificed for us; therefore let us keep the feast, 
not with old leaver neither with the leaven of malice and 
wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and 
truth." 

Every one, before partaking of the Memorial, should put 
himself or herself through a personal examination, to see if 
the heart is thoroughly purged, and if there is anything wrong, 
to make it right. The week preceding the Memorial night 
might well be one of preparation. We suggest that it would 
be in order for all the brethren who deliver discourses on 
the Sunday previous to the 5th day of April to speak upon the 
subject of the Memorial, pointing out to the brethren the 
meaning thereof and the blessings to be derived from intelligently
 observing the same. That week should be one of 
special examination, of cleansing ourselves, putting away 
everything that would be defiling or displeasing to the Lord, 
that we might be acceptable to him. The partaking of the 
Memorial means that we have covenanted with God to be 
dead with Jesus Christ — to be offered up as a sacrifice. 
"Leaven" is a symbol of sin, and old leaven would signify 
sins of long standing. These should be put away. Malice 
means ill-will and a wrong condition of heart. Let us see 
to it, then, that we purify our hearts and cleanse ourselves 
from all fllthiness of the flesh and mind, perfecting holiness 
in the fear of the Lord. 

STBITE AMONG THE BBETHREN 

Time and again our attention has been called to the fact 
that strife amongst the brethren is an evidence of spiritual 
sickness, and if persisted in would lead to spiritual death. 
All disputings and misunderstandings and strife should be 
put aside, that we may be in the proper attitude of mind and 
heart to appreciate fully the meaning of the Memorial and 
the blessel privilege of participating therein. 

The week just preceding the institution of the Memorial 
was an evenful one to the disciples. They expected the 
Abrahamic Promise to be put into operation, that the Lord 
would set up his kingdom, and that they would be a part 
of the kingdom. They could not understand the meaning 
of the types and shadows; they had no knowledge of the 
sufferings of Christ and the joys to follow; they were then 
fleshly-minded. Strife arose among them, disputings about 
which would be the greatest in the kingdom. The Lord lovingly
 rebuked them, pointing out the proper course for them 
to take. The Evangelist says, "And there was also a strife 
among them, which of them should be accounted the greatest; 
and he said unto them, The kings of the Gentiles exercise 
lordship over them, and they that exercise authority upon 
them are called benefactors; but ye shall not be so; but he 
that is greatest among you, let him be as the younger; and 
he that is chief, as he that doth serve. For whether is 
greater, he that sitteth at meat, or he that servethT Is not 
he that sitteth at meat? But ye are they which have continued 
with me in my temptations; and I appoint unto you a kingdom
, as my Father hath appointed unto me." 

May we each keep in mind that we have been called out of 
darkness into the light of the liberty of the sons of God; that 
the Lord has appointed us to a place in his kingdom; and let 
lis realize that the kingdom is near at hand ; and the great importance
 of being prepared for it. May we then all put aside 
our differences; may we be drawn closer together, having our 
hearts united in love in order to a better understanding and 


[6060] 


Makch IS, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(89-93) 


appreciation of theBe great things. "By love serve one 
another." 

Let us keep in mind the Bufferings through which our 
Master passed, and that we are now privileged to be broken 
with him. It was necessary for him to be broken and die 
that he might shine forth as the glorious Head over the church 
which is his body. It is likewise necessary for us to be 
broken with him, and if we are faithful in our sacrifice we 
have his Word that 'then shall the righteous shine forth as 
the sun in the kingdom." 

WHO HAT PARTAKE? 

The question may arise in the minds of some, Who should 
partake of the Memorial? We answer, Those, and those 
only, who have entered into a covenant with the Lord by sacrifice
. This means that if we have made a full consecration 
unto the Lord, trusting in the merit of Ohrist Jesus, then it 
will be our privilege and our great joy to commemorate the 
death of the Master by partaking of the Memorial emblems 
and thereby testifying that we have agreed to die with Christ 
Jesus, and with each other as members of his body. If the 
opportunity has been afforded, we should have symbolized our 
consecration by water immersion, thus testifying to the deadness
 of our wills. We suggest that provision be made for 
the symbolizing of consecration by water immersion prior to 
the celebration of the Memorial, for those not yet immersed 
who desire to partake; but the mere fact that one had not 
observed baptism since being accepted of the Lord would not 
necessarily preclude him from partaking of the Memorial. 
BE VOX DISCOURAGED 

Some of the Lord's dear ones are inclined to become discouraged
 as they approach the Memorial season, because of 
their inability to live up to the high standard that is set 
Some may be inclined to say, "I will stay away from the 


Memorial, because I am unworthy to go to the Lord's table," 
We do not consider this a wise attitude, dear brethren. We 
believe that this is the very time we should go. If on selfexamination
 we find that we have come short then let us go 
confidently to the throne of heavenly grace, claiming the 
promise which the Lord has given us, that we shall receive 
grace for help in every time of need (Heb. 4:14-16); and 
thus coming, have faith that the Lord is "faithful and juat 
to forgive us" all our sins, if we confess them. 
BITTEB TRIALS 
For some reason, which we are not able to explain, the 
trials of the Lords people often seem more severe during the 
Memorial season than at other times. Probably these trials 
are permitted to enable us to have a better appreciation of 
our privileges of suffering with Christ Jesus, that we may be 
partakers of his joy. Looking back to the typical passover, 
we recall that the children of Israel were directed to eat the 
lamb with their staves in hand and their loins girded about, 
and to eat with bitter herbs. This pictured that we are pilgrims
 and strangers in a foreign land, journeying toward 
our heavenly home. The bitter herbs very well represent the 
trials and bitter experiences through which the Christian 
must pass along this narrow way. The eating of the bitter 
herbs sharpened the appetite and caused a greater desire for 
more of the flesh of the lamb to remove the bitter taste, thus 
picturing how, when we have our bitter trials and experiences, 
there is a keener desire to partake more of our blessed Lord's 
Spirit, claiming his promises and having in mind his favor 
to us, that we may forget the bitter experiences and look forward
 to the joys that await us beyond, where there is bliss 
unalloyed and pleasures forevermore. And so, dear brethren, 
"let us keep the feast with the unleavened bread of sincerity 
and truth!" 


JESUS THE WAY, THE TRUTH AND THE LIFE 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "I Am the Way the Truth and the Life," published in issue of April 15, 1899, which 

please see.] 

JESUS GIVES SIGHT TO THE BUND 

[This article, with the exception of the paragraph below, was reprinted from article entitled ' ( I Was Blind, I Now See, ' ' published
 in issue of March 1, 1908, which please see.] 


A further lesson to be drawn from this incident is that 
the blind man received his sight on the Sabbath day. Jesus 
did many of his miracles on the Sabbath day, partly no 
doubt to emphasize the fact that the antitypical Sabbath, the 
thousand-year Day, the seventh thousand-year Day of man's 
history, will be the time of his kingdom. It is when we 
come to understand that the miracles of Jesus pictured forth 
coming blessings during his Messianic kingdom that we get 
the proper view of matters, and may rejoice accordingly that 
a good, a glad Day, is coming for all the blind, all the lame, 


all the deaf, as indicated by Isaiah's prophecy. (Isaiah 35:5, 
6) During that time all the blind eyes will be opened to the 
goodness, the greatness, the love, the power of God. Thus the 
world will come to know God, being helped to that knowledge 
under the influences of the heavenly kingdom; and all who 
avail themselves of the privileges then extended may attain 
to that glorious degree of knowledge mentioned by Jesus when 
he said: "This is life eternal, that they might know thee, the 
only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." 


LETTERS OF 

ONE OF THE SHABES OF THE 70WU3B 

Deab Brethren: — - 

Through the Watoh Toweb I have learned of the election
 of Brother Rutherford as President of the W. T. B. A 
T. Society. May the Lord bless and direct him in the work 
that is before him. We feel sure that he will do his best, 
the Lord helping him. While I do not like to intrude upon 
your time, yet I would like to ask a question and get your 
thought on it. My little girl likes games, and a few days 
ago she sent to a New York firm for a game which was advertised
 in a catalogue. Another firm explains this game to 
be a game of mystery. I had seen such games before she 
sent for this one, but really believed that the people working 
it pulled it around to make it spell things they had in their 
minds. I had no fear of it at that time. 

But since my little girl got this one and I have seen it 
work, I am afraid of it, and I will tell you why. One day 
my neighbors told me that it would work itself, without 
pulling or pushing it in the least, and would work with one 
person as well as with two. I told them that I rather thought 
not, as I firmly believed it to be a game of fun. But they 
assured me it would move itself and spell out the answers 
to any question asked. I then decided to try it 1 alone to 
make sure that no one pulled it to make it spell certain 
things. I did so; I put my hands on as directed, and In a 
minute or two the small table walked around on the board 
fairly pulling my fingers. It would answer most all the 
questions by stopping on the letters to spell the words. 

I asked my age, which it spelled correctly. I asked it for 
a certain Scripture, and it spelled it out correctly. I asked 
it what worked that board, and it said, "Lucifer." I asked 
it if it knew Pastor Russell, and it spelled "Yes." I asked 


DEEP INTEREST 

it where he was, and it said, "In heaven." I asked it if he 
liked Pastor Russell, and it spelled "No." I asked why, and 
it spelled, "Because he taught against me." I said to myself, 
with my hands still on the board, "Truly this is the work of 
the devil!" and it went up to "Yes." 

Now, to make sure, I did not move it in. the least; I 
looked out of the window, and did not look at the board only 
as it would stop on a letter. Then I became nervous about 
it and afraid, and said, "I should not have it in the house if 
I found out that it was the work of the devil." Then it 
quickly told me to "Go to h— ;" -spelling the words very fast. 

I may be wrong, but I cannot help but think it is the 
work of the devil. But my little girl wants to keep it. 
I shall not have it in the house should you think there is 
any unseen power working it. My neighbors tell me it is 
electricity in the hands that move it, and to let the child 
■have it. But something tells me different. I am afraid of it, 
and grow, more and more afraid. Does this not go to show 
that it is not right to have it around? Surely no good can 
ever come from it! My neighbors laugh at me; but those 
things are not to be laughed at. I know that it spells 
those things out in answer to your questions. That is the 
truth, and there are hundreds of them all over, and some 
truth people working them, too. 

Can it be possible that the devil is trying to deceive some 
of us by that so-called game? Tell us, for the good of all. 
Enclosed you will find pictures of it, taken from catalogues, 
marked with pencil. 

Yours in the One Faith, Mbs, Wm. Ikgebmait— Pa. 

[The Watch Toweb has several times referred to the 
Ouija board and to the Planch ette as being devices of the 


vn— 16 


[6061] 


(W-94) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BROOKI.YN, N. Y. 


stdvsrsary. The experience above related is another confirmation
 of our belief. 

NOBLE EXAMPLE OF UNU0BMUBIHG EHDtfBAHCB 
DEAB BftETHBEN: — 

We have just held our semi-annual election. It has been 
our custom to elect Brother Russell as our Pastor; but, as 
we were not able to do so this time, we concluded to send 
you the assurance that we cherish the memory of him who 
so faithfully served ua and brought us to so clear an understanding
 and appreciation of our Father's glorious plan of 
salvation and of his character of justice, wisdom, love, and 
power, through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. We also 
wish to assure you of our hearty, continued co-operation in 
carrying forward the work which our Pastor so wisely and 
in so masterly a manner mapped out for us as that "wise 
servant" of the Lord, "the man with the ink-horn." 

We heartily join in thanking our dear heavenly Father 
for so faithful a servant and so loving a character as Brother 
Russell, whose life aa an example of courage, zeal and love 
has been a constant stimulus to us, as a true copy of God's 
dear Son! So, having before us his noble example of selfsacrifice
, of laying down his life and strength in oub interest 
and service, and his example of faith, love, loyalty and cheerful
, unmurmuring endurance of persecution and misrepresentation
, therefore we resolve that, by the Lord's assisting 
grace, we shall endeavor more faithfully to walk humbly in 
our dear Redeemer's steps, daily striving to grow up into him 
and to develop more of the spirit of love. 

We desire to continue our co-operation with the Bethel 
family in the harvest work, in harmony with our dear Pastor
's labors; and we pray the Lord's richest blessings upon 
you, and all of the harvest laborers. Whether the work be 
much or little, while yet in the flesh, let us continue to press 
on toward the prize of the high calling which is in Christ 
Jesus, to whom he the honor, glory and praise aa Kane of 
kings and Lord of lords. Praising God from whom all blessings
 flow. 

Sincerely your fellow servants, 

East St. Louis Ecclesia. — III. 

SENDEES ALLEGIANCE TO JEHOVAH'S GOV2B1TMENT 

X>£AB BrETHBEN: — 

At our recent business meeting we unanimously passed 
the following resolution, which it was voted should be sent 
as an expression of our attitude toward the truth and yourselves
 at this momentous period in the affairs of the world. 

Resolved, (1) That having been immeasurably blessed by 
the incomparable message of the truth, which from the time 
of its advent among us has proved to be our comfort, our 
shield, the source of our spiritual upbuilding and our joy, we 
do hereby declare our gratitude for the same — gratitude first 
of all to the Father of all mercies and his blessed Son, and 
second to those noble exponents of the great Gospel message, 
who, operating in, through and from the Headquarters of 
the Watch Toweb Bible and Tbaot Society, have so earnestly 
and faithfully served our highest interests up to this present 
time. 

(2) That because of the arforesaid benefits received we 
have great confidence and love toward those officiating at the 
Headquarters in the general direction of the harvest work, 
and our prayers will ascend daily on their behalf, that wisdom 
from above may shed upon their minds its benign influence 
and power, so that the mighty forces of truth generated by 
God himself and received and expressed by his messengers 
may sweep onward to the full consummation of the present 
regime and the subsequent establishment of the kingdom in 
power and great glory. 

We furthermore take this opportunity of emphasizing our 
consecration, believing the finest thing in life to be heart 
and will in full accord with the majestic plan and purpose 
of the Most High, who is eventually to bend all things to 
his absolute sway. We realize that he graciously and lovingly
 accords us the privilege now of rendering to him upon 
invitation that allegiance to his government which he shall 
ere long demand from every living being in every sphere of 
existence. Therefore, we seek above all things to know his 
will and to conform ourselves thereto; and we do earnestly 
desire to co-operate with you in plans and ways of witnessing 
before men of the near approach of Messiah's reign, and thus 
to be used as instruments in the harvest, ere cometh "the 
night in which no man can work.'* 

In the spirit of gratitude and love, we remain, 

Yours very earnestly and with much Christian love. 

The Halifax Ecolebia. — N. S. 
A VOICE FROM JAMAICA 
Deab Brethren: — 

Until officially confirmed, the report of our beloved Pastors
 death was received with a measure of doubt, it being 
so unexpected. We bow in submission to the divine pleasure 
and unerring decision, and rejoice that our beloved Brother 
has entered fully into his rest and reward after a very extended
 ministry for Christ and his people. 

We grieve for the loss sustained, especially by you, but 
believe he is now better qualified to assist in directing the 
work which was committed to him. His loving devotion, self' 
sacrificing zeal, unflinching effort* and faithfulness, coupled 
with the nobility and purity of his Christian character, are 
most inspiring and stimulating, and worthy of imitation. 
What an example of resignation and endurance under much 
suffering, and cruel persecution unabated 1 May the blessed 
and precious memory of our beloved Pastor he perpetuated! 

With renewed resolutions and endeavors, and by God's 
grace, we hope to vie with him in all these respects, and What 
time is so appropriate as the present — the opening Of a New 
Year! We confidently believe that the Lord has made abundant
 provision for the needs of his own. 

We invoke daily in our prayers the Lord's blessings and 
favors on your behalf, that wisdom to guide, strength and 
courage to do, be bestowed from on high, that the work be 
prosecuted to its completion by those on whom the responsibility
 has devolved, I pledge myself to co-operate heartily 
with you; and may we all finish our course with joy and be 
counted worthy, so that we shall soon see our beloved one 
as he is and share his unspeakable joys and blessings. 

The harvest work here was started by myself and others 
about eighteen years ago, coming from the Isthmus of Panama, 
where I received the truth and labored for awhile. It prospered
 and we found many ready, sincere hearts, and the 
Truth continued to spread. 

With best wishes for the New Year, and prayer for comifort
 in your bereavement, I remain, 

Your fellow servant, L. A. Facet. — Jama&oa. 

THE VEHi SEEMS VBBY THIN NOW 

Greetings in the Master's name to the Bethel family and 
the friends of the Brooklyn Tabernacle I We desire very 
much to express to you our sympathy in the mutual loss 
by death of our beloved Pastor C. T. Russell, which loss, no 
doubt, you especially feel. 

We convey to you brethren as his close associates our 
deep love, and pray our heavenly Father that wisdom a.nd 
power may be yours to continue carrying out what remains 
to be done in the harvest work. Our Servant" we believe 
has passed to his reward; but though dead (according to the 
flesh), yet he speaketh. The veil seems very thin between 
us now, and the sweet and vivid realization of the presence 
of our dear Master grows stronger, while the time, we trust 
is not far hence before we too shall see him face to face. 
We wish to assure you of our continued faith in the Lord 
and of our hearty co-operation with the Society in furthering 
the harvest work, in whatever little ways we can. We daily 
remember you all at the throne of heavenly grace. 

We would appreciate very much to nave a brother come 
up to our place as soon as you can arrange for such a visit. 
We are very hungry for fellowship and a few words of encouragement
 along "the way," as we aTe quite tried by the 
opposition we sometimes meet. Our town hag of late been 
visited by two evangelists who, bv invitation of the churches, 
have conducted evangelistic services. As usual, they both 
found occasion to slander Pastor Russell's character and belittle
 his teachings. 

We tried personally and by letter to defend both Pastor 
Russell and the truth, but to no effect, only to cause more 
bitterness to be manifested. It is often difficult to stand for 
the truth in a small town, where you are known but not permitted
 to be given a hearing. We have stood thus for twelve 
years or more, and expect to stand until the^ end, by God's 
grace, endeavoring also to watch for opportunities to present 
the truth to hearing ears. Have at present a little encouragement
 in this way. We trust, if it be the Lord's will, that some 
fruit may result. Shall be very much pleased to soon see 
one of your familiar faces with ns again. The Lord's continued
-favor be with you all. 

Yours in the Master's service, Wi£, Hjobth.— N. Y. 

ANOTHER VOICE FBOM ABBOAX* 
Deab Bbethbew vsr the Lord — 

Seeing that so many dear brethren have written expressing
 continued loyalty to the truth and the harvest work 
one is also prompted to write you a line to say that the dear 
friends in Portsmouth, England, are fully in harmony with 
the expressions of loyalty that have already been given to 
the cause. 

How glad we are that our dear Pastor, who like the 


[6062] 


March 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(94-95) 


Master stood so long and resolutely against the almost continuous
 attacks of the great adversary, has now been counted 
worthy of experiencing his great change (we are sure it has 
been a great one), and is now in the actual presence of his 
Master, made like him and seeing him as he is 1 

Our loss over here is very small, dear brethren, compared
 with that which you must have experienced, because 
we still have our dear Pastor's presence with us in his writings
. But at the Bethel, what a vacancy there must be ! 

Our prayers are that you may continue faithful in the 
work of serving as "signs" to the world, and in assisting in 
building up in the most holy faith those who shall be accounted
 worthy to participate in the first resurrection. With 
continued love in the Lord n 

Yours in His Service, T. Stracy. — England. 

MEMORIAL TOWER LIKE BRIBE OF CHRIST 
Dear Friends; — 

I want to thank you and to congratulate you upon the 
Memorial number of The Watch Tower. It reminds me of 
the bride of Christ; for it is not especially beautiful or attractive
 on the outside, but it is all glorious within. Its contents
 are certainly an incentive to press on with renewed 
vigor and to strive to follow the example of our beloved 
Pastor, as he followed Christ. 

The extra copies I sent for will do good service; for 1 
want others to know something of the character of this saint 
of God who has just been taken from the earth. 

Yours in the Redeemer, Jessie I. Todd. — Ky. 

TRUTH MORE PRECIOUS THAN EVER 
To all the Precious Family at Bethel: — 

Greetings and heartfelt love in our dear Redeemer's name! 
Now that I have found my breath again, after the shock of 
my life, I just wish to write a line of loving sympathy and 
cheer to your dear hearts. You have been so much on my 
mind since our beloved one went under the veil, and we are all 
praying day and night that your dear hearts may be so 
thoroughly established that 

<f No storm can shake your inmost calm, 
While to that Refuge clinging; 
Since Christ is Lord of heaven and earth, 
How can you keep from singing!" 
We praise God more for the blessed truth today than 
ever before, and we never were more determined to press on 
to the finish, even as our dear Brother Russell did, who was 
such a noble example to us all. We have the Lord's graciou3 
promise still, that he will never leave us nor forsake us. 
No doubt that the rest of the dear "feet of him" will soon 
be with dear Brother Russell again in the grand reunion, 
where we can serve our glorious heavenly Father in perfection
, "Oh, that I may be one found worthy to reign 
with Christ a thousand years!" 

We know that we will have an interest in your prayers, 
as you have in all of ours. May the richest blessings of 
the Lord be with you all, dear friends and brethren. Please 
find enclosed $— — for "Good Hopes." By divine favor and 
love, Your brother and sister, 

C. E. Hbabd and wife. — B. C. 
HIS GLORIOUS TRIUMPH AH INCENTIVE TO AXL 
Dear Brethren of the Watch Tower: — 

We desire to mingle our joy and sorrow with all of the 
dear Israel of God everywhere at this time — sorrow because 
of the loss of our Beloved Pastor in the flesh; joy because 
we realize that his sufferings and trials now are over, and 
that having been a faithful overcomer, he has now partaken 
of the glorious divine nature. We Hfl up our hearts in 
gratitude to our heavenly Father for having spared him 
from the violent death so many of us had anticipated would 
close his earthly career. Surely God is "too wise to err, too 
good to be unkind!" 

Our Pastor's glorious triumph is a great incentive to us 
all to renew our consecration unto death, and to "strive to 
enter in." Having been elected Pastor of the little Ecclesia 
here, until his death, we desire to testify of the great help 
that we have received through his faithful ministration, although
 we have had him here only once in person. We are 
determined to go on, as if he was still here, loyally defending 
the "Faith once delivered unto the saints." Praying for, 
and supporting those who have accepted the great responsibility
 of carrying on the glorious work, we are, with much 
love in the Lord to all of "like precious faith," 

Your Brethren in Christ. Preston Ecclesia. — England. 
A MESSAGE FROM WALES 

Dear Brethren in the Lord: — 

After reading in the Bee. 1st Watch Tower the wonderful 
arrangements for the Harvest work in future, dictated by 
our beloved Pastor and Brother C. T. Russell, who we believe
 was "that servant," we, as a class of consecrated saints, 


resolve that we will be faithful to the Brethren elected to 
carry on the work of dispensing the "meat in due season," 
as prepared by our departed brother, the Lord's servant, to 
build up the Church in the most holy faith and to gather the 
wheat into the garner. 

We further resolve, that inasmuch as this man of God 
has faithfully followed the Lord's instructions, has completed 
his work on this side of the veil, and has received his full 
reward, we who have been influenced by his noble life and 
Christian character feel constrained, both individually and as 
a whole body, to renew our efforts to press on towards the 
goal which we believe he has attained. Praying the Lord's 
blessing upon your labor of love, we remain, 

Your brethren in Chriat, 

Ecclesia at Pontardulais. — Wales. 
PHOTO-DRAMA IN NEWFOUNDLAND 
Dear Brethren: — 

Recently we gave the four parts of the Photo-Drama of 
Creation in our town. Much interest was manifested. One 
man who had been saying very unkind things about us seemed 
to be pleased with the pictures. We ourselves enjoyed them 
more than ever before; and the townspeople were carried 
away with them. To satisfy the public demand the Drama 
will have to make quite a lengthy visit here. It is really 
pathetic to hear people say, "We missed all this last Spring!" 
Although they were not very far from where the Drama 
was shown at that time, yet somehow it was not advertised 
in their section. Now they are hungry enough to appreciate 
the lectures and the music even without the pictures! 

One of the sisters operates very skillfully; as a Drama 
operator she knows her work thoroughly, and weaves in fine 
explanations. When we meet opposition, we tell the opposers 
to be careful not to allow their wrong views to cause them 
to miss the great prize. When the lectures were finished, a 
man said, "That is all truth." He is a very quiet man; but 
whatever he says is to the point, and he seems to be accepting
 the message thus far, even to "What is the Soul?" 

We have been looking for an opening at . Several 

there, among them a school teacher, are reading all the literature
 they can get. 

Somehow I feel that we shall not leave here very soon. 
The people seem to be holding on to us very tightly j and we 
do not feel that it is right to leave them until they are 
thoroughly grounded in the Truth. We think that more can 
be accomplished by our staying here for a time. 

Your Sister in Christian love, C. B. Parrish. 

SO WONDERFUL A CHARACTER I 
Beloved Brethren; — 

I desire you to know that I have been greatly blessed 
by reading the Memorial Number of The Watch Toweb. 

The cpnduct of our dearest brother on his last Pilgrim 
tour, as related there, shows so wonderful a character that, 
while reading, I could not restrain a tear as I thought of how 
little I am in comparison and how wonderful is the kindness 
of God to permit even me to have a share in the things of 
Christ and to be associated with his noble people; the thought 
has well nigh overwhelmed me, but I have made it another 
stepping-stone to the higher life. 

And how beautiful and appropriate is that picture on the 
last cover page! What loving compassion in His eyes! What 
tenderness in His countenance! How eloquent are the silent 
sentiments of the whole, assuring us that the Good Shepherd 
still leads the flock! Surely he will deliver thee from the 
snare of the fowler; He will cover thee with his feathers, 
and under his wings shalt thou find shelter! 

Your fellow servant, J. A. Brown. — Canal Zone. 

CANADIAN FRIENDS PLEASED 
Dear Brethren: — 

The little item in The Tower of Feb. 1, in reference to 
Canadian Towers being sent as first-class matter henceforth, 
in order to avoid delay through Canadian mails, was of 
much interest to us. Our Towers have been seriously delayed
, particularly of late. 

We have refrained from complaint; because we felt assured 
that the Society was doing all it could in the matter. We 
believe it is now in order, however, to express appreciation of 
the move made to avoid further delay, and we have much 
pleasure in informing you that our ecclesia, by unanimous 
vote, passed a resolution expressive of appreciation of your 
move, to be attested also by a contribution to the funds of the 
Society to cover the additional postage expense incurred by 
sending the Towers direct. Please find enclosed an express 
order for In lieu of the foregoing. 

Assuring you of our continued prayers and co-operation 
in this glorious service, 

Your brethren by His grace, Truro Ecclesia. — Canada* 


[6063] 


ANGELOPHONE COMPANY CLOSING OUT 


The friends who organized the Angelophone Oo. had hoped 
to furnish good records dictated by Brother Russell. Some 
of the first were not as clear as desired, and Brother Russell 
expected to re-record them, but passed away before being able 
to do so. 

Orders came in so rapidly, the number of records to be 
handled was so great, and the requests so urgent, that it was 
impossible to test each set before shipping; hence the filling 
of many of the orders in the original packages of the manufacturers
. It was later found that these records were not even 
as good as those first received, and the manufacturers claim 
they cannot do better* 

So many complaints have lately been received that the 


Angelophone Co. has decided to close out at once. Some of 
the records are quite good, and all orders on hand will be filled 
as far as possible, unless otherwise ordered. Some may desire 
to have even these imperfect records. If so, orders should be 
sent at once. 

The Watch Tower Bible and Tbact Society possesses two 
excellent Columbia records of Brother Russell's voice, consisting 
of four introductory and four intermission talks of the PhotoDrama
 of Cbeation. Each of these is a double record — two 
talks on each side. These records can be used on an Angelophone
 by reversing the reproducer. We are obliged not to sell 
the Columbia records under $1.00 per record. 


NO EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 


After the passing away of Brother Russell, who was executive
 officer of the Society by virtue of being President, the 
Board of Directors provided for an Executive Committee to 
look after the executive work of the Society. That Committee 
ceased to exist upon the election of a President; hence there 


is now no Executive Committee. To avoid delay and confusion
, please address no mail to the Executive Committee. 
The President of the Society is the executive officer of the 
Society and matters of that nature are in his hands. 

