VOL. XVII. FEBRUARY 15, 1896. No. 4. 



CONTENTS. 

Special Items 26 

Views from the Tower 27 

The Sure Mercies of David 28 

Poem: The Peace of Christ 30 

By thy Words Acquitted; by thy 

Words Condemned 30 

Bible Study: Faith Encouraged 33 

Bible Study: Jesus the Messiah 34 

Bible Study: True Love to One's 

Neighbor 34 

Encouraging Letters 35 

page 26 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, NY. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



THE CHART OF THE AGES. 



OUR announcement of the pamphlet giving three primary discourses 
on the Chart of the Ages (leatherette covers, 10 cents each) 
brought many orders, and fresh inquiries about the Charts for use in 
home gatherings and small audience rooms. We therefore again describe 
them. 

They are five feet long, of heavy, tinted cloth, with spring roller, 
having painted thereon, by a good artist, the outlines, etc., of the divine 
plan of the ages, the same as represented by the diagram in the front of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I. Ordinarily it would cost about five dollars 
to prepare such charts; but by giving large orders in the dull seasons 
we can supply them at one dollar and fifty cents each,— and we prepay 
the expressage. 

A careful study of the three discourses above mentioned will enable 
many of the friends of the truth to explain the chart and the divine 
plan there symbolized, to their friends and neighbors. Later on you will 
be able to present other features, finding the help you need in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. 



All the consecrated are "anointed to preach" the gospel; and all 
such may do it, according to their talents and opportunities, regardless 
of nationality, color or sex; for all such are "new creatures in Christ:" 
and in Christ there is neither male nor female, bond nor free. But let 
all things be done decently and in [Scriptural] order, which implies 
that, all other conditions being equal, the man should do the public 
speaking, as the Lord's representative and mouthpiece. 

But let none but the consecrated attempt to teach spiritual truths; 
for they have no commission or ordination of the Lord so to do. Moreover, 
others would do injury to themselves; for their fleshly minds would 
soon be puffed up, and they would ere long fall into the snares of the 
Adversary, as boastful, heady men-pleasers. 

R1935 : page 26 

THE MUSICAL TOWER. 



WE have heard from many of their pleasure in connection with our 
last issue of the TOWER— "Zion's Glad Songs of the Morning." 
We would like it if these beautiful songs should become popular among 
Christian people generally. The singing of the truth is a good way to 
get it into the heads and hearts of God's people. It is one way of 
preaching the gospel, which figuratively is called a "song:" "Thou 
hast put a new song into my mouth, even the loving kindness of our 
God." 

We thank God for the musical and poetic talents granted to some 
of his saints. (We esteem the collection represented in the MUSICAL 
TOWER, and in our hymn book, "Poems and Hymns of Millennial 
Dawn," to be not only choice doctrinaily, but also choice poetically.) 
We thank God for the privilege of serving the truth to his flock in poetry, 
as well as in prose. Let each one who receives be active in serving 
again, by song and printed page and word, to others who have not yet 
tasted the heavenly food provided now, as "meat in due season," by 
our present Lord. If the whole body were an eye or foot or hand, 
where would be the symmetry? Nay, those members which even seem 
to be feeble and less important are all necessary, and may all do something 
in the service.— 1 Cor. 13:17-24. 

Extra copies of the musical TOWER will be supplied at the rate of 
five cents each, or twenty-five to one address for one dollar. 

page 26 

DO NOT SEND MONEY UNLESS "REGISTERED." 



COMPLAINTS of money lost in the mails continue. Send only by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order or Express Order. Then if letters be stolen 
the money can be recovered. 



R1935 : page 27 



VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



THE wonders of our day, "the time of the end," are 
so many and so astounding that even prudent, cautious 
thinkers hesitate to pronounce the most unreasonable 
things untrue. The present year has introduced to the 
world one of the most remarkable discoveries of modern 
times; one which, had it been advanced a century ago, 
would have been esteemed the ravings of a maniac, but 
which to-day is received at once by the scientific men of 
the whole world within two weeks of its first announcement. 
We refer to the discovery made by Prof. Roentgen, 
of Wurzburg University, Germany, that an electric ray 
can be passed through opaque substances, such as paper, 
wood, cloth, leather, aluminum, animal flesh, etc., although 
to varying degrees, and that the same ray does not penetrate 
bone, stone, and metals generally. 

Experiments show the photograph of coins in a purse, 
of a razor in its case, of the bones and sinews of a man's 
hand, of the contents of a wooden box, etc. Although 
still an infant of a month, the professional men of Europe 
and America are busy with various experiments which may 
yet lead to great improvements and to wider usefulness. The 
chief value of the discovery, so far, would seem to be in 
aiding surgery, by locating bullets and other foreign substances, 
"gravel" in the kidneys, "gall stones," etc., saving 
life and sufferings; for not infrequently good surgeons 
err in diagnosing. 

But a lesson goes with this discovery which will not be 
generally recognized at first, and yet one that sooner or 
later is sure to influence many. For centuries, skeptics 
and Infidels have been disposed to smile incredulously at 
the words of our Lord, "Enter into thy closet, and when 
thou hast shut thy door pray to thy Father which is in 
secret, and the Father who seeth in secret shall reward thee 
openly." (Matt. 6:6.) Can these scientists any longer 
mock at Christians for "credulity," because we believe 
that "All things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him 
with whom we have to do?" (Heb. 4:13.) Surely human 
pride and positiveness may well be abashed by its own nineteenth 
century discoveries. "He that formed the ear shall 
he not hear? He that formed the eye shall he not see?" 
And we begin to see how that other prediction can be fulfilled, 
largely in a "natural" way— "There is nothing 
covered that shall not be revealed; and hid, that shall not 
be known." 

Step backward only one century and you can sympathize 
with the Infidelity which disputed and denied everything 
which it could not see and handle and comprehend; 
for their unbelief in unseen things and powers was in full 
accord with their experiences. But when God's set time 
for "knowledge to be increased," "the time of the end," 
had come, he began gradually to lift the curtain, and to 
show the world invisible things and to teach them faith in 



invisible powers, and ultimately through these lessons to 
see him "who is invisible," with the eyes of their 
understanding. 

The Telephone, by which men hundreds of miles 
apart, may speak to each other through little boxes on their 
office walls, and recognize each other's voices, tells us, suggestively, 
that God can hear infinitely better, and without 
the wires and batteries necessary to our service. 

The Phonograph, recording our words and tones, preserving 
them if needful for years, and repeating them with 
their original emphasis and intonation, reminds us, suggestively, 
that similarly our brains are much more delicately 
constructed, and can not only record words but also thoughts 
and feelings, and classify these, and lay them away for future 
use, subject to the call of memory. It gives us a hint, also, 
of how simple a matter it will be for God to resurrect 

R1935 : page 28 

the dead, by creating new bodies with brains having similar 
convolutions to the deceased, which, thus revived by the 
breath of life, would reproduce beings which would recognize 
and identify themselves by the memory of their past 
thoughts and experiences. 

Machinery and cars moved by the invisible electric 
current of power are common everywhere to-day, though 
undreamed of fifty years ago. And through these we and 
all men have illustration of the invisible power divine, 
"which holds all nature up," and runs the vast machinery 
of the universe. 

These lessons to the child of God enforce the salutary 
thought that God hears the "groaning of the prisoners" 
of sin and death, the prayers or the murmurs, the thanks 
or the sighs of his children; that "Thou God seest me;" 
that "the eyes of the Lord are in every place beholding 
the evil and the good;" and that divine power, although 
invisible, is omnipotent and everywhere present. The same 
lessons will be valuable to the world, by and by, when 
God's Kingdom shall shine forth and chase away the night-shades 
of sin and sorrow: but meantime the Prince of 
darkness will no doubt continue to deceive many, and will 
use even these wonderful signs of the Millennial dawn to 
support delusions and to oppose the truth. For instance, 
the natural man, not led by the spirit of God, will thereby 
be led, by the Adversary, toward Spiritism, Theosophy, etc. 



The Superior Council of the "American Protective 
Association," commonly known as the "A. P. A.," met 
in annual session on Jan. 28 and 29 at Rochester, N.Y. 
This association, formed to offset the oppression of Papacy, 
especially against the Public School system, has been growing 
greatly but noiselessly for the past five years, and now 
claims to represent a voting strength of 3,500,000. These 
large figures will be a general surprise— not only to its 



enemies of Rome, but to its friends as well. 

The American Protective Association demands as the 
consideration for its support of any party for President, 
that the platform of the national convention of that party 
shall reaffirm the principle of the total separation of Church 
and State, the restriction of immigration, and the reform 
of the laws regarding citizenship and right of franchise. 
Such party, too, shall reaffirm its faith in the American 
school system as the basis of liberty and prosperity. 

One of the delegates to the Convention gave the following 
as the voting strength of this and other "allied 
orders"— 

American Protective Association 3,500,000 

Nat. League for Protection of American 
Institutions 1,590,000 

Junior Order United American Mechanics.... 500,000 

Patriotic Sons of America 350,000 

Order of Deputies 125,000 

Various other Patriotic orders 250,000 

Total 6,315,000 

It was reported at the Council that one hundred and 
eight members of Congress, the Governors of four states, 
majorities in the Legislatures of several States, the school 
boards of two hundred and fourteen cities and towns, and 
a majority of city and town officials in every central and 
western state were members of or allied with the American 
Protective Association. 

These facts, seemingly authentic, indicate that some 
have learned not to trust Papacy's recent professions of 
love for the Bible and education, but to stand guard over 
their own liberties. Although we may recognize the hand 
of Providence in this, and all such affairs, we are to remember, 
still, that the saints of God are enlisted in another 
branch of divine service. If it is the service of some 
to manage homes and orphanages, and hospitals, and reformatories, 
and temperance work, and liberty protections, 
we know that our commission is to preach the Gospel. We 
who are "ambassadors for God" are to wait upon our 
ministry (service) and not upon another, however much we 
may sympathize with or feel interested in every good work. 
We advise, therefore, that those who have been favored 
with the truth and the divine commission of ambassadors 
of it give it all their energies, aside from the providing of 

R1936 : page 28 

things needful, to this service. And we here remark, that 
if any understood our words in our issue of June 15, '95 
to be a commendation of Beneficiary Societies and an advice 
to join them, they misunderstood our meaning. Said 
societies are not without their good features while matters 
run along smoothly, but when the time of trouble will 
shortly overspread the world, all of these societies which 
depend upon assessments will quickly crumble; and then 
those who are leaning upon them will be most wretchedly 



disappointed, and many of them will by their despair be 
helped toward anarchism. 



R1936 : page 28 

THE SURE MERCIES OF DAVID. 



"And I will make an everlasting covenant with you, 
even the sure mercies of David."— Isa. 55:3. 

IF THE faith of any of God's children needs reinforcement 
from the Word of God, let him turn to the 
Lord's gracious invitation through the Prophet Isaiah to 
partake of the bounties therein offered. The call is not to 
every man, but to a certain class— "Ho every one that 
thirsteth!" (Vs. 1.) There is a blessing for the thirsty 
soul. "Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after 
righteousness [Observe, not only after truth with a curiosity 
interest, but after that righteousness which comes through 
a knowledge of the truth]; for they shall be filled." The 
invitation is not to those who are satisfied with sin, but to 
those who have learned the exceeding sinfulness of sin, and 

R1936 : page 29 

whose aspirations are toward God; who thirst after God and 
his truth and his righteousness. It is to the class which the 
Psalmist describes as saying, "As the hart panteth after 
the water brooks, so panteth my soul after thee, O God. 
My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God: when shall 
I come and appear before God?"— Psa. 42:1,2. 

Are you of this class? then hearken to the gracious 
invitation— "Ho, every one that thirsteth [The call is to 
you], come ye to the waters [the refreshing waters of divine 
truth]; and he that hath no money [None of us have 
aught to offer as an equivalent for this priceless treasure: it 
is God's free gift to all the thirsty]; come ye, buy and eat; 
yea come, buy wine and milk without money and without 
price." 

And not only is the invitation thus liberal, but the 
Lord also condescends to reason with those of this class who 
still have some hope of finding the satisfying bread and 
water of life where already they have long looked for them 
in vain. He graciously inquires, "Wherefore do ye spend 
money for that which is not bread? and your labor for 
that which satisfieth not? Hearken diligently unto me, and 
eat ye that which is good [the "meat in due season" provided 
by the Lord for the household of faith], and let your 
soul delight itself in fatness. [The portion which the Lord 
supplies is a satisfying portion; and the soul that is fed at 
his table is not lean.] Incline your ear, and come unto me: 
hear, and your soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting 



covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David." 

Turning to Psalm 89:19-37 we find the sure mercies 
of David enumerated. David is introduced here as a 
typical character representing Christ— primarily our Lord 
Jesus, but subsequently the Christ complete— Head and 
body. In the meekness of his youth, his loyalty to God, 
his faithfulness, zeal, courage and wise discretion, David's 
character was a very beautiful type of the beloved One, to 
whom God referred when he said, "I have laid help upon 
one that is mighty; I have exalted one chosen out of the 
people. I have found David my servant; with my holy 
oil have I anointed him." 

Our Lord Jesus is the mighty One upon whom the help of 
the world is laid. He is the great deliverer, but it has 
pleased God also to associate with him in this great work 
the Church of the Gospel age, the elect "little flock," 
whose names are written in heaven. These, all chosen out 
of the people, constitute that one body, which, with Christ 
Jesus their Head, shall bless all the families of the earth. 
These all possess the characteristics enumerated above, which 
are preeminently the characteristics of their Head. All, therefore, 
who hunger and thirst after righteousness, whose souls 
thirst after God as the hart for the water-brook, and who, 
having found him, have consecrated themselves to him and 
received the anointing of the holy spirit, witnessing with 
their spirits that they are the sons of God, and who as 
anointed sons can discover in themselves the worthy traits 
of true sons, enumerated above,— loyalty, faithfulness, zeal, 
energy, courage, discretion, etc.,— these constitute the 
class with whom the Lord has made an everlasting covenant 
and to whom belong "the sure mercies of David." 

Hear them— "With whom my hand [my power, dominion, 
kingdom] shall be established: mine arm [of support 
and strength] also shall strengthen him [to perform 
the great preparatory work of sacrifice]. The enemy shall 
have no advantage over him, nor the son of iniquity have 
power to hurt him. [All things, even the deep and wicked 
designs of the adversary, shall be so overruled by God as 
to work together for good to this David class]. 

"And I will beat down his foes before his face, and 
plague them that hate him. But my faithfulness and my 
mercy shall be with him; and in my name shall his horn 
[his authority and power] be exalted. I will set his hand 
also in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers. [His power 
will in due time control all the restless, ungovernable masses 
of the world, which like the raging sea will make great 
commotion in the time of trouble with which this age 
closes.] 

"He shall cry unto me, Thou art my father, my God, 
and the rock of my salvation. [Even in the midst of their 
earthly course of trial and sacrifice they shall have communion 
and fellowship with God: they shall realize his 
fatherly love and care and rejoice in his salvation.] 

"Also I will make him, my firstborn ["the Church of 
the firstborn"], higher than the kings of the earth. My 
mercy will I keep for him forevermore, and my covenant 



shall stand fast with him. His seed also [redeemed and 

restored mankind to whom Christ will be "the everlasting 

father"— Isa. 9:6; Psa. 45:16] will I make to endure 

forever [they shall have everlasting life], and his throne as 

the days of heaven. If his children forsake my law and 

walk not in my judgments; if they break my statutes, and 

keep not my commandments; then will I visit their transgression 

with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes. 

Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take 

from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. [This has reference 

principally to the fleshly people of God, and partially 

to the world during the Millennium.] 

"My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing 
that is gone out of my lips. Once have I sworn by my 
holiness, that I will not lie unto David [Christ]. His seed 
shall endure forever, and his throne as the sun before me. 
It shall be established forever as the moon, and as a faithful 
witness in heaven." 

Such are the "sure mercies of David" thus divinely 
assured to the Gospel Church, Head and body. 



"When I stand before the throne, 
Dressed in beauty not my own, 
When I see thee as thou art, 
Love thee with unsinning heart, 
Then, Lord, I shall fully know- 
Not till then— how much I owe. 

"When the praise of heaven I hear, 
Grand as anthems on the ear, 
Loud as many waters' noise, 
Sweet as harps' melodious voice, 
Then, Lord, shall I fully know- 
Not till then— how much I owe." 



R1876 : page 30 

THE PEACE OF CHRIST. 



"My peace I give unto you."— John 14:27. 

Sweet gift of Christ! O blessed thought! 
The peace of mind that God hath wrought! 
No earthly passion's half so sweet, 
No joy on earth is so complete, 
As that the loving Father gives 
To those in whom the spirit lives— 
The peace of Christ. 

O weary one upon life's sea, 

That hast no Christ to comfort thee, 

Remember when the billows roll, 



Surge upon surge, about thy soul, 
That there's a harbor safe and sure, 
Wherein thy heart may rest secure— 
The peace of Christ. 

O loving heart that trembles yet, 
Half fearful that it may forget; 
Afraid that it may miss the way, 
Doubting, wavering, all the day- 
Remember that it is to thee 
This gift of gifts is offered free— 
The peace of Christ. 

O Christian with the brow severe, 
With eyes that seldom drop a tear, 
With lips that smiling have forgot, 
Remember that it is thy lot 
To have within a joy divine; 
Open thy heart and make it thine— 
The peace of Christ. 

The love of God! How its dimension 
Reaches above our comprehension; 
And who of us can understand 
The workings of his mighty hand? 
But rest, my soul, and quiet be, 
Thou knowest this he giveth thee— 
The peace of Christ. 

So then, my soul, upon his breast 
Thy troubles cast, and be at rest. 
Though sorrow wrings the heart, and pain 
Saps life and strength with steady drain, 
O'er all these griefs and cares of thine 
God pours the healing balm divine— 
The peace of Christ. 

—Selected. 



R1937 : page 30 

BY THY WORDS ACQUITTED; BY THY WORDS CONDEMNED. 



"Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh. A good man 
out of the good treasure of the heart bringeth forth good things; and 
an evil man, out of the evil treasure, bringeth forth evil things. 
But I say unto you, that every idle [unprofitable or pernicious] 
word that men shall speak, they shall give account 
thereof on a day of judgment. For by thy words thou wilt 
be acquitted, and by thy words thou 
wilt be condemned. "-Matt. 12:34-37. 

REALIZING that we, the Church, are at the present 



time under the inspection of our kingly Bridegroom, 
who is now present (Matt. 22:1 1) to gather out of 
his Kingdom [in its present embryo or formative condition] 
all things that offend" (Matt. 13:41), and to gather unto 
himself his jewels, his bride (Mai. 3:17), we cannot too 
carefully consider the principles upon which this judgment 
and this selection are made. 

The above words of our Lord indicate that the heart 
and the mouth are under very special scrutiny, the former 
representing the individual character, and the latter being 
an index of the character. It is in this same view of the 
matter that those words of wisdom were penned,— "Keep 
thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of 
life. Put away from thee a froward mouth, and perverse 
lips put far from thee." (Prov. 4:23,24.) The indication 
is clear that a right condition of heart is necessary to 
right words; for "out of the abundance of the heart the 
mouth speaketh," as experience testifies to every man. It 
is therefore just that our words should be a criterion of judgment 
in the Lord's estimation, as he tells us they are. True, 
honied words are sometimes only the masks of deep hypocrisy; 
but the mask is sure to drop off some time, as soon 
as selfish policy renders a change of tactics necessary. The 
fact therefore remains that the words, the entire course of 
conversation and conduct, are an index of the heart. 

Our first concern, then, should be for the heart— that 
its affections and dispositions may be fully under the control 
of divine grace; that every principle of truth and 
righteousness may be enthroned there; that justice, mercy, 
benevolence, brotherly kindness, love, faith, meekness, 
temperance, supreme reverence for God and Christ, and a 
fervent love for all the beauties of holiness, may be firmly 
fixed as the governing principles of life. If these principles 
be fixed, established, in the heart, then out of the good 
treasure of the heart the mouth will speak forth words of 
truth, soberness, wisdom and grace. 

Concerning our Lord Jesus, whose heart was perfect 
—in whom was no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth, 
it was said, "Grace is poured into thy lips;" and again, 
"All bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words 
that proceeded out of his mouth." (Psa. 45:2; Luke 4:22.) 
Moses, personating Christ, foretold the blessed 
influences of the Lord's words, saying, "My doctrine shall 
drop as the rain; my speech shall distil as the dew, as the 
small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon 
the grass." (Deut. 32:2.) And Jesus said, "The words 
that I speak unto you, they are spirit and they are life." 

R1937 : page 31 

(John 6:63.) So wise, just and true were the Lord's words, 
that, though his enemies were continually seeking to find 
some fault, it is said, "They could not take hold of his 
words before the people; and they marveled at his answers 
and held their peace." (Luke 20:26.) And others said, 
"Never man spake like this man."— John 7:46. 



Thus our Lord left a worthy example to his people, 
which the Apostle urges all to follow, saying, "Let your 
speech be always with grace [with manifest love and kindness], 
seasoned with salt [a purifying and preservative influence]." 
(Col. 4:6.) And Peter adds, "If any man 
speak, let him speak as the oracles of God,"— wisely, and 
in accordance with the spirit and Word of the Lord. Again, 
it is written, "Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips 
from speaking guile [deceit]." "Whoso keepeth his mouth 
and his tongue, keepeth his soul from troubles." "The 
words of a wise man's mouth are gracious words: but the 
lips of a fool [an unwise, reckless talker] will swallow up 
himself. The beginning of the words of his mouth is 
foolishness, and the end of his talk is mischievous madness." 
"Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be 
hasty to utter any thing before God; for God is in heaven, 
and thou upon earth: therefore let thy words be few."— 
Psa. 34:13; Prov. 21:23; Eccl. 10:12,13; 5:2. 

Job, in the midst of all his afflictions, was very careful 
not to sin with his lips. (Job 2:10; 31:30; 1:21,22.) 
He knew that his words would be taken by the Lord as an 
index of his heart, and he was careful to keep both the 
heart and the words right, saying, "What! shall we receive 
good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil 
[calamities, troubles— for discipline or refining]?... 
The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be 
the name of the Lord." There was no spirit of rebellion 
in a heart out of whose abundance came such words of loving 
submission, patience and faith under severe testings, 
and that, too, without a clear apprehension of the divine 
wisdom in permitting them. 

The Psalmist puts into the mouth of God's consecrated 
and tried people these words of firm resolution:— "I said, 
I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue. 
I will keep my mouth with a bridle, while the wicked [who 
tempts and tries the righteous] is before me."— Psa. 39:1. 

How necessary to the stability of Christian character 
is such a resolution, and the self control which develops 
under a firm adherence to it. In an unfriendly world we 
can expect to receive only the reproaches of our Master; 
for the servant is not above his Lord. The world, the 
flesh and the devil oppose our way: there are fightings 
within and fears without, and many are the arrows and fiery 
darts aimed at the righteous. But what is the safe attitude 
of the soul under afflictions and severe testings? Is it not 
in silence before God, waiting and watching first to see 
his leading, his will, in every matter before presuming to 
touch things that often involve so much? So the Psalmist 
suggests, saying, "I was dumb with silence: I held my 
peace, even from good [even from doing or saying what 
seemed good in my own sight]; and my sorrow was stirred. 
My heart was hot within me, and in my self-communing 
there burnt a fire [description of a fiery trial]. Then spake 
I with my tongue"— not to the revilers, nor to others, but 
to the Lord. 

Yes, it is always our blessed privilege to carry our 



sorrows and vexations to the Lord; 

"For he knows 
How to steal the bitter from life's woes." 
He does it, as the Psalmist suggests (vs. 4-6), by showing 
us, through experience, the vanity of all earthly things and 
their utter inability to satisfy the soul's cravings, or to comfort 
the wounded spirit. Then comes the thought that the 
present life, with its cares, vexations and sorrows is passing 
away, that our days are but as a handbreadth, and however 
vexing our experiences, they will soon be over; and if we 
permit them to do so they will only work out in us the 
peaceable fruits of righteousness, and develop in us strong 
and noble characters, disciplined to thorough self-control, 
thoughtful consideration, patient endurance of affliction 
and loving loyalty and faithfulness and trust in God. Then 
the assurances of the blessed rewards of righteousness in 
the life to come begin to have a new and deeper significance, 
and we are made to realize that this is not our continuing 
city, but we seek one to come. Thus the heart is separated 
from earthly things, and made to realize the superior worth 
of heavenly things. Nothing but the Lord himself can 
satisfy the longings of the soul, which, tempest-tossed and 
tried, comes to realize— 

"How vain is all beneath the skies, 

How transient every earthly bliss, 
How slender all the fondest ties, 

That bind me to a world like this!" 
Thus chastened and comforted, we learn to look beyond 
the present to the glory that shall by and by be revealed 
in the faithful overcomers, who, by patient continuance in 
well-doing in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, 
seek for the prize revealed to faith alone. Thus disciplined 
and blessed under fiery trials by going to the Lord 
for comfort and help, the child of God begins to realize 
what it means to be dead to the world and alive toward 
God, with a keen appreciation of his love and goodness 
and grace; and being thus separated from the world, and 
more firmly united to Christ, the language of the heart is, 
as the Psalmist further suggests, "And now, Lord, what 
wait I for? my hope is in thee." (Vs. 7.) Thus 
"E'en sorrow, touched by heaven, grows bright 

With more than rapture's ray, 
As darkness shows us worlds of light 

We never saw by day." 
Such is the blessed result of bridling the tongue under 
circumstances of trial and vexation, and humbly taking 
all our cares to the Lord in prayer, to the end that, when 
we speak, our speech may be with grace, seasoned with salt, 

R1937 : page 32 

and that under all circumstances we may speak as the 

R1938 : page 32 

oracles of God. 



Considering our Lord's words above quoted— that we 
must give an account for "every idle [unprofitable or pernicious] 
word"— in view of the fact that the present is our 
(the Church's) judgment day, we see what great importance 
attaches to our words. All our words are taken by the Lord 
as an index of our hearts. If our words are rebellious, or 
disloyal, or frivolous, or flippant, or unkind, unthankful, 
unholy or impure, the heart is judged accordingly, on the 
principle that, "out of the abundance of the heart the 
mouth speaketh." Thus our words, in all the varied circumstances 
of our daily life, are bearing testimony continually 
before God of the condition of our hearts. So our 
Lord's words imply: and in this view of the case how 
timely is the admonition,— "Be not rash with thy mouth; 
and let not thy heart be hasty to utter anything before 
God [And remember that "all things are naked and opened 
to the eyes of him with whom we have to do."— Heb. 4:13]; 
for God [our Judge] is in heaven [upon the throne], 
and thou upon earth [under trial before the bar of God]: 
therefore let thy words be few." Let them be thoughtful 
and wise, as uttered before God, and not rash, hasty and 
illy considered. 

Again, in harmony with the Lord's statement of the 
responsibility incurred by our words, it is also written, 
"He that keepeth his mouth, keepeth his life: but he that 
openeth wide his lips shall have destruction." (Prov. 13:3.) 
What a fearful responsibility attaches to the tongue that 
wags in an evil, or even in a flippant, way, which is 
also dishonoring to God! And how necessary is the injunction 
of the Apostle Peter, "Be sober and watch unto 
prayer !"~1 Pet. 4:7; 1:13; 5:8. 

The Psalmist puts this prayer into the lips of all who 
feel this responsibility, "Set a watch, O Lord, before my 
mouth: keep a guard at the door of my lips. Permit not 
my heart to incline after any evil thing." "Let the words 
of my mouth and the meditations of my heart be acceptable 
in thy sight, O Lord, my strength and my redeemer." 
"My lips shall utter praise when thou hast taught me thy 
statutes. My tongue shall speak of thy word; for all thy 
commandments are righteousness. Let thy hand help me; 
for I have chosen thy precepts. I have longed for thy salvation 
[from all sin, and for the perfection and beauty of 
holiness], O Lord; and thy law is my delight."— Psa. 141:3,4; 
19:14; 119:171-174. 

That, as imperfect beings, we may always be perfect 
in word and deed is not possible. Despite our best endeavors 
we will sometimes err in word as well as in deed, 
yet the perfect mastery of our words and ways is the thing 
to be sought by vigilant and faithful effort. But, nevertheless, 
for every idle word we must give an account in this 
our day of judgment. If, in the daily scrutiny of our ways, 
which is the duty of every Christian, we discover that in 
any particular our words have been dishonoring to the 
Lord, we should remember that, "If any man sin, we have 
an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous" 
(1 John 2:1); and in the name of our Advocate we may 



approach the throne of grace, explain to our Heavenly 
Father our realization of the error, our deep regret at our 
failure to honor his name and his cause by a holy walk and 
conversation, and humbly request that the sin be not laid 
to our charge, but that it may be blotted out through his 
gracious provision for our cleansing through Christ, humbly 
claiming that in his precious blood is all our hope and trust. 

Thus we should render up our account for every idle 
word; and by our words of repentance, supplemented by 
the merits of Christ applied by faith, shall we be acquitted. 
Otherwise the idle words, dishonoring to the Lord, will 
stand against us and condemn us, and we will be obliged 
to suffer the consequences. The first consequence will be 
self-injury, for every evil thought or word indulged hardens 
the character and inclines it the more toward unrighteousness. 
The second consequence is a bad example to others, 
and the stirring up of evil in them. "A soft answer turneth 
away wrath, but grievous words stir up anger." (Prov. 15:1.) 
Thus, as the result of unwise or unkind words, 
we may stir up about us difficulties which will become the 
agents of retributive justice to teach us the lesson of self-control, 
and consideration for the feelings and opinions of 
others. It is often the case that the Lord (or the devil) 
is blamed for sending trials which are simply the natural 
results of our own mistakes. And those who fail to locate 
the root of the trouble (in themselves) pray in vain for 
the Lord to remove miraculously what they themselves 
could obviate by obedience to the Word, and vigorous self-discipline. 
"If we would judge [and correct] ourselves, 
we should not be judged; but when we are judged we are 
chastened of the Lord [largely by the experiences through 
which our own faults put us], that we should not be condemned 
with the world." (1 Cor. 11:31,32.) But even 
should it be admitted that the difficulties are not directly 
caused by God, or the devil ("Every man is tempted [tried] 
when he is drawn away of his own lusts [desires] and enticed"), 
the natural tendency is to blame the matter on some 
one else, and to think that our loss of patience, our hasty 
word or act was the fault of another. How many deceive 
and encourage themselves with the thought: "If every 
body else had as reasonable and generous a nature as I have 
our family or church gathering or community would be a 
veritable heaven upon earth!" Beloved, let us examine 
ourselves, let us be very humble, lest the very words of self-congratulation 
and self-satisfaction which we consider in 

our hearts (if we do not utter them aloud) bring our condemnation. 
"If ye love them which love you, what thank 
have ye? for sinners also love those that love them. And 
if ye do good to them which do good to you, what thank 
have ye [what merit is there in it]?" (Luke 6:33-38.) It 
is only when we "endure grief, suffering wrongfully," that 
our suffering is acceptable to God as a sacrifice of sweet 

R1938 : page 33 

incense. "What glory is it if, when ye be buffeted for your 



faults, ye take it patiently? but if, when ye do well, and 
suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with 
God; for even hereunto were ye called." (1 Pet. 2:19-21.) 
Beloved, let us see to it that our sufferings are for righteousness' 
sake only, and let us not charge God or our neighbors 
for tribulations resulting from the indulgence of our 
inherited or cultivated faults. 

"In many things we are all faulty. If any one does not 
err in word, he is a perfect man, able to control the whole 
body." (Jas. 3:2.) But such a man does not exist. We 
all need and must continually plead the merit of our Redeemer 
and Advocate, while we strive daily to bring every 
thought into captivity to the will of Christ, and to perfect 
holiness in the fear (reverence) of the Lord. 

In view of this fact, which we trust all of the Lord's 
people will endeavor more and more fully to realize, viz., 
that we now stand before the bar of judgment, we inquire, 
in the words of Peter, "What manner of persons ought ye 
to be in all holy conversation and godliness?" God-likeness 
certainly cannot include any harmful gossip, any unclean 
or unholy conversation, any disloyal or rebellious words. 
Let such things be put far away from all who name the 
name of Christ in sincerity and truth. And let us remember 
daily to settle our accounts with the Lord, to make 
sure that no record of idle words, unrepented of, and consequently 
unforgiven, stands against us. "Let your conversation 
be as becometh the gospel of Christ." "Whatsoever 
things are true, whatsoever things are honest, 
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are lovely, 
whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any 
virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things." 
Thus out of the good treasure of the heart we shall be able 
to speak the words of truth and soberness, to honor our 
Lord by a godly walk and conversation, to subdue the evil 
tendencies of our fallen nature, and to have our conversation 
"honest among the Gentiles: that, whereas they speak 
against you as evil doers, they may, by your good works 
which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation." 
-Phil. 1:27; 4:8; 1 Pet. 2:12. 

If daily we render up our accounts to God and seek 
his grace for greater overcoming power with each succeeding 
day, we shall be acquitted in judgment and stand approved 
before God through Christ, having the testimony 
of his holy spirit with our spirits that we are pleasing and 
acceptable to him. 



R1938 : page 33 

FAITH ENCOURAGED. 

-FEB. 23. -Luke 8:43-55.- 

Golden Text— "Thy faith hath made thee 
whole: go in peace."— Luke 8:48. 



NO ESSENTIAL element of Christian character is 

given greater prominence in the Scriptures 

than faith. "Without faith it is impossible to please God." 

In this requirement we see the condescending grace of our 

heavenly Father, who, though so far above us, yet, like a 

tender parent, desires the reciprocal love and implicit confidence 

of his intelligent creatures. Since Christ is the 

appointed agent of God in his dealings with men, whom 

God bids all men to honor, even as they honor the Father, 

and since he is the appointed way of access to God, faith 

in Christ is necessarily a part of our faith in God. Those 

who believe in Christ, believe the testimony which God 

gave of his Son through the prophets and through Christ's 

R1939 : page 33 

own teachings and the mighty works which God wrought 
by him, to the end that men might believe, having a sure 
and abundant ground for confidence; so that faith might 
not be mere credulity, but a reasonable thing. 

To believe in Jesus in those days, when his mighty 
works astonished the people, and the beauty of his holiness 
impressed every beholder, was most reasonable to those 
of simple hearts, who desired only to know the truth of 
God and to obey it, and who therefore had no crossgrained 
will or prejudice of their own to oppose it. Nor are the 
evidences, the foundation of faith in Christ, any less reliable 
to-day than they were then. On the contrary, they 
are still more abundant and strong,— a firm foundation that 
can never be moved. In simple faith, reliance upon the 
testimony of Christ, the sick woman came to Jesus, so 
fully assured of his power that she did not wait even to 
call his attention to herself when the multitudes thronged 
about him; "for she said, If I may touch but his clothes, 
I shall be whole;" and she was instantly healed. And 
Jesus, perceiving her faith, said unto her, "Daughter, be 
of good comfort: thy faith hath made thee whole; go 
in peace." 

This miracle was immediately followed by another, 
still more wonderful— the raising of the dead to life. Faith 
had brought an anxious father to Jesus to request the healing 
of his daughter. But while he was making the request, a messenger 
came to him saying, "Thy daughter is dead, trouble 
not the Master." The messenger evidently knew nothing 
of Jesus' power to raise the dead, and the anxious father 
would probably have abandoned all hope except for the 
Lord's reassurance of his faith, "Fear not: believe only, 
and she shall be made whole." 

In the former instance the faith was exercised by the 
patient; but in this case it was exercised by another on 
behalf of the patient, who, being dead, had no ability to 
exercise faith. Yet the faith in the power of Jesus of those 
who had requested the healing was a very weak faith, and 
when they saw the child was dead all hope departed. They 
had considerable faith in Christ, but they did not believe 



that his power extended to the raising of the dead, and 
were quite incredulous at the suggestion of the Lord's 
words,— "Weep not; she is not dead, but sleepeth,"— 
knowing that she was dead. As in the case of Lazarus, our 
Lord here referred to death as a sleep, in view of the fact 
of the resurrection. The term is similarly applicable to 
the whole human family in the death that came upon all 
through Adam; because there shall be an awakening, a 
resurrection of the dead, both of the just and the unjust. 
The second death, from which there shall be no resurrection, 

R1939 : page 34 

is never likened to a sleep, anywhere in the Bible. 

It is worthy of note, that while our Lord took with 
him the parents and three of his disciples into the chamber 
of death, that they might witness the awakening, when 
they manifested their lack of faith he put them all out, and 
then recalled the dead to life, and permitted them afterward 
to come in and minister to her. Thus, while he rewarded 
their faith, weak though it was, he reproved them 
also, and gave them overwhelming evidence of his mighty 
power. 

The statement of verse 55, when relieved of the mists 
of a false theology, is very clear. "And her spirit came 
again," simply signifies, "And her breath returned," and 
is so rendered in the Emphatic Diaglott, the Greek word 
"pneuma," translated "spirit" in the common version, 
signifying breath, wind, or the spirit or breath of life. 
With the reinstituting of the breathing process and the 
healing of the physical organism came reanimation, restored 
intelligence, and the dead lived again. Thus the 
Lord rewarded even the weak faith, and gave them additional 
and overwhelming evidence to strengthen and establish 
their faith. The Lord did not expect or desire the 
people to have faith without good substantial evidence upon 
which to base it; but he did desire and reward the faith 
that was exercised to the extent of the evidence. A faith 
without substantial evidence upon which to base it, is mere 
credulity, and generally degenerates into gross superstition 
unworthy of the intelligence which God has given us. 



R1939 : page 34 

JESUS THE MESSIAH. 

-MARCH 1. -Luke 9:18-27.- 

Golden Text— "This is my beloved Son: hear him."— Luke 9:35. 

FOR treatment of the major part of this lesson see 
our issue of January 15, 1895— "The Good 
Confession." 
The Lord's command to his disciples to refrain from 



bold assertions that he was the Christ, which, coming from 
them, his intimate friends and disciples, would have had 
about the same effect as if coming from himself, was a wise 
one. He preferred to give the people the evidences, rather 
than the assertions, of his Messiahship, and to let the logic 
of his mighty works lead them to the only reasonable 
conclusions. 

Our Lord's words following this command to tell no 
man, show the reasonings on which it was based— "The 
Son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected of the 
elders and chief priests and scribes, and be slain, and be 
raised the third day." Consequently if any followed him 
from any other motives than those of deep conviction and 
a heart desire to be in harmony with God, the trial coming 
would sweep them all away as chaff before the wind. 
But those who would follow him from a heart and head 
conviction of the truth, drawn from the clear testimony of 
the Scriptures and of his mighty works, would thus, by 
their settled convictions, be enabled to stand the tests of 
faith and endurance which must shortly follow. Even with 
this care, the faith of most of those who believed proved 
very superficial. They were swayed in judgment by the 
opposition of their leaders, and only a few stood firm in 
the midst of the trials following. 

The Lord plainly taught his disciples that following 
him meant daily self-denial and cross-bearing. He showed 
them how he must suffer reproaches and persecutions, and 
that from a source whence it might least be expected— from 
the leaders and religious teachers of his day, who were 
moved with envy and consequent hatred of one whose 
power and wisdom so far outstripped their own as to detract 
from their honor and esteem among the people. He showed 
them how he must suffer, even unto death, and that if they 
would follow him and continue to be his disciples, they 
must do as he did,— they must be willing to bear reproaches, 
and to suffer persecution even unto death. If they were 
not willing to do this, they were not worthy to be his disciples. 
"If any man will come after me, let him deny 
himself and take up his cross daily and follow me." 

The statement of verse 24 is applicable to those who, 
having entered into covenant relations with the Lord to lay 
down their lives in his service, subsequently ignore their 
covenant while they seek to save that which they had consecrated 
to God even unto death. Faithfulness to our 
covenant of sacrifice insures eternal life as spiritual beings; 
while the repudiation of it would surely forfeit that life. 
And since by our covenant we have given up all claim upon 
the humanity and its hopes and aims, which we engaged to 
sacrifice, the result must be as the Lord states it:— "Whosoever 
will save his life shall lose it; but whosoever will 
lose his life for my sake, the same shall save it." The 
reasoning of verse 25 is unanswerable, and should have its 
full weight with every consecrated soul. The assurances 
of verse 26 also claim most careful consideration. 

The reference of verse 27 was to the vision of the 
Kingdom of God given typically on the mount of the 



transfiguration. On this subject see our issue of Jan. 
15, '95. 



R1939 : page 34 

TRUE LOVE TO ONE'S NEIGHBOR. 

--MARCH 8.-Luke 10:25-37.- 

Golden Text— "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, 
and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; 
and thy neighbor as thyself."— Luke 10:27. 

THE insincerity and evil disposition toward Jesus on 
the part of the Jewish teachers (doctors of the law, 
scribes and Pharisees) was very manifest in the questions 
they publicly propounded to him, for the evident purpose 
of entrapping him in his words and thus hindering his influence 
among the people. It was for this purpose that they 
mingled with the multitudes who witnessed his miracles and 
attended his preaching. But Jesus was more than a match 
for their cunning craftiness; and we admire the adroitness 
with which he ever thwarted their purposes. 

R1939 : page 35 

The question on this occasion was, "Master, what 
shall I do to inherit eternal life?" The questioner probably 
thought he would say, You must believe that I am the 
Son of God, the promised Messiah. Then they would 
have said, "He repudiates the law. The law says that the 
man that doeth the things contained therein shall live by 
them." This, to the people, would have seemed a strong 
argument against Jesus, before they had become sufficiently 
acquainted with him and his teachings. While such a claim 
on the part of Jesus would have been the truth, the people 
were not yet prepared to understand and receive it. They 

R1940 : page 35 

needed continued and repeated evidences, not assertions, 
to convince them; and the Lord modestly and wisely gave 
them what they needed, and with great tact and skill 
avoided the interference with his purpose on the part of 
his enemies. 

Jesus' answer referred the questioner to the law, saying, 
"What is written in the law? how readest thou?" They 
gave the answer from the law— Thou shalt love the Lord 
with all thy heart, etc., and thy neighbor as thyself,— and 
Jesus said they had answered correctly, and that if they 
would do that, they should have eternal life. 

But the answer was not satisfactory to any one, not 
even to the questioner, who was doubtless anxious to make 
a show of his zeal for the law; but the thoughts now revolving 



in every mind must have been the disconsolate 

remembrance of the fact that, though thousands had endeavored 

to merit life through the keeping of the law, not 

one had ever yet succeeded in retaining life beyond the 

usual allotment. And so they understood the Lord's 

words to imply that if they could keep the law perfectly, 

then they should receive the life; but that "if" was insurmountable: 

they could not keep it, and there seemed to be 

no hope of life unless this great teacher might have something 

else to suggest. 

Even the questioner betrayed some anxiety in the 
matter, as though he felt that his own conduct toward God 
and his fellow-men might not stand the scrutiny of the law, 
even as judged by those about him. Possibly some were 
present, who, by their incredulous faces, indicated that they 
did not think this man always acted as if he loved his 
neighbor as himself, and God supremely. So, to justify 
himself in the estimation of such, this doctor of the law 
endeavored to give the impression that the word "neighbor" 
had some restricted meaning which permitted the 
exercise of a good deal of selfishness. 

The illustration which followed forced from the questioner 
himself the admission of the truth that every man 
is neighbor to every other man; that our common humanity 
is the neighborly bond, and that only those who recognize 
the bond of human brotherhood, and act accordingly, 
are worthy of the name "neighbor." To ignore the claims 
of human brotherhood is meanly selfish and inhuman. Yet 
that was just what the proud, boastful, hypocritical teachers 
of that day were doing (Matt. 23:14,23): they were 
scrupulously tithing their mint and anise and cummin, and 
omitting the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy 
and faith. 

The truth thus wisely put, and by logical argument 
forced home to the hearts of all, exposed the hypocrisy of 
the caviling questioner, and drew from himself the admission 
of the truth. "Then said Jesus unto him, Go, and 
do thou likewise." Thus the evil designs of the unbeliever 
were frustrated and the truth was triumphant. 



R1940 : page 35 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



New York. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I arrived home a few days 
ago, and I think you will be interested to hear my general 
experience in the colporteur work, and what my future intentions 
are. I am willing to go wherever the Lord 

wishes, for he knows where the most good can be accomplished; 
and I am taking it to him in prayer, that he will 
guide and direct me. 



In reviewing the last few months, I must acknowledge 
that the Lord has wonderfully watched over and blessed 
me in this great harvest work, and I thank him that he has 
counted me worthy to labor in his vineyard. I must confess 
that I am very weak and can do nothing of myself; 
but if I put my trust fully in the Lord, and do the work 
through him to glorify his name, I have the assurance that 
he will not forsake me. Whatever talent he has given me, 
if it be only one, I want to use it to win others; for I know 
the Lord's words are true, that if a person does not work 
with the one talent he has, he will certainly not have others 
given to him, and the only one he has will also finally be 
taken away. 

In less than four months I have put out about 700 
DAWNS, and I hope that through them some may come to 
the knowledge of the truth. I think myself that, as you 
remarked in your letter, a great many true Christians are 
still in the nominal churches, and it seems to me that (by 
such at least) the truth will be more appreciated in the 
future, because I have found a great many whose hunger 
cannot be satisfied there, and who are looking for the truth. 

Enclosed you will find Twenty Dollars, not to add to 
my account, but to use for the spread of the truth wherever 
you think it will accomplish the most good. As I have 
said before, I did not engage in the work to make money, 
and this is about what I made over and above my expenses. 

Wishing that the Lord may spare you, and use you to 
bring these glad tidings (which shall in due time be to all 
people) to a great many more, I remain, in Christ our Redeemer, 
your brother, F. KNAUSS. 



page 35 

California. 

DEAR BROTHER:— I heartily approve of the sentiments 
expressed in TOWER of Nov. 15. The Church question is 
one of great importance, and the term "church" needs to 
be clearly defined. Satan endeavors to take Christians the 
full swing of the pendulum; i.e., from the chains of sects 
to the license of "comeoutism." 

One of the worst weapons which the sects have used 
against us is that we were "comeouters." A sort of stigma 
attaches to that name, because of the actions of the real 
"comeouters;" and when it is applied to us it does great 
damage to the cause of the truth. My influence was hurt 
in this locality by the report becoming current that I was a 
"comeouter," and I was under the necessity of publicly 
disavowing any connection with them. 

I am fully convinced that sectarianism is sin, so much 
so that I would stand alone forever, before I would knowingly 
join any sect. But I am just as fully convinced 
that "comeoutism," as it finds expression in many, is the 

page 36 



other swing of the pendulum, and that the church is not 
an incongruous mass of irresponsible nondescripts. The 
New Testament Church is a New Testament reality, and 
occupies the golden mean betwixt the two extremes. 

But I can give a hearty "amen" to all you say in the 
Nov. 15 issue. It will do a great deal of good, and will 
help to remove the distrust with which we are viewed. God 
bless you and guide you! I know, as you say, that the 
time is short; but not too short in which to be right. God 
expects us to be right, to make plain paths for our feet, 
lest the lame be turned out of the way, but let it rather be 
healed. 

I thank God that Millennial truths are finding some 
lodgment in this neighborhood. I thank God daily that 
he has given wife and myself this "hearing ear." Like 
the Psalmist, we have set the Lord always before us; and 
when we go to God, it is always by the way of the cross. 

We pray much for you, that he will keep you unchangeably 
loyal to the truth. The position you occupy 
demands it for the glory of his name. 

Pray for us. R. F. CROOKS. 



British Columbia. 

DEAR SIR:-I regret my last contribution to ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER having been so long ago, and also that 
during the interval my reading of your periodical publications 
has been interrupted much more than I would have 
wished. My interest in your writings continues unabated 
—recognizing, as I do, your acquaintance with the whole 
Bible, and rare power in explaining in simple language its 
spirit and meaning. May your labors, and those of all 
other faithful workers in his vineyard, be abundantly blessed 
by God. 

Will you pardon me if I hint (from the best motives but 
with great diffidence) my fear that some of your correspondents, 
whose letters I see in the TOWER, may be in 
danger of deceiving themselves by assuming, on insufficient 
grounds, that their salvation is sure. Good works 
(for example those of colporteurs and others, in commending 
and circulating the Word of God) are of course meritorious; 
but this of itself cannot warrant the firm confidence 
with which not a few of the correspondents appear 
to me content to rely on efforts of their own. 

Can it be possible that your theology— with all its 
grand views of what Christ has done and suffered to redeem 
sinners— still has in it something relaxing, upon which 
poor, erring human nature may be deluding itself? I hope 
you quite understand that my remarks are made in all 
charity. I have no wish to be, nor to appear as, an 
accuser in any sense. 

Yours very truly, 

[IN REPLY:— We fully agree, dear Brother, that none 
have cause for boasting except in and through Christ. But 



we do believe that those who are true branches in the "true 
Vine" should know of this union with Christ, and should 
be able to "glory in the Lord," with a "full assurance of 
faith," "nothing doubting;" realizing that "he who hath 
begun a good work [in them] is able to complete it." So 
far as we know the brethren whose letters we publish, they 
rejoice in the grace of God in Christ through the redemption 
and the remission of sins. 

"How firm a foundation, ye saints of the Lord, 

Is laid for your faith in his excellent Word! 

What more can he say than to you he hath said? 

You, who unto Jesus for refuge have fled." EDITOR.] 



R1940 : page 36 

Minnesota. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The Lord has specially 
blessed my efforts of late in selling DAWNS during morning, 
noon and evening hours. Sold 11 volumes last Friday, 
16 Saturday, 10 yesterday. This morning I took an order 
for a set, and this noon I went to a sash and door factory 
and got orders for 32 volumes; and several more may buy 
when I deliver, next week. 

I see more clearly now than ever before the race we 
are running for the glorious high calling in Christ, and that 
each and every day shall tell whether we are among the 
overcomers or not. I realize more than ever before the 
great privilege which God in his infinite mercy has conferred 
upon us, a few, a small band, to give us his unadulterated 
gospel, and how glad we ought to be to run and do 
the Master's will, when we know what it is, and that it is 
so glorious towards all men, and that the days are evil. 
As the Apostle says, "We must buy it," or "Let us purchase 
the acceptable time, as the days are evil." (Norwegian 
trans.) I clearly see, that we, who have once voluntarily 
offered ourselves a living, holy sacrifice to do God's will 
only, henceforth and forever, are passed through the 
Adamic death, and if we wilfully sin, and count the blood 
of Jesus Christ, with which we were sanctified, a common 
thing, "there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins," and 
we certainly would be unfit to live on any plane. But, 
blessed be God! he judgeth our hearts, and if we will walk 
humbly by faith, God's Word shall truly light us home. 
God shall be our strength and our refuge; and if we abide 
under the shadow of his mighty wing, nothing shall tear 
us away. But it behooves us to be watchful, and faithful 
unto death, as only the faithful will receive the crown. 
Since we have been made free indeed, we feel the power 
of the devil and his unseen host trying every way to retard 
our progress; but, blessed be God! "We overcome in all 
things through Christ who strengtheneth us." 

Yours in the race, M. P. THORI. 



Florida. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I enclose a few clippings. 
As the N.Y. World admits a great many interesting articles 
on religious subjects, why not take advantage of its world-wide 
reputation and liberality to spread the truth? There 
were several articles lately on the missionary question that 
put the orthodox people in a "box." It has always seemed 
strange to me that more of the DAWN people do not write 
in the public press, where I see all shades of opinions represented, 
but rarely see any reference to the DAWNS or 
the truths taught in them. 

Wishing you all the Lord's continued blessing, 
Yours in the faith, W. A. WHITCOMB. 

[We commend this suggestion to all who have the 
talent to express the truth wisely, kindly, fluently and 
pointedly. We are glad to say that several Brethren are 
active in such directions. They usually send us the papers 
containing their articles, which often contain some reference 
to MILLENNIAL DAWN, or a quotation from it, and close 
with a promise to send reading matter free, and the writer's 
address. The securing of the addresses of the interested 
is very important, for you cannot hope to thoroughly convince 
any one by a short article or two. We are glad to 
cooperate by furnishing and mailing tracts, etc., to all the 
addresses you can send us. Let the light shine out in 
every way that you can.— EDITOR.] 



page 37 