A Time for Increased Activity
1 As the end of this present wicked system of things draws ever closer and we see how Jehovah is richly blessing our ministry, it is imperative for us to heed the apostle Peter’s admonition to ‘brace up our minds for activity.’​—1 Pet. 1:13; Isa. 60:22.
2 When Peter gave the above admonition, he was writing about the salvation that can be ours through the shed blood of Jesus Christ. Our declaring the good news of the Kingdom is one important way we have of demonstrating our faith and expressing our appreciation for the benefits we receive because of Jehovah’s love expressed through the gift of his Son. (John 3:16) The Memorial season is a time to be even more active in this God-ordained work.
MEMORIAL CELEBRATION AND SPECIAL TALK
3 The Memorial celebration this year will be held after sundown on April 10. Even now, in anticipation of that special date, we can examine our relationship with Jehovah God and the manner in which we are remembering the sacrifice of Jesus. Do we demonstrate our faith every day by adhering strictly to Jehovah’s righteous standards in our thinking, speech, and conduct? Are we showing love for others by exerting ourselves in preaching about the Kingdom and in making disciples? In a special way each year at the Memorial celebration, we remember what Jehovah God and Jesus have done for us. (Luke 22:19; 1 Cor. 11:23, 24) Such contemplative remembrance should move us to positive action according to our individual abilities and circumstances.
4 On March 25, most congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses around the world will present a special talk on the subject “Reach Out for the Real Life!” What a fine opportunity for new ones to begin associating with the congregation! Those who attend the special talk should be encouraged to be present for the Memorial celebration on April 10.
INCREASE DISTRIBUTION OF OUTSTANDING MAGAZINES
5 The Watchtower and Awake! play an important role in our public ministry while providing spiritual food and timely reading for all of us. All Kingdom publishers will appreciate the special effort that has gone into preparing the magazines for April and May. We will be highlighting these issues when presenting subscriptions. Endeavor to become thoroughly familiar with each issue as soon as you receive it. This will stimulate your zeal for presenting it in the field when offering subscriptions and individual copies or when presenting two magazines with one of the brochures to those who do not subscribe.
6 Can you make room in your personal schedule to auxiliary pioneer during April and May? If several publishers in the congregation arrange to pioneer at the same time, they can help and encourage one another during this special period of increased activity. The elders will be pleased to help by making additional arrangements for group witnessing where necessary.
7 Think seriously about your own circumstances, such as family responsibilities, physical health, secular work, or school schedule. If you are unable to pioneer at this time, to what extent can you increase your participation in the field ministry? Certainly Jehovah is pleased with whole-souled service that expresses our love and appreciation for him and for the precious gift of his Son, Jesus. As we examine ourselves in the light of God’s Word and brace up our minds for activity, we can be confident of having Jehovah’s spirit to sustain us in offering acceptable sacrifices of praise.​—Heb. 13:15.

