Announcements
● Literature offer for March: The Bible​—God’s Word or Man’s? for a contribution of $1.00. April and May: Watchtower subscription. One-year subscriptions to semimonthly editions are $5.00. One-year subscriptions to monthly editions and six-month subscriptions to semimonthly editions are $2.50. Where the subscription is not obtained, two magazines and a copy of any brochure, except the School brochure, may be offered for the contribution of 80¢. June: Survival Into a New Earth for the contribution of $1.00.
● The presiding overseer or someone assigned by him should audit the congregation accounts on March 1 or as soon as possible thereafter.
● New Publications Available:
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures (Deluxe pocket edition; DLbi25), available in black or maroon​—Dutch
Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? (Small size)​—Romanian
Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work—​Dutch, German, Swedish
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth​—Russian
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!​—Hmong, Quechua
Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Unitedly Doing God’s Will Worldwide—​Gujarati
“Look! I Am Making All Things New” (Brochure)​—Welsh
The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever​—Malagasy
The Government That Will Bring Paradise​—Luganda
Watch Tower Publications Index 1986-1988​—French
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
My Book of Bible Stories (set of four cassettes in an album; congregation and public: $8.00; pioneers: $6.00)​—Chinese (Mandarin)
Jeremiah, Lamentations (set of four cassettes; congregation and public: $6.00; pioneers: $5.00)​—French
● The February 15, 1990, Spanish-language issue of The Watchtower should have listed an additional English-language convention for JUNE 21-24 as follows:
LOS ANGELES, CA (Sign language also), Dodger Stadium, 1000 Elysian Park Ave.
The Los Angeles, CA, convention listed for JULY 12-15 should have read as follows:
LOS ANGELES, CA (Spanish only), Dodger Stadium, 1000 Elysian Park Ave.
Also, please note that the three New York, N.Y., district conventions are now confirmed and are no longer tentative.

