Build Faith in God’s Word
1 If ever there was a time when strong faith was needed, it is now. Many people have no faith at all and no hope for the future. Religious and political leaders have raised false hopes so often that many people openly despair. Truly, as the apostle Paul explained, “Faith is not a possession of all people.” (2 Thess. 3:2) However, faith is a possession of Jehovah’s Witnesses. We have complete confidence that the promises found in God’s Word will be fulfilled.
2 Strong faith makes Jehovah’s Witnesses stand out as different from other people. It motivates fine works that benefit others as well as ourselves, while bringing honor to God. Such faith results from allowing God’s Word to exert power in our lives. The present-day international brotherhood of genuine Christians demonstrates the value of building faith in the Bible as the inspired Word of God.​—2 Tim. 3:16.
WHY HELP OTHERS BUILD FAITH
3 Since lives are at stake, we have strong reason for helping others to build their faith. With this in mind, during March we will offer The Bible​—God’s Word or Man’s? for the first time in the field. The purpose of this new book is to help people see that the Bible is God’s Word. It discusses and refutes many of the false charges leveled against God’s Word. It gives satisfying answers to a number of questions, such as: Is the Bible unscientific? Does it contradict itself? Is it just myth and legend? Did the miracles mentioned in the Bible really happen? Has archaeology disproved the historical accuracy of the Bible? In addition, this publication presents many fine proofs of the inspiration of the Bible. It also calls attention to the infallible prophecies of the Bible and its wonderful overall harmony.
4 The profound practical wisdom of the Bible and its power to change people for good are only part of the evidence that proves that the Bible is God’s Word. We are responsible to help people learn of this evidence. To do this, we must first teach them to believe what the Bible says.
5 How were most of us helped to build faith in God’s Word? Most likely it was by means of a home Bible study that someone patiently conducted with us. So the placing of a Bible or a book is not the end of our faith-building efforts; it is only the beginning. If we have benefited from having someone study with us, we will want to return promptly to those with whom we place literature and offer a home Bible study to help them build faith.
NEW BOOK HELPS BUILD FAITH
6 When honestly evaluating the evidence, no sincere person can fail to accept that the Bible is God’s Word. This new book presents much of that evidence in an easily accessible form. We want to encourage others to accept the Bible as God’s Word and to live by its inspired counsel. Those who do so will come to echo joyfully the psalmist’s heartfelt prayer: “O see that I have loved your own orders. O Jehovah, according to your loving-kindness preserve me alive. The substance of your word is truth, and every righteous judicial decision of yours is to time indefinite.”​—Ps. 119:159, 160.
7 Through his Word, the Bible, Jehovah lovingly provides direction for all who seek his way of protection through the “great tribulation.” (Matt. 24:21) During March, we can encourage others to read and study God’s Word by offering the book The Bible​—God’s Word or Man’s? for a contribution of $1.

