Continuing Our Ministry Without Letup
1 The scene of this world is changing rapidly as we move deeper into the time of the end. (1 Cor. 7:31) In fulfillment of Bible prophecy, world-shaking events are taking place. As we contemplate what is happening both in the world around us and within the theocratic organization, we can appreciate how urgent it is that we preach “the good news” of the Kingdom.​—Mark 13:10.
2 It was our Leader and Exemplar, Jesus Christ, who gave the command to make disciples. In doing so, he guaranteed the success of that work by his promise, “I am with you all the days until the conclusion of the system of things.” (Matt. 28:19, 20) Jesus’ disciples took his words seriously, and even when facing strong opposition, “they continued without letup teaching and declaring the good news about the Christ, Jesus.” (Acts 5:42) What a fine example they set for us!
3 As we read the 1990 Yearbook, we see that Jehovah has blessed our ministry by bringing about fine increases in new disciples. In some lands the increases reported are truly spectacular. The overall increase worldwide exceeds by far what any of us could have imagined just a few years ago. (Isa. 60:22) But what about our local territory? And what about our individual ministry? Are we rejoicing over our part in the ministry as well as over the collective ministry of our fellow workers everywhere? Are we continuing our individual effort in the ministry without letup?
OUR INDIVIDUAL PART
4 Quite obviously, not all territories are equally productive. (Compare Matthew 13:23.) It is also true that some territories, such as Ireland and Quebec, have become productive only after many years of hard work on the part of zealous ministers. There are many opposers in some areas, and in others the people in general are apathetic and unresponsive toward the Kingdom message. In still other places, there are so many workers in the field that there is little territory to be covered. But regardless of the type of territory we have to work in, our zeal must never falter. The apostle Paul wrote, “Let us not give up in doing what is fine, for in due season we shall reap if we do not tire out.” (Gal. 6:9) His words of admonition apply to all Christians. How will we be able to do that? What will help us to continue our ministry without letup?
5 We can keep active and make our ministry successful if we put our trust in Jehovah and rely upon his strength to sustain us. Always have in mind that Jehovah is the one who makes the field productive. (1 Cor. 3:6) In answer to our prayers for help, Jehovah provides counsel, practical instruction, and an abundant supply of Bible literature for our personal use and for helping others to come to know him. Are we taking full advantage of these provisions?
MAINTAIN A RIGHT ATTITUDE
6 If we have a negative attitude, that can be a serious obstacle in the way of a productive ministry. If we have formed an unfavorable opinion about the people in our territory on the basis of their previous unresponsiveness, that attitude will be reflected in our tone of voice, facial expression, and lack of diligent preparation for the field service. We have received the commission to preach and teach, and we have not been told that the work is finished. Our desire to be obedient and submissive to divine direction should move us to continue our ministry without letup.
7 Jehovah’s purpose regarding the warning of the wicked and the gathering in of disciples will be accomplished before the end comes. We can share in the joy of the ministry now and look forward to eternal blessings among God’s people if we demonstrate our faith and love by continuing our ministry without letup.

