Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING MARCH 5
Song 108
10 min: Local announcements and appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Warmly commend publishers who have had a share in the field ministry already this month, and encourage all to participate zealously in the field during March. Give practical suggestions for offering current magazines in local territory. Remind publishers of congregation’s arrangements for field service.
20 min: “Build Faith in God’s Word.” Questions and answers. When discussing paragraph 3, have effective publishers in audience offer specific suggestions and comments on talking points that can be used in field service. Have these comments prepared in advance.
15 min: Call Back to Stimulate Further Interest. Encourage publishers to make return visits promptly on all who showed interest in God’s Word book. Previous part mentioned need to make return visits and start Bible studies with interested persons. After brief discussion of need and warm encouragement for all to call back where interest was shown, present one or two brief demonstrations showing how to make a return visit where new book was placed.
Song 23 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 12
Song 192
 7 min: Local announcements. Accounts report, including acknowledgments from the Society of any contributions sent in during February. Warmly commend congregation for generous support of Kingdom work through their monetary contributions. Review congregation’s field service arrangements, and encourage publishers to work with their respective service groups on weekend. Remind congregation that special public talk will be given on March 25. Refer to announcement in January 1990 Our Kingdom Ministry.
10 min: Question Box. Talk by elder, covering information in article. Also, make specific reference to excellent tape recordings provided by Society, and help brothers to see how these can be used by individuals and in Christian households.
18 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With Discernment.” Questions and answers. After considering paragraph 3, have two brief demonstrations showing how to adjust presentation to householder’s circumstances. Demonstrations can end when this is accomplished, usually during or immediately following the introduction.
10 min: “A Test of the Genuineness of Your Love.” Talk by elder based on article beginning on page 24 of December 1, 1989, Watchtower. Express appreciation for generosity of congregation in supporting Kingdom work locally and worldwide.
Song 225 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 19
Song 208
10 min: Local announcements. Include arrangements for weekend field service. Offer suggestions as to which articles in the current magazines may particularly appeal to people in the local territory.
20 min: “A Time for Increased Activity.” Question-and-answer discussion of article. Mention number already enrolled as auxiliary pioneers for April and May. When discussing paragraph 5, refer to February 1990 Our Kingdom Ministry article “Outstanding Magazines Featured.” Briefly review talking points in April 1 issue of The Watchtower if it has been received. Warmly encourage all to consider possibility of increasing field activity in connection with special-talk arrangement and Memorial celebration as well as for entire two-month period.
15 min: Local needs or talk and demonstration highlighting value of regular consideration of daily text and comments. Suggest how this can be done. Base talk on information in foreword of Examining the Scriptures Daily​—1990.
Song 46 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 26
Song 126
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Encourage all who can to share in field service this weekend. Sunday is first day of April and beginning of Watchtower subscription offer. All who will be auxiliary pioneering during April should have turned in applications, which are available from presiding overseer. As time allows, suggest appropriate presentations for current magazines.
20 min: “Continuing Our Ministry Without Letup.” Questions and answers. Have capable brother read paragraphs. Others in audience may read and comment on cited scriptures. Make local application of information, helping publishers to cope with problems faced in territory and maintain a proper attitude. All should be determined to serve Jehovah with zeal right down to the end.
15 min: Offer Watchtower Subscriptions. Briefly discuss importance of Watchtower subscription for all who would be seekers of life in Jehovah’s new world. Demonstrate subscription offer. When using April issues of The Watchtower, publishers could endeavor to stimulate interest by pointing out that God will soon bring peace. Psalm 72:7 could be used to show that God’s Word promises peace. Lovers of peace will be encouraged by seeing the promise at Psalm 37:10, 11 that true peace will come soon. If time permits, also demonstrate a brief, direct presentation of the subscription.
Song 71 and concluding prayer.

