Presenting the Good News​—With Discernment
1 The apostle Paul emphasized the need to use discernment in presenting the good news to people with differing beliefs and backgrounds. In our day, some people profess to be religious, while others are not spiritually inclined and do not appreciate spiritual values. As publishers of the good news, we must make the Kingdom message appealing “to people of all sorts” by using discernment in the ministry.​—1 Cor. 9:19-23.
UNDERSTANDING THE HOUSEHOLDER
2 The practical application of discernment in the field service involves the ability to adapt our presentation to the householder’s interests. This requires good preparation. By being thoroughly familiar with the wide variety of subjects considered in the books and magazines available, the publisher can be ready to present the good news with a variety of talking points. As we talk to older ones, youths, family heads, housewives, women in the work force, and others, we need to take into account their personal circumstances and use discernment in selecting material to present.
3 As you approach the householder, be alert to the surroundings. You may be able to discern that the householder is a parent, of a particular religious background, quite interested in the care of his home, and so forth. With this information, you can adjust your introduction to fit the householder’s circumstances and interests. By tactful, discreet questions and attentively listening to the person’s comments, you may discern his beliefs and feelings and then determine the best way to continue your presentation.
TAILORING YOUR PRESENTATION
4 If on your approach to the house you observe toys or children, you might open the present Topic for Conversation by saying: “We have been talking with parents in the community about guidelines they provide for their children. Many parents are concerned about the lack of moral guidance for children in the school system. Have you observed a problem along these lines?” Listen to the householder’s response. If the response indicates that the householder has a religious leaning, you might continue: “It is interesting that the Bible points to the need for us and our children to receive wise direction. Notice what is stated here at Proverbs 14:12.” After reading the scripture, you might say: “I was reading something just recently that stressed how practical the Bible’s counsel is for us.” Turn to page 174 of The Bible​—God’s Word or Man’s? and read the last paragraph in the chapter. Offer the book for $1.
5 If the householder’s response indicates that he does not value the Bible’s advice, you can show discernment by altering your presentation and saying: “Do you mind if I ask why you came to that conclusion?” After listening to the response, you might continue: “I can understand why you feel the way you do. In fact, recently I read something in this publication that I’m sure you would find interesting.” Turn to page 6 and read paragraphs 3 and 4. Also, read the first sentence in paragraph 5 on page 7. Ask the householder if he would like to consider what other people accept as proof of the Bible’s authenticity.
6 As we prepare well and show discernment in Jehovah’s service, we will be able to say as did the apostle Paul, “I have become all things to people of all sorts, that I might by all means save some.”​—1 Cor. 9:22; Prov. 19:8.

