Impart God’s Progressive Revelation to Mankind
THAT God gives his people on earth a progressive revelation is a thought that has never occurred to most persons of Christendom. But all Christian witnesses of Jehovah do appreciate that “the path of the righteous ones is like the bright light that is getting lighter and lighter until the day is firmly established.” Yes, even as it was true in the days of the apostles, it is true today that progressively God’s truths have “been made manifest to his holy ones.”—Prov. 4:18; Col. 1:26.a
Thus some eighty years ago Christian Bible students learned that the second presence of Christ was to be invisible and that God had earthly blessings in store for the vast majority of humankind. Through the years since then the light of God’s Word has shone ever more brightly and its truths have been widely publicized by means of The Watchtower and other Bible-study aids. Within the past twenty-five years or so we have progressively learned, among other things, that Christians must be neutral as regards conflicts between the nations and that blood, as well as life, is sacred in the eyes of God.
This progressive revelation not only has served to enlighten us on matters of conduct and doctrine but also has served to improve our ministerial activity. As a result, today Jehovah’s witnesses are able to give effective three- to eight-minute Bible sermons at the doorsteps of the people, know how to meet objections tactfully and how to arouse interest as well as to give longer sermons when calling back upon those persons who have evinced some interest in God’s Word.
Of course, since we want to be able to impart God’s progressive revelation to others, we must keep up with it ourselves. That means buying out the opportune time for private study, for attending the five weekly congregational meetings, for discussing truths with others and for prayer.
Among the obstacles we are faced with in making God’s progressive revelation our own are unexpected guests. If these come when it is time for meeting, why not invite them to come along? Then again, it may be bad weather. But since it seldom interferes with our secular work, should it interfere with our spiritual activity? As for children’s homework, it can be done after school so as not to have it interfere with meetings. Where secular work unduly interferes, why not discuss the matter with your employer and, if unable to improve matters in this way, perhaps you could find work that would not present such an obstacle.
Let us be careful with details as we impart God’s progressive revelation to others. What kind of details? Details such as our personal appearance and our tone of voice. Also, there is the matter of keeping a record of the names and addresses of those who show interest and the particular subject in which they are interested. Then be dependable in making return visits, being prepared to cultivate further the interest they have manifested.
Yes, return visits are important. Our obligation to impart God’s progressive revelation to others is not fully discharged merely by placing Bible literature with them; nor even by making a few return visits. Only by regularly studying the Bible with others can we hope to impart God’s progressive revelation to them. Be dependable in conducting such studies, arranging for a substitute when unable to conduct the study on any one night. We must take these studies seriously if we want those with whom we study to take them seriously. Only then can we expect God’s blessing upon our efforts, resulting not only in saving ourselves as well as others but, above all, in sharing in the vindication of Jehovah’s name.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, June 15, 1964.

