Can You Reach Out to an Unbelieving Mate?
 1. Why are Christians living in a divided household not the only ones interested in helping their unbelieving mate to accept the truth?
1 Do some publishers in your congregation have an unbelieving husband or wife? If so, no doubt these publishers desire that their mate join them in true worship. But they are not the only ones. The entire congregation mirrors God’s desire that “all sorts of men should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.” (1 Tim. 2:4) How may we reach out to the unbelieving mates of publishers in our congregation?
 2. How will having insight help us to assist an unbelieving mate?
2 First, we should try to see matters from the unbeliever’s viewpoint. Many unbelieving mates love their family and try to be a good marriage mate and parent. Perhaps they have sincere religious beliefs that are different from ours. They may know little about Jehovah’s Witnesses except what uninformed or prejudiced associates have told them. Some resent the time their spouse uses for worship that was formerly spent with the family. Insight will help us to treat an unbeliever kindly and respectfully and avoid being unduly nervous when we are around him.—Prov. 16:20-23.
 3. What may be the best way to win over an unbeliever?
3 Personal Interest: The best way to win over an unbelieving mate to the truth, at least initially, may be through our actions, not through a Bible discussion. (1 Pet. 3:1, 2) Important in this regard is showing personal interest. Sisters in the congregation can take an interest in an unbelieving wife, and brothers can do the same with an unbelieving husband. How?
 4. How may we demonstrate personal interest?
4 If you have not yet met the spouse, perhaps you could do so after consulting with the Christian mate. Do not be disappointed if the unbeliever’s initial response is lukewarm. Our friendliness and personal interest may move him to view Jehovah’s Witnesses more favorably. (Rom. 12:20) Some mature Christians have invited an unbeliever and his family to dinner, with a view to getting better acquainted and breaking down any prejudice that may exist. They have talked about his interests, rather than forcing the conversation toward spiritual subjects. Later, when the unbeliever feels more comfortable, a Scriptural discussion may be possible. Or he may be receptive to an invitation to attend one of our meetings to see what his wife is learning, especially since he already knows some in the congregation. Even if he is not ready to investigate the truth, he can certainly be commended for the support given to his believing mate.
 5. How may elders reach out to an unbeliever?
5 Elders especially should reach out to unbelieving mates and be alert for opportunities to give a witness. An unbeliever who has not been receptive to a Bible discussion may listen to Scriptural encouragement when he is in the hospital or encounters serious health problems. If a divided household experiences a crisis, such as the death of a family member, the elders may invite the unbeliever to sit in when they give comfort to the family.
 6. What reasons are there to reach out to unbelieving mates?
6 Imagine the joy that will be experienced by a Christian in our congregation if his or her spouse responds and comes into the truth! Such a happy event would also bring great joy to Jehovah, the angels, and the rest of the congregation. (Luke 15:7, 10) However, if the unbeliever is not initially responsive, we can still rejoice that our continued efforts please Jehovah, who “does not desire any to be destroyed but desires all to attain to repentance.”—2 Pet. 3:9.
[Blurb on page 6]
The best way to win over an unbelieving mate to the truth, at least initially, may be through our actions, not through a Bible discussion

