Prayerful Meditation—Necessary for Zealous Ministers
 1. What helped Jesus to avoid becoming sidetracked from his primary work?
1 Jesus had spent the evening healing people and expelling demons. When his disciples found him the next day, they said: “All are looking for you,” urging him to continue his powerful works. However, Jesus would not be sidetracked from his primary work of preaching the good news. He replied: “Let us go somewhere else, into the village towns nearby, that I may preach there also, for it is for this purpose I have gone out.” What helped Jesus to maintain his focus? He had risen early to pray and meditate. (Mark 1:32-39) How can prayerful meditation also help us to be zealous preachers?
 2. What could we meditate on to help us maintain zeal for the ministry?
2 Meditate on What? Jesus observed that people were “skinned and thrown about like sheep without a shepherd.” (Matt. 9:36) Similarly, we can reflect on how much people need the good news. We might contemplate the urgency of the times. (1 Cor. 7:29) We can ponder Jehovah’s works and qualities, our privilege to be Jehovah’s Witnesses, and the precious spiritual treasures we have learned from God’s Word that are still unknown by people in our territory.—Ps. 77:11-13; Isa. 43:10-12; Matt. 13:52.
 3. When might we meditate?
3 Meditate When? As Jesus did, some rise early when it is quiet. Others find it best to meditate in the evening before going to sleep. (Gen. 24:63) Even with a busy schedule, we can find time for meditation. Some do so while taking public transportation. Others use part of their lunch break for undisturbed contemplation. Many find that meditating before sharing in the ministry, even for a few moments, helps them to preach with greater zeal and boldness.
 4. Why should we meditate?
4 Prayerful meditation will deepen our desire to serve Jehovah, sharpen our spiritual focus, and strengthen our resolve to continue preaching. God’s Chief Minister, Jesus, benefited from meditation, and so will we.

