Question Box
▪ In what practical ways can we assist pioneers?
Around the world during the 2009 service year, nearly 800,000 brothers and sisters served as regular and special pioneers. These full-time servants sacrifice the firstfruits of their time, energy, and material resources in order to spread the Kingdom good news. (Prov. 3:9) How Jehovah must be pleased with their efforts! In what ways can we reflect Jehovah’s view and contribute to their joy and endurance in this avenue of service?
Certainly our well-chosen words may encourage them to continue serving as pioneers. (Prov. 25:11) Could we adjust our weekly schedule in order to work with them in the ministry? When working together, we might suggest using our vehicle instead of theirs. And if we ride in their vehicle, perhaps we could offer a contribution to help cover their expenses. (1 Cor. 13:5; Phil. 2:4) We also demonstrate our loving support by showing hospitality and occasionally inviting pioneers to our home for a meal.—1 Pet. 4:8, 9.
The Scriptures guarantee that Jehovah will provide the necessities for those who seek his Kingdom first. (Ps. 37:25; Matt. 6:33) One way that he does this is by means of our loving Christian brotherhood. (1 John 3:16-18) Of course, pioneers do not expect their financial responsibilities to be cared for by others. And they may not take the initiative to let others know when they experience a need. However, we can help faithful pioneers and “offset their deficiency” in practical ways by being alert and observant.—2 Cor. 8:14, 15.
When Phoebe, a zealous evangelizer in the first-century Cenchreae Congregation, traveled to Rome, Paul encouraged the brothers in Rome: “Welcome her in the Lord in a way worthy of the holy ones, and . . . assist her in any matter where she may need you.” (Rom. 16:1, 2) We have the opportunity to demonstrate the same loving support of those in our congregation who are declaring the good news without letup as regular and special pioneers.—Acts 5:42.

