Can Your Future Be Changed?
SUPPOSE you are planning for a family picnic but find out that the weather forecast calls for a severe thunderstorm. Would you not change your plans? There is nothing you can do to control the weather, but you do not have to get drenched. If alternative steps are taken, the family can have a pleasant time elsewhere despite the storm.
The situation is similar with respect to your future and Bible prophecy. In fact, the future can be seen through Bible prophecy. And although we humans cannot change prophetic events involving the earth, we can individually alter our plans, thereby ensuring an improved future amid those events.
Our future is inseparably linked with Bible prophecy. If we seriously consider the reliability of Bible prophecy and act accordingly, our future can be changed for the better. For example, Jehovah God promises a peaceful earth free from wickedness. And he desires life on that earth to be our future. The Bible says: “Watch the blameless one . . . for the future of that man will be peaceful. But . . . the future of wicked people will indeed be cut off.” (Psalm 37:10, 11, 37, 38) Can we depend on God’s promises? First, let us find out just what prophecy is.
What Is Prophecy?
Prophecy means an “inspired message; speech by divine influence.” According to Vine’s Expository Dictionary of New Testament Words, Bible prophecy is: “The speaking forth of the mind and the counsel of God,” the “declaration of that which cannot be known by natural means.” Included, also, is the “foretelling of that which is to come”​—history written in advance. And it is this latter meaning​—predicting the future—​that now concerns us. Let us look more closely at this facet of prophecy.
People have always had an interest in the future. Yet many will ignore the only accurate source of prophecy​—the Bible. Throughout the ages, millions have attempted to peer into the future by consulting astrologers, clairvoyants, seers and other prognosticators, and they have put their faith in such predictors of the future. But why do so many trust such human sources while dismissing the possibility that Bible prophecy contains the very information they are seeking?
Reliability of Bible Prophecy
Man lacks complete control of future situations and must react to them as they develop. God is different. His predictions are precise for two reasons. First, as the Creator, Jehovah knows humans and he can accurately foretell where human thought and action will lead. (Deuteronomy 31:21; Isaiah 46:9, 10) Second, God can shape events before they happen. In both ways his purpose is always accomplished and his prophetic word is always stamped as true.
Through the prophet Isaiah, Jehovah points out his ability to foretell and regulate the future as compared with the failure of false prophets to do so. He states: “I am the One that makes diviners themselves act crazily; . . . the One making the word of his servant come true, and the One that carries out completely the counsel of his own messengers.”​—Isaiah 44:25, 26.
Because God ‘makes the word of his servant come true,’ the Scriptures have accurately foretold the development of world powers, along with the events leading up to their establishment. An outstanding example of this is found in Da chapter 2 of the Bible book of Daniel. Here King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon is extremely disturbed by a dream he could not remember. He is frustrated. Not one of his Chaldean prophets can recount the dream, let alone interpret its meaning. They are totally baffled. Daniel, as the prophet of Jehovah, reveals both the dream and its meaning as the king listens in astonishment. Says Daniel:
“Your Majesty, there is no wizard, magician, fortuneteller, or astrologer who can tell you that. But there is a God in heaven, who reveals mysteries. He has informed Your Majesty what will happen in the future.”​—Daniel 2:27, 28, Today’s English Version.
Daniel next pinpoints the future rise and fall of powerful nations. The manlike image seen in the king’s dream represents a succession of world kingdoms, including Babylon (the gold head), Medo-Persia (the silver breasts and arms), Greece (the copper belly and thighs), Rome (the iron legs), followed by the Anglo-American World Power with today’s radical popular movements within its realm and sphere of influence (the iron-clay feet). Finally, human rule is replaced by divine rule as the complete image is pulverized by God’s heavenly Kingdom (stone).​—Daniel 2:36-45; see also Daniel 8:19-25.
To illustrate the detailed accuracy of Bible prophecy further, consider this example: Let us suppose that a prominent person goes on public record today and predicts events 200 years ahead, for the year 2184. The prophecy contains:
▪ A great military battle: The nations involved have yet to become rival world powers, and the results will change history.
▪ The very strategy used: A tremendous engineering feat altering the course of a mighty river.
▪ The name of the conqueror: His name is given about 200 years before the conquest and some 130 years before his birth.
▪ The outcome: The geographic location and ultimate destiny of the loser.
If all these predictions came true, would it not at least cause people to consider other things this person had said about the future?
What we have just described actually took place in detail in connection with the overthrow of Babylon by the Medes and the Persians. Some 200 years before this event took place, the Bible prophet Isaiah predicted:
▪ A great military battle: between Medo-Persia and Babylon.​—Isaiah 13:17, 19.
▪ The very strategy used: Dry up a moatlike river defense; enter a fortified city through open gates.​—Isaiah 44:27–45:2.
▪ The name of the conqueror: Cyrus of Persia.​—Isaiah 45:1.
▪ The outcome: Babylon in time to become a total desolation.​—Isaiah 13:17-22.
Since all these predictions came true, will you consider other Bible prophecies to be reliable too?
There are many other Bible prophecies that have been fulfilled in detail.a For example, Jesus had to fulfill scores of prophecies to qualify as the Messiah​—and he did fulfill them. The book Archaeology and Bible History, by Professor J. P. Free, says this about Jesus Christ: “The chances of all these prophecies being fulfilled in one man are so overwhelmingly remote that it is strikingly demonstrated that they could in no wise be the shrewd guesses of mere men.” Certainly, then, in connection with Jesus the Messiah, Jehovah did foretell the future. But, can Bible prophecy help us right now?
Prophecy and the Present
Besides helping us to understand the future, Bible prophecy helps us to cope with the present. How so? Well, it is through Bible prophecies of the past that we can understand the present. And understanding why world conditions are the way they are is a big step forward in coping with them.
Nineteen hundred years ago, the Bible foretold events and world conditions that have been witnessed in this century. The generation of the year 1914 has been experiencing this fulfillment in such events as global war, numerous earthquakes, widespread famines, epidemics of disease, increasing lawlessness and great fear. (Luke 21:10, 11) In addition, the loss of “natural affection” and the presence of “lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God” promote increases in sexual immorality, venereal diseases, abortions and broken marriages.​—2 Timothy 3:1-5.
The Bible not only predicts these things for our day but also gives the solution​—Jehovah’s Kingdom.
Bible prophecy, like a beacon, can guide us to a better future if we are attentive to its signal. The apostle Peter advised: “We have the prophetic word made more sure; and you are doing well in paying attention to it as to a lamp shining in a dark place.” (2 Peter 1:19) Will you give Bible prophecy closer consideration? Jehovah’s Witnesses are willing to help. If you ‘pay attention’ to Bible prophecy, your future can be one with everlasting benefits.
[Footnotes]
For additional information see Is the Bible Really the Word of God? published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
[Picture on page 5]
FROM THIS . . . TO THIS
“He is making wars to cease to the extremity of the earth.”​—Psalm 46:9
[Picture on page 6]
FROM THIS . . . TO THIS
“As regards the wicked, they will be cut off.” “The righteous one will sprout.”​—Proverbs 2:22; Psalm 72:7
[Picture on page 7]
FROM THIS . . . TO THIS
“The Sovereign Lord Jehovah will certainly wipe the tears from all faces.”​—Isaiah 25:8

