





Prayers From an Oak Tree




“I was born into a family that served Jehovah,” says Rachel, who now lives in the Dominican Republic. “Sadly, when I was seven years old, my father stopped associating with Jehovah’s people and became violently opposed to the truth. He made it very difficult for me to practice pure worship. For example, he would try to make me give up my service of Jehovah in exchange for things he could give me—a cellphone, a trip to Disneyland, or even a credit card! Sometimes he even tried to ‘beat Jehovah out of me’ with his fists. He would say that if I couldn’t talk or walk, then I wouldn’t be able to go to the meetings. It never worked. I have always been determined to attend meetings.
“My father made sure that he never hit me when Mom was present. He told me that he would hurt her if I told her about the beatings. He explained away the bruises, saying that they resulted from the martial arts training that he insisted on giving me.
“I was too young and too afraid of my father to tell Mom what was happening. So I would tell Jehovah. I took long walks in the woods behind our house in Maryland, U.S.A. In those woods, there was a wonderful oak tree that I would climb, and from a comfortable branch, I would talk to Jehovah. I prayed about my feelings and about what I was going to do for him when I grew up—if only he would help me survive long enough to get there. I also talked to him about what I would do in the coming new world, the family I would have, and the peace and joy I would experience with no pain and no fear.
“When my father tried to turn me away from God through bribes or beatings, I always felt Jehovah’s hand comforting and strengthening me. God helped me stay loyal and strong.
“I was baptized when I was ten, and I started pioneering two years later. At first, my father didn’t know about either of those things. When he did find out, he punched me and dislocated my jaw.
“Some counseled me against pioneering because I was quite young, and they worried that I didn’t understand the seriousness of my decision. Over time, I did see many young Witnesses in my area just drifting along spiritually. They were busy with parties and having fun. And what they were doing looked appealing! It was tempting at times. I wondered, ‘Why not stop preaching and just have fun like other people my age?’ But whenever I felt that way, I talked to Jehovah about it.
“When I was about 15 years old, I was approached by a prestigious modeling agency. They offered me an extremely lucrative contract with their offices in Milan, Italy. It was flattering to be told that I could be a model, appear in magazines, and display expensive clothes on catwalks. I had been a regular pioneer for almost three years, and I thought, ‘This job could financially support me and help me to continue pioneering for a long time!’ My father had left us, so I also reasoned that the money could help Mom with expenses.
“I prayed about the matter. I talked to my mom, who had been pioneering for many years, and I talked to a loved and respected elder. As usual, I also went to my tree and prayed some more. Jehovah answered my prayers through the words of a verse in the Bible that the elder shared with me. It is Ecclesiastes 5:4, which says: ‘Whenever you make a vow to God, pay it. What you vow, pay.’ I had vowed to serve Jehovah fully, and I feared that this particular employment offer could harm me spiritually. So I decided to turn down the offer.
“Well, I did survive to adulthood! I now live happily with my husband, Jaser, and our son, Connor, who is nine years old. Jaser is an elder, and Connor is an unbaptized publisher. I have been in full-time service for almost 27 years.





“I often think about the long conversations I had with Jehovah from the oak tree in the woods behind our house. I begged Jehovah to help me, and he has done so in a wonderful way. He has strengthened, comforted, and guided me. Throughout my life, Jehovah has shown me again and again what an amazing father he is. I am happy that I chose to serve him with all my heart. That is the wisest choice I have ever made.”



