Announcements
● Literature offer for November: New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures and either Should You Believe in the Trinity? or “Look! I Am Making All Things New.” December: Mankind’s Search for God. January and February: Any 192-page book published prior to 1980 that the congregation has in stock. If the congregation has no stock of such books to be offered, the book “Let Your Kingdom Come” should be used. The “Kingdom Come” book may be requested from Brooklyn.
● Congregations should begin requesting the 1991 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses on their November literature requests. (See the Watchtower Publications List, paragraph 10.) The Yearbook will be available in Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Norwegian, Portuguese, Spanish, and Swedish. Until the Yearbook is available and shipments are made, it will appear as “Pending” on congregation packing lists. Yearbooks are special request items.​—See the Watchtower Publications List, paragraphs 24 and 25.
● New Publications Available:
Insight on the Scriptures, Volume 1 (A-J)​—German
Watch Tower Publications Index 1950-1985​—French
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth​—Trukese, Wallisian
“Look! I Am Making All Things New”​—Bulgarian
Victory Over Death​—Is It Possible for You? (for Hindus)​—French
How to Find the Road to Paradise (four-page magazine-size tract for Muslims)​—English
Tract No. 13​—Albanian, Czech, Serbian
Tracts No. 14, 15, 16 ​—Albanian, Czech, Romanian, Serbian
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth (set of eight cassettes in an album)​—German
Listening to the Great Teacher (set of four cassettes and a book in an album)​—Korean
● The following publications are now available in grade-two English Braille:
Mankind’s Search for God (four volumes)
Examining the Scriptures Daily​—1991 (four volumes)
How Can Blood Save Your Life? (one volume)
Theocratic Ministry School Schedule for 1991 (one volume)
Mark orders for Braille publications, ATTENTION: BRAILLE DESK. Include name and address of the person that will use the Braille material.

