Directing Bible Students to Jehovah’s Organization
1 Bible students need to get acquainted with the organization of the “one flock” Jesus spoke about at John 10:16. They must appreciate that identifying themselves with Jehovah’s organization is essential to their salvation. (Rev. 7:9, 10, 15) Therefore, we should start directing our Bible students to the organization as soon as a Bible study is established.
2 Help your Bible students to get acquainted with the many features of Jehovah’s earthly organization. Following the first-century pattern, all of Jehovah’s people belong to congregations that are made up of elders, ministerial servants, and publishers. Today, the members of the congregations enjoy attending five meetings a week. There are periodic assemblies and conventions scheduled during the year, and these provide special instruction along with opportunities to associate with fellow Witnesses from different areas. Also, there are pioneers, missionaries, and traveling overseers, as well as a Governing Body that directs the worldwide work. How might you acquaint your Bible students with the various aspects of Jehovah’s organization? How can you help them see that the organization’s structure is Bible-based?
USE THE DOING GOD’S WILL BROCHURE
3 The Doing God’s Will brochure has comprehensive information regarding Jehovah’s organization. With it you can progressively acquaint Bible students with the organization and help them appreciate its operation. A good way to begin is by discussing what takes place at the Kingdom Hall. This will encourage the student to attend congregation meetings. Before inviting him to the public talk for the first time, review the information on pages 14 and 15. Draw his attention to the pictures. Describe the location and appearance of the local Kingdom Hall. You may even show him a picture of the Kingdom Hall you attend.
4 When the circuit overseer’s visit is announced to the congregation, consider with your Bible student pages 20 and 21. Use the questions at the end of page 21 to make the main points stand out. Consider with him the Scriptural background of our present arrangement by using the first paragraph on page 20. This information will make your student’s visit to the Kingdom Hall a meaningful one.
5 Similarly, prior to your district convention, circuit assembly, or special assembly day, cover what is published on page 19. Draw his attention to what is involved in a large convention, and point out the international scope that is presented in the pictures on page 18. When you comment on the illustration showing the release of a new publication, you may prepare him for a further discussion of pages 24 and 25. To explain pioneering, cover points on pages 22 and 23.
ADAPT TO THE NEED
6 As you can see, it is not necessary to start at the beginning of the Doing God’s Will brochure. Rather, as opportunity and need arise, consider specific points from the brochure that will help the student to appreciate Jehovah’s organization and encourage him to associate with the local congregation.
7 Speaking with conviction when discussing these matters will make a lasting impression on your student. Be aglow with the spirit. (Acts 18:25) Also, make sure that you, “the one teaching someone else,” set a good example in showing appreciation for Jehovah’s organization. (Rom. 2:21) Doing so, you may help others to join the one flock Jesus is leading to everlasting life.

