Help Others to Become Skilled in Using God’s Word
1 Jehovah has made numerous provisions for training us to be effective in performing our personal ministry. By using what he has provided, ‘our very steps have been made ready.’ (Ps. 37:23) As an example, for nearly 50 years the Theocratic Ministry School has been giving progressive training in the art of speaking and teaching. This has been supplemented by the weekly Service Meeting, with its practical talks, demonstrations, and discussion periods.
2 We benefit from regular visits by circuit overseers. The service overseer visits each book study group and provides loving encouragement to help improve our abilities in the public ministry. Along with all of this, each time we meet for field service, ten minutes of practical instruction gives encouragement and useful suggestions for that day. (Heb. 10:23-25) Such arrangements through his organization demonstrate Jehovah’s loving concern for those he has commissioned to preach the good news.
HELP YOUTHS AND BIBLE STUDENTS
3 Youthful publishers and newer ones need regular personal assistance in the public ministry. While all of us can offer help from time to time, the principal responsibility falls upon the parents and those who are conducting Bible studies with such ones. (Gal. 6:6; Eph. 6:4) Effectiveness in using the Bible does not come automatically with the passage of time and a measure of experience. Rather, there is need for systematic loving personal assistance and training.
4 Personal assistance should begin before the person actually shares in the ministry. Review the Topic for Conversation. Help those qualified to participate in the ministry to develop a simple presentation. Perhaps they can use just one of the suggested scriptures until they gain greater experience and confidence. While working together in the service, take time between doors to give commendation and provide kindly suggestions on how to improve. Emphasize the need to maintain a prayerful attitude at all times.​—Eph. 6:18, 19.
5 Although many regular pioneers and other experienced publishers share in the ministry mainly on weekdays, what a fine thing it is when these effective publishers can rearrange their schedules so as to be supportive of weekend field service from time to time. Such personal sacrifice on their part will be greatly appreciated by others who would like to improve by working along with them in the ministry.​—Eccl. 4:9, 10.
6 At one time all of us were new and inexperienced in the field ministry. Many of us received encouragement and training from more experienced publishers or pioneers. Our present skill and increased joy in the ministry are a direct result of that aid. (Prov. 27:17; Acts 20:35) May our appreciation for what Jehovah has done for us through active training in the ministry move us to make ourselves available to assist others to become more skillful in using Jehovah’s Word.

