Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 5
Song 180
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Highlight specific articles from current magazines that can be featured this week. Remind brothers to bring Doing God’s Will brochure to Service Meeting next week.
20 min: “Recommending the Word of God.” Question-and-answer consideration. When discussing paragraphs 3 and 4, have qualified publisher demonstrate new Topic for Conversation.
15 min: The Value of the New World Translation Reference Bible. Discussion. Elder considers value of Reference Bible with two or three publishers who have made good use of this publication. Consider statement of the New World Bible Translation Committee on page 5. Highlight value of footnotes, cross-references, two concordances, and appendix. Emphasize value of using this publication in personal study and in preparation for congregation meetings.
Song 46 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 12
Song 6
 8 min: Local announcements and accounts report. Read acknowledgments from the Society for contributions made to the Society’s worldwide work and to the Society Kingdom Hall Fund. Also, express appreciation for material support of local congregation. Outline special service arrangements for November 22.
17 min: “Directing Bible Students to Jehovah’s Organization.” Question-and-answer consideration. When covering paragraph 3, have qualified publisher demonstrate how student can be encouraged to attend congregation meetings, using specific information from Doing God’s Will brochure, pages 14 and 15.
20 min: “Special Conventions Honor Jehovah.” Question-and-answer discussion. Highlight key points in Teaching Committee’s letter of August 1, 1990. Stress importance of all cooperating fully with the Society’s arrangement for special conventions.
Song 36 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 19
Song 101
 5 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News. Encourage all to support weekend field service activity.
20 min: “Help Others to Become Skilled in Using God’s Word.” Consideration by questions and answers. Highlight need to help one another to become more effective in various features of the ministry. Demonstrate how publishers can help qualified Bible students or how a parent helps his minor child prepare for the ministry.
20 min: “Are You Ready to Face a Faith-Challenging Medical Situation?” Question-and-answer consideration by capable elder, covering paragraphs from beginning of insert article to subheading “Valuable Help in a Time of Need.” Stress not waiting until something happens to think of what to do. Plan ahead as a family now​—be ready!
Song 183 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 26
Song 161
 5 min: Local announcements. Remind congregation that new book Mankind’s Search for God will be featured in December. All will want to have full share in distributing this publication and should prepare well.
10 min: “Presenting the Good News​—In a Prayerful Manner.” Warm appealing talk. Highlight need to pray for God’s direction and blessing on our ministry.
18 min: “Are You Ready to Face a Faith-Challenging Medical Situation?” Experienced speaker gives clear talk on material from subheading “Valuable Help in a Time of Need” to end of insert article, emphasizing the benefit of working with elders and Hospital Liaison Committees when dealing with an emergency medical situation.
12 min: Offer Mankind’s Search for God during December. Talk and demonstration. Publishers may find a variety of ways to demonstrate the value of this new book, depending on the type of territory being worked and the individuals encountered. If particular religion of the householder is known, publisher may wish to go directly to the chapter dealing with that religion. Many people will readily recognize the value of the book as a reference work to help them become better acquainted with religions and cultures other than their own. Chapter 16 describes the new world and should appeal to lovers of righteousness. We want to help people everywhere to understand that now is the time to search for God. Isaiah 55:6, 7 could be used to show that the true God can be found. But man must seek God now, just as the apostle Paul pointed out to his audience on the Areopagus. (Acts 17:26, 27) Just as back there, Jehovah may open the minds and hearts of some of our listeners so that they too will become believers. Demonstrate how publishers might use these scriptures when working from house to house with book offer during December.
Song 188 and concluding prayer.

