Presenting the Good News​—In a Prayerful Manner
1 The apostle Paul wrote encouragingly to the Philippians, “For all things I have the strength by virtue of him who imparts power to me.” (Phil. 4:13) We also need to rely wholly on Jehovah for strength to present the good news boldly. How can we do this?
2 Jesus stressed the need for us “always to pray and not to give up.” (Luke 18:1) Paul exhorted, “Pray incessantly.” (1 Thess. 5:17) Yes, strength comes from prayer. We need to present the good news in a prayerful manner. We may pray for opportunities to witness to others, for wisdom and discernment in the house-to-house work, and for success in reaching the hearts of our Bible students. Since there is an urgent need to get the Kingdom good news preached before the end comes, we also need to pray for the advancement of Kingdom interests worldwide. (Matt. 24:14) We must ‘remain awake’ in prayer in order to avoid spiritual drowsiness and increase our appreciation for the privilege of speaking to others about Jehovah’s purposes.​—Col. 4:2; w62 p. 497.
ON BIBLE STUDIES
3 Why is prayer so important when conducting a Bible study? Starting the study with prayer puts us in the right frame of mind, and it helps the student to realize the importance of what is being said. He learns to look to Jehovah for direction. The student also learns how to pray by our example.​—Luke 11:1.
4 What are some things that would be appropriate to include in prayers at home Bible studies? Jesus’ model prayer and Paul’s prayer in behalf of the Philippians are excellent examples. (Matt. 6:9-13; Phil. 1:9-11) Our prayers need not be lengthy, but they should deal with specific things. It is important that we include appropriate expressions of praise to Jehovah for his innumerable excellent works. We can express recognition of his greatness, majesty, and perfect qualities. (Ps. 145:3-5) Mentioning the Bible student by name, perhaps acknowledging his circumstances, and praying that he make spiritual progress would be beneficial. As he advances, we can ask Jehovah’s blessing upon his efforts to attend meetings and to share with others the truth he is learning. Include petitions for Jehovah’s blessing on the worldwide preaching work.
FOR OUR BROTHERS AND SISTERS
5 All of Jehovah’s people are our fellow workers. (1 Cor. 3:9) Therefore, when secular authorities seek to interfere with the preaching of the good news, we are moved to pray “concerning kings and all those who are in high station.” For what purpose? “In order that we may go on leading a calm and quiet life with full godly devotion and seriousness.” (1 Tim. 2:1, 2) Such prayers are actually in favor of our brothers around the world. We pray that the authorities may be favorably disposed toward our work.
6 By means of prayer, we can request strength for our brothers who preach under difficult circumstances and for those who may be spiritually sick, that they can have a fuller share in the ministry. (2 Thess. 3:1, 2) It is also good to pray for congregation elders, traveling overseers, and the Governing Body​—all of “those who are working hard among you.”​—1 Thess. 5:12.
7 At all times we need to cast our anxieties upon Jehovah. (Ps. 55:22; 1 Pet. 5:7) We are assured that no matter what it is we ask in harmony with his will, he will hear us. (1 John 5:14) Therefore, if we pray for Jehovah’s assistance in fully accomplishing our ministry, we should be confident that he will listen and make our way successful.​—2 Tim. 4:5.

