Recommending the Word of God
1 Many today view the Bible as outdated and unrealistic. However, God’s Word has the power to change lives. (Heb. 4:12) This has been manifested in the thinking, conduct, and improved attitudes of a wide variety of people. (Eph. 4:24) Applying the Bible’s counsel contributes to a happy family environment. It promotes neighborly relations, regardless of race, color, or social standing.​—Luke 10:29-37.
2 Our personal experience with God’s Word should move us to encourage others to investigate for themselves the true value of the Bible. An excellent framework for doing this has been provided in our new Topic for Conversation, “Why Read the Bible?” How can we use this topic along with the New World Translation and either the Trinity brochure or the “Look!” brochure in our ministry during November?
USING THE TOPIC FOR CONVERSATION
3 After a brief introduction, we could say: “With so many pressures and problems affecting families today, we’re calling to direct attention to the only real source of practical help. In the past, people often looked to the Bible for guidance, but times have changed, haven’t they? Do you think the Bible can help solve today’s problems, such as the misuse of drugs, delinquency, and broken homes? [Allow for response.] Notice what the Bible says at 2 Timothy 3:16. [Read.] Do you think the Bible can exert that kind of beneficial influence? [Allow for response.] Most people need and want some kind of direction when facing problems or making decisions in life, don’t they? Consider where following God’s Word can lead us. [Read John 17:3.] The Bible gives clear direction for resolving personal difficulties and outlines a sure hope for the future.” If the person shows genuine interest in gaining an understanding of God’s Word, we could demonstrate the value of the New World Translation or one of the brochures.
4 When introducing the New World Translation, ask if the householder has a personal copy of the Bible and if he finds it easy to read. Depending upon the response, you could call attention to some of the helpful features of the New World Translation, including its use of modern language and the restoration of the divine name. You may also find it helpful to use one or two points from pages 276-80 of the Reasoning book. Offer a personal home Bible study to those who show interest.
5 When directing attention to the Trinity brochure, you might say: “Many sincere people have been taught to believe in the Trinity, yet they find the concept very difficult to comprehend. This brochure examines the Trinity in great detail from a historical viewpoint and in the light of what the Bible says. Would you like to read it?” As for using the “Look!” brochure, you may catch the householder’s interest by featuring either the inviting cover or the heading “Bad Things​—Why Does God Permit Them?” on page 15.
6 During November, be alert to opportunities to encourage people to read the Bible. Be quick to follow up with return visits on those who express interest. Help them cultivate a genuine appreciation for the power of God’s Word. By applying its principles in their lives, they will gain lasting benefits both now and in the life that is to come.​—1 Tim. 4:8.

