Special Conventions Honor Jehovah
1 Annual conventions provide Jehovah’s Witnesses with spiritual refreshment and encouragement along with joyful Christian fellowship. Large gatherings of Jehovah’s people also serve as an effective means of making known Jehovah’s name and publicizing the good news of the Kingdom.
2 Regular district conventions are arranged throughout the earth each year for the benefit of all the brothers. Then at times special conventions are held in certain regions. This provides an opportunity to show the international aspect of the organization and to give a greater witness. In 1989 three special conventions were held in Poland. How thrilling the reports we received regarding those special conventions!
SELECTED DELEGATE ARRANGEMENT
3 Thousands of brothers have a desire to attend one of the special conventions. In time it may be possible for more brothers to attend one of these. However, in order to accomplish the purpose of the special conventions and have everything take place in an orderly manner, the arrangement is for designated branches each to select a limited number of delegates to attend a particular convention. This provides for a balanced representation of the international brotherhood for the encouragement of the local brothers and for the effect of a witness to all observers. Of course, this means that not all who apply and are recommended by the local Congregation Service Committee can be selected as delegates. Some may be disappointed in not being selected, but we believe that all will understand the important reasons for such an arrangement.
4 In order for a fine witness to be given, the Society requests that everyone cooperate with the arrangements outlined for special conventions. If some brothers make their own arrangements to attend a special convention, even though they have not been selected as delegates, it creates problems. The number of delegates sent from selected countries to a special convention is determined by the Society. This is necessary in order to avoid overcrowding at the convention facilities. If facilities were to be overtaxed, it would hinder the smooth running of the convention and would not make a favorable impression on local authorities.
5 Selected delegates should keep in mind that their purpose in attending the convention is to advance Kingdom interests. This purpose is more readily accomplished when all delegates cooperate with travel and other arrangements made by the Society and do not make independent arrangements.
6 This year special conventions have been held in Berlin, Germany, and São Paulo, Brazil. In December a special convention will be held in Buenos Aires, Argentina. During January 1991, special conventions will be held in the Far East. The three locations will be Manila, the Philippines; Taipei, Taiwan; and Bangkok, Thailand. Delegates have already been selected for these conventions. Other special conventions for the summer of 1991 have been announced through the congregation, and Congregation Service Committees have approved dedicated and baptized members of the congregation and sent in applications for them. It is expected that all selected delegates will make every effort to give a fine witness in company with delegates attending from other lands.
7 Whether selected as delegates to special conventions or attending local conventions, may our daily conduct give evidence of our whole-souled devotion and our sincere desire to honor Jehovah in all we do!

