A 403-Year Marriage Is in Trouble
IN Sweden, Church and State have enjoyed a close relationship for more than 400 years. Now the marriage between religion and government is weakening.
Lutheranism was established as the State religion in 1593, and all Swedes had to be baptized members. Years later, during the 1850’s, an adjustment was made. It was no longer necessary for Swedes to be baptized; nevertheless, they were still considered members of the Lutheran Church. As such, they were required to pay 1 percent of their taxed income to support the church and to pay for certain civil services rendered by the church. More recently another change occurred. Beginning in 1952, Swedes could withdraw legally from the church and thereby be exempt from paying a major part of the church tax.
In recent years the Lutheran Church has continued to lose its grip in Sweden. This was inevitable, since 10 percent of Sweden’s inhabitants are non-Lutheran immigrants, including Jews, Catholics, and Muslims. Thus, at the beginning of 1996, only 86 percent of Swedes belonged to the Lutheran Church, and the number continues to decline.
The growing apathy is forcing a rift between Church and State. Already, it has been declared that the king need not be a Lutheran, and children born to a Lutheran parent are not automatically considered members of the Lutheran State Church. Furthermore, according to The Dallas Morning News, by the year 2000, “local parishes and the state must appraise and divide up vast amounts of property. The church must cut its $1.68 billion annual budget, most of which is collected through taxes.” After the turn of the century, the church will appoint its own bishops.
While apathy and falling membership plague Christendom, Jehovah’s Witnesses in Sweden continue to flourish. The 1997 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses reports that there are 24,487 publishers of God’s Kingdom in that land, and close to 10 percent are preaching as full-time pioneer ministers. Many of these are reaching out for greater privileges of service. For example, during the 1995 district conventions of Jehovah’s Witnesses, 20 married couples submitted applications for missionary training at the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead. At that time, there were about 75 Swedish graduates of past classes who were out in missionary service in different parts of the world. Undoubtedly, their fine example and encouraging letters and visits have a stimulating effect on those now contemplating this grand privilege.
Thus, as Christendom’s millions are suffering breakdown of spirit, Jehovah’s Witnesses “cry out joyfully because of the good condition of the heart.”—Isaiah 65:13, 14.
[Map on page 30]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
Sweden

