VOL. XXXV MARCH 1 No. 5 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

Consecration as Related to Present-Day 
Conditions 67 

Progressive Steps of Justification and 
Sanctification 67 

Those Consecrating Since 1881 67 

The Spirit of Helpfulness 69 

Responsibility for Our Influence 69 

Re Sunday Observance 69 

The End of the Age a Perilous Time 70 

Prevalence of These Conditions Universal 70 

A Subtle Test 71 

Courageous Dealing— Past, Present, Future 71 

Bible Brings Spirit of Liberty 71 

Church to Judge Courageously in Next Age 72 

Profitable Bible Talks 72 

God's Great Feast 73 

"Jesus Himself Drew Near" 74 

"Naught That I Have, My Own I Call" 76 

Life Rights Lost to Mankind 77 

Importance of Attaining Balance of Mind 77 

God's Use of Things In Our Hand 78 

The Spirit-Begotten in the Holy 79 

page 66 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



1914-GENERAL CONVENTION- 19 14 
CLINTON, IOWA-JUNE 28-JULY 5. 

It is proposed that the INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS 
ASSOCIATION shall this year hold an eight-day General Convention 
at Clinton, Iowa, June 28th to July 5th, and we are 
thus giving timely notice to permit the friends to arrange 
their affairs accordingly. Clinton is commended as an ideal 
convention city. It is reached by several prominent railroads 
and is quite central to St. Louis, Louisville, Cincinnati, 
Indianapolis, Chicago, Toledo, Detroit, Cleveland, St. 
Paul, Minneapolis, Madison, Omaha, Kansas City, etc. The 
large Coliseum which has been secured for our meetings 
stands near two beautiful parks, along the Mississippi River. 



MEMORIAL SUPPER-APRIL TENTH 

This year we will celebrate the Memorial Supper on the 
evening of Friday, April 10th. Further particulars in next 
issue of THE WATCH TOWER. Also carefully read over again 
Study XI, pp. 457 to 484, Vol. VI, STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR APRIL 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. 
At the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns 
for April follow: (1) 260; (2) 7; (3) 25; (4) 130; (5) 112; (6) 
12; (7) 155; (8) 313; (9) 307; (10) 318; (11) 113; (12) 310; 
(13) 8; (14) 152; (15) 1; (16) 168; (17) 314; (18) 295; (19) 
Vow; (20) 179; (21) 144; (22) 114; (23) 326; (24) 129; (25) 
227; (26) 203; (27) 229; (28) 18; (29) 281; (30) 208. 



R5410 : page 67 

CONSECRATION AS RELATED TO PRESENT-DAY CONDITIONS 

CONSECRATION is another name for sanctification, 

and signifies a setting apart. Sanctification, 

consecration, is intimately related 

to justification, because, although there 

is a partial justification when one turns 

from sin to God, there could not be a full 



justification, a justification to life, until 

such time as the person had made a full 

consecration. It would appear, then, that 

from the time when one starts toward God, 

when he turns away from sin, and seeks to know and to 

do God's will, there is a certain degree of consecration, 

setting apart to God, as in contradistinction to following 

evil. Each step that he takes toward God is a step toward 

sanctification and toward justification. 

Looking back to the picture in the type as illustrative 
of this, we see that a Levite or a priest when first approaching 
the Tabernacle, desiring to enter, would discern 
in the distance the wall of white surrounding the 
Court. With more or less knowledge of what was 
inside he would approach it. When he reached the gate, 
he would see that the Court was a sacred place, and that 
none would be received in any sense within its enclosure 
except as he recognized the sacrifice on the brazen altar 
just inside. 

PROGRESSIVE STEPS OF JUSTIFICATION AND 
SANCTIFICATION 

And so with a person who is in a semi-consecrated 
condition— a semi-justified condition. His first great 
lesson at the gate of the Court is that he is a sinner, that 
God accepts not sinners, and that only those who approach 
Him through recognition of the great Sacrifice will be 
received. Having recognized the Sacrifice, having trusted 
in the death of Christ for justification from sin, his next 
step would be a deeper consecration, and thus a fuller 
justification. If he proceeds, this would bring him to the 
brazen laver of the Court, which would represent a washing 
away of the filth of the flesh— the becoming more and 
more clean in life, doing all in his power to free himself 
from sin. This also is acceptable to God. 

But still he is neither justified completely nor sanctified 

R5411 : page 67 

completely. As he presses on, earnestly desiring to come 
still nearer to God, he comes to the door of the Tabernacle. 
There he finds that he can go no further except 
by death— the death of his human will, the surrender of 
all human rights and interests. He recognizes, further, 
that this death must be a sacrificial death, and that he 
needs to be accepted of the High Priest, that the High 
Priest must make good for his imperfections by the 
imputation of His merit before the Heavenly Father will 
accept his full consecration. 

His consecration takes place, therefore, before his 
justification to life. He must present himself in sacrifice 
before Jesus can accept him, before He can present him 
to the Father, that he may become one of His members. 
It is to be a membership in the earthly Body of Christ, 
for suffering and death, and a membership also in the 



spiritual Body, for life and glory. The sealing of his 
consecration will be the Divine acceptance of that consecration, 
which is indicated by a begetting of the Holy 
Spirit. And begetting of the Holy Spirit is indicated by 
his appreciation of the deep things of God, as represented 
in the altar of incense and the table of shew-bread; in 
experiences of chiseling and polishing, and by opportunities 
to serve. In some cases these various steps are taken 
almost simultaneously. 

After acceptance on the part of God, the consecration 
must be persisted in, maintained. We must abide in 
Christ, in order to be sharers in the Royal Priesthood beyond 
the veil, heirs of God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ 
our Lord. If we in the present time suffer with him, 
then we shall also reign with Him in glory. 

AS TO THOSE CONSECRATING SINCE EIGHTEEN 
HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-ONE 

Some have been concerned as to what evidence, if 
any, a person consecrating himself since 188 1 would have 
that his consecration had been accepted of God. We 
would say regarding this that something would depend 
on how recently the person had made the consecration. 
If very recently, he would have no sure means of determining. 
If a year or two had passed, and he had not in 
the meantime received any evidences of the Holy Spirit's 
begetting— if he had not received increased ability to 
understand and appreciate the Truth; if he had not experienced 
a love for the Truth and a desire to serve it; 
if he had not found some opportunity for serving the 
Truth, and some experiences of trial— in such case he 
would have reason to doubt the Divine acceptance of his 
consecration. 

But in such a case we would be inclined to wonder if 
the consecration had been properly made. Our thought 
would be that in one way or another God accepts every 
consecration, that a broken and contrite heart He will in 
no way despise. He did not despise those in ancient 

R5411 : page 68 

times who consecrated their lives to Him— the Prophets 
and the faithful Israelites of old. They were not despised 
nor rejected. They found opportunities for service and 
they had this testimony (Hebrews 1 1:7), that they 
pleased God; and they received a special blessing as a 
reward for their obedience and for all the sacrifices they 
had made. But this did not mean with them a begetting 
of the Holy Spirit. 

We have every reason at present to believe that the 
number of the Elect is not yet completed, because of 
many crowns having been forfeited. We see coming in, 
day by day and week by week, some who give evidence 
of the Lord's acceptance, who evidence that the Lord is 
permitting them to lay down their lives in His service. 



But the time will undoubtedly come in the near future 
when the number of the Elect will be complete. Then 
only such vacancies as might still occur by some falling 
out would remain. In that case there might be a 
number in the consecrated attitude, whom God would accept 
to take the places of some who would drop out. 
These would receive the begetting of the Holy Spirit, 
and would find opportunities for serving the Truth and 
for suffering for the Truth's sake. 

The evidences seem to be that there are still quite a 
number of vacancies in the elect number, because there 
are people coming into Present Truth and consecrating 
who have come directly from the world. This would 
seem to indicate that there are not at present a sufficient 
number fully consecrated to complete the 144,000. If 
there were, these would be given the preference over 
those not consecrated. 

THE AVERAGE CHRISTIAN'S PRESENT POSITION 

It would seem that throughout Christendom we can 
see today a great many who have taken the steps of consecration 
to a greater or less degree and more or less intelligently. 
Some recognize the Redeemer and the necessity 
for His work of salvation, and the fact that He 
gave His life as an offset for sin. Some have gone further, 
and with more or less intelligence have "washed at 
the laver." 

But it seems that the great majority have not gone 
much further— that they do not see the propriety of going 
further. The majority of professed Christian people 
today do not go any further than to live a moral life. 
They have not reached the point of consecration to God, 
and hence have not yet reached the point of vital justification. 
The majority have perhaps gotten to the laver, 
and are desiring to wash and be clean. 

As such come to learn the Message of the Kingdom 
as it is now going forth— that a full consecration to 
death is the only condition upon which any may be followers 
of Jesus— some of them gladly avail themselves 
of this knowledge and offer. They gladly go forward to 
the extent of full consecration, full justification; and by 
reason of their surroundings, and the fact that the majority 
of professed Christian people in the various denominations 
are behind them as regards attainment, instead 
of being ahead of them, these are looked upon as 
peculiar. The majority do not discern that this peculiarity 
is the very thing that God requires of those who 
would be joint-heirs with Christ— of those who would 
follow in the path of devotion and faithfulness, that 
they may be accounted worthy of reigning with Christ 
in His glorious Kingdom. 

THE GREAT COMPANY 

A class mentioned in the Scriptures as the Great 



Company, who will come up out of great tribulation and 
wash their robes and make them clean in the blood of 
the Lamb (Revelation 7:14), and who will eventually attain 
to the position of antitypical Levites, is worthy of 
consideration. These have passed the various stages of 
full consecration and Divine acceptance and the begetting 
of the Holy Spirit. They became New Creatures in 
Christ Jesus and entered into the Holy. But through an 
insufficiency in the matter of zeal, and a lack of stamina, 
because of their unfavorable environment in Babylon, 
these are failing to go on, failing to see that a full sacrifice 
of earthly things is the only condition upon which 
they can gain the Heavenly things. 

These are seeking to be followers of Christ and followers 
of Mammon, seeking to please the Lord and to 
please the world, having some of the Lord's Spirit and 
some of the spirit of the world, and in general not making 
progress, and not putting off the things of the flesh 
—anger, hatred, malice and strife, envy and evil speaking, 
the works of the flesh and of the Devil, and therefore 
are not putting on the fruits of the Spirit— faith, 
fortitude, knowledge, self-control, patience, godliness, 
brotherly-kindness, meekness, gentleness, love. 

It must be admitted that these have not had the right 
instructors, and they have gotten wrong conceptions- 
misunderstandings of the Lord's Word. Nevertheless, 
we cannot but have faith that God will guide these who 
are really His children, and will, through suffering, lead 
them to take a positive stand. 

We do not think we should understand the Scriptures 
to teach that the Great Company will attain to the same 
degree of spiritual development as the Little Flock. It 
is true that God has only the standard of perfection for 
any of His creatures; but there are many who demonstrate 
by their lives that, if everything were favorable, 
they would be very loyal to the Lord and very loyal to 
righteousness. It is merely because the narrow way is 
so steep, so up-hill and rugged, that they have not the 
courage to go on. They fail to display that love and 
zeal which the Lord has set as the mark for participation 
in the Royal Priesthood. 

We believe that the Lord would probably expect no 
more from the Great Company class than He would expect 
from the angels— as though He would say of each 
of these, Doubtless this person, under favorable conditions, 
would prefer to be My child and to live in harmony 
with Me, and he would not think of living in sin, 
and would even suffer death rather than deny My name. 
If such be the test of the Great Company class, there 
might be a million who have demonstrated this degree of 
loyalty in the past, during this Gospel Age. Some of 
these probably have even suffered martyrdom, when they 
were put to the final test. 

OPPOSITION OVERRULED FOR BLESSING 



We think there is good reason to believe that a considerable 
number who have made consecration are still in 
Babylon. We do not know this, however. We are near 
to the Battle of Armageddon, near the time of the overthrow 
of Babylon; and we are seeking to give the Message 
of the Truth as wide a circulation as possible, to 
the intent that this class may hear and come out, even 
though too late to win the great prize. That they are 
considerable in number is intimated in the 19th Chapter of Revelation, 
where we are told that when Babylon falls 
the number of those released at that time will be a great 
multitude, that the voices of these will be "as the voice 
of many waters." 

We believe that at the present time there are a great 

R5412:page69 

many in the nominal Churches whose minds are gradually 
becoming more and more awake to the Truth. In 
various pulpits, where the Truth is opposed, many things 
of the Gospel of the Kingdom are being proclaimed; and 
this will have the effect of awakening and informing 
some of this class. Even though those bringing forward 
these truths declare them in spite and envy, nevertheless 
the Message of the Gospel is preached. (Philippians 1:15-18.) 
Many thus have their attention called to certain 
truths, which we would never be able to give them 
—many whom we could not reach. 

For instance, some of these ministers mention that 
we believe the nominal Church to be Babylon; others say 
that we believe that our Lord is now present, in His 
Second Advent, and is gathering His jewels (Malachi 3:17); 
still others are telling that we believe the end of 
the Gentile Times will come in October, 1914. All these 
truths are being stated in a slanderous way. But we 
should not be surprised if the Lord will overrule for the 
good of His people many of these things. 

Not long ago, to our great surprise, a brother 
told us that his first knowledge of the Truth came 
to him through a Morehead Tract. Another man heard 
his preacher say that we were the Anti-Christ. He 
wanted to see what Anti-Christ looked like, and he came 
to see and hear us, and got the Truth, just on account 
of slanderous statements. So we have to be a target, 
that the Lord's Message may go forth. We are not to 
think it strange, as though some strange thing happened 
unto us, that we are caused to be a gazing stock, and 
pass through fiery trials. Let us rejoice that we are accounted 
worthy to suffer with Christ, that when His 
glory shall be revealed, we may be glad also with exceeding 
joy.-l Peter 4:12-14; Hebrews 10:32,33. 



R5412:page69 



THE SPIRIT OF HELPFULNESS 

"Let every one of us please his neighbor 
for his good to edification."— Romans 15:2. 

THE Apostle Paul does not say in our text, Let 
the younger ones please their neighbor, nor 
does he say, Let the older ones please their 
neighbor; but he says, "Let every one of us 
please his neighbor." All of the Lord's 
people should have such an interest in one 
another and in the Lord's cause, and should 
have so much of the spirit of the Master, 
that they would seek rather to sacrifice 
themselves than to gratify self, especially 
at the expense of others. 

If we have the spirit of the Master, we shall find 
various ways in which we will sacrifice self without waiting 
for specific directions. The Law of Love will incite us 
to act contrary to our own natural preferences, if by so 
doing we shall help one another in the good way. 

In his letter to the Corinthian Church the Apostle 
illustrates this principle by a practical application re the 
Greek custom of offering their meat in their temples. 
After having been thus offered to the idols, the meat was 
considered to be especially sacred. Thus nearly all of the 
meat available was offered to idols, so that whenever one 
wished to have meat he could find none that had not been 
thus offered. 

Those who had come out of idolatry into Christianity, 
knew that the worship of idols was wrong; for they had 
learned that there is only the one true God. They also 
knew that the meat itself had not been hurt by being offered 
to idols; for an idol is nothing. But they should 
have been willing to deny themselves meat rather than to 
injure the conscience of a weak brother who still thought 
that the meat thus offered was sacred, or who thought that 
it was contaminated. The Apostle declares that he would 
abstain altogether from eating meat rather than risk 
stumbling a brother who could not take the broader, truer 
view. To stumble such a one, might be to throw him out 
of the right way entirely. 

RESPONSIBILITY FOR OUR INFLUENCE 

The Apostle did not say that it is not right to eat 
meat; but that he was willing to forego his rights and 
privileges in order to edify another. These others of 
whom he spoke had not come to appreciate fully the fact 
that meat offered to idols had not been hurt thereby. To 
set meat before a piece of stone would not injure it; and 
so to set it before an idol would not hurt it. But St. Paul 
could better afford to give up eating meat altogether than 
to stumble a brother. 

The principle is obvious. We should, if necessary, be 
willing to deny ourselves some of our privileges if this 



course would be of any assistance to a brother and would 
avoid stumbling him. Some of the Lord's people have 
very sensitive consciences, others are less sensitive. The 
longer one has been in the School of Christ and the more 
ability he has, the more easily should he discern what 
would be pleasing to the Lord. As a Christian, he would 
not want to do anything to offend the Lord, even if he 
were to go without meat for the remainder of his life. 

But if he could take the position that his own conscience 
would approve of a certain course, then the question 
would be, Would he allow his intelligence, his poise 
of mind, to work injury to a brother? Would he wish to 
stumble a brother, to make him weak, to lead him to 
violate his conscience? Or would he wish to lose all his 
influence for good over his brother? The Apostle answers 
this suggestion in the negative; he says, When ye sin so 
against the brethren, and wound their weak consciences, ye 
sin against Christ. "Wherefore, if meat make my brother 
to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world standeth, lest 
I make my brother to offend."— 1 Cor. 8:1-13. 

RE SUNDAY OBSERVANCE 

Applying the above principle— our responsibility for 
our influence— to Sunday observance, we are not to feel a 
bondage, as the Jews did on their Sabbath day. But we 
should avoid driving tacks or making any unnecessary 
noises. We should avoid singing or playing on an instrument 
anything that would not generally be recognized as 
in keeping with things sacred. We should avoid what 
would be considered by others as not observing the Sabbath. 
We should do this for the sake of our influence. 
To our understanding every day is a part of the great 
Sabbath into which we have entered— rest in Christ. We 
have a greater liberty. But we are not to use this liberty 
to the injury of others. 

Many people think that any kind of labor is a violation 
of the Fourth Commandment. From our viewpoint we 
know that the Sabbath of the Jew was typical; and we 
see what the antitype is. We are enjoying the antitype 
of that Sabbath. But while we might have liberty to 
work on Sunday, our so doing might stumble our neighbor. 
We would not be violating any principle in not observing 
Sunday; but for the sake of not stumbling our 
neighbor, we are glad to rest from our work and to give 
ourselves to the study of God's Word. 

Christian people generally do not observe Sunday in 
the way they think they should observe it. The conception 
of many is that they should observe it as rigidly as 

R5412:page70 

the Jewish Law set forth; and that neither the ox nor the 
ass, the automobile, the street cars nor the steam cars 
should be used. Indeed, they would not think it right to 
go any great distance on the Sabbath. 



As a matter of fact, the nominal church of today 
are not living up to their own conceptions of God's Law. 
As we get opportunity, we would like to assist these 
people to get a truer meaning of the Sabbath, that their 
consciences be not hurt, but be free from uneasiness. 
Sunday should be a day that is quiet and reverential in 
every way, and devoted specially to the service of 
God— a day in which business is restricted, and as far 
as possible eliminated. But the interests of the Lord's 
work forbid our always refraining from the use of steam 
cars, street cars, etc., on Sunday. 

Remembering that the word Sabbath signifies rest, as 
the Apostle used it (Heb. 4:9, margin), we can see that 
the Church of Christ keeps the Sabbath, or rest, every 
day, and recognizes God's arrangement in connection 
with this matter. Those who keep every seventh day as 
a Sabbath, but who fail to enter into and keep the rest 
of faith, are not keeping the true Sabbath, but keeping 
another, so far as the Church is concerned. 

The Sabbath arrangement was for the Jews. We 
have the better arrangement under our Covenant. We 
enter into rest, our Sabbath, every day; and we are hoping 
soon to enter into the still Greater Sabbath. In that 
Sabbath, the Millennium, we shall have not only rest of 
heart, but also perfection; and we shall then not be beset 
by the trials and difficulties of life. During His ministry 
Jesus chose the Sabbath day in which to perform miracles, 
heal the sick, that He might show forth the kind of works 
which He will perform during the Great Sabbath Day, 
the seventh-thousand-year day— the Millennium. 

HELPING, NOT HINDERING, OUR NEIGHBORS 

We can apply this principle in a general way. We 
can apply it to our conversation with Christian people. 
There is a way of taunting people on their ignorance, etc. 
This is not love; for love does not delight to expose another's 
weaknesses. The more careful we become in our 
words and our actions, the more polite we shall be, the 
more helpful. 

"Politeness is to do and say 

The kindest thing in the kindest way." 

One may be polite for the sake of policy or for the 
sake of principle. Our pleasing of our neighbors should 
be for their edification. We should be glad to do all that 
we can for their assistance, their edification, their uplift, 
their upbuilding. If we can speak a pleasant word, a 
kind word, it would be for upbuilding; and we should 
speak it, instead of speaking an unkind word. 

In our desire for the upbuilding of others we are to 
have in mind primarily the upbuilding of the Lord's 
people in spiritual things. As the Apostle says, we are 

R5413 : page 70 

"to provoke one another." We know that there are different 



ways of provoking others, and St. Paul shows us 
the right way. What the Apostle had in mind was the 
reverse of provoking to anger, hatred and strife. Some 
of the dear brethren who are evidently very sincere have 
not caught the spirit of the Truth on this subject; and 
wherever they go, they are apt to stir up the evil mind of 
others, instead of stirring up their good mind and provoking 
to love and good works. 

We are to please our neighbors so far as it would be 
for their good, and according to right principles. But to 
upbuild one in injustice would not be right. We should 
not think it right to let our neighbor's chickens run all 
over our garden; and we think that he would thus be 
more edified by our firm stand for right. But we must 
not tell him how to manage his chickens. We must do 
our best to keep his chickens off our place; but we would 
make a mistake if we were to go in and order our neighbor's 
chickens, house and children. To do so would be 
busybodying. We shall have enough to do to look after 
the weaknesses of our own family. 



R5413 : page 70 

THE END OF THE AGE A PERILOUS TIME 

"In the last days perilous times shall come; men shall be traitors, 
heady, ...lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God."— 
2 Timothy 3:4. 

THE expression, "the last days," or the latter 
days, the closing days, refers, not to the 
end of the world in the sense that many 
expect this event, but is a Scriptural designation 
of the present time, the end of 
this Age, when the Reign of Righteousness 
is about to begin. We are glad to be 
living now in this Harvest time! "The 
Harvest is the end of the Age." (Matthew 13:39. 
— Diaglott.) The warning given by 

the Apostle is that, instead of the world's being Christianized 
and converted to God at this time, the reverse 
condition will prevail. It will be a time of great peril- 
peril to the Lord's people— peril for those who have 
started out to follow Christ. However, it will not be so 
much a perilous time for the world. 

The only ones who are on trial for life or death are 
those who have been released from the Adamic condemnation. 
To these the time described by St. Paul will 
be one of severe testing. The whole course of the 
world will be turned aside from the high standard that 
might have been expected. Men will be traitors. As 
long as it will be of advantage to them to perform a 
contract they will do so; when not advantageous they 
will not fulfil the contract. It will be a time when every 



man's hand will be lifted against his neighbor. Selfishness 
will be rampant. Each will do what will be to his 
own interest, regardless of obligation. There will be 
manifest headiness and selfishness and self-conceit. Men 
will be "lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God." 
This condition is to be a sign of the end of the Age. 

Every thoughtful person must perceive that this condition 
of things is prevailing now. Whenever a contract 
is found to be unsatisfactory— whether it be a marriage 
contract or a business contract— the dissatisfied contractor 
is liable to break the agreement. This party to 
the contract then assumes the attitude of one who declares, 
Force me to keep it if you can. The Lord's people 
will keep their word and be firm for principle and 
true to their contracts, even when these prove disadvantageous 
to them. This attitude is pleasing to the Lord. 

PREVALENCE OF THESE CONDITIONS UNIVERSAL 

We find headiness of spirit in the world everywhere 
—a loss of respect for authority. No doubt there has 
been too much respect for authority in the past. Now 
the pendulum is swinging to the other side, and there is 
no respect for authority. This condition has been 
brought about by a lack of reverence for God— the inevitable 
result of loss of faith in the Bible as the Word 
of God. As people lose faith in the Bible, they lose faith 
in God, and become more selfish and more self-willed. 
This condition of affairs has been brought about by false 

R5413 : page 71 

doctrine, error. People think that God is their Adversary, 
purposing to do them harm. 

The Higher Critics have been seeking to put away 
what they have considered the absurdities of religious 
thought, and to this end have done away with the Bible. 
Bible students see that the absurdities have been brought 
about by the creeds and not by the Bible. But the world, 
losing confidence in God, are becoming more heady than 
ever before. Even the reverential fear which once held 
them is departing, and there is a disposition to doubt 
everything. People are in the condition of mind where 
they say, "Let us eat, drink and be merry"; nobody knows 
about the future; the preachers are all confused. Everything 
has come about by evolutionary processes. Let us 
enjoy the present. Let pleasure be our aim in life. This 
would seem to be the attitude of the world. They are 
lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God. 

WORLDLY SPIRIT IN SOME OF THE CONSECRATED 

These conditions of our day make it a perilous time 
for the Church. Do you ask, Would not the Church, on 
the contrary, be more than ever led to love God? And 
would this not guard them and keep them from danger? 



We answer that some of God's people are becoming 
more and more immersed in the world. The spirit of the 
world surges all around them. With great difficulty could 
these come to realize that the whole world is astray in 
their ideas and ways. The tendency of all such is to 
have the mind of the world, even though they be 
spirit-begotten. 

This worldly spirit, the Apostle suggests, would affect 
the Church to some extent. Consequently some of the 
Lord's people would thus come into special peril at this 
time, because of neglecting their Covenant with the 
Lord. Others would remember that Covenant, and watch 
and pray, and so make good progress. Those who are 
living close to the Lord are, for this reason, developing 
in mind and heart. But these are few. 

The Great Company class, while still loving the Lord, 
are becoming immersed in the spirit of the world. Even 
those who are living nearest to the Divine standard will 
be more or less imperiled through this spirit, unless they 
continue diligent in prayer and the study of God's Word. 
What we see going on about us seems natural to our 
minds. The way in which other people spend time and 
money is a temptation to the Lord's people which must 
be steadfastly resisted. 

A SUBTLE TEST 

The Lord's people spend and are being spent in His 
service— by volunteer work, by attending meetings, by 
holding meetings and in various ways, according to opportunity. 
They are living separate from the world- 
distinct lives, lives of consecration. The world now has 
an eight-hour day. The Lord's faithful people would, on 
the contrary, make theirs a sixteen-hour day. But all 
these present-day conditions constitute perils. For us to 
do what others do, and to devote to the Lord's service 
only what the world considers a reasonable day's work, 
would not be fulfilling our Covenant of Sacrifice at all. 
Those who seek merely to do right, and to put in eight 
hours or so a day faithfully, after the manner of the 
world, will be judged from this standpoint; and they will 
merely obtain a place in the Great Company. They are 
not fulfilling the conditions of the Covenant of sacrifice. 

But the Little Flock will serve the Lord with such 
delight that they will scarcely know how to cease their 
efforts. They recognize that their bodies are fully consecrated 
to the Lord, and they are daily putting them to 
death in a reasonable, rational manner. In view of these 
perilous times, let us each ask himself the question, To 
which class do I belong? 



R5413 : page 71 
COURAGEOUS DEALING-PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE 



"Deal courageously, and the Lord will 
be with the good."-2 Chron. 19:11. 

THERE is a Divine oversight of the affairs of 

those who serve God recognized here, and 

a Divine blessing may be expected eventually 

upon all who deal justly. All heathen 

religions, as well as the Christian religion 

—the religion of the Bible— incline to lead 

the devotee to expect Divine blessing. But 

no other religion sets forth, as does the 

Bible, a just God. No other religions are 

founded on the principle of Justice. This 

is one reason why the Bible has had potent influence 

for liberty. Wherever it has gone, it has been "Liberty 

enlightening the world." 

There is no partiality with the Creator— no class distinction 
with Him— neither high nor low, rich nor poor, 
noble nor peasant. It is for this reason that when the 
teachings of the Lord were before the Israelites they 
were a liberty-loving people. In proportion as they fell 
into idolatry, they lost this spirit. 

BIBLE BRINGS SPIRIT OF LIBERTY 

With the spirit of liberty, of course, will go the 
spirit of heroism. Therefore the Bible is the source of 
the valiant qualities of the early Church in their withstanding 
persecution. Later on, when human traditions 
and heathen philosophies were heeded instead of the 
writings of Jesus and the Apostles and Prophets, the 
spirit of subjection, the spirit of slavery, the spirit of 
fear, the spirit of ignorance, proportionately prevailed, 
and brought on the Dark Ages. With the blessed influence 

R5414 : page 71 

which comes from the Word of God, we see, 
since the time of the Reformation, the spirit of liberty 
more manifest. Wherever the Bible has gone, the spirit 
of liberty has gone. Wherever the Bible has not gone, 
the spirit of liberty has not prevailed. 

Witness, too, the so-called Christian countries where 
the Bible has been ignored— Russia, Spain, Portugal and 
large districts of France, Poland, etc. Wherever the 
Bible is, liberty is more and more manifest. Even where 
the people do not recognize the Bible, the spirit of its 
teachings has had its effect. There is something of a 
realization that all are of one flesh and blood, one common 
brotherhood. God created of one blood all people 
that dwell upon the face of the whole earth. (Acts 17:26.) 
There are, of course, advantages in the way of 
birth, education, etc. Various circumstances affect conditions. 
But all mankind are responsible to the Creator, 
who is the great Judge over all. He is to be looked to 



as the One who will give rewards and punishments. 

SPECIAL DEALINGS UNDER LAW COVENANT 

Our text gives the words of the great king of Judah 
who became a reformer. He found that various degrees 
of injustice had crept into the customs of the people 
under the previous kings. In appointing officers and 
judges, King Jehoshaphat exhorted them to give their 
opinion according to the principles of justice. He said, 
"Deal courageously, and the Lord will be with the 
good." The Lord would bless those who would be faithful. 
The Lord would be with the good work that they 
would do, if they would do it faithfully. 

We are to remember that there was a special arrangement 

R5414 : page 72 

existing between God and the people of 
Israel. Under that arrangement the Lord was to bless 
them in proportion as they were loyal to Him and to the 
principles of His Government. We are not, therefore, 
to apply these words indiscriminately to other nations, 
if some in other nations had attempted some kind of 
reform. God was not undertaking to deal with other 
nations at that time. He was letting them get a general 
lesson under their own supervision. 

TEXT NOT APPLICABLE TO NATIONS TODAY 

God intervened only where it would be injurious to 
allow certain peoples to carry their evil course any further; 
as, for instance, in the case of the Ninevites, the 
Sodomites, and the Amalekites. We could not say that 
we could apply this text today; and that if some good 
people were in public office and should deal courageously 
and put down all the wrong and uplift the right, God 
would give them success in the work. God is not dealing 
with the nations at all. 

His whole dealing at this time is with the Church. 
The world today is still doing as it has always done, 
seeing what it can do for itself. In all probability these 
reformers today who would deal courageously would 
bring upon themselves great persecution if they should 
attempt to interfere with many of the entrenched vices. 
We have an example of this in New York City at the 
present time. Entrenched vice is hard to handle. Occasionally 
the world produces men who handle such 
things in a noble way. There are noble men inside and 
outside the Church. But we cannot say that the Lord 
would be with all of them. 

It is a mistake to say that the present governments 
are under the grace of God. The Bible says that the 
governments of this time are under the influence of the 
Prince of this world, and that he has the upper hand at 
the present time. But when Messiah takes His great 



power and reigns, then Satan will be bound. Then all 
the evil influences will be brought under the control of 
the Messianic Kingdom. From that time onward, the 
saints will deal courageously in Messiah's Millennial 
Kingdom, and shall reign for the purpose of putting 
down sin, until eventually Christ shall have accomplished 
the work of causing God's will to be done on earth, even 
as it is done in Heaven. 

CHURCH TO JUDGE COURAGEOUSLY IN NEXT AGE 

The point we notice, then, is that our text was applicable 
to the Jews, because they were a typical people 
of God. The king of Israel made use of these words 
to certain ones whom he appointed judges in his day. 
The Church is now being prepared for the work of 
judging in the Kingdom. The Lord distinctly tells us 
that we are not to judge before the time. In the 
Kingdom we shall judge. Then it will be our business 
to judge. Then we shall be required to render righteous 
and courageous judgment, in full accord with the Lord's 
instructions. 

As the Apostle Paul says, "Know ye not that the 
saints shall judge the world?" (1 Cor. 6:2.) We do 
know it. Our experiences now are fitting us to judge 
the world later, that we may do it successfully, courageously, 
lifting up all mankind who will to the glorious 
standard of perfection. All the evil doers shall be cut 
off. Then every knee will bow and every tongue will 
confess, to the glory of the Father and of the Son. 

CHURCH NOW JUDGES ALONG CERTAIN LINES 

The Scriptures instruct us that now the Church 
should judge its members along certain lines. We are 
not to judge one another's hearts. On the contrary, we 
are to take one another's word for their heart condition. 
But we are to judge one another's conduct. If 
one should live immorally, it would be the duty of the 
Church to deal with him according to the immorality of 
his conduct. The Apostle asks, Why should you go to 
law with the brethren before unbelievers? If you are 
unprepared to judge yourselves in small matters, how 
would you ever be prepared to judge in great matters? 

In our judging, we are to remember the lines along 
which the Lord would have us judge. The Lord will 
be with the good, we may be sure of that fact. But we 
are to deal kindly, affectionately. "Be kindly affectioned 
one toward another, with brotherly love." In dealing 
with one another, in proportion as we lay down hard, 
inflexible lines of judgment, in that proportion we would 
be fixing the gauge of the Lord's judgment with us. "For 
with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged." With 
what allowance we mete out to others, the Lord will 
judge us. We are to be sympathetic with others, and 
to remember that all need mercy and forgiveness, even 



as we hope for these for ourselves. 

Whoever has a duty to perform, let him not fear 
but be courageous; and if doing unpleasant tasks which 
are necessary, let us perform them in a kindly manner, 
both justly and lovingly. Let us not fear man, but rather 
fear the Lord, and be intent on pleasing Him. 



R5414 : page 72 

PROFITABLE TABLE TALKS 

--APRIL 5. -LUKE 14:7-24.- 

"Every one that exalteth himself shall be humbled; and 
he that humbleth himself shall be exalted."— Verse 11. 

A CONSIDERABLE number of advanced 

Christian people, Bible students, have in an 

informal way recently adopted the custom 

of having Bible talks during the meal hour. 

We know of many who are finding it profitable. 

To partake of Heavenly food at the 

same time that we appropriate the natural 

is quite proper; the lifting of the mind 

from the things of the world to the consideration 

of Heavenly things is advantageous 

in every way. We see that this was Jesus' custom. 

Today's lesson shows the Master a guest at the table 
of a prominent Pharisee, speaking in a manner that 
would not be appropriate to any but Himself. In a parable 
He criticised the gathering guests, because He noted 
that they selfishly chose the chief seats of honor, and 
because He would have them see that this selfish spirit 
would have to do with their character-building and with 
their fitness or unfitness for the honors of the Kingdom 
for which they hoped. 

When bidden to a public function, they should humbly 
take very lowly, inconspicuous places, not knowing 
how many might be more worthy than they in the estimation 
of the host. Then, if the host noticed them in 
a very humble place, and so desired, he might ask them 
forward to a more prominent place. Thus they would 
be honored and the honor would reach them in a proper 
manner; whereas, in taking a prominent place uninvited, 
they at least ran the risk of displeasing the host or the 
possibility of being asked to take an inferior place, the 
more honorable one being given to one considered more 
worthy; and thus they would be, in a measure, disgraced. 

R5414:page73 

The Master declared that this principle held with 
Him and with the Father; namely, that "whosoever exalteth 
himself shall be humbled, and he that humbleth 



himself shall be exalted." The Apostles set forth the 
same proposition, saying, "God resisteth the proud, but 
showeth His favor to the humble"; "Humble yourselves 
therefore under the mighty hand of God, that He may 
exalt you in due time."— James 4:6; 1 Peter 5:6. 

The thought is that the self-seeking, the proud in 
spirit, could not be trusted by the Lord in a high position. 
They might do damage to themselves and to His 
cause, with such a spirit. On the contrary, He will seek 
those who are of humble mind and who would not be injured 
by the exaltation, nor in danger of deflecting in the 
future work to which all of the Kingdom class are called. 

Turning to His host, Jesus gave him something of a 
compliment, saying, "When thou makest a dinner or a 
supper, call not thy friends, nor thy brethren, nor thy 
kinsmen, nor thy rich neighbors; lest they bid thee again, 
and recompense be made thee. But call the poor, the 

R5415 : page 73 

maimed, the lame, the blind: and thou shalt be blessed; 

for they cannot recompense thee; for thou shalt be recompensed 

in the resurrection of the just." 

The Pharisee had done something of the very kind 
in inviting Jesus and probably His disciples to dinner. 
He well knew that they were poor and would be unable 
to ask him in return. The Master's words may have 
been comforting to him. At all events, they set forth a 
grand principle, which should be recognized by all, rich 
and poor alike. If we get our rewards for good deeds 
in the present life, how will there be anything coming to 
us in the future? 

Let us therefore follow the Master's instruction and 
seek to do kindnesses to those who cannot return the 
favor, assured that God will appreciate such things as 
done for mercy's sake, for righteousness' sake, and will 
give a proper reward. We do not understand the Master 
to mean that it would be wrong to invite friends or 
neighbors or kinsman who might invite us in turn, but 
that we are not to think that in so doing we are laying 
up any treasure in Heaven. 

There was more reason for the calling of the poor, 
the lame, the maimed, in Jesus' day than now. Today, 
by common consent, civilized people recognize a duty 
toward the poor, the maimed, the lame and the blind. 
Homes are provided for them out of the public purse, by 
general taxation. Whoever enters into this matter of 
paying for the support of the poor in a proper spirit is 
doing something that in the sight of God is meritorious; 
but whoever pays such taxes from compulsion merely, 
without appreciation, evidently would not be deserving 
of any credit. However, all such institutions should be 
conducted in such a manner as would afford reasonable 
comfort and be good enough for ourselves or for our 
relatives, were we or they the persons in need. 

Under such conditions it would be almost wrong to 



fail to co-operate with these provisions, to refuse such 
provisions and to expect private support from friends 
and relatives, at an additional cost over and above the 
taxes they pay. Everything in God's Word seems to 
inculcate the spirit of justice first, and the spirit of love, 
kindness and sympathy beyond justice. But it should be 
voluntary and not enforced, and an indication of the 
measure of the Holy Spirit which we possess. 

GOD'S GREAT FEAST 

A person at the supper, after hearing Jesus' comments, 
remarked that it would be a blessed thing to have 
a share in the great Feast with which the Kingdom of 
God will be inaugurated. Jesus seized upon this as a 
text, and preached another sermon in a parable. As 
usual, His parable-sermon was in respect to the Kingdom 
of God: 

A man made a great supper and bade many guests. 
When the time for the supper arrived, he sent his servants 
to inform them, saying, "Come; for all things are 
now ready." But these with one accord began to make 
excuse. One said, I have bought a field; I must go and 
take a look at it; please excuse me. Another said, I have 
bought five yoke of oxen, and I must be proving them; 
please excuse me. Another said, I have recently married; 
therefore I cannot come. When the servant returned 
and told his experience the Master of the house 
was provoked, and said to the servant, Go out quickly 
into the streets and the lanes of the city, and bring in 
the poor, the maimed, the blind and the lame. 

The meaning of the parable is not far to seek. God 
had indeed provided a great Feast. Long years before 
He had sent word to the Jewish nation that in due time 
such a great blessing would be open to them— the privilege 
of becoming members of the Kingdom of God- 
sharers of it with Messiah. Yet, when Jesus appeared 
and the time came for the feast to be spread, those who 
had been bidden were careless. 

Jesus and His disciples had been going about for some 
time declaring that the Kingdom of Heaven was at hand, 
and that all who believed should make haste to associate 
themselves with it— to come to the Feast— should be getting 
a part of the blessing. But the invited ones were 
full, covetous, money-lovers. When they heard the Message 
of the Kingdom they said, I am too busy with my 
worldly prospects. And so they slighted God's invitation, 
extended to them through Jesus and the Apostles. 

The ones especially invited were the ones who specifically 
claimed to be the "holiness people"— the Pharisees 
and the Doctors of the Law. In the parable, the rejection 
of the ones originally invited led to the invitation's 
being sent to others, in the streets and the lanes of the 
city. This meant that the poor had the Gospel preached 
to them. Publicans and sinners were received by our 
Lord, told about the Kingdom, and invited to leave all 



their sinful and injurious practises, to accept forgiveness 
of sins, and to come in and participate as heirs of God's 
promise of joint-heirship with Jesus Christ their 
Redeemer. 

Nearly all the preaching of Jesus and of His disciples, 
up to Pentecost and after, was to the poor of Israel— the 
publicans and sinners. The charge made against our 
Lord by the Pharisees who rejected Him was that He 
received sinners, and that He ate with them. 

GREAT FEAST REPRESENTS RICH BLESSINGS 

The great Feast of the parable figuratively represents 
rich blessings of God's providence for the Church— the 
knowledge of the Truth, justification from sin, the begetting 
of the Holy Spirit, the privilege of appropriating 
the exceeding great and precious promises of God's 
Word. All this is the Feast which the Lord has spread 
for now eighteen hundred years, and to which He has 
been inviting, or calling, certain ones. First the Pharisees, 
the "religious lights," representatives of Moses, and secondly 
the poor, the sinful, the weak, the outcasts of 
Israel, the Prodigal Son class, were invited. 

Some of the latter class came, but not enough to fill 
the places already provided. In other words, not enough 
of the Jews were "Israelites indeed," acceptable to God, 
to fill the foreordained number of the elect Church. Hence 
the Master sent out His servants the third time, saying 

R5415 : page 74 

that they should go outside the city, into the highways 
and hedges, and urge the people to come in, that His 
House might be filled— not a seat left vacant. 

This applies, evidently, to the sending of the Gospel 
to the Gentiles. For eighteen hundred years the Message 
has been going up and down through the highways 
and hedges, calling and inviting, drawing, such as have 
hearing ears and responsive hearts. In all, they will not 
be a great company. In all, they will not represent very 
many of the Lights of the world. The Apostle writes, 
"Ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise 
men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble," 
hath God chosen, but chiefly "the poor of this world, rich 
in faith," to be heirs of the Kingdom.— 1 Corinthians 1:26,27; 
James 2:5. 

Ultimately the full number purposed by the great 
Householder will have been called, accepted, and found 
worthy through Christ to have a place at that table— to 
share in that great Feast. It will be the Nuptial Feast, 
in honor of the marriage of the Lamb, after His wife 
hath made herself ready. (Revelation 19:7-9.) At that 
feast, we are assured, will be a secondary company, not 
worthy to be of the Bride class. These may be figuratively 
styled the bridesmaids, the Great Company class; 
for after the account of the gathering of the Bride we 



have the Lord's message to these subsequently delivered 
from Babylon, saying, "Blessed are they that are called 
to the marriage supper of the Lamb." 

You can imagine the honors and joys of that great 
banquet! The aroma of the good things coming, already 
reaches us in the anteroom, before we enter the banquet 
hall. These odors come to us through the exceeding great 
and precious promises of God's Word, assuring us of His 
faithfulness and of His provision of the things which 
"eye hath not seen, ear hath not heard, neither have entered 
into the heart of man," but which "God hath provided 
for them that love Him" supremely. 

Those originally bidden will not taste of that supper, 
though, thank God! Divine provision has arranged for another 
banquet, which through the Kingdom will be spread 
for all nations, kindreds, tongues and peoples— "a feast 
of fat things."— Isa. 25:6-8. 



R5415 : page 74 

"JESUS HIMSELF DREW NEAR" 

-APRIL 12.-LUKE 24:13-35.- 

"It is Christ that died, yea, rather, that was 
raised from the dead."— Romans 8:34. 

WE ARE to study today one of the most striking 

manifestations of Jesus to His disciples 

after His resurrection. Early in the morning 

of the day of His resurrection He had 

appeared to the women who came with 

spices to embalm His body. They had communicated 

to St. Peter and St. John that the 

Lord had been with them. These two most 

energetic Apostles vied with each other 

to get to the sepulcher with speed. But 

they saw merely the empty tomb. 

The disciples of Jesus were dazed, perplexed. Although 
He had told them that He would be crucified, 
and that He would rise from the dead on the third day, 
they had not comprehended the teaching. Even after 
hearing of His resurrection they were seemingly slow to 
connect it with what He had previously told them. 

In the afternoon, two of the company were walking 
home, discussing their disappointment in Jesus— how, 
instead of becoming a great king, He had been crucified, 
and their hopes of associating with Him in dignity and 
honor had all been dashed. Jesus had been proven a 

R5416 : page 74 

fraud, to the satisfaction of their rulers. The fact that 
He was crucified seemed to settle the matter that He 



could not have been the Messiah, as He had declared and 
as they had believed. 

THAT JESUS IS STILL FLESH IS UNSUPPOSABLE 

While they thus talked, Jesus overtook them. They 
knew Him not, because of His resurrection change. The 
Apostle Peter tells us that He was "put to death in flesh, 
but quickened in spirit." We understand this in the 
light of the explanation given of the resurrection change 
of the Church. The Apostle Paul declares: "Sown in 
weakness, raised in power; sown in dishonor, raised in 
glory; sown an animal body, raised a spirit body." (1 Corinthians 15:42-44.) 
And, of course, if the Church is 

to experience such a resurrection change in order to be 
like her Lord, He must have experienced just such a 
change. 

The same thought is impressed again by the Apostle's 
statement: "We shall all be changed, in a moment, in 
the twinkling of an eye"; for "flesh and blood cannot 
inherit the Kingdom of God." The change which the 
Church is to experience, in order to be fitted for the 
Kingdom of God is the same change which Jesus experienced 
when He was raised from the dead, a life-giving 
Spirit— no longer a man. 

Our Lord's title, "the Son of Man," still belongs to 
Him, just as the title, "the Word of God," the Logos, 
still belongs to Him. When the Logos was made flesh, 
the identity was not lost. Respecting our Lord's human 
experiences, we read: "A body hast Thou prepared Me" 
—for the suffering of death. (Hebrews 10:5-10.) When 
He had accomplished that purpose, He no longer had 
need of human nature; but, as He had foretold His disciples, 
He ascended up where He was before— to the 
spirit plane, to the spirit nature, as well as, later on, to 
Heaven itself. 

To assume that Jesus is a fleshly being in Heaven, 
bearing wounds and scars to all eternity and surrounded 
by spirit beings on a higher plane than the human, is to 
suppose that the Father never really exalted Him again 
to the glory which He had with God before the world 
was (John 17:5), and is unsupposable. We must bear in 
mind, therefore, the Scriptures, which show that the 
Father highly exalted the Redeemer, not only restoring 
Him to spirit-being, higher than human, but exalting Him 
"far above angels, principalities, powers and every name 
that is named. "-Phil. 2:9-11; Eph. 1:20-23. 

"JESUS SHOWED HIMSELF" 

St. Luke declares that Jesus showed Himself alive 
after His resurrection. (Acts 1:3.) Again he speaks of 
Him as appearing. The narrative shows both terms are 
justified by the facts. He appeared and disappeared. He 
showed Himself to some and not to others, and in every 
way manifested the fact that some great change had 



taken place in Him after those three days. Not only did 
He appear and show Himself in different forms, in different 
bodies, unlike each other, but also in different 
clothing. Then, too, when He suddenly disappeared, the 
clothing disappeared also. 

When we say that Jesus, a spirit Being, materialized, 
we are not to be understood as in any way sympathizing 
with the class called Spiritualists, who produce materializations 

R5416 : page 75 

of the dead. If we desire an illustration, let us 

go back to the Bible account of how Jesus, when He was 

the Logos— before His nature was changed from Spirit 

to human— appeared to Abraham, in company with two 

angels. We read that the Lord and two angels did eat 

and talk with Abraham, who knew them not, but "entertained 

angels unawares" until, eventually, their identity 

was revealed. 

Just so it was with the two disciples en route to 
Emmaus: The stranger who overtook them sympathetically 
inquired, Why look and talk so sadly? They opened 
their hearts to Him, astonished that He did not know. 
They told of Jesus the Nazarene, a Prophet mighty in 
deed and word before God and all the people; and they 
explained to Him how the chief priests and rulers had 
delivered Him up and crucified Him. They explained 
that theirs was a double disappointment, in that not only 
had they lost a Friend, but their hope that He was the 
Messiah, who would have redeemed Israel, had been 
crushed. They proceeded to tell Him of the events of 
that very morning— that some of the women of their 
company had found the tomb empty and had seen angels, 
who said that He was alive, etc. 

This gave Jesus the opportunity He sought— to explain 
to His disciples quietly, without any excitement, 
that the experiences they had had were part of the Divine 
Plan. He said to them, "O foolish men, and slow 
of heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken!" 
He declared that it was necessary that He should thus 
suffer in order to enter into His glory— that without such 
suffering He never could be the King of Glory, with 
power to bless and restore humanity, by and by.— 
Acts 3:19-21. 

Then He began to point out from the writings of 
Moses and all the Prophets what God had foretold respecting 
Messiah's experiences. He probably reminded 
them of how Isaac had been offered up by Abraham, explaining 
that Abraham typified the Heavenly Father and 
Isaac typified Himself; and that the offering, even 
though not fully carried out, represented the death of 
Himself as it had taken place, the subsequent life of Isaac 
representing the resurrection of Jesus, to be with His 
Father again. 

He doubtless told them about the smitten rock, from 
which gushed the waters— that that rock represented 



Himself, who must be smitten in order to give the Water 
of Life to the dying world. He doubtless told them how 
Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, and explained 
that the serpent represented sin; and that 
He, in being crucified, was made to take the place 
of the sinner, that the sinner might, through faith, be 
made righteous in God's sight through the Redeemer's 
sacrifice. 

He doubtless explained to them the sacrifice of the 
Atonement Day, in which the bullock, which died, represented 
Himself in the flesh; and in which the high priest, 
who lived, and who entered into the Most Holy and 
sprinkled the blood for the forgiveness of the people, 
also represented Himself, a spirit Being, who after 
resurrection would go into Heaven itself and eventually 
offer up full sin-atonement on behalf of the world, and 
would come forth again at His Second Advent to bless 
those for whom He had died. 

"HE OPENED THE SCRIPTURES" 

He doubtless explained to them respecting the passover-lamb 
—that it typified Himself, "the Lamb of God, 
which taketh away the sin of the world." We may assume 
that He proceeded to the Psalms, Isaiah and the 
other Prophets, explaining all the prophetic passages relating 
to the sufferings of Christ and the glory that 
would follow. No wonder those disciples afterward declared 
that their hearts had burned within them while 
He opened to them the Scriptures ! 

As the early disciples were refreshed by the Message 
of God's grace and the fulfilment of His promises, so it 
is sure to be with all the followers of Jesus. The Lord 
prophetically declared, "My people perish for lack of 
knowledge." Evidently there can be only a dwarfed 
Christian life and experience except as the Word of 
God is understood and assimilated. Hence we have the 
frequent exhortations of Jesus and the Apostles that the 
people of God should grow in grace and knowledge, 
should search the Scriptures, etc. Let those who are cold 
and indifferent unite with those who are dejected and 
despondent, in coming to the Master for the "meat in due 
season." Such surely will not be turned away empty by 
Him who said, "Seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it 
shall be opened unto you." And in proportion as they 
find their hearts also burning within them, as they realize 
the fulfilment of God's promises in the past, so shall they 
develop faith in the fulfilment of those promises which 
relate to the future. 

Jesus could have manifested Himself to His disciples 
otherwise than He did. Instead of appearing as the 
gardener and as the traveler, etc., in different forms, and 
then vanishing after communicating with His disciples, 
He could have done just as He did with Saul of Tarsus, 
the last one to whom He appeared. As we read, "Last 
of all He was seen of me also, as of one born before 



the time." (1 Corinthians 15:8.) Those begotten of 
the Holy Spirit now are to be born of the Spirit in the 
resurrection. Then they will be spirit beings, like the 
Redeemer, see Him as He is and share His glory. That 
will be the due time for all of His followers to see Him 
as He is— not as He was.— 1 John 3:2. 

But Saul of Tarsus saw Him thus as a spirit Being, 
"shining above the brightness of the sun" at noonday- 
saw Him before the time. The effect upon him was disastrous 
to his eyes, and required a miracle for his recovery 
of sight. And even then apparently a certain 
blemish was allowed to be a thorn in his flesh to his 
dying day, as a reminder of God's great mercy toward 
him, and to keep him humble in connection with his 
powerful ministry.— 2 Corinthians 12:7. 

"THEY KNEW HIM -HE VANISHED" 

When the travelers arrived in Emmaus Jesus, after 
being urged, accepted their hospitality. We have every 
reason to suppose that if they had not urged, He would 
not have stopped with them; for "He made as if He 
would have gone farther." And so it is still; He does 
not intrude upon His disciples. Rather, He encourages 
us to recognize our need of Him and to ask, that we 
may receive, that our joy may be full. So it was with 
those brethren at Emmaus. They were appreciative of 
what they had learned. "Never man spake like this 
Man." If He had ministered to them so much spiritual 
joy, they would delight in showing Him every courtesy 
in their power; and perhaps this might give further opportunities 
for conversation. 

And so it was. When they sat down to supper, their 
guest assumed something of the manner of Jesus; and 
the way in which He asked a blessing upon the food 
reminded them, evidently, of Jesus. Their eyes of understanding 
began to open. Immediately they realized that 
no one but their own Master could have given them the 
lessons just enjoyed on the journey. And thus having 

R5417 : page 76 

fulfilled the purpose of His materialization, He immediately 
vanished out of their sight— clothes and ail- 
instantaneously. 

Their joy was too great to permit them to sleep. They 
must hasten to carry the good tidings to the other disciples. 
So they journeyed back to Jerusalem, and there 
found the others rejoicing in the fact that the Lord had 
manifested Himself to Simon Peter. Then the two told 
the story of their experiences; and faith, hope and joy 
began to grow in all their hearts. 

Who cannot see that the Lord's way of manifesting 
Himself after His resurrection was in every way the 
best! Had He appeared to many of them, or to all of 
them, as He appeared to Saul of Tarsus later, they would 



have been bewildered, shocked. They would not have 

been so well able to identify "the light shining above 

the sun at noonday" with their Master, Jesus. Even if 

a voice from Heaven had declared the fact of His resurrection, 

Jesus would not have had the same opportunity 

of explaining to their minds the prophecies; and they, 

perturbed and excited, would not so well have been able 

to receive the instruction. 

It should be remembered that out of fewer than ten 
appearances during the forty days between our Lord's 
resurrection and ascension, He only twice appeared in a 
form similar to that which they had seen, and bearing 
the marks of crucifixion; and that on both of these occasions 
He appeared while the doors were shut, and later 
vanished while the doors were still shut, in order that His 
followers might learn a double lesson: 

(1) That He was no longer dead, but alive, 
resurrected; 

(2) That He was no longer flesh, but Spirit— "Now 
the Lord is that Spirit." 



R5417 : page 76 

"NAUGHT THAT I HAVE MY OWN I CALL" 

"The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away, 
blessed be the name of the Lord."— Job 1:21. 

ALL that we have should be regarded as a gift 

from God, whether it be much or little. 

God's gift to our first parents was a very 

munificent one— perfection of life. They 

were made in the image and likeness of God 

in the flesh— only "a little lower than the 

angels." Because of disobedience this perfection 

was forfeited. Obedience was the 

condition on which Adam would be permitted 

to remain in the Garden of Eden. 

If he was obedient he might live and enjoy it, might 

fill the earth with posterity and gradually bring the 

whole world to the blessed conditions which he himself 

found in the Garden. 

It was when Adam sinned that God rejected him from 
being a son. After that time no man was ever called 
a son of God until Jesus came. And no man since Jesus 
has been called a son of God, except those who have 
come to God through Jesus, and have been accepted by 
Him. Adam was cast out of his Eden home for the 
very purpose of bringing upon him the penalty of sin 
—death. The angel of the Lord drove Adam out. We 
remember God's expression on this: "In the day that 
thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die." (Gen. 2:17.) 
The dying process began at once and continued until 
completed after 930 years. 



Since the penalty of sin was death, it was of God's 
mercy that He allowed our first parents to live at all 
after their disobedience. While it was a curse He inflicted 
on our race when He drove Adam and Eve out 
of Eden, nevertheless there was a blessing connected 
with that curse. When God drove them out of the Garden, 
He said, "Cursed is the ground for thy sake. Thorns 
and thistles shall it bring forth unto thee. In the sweat 
of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou return to the 
ground whence thou wast taken; for dust thou art, 
and unto dust shalt thou return." Here was the curse. 
They were to die by gradual processes. 

ALL OUR BLESSINGS OF GOD'S MERCY 

Adam and Eve might do all in their power to prolong 
their lives, but it was not possible for them to live 
out the full thousand years, which constitute one of the 
Lord's Days. Adam lived out nearly an entire Day, but 

R5418 : page 76 

he was gradually going down to the tomb all the while. 
His mental, moral and physical powers were waning. 
And so all of his race are a groaning creation. 

It was not an unjust sentence, nor an unfair sentence. 
It is a favor from God that we have life at all. 
The privilege He gives us of living even a few years 
is a great boon. And so it is true of all of us, as 
described by the Prophet Job in relating his experience, 
that naked came we into the world. We have nothing 
that is really our own. It is of God's providence that we 
enjoy the privileges that we have. 

It was true of Job that it was of God's permission and 
mercy that he had his flocks and herds and children. Then 
fire came down from heaven and burned up his sheep 
and the attending servants. Enemies killed his camels 
and oxen and asses, and still other servants. The hurricane 
came and killed his children. But Job said, "The 
Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away. Blessed be 
the name of the Lord!" Job had no claim on everlasting 
life, although he had a hope of it. He realized that all 
he had possessed belonged to God; they were not his own. 

Life and immortality were not brought to light until 
Jesus came. (2 Tim. 1:10.) The great Message of salvation 
which before was only hinted at was in due time 
clearly stated by Jesus. He came to give His life a Ransom-price, 
to give a life that corresponded to the life that 
Adam lost. We see the beauty of the whole arrangement, 
that as by a man came death, by a man also should 
come the resurrection of the dead. Whereas "by one 
man's disobedience many were made sinners, even so by 
the obedience of one shall many be made righteous" 
(Rom. 5:19)— made free from the death penalty— and 
ultimately shall have a resurrection. 

Those who get the first benefit of this provision in 



Christ are the Church. The Apostle says that we are 
risen with Him to walk in newness of life. And we have 
faith that God is able to fully complete this resurrection 
as He has promised. We do not claim that we do not 
die, which is contrary to all the facts and to the Scriptures. 
We, on the contrary, admit that we die. But we 
believe that He who raised up Jesus from the dead will 
raise us up also by Him. Jesus has effected an atonement 
for the sins of the whole world, upon the basis of which 
those who believe now may have reconciliation with God. 
And by and by the world will have the benefit of Christ's 
atoning work, and opportunity for reconciliation. 

LIFE RIGHTS LOST TO MANKIND 

The hope of the Church is that she shall reign with 
Christ for a thousand years, bind Satan, uplift mankind 
from sin and pain and death, and, as the Scriptures declare, 
"wipe away the tears from off all faces." (Isaiah 25:8.) 
And this is the work of God in that He planned, 
designed, the whole matter. It is the work of Christ in 

R5418 : page 77 

that He purchased the race and is the Father's Agent— 

who is "the Beginning of the creation of God," "the Beginning, 

the First-born from the dead; that in all things 

He might have the pre-eminence," not pre-eminence over 

the Father, but above all others.— Rev. 3:14; Col. 1:18. 

We can see more clearly than did Job, that all our 
blessings are of God, not of ourselves. We can see more 
clearly because we are spirit-begotten. We know that 
we have no rights whatever. All we can do is to call 
upon God's mercy. But all are not able as yet to hear 
the Message of mercy. "The god of this world hath 
blinded the minds of them which believe not."— 
2 Corinthians 4:4. 

And so only those whose eyes are especially anointed 
can see. As Jesus said in His day, "Blessed are your 
eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they hear" (Matt. 13:16.) 
And so St. Peter confirms the same thought of 
blindness, respecting those who crucified the Lord: 
"Brethren, I wot that through ignorance ye did it, as did 
also your rulers."— Acts 3:17. 

So then from our favored vantage ground we, still 
more than Job, can take in perfect submission whatever 
experiences God in His wisdom and love sees fit to allow 
to come upon us. If we are His children, we are bound 
to accept all our experiences as being of His providence 
and order and arrangement. 

"Naught that I have my own I call, 

I hold it for the Giver; 
My heart, my strength, my life, my all 
Are His and His forever." 



R5417 : page 77 

THE IMPORTANCE OF ATTAINING BALANCE OF MIND 

"Let all your deeds be done in love." 
-1 Corinthians 16:14.~Diaglott. 

GOD is the very personification of sympathy 

and love. As the Scriptures declare, "God 

is Love." And all who will be God's children, 

developed in His likeness, will be 

loving children. As St. John says, "He that 

dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God, and God 

in him." (1 John 4:16.) In proportion as 

we develop strength of character as New 

Creatures, this quality of love increases. In 

addition, we should find our judgment also 

becoming more accurate. Those who are developed in 

the Spirit of the Lord have better judgment than they 

formerly had. As the days go by, they know better how 

to sympathize with the world; how to deal with mankind; 

they are getting more and more of the wisdom which 

cometh from above. 

CAREFUL PREPARATION FOR KINGDOM NECESSARY 

Before we became Christians at all, we may have 
been under-balanced, or over-balanced— we may not 
have known how to deal properly with our families or 
our friends. Out of kindness and sympathy we may 
have been inclined to give them money, or to yield to 
their wishes in a way that was injurious to them; or we 
may have been too severe and unyielding. But as we 
grow in the spirit of a sound mind, we learn better how 
to deal with others, so as to be in harmony with the 
Divine will, the Divine Spirit. 

When we shall have experienced our change and 
have become like our Redeemer, all of our powers will 
be perfect. Our love, our conception of justice, and 
also our conception of how to deal with others, will then 
be perfect. Every one who does not develop this character 
of love, mercy, justice, etc., will be unprepared for 
the Kingdom work. 

The next Age is to be a time of purification, of purgation, 
to the world; and those of the Lord's people who 
do not now have character enough to give necessary 
stripes are not worthy of a position in which authority 
must be exercised. On the other hand, those who would 
give too many stripes would not be fit to deal with mankind. 
Therefore we all need this balance of mind in 
order to be ready for the work of the next Age. 

PROPER AND IMPROPER OCCASIONS FOR ANGER 

As we come to see that the whole race of Adam is 



fallen— some more, some less— we develop a broad sympathy 
for mankind. We grow compassionate. We desire 
to lift them up out of their degradation. We would 
like to help them as much as opportunity affords. Hence 
we are far from wishing to render evil for evil. We 
wish to be peacemakers as far as possible. Therefore, 
unless it would be injustice to refrain from speaking 
sharply, we should be careful that our words are kind 
and loving. However, even though our words might not 
be angry, there are times when sharp utterances might 
be helpful, but even these should be tempered with love; 
tempered with the spirit of the Master. 

"BE YE ANGRY AND SIN NOT" 

There is a difference between anger that would be 
righteous indignation and anger that would be unloving, 
unkind, unjust. We know that God is angry with the 
wicked, for the Scriptures so tell us. (Psalm 7:11.) This 
fact shows us that anger of itself does not necessarily 
imply a sinful condition; for God has no sin, and He 
judges Himself by the same regulations under which He 
judges His creatures. Therefore anger in itself is not 
sin. 

In God's case there is no danger that He will make a 
mistake and be angry with the right or approve the 
wrong, or that He will be lenient with the wrong and 
thus oppose the right. His knowledge is perfect; therefore 
His conduct is perfect. In our case, however, if we 
feel that anger is proper for us, we should use a great 
deal of discretion. As the Apostle Paul says; "Be ye 
angry and sin not."— Ephesians 4:26. 

In a case where an innocent person is suffering wrong, 
and we have full knowledge of the matter, then it might 
be our duty to manifest anger, righteous indignation. It 
would be proper to manifest a certain degree of anger 
if we saw even a dumb brute mistreated. If we saw the 
principles of righteousness being outraged, it might become 
necessary to manifest some anger, some indignation. 

But these cases would probably be very rare, for the 
circumstances would not often be a matter of our business. 
As St. Peter remarks, we are none of us to suffer 
as busybodies in other men's affairs.— 1 Peter 4:15. 

If we see a parent doing to his child something 
that is not right, we should not interfere unless the 
child's life is endangered. If it is merely a case of 
switching or a box on the ear, we must not interfere. It 
is not our business. Let us as the Lord's children, ambassadors 
of the King of Heaven, seek more and more 
to exercise the spirit of a sound mind, the spirit of love 
and reasonableness. 



R5418 : page 78 



GOD'S USE OF THINGS IN OUR HAND 

"And the Lord said unto Moses, 

What is that in thine hand?"— Exodus 4:2. 

MOSES had been called of the Lord to the 

great and honorable work of delivering His 

people from the bondage of Egypt. He 

was now eighty years of age. His long experience 

in the Egyptian court had given 

him an insight into the affairs of government. 

Stephen tells us (Acts 7:22) that 

"Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the 

Egyptians, and was mighty in word and in 

deed." Tradition says that he was also an 

able general in the Egyptian army. 

Yet he relinquished all these earthly advantages to cast 
in his lot with the despised people of God. (Heb. 1 1:24-26.) 
"Moses. ..refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's 
daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction with the 
people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a 
season; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches 
than the treasures of Egypt; for he had respect unto the 
recompense of the reward"— he preferred to share with 
God's chosen people, Israel, in their affliction, and to 
have part with them in the Promise made to their fathers. 

How appropriate it was that the man whom God called 
to be the leader of Israel out of bondage should be a 
learned man, and one well equipped to be at the head of 
such a people and under such circumstances! We cannot 
doubt that his wandering as a shepherd in the wilderness 
for forty years, tending the flocks of Jethro, his father-in-law, 
made him thoroughly familiar with every road, 
every hill, every stream; and that this was subsequently 
of great advantage to him, when, under the Lord's direction, 
he became leader of Israel through this wilderness 
en route to Canaan. 

MEEKNESS TAUGHT BY EXPERIENCE 

But this forty years' experience in Midian had taught 
Moses another important lesson— the lesson of meekness. 
And his long isolation had made him reserved. Furthermore, 
soon after severing his connection with the royal 

R5419 : page 78 

house of Egypt, he had made an attempt to deliver his 
people; but they had not wished his services, and had 
rather resented his interference. So now, when the Lord 
would send him to do this great work, he was distrustful 
of his ability to lead the people of Israel out of bondage 
into the land of Canaan, and was fearful and reluctant. 
The Lord had appeared to Moses in the burning bush 
which was not consumed, had given him his commission, 
and had assured him that He, Jehovah, would certainly be 



with him. Moses, however, very properly felt the magnitude 
of the undertaking and his own insufficiency. He 
urged that he was incompetent, that it would require 
some one more powerful than he to influence the heart 
of the king of Egypt. He knew that it would be entirely 
contrary to the purpose and policy of the Egyptians to 
let the Israelites go from their service. He said to the 
Lord, "Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that 
I should bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt?" 
But the Lord assured him that He would Himself be 
responsible; that He would direct in the matter. 

"WHAT IS THAT IN THINE HAND?" 

Still Moses wanted some demonstration of God's approval 
and power. He asked, How shall I make Israel 
know that Thou hast sent me? for they will not believe. 
Then the Lord asked, "What is that in thine hand?" 
Moses answered, "A rod." And the Lord said to him, 
"Cast it upon the ground." Moses did so, and the rod 
became a serpent, and Moses fled from it. If he had not 
particularly noticed what he had in his hand, he might 
have thought that possibly it had been a serpent before. 
But he had looked, and was sure that it was a staff which 
had been changed into a serpent. Then God told him to 
take up the serpent by the tail. He did so, and it again 
became a rod in his hand. 

THE LESSONS FOR US 

From this we would take the lesson that if the Lord 
sends us on any mission, we should not have the feeling 
that we could conquer the world, but should realize our 
own littleness and should properly feel wholly insufficient 
of ourselves. We should realize that without His assisting 
grace we could accomplish nothing. We should be 
very sure that He has commissioned us, and that our mission 
is not some foolish thought of our own. We should 
be very sure that the Lord is back of the whole arrangement. 
Then we should have full confidence in Him. 

We should feel like saying with Moses, "I cannot do 
anything." But if we wish to serve the Lord, we are to 
look to what we have in our hands, whether it be one 
talent or another. God is so wise that He can use our 
humblest talent to His praise. What He wants us to use 
may be right in our hands, and we may not have noticed 
it. No matter how ordinary our lives may be, God is 
able to use us, and to give us also the needed lessons in 
connection with our experiences. 

Another lesson that we could draw from the Lord's 
dealings with Moses is that the things which we have in 
our hand, those things closest to us, might become injurious 
to us, if it were not that the power of God is 
able to make everything work together for our good. If 
we have the spirit of service, the Lord can and will use 
things right at our hand— not necessarily things afar from 



us; and the Divine power over evil can make all things 
work out good to those who love Him. More and more 
we are learning these lessons. If, then, we would serve, 
we should look to see what we have in our possession; 
what things we can make use of. 

FAITHFUL IN LEAST-FAITHFUL IN MUCH 

A great many people would like to serve the Lord 
with a thousand tongues. If they had a thousand tongues, 
they feel sure they would sing with them all. How do 
we know that we would use a thousand tongues, if we do 
not faithfully use the one we have? "He that is faithful 
in that which is least" will be faithful in the greater 
things. 

There are plenty of people who like to address thousands. 
But if we cannot address thousands, it is all the 
more necessary to address one. Some say that if they 
had a million of dollars they would give it to the Lord. 
But the Lord is not likely to ever give them the chance 
of giving large sums if they do not manifest a disposition 
to give of the small amounts already in their possession. 
"To him that hath [through use of his talents] shall be 
given, ...and from him that hath not [from neglect of 
his talent] shall be taken away even that which he hath." 

So the lesson to us of Moses' experiences would seem 
to be— the use of things we have in our hands. The same 
lesson is taught in another way in the case of the poor 
widow who cried to the Prophet Elisha for help. She 
was in poverty, and her creditors were about to take her 
two sons for debt. "What hast thou in the house?" 
asked Elisha. The woman replied, "Not anything in the 
house save a pot of oil." Then the Prophet told her to 
go and borrow empty vessels from her neighbors— "not 
a few"— and to then begin to pour out the oil into the 
vessels. The woman obeyed, and all the vessels were 
filled with oil, and she had oil to sell and thus pay her 
debt. The Lord used what she had in her hand. 

R5419 : page 79 

It was the same way with the Lord's miracle in feeding 
the thousands. He asked, What have you on hand? 
He did not say, How far is it to town? And He did not 
tell the Apostles to get wagons and go to town for bread 
and meat. But He said, Use what you have. And He 
blessed the five loaves of bread and the two small fishes, 
to the abundant feeding of the five thousand; they all ate 
"as much as they would," and of what remained the disciples 
gathered up twelve baskets full. (John 6:5-13.) 
So we should use all our talents and opportunities. The 
Lord is looking for us to use what we have, and we 
shall receive blessing therefrom; and the more faithful 
we are in the performance of our privileges, the greater 
will be our blessings from Him. 



MOSES' EXPERIENCES TYPICAL 

In addition to the lessons just noted, we believe there 
is a further significance in the experiences of Moses, and 
the deliverance of Israel. We are to see something representative 
of conditions in our day. Moses was acting 
under Divine instruction. Many things connected with 
this mission of Moses to the Israelites seem typical of the 
deliverance of God's people from the power of evil. 
Pharaoh was typical of Satan. We are living in the corresponding 
time, when God purposes to deliver all from 
the power of Satan. Jesus and the Church will be the 
Agent of Jehovah— the deliverance will be the work of 
Messiah as God's Representative. 

The rod represents authority. This was illustrated at 
the time when the Lord instructed that Aaron should 
represent Him as the head of the tribe of Levi. There 
had been murmurings in Israel, and the principal men of 
the twelve tribes were instructed by the Lord through 
Moses to take each man his rod, write upon it his name 
and send it into the Tabernacle. (Num. 17: 1-9.) Aaron's 
rod was to go in with the others, because it was the rod 
of his father's family. And when they examined the rods 
in the morning, Aaron's rod had budded, blossomed and 
brought forth almonds. 

This would give us to understand that a rod might 
generally be considered to represent authority. As the 
hand is power, so the rod is authority. Thus the rod 
would seem to be a special manifestation of Divine Power 
and Rule. We may not speak too positively of the antitypical 
fulfilment of this experience of Moses. But we 
might think that in some way or other the power of God 
would appear to be evil— the serpent was evil. Evil has 
seemed to triumph for these six thousand years. When 
Moses and Aaron went into the presence of Pharaoh, 
Moses' rod became a serpent there also. Then the 
magicians cast down their rods, and they became serpents. 
But Moses' rod swallowed up all the rods of the magicians. 

RESUMING THE ROD OF POWER 

We would very much like to know just what these 
things signify— just how God will permit the world under 
the power of Satan to have an hour of triumph. There 
is to be permitted a great Time of Trouble, and it will be 
because of the casting down, for a time, of Divine authority 
and rule. 

We think this condition is present now. People 
are losing confidence in God. They are feeling, for 
the time, as though there were no God. The tendency 
of Higher Criticism and Evolution is to give humanity 
the impression that there is no God but Nature. And 
as mankind get this idea of a Nature-god that is ruthless, 
relentless, impersonal, it is very likely to efface all thought 
of a living God of Justice and Love. "There is no fear 
of God before their eyes," the Scriptures say. So we 



may expect a great Time of Trouble, when the power of 
God will seem to be a further manifestation of evil— as 
the power of evil. The taking up of the rod of power 
again, a little later, will be the resuming of Divine 
authority. 



R5418 : page 79 

THE SPIRIT-BEGOTTEN IN THE HOLY 

OUR ears and our tongue bring us many blessings 

and in general are grand servants. 

Nevertheless, sometimes they are difficult 

so to manage as not to be misleading. 

Fully half the difficulties everywhere are, 

apparently, the results of misunderstanding. 

God has been misunderstood, the 

Bible is misunderstood and preaching is 

misunderstood. We cannot wonder, then, 

that STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES and TABERNACLE 

SHADOWS and THE WATCH TOWER have been 

misunderstood. All that we can do is to restate matters 

afresh, hoping that our tongue or pen will serve us better, 

or that the eyes and the ears of our readers will 

serve them better. 

BEGETTING THE TRANSFORMING POWER 

Repeatedly we have endeavored to show that the begetting 
of the Holy Spirit, in the case of each individual 
Christian, is the transforming power by which he passes 
from the human nature to the new nature. This transfer 
is beautifully pictured in the Tabernacle types by the 
priest passing from the Court into the Holy. The Court 
represents, in the present time, the earthly condition of 
those who are approaching God, but have not yet made a 
full consecration of their lives to Him and His service. 

When the step of consecration is taken, Jesus, acting 
as our great High Priest, imputes His merit to cover our 
deficiencies of the flesh, and forthwith presents us to the 
Father. Our consecration of the earthly nature is thus 
made acceptable, and in the Divine reckoning we are 
from that moment dead according to the flesh, but alive 
according to the spirit— begotten again, not with corruptible 
seed, but by the Spirit of God. All thus begotten 
are in the Holy in their relationship to God— that 
is to say, they are children of God, heirs of God. Thereafter 
they have the enlightenment of the Truth as represented 
by the Golden Lamp-stand with the seven burners; 
the spiritual food as represented in the Table of 
Shewbread, and the privileges of worship and prayer as 
represented in the Incense Altar. 

This condition continues until the end of this Age, 
when a judgment, or testing, or distinction, will be made 



as between the most faithful, the Little Flock, the Royal 
Priesthood class, and the less faithful class of the Great 
Company— the latter thereafter being typed by the tribe 
of Levi. 

In the new order of things, after the establishment 
of Messiah's Kingdom, this distinction between the 
Church proper, joint-heirs with Christ, and the larger 
company of antitypical Levites, will be perpetual, and the 
services of the two will be different. The former will be 
a Priesthood corresponding to that of Melchizedek— a 
Priest upon His Throne. The work of the latter will correspond 
more to that accomplished by the Levites; namely, 
teaching the people, etc., as servants of the Priests, from 
whom they will receive their directions. 



page 8 1 
