
Do You Remember?




Have you carefully read the recent issues of The Watchtower? Well, see if you can answer the following questions:
What Scriptural evidence is there that God has empathy for us?
When the ancient Israelites were slaves in Egypt, God was aware of their distress and felt their pain. (Ex. 3:7; Isa. 63:9) We are made in God’s image, and we can have empathy. He has empathy for us even when we might feel unworthy of his love.​—wp18.3, pp. 8-9.
How did Jesus’ teachings help people conquer prejudice?
Many Jews in Jesus’ time had prejudices. Christ stressed the need for humility and condemned racial pride. He urged his followers to view one another as brothers.​—w18.06, pp. 9-10.
What do we learn from why God did not allow Moses to enter the Promised Land?
Moses had a close relationship with Jehovah. (Deut. 34:10) Near the end of the 40 years in the wilderness, the people complained a second time about a lack of water. God told Moses to speak to the crag. Instead, Moses struck the crag. Jehovah may have been indignant that Moses did not follow His instructions or that Moses did not give glory to God for the miracle. (Num. 20:6-12) This should teach us the importance of obeying Jehovah and bringing him glory.​—w18.07, pp. 13-14.
How might we easily err if we judge by outward appearances?
There are three areas in which many are influenced by outward appearances: race or ethnicity, economic situation, and age. It is important for us to try to see others through God’s impartial eyes! (Acts 10:34, 35)​—w18.08, pp. 8-12.
What are some ways in which older Christians can help others?
An older Christian who has had a change of assignment continues to be treasured by God and can do much to help others. He might reach out to unbelieving mates, help the inactive, conduct Bible studies, and expand his ministry.​—w18.09, pp. 8-11.
Christians have what items in their Teaching Toolbox?
There are contact cards and invitations. Eight well-designed tracts as well as the Watchtower and Awake! magazines are included. The toolbox also contains a few brochures, two principal study books, and four useful videos, including Why Study the Bible?​—w18.10, p. 16.
How can a Christian “buy truth,” as urged at Proverbs 23:23?
We do not pay money for truth. However, we do need to spend time and expend effort in order to acquire it.​—w18.11, p. 4.
What can we learn from how Hosea dealt with his wife, Gomer?
Gomer repeatedly committed adultery, but Hosea forgave her and stayed married to her. If a Christian’s mate commits sexual immorality, the innocent mate can extend forgiveness. When he or she resumes sexual relations with the guilty mate, the grounds for obtaining a Scriptural divorce would be canceled.​—w18.12, p. 13.




