Are You Open-Minded Toward God?
DO YOU love God? Do you want to know him better? The way to do so was shown 19 centuries ago. The apostle Paul preached to a mixed crowd of Jews and Greeks in a Jewish synagogue in Thessalonica. Some Jews and some Greeks were convinced and changed their religion, but many of the Jews, “full of resentment, enlisted the help of a gang from the market place, stirred up a crowd, and soon had the whole city in an uproar.”
Under cover of darkness, Paul escaped the mob and moved on to Beroea and soon was in the synagogue preaching to both Jews and Greeks. “Here the Jews were more open-minded than those in Thessalonika, and they welcomed the word very readily; every day they studied the scriptures to check whether it was true. Many Jews became believers, and so did many Greek women from the upper classes and a number of the men.”​—Acts 17:1-12.
The Jews in Thessalonica clung to their centuries-old religion with its oral traditions that made void God’s Word. (Matthew 15:1-9) How different were those of Beroea​—they listened with open minds, checked the Scriptures to see whether Paul’s words were true, and changed their religion.
Catholic commentators, as quoted in the previous article, have this to say about Jehovah’s Witnesses. They are “in first place when it comes to fervor, zeal, activism.” They “are the first to live the faith they preach,” and they “follow a virtuous and honest life-style.” One is “welcomed with warmth and a sense of brotherhood and solidarity.” “They always have the Bible in their hand,” and their “way of reading the Bible evidently meets real needs that other theologies no longer fill.” Their message “helps in overcoming the anxiety of the individual in the face of this world’s woes.” All of this and more is said by Catholic clergymen and commentators. Is not all of this high praise for Jehovah’s Witnesses?
Would it not be wise, then, to listen to their Bible-based conversations when they call at your door? And remember, the fact that their religion is disparagingly called a “sect” does not make it false. The first Christians were called “the Nazarene sect.” The Bible admonishes all of us to “prove all things: hold fast that which is good.” (Acts 24:5; 1 Thessalonians 5:21, Douay Version) Should not all who love God and want to know him heed this divine counsel?
[Box/​Pictures on page 9]
If you are a Catholic and wish to know God better, with an open mind consider these questions along with the scriptures cited, using your own Bible.
  The Catholic Douay Version Bible teaches that the soul dies​—does your church teach that it is immortal?​—Ezekiel 18:4; Acts 3:23; Apocalypse 16:3.
  It teaches that the wages sin pays is death​—does your church teach that sinners are tortured in hell or in purgatory?​—Ecclesiastes 9:5, 10; Romans 6:23.
  It teaches that Jehovah is one God and that Jesus is not equal to him​—does your church teach that God is one God in three persons and that Jesus is one of three equals?​—Deuteronomy 6:4; John 14:28.
  It teaches that Jesus is the rock on which God’s church is built​—does your church teach that it is built on Peter?​—Ephesians 2:20, 21; 1 Peter 2:4-8.
  It teaches praying to God through Christ Jesus​—does your church teach praying to or through others?​—Philippians 4:6; 1 Timothy 2:5.
  It teaches addressing confession of sins and requests for forgiveness to God through the advocacy of Jesus Christ​—does your church teach that these favors come through a priest?​—1 John 1:9; 2:1.
  And that same Catholic Bible teaches that friendship with the world and political involvement with this world is enmity with God​—does your church involve itself with the political or military affairs of this world?​—John 15:19; 18:36; James 1:27; 4:4.
[Pictures]
Hellfire?
Trinity?
Intercessors?

