Announcements
APPRECIATING THE LIFE-GIVING THEOCRATIC ORGANIZATION
All things are made to work together for good to those who love and serve Jehovah God. Thus Jehovah’s witnesses work effectively together, honoring God and being honored by him in so doing. (1 Sam. 2:30, AS) They call on people with life-giving knowledge that can set people free, and Bible study aids that will uplift and bring joy to the sheeplike ones of mankind. During this month they will continue offering a book and booklet combination for the nominal sum of 50c. Are you having a share in proclaiming Bible truths? You may do so. Inquire at the nearest Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s witnesses or write this office.
ASSEMBLIES PROGRESSING
By the time you read this, vast audiences at Chicago, Vancouver and probably Los Angeles will already have thrilled at the stirring public lecture “World Conquest Soon—by God’s Kingdom.” Were you a part of the blessed groups that assembled in those cities? Have you heard this message? If not, then by no means fail to take advantage of the “Triumphant Kingdom” Assembly in Dallas, July 13-17, or New York, July 20-24. Then, further, will you be one of the international travelers taking in the assemblies in London, July 27-31; Paris, August 3-7; Rome, August 5-7; Nuremberg, August 10-14; Stockholm, August 17-21; The Hague, August 17-21? Then remember that the love of your brothers goes with you, keep in mind the importance of properly representing the godly name that you bear, and never overlook your responsibility to listen and observe closely so that you can give a good report to your brothers back home. Have a pleasant trip and happy assembling!
SPIRITUAL “FOOD AT THE PROPER TIME”
Are you getting adequate spiritual “food at the proper time”? Is your “table” well prepared and the food furnished pleasing, adequate and strengthening? Your spiritual table will be all of this if you receive and make use of the Watchtower magazine regularly. This 32-page magazine enjoys the largest circulation of any religious magazine in the world. Published twice a month, the yearly subscription rate is only $1.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
August 21: War from Heaven Brings Peace to Earth. Page 433.
August 28: The Peace That Follows War from Heaven. Page 440.

