Giving Them a Helping Hand
1 Many of us remember vividly the times when we were given a helping hand by friends or family members. We appreciate what they did in our time of need. Giving a helping hand to fellow Christians is an obligation we may be called upon to fulfill.—3 John 5-8.
2 It was gratifying to learn in January that a concerted effort will now be made to aid those who have become inactive. In this connection, the May 1 Watchtower carries an article entitled, ‘Return to the Shepherd of Your Souls.’ If it is arranged for you to make calls on inactive persons, why not invite them to read through this article with you? Then, in cooperation with the service overseer’s direction you may be asked to conduct a regular study with such persons. But how should we go about conducting these studies?
PURPOSE OF THE STUDY
3 Our main purpose in conducting a Bible study with an inactive person is to help him to regain his spiritual strength. We want to help him appreciate that Jehovah, out of loving concern for him, has arranged for this additional help through his organization. Lasting results will be achieved only if the individual’s relationship with Jehovah is strengthened. If this is done, it will be evident by his renewing his appreciation for Jehovah’s organization.
4 The individuals that we will be studying with in this special program are persons who have been baptized as Jehovah’s Witnesses. In most cases the study will not be conducted in the Truth book. They likely know the basic doctrines of the Bible.
5 The elders will discuss with you what publication might be best to aid the person you are asked to help. It may be that his appreciation for Jehovah’s organization needs to be enhanced. The elders may suggest using “Let Your Kingdom Come” or some other book that would provide such needed assistance and encouragement.
CONDUCTING THE STUDY
6 No doubt you can remember when you conducted your very first Bible study. You felt the need to prepare well for it. No matter how many times you may have conducted a study since then, you know you will do a better job if you prepare thoroughly ahead of time. (Prov. 25:11) This is especially true regarding studies conducted with inactive brothers and sisters. Paul urged his fellow minister Titus to continue reminding Christians “to be ready for every good work.” (Titus 3:1) This suggests being prepared in mind and disposition to handle such an assignment.
7 Questions are especially helpful in effective teaching, as Jesus Christ often demonstrated. (Luke 10:36) When using the printed questions, we want to teach and not be satisfied with answers that are merely read from the publications. It may be appropriate to ask additional questions to stimulate thinking and get the person to put the thoughts into his own words. Leading or viewpoint questions are quite effective in doing this.
8 What a blessing it will be to see some of our brothers who have become inactive really helped by these Bible studies and once again join us in spreading the Kingdom message far and wide! We will rejoice in their spiritual advancement, particularly when we have been able to help personally. May we feel as did the man who searched for one sheep that had strayed. “And if he happens to find it,” said Jesus, “I certainly tell you, he rejoices more over it than over the ninety-nine that have not strayed.”—Matt. 18:12-14.

