Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING MARCH 28
Song 80
10 min: Local announcements. Consider “Bible Reading for Memorial Week.” Remind congregation there will be no Theocratic Ministry School and service meeting next week.
15 min: “Share in Announcing Jehovah’s Kingdom.” Question-and-answer coverage.
20 min: Topic for Conversation. Discussion and demonstration. Review both scriptures with audience and consider possible introductions and points to tie the two scriptures together. Have demonstration of suggested presentation. After short introduction publisher could say: “We are calling on our neighbors because we believe that you are concerned about the future just as we are. As you know, right at this moment the nations have missiles pointed at one another that could virtually wipe all of mankind off the face of the earth in a matter of minutes. Do you think man will eventually find a way to prevent this from happening? Or do you think the Creator of man will need to step in? [Allow for response; be ready to adapt comments.] It is interesting to realize that millions of people have been praying for a solution when they use the words of the well known ‘Lord’s prayer’ or the ‘Our Father’ prayer. [Read or quote Matthew 6:10.] This model prayer indicates that the kingdom of God is the real solution to man’s problems. Yet many people do not feel the Kingdom will come in our day. Can you think of a better time for it to come? Jesus prophetically described the critical conditions that exist today and then said these words recorded in Luke 21:31, 32. [Read.] So this generation that saw the start of the signs in 1914 will see God’s kingdom come and put an end to these distressing conditions. But who will rule in this kingdom? Will it have subjects on the earth? People have many questions in their minds about the Kingdom, and these need Bible answers. That is why this magazine has been published. Note its title, The Watchtower Announcing Jehovah’s Kingdom.” Then highlight a particular point in one of the articles and offer the subscription. Conclude part by encouraging all to share in first Sunday of the month activity, using Topic for Conversation in house-to-house work, and making calls to invite people to the Memorial on Thursday, April 8.
Song 105 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 4
Memorial
WEEK STARTING APRIL 11
Song 22
 5 min: Local announcements and accounts report.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News—With Magazines.” Question-and-answer discussion of first three paragraphs. Demonstrate presentations in paragraphs 4, 5 and 6. Keep presentations brief and practical for use in your territory. Analyze presentations with audience as time permits.
15 min: Comments from audience as to last week’s Memorial program. Then, talk on need to make return visits on those who attended the Memorial so they can be helped to appreciate need for further association with congregation. If they are not already subscribers to The Watchtower they should be encouraged to subscribe and to attend Watchtower study. Give general encouragement for all to attend all meetings regularly.
10 min: Cover local needs, or give talk based on “Questions from Readers” in January 15, 1982, Watchtower, noting the difference between disassociated and inactive persons.
Song 36 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 18
Song 9
10 min: Local announcements. Also appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: “Should We Give Away Literature?” Question-and-answer coverage.
20 min: “Giving Them a Helping Hand.” Talk by service overseer. Include demonstration of discussion between service overseer and a brother or sister who is being asked to handle study with inactive one. Encourage all to bring January 15, 1982, Watchtower next week to consider three articles dealing with honesty.
Song 43 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 25
Song 38
 5 min: Local announcements.
25 min: “Why Be Honest?” Based on first three articles in January 15, 1982, Watchtower. Use “Why So Much Dishonesty?” on page 3 for introduction. Question-and-answer coverage of second article, “Why Be Honest?” (pp. 4, 5) Highlight scriptures. As time allows, consider an experience or two from “They Made It—In Honesty.” (pp. 6, 7)
15 min: Interview auxiliary and regular pioneers who have had interesting experiences in field service during April. Line up some ahead of time so they will be prepared. Encourage auxiliary pioneering in May. Since there are five weekends during May, many more may be able to schedule their affairs to share.
Song 62 and prayer.

