Share in Announcing Jehovah’s Kingdom
1 What a privilege it is to be commissioned by Jehovah God as public announcers of his kingdom! As heralds of this grand government, we have the assigned duty to spread the message of its establishment far and wide. (Matt. 24:14) People must know what the Kingdom is, what its coming means and that now is a time of decision for all.—Compare Mark 1:14, 15.
2 A marvelous instrument in aiding us to accomplish our work is The Watchtower. Since March 1, 1939, the full title of this magazine has been The Watchtower Announcing Jehovah’s Kingdom. The title describes its primary purpose and distinguishes it from all other magazines. How appropriate it would be for us to highlight this fact during our subscription campaign.
3 Have you been able to obtain subscriptions in the past? What helped you to do so? Many have said that what helped them was a positive attitude, not allowing timidity to hold them back from offering the subscription at every opportunity. During the subscription campaign last May one auxiliary pioneer set for himself the goal of placing one subscription for each hour of service, that is, 60 subscriptions for the month. That was certainly being subscription-positive! The results? He reported that he was able to obtain 155 subscriptions to The Watchtower, and three persons subscribed to Awake! What will your goals be for this April and May?
4 Something that might help you reach your personal subscription goal would be to write up a list of potential subscribers and then make a special effort to contact each one. Good possibilities might be persons who have taken the magazines before, those on magazine routes, Bible students, relatives, neighbors, workmates, classmates, persons who call regularly at your home and others. Likely you can think of many persons who would profit from a regular flow of Bible information about God’s kingdom. Will you get at least one subscription this month?
“SEEK CONTINUALLY HIS KINGDOM”
5 Jesus urged his disciples to ‘seek continually God’s kingdom.’ (Luke 12:31) He thus emphasized the need for us to demonstrate a steady, uninterrupted interest and concern for God’s government. Also, the apostle Paul urged, “Let us hold fast the public declaration of our hope without wavering.” (Heb. 10:23) How can we do this? One important way is by being regular in Kingdom-preaching, not allowing a week to slip by without making some effort to spread our Kingdom hope. Have you made definite plans to share in announcing Jehovah’s kingdom this week?
6 Remember that the thousands who attend the Memorial celebration with us need special encouragement to maintain an active interest in God’s kingdom. How can we help them? One way is to give them a warm personal invitation to join us in our study of the book “Let Your Kingdom Come.” The family-like atmosphere in our book studies may impress them so that they will come to appreciate the loving provisions made by Jehovah to educate his subjects. It may stimulate them to attend regularly with us.
VALUE YOUR ROYAL SERVICE
7 The Kingdom government is not a product of human imagination. It is a reality and has its ambassadors, along with more than two million earthly subjects who represent it as Kingdom envoys.—Prov. 25:13; 2 Cor. 5:18-20.
8 Recognizing that we are speaking for God and Christ should make us conscious of the need to represent them in a fine way. This means that we will want to prepare carefully so that we will present the Kingdom message clearly and understandably. We should not be like employees of political governments who work for a salary, but our labors should spring from a heartfelt faith and desire to honor Jehovah God. We also want to help others to gain salvation. Thus, as we share in announcing Jehovah’s kingdom we will not merely be speaking out a message in a formal way. We will seek to use reasoning and persuasion to reach the hearts of our hearers so they also may come to believe and exercise faith.—Acts 28:23.
9 Before the Kingdom puts an end to “all these kingdoms,” let us make every effort to announce Jehovah’s kingdom and notify people in our territory of the opportunity they now have to come under its security and protection.—Dan. 2:44, 45.

