Should We Give Away Literature?
1 The Society has received numerous reports indicating that much of the literature placed in the field is being given away. Apparently some publishers customarily refrain from asking for contributions for the literature they place. While it is certainly commendable that publishers want to get our fine literature into the hands of the public, always giving it away can present problems. For example, publishers living on a very limited income have been disturbed when they see others giving literature away while they cannot afford to do so. Others have even observed publishers regularly giving away books while in field service. On occasions householders have expressed surprise at the mention of a contribution, stating that previous Witnesses gave a publication to them free of charge.
2 It is true that there may be some people who really cannot afford to contribute for the literature when you call on them. But in this country such people are few. Have you noticed that many who say they cannot contribute are known to spend money for nonessentials? So is it really wise for us to give away literature when going from house to house? Will it help householders to value the literature? If we do meet someone who says he cannot afford to contribute for the literature, we might offer a booklet, a back issue of one of the magazines or a tract with the expressed condition that he promises to read it. Or we may offer to call back when he would be in a position to contribute for what we are offering.
3 Householders who say they have no money to contribute for the publications may be given a copy of a tract such as Is Planet Earth Near the Brink? Then we can follow through on the initial interest by returning to discuss points in the tract and direct attention to additional scripture texts.
BACK ISSUES OF MAGAZINES
4 Some publishers occasionally leave back issues of magazines at doors when no one is at home, making sure, of course, that the magazines are completely out of sight of passersby. This is not objectionable. However, in congregations where the territory is worked often, people might reason that the magazines are always free if we were to leave magazines at not-at-homes indiscriminately or each time the territory is worked. If another item, such as printed advertising material, is found at a door, it may not be good to leave our magazine on that occasion. So it is good to use discretion in this matter.
5 Each time free magazines are left, an effort should be made to call again. When using the back issues in such a way, some have found it effective to fold the magazine open to an article they feel would be of particular interest to the householder. This provides a fine opening for conversations when calling on those who were not at home previously.
6 Jehovah does not want any persons to be destroyed; so we should take advantage of every opportunity to spread the “good news.” (2 Pet. 3:9) Some time ago an elder in England was going from house to house and left a copy of The Watchtower under a door where no one was at home. The householder was so interested in the contents of the magazine that he phoned Jehovah’s Witnesses. A study was started and he made rapid progress, recognizing the truth.
WHEN WITNESSING INFORMALLY
7 It is understandable that when witnessing informally to relatives or other acquaintances we may wish to present them with a gift-copy of a publication and not ask for a contribution. But when we are talking to strangers, as in house-to-house work, it is best to offer the current literature for the regular contribution. In this way we may be helping persons to appreciate the value of what they have obtained and this may motivate them to read the literature.
OUR VALUABLE LITERATURE
8 We do give freely of our time and our energy in sharing the truth with others. This is most appropriate, since Jesus said, “You received free, give free.” (Matt. 10:8) Our doing so requires sacrifices of time and also money to cover the expenses of transportation. However, there is no need to feel that we must bear all of the costs for the literature we place with persons in the field. Compared with the expensive popular magazines and books of today, our literature is still available for a reasonable contribution. Usually this is within the reach of just about everyone in this country. The very small contribution that is asked enhances the value of the literature to the householder. There is no reason for anyone to feel he is selling literature just because he asks for a small contribution to cover printing and distribution costs.
9 May all of us continue to value the Society’s publications highly and aid those we meet in our ministry to do the same, for the knowledge our literature provides can lead to everlasting life.—John 17:3.

