R1099 : page 1 

VOL. X. 

ALLEGHENY, PA., MARCH, 1889. 

NO. 5. 



page 1 

Zion's Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: No. 151 Robinson St., Allegheny, Pa. 
C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

DOMESTIC, -Fifty cents a year, in advance, by Draft, P.O. 
Money Order, or Registered Letter. 

FOREIGN,-Three shillings per year. Remit by Foreign Postal 
Money Order. 

TO POOR SAINTS. 

This paper will be sent free to the interested of the Lord's poor, 
who will send a card yearly requesting it. "Ho, every one that 
thirsteth, come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, 
come ye, buy and eat— yea, come, buy wine and milk without 
money and without price. " And you who have it- "Wherefore 
do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your labor 
for that which satisfieth not? Hearken diligently— and eat ye that 
which is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness." - 
ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



Entered as SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER, at the P.O., 
Allegheny, Pa. 



page 1 

DO NOT send us Foreign or Canadian money or stamps. Send 
Money Orders. 



R1099 : page 1 

YOUR SUBSCRIPTION FOR THIS YEAR. 

Look up your memorandum; see whether your subscription is 
expired. Did you renew it for the present year? 

It is past our usual time for revising our list and striking off the 
names of all who have not renewed their subscription for the 
present year. We must do so now. None need expect the next 
issue, except those who have renewed in one of the three 
following ways;- 

lst, By paying the amount due in advance; or 

2nd, By sending a card or letter, saying -"Please renew my 
subscription for the TOWER for the present year. I cannot 
conveniently send the money at present, but will do so as soon 
as possible-I hope during the year;" or 

3d, By sending a card or letter to the TOWER TRACT 
SOCIETY, saying, "I am so circumstanced that I cannot pay for 
the WATCH TOWER for the present year- (aged, invalid or 
whatever)— Yet I am deeply interested in its teachings, and 
desire that my subscription shall be paid for out of the Tract 
fund, as one of the Lord's poor. " 

This arrangement complies with both the letter and spirit of the 
Postal Law, yet provides amply for all the truth-hungry; for none 
are so poor as to be unable to purchase a postal card. And all 
such orders, without money, are as promptly and carefully 
attended to, as those which contain money. If you need to avail 
yourself of this arrangement for the Lord's poor, do not let a 
false pride hinder you. Consider that it is of the Lord and not of 
us, though through us, that the favor comes. It is because we 
partake of his spirit that we take pleasure in distributing the truth 
to you, regardless of your ability to share in the cost of the 
service. Be free then, to accept of our offer. We well know that 
all of the saints would rather, far, contribute to the Tract Fund 
than receive from it— hence we urge you thus to partake of the 
bounties of our Master's table, if you have a relish for the food 
there supplied. 



R1099 : page 1 



OUR SPECIAL ISSUE FOR APRIL AND MAY 

360 PAGES MAGAZINE FORM TO PAID UP 
SUBSCRIBERS ONLY. 

So many appeals have come to hand, from those who feel that 
they cannot afford to purchase MILLENNIAL DAWN Vol. H. 
in cloth binding, desiring that "The Time is at Hand" be issued 
in magazine form, to bring it within the reach of all, that we 
have concluded to issue it as we did Vol. I., "The Plan of the 
Ages;" viz., as a special issue of the WATCH TOWER. 

It is proposed, therefore, that it shall represent the April and 
May issues, No. 6 and 7, of TOWER Vol. X. We expect to mail 
it about April 15th next, to all whose subscriptions on our books 
shall stand renewed for 1889, as above explained, on the first 
day of April next. 

All whose subscriptions for the TOWER come in after May 1st 
'89 will be expected to pay 25 cents for this special issue, or 75 
cents for this year from Jan'y forward. 

This special issue will of course be a great expense to us, but 
reflecting that 

R1100:pagel 

about two thousand, now on our poor list, would not, possibly, 
otherwise get the important truths which Vol. II. presents, 
decided us that such a course would be to the Lord's glory. 
Many of these have waited long for this "meat," hoping that the 
Lord would provide it for them in some manner. And we would 
have presented this subject-matter long ago, in TOWERS of the 
usual shape and size, but the subject is such, and so connected, 
that much of its strength and force would be lost, if spread over 
a year's issues of the TOWER. Besides, the subjects are such as 
will need to be referred to continually, and this would be less 
convenient in our usual shape. In fact, all who can afford it, 
should also have both "The Plan of the Ages" and "The Time at 
Hand" in cloth binding, for preservation and frequent reference. 
And such will surely want some extra copies for their friends, if 
they appreciate the subjects treated. 



Do not hasten through, in reading The Time at Hand. The 
subjects will require at least two readings to get their force and 
beauty. And you will probably find, as so many have written of 
DAWN VOL. I., that the second or third reading was even more 
enjoyable and profitable than the first. So then, the two months 
which that special issue will supply, April and May, can be 
abundantly and profitably occupied by the study of its topics-a 
subject of deep interest to all who have caught a glimpse of the 
Plan of the Ages, and seen that in its sublime culmination, in the 
Millennium, center all our good hopes. None such can be 



indifferent to whatever testimony our Heavenly Father may have 
supplied us with, in the Scripture, touching the time for the 
beginning of the Restitution work of blessing. 



R1100:pagel 

ANNIVERSARY OF OUR LORD'S DEATH. 

For the sake of new readers we mention that it is our custom to 
commemorate our Lord's death once a year, upon the recurrence 
of its anniversary. 

To all who truly realize that the "wages of sin is death" -and that 
the ransom given for all, by our dear Redeemer, was his life,— 
his death, his cross, must always be the central point of interest 
from which all our hopes of future life and blessing emanate. All 
such will esteem it a privilege to commemorate the dying love, 
the redeeming love, the enduring love, the powerful love 
manifested at Calvary. Greater love hath no man than this, that a 
man lay down his life for his friends. But the love of God is 
specially commendable, as beyond all other loves in that it was 
while we were yet sinners and enemies, that Christ died for us, 
the just for the unjust, that he might lead us to God; that he 
might have the right and opportunity of effecting human 
restitution to the state of perfection and harmony with God, 
forfeited by Adam's transgression. 

As foreseeing this desire in his loyal followers, and as indicating 
his approval of it, and the propriety of it, our Lord instituted that 
very simple, yet very impressive remembrancer known as "The 
Last Supper." It was instituted the day before the beginning of 
the Passover Festival, —in the same night in which he was 
betrayed, and in the same day in which he was crucified;— the 
14th day of the month Nisan. 

The Hebrews reckoned their day differently from what we do. 
With them it began at sunset or at 6 o'clock P.M. Thus it was 
that our Lord and the apostles could eat the Last Supper 
probably about 8 o'clock, then go to the Garden of Gethsemane, 
to Pilate and Herod and be crucified the same day in the 
afternoon. Probably it was in view of the fact that both the 
symbolic supper in commemoration of our Lord's death, and the 
death itself, might be upon one and the same day, that the 
Hebrews had the custom mentioned, of reckoning the 24 hour 
day as beginning with the night. Again, the night represents the 
dark period of sin, and sleep in death, to be followed by the 
glorious and everlasting day, of resurrection and heavenly light 
and blessing, which begins with the rising of the Millennial Sun 
of Righteousness with healing in his beams. 

The fact that the Lord instituted his memorial supper of bread 
and wine as taking the place of the Paschal Supper of the literal 



lamb, coupled with the fact that the Passover lamb and the 
deliverance from Egypt which followed the eating of it, were 
typical of the Lamb of God and the deliverance of all who 
partake of his merits, leads us to recognize the propriety of 
commemorating on its anniversary, the death of its antitype, "the 
Lamb of God who taketh away the sins of the world, " as the 
only intended and proper and significant time. We believe too, 
that this was what our Lord intended to be understood by his 
words, "As oft as ye do this, do it in remembrance of me;" i.e., 
as often as ye celebrate this Passover Supper, henceforth, you 
who believe in me as the antitype, the Lamb of God, should 
think of me and the real passing over due at the resurrection, and 
not any longer do this in commemoration of the typical lamb 
and the typical deliverance from Egypt. 

Christians in every age have recognized the propriety of 
celebrating in some manner this great event of Calvary, and the 
purchase of the life of the world there effected; and many 
commemorate "Good Friday" and "Easter Sunday" in 
remembrance of the crucifixion and resurrection. But as for 
celebrating the Lord's death in the Supper, upon its anniversary, 
the very commemoration which he approved, that has been lost 
sight of for now nearly sixteen hundred years. It was dropped 
from policy, for two reasons: First, because of the animosity 
engendered between professed Christians and Jews: to cut the 
cord which would link the new religion with the old, for fear of 
the influence of other Jewish rites and customs over Christians; 
and secondly, because when Papacy had general control the 
"Sacrifice of the Mass" (which claims to be a fresh sacrifice of 
Christ repeatedly) was substituted for the one and true death, 
which alone and once for all time, taketh away the sins of the 
world. 

Protestants coming out of papal darkness generally saw enough 
to lead them to reject the Mass-"the abomination"-and to re- 
establish the Lord's Supper in much of its early simplicity. They 
are in doubt, however, as to how often it is proper to celebrate it; 
some doing so every Sunday, some monthly, some quarterly, 
etc. 

Scripture evidence upon the subject, however, removes all 
doubts and conjectures, and presents the ordinance in its 
primitive simplicity, and full of typical significance. As this 
subject was treated at some length in our issue of March 1888, 
we refer new readers to the article, "This Do in Remembrance of 
Me," in that number. We have a few copies on hand which we 
will be pleased to supply gratis, to such as are desirous of 
studying the subject from this standpoint. 

It is our custom to celebrate this event on its anniversary as 
reckoned by the Jews— the reckoning followed by the apostles 
and the early church in general— lunar, not solar time. Following 



the lunar time exactly, as the early church did, the celebration 
may fall upon any one of the 

R1100:page2 

days of the week. * This year it will be upon Sunday evening 
April 14th (after six o'clock). At six o'clock of that evening, the 
14th day of the Hebrew month Nisan begins, and lasts until 
Monday evening at six o'clock, where the 15th of Nisan 
commences the first day of the seven days festival of the Jews, 
called the Feast of Passover. We, however, do not celebrate their 
feast, neither do we use the literal lamb. Ours is the antitypical, 
the true Lamb of God, of whom the bread and wine are but 
emblems. And by and by we shall celebrate the antitype of their 
seven days feast of rejoicing, when all of God's people (all who 
have and will come into harmony with him, typified by Israel), 
shall have passed the Red sea of sin and its consequence, death, 
and stand on its further shore; and when Satan and all his willing 
followers with their slings and spears and chariots of evil devise, 
who now seek to hold in bondage, the firstborn (the church) 
and all who desire to follow them and to serve the Lord, shall be 
finally and everlastingly overwhelmed in death— the lasting or 
second death. These and their final destruction were typified by 
Pharaoh and his horsemen, overwhelmed in the Red sea. From 
that calamity all who were under the blood of the Lamb were 
saved,-not only the firstborn saved (spared) in that night (the 
present Gospel age), but also all the hosts of the Lord who 
followed their lead the next (the Millennial) morning. 

Wherever two or three or more believers in the efficacy of the 
precious blood of our Lamb can do so, let them not forget to 
assemble themselves and "do this" in remembrance of him who 
did so much for us. But while desirous of thus meeting as many 
members of the Lord's body as possible, do not urge any, nor 
feel that numbers, or the presence of any particular one of your 
company, is essential; indeed meet the Lord alone and celebrate 
his great sacrifice if you can find no others near you who would 
enjoy the privilege with you. 

Think not that the handling and commemorating of this simple 
ordinance belongs to a special class, called the "clergy," as some 
teach and as many believe. The Lord recognizes no such caste 
among 

R1101 : page 2 

his true followers, but declares, "all ye are brethren, and one is 
your Master, even Christ. " All ye are ministers (servants) of 
Christ; all ye are preachers (declarers) of the good tidings, 
showing it in your cheerful words and looks and deeds, as well 
as telling it with your tongues and pens and through the printed 
page; all ye are priests, not of human ordination, but by divine 
acceptance as members of the body of our great High Priest— 
"the High Priest of our order"- "the Royal Priesthood" "after 



[like] the order of Melchizedek."-Matt. 23:8; Rev. 1:6; Heb. 
3:1; 4:14; 7:21. 

But while not seeking the company of any but the consecrated, 
be not close-communionists; attempt not to decide the rights of 
others at the Lord's table. If some of whom you disapprove draw 
near and desire to commemorate, remember that one at the table 
with the Lord was a deceiver and that very night betrayed him 
for money. If the Lord endured Judas, until the devil whom he 
served led him to "go out," so can you wait for the separation to 
come voluntarily, on the part of a similar class now. 

It has been the custom of the church at Allegheny to invite all 
who can do so to meet with us here, to celebrate, and so far as 
possible to entertain those who come from a distance; and this 
invitation is warmly extended again, this year. Come, all who 
can; that we may celebrate our Redeemer's sacrifice, and in the 
three days following contemplate its fulness and sufficiency— as 
regards the consecrated church now, and as regards "all the 
families of the earth" shortly. Wait not for any further or private 
invitation. All who come will be welcomed, and this is your 
special invitation. But, let none come with bitterness of heart, or 
pride, or vain-glory; but with hearts overflowing with love to the 
Redeemer, and full of desire to know him, and to know his will 
and plan and our respective privileges therein more perfectly, let 
us meet. 

Decide as soon as possible whether you can probably come. If 
you think you will come, please write us a letter or postal card 
on this one subject alone. Give your address very plainly and 
mention if others will be with you, what rail-road you will take, 
and when you expect to arrive here. 

In reply to inquiries, whether there will be an opportunity during 
the meeting for water baptism (in symbolization of the real 
baptism or immersion into Christ- into his death) we would say, 
Yes! good opportunity. Both the "Baptists" and the "Disciples" 
have kindly placed their baptistries, robes, etc., at our disposal, 
for several years past. So many as feel that they have already 
been immersed into Christ, and are desirous of following the 
example of the Lord and the apostles, in the water symbol, will 
have the opportunity afforded them in the afternoon of Sunday 
April 14th. All such are requested to study the subject carefully 
with their Bible, Concordance and the May 1888 WATCH 
TOWER. Twenty-three rejoicingly availed themselves of this 
privilege just before our last Anniversary Supper. But we urge 
no one to thus openly confess his consecration. Nor do we make 
it a test of fellowship: we believe, however, that sooner or later 
the fully consecrated will be led to see the beauty and propriety 
of the water-symbol, and that whenever seen it becomes a test of 
the depth of our consecration, the reality of our death with 
Christ to the world and its opinions. 



The bread used by the Lord was unleavened bread, bread made 
without yeast rising, much like water crackers but in large thin 
sheets. If you can procure such bread from a Hebrew family, do 
so; or if more convenient use water crackers. Not that it is 
essential to have bread made without yeast, for "we are not 
under Law" but controlled by love and privilege in this, as in the 
matter of the time of observing the supper. But as we desire to 
observe at the proper time, when we see its special 
appropriateness, so in the matter of the bread, when we see it to 
be a symbol or representation of our Lord's body, and when we 
learn that leaven or yeast is used in the Scriptures as a symbol of 
corruption and sin, we naturally desire to use as pure a bread- 
symbol as we can conveniently obtain, to represent the pure 
One— holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from the race of 
sinners. 

The wine used by our Lord, to represent his shed blood, we have 
no doubt was made (as "orthodox" Hebrews still make their 
Passover wine) without any yeast or leaven being added to the 
grape juice to hasten fermentation. But nevertheless it was 
fermented wine; the elements of fermentation inhering in the 
grape juice, led by slower process to fermentation and 
clarification, and thus it became "wine." But while it is clear to 
us, that the wine used by our Lord at the Supper, was pure wine 
(but not simple grape juice, which would not keep without 
fermentation from fall to spring) and of the same sort mentioned 
elsewhere in Scripture, an excess of which would make drunk 
(Eph 5:18; John 2:10; Luke 5:39), still, we feel convinced, as 
we view the havoc made by the adulterated wines and liquors of 
commerce, and the wrecking of health and homes which it has 
accomplished and is accomplishing, that our Lord would neither 
use those adulterated and injurious wines as a symbol of his 
precious life-giving blood, nor any other, even pure wine, 
calculated to awaken or revive an appetite for alcoholic liquors. 
We believe that he would regard in this matter the growing 
weakness of our dying race. And when we thus judge of our 
Lord's sentiments on the subject, and reflect that the celebration 
of his death in the use of emblems is not a command, but a 
privilege, we see that as it would not be wrong for us to use 
leavened bread, so it would not be a wrong, nor a neglect of the 
ordinance, for us to use something that will not tempt any, as a 
substitute for the wine; especially as this principle is strongly 
inculcated by the apostle, who says, "It is good neither to eat 
flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy brother 
stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak." "If meat make my 
brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world standeth, 
lest I make my brother to offend." -Rom. 14:21; 1 Cor. 8:13. 

What can we use instead of wine? We can do as the Hebrews 
used to do during the Passover week in which all leaven was 
forbidden them under the law. If their supply of wine ran short 
and they could obtain no more into which they were certain that 



no leaven or yeast had been put to hasten fermentation, they 
made of raisins a substitute for wine, equally a "fruit of the 
vine." We can all easily do the same. Get the common raisins, 
which are strongest in sugar, and after stewing them in a little 
water strain off and use the juice. And will not this be as really a 
"fruit of the vine" as though it were real wine? Therefore while 
not claiming that our Lord and the apostles used raisin-juice or 
grape-juice, but the real wine, we believe that because of our 
climate, and the push, drive and fast living of our day, and the 
present weakness of self-control among men, the Lord would 
approve our use of the raisin-juice fruit of the vine, rather than 
real wine, because of the changed circumstances. 



*Those who commemorate Good Friday, Easter Sunday, etc., 
also reckon by lunar time, but not exactly, for they take for their 
anniversaries the Friday and Sunday nearest to the exact lunar 
date. 



R1101 : page 2 

ENTERTAINMENT AT THE MEETING. 

For some years past a few of the friends at Allegheny have 
attempted to entertain all the visitors at these anniversary 
meetings, but as our gatherings increase each year, and will 
probably be much larger this year, this will be no longer 
possible. 

It is proposed this year to divide this honor of serving the Lord's 
body, so as to give a larger number a share in the privilege, by 
dividing the visitors. One of the marks of female saintship in the 
early church was, "if she have washed the saints' feet." (1 Tim. 
5:10.) Feet- washing being a necessity of that time, became a 
synonym of service and kindly hospitality. To illustrate this 
same principle of service and humility, our Lord used this same 
custom on the night of the Last Supper: and the entertainment of 
any of the household of faith, is really the fulfilment of our 
Lord's injunction, "See that ye wash one another's feet." But 
none should be permitted to overdo themselves in this blessed 
service, nor to deprive themselves of the spiritual communion of 
the meetings: to this end all have been urged to make only very 
simple arrangements, that both visitors and entertainers may 
have their principal feast upon the spiritual meat. Come then, 
expecting a warm welcome to such plain things as we have 
ourselves. 

Endeavor to reach Allegheny on Saturday afternoon or evening, 
April 13th, and come direct to our office, 151 Robinson Street, 
where some one will remain to meet you until 9 o'clock P.M. 



Those who may arrive on Sunday morning, April 14th, should 
come direct to our Meeting Room, No. 101 Federal Street, 
Allegheny, where there will be meetings at 10 A.M., 2 P.M., 
Baptism service at 4.30 P.M., and the Anniversary services at 
7.30 P.M. The hours for meetings on succeeding days will be 
arranged later. 

*** 

For the information of the friends, we announce, that we have 
arranged with restaurant-keepers here, so that all can have 
dinner and supper, near our hall, at 10 cents each,-no more than 
car-fare would cost you: the difference being made up by some 
of the friends here. Come to the morning meeting, therefore, 
with all your arrangements made to spend the entire day in 
spiritual communion. 



page 2 

EXCURSION RATES TO THE MEETING. 

The following Rail Roads offer us special rates, on the terms 
mentioned below: 

New York Central R.R. and branches. 

Baltimore and Ohio R.R. and branches. 

Pennsylvania R.R. and branches. -In fact all rail-roads, members 
of "The Central Traffic Association," and "The Trunk Line 
Association. " And these include most of the Rail Roads as far 
West as the Mississippi river. 

The reduction allowed, is one-third off the price of the first-class 
limited fare. 

To obtain this reduction, the following directions must be 
carefully followed, viz., Apply to the ticket agent of any of the 
roads named above (the one in your own town, or the nearest 
station to it on one of these roads). Ask him for a certificate with 
a first class limited ticket to Pittsburgh, Pa. (or better still to 
Allegheny, if their road enters Allegheny, which is just across 
the river from Pittsburgh). This certificate must not be dated 
earlier than April 1 1th, hence you must defer purchasing your 
ticket until ready to start for the meeting, though you had best 
inquire about price of ticket, route, certificate, etc., sooner. 

You will be required to pay the full price for the limited ticket 
coming, but hold on to the certificate, and when properly signed 
by the clerk of our meeting here, you will be supplied a first 
class ticket back home, over the same route you came; at one 
third the usual first-class price,- good to reach home on, by or 
before April 21st. Follow these instructions carefully and you 
will have no difficulty whatever. 



To all who write to us, as above suggested, saying they think of 
coming to the meeting, we will mail a sample of the sort of 
certificate they should expect to get (properly filled and signed) 
from their R.R. ticket agent. 



R1102:page3 



ENTERING IN. 



Why don't you enter in? 

Into the work that calls for you, 

Into the promises grand and true, 

Into the inheritance that waits: 

Why stand and weep without the gates, 

O sorrowing one? 

You say you cannot see 

Why, if He loves, He grieves you so, 

Why thro' this path He made you go; 

if you'll enter in to-day, 

He'll show you in His own sweet way, 
Dear suffering one. 

But you will enter in, 

1 am so sure, some blissful day, 
And then, you'll joy to hear Him say, 
Why you have suffered and wept so sore, 
And you will see your sorrow was the door 
To let you in. 

"He lets us in,- 

O Alchemist divine, O wondrous sight! 

Our counted tears all changed to jewels bright, 

When we have entered in the secret place, 

Where He reveals the wonders of His grace. 

Then we can see the "all things" of His Word! 

When we have fully entered into the will of God. 



-Selected. 



R1102:page3 



OUR BODY, NOW AND HEREAFTER. 

"For our conversation [lit. community-the government or 
polity in which we are sharers] is in heaven, from whence also 
we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change 
our vile [ignoble] body that it may be fashioned like unto his 
glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even 
to subdue all things unto himself." -Phil. 3:19,20. 



There is a very general misunderstanding among Christians 
with reference to the body here mentioned by the apostle. He is 
here supposed to teach that these human bodies are to be 
changed and made like Christ's glorious body; and that the 
promise is to all of mankind who will be saved. But, while it is 
true, and elsewhere taught, that the "little flock" shall be 
changed and given spiritual bodies like that of Christ, and that 
they will thus be like him, yet, this is not what the apostle is here 
teaching. It should be noticed that the word body is not plural, 
but singular; and that this letter is addressed to the saints in 
Christ. And since the apostle likens the church to a human body, 
the head of which represents our Lord, and the various other 
members the individual members of the church, we are 
warranted from the context in believing that the body to which 
he here refers, is the church, and that this is another instance in 
which he employs this figure. 

The body or the church, in its present condition, is called a vile 
body, not because it is actually vile, but because it is so 
considered by the world. In the Emphatic Diaglott it is 
translated, "the body of our humiliation. " And this body, the 
church, which in God's estimation is a holy body, a body 
justified, and consecrated to his service, and therefore 
acceptable to him, and by him anointed for the glorious work of 
carrying into execution his great plan of salvation by the 
restitution of all things, is to be changed from its present 
condition of humiliation to a glorious condition-to a condition 
suitable to its real character, and the high position it is destined 
to fill as the bride of Christ. 

While, in God's estimation, the church is now regarded from the 
standpoint of her future exaltation as a glorious body, yet now, 
in the estimation of men, she is despised, rejected and hated, as 
was her Lord; because the world knows her not even as it knew 
him not. The world does not realize that this body, now in 
humiliation, is a body of kings and priests who shall by and by 
bear rule over angels and men. If they thought so, the saints 
would be very differently regarded and treated. They have found 
their Lord's prediction fully verified in their experience,-"Ye 
shall be hated of all men for my name's sake." (Matt. 10:22.) 
They must, however, be patient in their humiliation and 
suffering unto the coming of the Lord. Their exaltation and 
glory is not due until then. 

Though our Lord was changed from his condition of 
humiliation, and highly exalted to his present glorious condition 
nearly two thousand years ago, mankind in general is not even 
yet aware of his exaltation. Though they hear the church speak 
of it, they see no evidence of it, and have no faith in what they 
hear. The time when his glory will be manifested to all, so that 
none shall fail to recognize it, will be at his second advent; and 
we are further assured that the church's exaltation and glory 



shall occur, and shall be manifested at the same time- "When 
Christ ...shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in 
glory." (Col. 3:4.) Then, the church shall in reality be a glorious 
body, a body suitable in every way for the high position she 
shall fill as the bride of Christ-the companion of the Son of God 
for all eternity, his joint-heir in all things, and his efficient and 
thoroughly capable co-worker in the great mission to which 
Jehovah hath appointed the Christ-head and body-bridegroom 
and bride. Together they shall constitute the great Prophet, Priest 
and King whom Jehovah hath anointed; and their glory shall 
appear to all intelligent creatures in heaven and in earth. 

But before this glorious exaltation, must come the deep 
humiliation of every member; and if we have no part in the 
humiliation, we have no share in the glory; for only the meek, 
the humble, faithful ones who prove their loyalty to the divine 
will by most severe and humbling tests, will be worthy. They 
must manifest their disposition toward God by obedience even 
unto death; strengthened while walking down into the very 
depths of humiliation, by faith in the promise of God, to exalt 
them in due time. We must close our eyes and ears to the world, 
let them think and talk of us as they will, only giving no real 
occasion, by any actions which our enlightened conscience 
cannot approve. We must be willing to be counted a "vile body, " 
the refuse and dross of society, the offscouring of the church, 
and as fools and fanatics to be persecuted for righteousness sake. 
We must be willing to do good, to forward the truth and to 
suffer for it, and to continue on in the course directed by God, 
regardless of the losses and sufferings it will cost; through all 
waiting patiently, until in his own good time, God shall make 
our righteousness to shine forth as the noon-day, and silence all 
our opposers.-Psa. 37:6. 

Not forgetting that there is but one such body let us look about 
us to discover it. Is it the great Roman Catholic Church?- Or the 
Episcopal, or the Lutheran, or the Baptist, or the Methodist, or 
the Congregational, or any of the numerous other religious 
"bodies" or organizations known by distinctive names? Are any 
of these organizations despised, rejected and counted "vile" by 
the world? No, not one of them. From the least to the greatest 
they are all respected, and thought and spoken well of; but the 
measure of their respect and esteem among men, is always in 
proportion to their numbers and wealth. Some of the smaller 
organizations, comparing their own with the larger and more 
influential, might say they are lightly esteemed and less favored 
by the world, but this does not answer the description of the true 
church. God's Word points out the true church, not by naming 
the organization, but by naming certain features by which it can 
be recognized. 

First of all, he would have us bear in mind that there is but one 
true church (Col. 1:24; Heb. 12:23), and that other organizations 



called churches are not so recognized by him. Secondly, that this 
one church which God recognizes, is only a "little flock." (Luke 
12:32.) So we need not be on the outlook for the largest 
organization as the true church of Christ. Thirdly, we are 
informed, that this "little flock" does not contain many of the 
rich, or great, or wise according to the wisdom of this world. (1 
Cor. 1 :26.) It may contain some of the rich and learned, but not 
many. The rich and learned generally esteem the honors of this 
world (which their riches and learning secure), too highly to 
associate themselves with the humble and despised. Fourthly, it 
is shown that while the church does not contain many of this 
class, it is composed almost entirely of the poor of this world. 
(James 2:5.) And though they are not generally learned, neither 
are they ignorant; for they are close students of God's Word and 
learned in the Scriptures; and the heavenly wisdom derived 
therefrom, gives them an education to which the wisdom of this 
world can never attain. 

Fifthly, all the members of this little church are to be known, 
chiefly, by the spirit they manifest, which is the spirit of Christ; 
for, "If any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his. " 
(Rom. 8:9.) He is not recognized of God as a member of the 
church, however much he may profess to be. But here there is 
some danger of being mistaken, unless we observe very closely 
what the spirit of Christ is; for the world and nominal 

R1103:page3 

Christians have, and very positively assert, their idea of the 
spirit of Christ, and bitterly oppose those who truly manifest his 
spirit. Their idea of the spirit of Christ, is simply that of a 
tranquil, peaceful disposition, which manifests itself always and 
only in kind deeds and kind words which the world can 
recognize as such— a disposition which can never be roused to 
indignation, and to words and actions manifesting it. Study 
carefully the spirit manifested by our Lord, and you will find 
that while he was courteous and kind, he expressed his righteous 
indignation against evil-doers, and particularly against 
hypocritical evil-doers, who pretended to be faithful servants of 
God, and exemplary keepers of the law. He never avoided 
declaring the truth, even though it placed him in direct 
opposition to all the religious teachers of his day. And so far 
from maintaining peace and order, was the course which he 
pursued, that to those who had the same idea now so prevalent— 
that his words and actions should always be for peace-he said, 
"Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to 
send peace, but a sword; for I am come to set a man at variance 
against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the 
daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law; and a man's foes 
shall be they of his own household. He that loveth father or 
mother more than me is not worthy of me: and he that loveth son 
or daughter more than me is not worthy of me. And he that 



taketh not his cross and followeth after me is not worthy of me. " 
(Matt. 10:34-37.) Mark also, that the spirit of our Lord was one 
of meekness and humility, and that so he taught his disciples, 
saying, "Take my yoke upon you and learn of me; for I am meek 
and lowly in heart. " In him, truth, humility and love found an 
exponent, who at the same time was bold as a lion in their true 
defense. Though we will not find the spirit of the Master exactly 
duplicated in the members of the true church, we will at least 
find in every member a measure of that spirit, and an effort and 
progress toward a fuller development of it, some being much 
more advanced than others. 

Finally, we are told, that the true church is to be found walking 
in a very narrow way which few find, and in which fewer yet 
care to walk. It is the way of sacrifice, of suffering for 
righteousness' sake, and of humiliation even unto death. 

This class with such experiences as we have described, would be 
esteemed by the world a very miserable "body" as well as a very 
ignoble one; but in this they are mistaken also, for not only is it 
very honorable and destined to exceeding glory and honor in 
God's due time, but it is also a very happy, joyful "body." Those 
of its members who sacrifice, suffer and endure most in the 
cause they serve-the Lord and the truth-are "always rejoicing" 
and "in everything giving thanks." They have a "peace which 
passeth all understanding" and a "joy which no man taketh from 
them; " because, having done the Father's will, they know of 
Christ's doctrine (John 7:17), and "the light of the knowledge of 
God as it shines forth in Christ, hath shined into their hearts (2 
Cor. 4:6), giving beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, 
the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness (Isa. 61:3), for 
as much as they "know that their labor is not in vain in the 
Lord," and that what he hath promised he also will perform. 
Hence these, outwardly buffeted, have the greatest peace at 
heart; and these, outwardly troubled, have the deepest real joys— 
the joys of the Lord. 

Here is the description of the church. But comparing it carefully 
with every organization great and small, we find that not one of 
them answers the description. The true church is not a visibly 
organized body, and is not known among men as a church at all. 
Many of its members have been, and some still are, in the 
various nominal churches, and others are separate from all of 
them, so that you cannot point them out as a visible company 
and say to the world, This company is the true church. But, "The 
Lord knoweth them that are his" (2 Tim. 2:19), and they know 
each other wherever found, by the description which God has 
given. During this entire age it has been in existence, and has 
always been known and loved of God and nourished and 
sustained by him, though its scattered members have grown up 
as wheat in the midst of tares. Now, in the time of harvest, they 
may be more readily discerned as a company than ever before 



(except in the beginning of the age, before the tares began to 
mix in with them and to overshadow and hide them), because 
the Lord is calling them out, and separating them from the tares; 
and the table he has spread before them in the very presence of 
their enemies— the glorious truths now in due season revealed to 
them-is attracting them— in person so far as possible, and into 
sympathy and co-operation, however far separated personally. 

Bear in mind, then, fellow-Christian, that this body, the church, 
which is to be changed and made glorious like her Lord, at his 
appearing, is now a vile (ignoble) body in the estimation both of 
the world and nominal Christians; that her present condition is 
as the body of humiliation; and that her chief ambition and effort 
now, is to use all her powers to the best advantage for the 
Master's glory, in the advancement of his cause and in the 
interests 

R1103:page4 

of his kingdom, rejoicing even in the midst of present 
persecutions, in hope of the coming glory, now shortly to be 
revealed. And if any Christian would make his calling and 
election sure, he must see that he is one of this "vile body, " 
bearing some of the reproach of Christ. The present humiliation 
and sacrifice of the church, as well as her more glorious future 
work, is all for the grand purpose of subduing all things unto 
Christ. It is the indirect means which has for its grand ultimate 
object the restitution of all things. 

Such being the hope of the church, her interests are not in the 
things of this present time— what shall we eat, and what shall we 
drink, and wherewithal shall we be clothed?— how shall we plan 
for the future comforts and good things of this life, etc., etc.? 
These are not the questions of chief interest among the saints. 
The King and kingdom to which they owe allegiance are 
heavenly, and wherever the forwarding of their interests requires 
the sacrifice of earthly good things, that sacrifice for that object 
becomes a pleasure; and hence the saints have no interests here 
which they do not expect to sacrifice for the interests of that 
kingdom in which they shall be sharers, and to which they are 
even now heirs and reckoned of God as sharers. They count that 
already their citizenship is in that heavenly kingdom, and that 
here they are merely aliens and foreigners. 

Therefore, under the kingdoms of this world they have a right to 
expect only such rights and privileges as are accorded to aliens 
and foreigners, yet they know that even such rights and 
privileges may in many cases be denied them; for now "the 
kingdom of heaven [represented by the church] suffereth 
violence," and it shall continue to suffer violence to some extent 
until it is set up in glory and power. 

The "body" of Christ in its present condition of humiliation, is 
actually a very imperfect body, though reckoned perfect through 



the imputed righteousness of Christ; for we have the heavenly 
treasure —our new, transformed mind— in earthen vessels, full of 
imperfections inherited through the fall. These we strive 
continually to overcome; yet we shall never be fully able to 
eradicate them all. Our weaknesses of mind and body and bias 
of disposition, must be fought down, and kept under, every inch 
of the way. Inherited, and formerly cultivated, sinful 
dispositions, such as pride, love of display and praise of men, 
love of ease, selfishness, indolence, and every other sinful 
propensity, will prove a means of discipline to us in our efforts 
to overcome them, and to oppose them by doing the will of God. 
And the patience with which we bear with each other, as we 
gradually grow up into Christ, will prove the measure of our 
love both for each other and for our Lord, whose we all are. 

The various members of the body of Christ, knit together in 
love, should bear with each other, giving and receiving reproof 
in the spirit of meekness; each being careful not to put a 
stumbling-block or cause of offence in his brother's way; or if he 
has unwittingly done so, to quickly remove it as soon as he is 
made conscious of it. We are not to judge one another after the 
flesh but after the spirit, remembering that the flesh warreth 
against the spirit, and that it requires a desperate struggle in 
many cases to keep it down. If a brother through the weakness 
of the flesh has stumbled, remember it was through his 
weakness, and be patient and helpful, unless he manifests no 
disposition to regret it or to reform, in which case he needs 
counsel and reproof; for unless he reform he will be considered 
by the Lord as unworthy and will be cut off from the body. 

In the preceding verses, Paul speaks of some in his day, who 
after identifying themselves with the church, became the 
enemies of the cross of Christ by walking after the flesh and 
minding earthly things, and shows that the end of such a course 
is destruction. He warned the church against such, that they 
might not assimilate with, or recognize them, or be deceived by 
them into the idea that we can mind the earthly things, giving 
our effort and time and attention and interest to them, and still 
be of the little flock which God recognizes as his church, the 
body of Christ. 

Our citizenship is in heaven and all our interests are there, while 
here we are mere strangers and pilgrims, living only for that 
which is beyond. 



R1104:page4 



AS BECOMETH WOMEN 
PROFESSING GODLINESS. 



NO. 4. 



CHRISTIAN WOMEN AS REAPERS 
IN THE GOSPEL HARVEST. 

Now we wish to talk a little to those sisters in Christ who have 
some talents, however great or small, which they desire to make 
use of in the interest of the great harvest work. We have nothing 
to say at present to those Christian women who find both the 
center and circumference of their desires and efforts to do good, 
within the comparatively narrow sphere of home, except that 
they are living far below their privilege, and that selfishness, and 
not the glory of God chiefly, is the mainspring of their efforts 
whether they yet realize the fact or not. 

Let us not be too quick to conclude that we have no talents. All 
the called ones have at least one, though the majority have more. 
Remember that health, money, time, influence, mental activity, 
education, and every advantage we possess, is a talent, to be 
used or abused. And while we should not think of ourselves 
more highly than we ought to think, neither should we underrate 
our abilities. We should think of ourselves soberly, and take as 
nearly as possible a correct estimate, in order that we may make 
the best possible use of our powers. 

We have heretofore shown the principles which should govern 
Christian women in all their work-that modesty of demeanor, 
dress, etc., should always be observed, and that every thing 
approaching a boastful, heady, high-minded spirit should be 
studiously avoided. Bearing this in mind, let us inquire then-In 
what way can we do harvest work to the best advantage? 

On this point several suggestions might be made. They will not 
fit every case and some of them may be impracticable in many 
cases, but we can make use of any or all of them as we find 
ability and opportunity. We should not forget that the strongest 
influence is generally that which comes closest to the heart, and 
here is woman's opportunity. The truth may be presented ever so 
clearly and eloquently in a public discourse, and the majority of 
its hearers will soon forget it in the multitude of other cares. But 
a woman whose heart is filled with the truth and the spirit of the 
truth, can drop in for a neighborly call and brush away the 
rubbish of care, water the seed with a little Christian sympathy, 
warm it with the happy sunshine of her living faith, and loosen 
the soil about it by tenderly showing how helpful such a faith is 
in lightening the cares of life, and how much it has done for 
herself in this way. 



A woman's natural and quick perception, too, generally shows 
her how far to go, and when to stop. Cultivate this faculty; it is a 
natural talent to be used for the Master's glory. 

Then, is any one sick in your neighborhood? You are generally 
welcome with your helping hand, your cheerful smile, and 
words of comfort, both to the sick and to the anxious friends 
who watch over them. Let your words be seasoned with the 
hope of the gospel, in such measure as may be most helpful to 
them, while your kindly offices give them confidence in your 
Christian spirit of love and self-sacrifice, and prepare the soil for 
the reception of the truth. Sometimes you will find it expedient 
to thus prepare the soil by more or less acquaintance before you 
drop any of the seeds into it. In this be wise and harmless, as the 
Master directs, but not too slow and over cautious else you will 
fail of your important work. 

Then remember, "the poor you have always with you;" and 
generally they are the class most ready to receive the truth. 
Some of them may be rough and rude and by no means 
congenial to your tastes. And when you were of the world you 
may have shunned them, and thus incurred their displeasure. Ah, 
what a mission you have here! and what a test, too, of your 
standing, and measure of your growth. Stop first and measure 
yourself, before you think of what you can accomplish in this 
way. Is your former pride crucified, so that you would not be 
ashamed to be seen with that coarse, uncouth neighbor, or to be 
called her friend, if thereby you can feed her with the bread of 
life? Would you be ashamed to say before your friends, as the 
Lord said to Zaccheus (Luke 19:5), I will dine with thee to-day, 
or Thou shalt dine with me? Have you learned to mind not high 
things, but to condescend to men and women of low estate, for 
the privilege of helping them up? (Rom. 12:16.)-and that, too, 
not in a condescending, patronizing way, but with true sisterly 
sympathy and love, manifested in your kindly courteous 
manner, plainness of dress, and simplicity of home 
appointments? 

If so, you can carry the blessed tidings to many a lowly, and to 
many a wretched home. And among them you will occasionally 
find one of the Lord's precious jewels, perhaps unfortunately 
united to a depraved character who calls himself husband, 
though he never knew the meaning of the name, and never filled 
the office. Crushed under a load of care and sorrow, and 
shunned by the more fortunate, what a comfort and blessing you 
may be, with your true friendship and the good tidings of great 
joy. 

Then there are children in your neighborhood. The children of 
the rich you may not be able to reach, but the children of the 
poor may be reached, if you use tact and discretion. You might 
gather a class of children about you to meet with yours at stated 
times, and then tell them the old, old story in as pleasing and 



simple a way as you can. Inspire the little ones with the hope of 
the glorious restitution of all things to Edenic glory and beauty. 
Paint the glowing details before the simple mind of a childhood 
and let them carry it home, being careful not to give meat too 
strong. Your own children, too, carefully instructed, may be 
little messengers of God. If they like the service, tell them they 
are God's little angels (messengers) and that all their little 
services are appreciated in heaven, where their names are 
written and they are personally beloved. 

As to your children's associations, you need to bear in mind that 
"evil communications corrupt good manners;" and, therefore, in 
the impressible period of childhood it will not do to let your 
children mingle indiscriminately with others, much as you may 
love the parents and desire to show yourself friendly to them and 
theirs. Indeed they will be better, especially in these days, to be 
kept to themselves as much as possible. And if your principles 
on this point are made known to your friends, they will not 
misunderstand, but will probably endeavor to imitate you. On 
very special occasions, however, you might find it expedient to 
call in your neighbors' children, even if they are rude and ill- 
mannered, that yours may treat them kindly and show 
themselves friendly. Under your eye, politeness and kindness 
and good feeling will readily take the place of rude ways. The 
strongest characters to resist evil are not those who never meet 
it, but those who do meet it, and overcome it. If your children at 
school and in the neighborhood meet rude children, and their 
rudeness is never commented upon or discountenanced by you, 
they will surely imitate it. Yet such comments should always be 
with charity and pity, and should never be made before others. 
While you teach your children to dislike the evil, teach them 
also to love and pity the evil-doer, as God does, and to study 
how they may help them. Be on the alert for all such 
opportunities, and by so doing you will develop strong 
characters able to resist the evil, which sooner or later they must 
meet, and to overcome it with good. Thus trained, you will soon 
have them as active co-workers with you and with God in the 
great work. 

If worldly ambitions for your children as well as for yourself, 
have been sacrificed —as they must be with the faithful, 
consecrated ones— and your chief desire for them is to have them 
faithful, humble and competent servants of God, you have here a 
grand opportunity to prove your faithfulness-or vice versa; and 
it will affect all your plans for them. As a servant of God you 
will bring them up as near to his idea as possible, teaching them 
that the adornments of the mind and heart are the chief 
adornments in God's sight. 

Another quiet unobtrusive way of working would be to visit the 
various churches, particularly their prayer and conference 
meetings and the Methodist class meetings, dropping a 



seasonable word where you can, and observing those who 
appear to be most earnest and devoted to the Lord, in order that 
you may acquaint yourself with them, or hand or mail them 
something to read, or visit them. 

Then again, there are both friends and strangers near and far, 
who may be reached both by personal letters and printed matter. 
Here lies a wonderful fruitful field of labor-practically 
unlimited. Mark, too, your privilege of spreading the cheerful 
meal— not elaborately, but plainly, and such as the humblest 
might imitate-and calling in, not your friends and rich 
neighbors, but any of God's children without respect to their 
earthly condition, who may be blessed by such a season of 
communion with saints. And verily, you shall not lose your 
reward, even in the present life. Remember, too, the old proverb 
which you can apply to advantage in the Lord's service, viz., If 
you would have friends you must show yourself friendly. Teach 
the little ones too, to enjoy and assist in such hospitality with 
you; and show them that 

R1104:page5 

this is the way, God's way, for us to find real happiness-in 
blessing and serving each other. 

On such and on all occasions discountenance everything 
approaching gossip, and show most decidedly that you have 
neither an ear nor a tongue for any such thing, and make some 
features of the truth, or of the harvest work, the topic of 
conversation. 

In such ways the busiest mothers may find places for profitable 
investments of their talents. With such at his coming the Lord 
finds his own, with interest. 

R1105 : page 5 

Then, in addition to these ways, in which it would seem very 
many could engage, there are the more fruitful means, such as 
those free from domestic encumbrances find— in canvassing 
town and city and country, and spreading the truth broadcast in 
printed form, leaving it to do its blessed work in silence, or to be 
watered and cultivated by some neighborly Christians who see 
in this their opportunity for service. But the above means will be 
open to the greatest number. 

Some, not fully understanding the spirit of consecration, may 
feel inclined like a certain class mentioned in one of our Lord's 
parables, to at once make excuse, saying, "I have no time, no 
money to spare for feasting friends and neighbors, too much 
opposition at home to claim such privileges, no talent to talk of 
the truth. I do not like to associate with people I have always 
considered beneath me, or to have my children mingle with 
theirs. I have no special aptitude to serve the sick, and my 



neighbors are generally well again, before I know they have 
been sick, etc." 

Well, then my dear friend, the principle difficulty with you is 
that you are not very anxious to find work in the vineyard; and if 
so, then you are not wanted there. Where there is a will, there is 
always a way to do something. You have not much time, but by 
economy of labor, in simplicity of house-keeping, of cooking, of 
dress, etc., by regularity and system, by seasonable times for 
rising and retiring, etc., and in various ways you can gain some 
time. If you have but little means, do not be too proud to be 
hospitable in a plain simple way. The Lord and his disciples 
often had nothing more than bread and fish. You have 
opposition from the worldly-minded in your home, but why 
allow all your rights to be rudely trampled under foot? If you 
have faithfully served the interests of husband and family these 
many years, or if as a young mother and wife, you are doing so 
now, it is your right and privilege to extend your simple 
hospitality to your friends as well as theirs. And you should 
claim and use the right. As your children grow up let them see 
that you expect their services, and while they are growing speak 
of the time when you will need it. Train them to the idea of 
relieving the cares of father and mother as soon as they are able. 
And as they are able, put little responsibilities on them, and use 
the time so gained in the Master's service. Some selfish, worldly 
husbands need to have this thought kept before them, too; for 
many such will see a faithful wife plod on year after year under 
burdens which they would not touch, and then feel that they are 
greatly wronged, if she seeks to have them lightened, when such 
a thing is possible. But remember that our first allegiance is to 
our heavenly Bridegroom; and where his counsel is called in 
question, there is but one proper course, and that is, loyalty to 
him at any cost. For this same reason, that you may have more 
time for the Lord's special work, be less particular than you 
would prefer to be about non-essential features of your 
housekeeping. Do not be too hard to please in your house 
assistant. She will not do the work so well, or systematically as 
you have done it yourself; but be satisfied with the best she can 
do under your direction and training. 

You will probably find, too, after faithfully making the effort a 
few times, that you have a better talent for talking of the truth 
than you now know of. Indeed you will often surprise yourself; 
for the Lord has promised you a mouth and wisdom that none of 
your adversaries can gainsay or resist. Sometimes you will find 
your opportunity best used in reading to others, or in merely 
talking enough to introduce the reading matter, and to lead your 
neighbor or friend to investigate. 

The excuse that you do not like to associate with some of the 
humble ones, savors both of the spirit of the world, and also of a 
seeming necessary prudence; and therefore it may be well to 



consider it carefully. The first thought is of the old nature—an 
outcropping of its pride and high-mindedness. Resist it, 
remembering the Master's words:- "Except ye be converted and 
become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of 
heaven. Whosoever shall humble himself as a little child, the 
same is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven. And whosoever 
shall receive one such little child (a humble teachable believer, 
or one likely to receive the truth) receiveth me."-- Matt. 18:3-5. 

Thus, in very many humble ways, the watchful faithful stewards 
will find opportunities to invest their talents with a good hope of 
considerable interest. He that is faithful in that which is least, 
will be faithful also in much. (Matt. 25:21,23.) Study to show 
yourself a workwoman approved unto God. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R1105 : page 5 

THE REST OF THE DEAD. 

But the rest of the dead lived not again, until the thousand years 
were finished. 

The reader is reminded that these words, though given as part of 
Rev. 20:5 in our common version Bibles, are not found in the 
oldest and most reliable Greek manuscripts; -in none written 
prior to the fifth century, nor even in Vatican MS. 1 160, of the 
eleventh century; neither does the Syriac MS. contain these 
words: but many MSS., not so old nor so exact generally, do 
contain the words. Whether they were originally a memorandum 
by some copyist, who thus commented for his own subsequent 
remembrance and jotted down his thought of the meaning of the 
text, afterward copied by others as part of the text, or whether 
the words really belong to the text and were accidentally omitted 
from the best, oldest and most reliable manuscripts, we will 
know, when we know all things. To us, these facts are of 
sufficient weight to warrant the conclusion that they are 
spurious. 

However, for the sake of those not so fully convinced, let us 
here consider the words as though they were part of John's 
inspired revelation. And it will be seen that even if they are not 
spurious, but properly of the text, yet they are in perfect 
harmony with the plan of the ages. The difficulty in the minds of 
those troubled by this expression, arises mainly from their 
failure to fully appreciate the terms "lived" and "resurrection." 

The passage when rightly understood is not at all in conflict with 
the Bible teaching, that all that are in their graves shall come 
forth, and that all shall be brought to a knowledge of the truth, 
and to a full opportunity for accepting or rejecting it, during the 



period of Christ's Millennial reign, and that with its close comes 
the end of human probation, when the willingly obedient shall 
all enjoy everlasting life, and the willingly disobedient will all 
be cut off in the second death; and that Adamic death shall 
cease, being destroyed by the Redeemer and Life-giver; and 
when, consequently, pain, sorrow and weeping, incidents of that 
Adamic penalty shall be forever at an end. 

The word life, really signifies that perfect state of existence from 
which death and dying, sickness and pain, and all the elements 
of death and condemnation, are excluded. Adam and Eve 
(before they sinned, and passed under condemnation of death 
and began to decay), and our Lord Jesus who was sinless, alone, 
of all human beings, ever had life; they alone ever "lived" in the 
full proper sense of the word; all others, born under Adamic 
condemnation (Rom. 5:12,17-19), are properly speaking dying, 
not living now. The death sentence having passed upon all, from 
the true standpoint of life all are in death-dying. All inherit the 
weaknesses, the imperfection and sin, and like-wise the penalty, 
dying and death. Thus our Lord also, at times, spoke of the race 
as a whole- "Let the dead bury their dead." 

We all know what it is to be dying until totally dead; let us all 
learn that it means to reverse this order, when we speak of living 
until perfectly alive. As the present and the past six thousand 
years, have been a dying time,— a time in which DEATH HAS 
REIGNED and triumphed and conquered the race-so the 
coming thousand years, the Millennium of Christ's reign, is to be 
a re-living time, a time in which LIFE WILL REIGN, the result 
of Christ's obedient sacrifice.— Rom. 5:17-19. 

When life shall reign, the reign of Adamic death (from whose 
dominion all were purchased by the precious blood of the new 
King, the Life-giver,) must cease. 

Many make the mistake of supposing that death was conquered 
when our Lord Jesus arose from the dead. True, there death was 
forced to surrender Him who is to be the destroyer of death, the 
life-giver to as many as will receive everlasting life as a gift of 
God upon his conditions, but Adamic death was not conquered 
then, nor its power even restrained. The long six thousand years 
reign of death has not yet been interrupted, except by the 
resurrection of our Lord. Death reigned before the Law-from 
Adam to Moses, -and during the Law or Mosaic dispensation, 
which gave release to none; and it has also reigned during the 
Gospel age over all except Christ. And since, we walk by faith 
and not yet by sight; trusting our Lord's promises of final victory 
through a resurrection out of death's domain and power. 

The apostle after relating (1 Cor. 15:42-54) the particulars of the 
first resurrection, that of the Gospel church, to the likeness, 
glory and power of her Lord, which he shows to be due at the 
appearing of her Lord, in the beginning of the 



R1106:page5 

Millennial age (1 Pet. 1:7; Titus 2:13; 2 Tim. 4:8), exultantly 
exclaims: "Then shall be brought to pass [to fulfilment] the 
saying which is written, 'Death is swallowed up in victory!'" But 
it is a further mistake to suppose the apostle to mean that the 
victory over death is gained when the church is completed, in 
the first resurrection. Not so; on the contrary he shows, that then 
shall be brought to pass, or from then on shall be accomplished, 
the victory over death. 

The resurrection of the Church, with the change of the living 
members of the same, marks the period of the inauguration of 
Christ's Kingdom, and from then on the reign of sin and death 
must give place to the reign of righteousness and life. The 
victory of the Life-giver, assured eighteen centuries ago by his 
resurrection from the dead by the power of the Father, will begin 
with the deliverance of his joint-heirs, the first resurrection, but 
thank God it does not end there. 

Dear dying Lamb, thy precious blood 
Shall never lose its power, 
'Till all the ransomed hosts of earth 
Are saved from Satan's power. 

This brings us to the point of time referred to by the passage 
quoted at the head of this article, when the first resurrection is 
complete. What then about the rest of the dead?— We answer: 

Then the general resurrection, of the dead and dying world, will 
begin. But it will not be at all like what is generally surmised. It 
will be the work of the entire Millennial age, a gradual lifting up 
to perfect life of those of mankind who shall then be found 
worthy of it. And though this work of resurrecting will be 
gradually progressing throughout the Millennial age, yet the rest 
of the dead (aside from those who share in the first resurrection, 
and live and reign with Christ) will not live again in the full 
sense of living-in the sense of regaining the perfection of life 
lost in Adam, -until the thousand years are finished. 

"The wicked shall never see life, " in this full sense (Psa. 
49:19,20; John 3:36), though all the families of the earth shall be 
awakened and brought to full clear knowledge of the truth, 
before being sentenced as "wicked."-! Tim. 2:3,4; Heb. 10:26. 



R1106:page5 

RESURRECTIONS AND 
CONDITIONS CONTRASTED. 

Let us contrast briefly the trial of those who shall share the first 
resurrection, with that of those who shall share the general 
resurrection; and the Lord's method of giving the reward to the 



worthy of this trial and to the worthy in that; and the reasons for 
the differences; in order that we may comprehend the situation 
more clearly. 

The first resurrection at the beginning of the Millennial age and 
the completion of the general resurrection at its close, reminds 
us of the fact that our Lord was raised from the power of death, 
perfect, in the beginning of the Gospel age, but the church lives 
not until the end of the Gospel age. But while there is this 
general resemblance between the two ages, in the fact that trial 
and testing come throughout, and the reward of life at the close, 
there is a wide difference between them in other respects. For 
instance:— 

First, the kind of "life everlasting" to be bestowed in the end of 
the Gospel age to the Gospel church, will differ from that to be 
given the faithful of the Millennial age— or rather, to express it 
correctly, the Gospel church will obtain similarly everlasting 
life, but will have bestowed upon them a higher nature or finer 
organism. Both classes when perfected, will have perfect 
everlasting life, but the one will be a perfection of human 
nature,- "very good," grand indeed, an image and likeness in 
the flesh, of the divine while the other will be superlatively 
grand, of a nature, organism, etc., not only higher than human, 
but "far above angels"— the express image of the Heavenly 
Father's substance- "partakers of the divine nature." 

Second, the kind and degree of trial will be very different. In the 
Millennial age all who would have the perfection of human life, 
then to be freely bestowed 

R1106:page6 

upon all worthy of it, will be required to prove their worthiness 
by willing conformity, not only to the righteous laws which will 
then prevail, but also to principles of righteousness. They must 
come to love righteousness and hate iniquity, not merely from 
fear of penalties, but on principle. But then knowledge will be 
clear and all things favorable to righteousness. In the Gospel age 
much more exacting and crucial is the test. All who shall share 
Christ's nature and throne are obliged to prove their worthiness 
by enduring much opposition from the wicked and blinded in 
the present age, as well as from their own physical and mental 
weaknesses and imperfections. They must prove themselves 
"overcomers" by patiently and perseveringly doing the Lord's 
will as best they can understand and do it. 

Third, the methods of giving the reward of life will differ. The 
Gospel church must walk by faith all the way, being treated as 
other men, subject to many of the vicissitudes of disease and 
death much as others; and they must trust, believe and hope for 
the life promised at the close of the age without experiencing 
any evidence of it on the way, except by faith. They, like others, 
have pain, sickness, sorrows and difficulties; they are men of 



sorrows and acquainted with grief, and are finally sown in death. 
Though trusting in Christ as their Savior and Life-giver, and 
publicly declaring it, yet they must in dishonor and weakness 
fall under the blow of the now reigning prince of darkness- 
death— hoping, praying, trusting for the resurrection- life 
promised, but not in any measure actually accomplished in 
them. "I have said, Ye are gods, all of you sons of the Most 
High; but ye shall all die like men and fall like one of the 
chiefs." (Psa. 82:7.) [We do not fall in death as sinners, like 
Adam, but as sacrifices for the truth in opposition to error, like 
the other chief-Christ Jesus- with whom we are reckoned joint- 
sacrificers.] These, having passed all their trial satisfactorily, 
without rewards, will be given the great reward all at once, 
without further trial. Their resurrection or perfecting as new 
creatures, spiritual beings, will be an instantaneous one-in a 
moment, in the twinkling of an eye. 

But with the world, during the Millennial age, it will be very 
different. They will not be promised life and restitution, yet be 
deprived of it entirely until the close of their age, and be obliged 
to sicken and die. No; on the contrary, Death shall reign no 
longer. At the very beginning of the Millennial age, Life will 
begin to reign, and will begin to pay his wages unto all obedient 
unto the spirit of the law of life. Each act of obedience shall be 
rewarded; each effort to honor and obey and uphold the right 
and the truth, will bring its compensation; not only of pleasure 
and a sense of heavenly approval, but also of health and 
strength— a gradual release from death, and a gradual bestowal 
of life. The work of restitution, as it relates to mind and morals 
and physical development is the resurrection work; -lifting the 
race up, out of the death state and all the degradation into which 
the penalty of Adam's sin plunged it. This is the true meaning of 
the word resurrection. 

It is a serious and blinding mistake, made by very many, to 
suppose that the raising of a corpse out of a tomb, or even the re- 
animation of a dead person, such as Lazarus, the widow's son, 
Jairus' daughter, etc., to be resurrections. Not at all; the term 
resurrection is never applied to such cases in the Scriptures. Of 
Lazarus our Lord said, I go to awake him out of sleep. He was 
re-animated or awakened to a former degree of life; or rather, 
we might more properly say, to the former degree of death. Of 
little value would the promise of resurrection be, to any, if it 
merely signify awakening and re-animation to our present, poor, 
dying state. Thank God it means in the fullest sense "to raise up 
again" not partially, but up, up, up to perfection. To the 
majority, as already shown, this will mean a lifting up, or back, 
to the perfection of human nature lost by father Adam- 
gradually, during the Millennium, and in co-operation with their 
own efforts and longings for righteousness and perfection, 
mental, moral and physical. To the "little flock," who, under the 
favor of the Gospel call, have exchanged human nature (by its 



sacrifice) for divine nature, it means, the lifting up (at one 
bound-in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye) to the full 
perfection of the new nature-the divine nature; not gradually, 
but instantly, from mortality to immortality, from weakness to 
power, from dishonor to glory, from a natural body to a spiritual 
body; because their trial is fully past before death. And all who 
shall be accounted worthy of the first [chief] resurrection will 
have been already proved "overcomers," "faithful until death," 
and "worthy," or they would not have part at all in that chief 
resurrection. 

Blessed and holy, proved and accepted, are all they that have 
part in the first resurrection. And while all others shall share in 
the general resurrection, none but holy ones shall ever reach its 
grand climax- perfect life;— for everlasting life is the gift of God 
(through Jesus Christ our Lord); and he gives it to none of the 
wilfully wicked or rebellious, but only to such as will serve, 
honor and obey him, when their knowledge and opportunities 
are perfect. All shall be awakened and brought to full knowledge 
before being sentenced as "wicked. " But the wicked shall never 
see life.-Psa. 145:20; Heb. 10:26,27; John 3:36. 



R1107:page6 

THEY THAT SHALL 
ATTAIN RESURRECTION. 

"They that shall be accounted worthy to obtain that age and the 
resurrection from among the dead, neither marry nor are given 
in marriage."— Luke 20:25. 

We do not here treat the subject, "Whose wife shall she be?" 
having already considered it. (See, TOWER of March '87.) We 
wish now merely to draw attention to the harmony between the 
above words of our Lord and the foregoing view, on the 
meaning of the word resurrection, as applied to the world, 
showing the class worthy of it, and how the worthiness or 
unworthiness of each will be demonstrated by their conduct, 
when awakened from death. 

We cannot understand our Lord's words, to apply to the saints, 
the church, who will share in the first resurrection; for the 
inquiry and conversation were regarding another class, and by 
another class. The Lord's answer applied to ordinary Jews who 
knew nothing about the first resurrection, the reward of 
following the Lord in sacrifice. 

The Millennial age is an age of trial, a transition period, and 
hence was not the age looked to by the question of the 
Sadducees who wished to know how matters would be finally 
and everlastingly. Our Lord's answer meets the question exactly; 
he does not explain how it will be during the Millennial age, 



while the race is being awakened, and while the willing ones are 
being restored from death to life, but pointing his words to "that 
age" of perfection which will follow the Millennium of testing, 
he informs them first of all, that it is an open question as yet 
whether the woman and the seven husbands will be accounted 
worthy of that age, worthy of resurrection,-of being raised up 
again to the perfection lost in Adam, and entering the everlasting 
state. Thus our Lord clearly teaches that though all that are in 
their graves shall hear his voice and come forth, some [the 
church] will come forth to a resurrection of life, and some will 
come forth to a resurrection of judgment or trial,-a resurrection 
work being begun which for its completion will depend wholly 
upon the faithfulness of those being tried in it. If in that period 
of judgment-resurrection any shall be proved worthy of the 
perfect age and everlasting life, he shall have it; and any found 
unworthy in that time shall not obtain access to the perfect age, 
nor to the perfection of life: They are "wicked" and "shall not 
see life," nor be worthy of complete resurrection. 

But, let us remember, that since a full release from the wages of 
Adam's sin (death-everlasting destruction) has been granted, it 
follows that the Millennial trial of each, individually, will be as 
though each were perfect, as though they had never been 
condemned in Adam,— full allowance being made by the Judge 
for the weaknesses, from the fall, remaining in them. Each will 
be judged by his own attitude toward righteousness, under the 
clear light and full understanding of the Millennial age. Only 
those wilfully opposed to righteousness, when clearly seen, will 
be condemned as unworthy of life; and such as then die, will die 
the second death; for if never fully lifted up out of the present 
dying state, it will be their own fault entirely-an evidence of 
their unwillingness to have life upon the only conditions it ever 
will be offered— obedience to God's righteous law. 

Hence, when we read, "Even death the last enemy shall be 
destroyed," "Death shall be swallowed up in victory," etc., we 
should "rightly divide the word of truth," and note that it is the 
release of humanity from the penalty which came upon all 
through Adam's sin and not from the second death, which will 
come upon willful sinners only. 

Adamic death, though a just penalty, is an enemy or opponent, 
because it slew all— both the willfully wicked, and the ignorant 
and blinded, and those also who willed to do well and loved 
righteousness. It was because God foresaw that there would be 
such lovers of righteousness under the death condemnation, that 
Christ Jesus died for our sins and released all from that penalty 
so as to give life to as many as would take pleasure in using it to 
God's glory and their own everlasting well-being. 

The second death, on the contrary, is not an enemy but a 
blessing; just as the destruction of useless, injurious and filthy 
rubbish, is a blessing. If the second death meant everlasting 



torture, the case would be different: No excuse could be offered 
to justify the perpetuation in misery of the existence of any 
creature, however wicked. Extinction (death, without hope of 
resurrection) is certainly a just penalty upon those who are 
willfully wicked, after they had full knowledge of good as well 
as evil, and the results of each. But the second death is an enemy 
to none of the righteously disposed; to them it is a blessing. The 
utter destruction of such as are proved unfit to have life, is 
needful to the harmony of God's kingdom and the peace and 
happiness of such as love righteousness. And this is the 
testimony of God's word concerning his plan: "All the wicked 
will he destroy." He will "destroy those that corrupt the earth. 
These are the symbolic "goats" of Matt. 25:41,46, also called the 
angels, messengers or servants of Satan, and the symbolic "fire" 
destroys them. The second death will be proportionately as great 
a blessing, in ridding the earth of the evil-disposed incorrigible, 
as the Adamic death was an enemy, destroying the well- 
disposed with the evil-doers and the ignorant. 



R1107:page6 

A MISAPPREHENSION. 

Some seem to get the impression, that for the Lord to finally 
destroy some of his creatures— Satan, and such as have his spirit 
of opposition to righteousness,— would imply a failure of the 
divine plan. Such ask, Is it not written that "All his purposes 
shall be accomplished?" and, Cannot God melt the hardest 
hearts? and will not Christ subdue all things unto himself and 
reign until he has put down all enemies? 

Yes, we answer; God's plan will be fully accomplished, but it 
does not follow that every human plan is the divine one. 
Nowhere has God declared it to be his plan to preserve 
everlastingly every creature he has made, and to force all such 
into obedience. To suppose such pride on the part of the 
Almighty would be to accuse him of folly. And if such a pride 
of workmanship related to man would it not extend to all of his 
creation and insure the resurrection to everlasting life, of every 
animal, fowl, fish and insect that ever lived? 

But such is not God's declared plan. On the contrary, while the 
Scriptures declare that God takes no pleasure in the death of any 
of the human family, but would or is willing that all should turn 
unto him and live, and has made abundant provision in harmony 
with this, his will, through Christ's sacrifice and coming 
Millennial reign, yet he declares clearly, that as sin in Eden 
brought death (from which we were redeemed by Christ's death, 
because it was not the penalty of our own wilful sin) so when 
each stands trial for himself the penalty will be no different; for 
God and his law have not changed. "The wages of sin is death," 



still. And in the individual trial, "The soul that sinneth 
[wilfully], it shall die," though in that [Millennial] day none 
shall die for another's sins, as now. 

So far from planning to coerce all men into his service, God's 
plan is the very reverse; only the willingly obedient shall eat the 
good of the land— shall partake of his bounties of lasting life and 
favor. Had God chosen to make man a mere machine— without 
will of his own, acting only as acted upon— would he not after 
making the machine right, keep it right; and not permit it to fall 
into destruction? Experience would be worse than wasted on 
such beings. But this theory would necessitate the conclusion, 
that God is responsible for all the sin and misery of the world. It 
implies that the fault is all with God, and starts the inquiry, Why 
did he not make the human machine as he wanted it at first? If 
this theory were true, God would be the great and only sinner; 
the only one justly worthy of punishment. 

But this theory would make God a liar, a deceiver, a hypocrite 
and unjust; for he tells us that the sin was man's, and that the 
penalty inflicted was just. Let us believe God. The man he 
created was a fleshly image of himself. He was in a fit condition 
to be tried or tested, to prove 

R1107:page7 

himself worthy or unworthy of life. He was organically perfect; 
nothing imperfect would be an image of God; nothing else could 
be tried or condemned, justly. To set Adam on trial, not only for 
his own life but also as the representative of the race in him, and 
to have him fall because created imperfect, would be unjust; and 
such a trial would be a farce, a deception, a great wrong. Any 
penalty would be unjust under such circumstances. 

Not only organically perfect, but also favorably situated in Eden, 
Adam had no reasonable temptation to disobey God's command, 
as would have been the case had other food been scarce and he 
about to die of hunger. If, having promised him life, God had 
made insufficient provision of food, etc., and forbidden a fruit 
necessary to his existence, Adam would have had some excuse 
for his disobedience and might have said, Lord you promised me 
life, but I was dying of hunger, and therefore I ate supposing 
you had forgotten your promise. In such a case the disobedience 
would not have been wilful, but under provocation -temptation. 
But God tempteth no man. 

It is true, though Adam had a perfect brain, he had not reached 
perfect knowledge and experience at the time of his trial. It was 
not needful to a fair trial that he should have had experience in 
disobedience, 

R1108:page7 

or a knowledge beyond what he possessed. He knew that God 
was his Creator and Benefactor and that he ought to render 



obedience to his commands, if he would continue to enjoy his 
favor and blessings. Nor was it needful to the trial that he should 
have large experience in the use of his perfect mind, for instance 
for the construction of apparatus for analyzing the forbidden 
fruit, to see whether it contained something really injurious, or 
for reasoning out the cause of its prohibition. The reason and 
propriety of this as a trial or test of his obedience, he no doubt 
would have been permitted to fully understand afterward, had he 
continued obedient to God. 

Adam was not deceived even (1 Tim. 2:14); he disobeyed God 
knowingly and willingly, evidently with the expectation and 
intention of dying; because his loved companion had been 
deceived into disobedience. As a free moral agent, he was left to 
do as he chose, and he wilfully chose to disobey and received 
the penalty -death. 

This power of will or choice belongs to human nature as God 
made it. Were it otherwise, human nature could not be called an 
image or likeness of God's nature. God has a will and exercises 
it. Man, made in God's likeness, must have a similar will of his 
own, and must be similarly free in its exercise. Adam's proper 
course would have been to say, Though all my happiness seems 
lost by the disobedience of my dear companion, for I know that 
God meant all he said, when he pronounced the penalty for 
disobedience, yet two wrongs will never make one right. I will 
be obedient myself, and go to God and confess with sorrow the 
case as it is, and solicit his mercy in view of the extenuating 
circumstance of Eve's deception. I will lay the case in the hands 
of our kind benefactor, praying that whatever his love and 
wisdom and power and justice can arrange may be done for her 
atonement and recovery. Peradventure he may see a way to 
maintain his own justice, and yet spare the only companion I 
have on earth. But self-will chose the independent course; and 
Adam determined to share the fate of his wife. His was really a 
case of suicide. 

Human nature has not changed, though our free agency is very 
largely curtailed by our unfavorable surroundings and our 
unbalanced, unsound minds on all subjects. With the restoration 
or resurrection, under the advantageous surroundings and 
allowances of the Millennium, the free agency or free will of 
man so far from being utterly destroyed will be restored, 
perfectly and completely; and by their will all will be judged 
worthy or unworthy of life everlasting. If it were a labor for the 
Almighty to create human beings or to destroy them, or if 
numbers were a necessity in his plan, there might be some room 
for questioning whether ages and ages of effort would not be 
made to bend the wills and turn the hearts of those found 
incorrigible during, and at the close of, the Millennium. But, 
when to create or destroy, are as easy with the Almighty as to 
preserve us alive, we see the wisdom of his plan of giving and 



continuing life to only such as appreciate it as his favor, and 
who, when fully informed, will rejoice to co-operate with God 
in recognizing it as the all in all of wisdom and righteousness- 
their wills being in perfect harmony with his. 

The promise that all things shall be "subdued," or "put under 
Christ," refers to the power that will coerce active evil during 
the Millennial age. All things actively in opposition to God's 
plan and law will be subdued, restrained, hindered. And if, after 
being for a time outwardly forced to obey the laws of 
righteousness, the former evil-doers continue opposed at heart 
they shall be cut off (Isa. 65:20; Rev. 20:7-10,15), that evil may 
be rooted out and righteousness firmly and lastingly established 
in and through them that love it. 



Rl 108: page 7 

ABOUT OLD MANUSCRIPTS. 

DEAR SIR AND BROTHER:-I have read with much interest 
your work "MILLENNIAL DAWN," and I agree that the theory 
it presents, though new [The original, old theology of the Bible, 
we call it. -EDITOR.], ought not to be rejected because so. But 
that passage in Rev. 20:5, "But the rest of the dead lived not 
again, until the thousand years were past," arose in my mind at 
once as a barrier to the reception of your view. You state it to be 
an interpolation, and that the words are not found in the best and 
most ancient manuscripts. I wrote to Dr. Manly of the S.B. 
Theological Seminary as to his knowledge of the matter. He 
writes to me, that so far as his investigations have gone there has 
been no dispute as to the authenticity of the passage, but some as 
to the verbal construction. He further says, that in his opinion 
there is no copy of Revelation ante-dating the fifth century. 

Now I am anxious to know just what God's Word teaches. Will 
you please give me the source of your information upon which 
you state that it is not in the ancient copies? Do you know from 
a personal investigation? Are there no copies of Revelation ante- 
dating the fifth century? I am anxious to be informed on the 
subject, for your theory will relieve my mind on some things 
that have been hard to understand. I want to believe it, if the 
Scriptures will allow me. But while that passage remains, it 
effectually bars the door to belief. I have been a pre-millennialist 
for nearly thirty years, and the doctrine becomes clearer with the 
coming years. Now, if your theory be true, a beautiful harmony 
will exist in my mind. 

Fraternally Yours, 

G. E. BREWER. 



-INREPLY- 

There are but two known copies of the New Testament, in 
Greek, ante-dating the fifth century: these are known among 
scholars as the Sinaitic and Vatican manuscripts. They are given 
the same date,- about A.D. 350-though by some the Sinaitic, 
which was most recently found, by Prof. Cons. Tischendorf in 
1859, is supposed to date a little earlier. 

The Vatican MS. came into the possession of European scholars 
in 1475 A.D., and is known from other more recent Vatican 
MSS. by its number, 1209. It is very accurate so far as it goes, 
but it is of no authority on the clause of Rev. 20:5 in question, 
because it is defective, incomplete, —the Epistle to the Hebrews 
from 9:15 to close is lacking, as well as all of the Epistles to 
Timothy, Titus, and Philemon, and the book of Revelation. 

The Sinaitic MS., remarkable as being the oldest as well as for 
its completeness and accuracy, is therefore the only Greek 
authority on Revelation ante-dating the fifth century: and it does 
not contain the clause, of Rev. 20:5, in dispute. 

Regarding your question, as to our authority and information, 
we would say: We do not possess these old manuscripts and do 
not hope to— they are esteemed as of almost priceless value 
among scholars. The Sinaitic is now in the possession of the 
Russian government at St. Petersburg. However, at great 
expense, borne by the Czar of Russia, Prof. Tischendorf, the 
finder, published an exact copy of this MS. And later, for the 
benefit of the general public, Mr. T. prepared and published, in 
1869, the common version of our English New Testament, with 
foot-notes showing all instances in which it varies from the three 
oldest Greek MSS. -the Sinaitic, and Vatican, above mentioned, 
and the Alexandrine, a later and less accurate MS. This work in 
a small form, cheaply bound in cloth, can be ordered through 
your nearest book-seller. Its retail price is one dollar. 

We hope, at some time ere long, to get out a copy of this last 
mentioned edition in cheaper form, for the benefit of all our 
subscribers; being desirous that they should all enjoy the 
benefits and information thus afforded. 



Rl 108: page 7 

A SUCCESSFUL MINISTER. 

[The following is from Brother Weber of Maryland. Though a 
florist and gardener on a large scale, he is not seeking worldly 
prominence or wealth, but divine approval and heavenly riches. 
To do this he uses his garden, hot-houses, etc., as ways and 
means for honoring the Lord by spreading the truth. He is out as 
much as possible in the "harvest" field selling DAWN Vol. I. A 
man of keen business judgment and good address, he enlists his 



best endeavors in this highest service— the service of God— and 
we believe is laying up treasure in heaven. -EDITOR.] 

MY DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-After taking leave of you, 
Wednesday evening 6th, I arrived in Frederick, Md., next 
morning at 9:30 A.M., and started out by 10 o'clock and 
distributed Arp tracts the remainder of the day. Next morning I 
started out at 8:30 and sold that day 32 of DAWN Vol. I., and 
next day 22. Saturday being a pleasant day, a great many were 
not at home, which cut my sales short that day. The week 
previous I used a day and a half in the same way and sold 55 
books; and altogether in the 4-1/4 days I have sold 109 books. I 
only wish I could give my entire time to this blessed work, but 
other duties will not permit me yet to do so. But I hope as soon 
as I see my way clear, nothing shall prevent me from doing so. I 
realize the privilege of being 

R1109:page7 

a co-worker with the Lord in this evil day; and selling DAWN is 
certainly the most effective way of preaching the real Gospel, 
thus placing these blessed truths right in the hands of the people. 
This certainly is the best way of preaching, and if we are 
confronted with the blind leaders who will not buy them, we 
have then an opportunity of bearing witness to the truth by word 
of mouth. 

May our dear Brethren and Sisters who can give their time, see 
the privilege of doing all they can, so they may have the 
Master's approval. I will close with best regards joined by Sister 
W. to you and Sister R. and all the friends. Yours in fellowship 
and service of the truth. 

H. W. 



R1109:page7 

OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS. 

THE WAGES OF SIN. 

This small tract of 24 pages, neatly printed, is considered 
excellent for new readers. They are of proper size for enclosing 
in envelopes. We believe that one of these, an Arp Tract, 
enclosed in a Missionary Envelope, would be a good means of 
reaching many of your friends. Those who think the plan a good 
one and desire to avail themselves of it, can do so. 

It is proposed to issue these tracts quarterly. They will vary in 
the number of pages. To conform to the requirements of the 
Postal Laws, a price must be fixed on these and subscriptions 
received,- same as with TOWER. We have fixed the price at 10 
cents per year, which would cover the cost, including postage. If 



we can get them out in large quantities, we will be able to 
produce them cheaper, and the more issued the more good 
results we may hope for. We therefore propose a large discount 
on quantities, thus— 

25 copies-quarterly for 1 year (100 tracts) for $ 1.00 

50 copies-quarterly for 1 year (200 tracts) for 1.75 

100 copies-etc. (400 tracts) 3.00 

500 copies- (2000 tracts) 13.50 

1000 copies- (4000 tracts) 25.00 

3000 copies- (12000 tracts) 68.00 

The topics selected for these will be chiefly selections from 
TOWER matter, specially suitable for general, promiscuous use. 
The cost of 1000 copies, quarterly, for a year, would be no more 
than some of you used to pay for pew-rent,— to have your 
understandings darkened by misrepresentations of God's 
character and plan. It is for you to consider, whether you can not 
better use that sum hereafter in preaching the Old Theology of 
the Bible, to your former fellow-sectarians and others. This 
number of tracts distributed quarterly at mills, shops, among 
clerks in stores, printers, editors, reporters, school teachers, at 
offices of lawyers and physicians, and at church doors, by 
yourself, or others employed by you, could scarcely fail to 
accomplish some good, in opening the eyes of some who would 
thank you for it eternally, as God's agent and light-bearer. 

Perhaps you used to give a like sum toward Home Missions, and 
as much more toward Foreign Missions-$75 per year toward 
religious teaching. It is for you to consider that under this plan 
this $68 would enable you to preach 3000 sermons quarterly, to 
your own and neighboring townsmen. 

You used to think that one-tenth of your earnings or profits 
should be used in the Lord's service; now you see, that that 
tithing system was the law to the Jews only, and that we are not 
under the Law, but under grace. As followers of Christ, we 
covenanted to give not merely one-tenth of our profits, but all 
that we have and are and shall be,— time, money, influence, all 
and forever-to the Lord and his service. It is for each to 
consider whether or not the Lord's favor toward us, in opening 
our eyes and delivering us from the bondage of fear and error, 
has drawn our hearts closer to him and made us anxious to 
spend and be spent more and more to honor him; or whether the 
removal of the chains of error's bondage and fear of future 
torment, has made us harder and more selfish. We may be 
assured that if the truth produces a hardening effect on us, it 
would not only prove us unworthy of the high-calling to joint- 
heirship, but 

R1109:page8 



unworthy of life on any plane. Pharaoh is an example of those 
whose hearts harden instead of melt, under the influence of 
God's mercy. 

Consider, too, that what you now do and spend, is in part at least 
to offset that formerly spent; to counteract former errors and 
misrepresentations of God's character with the clearer light now 
shining. Some of us who were for years very zealous in the 
spread of error, before the truth reached us, and who like Paul 
verily thought thereby to do God service, might almost despair 
of ever offsetting it with the truth, but for the fact that the money 
and energy we then spent accomplished little, compared with 
what even the same amount of each would accomplish now, in 
the service of the truth, in this harvest time and with the 
facilities our Lord has now put into our hands. 

Consider that "the time is short:" that where we used to give one 
dollar, or a hundred, or a thousand, we now have the privilege of 
showing the Lord our appreciation of the truth by using five 
times as much, both of time and money; the results of which are 
beyond comparison. 

Can we preach the good tidings in a better way than in 
circulating DAWN VOL. I., and these tracts? If some can afford 
to pay for the tracts, but cannot attend to having them circulated 
(and all should be able to do this also, unless invalids), there 
may be other brethren and sisters who would be glad to 
distribute more tracts than they can purchase, and we will find 
such agents for you, if you desire. 

But we are not urging this work, but merely asking you to 
consider the matter and act according to your own judgment. 
Here is an opportunity for extensive harvest work; and the time 
between the quarterly issues is ample for thorough distribution. 



R1109:page8 

EXTRACTS FROM 
INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Venango. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your book, The Time is at 
Hand, has been received and read with avidity. I can scarcely 
restrain myself from continually crying aloud, "Glory to God in 
the Highest!" Hallelujah! for evermore. May the praises of God 
and the Lamb be upon every tongue! How can it be otherwise? 
Who so great or so glorious as our Redeemer who gave himself, 
was slain, for the sins of the whole world— save the Great 
Jehovah who planned the redemption. I rejoice daily that I am 
made wise even at this day, and yet my heart grows sad when I 
think of the years that I have been led by the blind. Why was I 



not permitted to know sooner? Your book MILLENNIAL 
DAWN came to me last Fall-the first hint I ever had of such a 
work. I received it on a Saturday evening, commenced to read it 
immediately and never laid it aside, except when obliged, until 
finished. Its truth captured my heart at once; forthwith I 
withdrew from the Presbyterian Church where I had so long 
been groping in the dark for the truth, and found it not. 

The DAWN came as a light in a dark place and you cannot 
know the eagerness with which I have devoured all that I could 
get of your writings. My first impulse was to deliver the tidings 
to all I knew, but especially immediate friends, that they too 
might be made wise, and have cause for rejoicing; but they one 
and all discarded the book and TOWER, as the theories of one 
man trying to start a new religious sect for his own 
aggrandizement, I suppose, instead of an effort to place us upon 
the original Christian basis, which Christ and his apostles 
outlined for all the true followers down to the end of the age. I 
sometimes grow discouraged; still I cannot help rejoicing that I 
have found the true version of the Scriptures, even if others will 
not accept. I cannot tell you how happy it makes me. I try to do 
what good I can, but when others deem me crazy or lost to all 
my former senses, where is my influence? 

I long to tell you all that is in my heart, of joys and hopes, but 
cannot at present. May God bless you through time and eternity, 
which I know he will do; but what will become of such as I, who 
have never known the Scriptures aright, nor even concerning our 
Lord's presence and the harvest, until so late. 

[This must not discourage us; we must expect just such results; 
they were promised. (Matt. 10:22; 1 Cor. 4:10.) Even our Lord's 
faithfulness made him of "no reputation." And Paul and the 
early church were "counted fools for Christ's sake." Yea, and 
whosoever will live Godly, in this present time, "shall suffer 
persecution" of some sort— according to the degree of 
civilization by which surrounded. While pitying their blindness 
and longing for the clearer, fuller dawn, when all shall see 
clearly, let us rejoice that we are counted worthy of an 
experience so much like that of our dear Redeemer. -EDITOR.] 

Still, I will praise him. I cannot help being so late to know the 
truth. For many years have I prayed and striven to lead a 

R1110:page8 

Christian life, but with only blind leaders what could I know? I 
blush to think of my ignorance. Your last book is so conclusive 
in all its proofs; who can doubt them? I must read it over and 
over again. I do not feel able to say much to others, until I have 
informed myself more perfectly. How chilling such retorts as the 
following: After reading all the chronological facts and 
Scripture bearing upon them, my heart was so filled with joy 
that I mentioned them to a friend of Christ's coming, when he 



remarked, He has set the time, has he? I cannot tell you, how it 
makes me feel. You do not set the time; 'tis God, and 
undoubtedly there is a set time, as all will yet see. 

With much love to you and your beloved helpmeet, I remain 
sincerely, 

Your Sister in Christ, 

J. H 



[Be of good courage, dear Sister, consider that the readiness of 
heart in which the truth found you, indicates that you were a true 
child of God before, and that it was sent to you by our Master; 
because, blinded and starved by human tradition, you were 
hungering and thirsting for righteousness [truth]. He now invites 
all such to be filled, both with the truth and with its spirit. What 
VOL. II. has made clear to you regarding the "harvest," etc., will 
be emphasized and clinched by VOL. III. in due time, making 
very clear the importance of the work of harvest. Meantime 
enter as fully as possible into the present blessed opportunities 
of service, making known the good tidings of great joy— The 
Plan of the Ages— whenever and wherever you can find or make 
opportunity. The results to you will be deeper joy and clearer 
insight, whether they hear or whether they reject. Faithfulness in 
receiving and confessing the light, as God supplies it, is 
imperative. Yet, let us be "wise;" let us feed the "milk" before 
the "strong meat." 

"The Plan of the Ages" (Vol. I.) should, therefore, always be 
presented first, before any mention is made of "The Time at 
hand." If they cannot digest the "milk," we may be sure they 
cannot the "meat," and the result would be only the greater and 
stronger opposition. Remember how our Lord exemplified this 
in his teaching; he even said to his followers once, "I have many 
things to tell you, but ye cannot bear them now." To us, as well 
as the apostles, our Lord's words apply: "Be ye wise as serpents, 
and harmless as doves. "-EDITOR.] 

page 8 

St. Louis, Mo. 

GENTLEMEN:-I came into possession of a copy of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN VOL. I., The Plan of the Ages, a short 
time ago, which I read with a great deal more than ordinary 
interest. Though there are a few paragraphs I do not altogether 
comprehend, yet as a whole, it has given me an entire new 
channel of thought relative to the impenetrable future. I 
carefully compared all your Bible references, and became so 
favorably impressed with your version of Scripture and so 
hungry for more of the same kind of spiritual food that I feel I 
must have the second volume. 



I have enlisted in the service of the Lord Jesus Christ for the 
remainder of my life; and it is my heart's desire to be even more 
faithful to Him than I was to the stars and stripes during the dark 
days of the rebellion. Oh! how I should love to be one of that 
"Little Flock," one of the Lord's daring soldiers, to help bind the 
great dragon, Satan, the vile enemy of all those faithful to the 
Lord. 

Please let me know if you have any other religious literature. 
Very Respectfully, Yours in the Love of Jesus. 

L.W. 

R1110:page8 

Florida. 

MY DEAR SON:-Your welcome letter is received. We are glad 
to know that you are in usual health, and I trust and pray that 
your labors are still being blessed to yourselves as well as all 
others who have ears to hear and eyes to see. 

As for myself I have been greatly blessed by the reading of 
Vols. I. and II. of DAWN. I have just finished reading Vol. n. 
and I feel that it would be impossible to ignore the truthfulness 
of these wonderful developments. The types and antitypes of the 
Jewish and Gospel dispensations, The Times and Seasons, the 
Manner of our Lord's Second Advent, Earth's Great Jubilee, 
Parallel Dispensations, Elias shall First Come, and the 
wonderful unfolding concerning Antichrist, the Man of Sia- 
mese contain very much that I had never fully understood 
before. I am perfectly astonished at the array of Scriptural 
argument to substantiate every position taken; and I can only 
say, To God let us give all the praise. It seems to me that no one 
can overthrow these arguments and conclusions except they 
deny the truth of the Scriptures. 

I am very sorry to know that Brother Clowes is so very low. 
Possibly before this time he has gone to his rest. But his works 
will follow after; and may we also be ready, for we know not 
when our change may come. We are all in usual health at 
present, and hope you are all well. Joined by Wife and Mabel in 
love to you all, I am your loving Father, 

J. L. RUSSELL. 

[The above is from the Editor's aged Father, whose 
appreciation, love and zeal for the truth, seem to grow with his 
years. Now in his seventy-fifth year, he is more and more 
seeking to let the light shine, loaning DAWN, tracts, etc. His 
fellowship is highly appreciated. 

On Januaryy 25th our dear Brother Clowes, with whom some of 
our readers were acquainted, having heard him preach the word 
of truth at various points near Pittsburgh, passed away full of 
triumphant faith and glorious hope. "Blessed are the dead who 



die in the Lord from henceforth. Yea, saith the spirit, they shall 
rest from their labors, but their works follow with them."] 

page 8 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:- I would like to 
tell you how much we enjoy the Second Volume but haven't the 
words. I shall be very glad when the next Vol. comes, but expect 
to read this over many times yet; and having the "Sure Word of 
Prophecy," there is no lack of food, until it is ready. 

I do hope you may find it desirable, to publish this Vol. in paper 
binding and to help the work I will do what I can. 

It is true that comparatively few are yet interested, but some of 
this sowing is for the future harvest and the truth must be first 
made known before it can be received. Our heathens are at our 
own doors. "Who is blind but my servant?" I send a check for 
$30, toward the fund for paper bound "Time at Hand." If you do 
not think it best, however, or if means are not sufficient, use the 
money in any way that you deem proper or in the Tract Fund. 

In your last you expressed the desire to hear how the good work 
prospered with us. Although "our report" is looked upon as 
foolishness, and ourselves as deluded, I do not at all feel 
disheartened, for the rumblings of our chariot wheels sound all 
around. The papers have to announce sermons upon special 
subjects by the different pastors to notify the people of very 
interesting themes, viz., Immortality, Future Punishment, etc. 
DAWN has stirred up the waters any way! If none believe, it is 
not surprising, no man has helped them yet to get into the water 
and be healed, but they will soon get help and then they will 
proclaim the goodness of the Lord. (Psa. 107:10-16.) The 
greatest obstacle in the way is the denunciations of the clergy. 
They tell their sheep this is poisonous food and they are so 
ignorant of God's Word, that they are afraid of the unpardonable 
sin if they dare to read for themselves and trust to the spirit of 
truth to interpret for them. Truly "they sit in the shadow of death 
and are bound with fetters of iron and brass. But when they cry 
unto the Lord he will hear and deliver them. " "Wait upon the 
Lord and ye shall see his salvation, " is good enough cheer. In 
most kind remembrance and love in Christ, Your fellow- 
workers, 

DR. and MRS. ABIEL BOWEN. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I enclose a letter which is so full of 
interest and encouragement to me, that I thought it might be 
interesting to you also. I am sorry to say that I am unable at 
present to do much in the cause of truth, as I cannot leave home, 
but expect to go on the road again about April 1st. Then I shall 
use every possible opportunity to distribute Arp tracts and sell as 
many DAWNS as I can. Yours, L. A. PATCHEN. 



DEAR BRO. PATCHEN:-Your welcome letter at hand, I was 
glad to hear from and get your opinion of DAWN Vol. n. 

Mr. Tavender called about two weeks ago and said so much 
about the book, that I sent right away for a copy and have read it 
through, some parts twice. 

I feel that Mr. Russell has been entrusted with the key which has 
unlocked the prophecies. It seems that the blessed time we have 
been so long praying for is very near, even at the door. I am 
trying to spread these truths as much as I am able. I talk to every 
one I can reach. Does it seem possible that 25 years more will 
see evil overthrown and the "King of Righteousness" reigning in 
the Earth? Will there then be no more, agonizing wives in behalf 
of drinking husbands? No longer shall mothers on bended knees 
cry to God: how long, O, how long! 

Thank God, the clouds are parting, and we begin to catch 
glimpses of the great plan which was laid before the foundations 
of the earth. Evil has had its day. The good have been powerless 
to turn back the tide of wrong-doing which has flooded the 
whole earth. How we have suffered on account of evil, but could 
not see why we were not able to subdue wrong. I have verily 
thought myself to blame for many things which I now see I was 
powerless to control. 

I trust I shall ever feel grateful to you, brother, for calling my 
attention to these things, when in agony of soul, God was 
leading me through affliction away from the love of earthly 
things, that I might be prepared with those who love Him for 
that rest that remaineth for the people of God. I am trying to 
spread the truth and with some success, apparently. 

Mr. P. sends kind respects. Yours in Christ, 

MRS. J. H P . 



page 8 

IF THERE is a mark, thus (check mark), opposite this item it 
indicates that your subscription has not been received for the 
present year. If there is any mistake about it, write us at once. 

If there is a mark, thus X, it indicates that you are owing for the 
past year; and two such marks (XX) indicate that you are several 
years in arrears according to our books. If you think our record 
in error, advise us. If you cannot pay such arrearages, write and 
tell us so; and we will CANCEL THE DEBT. We want to 
square up all accounts to Jan'y 1889. Then, if ever you become 
able, you may, if you choose, contribute to the Tract Fund 
account, to help carry the good tidings to others. 


