Announcements
BECOME SKILLED IN YOUR WORK
“Do not loiter at your business. Be aglow with the spirit,” was the apostle Paul’s wise counsel to early Christians. (Rom. 12:11, NW) Also, Christians today want to be skilled in the ministry so as to efficiently do the work approved by God. “You see a man skilled at his work? He will stand in the presence of kings.” (Prov. 22:29, AT) World-wide, during the month of February, Jehovah’s skilled ministers will go from house-to-house presenting the Watchtower magazine. A year’s subscription is only $1, and three booklets will be given free to each new subscriber.
1954 MEMORIAL ANNOUNCEMENT
Saturday, April 17, 1954, is the date for observing the Lord’s evening meal. After 6 p.m., Standard Time, all persons dedicated to Jehovah and his service should assemble in their Kingdom Hall or place of meeting to obediently keep the Memorial. (1 Cor. 11:20-26, NW) The meeting will be opened with song and prayer, after which a capable dedicated and baptized brother of the anointed, if such is available, will give a talk on the importance and meaning of the Memorial. The emblems, unleavened bread and red wine, will be served at an appropriate time in the course of the meeting, and the anointed will partake of them. Field service announcements may be made at the close of the talk, a song sung and the meeting closed with prayer. All people of good will should be encouraged to attend the Memorial and to join in Kingdom activities scheduled for Sunday, April 18. Each congregation should arrange for a public talk Sunday, April 18, and immediately following it report to the Society the number in attendance at the Memorial and the number partaking of the emblems, and the number attending the public talk.
THE “WATCHTOWER” MAGAZINE
The more one makes use of the Watchtower magazine, the more familiar he becomes with the contents of the Bible; and the more familiar one becomes with the Bible, the more he will want to make use of The Watchtower. This magazine is an invaluable aid to profitable Bible perusal, for it helps one to really understand the Bible and to become well acquainted with the glorious purposes of Jehovah God. Are you a subscriber for this magazine? It is published the first and fifteenth of each month and a year’s subscription is only $1. Three booklets on stirring Bible topics will be given with each new subscription.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of March 7: The Ransom Merit of Jesus Christ; also, “Release by Ransom,” ¶1-3.
Week of March 14: “Release by Ransom,” ¶4-28.

