Become Skilled in Your Work
WHEN it comes to work, Jehovah is the great Expender. He never tires of carrying out his purposes, he always completes what he starts out to do and he works with consummate skill. As we consider his works of creation we are impelled to exclaim: “O Jehovah, how manifold are thy works! In wisdom hast thou made them all.”—Ps. 104:24, AS.a
Jehovah’s example as a worker was followed by Christ Jesus. In the first place he worked alongside his Father in the monumental task of building the universe. Then, upon being sent to earth, he worked faithfully with consuming zeal and great skill, accomplishing the threefold purpose for which he had been sent, namely, to bear witness to the truth, to give his life a ransom for man, and to vindicate his Father’s name by maintaining integrity under test.
So that the work of bearing witness might continue and so that others also may have a share in the vindication of Jehovah’s name, by maintaining integrity, and gain for themselves the benefit of his ransom, Jesus Christ while on earth formed a service organization with his twelve apostles, whom he personally trained.
Although a great falling away took place after the apostles fell asleep in death, as a result of which we see today a Christendom teaching false doctrines, indolent and divided by a clergy-laity distinction, yet Jehovah has in recent years, by means of his Word, his spirit and his guiding providences, again provided for a service organization in the earth to carry out his purposes. Known as the New World society, it brings to the people the truth, has no clergy-laity distinction but all its members work and preach.
And you, the individual ministers in the organization, upon whom rests the burden of preaching the good news of the Kingdom, while pushing ahead with zeal, remember that the effort made is not everything; it is results that count in the final analysis, and results can be expected only if the effort is applied efficiently, if you become skilled in your work.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, April 1, 1953.

