Letter Regarding “New Heavens and a New Earth”
THE following interesting letter from the twenty-second class of Gilead to the president of the Watch Tower Society is published because of its general interest.
November 9, 1953
Dear Brother Knorr:
The new earth founded 1919! Indeed a faith-strengthening fact to all lovers of truth and righteousness. We, the students of the 22nd class of Gilead, having completed an absorbing study of the book “New Heavens and a New Earth”, are very grateful to the “Giver of every good and perfect present” for this provision and, through you, we desire to express our heartfelt thanks to the “faithful and discreet slave.”
From its opening chapter our appreciation grows for Jehovah our God, who does not leave us in ignorance or at the mercy of worldly scientists, but rather invites us to ask Him questions concerning His purposes and operations for the blessing of mankind. With forceful simplicity our questions were reasonably and Scripturally answered as we were quickly carried through the revealing study of creation, exhibiting the wonderful harmony of true science with His Word.
Our attention was next irresistibly drawn to the account of Ezekiel, chapter 28, detailing the striking parallelism of the once faithful, but later treacherous, course of conduct of the king of Tyre with God’s people; how this so exactly fits the perfidious action of the archenemy, Satan the Devil, in whom this prophecy finds its major fulfillment!
Exciting as these truths were to us, of surpassing joy was the clear realization of the establishment and operation of the New World society. Since the “new heavens” are higher than the “new earth,” so a righteous heavens will guarantee a righteous earth. How proper, then, to delight in the qualifications of the tried and tested foundation stone, Christ Jesus! Contrasting his course with the failure under test of the original “covering cherub” serves to emphasize the solid, enduring and perfectly righteous qualities of the new world’s foundation, laid in heavenly Zion A.D. 33 in the first instance, but in full scale when the Kingdom was born A.D. 1914.
Tracing the history of the prophetic city of Jerusalem, or Zion, down to its fatal end and the vivid description of the desolating of spiritual Israel thereafter, prepared us for the masterly exposition of Isaiah 66. Barrenness and desolation ended! In one day, Jehovah’s day, Zion, the universal organization, brings forth a heavenly man-child government in 1914, and in 1919 a new nation, yes, also a new land! With liberation from Babylonish captivity the new nation of the anointed remnant are brought into the new land of organized activity, these happy inhabitants thus forming the “new earth.” Joy at this realization increased as we learned that the land, a visible organization, has now expanded to include additional inhabitants, the “strangers,” men of good will from all countries and “the isles afar off,” who join in with the new nation in building up the land, the New World society organization.
To learn how Isaiah 65:25 also applies now in that the “new earth” is free from all beastliness, animalism and any vicious disposition to be wild and hurtful to fellow associates, greatly enhances our appreciation of living and working under the New World society.
Striking a note of urgency, the book directs our attention to Luke 21:20, 21 and highlights the prophetic significance of the “disgusting thing that causes desolation” as to ‘Jerusalem’s being surrounded by encamped armies.’ A strong appeal is made to all to follow the course of the faithful Christians who, when the Roman armies first encircled Jerusalem A.D. 66, rightly took this as the cue foretold by Jesus and ‘fled to the mountains.’ So today, as we see the leftist totalitarian forces contained within the modern “disgusting thing,” the alliance of apostate religion with the United Nations, lined up against antitypical Jerusalem, should this not alert the discerning reader to flee posthaste to God’s organization, the New World society?
In a ring of optimism the last chapter gives us a clearing vision of the operation of the New World society after Armageddon. Stepping out as pioneers into a cleansed earth, they will undertake, under the direction of the New World society, tremendous reconstruction projects. Living in the resultant paradise will never become monotonous, but will be a daily delight, perpetually warmed with love from God and his King and from fellow man. This transformed earth will never end, but will be preserved by the Creator of the “new heavens and the new earth” to be an eternal monument testifying to the vindication of his universal sovereignty and holy name.
In the intervening period between now and Armageddon we feel this publication will be the means of directing many thousands to associate with the New World society. With its striking title, concrete hopes, wealth of Scripture proofs, colored illustrations and chart of historical dates, we are eagerly looking forward with the rest of our brothers under the New World society to offering this latest textbook in the house-to-house ministry. As a medium for home Bible studies we are convinced of its excellency. Above all, we are assured that this book will prove particularly advantageous at the congregational book studies where an examination of it will deepen the faith and appreciation of all associates of the New World society.
Our own study of this book has made us look forward with increased faith and zeal to the time when we can, in a more abundant way, help those who ‘sigh and cry’ to appreciate Jehovah’s “new heavens” and to gain everlasting life as part of His righteous “new earth.”
Your co-workers in the interests of the New World society,
THE STUDENTS OF THE
22ND CLASS OF GILEAD

