“Do Not Be Afraid or Be Terrified”
“Do not be afraid or be terrified. . . . Jehovah will be with you.”—2 CHRONICLES 20:17.
 1. What effect does terrorism have on people, and why is their fear understandable?
TERRORISM! The very word strikes fear into the heart, evoking feelings of insecurity and helplessness. It awakens mixed emotions of horror, grief, and anger. And it is a word that describes what many fear will plague mankind for years to come. The fact that some countries for decades have been fighting terrorism in its many forms with only limited success gives credence to such fear.
 2. How do Jehovah’s Witnesses react to the problem of terrorism, leading to what questions?
2 Nevertheless, there is genuine reason for hope. Jehovah’s Witnesses, who are actively preaching in 234 lands and territories of the earth, are remarkably optimistic. Instead of fearing that terrorism will never be eliminated, they are confident that it will be—and soon. Is it realistic to share their optimism? Who could ever succeed in ridding the world of this scourge, and how could it happen? Since violence of some kind has probably touched all of us, it would be well to examine the basis for such optimism.
 3. What causes for fear exist, and what is foretold about our time?
3 Today, people are afraid and terrified for a variety of reasons. Think of the multitudes who are no longer able to care for themselves because of advanced age, of individuals wasting away with incurable diseases, and of families struggling economically to make ends meet. In fact, think of the uncertainty of life itself! Sudden death by accident or disaster may seem to lurk around every corner, ready to put an end to everything we hold dear. Such fear and anxiety, plus numerous personal conflicts and disappointments, have made our times precisely what the apostle Paul described: “Know this, that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here. For men will be lovers of themselves, . . . having no natural affection, not open to any agreement, slanderers, without self-control, fierce, without love of goodness.”—2 Timothy 3:1-3.
 4. What positive aspect is there to the bleak picture presented at 2 Timothy 3:1-3?
4 Although this scripture paints a bleak picture, it nonetheless points to hope. Notice that the critical times are to exist “in the last days” of Satan’s present wicked system of things. This means that relief is near and that the wicked world system is soon to be replaced by the rule of the perfect Kingdom of God, for which Jesus taught his followers to pray. (Matthew 6:9, 10) That Kingdom is God’s heavenly government, which “will never be brought to ruin,” says the prophet Daniel, but “it will crush and put an end to all these [human] kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.”—Daniel 2:44.
Christian Neutrality Versus Terrorism
 5. How have nations recently responded to the threat of terrorism?
5 For decades, terrorism has taken thousands of lives. Worldwide awareness of this danger increased considerably after the attacks in New York City and Washington, D.C., on September 11, 2001. In view of the magnitude and global scope of terrorism, nations around the earth quickly banded together to combat it. For example, on December 4, 2001, according to media reports, “foreign ministers from 55 European, North American and Central Asian countries unanimously adopted a plan” designed to coordinate their efforts. A top U.S. official praised this action as giving “a new level of energy” to the counterterrorism effort. Suddenly, hundreds of millions of people were caught up in what The New York Times Magazine called “the beginning of an epic battle.” How successful such efforts will be remains to be seen. The repercussions of such a war against terror, however, have evoked feelings of fear and apprehension in many, but not in those trusting in Jehovah.
 6. (a) Why may some at times find it difficult to accept the stand of Christian neutrality taken by Jehovah’s Witnesses? (b) What example regarding political activity did Jesus set for his followers?
6 Jehovah’s Witnesses are well-known for their political neutrality. While most people may be willing to accept this position in times of peace, they become less tolerant when extraordinary circumstances arise. Often, fear and uncertainty brought on by war arouse strong sentiments of nationalism. This may make it difficult for some to understand why anyone would be reluctant to support popular national movements. True Christians, nevertheless, know that they must obey Jesus’ command to be “no part of the world.” (John 15:19; 17:14-16; 18:36; James 4:4) This requires that they maintain neutrality in political or social matters. Jesus himself set the proper example. Considering his perfect wisdom and outstanding abilities, he could have made a fine contribution to the human affairs of his day. Yet, he refrained from getting involved politically. At the beginning of his ministry, he flatly rejected Satan’s offer of rulership over all the kingdoms of the world. Later, he decisively avoided a draft for political office.—Matthew 4:8-10; John 6:14, 15.
7, 8. (a) What does political neutrality on the part of Jehovah’s Witnesses not mean, and why? (b) How does Romans 13:1, 2 rule out participation in violent activities against governments?
7 The neutral stand taken by Jehovah’s Witnesses should not be misunderstood to mean that they support or condone acts of violence. For them to do so would belie their claim of being servants of “the God of love and of peace.” (2 Corinthians 13:11) They have learned how Jehovah feels about violence. The psalmist wrote: “Jehovah himself examines the righteous one as well as the wicked one, and anyone loving violence His soul certainly hates.” (Psalm 11:5) They are also aware of what Jesus said to the apostle Peter: “Return your sword to its place, for all those who take the sword will perish by the sword.”—Matthew 26:52.
8 Although history clearly shows that counterfeit Christians have often resorted to “the sword,” that is not true of Jehovah’s Witnesses. They refrain from all such activity. The Witnesses faithfully obey the injunction of Romans 13:1, 2: “Let every soul be in subjection to the superior authorities [governmental rulers], for there is no authority except by God; the existing authorities stand placed in their relative positions by God. Therefore he who opposes the authority has taken a stand against the arrangement of God; those who have taken a stand against it will receive judgment to themselves.”
 9. In what two ways do Jehovah’s Witnesses combat terrorism?
9 Since terrorism is so evil, however, should not Jehovah’s Witnesses be doing something to help combat it? Yes they should, and they are. First of all, they refrain from any such activity themselves. Second, they teach people Christian principles that when followed eliminate violence in all its forms.a Last year, the Witnesses spent 1,202,381,302 hours helping people to learn this Christian way. This was not time wasted, for as a result of this activity, 265,469 persons were baptized as Witnesses of Jehovah, thus showing publicly their categorical rejection of violence.
10. What are the prospects for wiping out violence in today’s world?
10 Additionally, Jehovah’s Witnesses recognize that they of themselves can never rid the world of evil. That is why they place their unqualified trust in the one who can—Jehovah God. (Psalm 83:18) Despite sincere efforts, humans cannot bring an end to violence. The inspired Bible writer forewarns us about our time, “the last days,” and says: “Wicked men and impostors will advance from bad to worse, misleading and being misled.” (2 Timothy 3:1, 13) Viewed from this standpoint, human prospects for winning the battle against evil are less than favorable. On the other hand, we can rely upon Jehovah to remove violence totally and permanently.—Psalm 37:1, 2, 9-11; Proverbs 24:19, 20; Isaiah 60:18.
Fearless in the Face of Imminent Attack
11. What steps has Jehovah already taken to eliminate violence?
11 Since the God of peace hates violence, we can understand why he has initiated steps to destroy its root cause, Satan the Devil. In fact, He has already caused Satan to suffer a humiliating defeat at the hands of the archangel Michael—God’s newly enthroned King, Christ Jesus. The Bible describes it this way: “War broke out in heaven: Michael and his angels battled with the dragon, and the dragon and its angels battled but it did not prevail, neither was a place found for them any longer in heaven. So down the great dragon was hurled, the original serpent, the one called Devil and Satan, who is misleading the entire inhabited earth; he was hurled down to the earth, and his angels were hurled down with him.”—Revelation 12:7-9.
12, 13. (a) What is significant about the year 1914? (b) What does Ezekiel’s prophecy foretell for those coming out in support of God’s Kingdom?
12 Bible chronology and world events coincide in pinpointing the year 1914 as the time when that war in heaven took place. Since then, world conditions have steadily worsened. Revelation 12:12 explains why, saying: “On this account be glad, you heavens and you who reside in them! Woe for the earth and for the sea, because the Devil has come down to you, having great anger, knowing he has a short period of time.”
13 Understandably, the Devil’s anger has been directed primarily against God’s anointed worshipers and their “other sheep” companions. (John 10:16; Revelation 12:17) This opposition will soon reach its climax when the Devil launches a bitter attack against all those who support God’s established Kingdom and who place their trust in it. This all-out attack is referred to in Ezekiel chapter 38 as an attack by “Gog of the land of Magog.”
14. What protective efforts have Jehovah’s Witnesses enjoyed in the past, and will this always be so?
14 Since Satan’s ouster from heaven, God’s people have sometimes been protected from Satan’s attacks by the efforts of certain political elements, described in symbolic language at Revelation 12:15, 16. In contrast, the Bible indicates that during Satan’s final attack, no human agencies will come to the defense of those who place their trust in Jehovah. Should this cause Christians to become afraid or terrified? Not at all!
15, 16. (a) Jehovah’s reassuring words to his people in the days of Jehoshaphat present what cause for optimism for Christians today? (b) What pattern did Jehoshaphat and the people set for God’s servants today?
15 God will back his people just as surely as he supported his typical nation in King Jehoshaphat’s day. We read: “Pay attention, all Judah and you inhabitants of Jerusalem and King Jehoshaphat! Here is what Jehovah has said to you, ‘Do not you be afraid or be terrified because of this large crowd; for the battle is not yours, but God’s. . . . You will not need to fight in this instance. Take your position, stand still and see the salvation of Jehovah in your behalf. O Judah and Jerusalem, do not be afraid or be terrified. Tomorrow go out against them, and Jehovah will be with you.’”—2 Chronicles 20:15-17.
16 The people of Judah were assured that they would have no need to fight. Likewise, when God’s people are attacked by Gog of Magog, they will refrain from taking up arms in self-defense. Rather, they will “stand still and see the salvation of Jehovah” in their behalf. Of course, standing still does not indicate complete inactivity, even as God’s people in the days of Jehoshaphat were not totally inactive. We read: “At once Jehoshaphat bowed low with his face to the earth, and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem themselves fell down before Jehovah to do obeisance to Jehovah. . . . Further, [Jehoshaphat] took counsel with the people and stationed singers to Jehovah and those offering praise in holy adornment as they went out ahead of the armed men, and saying: ‘Give praise to Jehovah, for to time indefinite is his loving-kindness.’” (2 Chronicles 20:18-21) Yes, even in the face of enemy attack, the people continued actively praising Jehovah. This sets the pattern for Jehovah’s Witnesses to follow when Gog launches his attack against them.
17, 18. (a) What positive attitude do Jehovah’s Witnesses today have as regards Gog’s attack? (b) What reminder was recently given to Christian youths?
17 Until then—and even after Gog’s attack has begun—Jehovah’s Witnesses will continue in their support of God’s Kingdom. They will continue to find strength and protection in association with the more than 94,600 congregations around the world. (Isaiah 26:20) What an opportune time to praise Jehovah courageously! No, living in expectation of Gog’s imminent attack does not cause them to shrink back in fear. Rather, it spurs them on to increase their sacrifice of praise to the extent that they reasonably can.—Psalm 146:2.
18 This positive attitude is nicely demonstrated by thousands of young ones all over the world who have taken up the full-time ministry. To highlight the superiority of choosing such a life course, the tract Youths—What Will You Do With Your Life? was released at the 2002 district conventions. Christians, both young and old, are grateful for such timely reminders.—Psalm 119:14, 24, 99, 119, 129, 146.
19, 20. (a) Why do Christians have no reason to be afraid or terrified? (b) What will the next study article do?
19 In spite of world conditions, Christians need not be afraid or terrified. They know that soon Jehovah’s Kingdom will once and for all wipe out violence in all its forms. They also find comfort in knowing that the resurrection will restore to life many who have lost their lives through violence. While this will give some their first opportunity to learn about Jehovah, it will enable others to continue their course of dedicated service to him.—Acts 24:15.
20 As true Christians, we appreciate the need for maintaining Christian neutrality and are determined to do so. We want to hold on to the marvelous prospect of being able to “stand still and see the salvation of Jehovah.” The next article will strengthen our faith by making us aware of present-day events that are progressively giving further insight into the fulfillment of Bible prophecy.
[Footnote]
For examples of individuals who renounced lives of violence in order to become Witnesses, see Awake! issues of March 22, 1990, page 21; August 8, 1991, page 18; and Watchtower issues of January 1, 1996, page 5; August 1, 1998, page 5.
Can You Explain?
• Why are many people today so pessimistic?
• Why are Jehovah’s Witnesses optimistic about the future?
• What has Jehovah already done about the cause of all violence?
• Why is there no reason for us to fear Gog’s attack?
[Picture on page 13]
Jesus set the proper example of Christian neutrality
[Pictures on page 16]
Thousands of young Witnesses have joyfully taken up the full-time ministry
[Picture Credit Line on page 12]
UN PHOTO 186226/M. Grafman

