R748 : page 1 



VOL. VI. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., MAY, 1885. 

NO. 9. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: 
NO. 40 FEDERAL ST. ALLEGHENY, PA. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 
TAKE NOTICE. 



This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 
we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat— yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it- "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently— and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 

==================== page 1 



WALL CHARTS.-We have no more. 



FLORIDA LAND.-Only two plots of the land donated to the 
Z.W.T. Tract Fund remain for sale. 



R748 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

"Ye can discern the face of the sky and of the earth, but how is it 
that ye do not discern this time?" Luke 12:56-59. 

Glance backward for a little more than eighteen centuries. There 
stands Jesus with twelve disciples; they are mostly young men, the 
Master himself being but little over thirty. They have never had an 
education, and most of them have been ordinary fishermen. But 
though "unlearned and ignorant men" (Acts 4:13), the disciples had 
a confidence and power in teaching which marked them among 
men as peculiar; and wherever they went "they took knowledge of 
them that they had been with Jesus," for though their Master had 
"never learned," yet he was scholarly, a man of letters. John 7:15. 

But after all, that was an insignificant little band in the eyes of the 
military governor Pilate, in the eyes of the chief priest, and in the 
eyes of the Scribes, and Pharisees-the Doctors of Divinity-the 
apostles of legal holiness in that day. The class chosen to announce 
Jesus as the King of the Jews, saying, "The time is fulfilled and the 
kingdom of God is at hand" (Mark 1 : 15), was not a prepossessing 
one, and to the zealous Jew was so unlike what might be expected 
of their long anticipated Messiah, and so out of harmony with their 
great religious teachers, that they failed to recognize Jesus as such. 

The miracles and teachings of Jesus, and the correspondence of 
these with the predictions concerning Messiah, made by the Lord's 
prophets long before, were the only evidence Israel had, that Jesus 
was the long-expected King. This could be evidence to such only as 
by careful heed to the "more sure word of prophecy," knew what to 
expect, and who by humility of mind would be prepared not only to 
note the prophetic utterances which foretold the rejection and 



crucifixion of Jesus, but to receive him who came in meekness with 
the escort of humble fishermen. 

Even John the Baptizer, his cousin, who had immersed Jesus, and 
who saw and bare witness to his anointing by the holy spirit of God 
was sorely puzzled by the strange course events were taking. He 
had perhaps supposed that when anointed, Jesus would publicly 
announce himself with power and authority, and bring honor and 
dignity to all associated with him; but to the contrary of this, Jesus 
was going about quietly and not attempting the exercise of marked 
power as a ruler, while he (John) had been cast into prison. Things 
progressed so differently from what he had expected that even 
John's faith in Jesus as the Messiah began to fail, and he sent a 
message to Jesus, saying: "Art thou he that should come, or [are 
you also merely a forerunner as I was, and] look we for another," to 
be the Deliverer, the Messiah to bless Israel and through them all 
the nations? 

Mark carefully the answer of Jesus to John; he in substance recalls 
to him the transpiring events, as in the Scripture at the head of this 
article; and he expected John to be able to DISCERN THE TIME 
by the events. He said, "Go and show John again, those things 
which ye do hear and see: The blind receive their sight, and the 
lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are 
raised up, and the poor have the gospel preached to them." Matt. 
11:3-6. 

There was in transpiring events proof that he who was then present, 
was no less than the Messiah promised. But we should not forget 
either, that not only were Jesus' miracles performed with a degree 
of secrecy, but that they were done over a large area of country, and 
that the majority of the Jews probably never saw one of the healed 
persons. Nor had they the printing press and its reporters to spread 
reports of the details of the miracles. 

The learned there, might have known from Daniel's prophecy that 
The time was fulfilled; (Dan. 9:24-27; Mark 1:15,) but for the 
masses, the evidence was simply, and only, the signs of the times; 
but these because blinded by the traditions of men, they did not 
appreciate. In following men the word of God became of none 
effect, so that the people as well as the leaders were blind. The 
blind followed the blind; both stumbled; and thus Israel as a nation 
received not the blessing but only the elect— those who were of the 
class chosen, "Israelites indeed." 

And now what do we see? Messiah is present again; the time is 
fulfilled for his Second Advent— Jesus a spiritual being, in power, is 
about to exalt his "body" to his own condition, and to judge, 
cleanse, heal and bless the world— the House of Jacob and all the 
families of the earth. 

What are the evidences? They have been repeatedly furnished in 
these columns, and are ever increasing. We have shown the 
testimony of the prophets to be that-The Day of the Lord [the time 



of Christ's presence] is a day of trouble; that in it the powers of the 
heavens shall be shaken [earthly governments and authorities 
removed-Matt. 24:29; Heb. 12:27,28; Danl. 2:44.] In it, when fully 
under way, all the tribes of the earth shall mourn because of him 
who now is assuming the control, and who will shake to pieces 
every evil system which hinders, binds, oppresses, or blinds the 
people whom he comes to bless— all of earth's families. Then the 
great ones shall fear as they look after those things coming upon the 
earth. They are already in this condition. They see the spirit of 
liberty working among the masses, and they truly see that it will 
soon lead them to madness and bring a sanguinary conflict. Again, 
it is noted in Scripture that in the coming troubles the rich of this 
world will suffer much; (James 5:1-4) and so it is, to-day, the aims 
and threats of the discontented are against the wealthy. We see 
these things all about us; are they not signs of the times in which we 
are living? 

Look again; see the Jew once more finding a home in the land of 
promise from which for so long he has been an exile. Note, too, the 
fact that there is now a beginning of the turning away of his 
blindness, and he is beginning to recognize Him whom they have 
pierced and lament therefor. (Zech. 12:10.) Turn now to the apostle 
James' statement, and note that this rebuilding of Israel is due 
"after" the selection of the people for his name, the Bride from the 
Gentiles. (Acts 15:16,17.) Turn to Paul and note his statement-that 
when the fulness of the Gentiles is come in [the full number 
selected from the Gentiles to be joint-heirs with Christ— His Bride] 
then, blindness shall begin to depart from Jacob-Israel after the 
flesh. Rom. 11:25-32. A letter from the one whom God seems to be 
raising up as a teacher among the Jews, will be found in another 
column, and is of deep interest as bearing upon this feature of 
restitution. What is this, if not an evidence of what the time periods 
of the prophets have already showed us? -that we are living in the 
harvest of the Christian age, the dawning of the Millennial age; that 
the selection and trial of "the Church which is His (Christ's) body" 
is about complete. It proves that the DELIVERER (head and body) 
is come, and the blessing coming to Israel is but a premonition of 
the coming blessings upon all nations, of which they are the first- 
fruits. 

Look again, but in another direction; Note the increase of special 
healing of diseases since 1 874. Some are in answer to prayer, some 
in answer to anointing with oil and prayer, and some without 
prayer, or oil, or anything. Thus in various ways to-day, ye see 
increasingly that the lame walk, the deaf hear, the dumb speak, 
blind eyes are opened, and the Gospel (good tidings) of a 
"restitution for the groaning creation, of all things spoken by the 
mouth of all the holy prophets" (Acts 3:21.) is preached. 

The healings of our day are as pronounced and as true, as were 
those at the first advent, except that the dead have not yet been 
raised from the tomb. Nor is it in any one place, but everywhere, 



that this power is manifested and this feature of restitution work is 
beginning. We hear from Sweden, and Germany and Britain, in 
much the same strain, as from all over this land. Among the 
remarkable insurances coming under our notice recently, is that of a 
family in Louisville, Ky.,* in which four deaf and dumb persons 
were perfectly and instantly healed. One of them aged eleven years, 
had never spoken or heard from birth. The two small towns of 
Midway and Primrose, Pa., have during the past month been much 
excited by six remarkable cases of faith cure from various maladies. 
One old man, Hamilton Smith, Midway, Pa., had been so crippled 
by rheumatism that he could not stoop down; but was instantly 
healed, and to a reporter who called to inquire regarding his 
healing, demonstrated his suppleness by kicking higher than his 
own height, and the night he was cured he jumped over a fire board 
fence with ease. He declares that he is stronger than ever, and that 
he is becoming young again. And in fact this seems true. He is 
seventy-two years old but in a short time his white hair has 
commenced to resume its original color; the wrinkles are leaving 
his face, and his complexion becoming fresh so that he might pass 
now, for a man of fifty. 

We might multiply instances; one of a woman healed after an 
illness of sixteen years, who is now thirty-seven years old but might 
readily be mistaken for twenty. She though ignorant of the views 
presented in the TOWER relative to our being now in the dawn of 
Millennial Day, expresses herself as satisfied that 



*Mrs. Ann Mack, No. 2700 Lytle St., Louisville. 

R749 : page 1 

she has entered on the "Resurrection Life" as she calls it. 

If these be not evidences of the beginning of Restitution work, what 
are they? This is the right time for the work of healing; in the time 
of the first advent, restitution and restitution works, healing, etc., 
were not due; they were premature and were only performed to 
manifest forth beforehand, Christ's glory 

R749 : page 2 

and to illustrate the powers of the world (age) to come, which now 
is at hand. In his miracles, as in everything else, Jesus dealt with the 
end of that age as though it had been the Gospel age which it only 
typified; hence the works of the restitution which he and the 
disciples performed, no less than offering himself then as their 
King, and Reaper, were but illustrations of the end of the Christian 
age, his assumption of kingly powers, etc., now fully due, because 
the "body," the church, is complete, and the time for this blessed 
SEED of Jehovah (Gal. 3:29) to bless all the families of earth, is at 
hand. 



If all could see that the world's hope is restitution to perfection, 
many more of that class would be prepared to ask the Lord in faith 
for physical healing and might go on unto the perfection of human 
nature, instead of into the tomb. Not only is the time at hand when 
he that belie veth need not enter the tomb, but such may go from 
strength to strength. If men but realized the Scripture teaching, 
better, and did not get the heavenly hope of the Gospel church, the 
"body of Christ," mixed with the restitution hope of the world, they 
would be much better prepared to receive the blessing of restitution 
now within their reach. The basis of restitution simply stated is this: 
Man became a sinner and in Adam his right and hold upon life was 
lost. Since then, death has reigned over all. But Jesus was made 
flesh in order that he by God's favor might redeem all. He paid the 
full penalty, DEATH, and thus redeemed ALL. (Rom. 5:17-19.) 

Now, all may return to life and perfection because ransomed by 
Jesus. This restitution might have taken effect as soon as Jesus died 
and rose and ascending on high presented the sacrifice on man's 
behalf. Jesus might have returned at once to restore all things but 
another work intervened the selection of the Christian church-"the 
body" "the Bride" of Christ Jesus, to be his joint-heir in the reign of 
blessing and work of restitution. Now, the work of restitution is 
fully due because the selection of the body of Christ, from the 
world is complete, and the work of restitution is beginning while 
the sifting of the consecrated saints progresses to completion. Men 
shall be and now may be, released by faith in him who gave the 
ransom which not only releases from pain and sickness, but 
ultimately from every degree of death, to perfect life. 

So far as our observation goes, the Lord makes use of various 
characters as agents in these healings, even as Judas was one of the 
twelve who worked miracles. And some mentioned as remarkable 
for doing "wonderful works" (Matt. 7:22), will lack the approval of 
the Master, and some were not reckoned among the followers of 
Christ (Mark 9:38,39). Apparently the Lord acknowledges and 
answers FAITH in this direction by whomsoever exercised, because 
it is now due time for restitution work of this kind to have a 
beginning. 

As heretofore shown, physical restitution is not the hope set before 
the "little flock," but on the contrary sacrifice. It is their mission as 
it was their Leader's whose footsteps they follow, to "lay down" life 
as human beings, not to take it up. They might be agents of God in 
blessing others as was Paul (Acts 19:12), and yet like him suffer 
from maladies they were instrumental in curing in others (2 Cor. 
12:8,9). Of the Master it was truly said: "He saved others himself 
he cannot save." Had he saved himself, he could not have been our 
Redeemer. So if we would share his glory, and with him bless and 
restore the families of earth, we must with him, share in his 
sacrifice. 

But while these, appreciating their covenant, will not ask for 
healing or any earthly blessings, it does not follow that if they 



asked, God would always, as in Paul's case, refuse them. Thus Jesus 
said in Gethsemane, "Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my 
Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of 
angels? But then how shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it 
must be." Matt. 26:53,54. 

If the legions of angels had protected him from the priests and 
soldiery then where would have been his sacrifice? Therefore he 
did not ask. Likewise those who now tread the same "narrow way" 
[See "Food," page 134] refuse to ask for the same reason-that they 
may complete their covenant of sacrifice. At times, however, 
without asking, such have been relieved in such manner as to 
enable them to accomplish further labor in the Lord's vineyard 
(Phil. 1:12,13,24,25). 

What think you of the signs of our times? How is it that you can 
discern the face of the sky, but cannot discern this time? Is it not 
more clearly marked than was the first advent? Are there not more 
convincing proofs now, than there were then, even in the signs of 
the times, that we are in the Day of the Lord's presence? 

The Lord willing, we purpose hereafter to devote more space to the 
mention of cases of healing on every hand, that this sign of 
restitution and hence of the Lord's presence (Acts 3:21) may be 
duly noted by our readers. 



R749 : page 2 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Ellenton, April 29, 1885. 

C. T. RUSSELL, DEAR SIR: I wish to ask a question on a subject 
that does not appear quite plain to me in the TOWER. I have been a 
member of the Presbyterian Church for twenty odd years, having 
joined that Church at my old home, St. Louis, Missouri. I am quite 
certain that I joined the Church with a sincere desire to become one 
of Christ's followers, and I fully understood the nature of the vows I 
took, and experienced great pleasure in reading the Bible with its 
commentaries; and this for a number of years. I either expected too 
much in this new relation I had placed myself in, or else I had never 
experienced a change of heart, for in spite of my earnest desire after 
a Christian life and holiness, I was continually breaking God's 
Word in some way or other. This caused me so much trouble that 
finally I grew cold, and of late years have taken very little interest 
in religion, thinking that I must long ago have been out of its pale, 
and might just as well let myself drift along with the masses and 
take my chance with others. At no time, however, has my belief in 
the fundamental truths of the Bible been lost, nor do I think they 
ever will be. I simply found I could not live up to its teachings so 
considered myself out of 



R750 : page 2 

the race. When I first read your paper, however, and afterwards 
"Food for Thinking Christians," I became greatly encouraged and 
had reason to believe that I might yet have a chance of reaching the 
class of them enjoying perfect human nature. This is the point, 
therefore, that I am not clear about from reading in the TOWER. 
What I wish to ask is, Does "Food for Thinking Christians" teach 
that persons in my condition have yet an opportunity of being 
brought back into closer fellowship with the Lord, and finally 
partake of the divine nature and become spiritual new creatures? If 
so, when will that change take place? And how shall one know 
whether he belongs to this class [the spiritual] or will only be able 
to attain to the "perfect human nature"? You will confer a great 
favor upon me by answering these questions. 

Yours truly, 



IN REPLY. 



DEAR BROTHER: We are glad to know that the truth in your 
case has been doing its quickening work. In answer to your 
question I would say that I judge you to be eligible to the high 
calling— "the divine nature"; but you can very soon decide that 
matter for yourself. If you ever gave yourself entirely and 
unreservedly to the Lord, you may be sure on the strength of the 
promise, "Him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out"— you 
were accepted of him. And those new desires after and appreciation 
of heavenly things are an evidence of your adoption and sealing. 

Though you became discouraged, and therefore grew cold in your 
love and service, because of your ignorance of our Lord's bounty 
and kind consideration for our frailties since covered with our 
Redeemer's righteousness, He has now sent you such a thrilling 
message of his wondrous grace as to quicken you into new life, and 
to remind you of your covenant and of the necessity of fulfilling it, 
and thus making your calling and election sure. 

If you never so consecrated, of course it is your privilege to rise to 
human perfection; but I think from what you say, the former is your 
case. 

I should add, that while it is possible for those who have 
consecrated, to so run as to obtain the great prize; it is of course 
possible to come short of it, "Let us therefore fear," and so run with 
care. 

EDITOR. 

Nebraska, April 8th, 1885. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL: I come to you a new reader of the 
TOWER. I am not of those who have come out of "Babylon" as 
have not been "defiled" in that way. The Lord took me out from the 
world as "a brand from the burning," and has been training me in 



the way of truth. It has been here a little and there a little. I was free 
from prejudice to start with, and, with God's help, have kept so. I 
am always ready to accept of truth and light, no matter by whom it 
is presented. I saw from the start that I could never join any of the 
different denominations and remain with them. This work has been 
going on in me now about five years. I have believed in the return 
of Christ that length of time. 

Some time over two years ago "Food for Thinking Christians" was 
handed me by a dear old man, whose feelings I respected. So I 
accepted of it, took it home and laid it away,— counted it as rubbish 
without giving it a hearing. It went to Jerusalem and back among 
my other books in the year of 1883. Going and coming I sold and 
gave away some of my little stock of books, but somehow this little 
no-account affair stuck to me. Well, for over a month now I have 
been pleading with God for light on the "Times of the Fullness of 
the Gentiles. " What is to mark that event? While looking to the 
Lord for light on this and kindred subjects, I took up this little 
work, and— well I give God thanks. His mercy is for all, and 
endureth forever. After feeding on this for two days, I started to 
look up my old friend to see if he had anything more for me. I got a 
year's numbers of the TOWER. I want the whole truth, and pray to 
the Father of mercies to keep me free from error. Enclosed please 
find $5. Send me Young's Greek, Hebrew and English 
Concordance; put me on your list for the TOWER, and the balance 
in the Lord's treasury. I can use some extra numbers of the TOWER 
to good advantage. 

Perhaps it may interest you to know something of my plans for the 
future. I have none. I have closed up my business account with the 
world, and, as I believe, have made a full surrender to the Master. 
My only desire is to be led by him, that I might devote the 
remainder of my time for this age, as well as the age to come, in 
His service. Yours, hoping to be made ready for his appearing, 



Glasgow, Scotland, April 4th, 1885. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: On Sunday night, March 29, at 7 
o'clock, the anniversary of the Lord's Supper, the night on which he 
(Jesus) poured out his soul unto death for the sin of the world, 
twelve of the WATCH TOWER readers met in my house. 

After prayer and singing, together we read articles from the 
TOWER, when all joined in reading the Scripture proofs, and then 
partook of the bread and wine according to the Word (1 Cor. 
11:23). We were blessed with a sweet communion, and were sorry 
to separate at 10 o'clock. One brother remarked there were thirteen 
present, Jesus being in the midst of us, blest us and did us good. 

Thank God for the light we receive through the WATCH TOWER. 
The article on "Two Baptisms," which appeared in the TOWER 
seems to have taken hold of the readers here. 



I baptized four into Christ on April 1st., and others are wishing to 
be immersed into truth, which will be done, "For as many of you as 
have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ." Gal. 3:27. 

Yours in Christ, 



Plainview, Neb., March 1, 1885. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: For two years I have been a reader 
of ZION'S WATCH TOWER, and have looked anxiously for it 
each month. I should like to tell you how providential were the 
circumstances that first brought the September (1881) number to 
my notice, but it would be too long a story. I read it carefully and 
compared it with the Scriptures, and felt in my heart that it was the 
truth. And although I have been a member of the Baptist Church for 
twenty-five years, and have tried to do the will of God by his help, 
doubts would often drive away trust; but the TOWER came as a 
shining light, and led me to exclaim with Thomas, "My Lord and 
my God." And it is my daily prayer that He may send abroad his 
light until all the world shall know and do his will. 

Your Brother in Christ, . 



Independence, Kans. 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER: I began working with you two 
years ago, and I am sorry to say I have not been able to send you 
but 50 cents in money. I am so poor in this world's goods that I can 
hardly support my family. And yet I shudder when I think of the 
many hidden pitfalls into which I would have stumbled but for the 
TOWER. Quite a number with whom I labored have become 
subscribers of your paper. I do not want you to forget me, and yet, 
if I am eating food which by right belongs to one more worthy, do 
not permit me to stand in the way. I am still teaching whenever an 
opportunity is afforded, but meet with the opposition promised by 
our Saviour. A few days back I was in a Quaker congregation. 
When they asked the question, "If Christ died for all, then why are 
not all saved?" I replied, "Paul says, How can they hear without a 
preacher," &c. The elder of the church asked what I would do with 
the heathen. I replied, "It shall be testified unto them in due time." 

Your Brother in Christ, . 

R749 : page 3 



SUNSHINE OVER ALL. 

What folly, then," the faithless critic cries, 
With sneering lip and wise world-knowing eyes, 
While fort to fort, and post to post repeat 
The ceaseless challenge of the war-drum's beat; 



And round the green earth, to the church-bells' chime, 

The morning drum-roll of the camp keeps time. 

To dream of peace amidst a world in arms, 

Of swords to plowshares changed by Scriptural charms; 

Of nations, drunken with the wine of blood, 
Staggering to take the pledge of brotherhood, 
Like tipplers answering Father Matthew's call. 



Check Bau or Kaiser with the barricade 

Of 'Olive leaves' and resolutions made, 

Spike guns with pointed Scripture texts, and hope 

To capsize navies with a windy trope; 

Still shall the glory and the pomp of war 
Along their train the shouting millions draw; 
Still dusky labor to the parting brave 
His cap shall doff and beauty's kerchief wave, 

Still shall the bard to valor tune his song; 
Still hero-worship kneel before the strong; 
Rosy and sleek, the sable-gowned divine, 
O'er his third bottle of suggestive wine, 

To plumed and sworded auditors shall prove 

Their trade accordant with the law of love; 

And Church for State and State for Church shall fight, 

And both agree that might alone is right." 

Despite the sneers like these, oh, faithful few, 
Who dare to hold God's word and witness true, 
Whose clear-eyed faith transcends our evil time, 
And o'er the present wilderness of crime 

Sees the calm future with its robes of green, 
Its fleece-flecked mountains, and soft streams between. 
Still keep the path which duty bids ye tread, 
Though worldly wisdom shake the cautious head; 

No truth from heaven descends upon our sphere 
Without the greeting of the skeptic's sneer; 
Denied and mocked at till its blessings fall 
Common as dew and sunshine over all. 

-J. G. Whittier. 



R750 : page 3 

THE WITHERED FIG TREE PUTTING 
FORTH FRUIT. 

Matt. 21:19 and 24:32. 



We sometime since made mention of the conversion of a Jewish 
lawyer, Joseph Rabinowitz, of Southern Russia, to faith in Christ 
Jesus. Fully persuaded of the Messiahship of Jesus he returned to 
his home in Bessarabia and began to preach "Jesus our Jewish 
brother the true Messiah," with great success. Shortly after it was 
rumored that he had been murdered, but the latest accounts 
contradict this and say that the movement among the Jews is 
spreading gradually. The following translation of a letter from the 
Reformer to a gentleman of London will be read with interest. The 
fig tree cursed to the end of the age not only has leaves of promise 
but now begins to bear fruit. 

KISHENEY, January 2, 1885. To JOHN WILKINSON, the 
esteemed man: 

Your valuable letter and your pamphlet, "The Work of the Lord 
Among Israel," were received. My heart rejoiced when I read them 
and perceived how great and strong the love of your heart is toward 
the brethren of the Lord Jesus, the Messiah, according to the flesh, 
and how precious the salvation of the Israelitic nation is in your 
eyes. 

I prostrate myself before Jehovah, the God of our Lord Jesus, and 
from the depth of my heart stream forth the words of the Sweet 
Singer of Israel (Psa. 35,) "Let them be ashamed and brought to 
confusion together that rejoice at mine hurt. Let them shout for joy 
and be glad that favor my righteous cause; yea, let them say 
continually, Let the Lord be magnified, which hath pleasure in the 
prosperity of his servant." Amen. 

R751 : page 3 

Herewith I send you a pamphlet, "The First Fruits of a Fig Tree," 
which contains my opinions and statements in reference to those 
children of Israel in Southern Russia who believe in Jesus as the 
Messiah. These documents have been edited by Professor Franz 
Delitzsch, of Leipzig. Out of them you will learn to know the origin 
of our faith in Jesus (our Brother bodily), the Messiah. He is the 
innermost desire and longing of our hearts. Our English friends and 
brethren in Jesus, our Saviour, may be convinced by this above- 
named pamphlet that after the Lord hath made bare his holy arms in 
the eyes of all the nations, and all the ends of the earth have seen 
the salvation of our God, that now the time has come when there 
shall depart and go out from the midst of Israel all unclean persons, 
and the bearers of the vessels of the Lord shall be cleansed. 

True, the salvation of the Lord cannot go out and come into (Joshua 
6: 1) the world with haste, nor can it walk with rapidity, but now as 
Jehovah, the Avant-guard and King of the Universe, has passed on 
before the people of Israel, the God of Israel shall come also as 
Rear-guard, as gatherer of the outcasts of Israel. 

Beloved of the Lord! I herewith write to you that when my feet 
touched the holy city, i.e., Jerusalem, and I beheld the place where 



they pierced Him (Jesus), then and there Jehovah enlightened my 
eyes, so that I understood the Law, the Prophets and Psalms in 
reference to the plan of salvation, and I tasted somewhat of the 
sweetness of that mystery which is, to the sorrow of my heart, still 
unrevealed to the majority of my brethren, the sons of Israel. 

From that time on I devoted my time and name to the welfare of my 
stubborn and unhappy nation to testify unto them with a brazen 
forehead in the strength of God the gospel of promise, which our 
fathers had received, viz: that God hath raised this man, Jesus of 
Nazareth, out of the seed of David as Saviour (Liberator) of Israel. 

Through the depth of the riches and wisdom of God, the highest, 
our Fathers, who were incumbents of the Promise, rebelled against 
Jesus, so that grace might be bestowed upon the heathen nations, 
not through any promise, but through grace in the gospel of the 
Messiah. 

Now, after the fulness of the Gentiles hath come in, the time has 
arrived for us, the sons of Israel, to return to the God of Israel and 
his King and be his beloved children. We should accept our 
heritage, the heritage of Jacob, which is without limit, for we are 
the legitimate heirs, children of Abraham, disciples of Moses, 
servants of the house of David in eternity. Thus our fulness (i.e., the 
coming of many Israelites to Christ) will be our riches and the 
riches of the nations, according to the words of Jehovah by St. Paul, 
a firstborn of Israel, and at the same time the foremost among the 
returning heathen. 

Among my brethren and in large meetings I earnestly admonish, 
"Shake thyself from the dust; arise, put on my beautiful garments, 
my people; through the son of Jesse, Jesus of Nazareth, hath the 
Lord done great things with thee, O Israel, that he might also work 
great things among the nations of the earth, who were blessed in 
our fathers." 

I greatly thank God that I see thousands who cheerfully listen, and I 
trust in Jehovah, who elected David his servant, and his seed after 
him, that in due time all these will be living stones built by God 
himself into a steadfast house and priestly sanctuary, so that 
acceptably sacrifices may be brought hither to the God of Israel in 
Jesus, the Messiah. They shall know and accept the truth, which 
alone can make them free children. 

Many and worthy sons of Israel are waiting and long for the hour, 
the hour of grace of our God. I implore you, in the name of our 
brethren in Russia who seek the salvation, that the friends of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, wherever they be, may not be silent, but that they 
give counsel and speak out boldly, until Immanuel be with us also, 
until Jehovah show us him and his dwelling. 

Then all who see us in our land, Russia, will say of us, "They are 
the blessed seed of the Lord." 



These are humble words written from afar off by one who bows 
before you and seeks a more intimate acquaintance with you, a son 
of Israel indeed. 



JOSEPH RABINOWITZ. 



R751 : page 3 

OUR HOPE IN CHRIST. 

Paul had by the teaching of the Holy Spirit a clear conception that 
the "hope of Israel" as set before them in "Moses, the prophets and 
psalms, was "resurrection from the dead," and that this hope was 
fulfilled, its realization made sure, in the resurrection of Christ. 
(See Acts 23:6; 26:6-8; 26:22-23; 28:20.) 

So the light to Israel was the hope of resurrection. That hope is not 
yet realized. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph and Joshua still sleep. 
Their children scattered over the world are still in the dead spiritual 
condition as a people, typified by their bones. Light, therefore, has 
not yet dawned upon Israel. Whatever views may be held as to the 
light offered to Israel upon Pentecost, or by Stephen-and which 
they rejected -a reading of the prophecies (Isa. 42:6; 49:6, and 
60:3), with the context, would be convincing that the light there 
spoken of as to come to Israel (and which Paul evidently refers to) 
has not dawned. Now the question would naturally be, what delays 
it? I think the answer of the scripture is, "the waiting for the 
completion of the resurrection of Christ. " If we transfer to another 
dispensation the full fulfillment of the prophecies that "Christ is to 
be a light to lighten the Gentiles," and regard that the work of God 
now is the gathering of the body that is to share with its living head 
in resurrection life and power, and that the resurrection of Christ is 
not complete until the whole body is raised, the Scriptures are in 
harmony. 

The Christ of God is Jesus and the redeemed Church (1 Cor. 12:12; 
Eph. 5:23,30,31; Eph. 1:20-23; 2:21,22.) With this view Acts 15 is 
in perfect harmony. God is now visiting the Gentiles to gather THE 
BODY. After the resurrection, Christ will be revealed in GLORY 
AND LIGHT to Israel, and they shall fall before him as did 
Thomas, who is a type of Israel— and the veil taken from their 
hearts, they shall go out as the people through whom God will 
lighten the Gentiles. It is instructive to compare in this connection 
Acts 13:46, and Isa. 60:3. Does Paul speak of himself as an 
Israelite, commanded by this passage to go to the Gentiles, or of 
Christ as prophesied of as the light of the Gentiles? Perhaps both 
are included. 

Man was created by God to bear rule and have dominion over the 
earth (Gen. 1:26.) In his sin he lost all. In the promised SEED he is 
to regain all. Compare Gen. 1:26 with Ps. 8 and Heb. 2:5-10, and 
Rom. 8:19-24, for connecting links as to Christ our hope, as set 



forth in the promise of the "SEED." A very interesting study will be 
found in taking up the Bible as a history of Satan's war against the 
seed of the woman. He brought the first born Cain under the curse 
and condemnation of God for murder, by his pride. He killed Abel 
the second born. He corrupted the sons of Seth the third, and 
brought the race to destruction in the flood, God interposing by 
grace to save Noah. After Abraham is called out the war is against 
his family. One after another comes forth in prominence as if the 
promises would be fulfilled in them, but all fail, until the Son of 
God incarnate came and stood every test. He wrought 
righteousness, was without sin; and overcame the power of the 
devil. His title as the Son of man is intended always to carry us 
back to Gen. 3 in adoring gratitude to God for His faithfulness to 
His word and His grace to the sons of Adam (Gal. 4:4-6). By Christ 
and in his church is the victory gained. 

To Abraham, as the man of faith, how applicable is the definition of 
faith God gives us in Heb. 11:1, "who against hope believed in 
hope" (Rom. 4:18). He died at the age of 175. Promised a land he 
had never seen, he was 75 years old before his feet touched its soil. 
His first experience in it was a famine- and in leaving it, promised 
a seed by Sarah, he came near losing her in Egypt. Faith with him, 
as with all God's called ones, was continually tried. But for God's 
grace and providence Abraham would many a time have made 
shipwreck. "Against hope he believed in hope." All of the promises 
centre in the promise of a seed. He is to possess the land through 
his seed. Two or three times he tries to help God out of seeming 
difficulties in the literal fulfillment of his word, as do many of his 
children now. He fell into the line of argument that Sarah was not 
really to have a child— it was figurative and not literal— and so he 
tried to raise a figurative child-but, as do all who try to plan and 
interpret for God, he made a poor figure in his attempt, and his 
figurative child was cast out. "In Isaac shall thy seed be called." 
"Sarah shall have a son," was the literal word of God. His hope was 
in a literal Isaac, and all his efforts for Ishmael hindered instead of 
helped the thing he hoped for. Yet "against hope he believed in 
hope," and at the age of one hundred, received Isaac as one born 
from the dead, Rom. 4:19,20; Heb. 11:12; and rejoiced in the 
fulfillment of God's promises-in faith; literally, he had seen but a 
scant realization of them. He never possessed the land, he lived and 
died in a tent, and owned no part of Canaan except the place of his 
burial. God 

R752 : page 3 

promised him a seed as numerous as the stars, and like the sand of 
the seashore, in Isaac. When he died, Isaac had been married, and 
although years elapsed, Rebekah had no children, yet after the birth 
of Isaac we have no intimation that the faith of Abraham ever 
wavered. The gift of Isaac was the seal to him of everything 
promised, and looking upon Isaac, he rejoiced in all that was to 
come. And so the word presents the church as not yet having 



entered into the realization of her inheritance, but having Christ, 
knowing that with him God will freely give her all things, Rom. 

8:32. 

It is difficult to turn away from Isaac 

R752 : page 4 

in the manifold views of Christ we have presented through him. 
"He was the first to arise from the dead," in the figure of his birth, 
and his arising from the altar on Mount Moriah. In him the people, 
(Israel) were called, by the birth of Jacob-but not until God had 
first provided him a bride to share the riches and glory bestowed 
upon him by the Father. So in Christ, Israel are to be blessed, but, 
not until the Bride takes her place with the heavenly Bridegroom, 
Rom. 1 1:25,26. No part of the blessed Scripture is more calculated 
to feed the souls of Christ's redeemed and chosen people, and to set 
more plainly before them Christ our hope than Gen. 24, where we 
have Abraham sending the servant after a bride for Isaac. It is not a 
public event-the people of the land not seemingly interested, not 
occupied with its import. The servant goes with the message guided 
by God to the one whom God has chosen to be the Bride. Caravans 
of merchantmen, passing from Damascus to Egypt, soldiers of the 
king of Shinar, on missions of conquest, may have seen Eliezer as 
he journeyed to Mesopotamia, and may have known his errand, but 
they had no interest in it and knew nothing of God's purposes. So 
now the Holy Ghost has come from the Father with a message for 
the chosen Bride, an invitation from an absent Bridegroom to share 
his Father's love, his inheritance-His throne. Noiseless as the tread 
of the camels' feet over the sands of the desert he pursues his way, 
and in every age and in every clime there are waiting Rebekahs, 
who have circumcised ears, believing hearts, and willing minds, to 
hear the story of God's dear Son— His dying love, His living power, 
the distant home, the coming glory, and to gladly say as did 
Rebekah, "I will go." The world around takes no note of his errand- 
-of his success, occupied with its schemes of wealth and ambition, 
and of a glory to be built up in Ishmael instead of Isaac. So Ishmael 
lives, and becomes a great nation, with twelve princes, they care not 
who shall become the bride of Isaac. 

What interest to-day has the world at large in Christ, God's dear 
Son, in the revelation made of Him in the Scriptures as the 
heavenly Bridegroom. What light have they on the purpose of this 
dispensation as the calling out of a people for his name? What 
sympathy have they in God's revealed plan and purposes, as 
centering everything in heaven and on earth in the glory of His 
Son? No more than the world had in Isaac's day in the call of 
Rebekah. Yet the message shall come with power, and the report be 
believed by those whom God shall choose. John 14:17; 6:45. 

Rebekah left her home to go to one she had never seen, to go to one 
of whom she had heard, Rom. 10:16,17. She had a long journey 
over the desert under the care of Eliezer. The one hope that lead her 



forth was Isaac. If doubt suggested the fear that Isaac might reject 
her, she knew with that rejection everything was lost, every hope 
perished-for all hope for everything centered in Isaac. As Isaac's 
chosen bride, all that Isaac had she was to share— she could have no 
fear for anything while confident in Isaac. So, believing the report 
concerning Christ, have we brethren, turned away from the world, 
and accepting the call of God, do we now journey on to meet our 
Lord? Rebekah had Abraham's words repeated to her by the 
servant, concerning Isaac, as the foundation of her faith. She had 
the constant care and companionship of the servant upon her 
journey, as the earnest of what awaited her when she should meet 
Isaac, but the purpose for which she was called was not fulfilled 
until she met Isaac. She did not occupy the position of Isaac's bride 
until conducted by Isaac himself to that position. So in Eph. 5:27; 1 
John 3:2. How much we now have— how little we now have— must 
be the thought of every child of God. 

After the calling of the bride in this wonderful chapter, we have 
Israel as an earthly people introduced in the birth and election of 
Jacob. They inherit the promise made to Abraham and Isaac. 
Through them God is to reveal Himself a light to the Gentiles. But 
every promise to them centers as to us in Christ. In contrast to the 
acceptance of Rebekah in humble faith of the call of God, fulfilling 
Rom. 9:30, we have Israel from the outset quarreling with grace, 
and blind as to God's purpose, as in Rom. 9:31,32. In Jacob the 
early Israel is established, the twelve tribes formed, and covenant 
with God recognized. 

To this Israel God reveals Himself, gives them His law, gives them 
teachers and prophets. They should have been the teachers of the 
world, the witnesses for Christ. They failed and were set aside, and 
over and over again this setting aside of the one who had the right 
of the firstborn is acted out in the books of Moses. Ishmael and 
Isaac, Jacob and Esau, Leah and Rachel, Ephraim and Manasseh, 
are examples. In their setting aside we are told plainly God has not 
changed His purposes. They are still His people, it is still His 
purpose to use them as a light to the Gentiles, Rom. 9:15,26-29. 

All of this is shadowed forth in the relations of— first, the sons of 
Jacob; second, the world to Joseph. Not until the eleven brothers 
united in bowing the knee before him, were their eyes opened to 
know him, and they delivered from their trouble. And through 
Joseph as the head of the earthly Israel was Egypt fed. Joseph was 
the joy and hope of three different classes. 1. Of the king upon the 
throne who had given him all power. 2. Of his Gentile bride 
Zipporah, who in grace he had married. 3. Of the children of Israel, 
his kinsmen according to the flesh. So he shadows forth Christ in 
His relations to his Father, to the Church, and to Israel. Jacob 
before Pharaoh shows us the position of Israel among the nations 
when joined to Christ. "He blessed Pharaoh," Heb. 7:7. 

Thus "Christ as our hope" is set before us in the word through 
Moses. Jesus said, "Moses wrote of me," and truly the one theme of 



the writings of Moses, as we are taught of God, will be found to be 
Christ. May God give us grace to make Christ the center of study, 
of worship, of service, that all our springs may be found in Him.- 
D.W. Whittle. 



R752 : page 4 



THE WORLD'S HOPE. 



Notwithstanding the world's seeming indifference to the future, 
the vast majority believe that there is a future before them. All men 
instinctively cling to life, and even when dying to a hope of some 
existence in the great unknown. Modern as well as ancient 
philosophers reason from this universal desire for life, that man 
must be an immortal being; overlooking the fact that the same kind 
of logic would prove that every man is wealthy because there is a 
universal desire for wealth. 

While denying that man is by nature such a being as could never 
cease to be, whose existence even God could not blot out, we have 
from time to time shown that God has a grand plan for the 
restitution of the world from death, and that his promise is, that to 
all who appreciate that gift, and will live in harmony with His 
righteous will, He will supply life sustaining elements by which 
they may live forever. We have seen too that He has provided this 
gift in a certain definite way-through the gift of His son- through 
the redemption which is in Christ Jesus. 

The errors with which Satan has, as with leaven, permeated the 
faith of Christians, has helped to hinder the world from seeing the 
symmetry and beauty of God's plan through Christ. The world's 
hope is, that after all, it will be found that faith in Christ, is not 
essential to salvation, but that there is a general system of evolution 
by which all go from a human condition to some higher condition, 
the marks and conditions of progress being, not faith, but morality. 

To these the Scriptural account of the fall of the race from 
perfection is all a mere myth, consequently the ransom of the race 
from the effects of that fall, are equally mythical, and the Scripture 
promise to the world of a restitution, or return to that condition 
which existed before the fall, is absurd. Since they think that they 
did not "fall," they reason that they need no Saviour, and as a result, 
all those Scriptures which speak of ransom, sacrifice, redemption, 
of our being bought, etc., are meaningless to them. They place 
Plato, Socrates, Aristotle, Confucius, and Jesus Christ, all on a 
common level and in their definition of saviour these were alike 
and together saviours of the world in that they all taught 
righteousness, and virtue, and condemned sin. 

Alas poor world! It knows not God, hence it knows not his plan of 
salvation through Jesus only. It was not in his teachings merely that 
Jesus was great. His greatness was in that he was able to say, "Thy 



sins be forgiven thee." It was by virtue of his acceptable sacrifice as 
a ransom, that he was exalted to be a prince and Saviour and to 
grant repentance and remission of sins. This none other could ever 
do. 

Thanks be to God that His gracious plans are so far reaching that he 
has made 

R753 : page 4 

abundant provision for man's willfulness and opposition, by not 
only redeeming them, but by providing a means by which they shall 
come to know and appreciate the truth concerning the only name, in 
order that through faith in His redemption they may live forever as 
it is written: God "will have all men to be saved [from death-the 
result of the fall] and [then] come to a knowledge of the truth." 1 
Tim. 2:4. 

The great expounder of this, the world's hope, Mr. Henry Ward 
Beecher, in his discourse of Sunday, Feb. 1, '85, asked and 
answered this important question as follows: 

"Must not a man have faith in Jesus Christ? 

In regard to that I hold that the right understanding of Jesus Christ 
is the most powerful persuasion to a religious life. Nevertheless, if 
by any way a man has gone up; if he has found in himself the 
kingdom of heaven without knowing Jesus Christ, he will be saved. 
If you believe the old scheme of theology that men fell in Adam, 
that there was a council somewhere up in heaven and that a few 
were foreordained to be saved and that all the rest were to be 
damned, then you have not any room to believe anything I am 
telling you and my preaching is idle." 

And yet Mr. Beecher calls himself a Christian and men call him 
reverend. Surely this is sailing under false colors. He speaks of "a 
right understanding of Jesus Christ," by which we understand him 
to mean an understanding such as he has; and since his 
understanding is the opposite of that of Jesus and the Apostles, we 
conclude that Mr. Beecher must be a new apostle of "another 
gospel," to which Paul refers (Gal. 1:6-9). Peter very clearly 
answers Mr. B. He says of Jesus: "This is the stone which was set at 
nought of your builders, which is become the head of the corner. 
Neither is there salvation in any other; for there is no other name 
under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved." Acts 
4:12. This apostle of the new gospel not only contradicts Peter, but 
places himself squarely at issue with Paul and what he calls "the old 
scheme of theology, that men fell in Adam." The old scheme is 
stated by Paul in Rom. 5:15,17,18,19,8 to 10, and makes necessary 
the ransom-sacrifice of Jesus, to which the new gospel and its 
apostles object. The same is true of Jesus' statement of the "old 
scheme of theology":— he declared: "The Son of man is come to 
save that which WAS LOST." Matt. 18:11. 



Of those who are building their faith on the foundation of the 
Apostles- Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone, Mr. 
Beecher well says: "You have not any room to believe anything I 
am telling you, and my preaching is idle." This is well stated, and is 
just what we have been trying to show. Those who are building on 
the true foundation laid in the Bible, should speedily be convinced 
that all theories thus contrary to it are "idle," useless, profitless; and 
to those not filled with the truth, and who have a little room for it, 
this insidious form of infidelity may prove very hurtful. The more 
they look at it, and "wonder what he will say next," the greater the 
danger. Only one course is safe— when we have proved any theory, 
and find it contrary to our tried standard— [The Bible]- drop it and 
leave it finally. To handle such things is like handling poison; it is 
liable to be absorbed into the system unconsciously. We are all by 
reason of our fallen condition more susceptible to error than to 
truth; besides, evil is many sided, presenting itself in a hundred 
delusive guises, but truth is but one. Error always presents itself as 
truth, and its messengers as the messengers of light. (2 Cor. 11:13- 
15). Hence it becomes us to test or prove such as come in our way 
and claim our attention. 

Nor should we be always sipping and tasting of poisons so as to 
have no time to feed upon the truth, or a vitiated palate which 
cannot appreciate truth, for we have at hand a speedy and infallible 
test-the Word of God. Any system or theory which rejects or 
ignores the teachings of Jesus and the Apostles is not of God- 
hence of darkness, and leads to darkness. Any system which uses 
Scripture passages simply as texts, and ignores the teaching of the 
passage in its connections, is evidently a trap and a snare, and out 
of harmony with our standard. Any system which uses one passage 
of Scripture which suits it, and contradicts another passage merely 
because it does not suit its theory; or, which uses one text of 
Scripture as an offset or contradiction of another, is manifestly 
erroneous. Any system which attempts to use Scripture words or 
phrases but to deny or ignore or wrest their true meaning, is 
undoubtedly most deceptive and blinding error. Each of these 
methods would manifestly be "handling the Word of God 
deceitfully" 

R753 : page 5 

to make it prove their theory, instead of handling it honestly to 
prove to them God's theory. 

All such, when proved false by our only standard, should be 
dropped at once. We cannot trust to our reasoning powers and stop 
to parley with error, for unless fully armed with a full, clear and 
comprehensive knowledge of the plan of God, many of Satan's 
misleading theories might seem at least possible. Even the Master 
would do no more than show that Satan's arguments were contrary 
to the teachings of Scripture by quoting Scripture in reply: "It is 
written," etc. 



By following this method, how many would find that much of the 
preaching, though not as injurious as Mr. Beecher's, is nevertheless 
"idle," and a waste of time on the part of those who attend. If 
governed by this rule, how many would find, as Mr. B. suggests, 
that they have really "no room to believe" what they hear? Judged 
by this scriptural test, how many theories which consume precious 
time, as well as confuse and perplex the mind, would be rejected as 
"idle"?* 

Let us always remember, however, that we are not to decide what is 
truth and what error by our prejudices and preferences, but by the 
Word; not by our general impression as to what the Word teaches, 
nor by a fragment of it imperfectly remembered, but by a careful 
examination of the text and context. 

Any teacher who does not cite the text upon which he bases an 
argument claimed to be scriptural, is unworthy the name of teacher 
or expounder, and his products are unworthy of study. Those who 
do quote should be carefully examined, not only to ascertain that 
the Word of God is handled honestly and fairly, but also to impress 
the truth, upon the reader's heart. 

Behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell 
together in unity (Psa. 133:1); but truth and error, light and 
darkness are not brethren, they are implacable and everlasting foes, 
and have been ever since error was born- for truth is eternal. And 
while the children of light and truth must from their very nature, 
love and sympathize with men as members of a common race, and 
whensoever they can may do them good, yet they should not 
sympathize in their course of error with those who have become 
children of darkness and whose influence is opposed to the truth. 
Hence, though we would not injure a hair of their heads, and would 
not even attempt to restrain their liberty in presenting error (because 
the time for binding evil has not yet fully come), yet we should be 
bold for the truth; we must not shun to declare the truth and show 
the error, else we are unworthy a place or name among those called 
"the children of the light." 

And this is the course marked out as the true path of love. Love to 
God is above all, and love to God's word Jesus puts next (Mark 
8:38). The apostle claims that true love not only "rejoiceth in the 
truth," but it "rejoiceth not in iniquity." (1 Cor. 13:6). He teaches 
that those exercised by true love should "have no fellowship with 
the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather REPROVE them." Eph. 
5:8 and 11. And we read "He that abideth in the doctrine of Christ 
hath both the Father and the Son: If there come any unto you, and 
bring not this doctrine [i.e. bring any other doctrine] receive him 
not into your house, neither bid him God speed. For he that biddeth 
him God speed is partaker of his evil deeds," 2 John 9:10. God who 
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined into our 
hearts" "ye should show forth the praises of him who hath called 
you out of darkness into his marvellous light." "For what fellowship 
hath righteousness with unrighteousness? And what communion 



hath light with darkness? And what concord hath Christ with 
Belial? Or what part hath he that believeth with an 
infidel?. ..Wherefore come out from among them and be ye separate 
saith the Lord and touch not the unclean thing." 2 Cor. 6:14-17. 



*We recommend such a test of the teachings of the TOWER. If 
then you decide that its foundation is not laid in the teachings of 
God's Word, you should order it stopped. If you find that its 
teachings are built upon and supported by the Scriptures, it will 
give you the more confidence in the unfolding plan of God which it 
endeavors to present. 



R754 : page 5 

SPIRITISM EXAMINED. 

"Regard not them that have familiar spirits ...to be defiled by 
them." Lev. 19:31. 

"There shall not be found among you.. .a consulter of familiar 
spirits, or a wizard or a necromancer... because of these 
abominations the Lord thy God doth drive out (the nations) from 
before thee." Deu. 18:10-12. 

The belief that the dead are alive in another sphere or condition of 
being is not new. It was part of the religion of the ancients, and was 
the very root of all mythology. This naturally made it appear then 
as it now does, at least reasonable that these dead persons under 
such circumstances should be capable of, and did hold intercourse 
with the living. 

This very plausible reasoning, based on a misunderstanding (the 
facts being made known in the Scriptures only) has given cover and 
force to the deceptions practised by "demons" under the guise of 
dis-embodied spirits of men. They have eagerly availed themselves 
of this mode of concealing their identity, and have thus perpetuated 
their sway over the minds and lives of many. 

God regards this intimacy or familiarity with spirits as a vile 
abomination, and threatened those who would engage in it 
(mediums) and those who would inquire of them with death. 

This consulting of spirits was evidently extensively practised by the 
heathen nations that had inhabited the land of Canaan. Against 
spiritism, "orthodoxy," so called, makes a feeble show of 
opposition, but it is really powerless to cope with it, because the 
orthodox theories give it encouragement and strength. This is 
shown by a sermon preached by Rev. W. J. Robinson, of 
Allegheny, which we quote below from the Pittsburgh Dispatch, of 
November 3d, 1884: 



MODERN SPIRITUALISM 

"An unusually large audience assembled last evening in the First 
United Presbyterian Church, of Allegheny, to hear an interesting 
and instructive sermon on "Modern Spiritualism," as delivered by 
the pastor of that congregation, Rev. W. J. Robinson, D.D. He had 
chosen for his text the words: "They have Moses and the Prophets. 
If they hear not them neither will they believe, though one rose 
from the dead. " In his introductory remarks he said he did not see 
the necessity of any soul returning from the spirit land, as they 
could tell no more about it than had already been revealed by the 
word of God as set forth in the Scriptures. He cited the declaration 
of King David in regard to Absalom's spirit returning. David said, 
"I will go to my son; he shall not return," and again, Job had 
emphatically declared, "the dead shall not come until the heavens 
are no more. " There are but three instances of the return of souls 
from spirit-land in all the records contained in the Bible. When 
Jesus took three of his disciples into the mount, they fell asleep, 
and, upon awakening, saw Moses and Elijah was one of these; 
Samuel's apparition to King Saul forewarning him of his death on 
the morrow, and the coming reign of David was another, and the 
returning of Dives, the rich man who persecuted Lazarus and turned 
a deaf ear to his requests for the necessities of life, was the 
remaining one. 

As to Samuel's coming, there was no need of it, as Saul knew what 
was inevitably to happen to him for his wilfulness and disobedience 
of the commands of God; but it is evident that Samuel came to 
convince men of the uselessness of such visitations, as he could tell 
only what was already known. Moses had been dead several 
hundred years. Elijah had departed for the other world 150 years 
previous. Dive's message was concerning that hell of torment of 
which all had heard. He told them that repentance on earth alone 
would save a soul, and that such a thing was impossible in hell. 
And that was also familiar to every one who had heard the 
Scriptures read or explained. All these came with messages and 
only reported facts which God is constantly keeping before the eyes 
and in the minds of men. But how different were these Bible 
revelations to those spoken of to-day. Only one in all the ages 
appeared in response to a call. And then the manner of their 
coming. Those of the olden times were voices which spoke 
messages of truth, while those of to-day, so called, are rappings, 
which would indicate anything else as well as a return from Spirit 
Land. The Bible-told messages were the truth, while those of 
modern times speak a mummery that whatever else the spirits had 
learned they had lost their former senses. They speak drivelling 
nonsense. The difference lies between truth and falsehood and light 
and darkness. The Bible contains all men need to know; there is 
found the testimony of the dead. "And now, while the dead did not 
come back to us, we are rapidly going to them. Study this world 
and your Bibles, and prepare for the world to come," were the 
concluding words of his sermon. 



This may be regarded as the expression of "Orthodoxy" as to the 
condition and abode of the dead. 

"Only one (says Dr. Robinson) in all the ages responded to a call," 
but if one why not more? And this one was God's faithful servant 
Samuel. If this were true, then God's righteous servant was under 
the dominion of a wicked medium, and all God's servants would 
undoubtedly be subject to the same kind of power, and if the great 
God was powerless to protect Samuel from this abomination which 
was so abhorrent to his will, how could any of his children expect 
protection from the powers of darkness? We cannot find words to 
express our indignation and abhorrence of such blind and 
misguided views of God and his word. Is it any wonder that 
Spiritism is spreading, when teachers in high places misquote and 
flatly contradict the word of God? God's word declares, "The dead 
know not anything;. ..there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, 
nor wisdom, in the grave whither thou goest" (Eccl. 9:5,10). "In 
death there is no remembrance of thee; in the grave who shall give 
thee thanks" (Psa. 6:5). Either so-called Orthodoxy and Romanism 
and Spiritualism are right, and that the characteristics and 
sensibilities of life are possessed by the dead, and God's word is a 
lie, or else God's word is true, "the dead know not anything," and 
these man-made systems teach falsely. There can be no middle 
course. We must reject one or the other. 

If Dr. Robinson had quoted Job correctly he would have 
demolished his own argument. Job says (Chap. 14:10-12), "Man 
dieth, and wasteth away: yea, man giveth up the ghost ("gasps out- 
expires" -Young), and where is he?... as the waters fail from the 
sea, and the flood decayeth and drieth up, so man lieth down, and 
RISETH NOT: till the heavens be no more, they shall not awake, 
nor be raised out of their sleep." 

Could anything be stated more plainly than this? It shows the 
absence of everything that characterizes life— wisdom, knowledge, 
work, device, remembrance, or thanksgiving. And none are exempt 
from its penalty. "In Adam all die." No man can deliver his soul 
(being) from its power. He is cut off from the "land of the living"- 
all life, for the time being, shown by the words "man dieth.. .and 
where is he?" implying that he no longer exists— except as he has a 
place in God's purpose to be realized through a resurrection. 

The penalty or wages of sin is death- extinction of life. There is no 
escaping it, nor is there any possibility of rising out of it: this is 
proven beyond a peradventure by these Scriptures, and is made 
very emphatic by the words- "riseth not," and "shall not awake," 
but that there will be an awakening or resurrection of the dead at an 
appointed time is apparent from the completion of the sentence-till 
the heavens be no more; i.e., till the new dispensation is introduced; 
the present referred to by Jesus (Matt. 24:29), and by Paul, (Heb. 
12:26,27), being shaken and removed. As no exception to these 
statements of God's word is possible, it should be evident that the 
possibility of communication with dead men is a delusion. The 



deception practiced in Spiritism is the more gross, because, not men 
but demons are communicated with. There is abundant proof of this 
furnished by God's word. Nevertheless "orthodoxy" is powerless to 
cope with this abomination because of her adherence to false 
theories as to death and her wilful ignorance of the testimony of 
God's word to the contrary. 

The mediums of modern spiritism are identified with those who 
anciently had "familiar spirits," who under the names of Witch and 
Wizard then claimed power to bring up and communicate with the 
dead as they now do. This is shown by the reply of the Witch of 
Endor to Saul's request: "Whom shall I bring up unto thee"? and 
Saul answered, "Bring up Samuel" (1 Samuel 28:11). That which 
she did bring up assumed to be Samuel as do the same spirits now 
assume to be dead friends of living men. If this spirit told the truth 
as claimed by Dr. Robinson, and the "orthodox" theory be right, 
wicked Saul would next day be with righteous Samuel. 

If, however, this consulting of familiar spirits was contrary to God's 
express command— "Regard not them that have familiar (or 
intimacy with) spirits. ..to be defiled by them" (Lev. 19:31) how 
could God's prophet who had denounced this as wickedness, be a 
party to it now that he was dead? And whether called up willingly 
or unwillingly, he would in either case have become subject to the 
powers of darkness in this intimacy with one that was deemed 
guilty of death, because of this kindness. 

If it was not Samuel, then who was it? We answer, It was an evil, 
lying spirit who personated Samuel. 

These wicked spirits eagerly avail themselves of every opportunity 
to bring mankind under their foul sway, deceiving those who 
commune with them as to their identity, notwithstanding God's 

R755 : page 5 

command: "There shall not be found among you.. .a consulter of 
familiar spirits, or a wizard or necromancer, for all these things are 
an abomination unto the Lord: and because of these abominations 
the Lord thy God doth drive out (the nations formerly inhabiting 
Canaan -whose sin Israel's king imitated) from before thee" (Deut. 
18:10). And "the soul that turneth after such as have familiar 

R755 : page 6 

spirits and after wizards... I will set my face against that soul and cut 
him off from among his people" (Lev. 20:6). Of these commands 
Saul was well aware: he knew that he was in the most deliberate 
and wilful manner acting contrary to these commands in consulting 
the Witch of Endor; and God visited upon him the threatened 
punishment for this transgression. "Saul died for his transgression 
which he committed against the word of the Lord which he kept 
not, and also for asking counsel of one that had a familiar spirit, to 
inquire of it" (1 Chron. 10:13). This settles the point at issue. Saul 
sinned in asking counsel contrary to God's command of one that 



had intimacy with a spirit to inquire of it. Therefore it is plain, not 
only that it was not the Lord's prophet that was consulted, but that it 
was an evil spirit— the same in kind as those cast out by Jesus and 
his disciples. That they were of this same class of fallen spiritual 
beings, is conclusively proven by the similarity of description in the 
case of the "damsel possessed with a spirit of divination... which 
brought her master great gain," by soothsaying, which so grieved 
Paul that he "turned and said to the spirit, I command thee in the 
name of Jesus Christ to come out of her, and he came out the same 
hour" (Acts 16:16). This corresponds with the account in 1 Sam. 
28, "Saul said to her, I pray thee divine (make known) unto me by 
the familiar spirit." The divination practiced by the Witch of Endor 
was of the same nature and through the same agency used by this 
damsel out of whom Paul cast the unclean spirit or demon. 

Nor does the appearance of Moses and Elijah on the mount of 
transfiguration, quoted by Dr. Robinson, support the theory that 
dead men live, for Jesus expressly declared to these disciples that 
this was a "vision," and charges them to tell no man of this 
foreshadowing of the kingdom of Christ until after he was risen 
(Matt. 17:9). 

All the parables recorded in the New Testament receive a non- 
literal interpretation by orthodoxy, except that of Dives and 
Lazarus, which, contrary to this generally accepted principle, they 
literalize: this involves some absurdities, such as Lazarus carried by 
angels into Abraham's bosom; and the great gulf fixed so that they 
which would pass hence (from heaven) to you (in an orthodox hell) 
cannot, &c. They commonly add to this literalism that "they who 
enter hell return no more: they who sink there, sink forever." Dr. 
Robinson, however, adds a new phase to it which reaches the 
climax of absurdity and inconsistency in trying to make it appear 
that Dives returned from spiritland (an orthodox hell) with a 
message. For a consistent elucidation of this parable, see "Food for 
Thinking Christians," page 154. See also page 74. 

S. O. BLUNDEN. 

N.B. Those of our readers who have not yet had a copy of this little 
book ("Food") can procure a copy free, by applying to the Editor. 



page 6 

YOUNG'S CONCORDANCE.-Seven copies remain at the old 
price, $2.25; when these are gone the special price will be $3.00 to 
our subscribers, which is $2.00 below the regular price. 



THE pamphlet entitled THE TABERNACLE AND ITS 
TEACHINGS is now out of print. Many requests for this pamphlet 
continually coming to hand, we have arranged to publish it soon as 
a number of the TOWER. 



R755 : page 6 



AN OPEN LETTER. 



[The following by a subscriber, dated Feb. 3, 1885, was 
unavoidably delayed until now, in this office. -EDITOR.] 

REV. R. HEBER NEWTON, Dear Sir: I have just been reading the 
abstract of your sermon in to-day's Tribune and cannot resist the 
temptation to traverse briefly your position on the doctrine of 
Election. It seems to be your effort, as of many who cannot accept 
the old standard and are yet unwilling to flee out from the technical 
borders of old affiliations, to give merely a different statement to 
old dogmas or to show how the old statement may be reconciled to 
the keener or the bolder insight into all things prevailing to-day. 
You appear to treat the doctrine of election as formulated by 
protestant fathers as an attempt to account for observed conditions 
of human life, rather than to be purely their conception of the 
teaching of the inspired Word. If it was mainly the former, it would 
deserve from us as much reverence as any other merely human 
philosophy and no more. If it was an attempt to epitomize, rather, 
the teaching of the Bible, it deserves consideration only so far as it 
is found to be a truthful abstract thereof. The present day has a 
perfect right to decide upon that point, for the present has two 
advantages over the past in any question of Biblical study. The first 
is, that scholarship is abler and is better provided with the means of 
accurate historical and exegetical research. The second is, that no 
part or section of revelation is comprehended until the time when 
its vital work is to be done in the world. The later the era the more 
probably correct its judgment as to the real import of the divine 
message. 

You recognize the repulsive character of the old statement by which 
it appears that the "ninety and nine" are not in the fold, but doomed 
to the mountain side and the bottomless pit forever while only the 
one is chosen to be saved. So do I. No philosophy, no terrors that 
can be denounced, no pleading, nothing short of a demonstration 
hereafter can convince me that a being of love planned such a 
scheme as that. How do you proceed? You would convince men by 
ocular evidence that in the world such a condition of things obtains, 
that some, a few indeed, survive and prosper while many, the mass, 
go under the wheels of a Juggernaut, and that what is, is right, 
though in a way mysterious and beyond the purview of mortal 
vision though aided by all the light shed by the "Lamp" of God. 
You would say, "Be reconciled, for such is God's way, and out of it 
good will come though at present his way and the world's way seem 
alike hopeless for the weaker of the earth and heartless for all." 

My conception of your position may be all wrong, for newspaper 
abstracts are apt to be misleading, and I both read and write in great 
haste. If so, pardon me. 



Now for another view. Election is true. If any reliance is to be 
placed on Biblical statements of plain matter of fact, God chose his 
prophets, and Christ his disciples and not they him. From Abraham 
to Simon Peter, the servants of the Sovereign of Heaven have 
bowed only as the scepter was laid down upon their shoulders. 
They could speak and act divinely only as the Spirit wrought upon 
their hearts and tongues. The words of Christ incite us to believe 
that he continues to select his followers in this as in every other age. 
He giveth repentance to whom he will. The only reason why 
objection can be felt to the doctrine, is that he appears to have 
selected so small a proportion of the race, and that with the doctrine 
of election is conjoined that of condemnation to endless doom for 
all not chosen. All mankind stand related to Christ, and he is 
declared all powerful in heaven and on earth. Our highest sense of 
justice requires liberty of choice and power of action, as grounds of 
responsibility, which circumstances have surely denied to many 
who seem to fall under condemnation. Men admire striking 
statement, and the framers of the catechism seem to have yielded to 
the attractions of antithesis. If some men were chosen, elected, 
those not so favored must surely be doomed, they argued. The 
elevation of one class must be equaled by the degradation of the 
rest. Height must be equaled by the depth and happiness by misery. 
The crude and childish conception of purgatory was to be escaped 
from and counteracted, and the frivolousness and irreligion 
developed under the pomp and show of Romanism were to be 
frightened out of men by a stern theology. No one can say the 
attempt did not succeed. God's servants are his, though their words 
may not embody the first truth, or their acts reflect the divine will to 
perfection. What is the reverse to the truth of election, its other side 
I mean? Our version says, "Jacob have I loved and Esau have I 
hated," but we all know that "hated" should read "loved less." The 
election of Abraham does not argue the destruction of Lot. In fact 
Ezekiel, in chapter 16 says, that even Sodom shall be restored to her 
former estate and be a sister to Jerusalem. Abraham was told 
repeatedly why he was chosen; that through him or his seed all the 
nations, kindreds, families of the earth should be blessed. There 
was no antithesis in that. All the prophets were chosen to do good 
to other people. The disciples also were selected only as the 
foundation stones of an edifice whose proportions should be 
measureless grandeur and beauty. Who shall say what are means 
and what are ends? Is not the saving of the ninety and nine a 
grandeur and a better consummation that the salvation of the one? It 
is the weakness of every age, as of every nation and of every 
individual, to magnify itself and to imagine the final greatness of 
the earth to be near its culmination in itself. The Jew supposed 
Judaism to be the final truth. We know it was not. May not our 
sixteenth century theologians have been similarly self deluded. A 
new Bible is not to be given. Judaism and Christianity have their 
root in the same primal revelation. Suppose this Christian age in 
which election has merely taken a wider scope, to be but 
preparatory to a nobler era yet, when the converts of the present 



shall become the apostles mighty for the regeneration of "all the 
families of the earth." Do you call this a fanciful speculation? Were 
it no more, it would give men a better conception of the character of 
their Heavenly Father than the antithetical 

R756 : page 6 

one. The aspirations of noble souls eager for the good of all would 
find in it the mirror of their loftiest dreams. Instead of having to 
explain away inconsistencies of doctrine almost to the verge of 
apology, they would point to the glory of a consummation worthy 
of the eternal Father and of the self-sacrificing Saviour. Is it only a 
speculation? Go back to the Word and see whether it does not yield 
a footing broad and solid, for this conception of God's plan of 
grace. Do you ask the location and the method of the millennial 
regeneration? The earth, and not some distant or unknown 
purgatory, is to be the theatre and the resurrection as described by 
Paul in 1 Corinthians 15, the way, by which the myriads who have 
perished in ignorance and blindness shall be brought into the 
enlightening presence of the new day. "Every in his own order," 
says Paul. 

Death will have purged away the taint of evil heredity, and the new 
life will be fuller, freer, more favorable to the acceptance of Christ. 

We know well enough that certain predictions of the Scriptures do 
not apply to our day. But when the laborers no longer are few, 
when the knowledge of God shall cover the earth, when Christ shall 
possess the uttermost parts of the earth and the heathen, when the 
way of life shall be so plain that the way-faring man, though a fool, 
shall not err therein, when the wells of water now springing up in 
Christian hearts here and there shall have become the "river of the 
water of life," of which "whosoever will" may partake freely, then 
the doctrine of election will have its justification. 

Christ and his Bride will not be childless, though the children may 
not attain equal honor with their parents. There are the hundred and 
forty and four thousand, as well as the multitude whom no man can 
number. 

If we explain the very limited salvation of this and preceding ages 
on the basis of the survival of the fittest we must assume that the 
ninety and nine are not worth saving, a proposition at variance with 
all Christian professions as to the value of souls and presumptuous 
in the last degree, since none but God can know whether any of his 
creatures are not worth saving. That being whose visible creations 
are so marvellously complete and perfect has surely a plan for the 
restoring and perfecting of his chief creation-man. 

It is natural to think that God's plan will develop in stages, and 
when apprehended will not require apology or defense. The fact 
that the old and partial views are no longer believed, proves that the 
revelation of a fuller truth is due, and only awaits apprehension and 



expression, for it is embodied in the recorded word of God. Are our 
windows open toward Jerusalem? 



Very truly yours, 

J. ALBERT STOWE. 



R756 : page 6 



WALK IN WISDOM. 



"Walk in wisdom toward them that are without redeeming the 
time. ['Securing the season.' -Diaglott; 'buying the opportunity'- 
Rotherham.] Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with 
salt, that ye may know how ye ought to answer every man." Col. 
4:5,6. 

Paul drew such a bold, clear line of separation between himself 
and the world, that no one observing him need be in doubt of his 
inflexible purpose and his faithfulness in carrying it out. And when 
he wrote to the Corinthian church, "Be ye followers of me" (1 Cor. 
4:16), there was no danger of misunderstanding. They could not 
help knowing that he meant the narrow way of sacrifice- in the 
very foot-prints of the Lord. Alluding as an illustration to those last 
exposed in the theatre to fight with wild beasts, or with each other, 
and who were devoted to certain destruction, he says, "I think God 
exhibited us the Apostles last, as devoted to death; for we are made 
a spectacle to the world, 

R756 : page 7 

both to angels and to men." And so are all who follow in the 
footsteps of these faithful ones-the footsteps of our Lord. 

In view of the fact that those who have consecrated themselves as 
sacrifices, are being made a spectacle to all those outside, as well as 
within their own company, Paul further urges that we bear this in 
mind, and that we walk wisely, so that, so far as it is possible, our 
conduct, etc., may be transparent before the world. We call to mind 
many of his words of special instruction on this point. Among 
others he says (Rom. 12:18), "If it be possible, as much as lieth in 
you, live peaceably with all men." If circumstances have placed you 
among contentious and disagreeable people, here is a good 
opportunity to show them in your actions, and without the least 
ostentation, your spirit of self-sacrifice, your benevolence, brotherly 
kindness and love. Such a spirit will rebuke the world and show 
them a more excellent way, whether they are yet ready to walk in it 
or not. This spirit, however, should not permit continued oppression 
and injustice for the sake of dearly bought peace. Sometimes we, as 
Paul did, may have to speak very plainly and pointedly, and warn of 
a coming time of reckoning when the actions of the present time 
must all be accounted for. (Acts 24:25.) Thus Paul reasoned with 



Felix, until the strong man trembled in view of the time of 
reckoning. 

Again he says, (Rom. 14:16), "Let not your good be evil spoken 
of. " Even though some things may be right enough and lawful to 
us, if they become an occasion of stumbling to others, we should 
deny self if need be, that others be not caused to stumble. 

"Let your speech be always with grace [liberality, favor] seasoned 
with salt." In reproof, warning or counsel, a spirit of liberality will 
not lose sight of commendable features in those opposed, nor fail to 
commend it. Temperance [moderation] should characterize all our 
conversation, and in all our dealings with men of the world, as well 
as with Christians, courtesy, liberality and kindly consideration for 
their interests, should be evident, even though their lack of such 
consideration toward us should be glaringly manifest. Not only 
should our speech be liberal, temperate, courteous, but it should 
also be seasoned with salt. Salt is a figure for truth. Truth, like salt, 
has the power of preserving from decay that which is good and 
pure. We should, therefore, be well established in the truth of God's 
Word, that we may be able to answer every one, giving a good 
Scriptural reason for both our faith and our practice. 

But mark the significance of the words "buying" or "securing the 
opportunity." Shortly those now sacrificing will be reigning. The 
time for sacrifice and suffering will be over. Seeing the reward as 
we do, we should wisely secure the present opportunity which can 
never again be enjoyed. When the Church has been glorified, the 
world's time of trial and discipline begins, and their way up to 
perfection will be more or less painful and difficult; but it will be a 
source of encouragement and comfort to them to know as they look 
back to our still more difficult path of sacrifice, that they have not a 
Priest who cannot be touched with the feeling of their infirmities. 

Are we in any way hoping to escape the cross, and yet to wear the 
crown, as members of the Royal Priesthood? Such hope is certainly 
vain. Let us each ask ourselves, What kind of a spectacle am I 
before angels and men? Let us endeavor to ever keep this thought in 
mind, and let everything be done with an eye to this great 
responsibility, counting it all joy when our names are cast out as 
evil, when like our Lord we are despised and rejected of men. 
Those who now reject and despise the sacrificing ones will, by and 
by, be comforted and blessed through this sacrifice. At present they 
think it strange that we run not with them to the same excesses, 
often thinking and speaking evil of us. But we must bear in mind 
that we walk toward a shining mark which they cannot discern; and, 
therefore, should be patient and courageous as seeing that which is 
invisible to the world. 

Contrast for a moment the real position of the saints with those 
flourishing in the world about us. Some of them are living in 
present affluence and gratifying themselves with every luxury, but 
soon these, and even life itself, must be laid down, and they must 



wait in the unconsciousness of death possibly many years, until 
their turn for the awakening comes, and then must awake without 
their past possessions and to be more or less severely disciplined up 
to perfection. But now that we are in the day of the Lord, those 
faithfully enduring trial and sacrificing even unto death, finish their 
course here, to be changed instantly, in the twinkling of an eye, 
without a moment's unconsciousness, to the glory of their new 
condition-even the divine nature. 

Think on these things, dearly beloved, that ye may be enabled to 
walk in wisdom toward them that are without, securing the 
opportunity for sacrifice, remembering that it is a great privilege 
because of its great reward, and that now is the accepted time— the 
time or opportunity granted. Secure the opportunity and with it the 
great prize of our high calling. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R757 : page 7 

THE FEET OF CHRIST. 

"How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of Him that 
bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace, that bringeth good 
tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, "Thy 
Godreigneth."Isa. 52:7. 

Among the many beautiful and appropriate figures used to 
represent the "little flock" and their union with Jesus, is that of a 
human body— Jesus the head, and the true church the members of 
the body. 

Sometimes, as in 1 Cor. 12:13-27, all the parts are represented in 
any assemblage of the church, the hand and foot, &c, as well as the 
various excellent qualities which belong to the head— hearing, 
seeing and expression. Thus the head of the church is present with 
the members of his body whenever two or three or more of them 
meet in his name; and the body is complete and as effective for 
growth in Grace, Knowledge and Love, and far more so, than if 
hundreds of unbelievers and merely nominal Christians were 
present. When thus spoken of the more able and intelligent ones are 
mentioned in contrast with the less able, by calling one class head 
members, (Eye, Ear, etc.,) and the other class feet (v. 21). Thus 
mentioned the word feet will be seen to mean the lowest members 
which require the especial assistance of the others. 

But another sense in which feet may be understood, is as indicating 
the last part, or completion of the body. So to speak The Christ has 
been in process of development during the Gospel age- the head 
first, and we, the living, representing the feet, last. This certainly is 
not an unreasonable deduction, and there are several texts which 
seem to indicate that the last members of the overcoming band, are 



mentioned especially under the term "feet"-not in the sense of 
degraded but as the last-or end of the "little flock." 

The Scripture above cited is of this character, and while Paul quotes 
a part of it (Rom. 10:15) "How beautiful are the feet of them that 
preach the Gospel of peace and bring glad tidings of good things," 
and while it has undoubtedly been true of all the members of the 
Body of Christ, that they were the bearers of glad tidings, and that 
to all who received the message their footsteps were welcome, yet it 
is true also that the proclamation of many of the sweetest notes of 
the glad tidings of restitution, are reserved until now during the 
sounding of the seventh trumpet. (Rev. 10:7; Rom. 16:25), when 
the mystery of God is finished, which he hath kept secret from the 
foundation of the world. 

Truly ours is a choice and favored day compared with any age of 
the church, for though God's Word has always been a lamp to 
enlighten "the body" all through the dark night, yet it is true, that in 
an especial sense it is giving light to the "feet," as we read: "Thy 
word is a light to my feet." Living in the time of the fulfillment of 
so much prophecy, we walk in the blazing light of the lamp, and on 
us and our day the eyes of all "the body" throughout this age have 
anxiously rested; and of our day-"The day of the Lord," and our 
gathering together unto him, both Paul and Peter wrote more 
frequently than of their own day. Hence it need not surprise us, if 
under the figure of "feet" the Prophets mention us. 

There is one part of the text above quoted, which certainly was 
never applicable to any but the present members; this part Paul 
omits, because it was not applicable until now, viz: "That saith unto 
Zion thy God reigneth. " 

As Jesus in his application of Isa. 61:1, used only that part of the 
quotation which was applicable at that time, and left unquoted the 
words— "the day of vengeance of our God," because the 
proclamation of the day of vengeance was not due until our day; 
and therefore while the whole message referred to, has been 
proclaimed by the Christ, yet only the feet have been privileged to 
utter it all, so with the scripture now under consideration: Jesus and 
the Apostles had a great and important part in proclaiming "the 
good tidings of good," but only "the feet of him" have been 
privileged to say "unto Zion, Thy God reigneth." 

The beauty of the feet's position, and the honor connected with their 
proclamation, does not appear to the eyes of the world. Oh no, none 
of the members of the Christ have been of earth's heroes or wise, 
but in their eyes "we are counted fools." No, it is from the spiritual 
standpoint, the standpoint of God and of those who have ears to 
hear, that the bearers of these good tidings are esteemed. We rejoice 
then in our privilege as being among those who announce to Zion 
these tidings that the kingdom began in 1878. 

At present our tidings can only be received by faith in the same 
authority on which we base our statements— the Word of God— 



consequently, not many are now able to hear. But soon there will be 
abundant evidence of the truth of the statement in the crumbling 
and falling of the various systems of iniquity -both in the uprooting 
of the blasphemous heresies of the Church, Nominal- Babylon the 
Great, Mother and Daughters; and afterward, in the judgment and 
chastisement of the nations of the earth, who through these false 
teachings, have established oppressive governments, which the 
nominal churches assure them are Christian governments, telling 
the people they are of God's appointment and are the "Kingdoms of 
our Lord and of His Christ." 

Receiving their original right (?) of ruling from Papacy, these 
kingdoms are to-day recognized and blessed by all the daughters. 
But these are all parts of that great system of Anti-Christ, or 
opposition to the real Church and kingdom of God mentioned by 
Paul (2 Thes. 2:8), which the Lord shall consume by the spirit of his 
mouth (truth) and destroy by the bright shining of his presence. 

Truth, the spirit of the Lord's mouth may come through a thousand 
channels, even blasphemous infidelity may be one of the agencies, 
and we believe it is the truth uttered, though mixed with error and 
blasphemy, which is the secret of power against Babylon, for it 
strikes her on her time honored and festering sores of error. It is 
truth with respect to human rights and equality, which is now 
moving Communists, Nihilists and Socialists to resist oppressive 
governments, and which will in time overthrow them; and truth it 
is, which will prepare the world for the blessed reign and rule of the 
kingdom of God, though in the development of truth, in its various 
branches, both the nominal church and the world must pass a 
terrible baptism of trouble:-Yet in all, truth will be conqueror and 
come off victorious, because now the rule and government has been 
assumed by "Him whose right it is. " He has taken to himself his 
great power and his reign is commenced, consequently we may 
soon expect the wrath and angry nations of Rev. 11:18. 

How clear it is then, that the declaration to Zion, "Thy God 
reigneth," is due now before the feet are joined to the body in glory, 
and before the judgments of the Lord go abroad; for then, it will 
need no proclamation; it will be manifest to all, by the outward 
signs, that the kingdom is set up-even the tribes of the earth shall 
then see— recognize— that the great day of his wrath is come. 

It is the feet of the Christ that bring the glad tidings, though others 
may echo and re-echo the glad song. 

Again, David who often represents or personifies The Christ, says: 
Jehovah— "Brought me up out of a horrible pit (depth of 
confusion), out of the miry clay, and set my feet upon a rock and 
established my goings." Psa. 40:2. We might make a similar 
application of this Scripture. The whole body of the Christ (except 
the head) was down in the pit of confusion and mire of sin; all 
through this Gospel Age Jehovah has been lifting them up, or 
taking out a people for his name— separating such from the world 



and mire of sin; and last to be lifted up are the feet, and truly the 
feet have been placed upon the rock of truth. 

While the whole body has had truth as a basis of faith and trust, yet 
undoubtedly the feet are more firmly established 

R757 : page 8 

by it than any previous part of the body, because we live in the time 
where the light of all past ages centers and the mystery of God is 
finished. 

"How firm a foundation ye saints of the Lord, 

Is laid for your faith in his excellent Word." 

Again, while it is true that all members of the body sung a new 
song of praise to God when lifted from the depths of confusion and 
mire of sin, yet it is especially true of the feet— the song of praise 
breaks forth as soon as the feet touch the solid rock of truth and 
realize that- 

There's a wideness in God's mercy, 

Like the wideness of the sea." 

They can now sing with double joy the restitution song- 

"All nations which thou hast made 

Shall come and worship before thee." 

Again, we find a striking reference to the feet of the Christ in Psa. 
91:11-12: "He [Jehovah] shall give his angels charge over thee to 
keep thee in all thy ways: They shall bear thee up in their hands, 
lest thou dash thy foot against a stone." 

This prophecy by David refers to the Christ as a whole; its personal 
application by Satan was rejected by Jesus as a misapplication of 
Scripture (Luke 4:12), but when we apply the reference to "foot" to 
the feet or last part of the body of Christ, all is harmonious. The 
stone referred to we understand to be the same as that of Isa. 8:14, 
viz.: That Jesus is the stone of stumbling. 

Jesus at the first advent was a stone of stumbling before the feet of 
the nominal Jewish Church, and they stumbled over him because, 
being out of harmony with God, they could not see in him the 
Messiah. In their pride of heart they, especially the Pharisees and 
Doctors of Divinity, were sure that Messiah would come in their 
way, and own and accept of them as a people. They stumbled 

R758 : page 8 

and were broken as an institution. But the real feet of the real 
Jewish Church- the Israelites "indeed" -these received the then 
present Messiah and were blessed and lifted up by that "stone" to 
the higher plane of the Gospel church. "To as many as received 
him, to them gave he liberty to become sons of God." (The Jewish 
house was the house of servants —the Gospel house a house of 
Sons.) 



As there was a stone and stumbling there, in their "harvest," or end 
of their age, so the parallelism which we find associating the 
Christian age with its shadow, the Jewish age, demands that the 
stone should be present in the path of the Gospel church, to be 
either accepted or rejected; and if the parallelism continue (as we 
see it has), then we should expect that here the feet of the nominal 
church would stumble as its shadow did, and for the same reasons. 
And so we find it, the living generation of the nominal church-the 
feet, have failed to discern the presence of the Lord-"they know 
not the time of their visitation"- and all but the true feet of the true 
body have stumbled; as it is written: He shall be for a stone of 
stumbling and rock of offence to both the houses of Israel. To 
"Israel after the flesh" he presented himself in the flesh, and to the 
spiritual Israel he presents himself a spiritual being— to each on their 
own plane. 

But we cannot for a moment doubt, that as Jesus at the first advent 
took special care to make himself known to every "Israelite 
indeed," and gave such clear evidences (while to others he spoke in 
parables and dark sayings) (Psa. 78:2), so here at the second advent, 
every one wholly consecrated to God (not to churches and creeds), 
and as such a part of the true feet, are to be made aware of that 
presence, and consequently do not stumble over it. This special care 
for all such is what is referred to by the text considered- "He shall 
give his angels charge, etc., lest thou dash thy foot against a stone." 

Only the feet could stumble over such a stone. The stone of 
stumbling was not in the path of the members of the body which 
preceded us. And when we look back and see how closely "the 
lamp" has been put "to the feet" and how it has been kept trimmed 
and burning brightly, revealing to us the stone which nominal Zion 
is stumbling over and being shipwrecked upon, but which to us is a 
tried stone, elect, precious, the head of the corner, or the chief stone 
of all in the glorious spiritual Temple, we thank God for His care 
over us, and rejoice that we are counted worthy to be members of 
that company, which in the eyes of the world has no beauty that 
they should desire it, but which is a root out of dry ground-the feet 
of Him that bringeth glad tidings, that saith unto Zion, Thy God 
reigneth. 



R758 : page 8 



JEHOVAH'S FEET. 



"Thus saith Jehovah, Heaven is my throne and earth is my foot- 
stool." Isa. 66:1. [Literal.] 

The word feet is sometimes used in Scripture, as in this text, to 
represent permanent establishment, or rest. Stephen after quoting 
the above (Acts 7:49), adds the words: "What is the place of my 
rest" -residence? 



Jehovah used his foot-stool before sin entered, but since then he has 
removed his presence and allowed sin to reign and Satan to be "The 
prince (ruler) of this world." (John 14:30.) In a typical way he 
established his presence among the Israelites in the Tabernacle and 
Temple, and in a higher and better sense, his presence has been in 
the Gospel Church as in a shifting tent or Tabernacle, all through 
the Gospel Age, but soon the Temple glory, or his presence in the 
Glorified Church-head and body -will be manifested to the world. 
And in that glorious reign of the Christ complete, typified by 
Solomon's peaceful reign, and under the shadow of that glorious 
temple, of which that made with hands was a type, all the families 
of the earth shall be blessed, and brought into complete harmony 
with God. Then the knowledge of the Lord will fill the whole earth; 
and all sin and every opponent of right having been destroyed, All 
the ends of the earth (people) shall remember and turn to the Lord, 
and the glory of the Lord shall fill the whole earth. 

Thus, through the reign of his Anointed, Jehovah will prepare and 
cleanse his foot-stool to place his feet, his abiding presence, there, 
as he declares through the prophet Isaiah (6:13)— "I will make the 
place of my feet glorious." 

In harmony with this same thought we find in Zech. 14:3,5, a 
description of when and how Jehovah will establish his feet, or 
residence. This Scripture, as well as some of those above quoted, 
which evidently apply to the Father- Jehovah-are often misapplied 
to our Lord Jesus; and while Jesus and his Church will doubtless be 
the active agents of Jehovah in subduing all things (Phil. 3:21), yet 
the fact remains, that the work here mentioned is Jehovah's, and the 
Hebrew text leaves no question about it. 

We will quote and apply this prophecy (verse 3): "Then shall the 
Lord [Jehovah] go forth and fight against those nations, as when he 
fought in the day of battle. " The scene is laid in "the time of 
trouble," probably near its close, (perhaps, as we read the prophecy, 
about 1914 A.D.) It is surely during "the day of the Lord" (verse 1) 
when the first return of Israelites to Palestine will have taken place 
[a second, and greater returning mentioned by the prophets 
evidently will not take place until after the time of trouble.] The 
Israelites will have been in comparative peace and security there, 
and measurably free from the trouble which, meantime, will have 
been disturbing and overturning and impoverishing the nations of 
the earth. Their wealth and prosperity excite the cupidity of the 
nations, which we read come up against "my people Israel dwelling 
safely in their own land, ...to take a spoil and a prey." Ezk. 38:8,12. 

The battle at first goes against Israel, as described in verse 2; then, 
the time having come for a manifestation of God's justice against 
the nations and his favor to his anciently-favored people, He 
manifests his power and fights against the nations, not by Jesus and 
the saints appearing on a mountain with carnal weapons, but we 
read "as he (Jehovah) fought in the day of battle." Jehovah fought 



Israel's battles anciently without being seen by other than the eyes 
of their understanding. 

Thus the Angel of the Lord slew (with death) the hosts of the 
Assyrians (Isa. 37:36); put to flight the Midianites (Judges 7:21), 
and "smote great nations and slew mighty kings. (Psa. 135:10.) And 
"as" he fought for Israel then, so he is to do again for their 
deliverance. The coming deliverance will be so great and marked 
that they will recognize God's power and favor, and being blessed 
by being brought to a condition of nearness to God, in prayer and 
supplication, they will come to a full recognition of the fact, that as 
a people, they had rejected and pierced their Redeemer. "They shall 
look upon (recognize) him whom they have pierced," and shall all 
mourn because of Him. Zech. 12:8,10. 

Verse 4: "And His (Jehovah's) feet shall stand (be established) in 
that day upon the Mount of Olives. " This is another picture of the 
establishment of Jehovah's dominion. As the above description 
showed us how it will be manifested to Israel that God's arm is 
ruling, now we get the inside or spiritual view of the kingdom's 
establishment, and appropriately, symbols are used in the 
description. The feet of Jehovah standing or resting-the Mt. of 
Olives-its location to the east (or sun-rising) of Jerusalem (the 
peaceful habitation)-the division of the mountain into two parts- 
the valley formed into which Israel will flee, &c. ; these all, we 
understand to be symbols; as also the reference in verses 6 and 7 to 
the day of the Lord being a dark day. It remains dark until the close 
of this period of trouble, or until the evening of that dark day, then- 
"at evening it shall be light;" that is when the day of wrath is over 
the Sun of Righteousness will arise with healing in his wings- 
blessing and restoring morally and physically. 

A mountain is a symbol of a kingdom, and Mt. Olivet would signify 
Kingdom of Light and Peace.* Then, in this "day of the Lord," 
already begun, Jehovah will establish himself in a Kingdom of light 
and peace. This, we believe, will be accomplished through his 
representative, Jesus, who takes his great power and reigns. The 
organization of his church by resurrection and change, to the same 
condition (spiritual bodies), we understand to be the organization of 
the kingdom whose exaltation to power, invisibly smites and 
consumes evil systems and governments. By the teaching of the 
Word, we understand that this organization of the kingdom began 
in 1878, and will be complete when the living members are "ready." 

This kingdom once established is Jehovah's foothold, and is to be 
the seat of government from which shall emanate the laws, etc., for 
the guidance and blessing of mankind. Another figure is Mt. Zion. 

The division of the mountain into two parts represents the two 
phases of the kingdom of God: one the higher, spiritual, invisible 
kingdom, composed of Jesus and the Gospel church; the other the 
earthly phase of the kingdom, composed of perfect fleshly beings, 



visible to humanity-Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets, 
and all those of past ages justified by faith. 

The valley represents a place of favor and protection, made and 
guaranteed by both the heavenly and earthly phases of kingdom 
power; and into this place of protection and safety Israel is 
represented as fleeing. Then they shall recognize him whom they 
have pierced. 

The earthly phase of the kingdom will thus be seen to be essentially 
Israelitish, and according to the promises of God, ungodliness shall 
be turned from Israel (Rom. 1 1:26) and they shall come to the 
inheritance of the land, and promises vouchsafed to Abraham; and 
then the fleshly seed of Abraham will be used as the agents of 
Jehovah in carrying to the world the blessings purchased by Christ, 
the higher spiritual seed of him whom Abraham typified- Jehovah. 

This earthly phase of the kingdom is to spread and increase until it 
fills the whole earth and is under the whole heaven, and the kings of 
the earth shall bring their glory and honor into it-by coming into 
harmony with its laws. 

These two phases of the kingdom will be in perfect harmony; the 
earthly being under the control and direction of the heavenly. "Out 
of Zion (the spiritual phase) shall go forth the law, and the word of 
the Lord from Jerusalem," the earthly phase. (Isa. 2:3.) 

Though in due time there will be an earthly element of the kingdom 
visible to humanity, which shall be a praise in the whole earth, yet 
in the inception of the kingdom it will not have this double 
character. [Jehovah's feet stand on the Mount of Olives as one at 
first, before its division]. And so we read that when demanded of 
the Pharisees when the kingdom of God should come, Jesus 
answered and said: The kingdom of Heaven cometh not with 
observation, neither shall ye say, Lo here! or lo there! for behold it 
will be in your midst (Luke 17:20). That is to say-the kingdom of 
God will be among, but invisible to men in its coming. It is only 
after it has come and done a work, that the visible phase is due— 
during the Millennial age. 

It is for this kingdom in both its phases (especially the spiritual, 
where our inheritance is) that we pray "Thy kingdom come, Thy 
will be done on earth as it is in heaven." Welcome the day when 
Jehovah's feet will be established and his footstool made glorious! 



*An olive-branch has long been a symbol of peace, and the 
original word elaios mercy, is derived from elaia an olive. The oil 
from the olive is the principal source of light among the Orientals. 


