Divisions Widen Within Church
THE conflicting attitudes among clergymen of the Catholic Church on morals and politics spill over into other areas. French television viewers were also given insight into this condition.
One item noted was an interfaith Communion-Mass being held in a Protestant church in Amsterdam. A Catholic priest was giving the sermon. Such ‘ecumenical services’ are being held every Sunday in Holland. Yet, they are against the instructions of the local hierarchy and Rome.
Viewers were also introduced to the “Student Parish” of Amsterdam. This is ministered to by four Catholic priests, one of whom is married. Although married, he celebrates Mass every Sunday. The TV interviewer expressed surprise that no disciplinary measure had been taken against this priest by the local hierarchy or by Rome.
At this, one of the four priests replied: “Rome is afraid.” Questioned on this point, a bishop answered evasively: “It does not seem advisable to take disciplinary measures.” Yet, in the United States, a priest was recently excommunicated when it was discovered that he had been married for years and had a child!
A nun was asked if she thought priests should be left free either to marry or to practice celibacy. The nun gave this frank answer: “I wish they could do so. Sometimes the pope’s indignation makes me indignant. In Italy, in Spain and in South America there are thousands upon thousands of illegitimate children fathered by priests. The pope says nothing about this, and these priests are allowed to celebrate Mass and to hear confessions.”
One priest spoke of racial divisions among Catholics in the United States. He said the situation was well illustrated by the musical drama “West Side Story.” He remarked that the two gangs, one made up of European immigrant Americans and the other of Puerto Rican Americans, were both composed of Catholics wearing crosses around their necks. Yet this did not prevent them from hating and fighting each other. And a black Catholic priest in Baltimore noted the race distinction within the Catholic Church in America.
The divided aspect of Catholicism in France came to light during an interview with a conservative French Catholic. He belonged to an Old Guard Catholic organization that has resorted to violence against other Catholics whom it considers too ‘progressive.’ This conservative movement has even broken up Catholic church services because Mass was being said in French instead of Latin!
One of the programs ended with the testimony of three French bishops. One bishop admitted that the Catholic Church is divided. But by this time the viewers could see that for themselves. Also, this same bishop confessed that he sometimes has “problems” with his faith and that he envies “simple folk who live their faith” in Jesus Christ.
For Catholics, all of these disclosures did not paint a very reassuring picture of the future of Roman Catholicism. And many viewers were quick to express their bitter disappointment.

