French Shocked by Clergy Attitudes on Morals
THE first television broadcast in the series showed why the French state television had recommended parts of it ‘for adults only.’ It was shocking even to many adult Catholics. Especially so was the part concerning morality, and it came when the camera moved to the Netherlands.
A preliminary scene showed a Dutch Catholic church decorated with plants, flowers, an aquarium and an aviary. A polite inquiry as to the reason for this rather unusual décor for a Catholic church brought forth from the local priest the reply that Mass “is a festival, not like Solesmes [the headquarters of the French Benedictine monks, experts in Gregorian chant], but like Woodstock [the scene of a huge hippie ‘pop’ festival in the United States]!”
But this was only the beginning. Further surprises awaited the French-speaking televiewers in France, Belgium and Switzerland. A few scenes later, turning to the subject of auricular confession of sins, the television commentator summed up the situation in the Netherlands as follows: “People hardly ever confess anymore, mainly because a wave of sexual emancipation has swept through Holland, so that people no longer really know what constitutes a sexual sin.”
A parish priest admitted that the Catholic Church shares the responsibility for this moral breakdown. He noted that it allowed Catholic psychiatrists and psychologists to lower the barriers against immorality.
The Biggest Shock
The biggest shock was to come next. The televiewers saw and heard proof that the Catholic Church tacitly condones not only sexual immorality, but even sexual perversion!
Viewers learned that in Amsterdam there is a “parish” made up entirely of Catholic homosexuals. The priest who “ministers” to them was asked: “Can homosexuals be Christians like anybody else?” He replied: “Yes, I am sure of it, and so are all the members of our group who have been working among homosexuals for ten years here in Holland.”
This priest revealed that at least two homosexual “marriages” have been solemnized in a Dutch Catholic church. Questioned on the propriety of such ceremonies, he added: “When two homosexuals request it, I am of the opinion that a priest can bless them.”
French-speaking Catholics watching could hardly believe their eyes and ears. But worse was yet to come. They were next offered the spectacle of a Catholic priest shamelessly admitting on television that he was himself a practicing homosexual! The interview ran as follows:
Commentator: “Since homosexuality is no longer considered to be a sin, Father ​——​——, a priest in the student parish, has chosen to be frank. Father ​——​——, you are a priest. You also belong to the C.O.C., a homosexual organization.”
Priest: “Yes.”
Commentator: “Are you a homosexual?”
Priest: “Yes.”
Commentator: “How long has it been publicly known that you are a homosexual?”
Priest: “Not for long. Six months.”
Commentator: “Has this situation brought forth any reaction on the part of your bishop? It must surely be the first time a priest has publicly admitted being a homosexual and an active member of a homosexual organization.”
Priest: “No, the bishop has not yet reacted.”
Commentator: “Do you consider yourself to be, in other people’s eyes, as good a priest as any?”
Priest: “Yes, of course! Why not?”
Bishop and Cardinal Comment
After this astonishing conversation, the TV reporter asked a Dutch bishop what he would do if a priest in his diocese openly admitted being a homosexual.
Many Catholics watching the program no doubt expected this prelate to reply unhesitatingly: ‘I would suspend him immediately!’ Instead, they saw and heard this bishop ‘beat around the bush’ and say: “It is very difficult for me to answer. If such a situation arose, I would have to see the priest and decide if his position shocked the faithful.” Asked if he personally was shocked by such a situation, he stammered: “It’s . . . it’s . . . it’s very new to me.”
The bishop directly concerned in this case had done nothing about the priest who is an avowed homosexual. This second bishop, who was interviewed, was either not shocked by the situation or not courageous enough to say so. What an example for sincere Catholics!
One hope remained for the hierarchy of the Catholic Church to come out openly for righteous Bible principles and against immorality being committed and tolerated by members of the clergy. That hope was French Cardinal Daniélou, who had been sitting in the studio throughout this program. The TV commentator put the following question to the cardinal: “Father, what is your reaction after seeing this report on Holland?”
What a golden opportunity to defend Christian principles! And therefore what a severe disappointment for sincere Catholics when they heard this high-ranking prelate philosophize and then compromise with Christian principles! The cardinal said: “I believe homosexuality is a problem the Church should carefully study because of its obviously dramatic character; on the other hand, it is quite clear that a homosexual has a perfect right to belong to the Church and to have faith.”
Although later conceding that homosexuality is not ‘normal,’ this French cardinal at no time condemned it, apparently forgetting that Catholic Bibles call it “filthy,” a “perversion,” “monstrous behaviour” and “depravity.”​—Rom. 1:26-32, Douay; Jerusalem Bible.
After this program a sincere young Catholic woman in Lyons wrote the following in an open letter to Cardinal Daniélou: “In view of this display of abject theories on sexuality and particularly on homosexuality such as we heard yesterday on television, would it not have been fitting, Father, for you to have jumped up from your seat and cried out loud and clear your disapproval and your disgust? . . . I almost cried with shame!” This was published in the press, in Le Progrès de Lyon.

