Reactions of French Catholics
THE reactions of French Catholics showed the anguish many of them experienced after viewing these television programs. Both the French press and individual citizens expressed dismay over some of the disclosures.
After the general outcry caused by the first program, the one showing the homosexual priest, a producer of the program, Pierre Dumayet, stated: “Our purpose was not to tell people there are homosexual priests, but to show to what limits the Church is willing to go in tolerating priests who publicly say they are homosexuals.” From the reaction of many Catholics, it was obvious that they thought the Church had exceeded the permissible limits.
Le Monde commented that this program showed “the extent to which the [Catholic] Church is not only ‘in the world’ but influenced by the world.” Many viewers regarded that worldly influence as having had a degrading effect on the Church. Thus, the most widely read French newspaper, France-Soir, commented: “It seems as though the world that has ‘lost’ its spirituality can no longer count on the traditional church to put an end to its confusion.”
A French Catholic in the Paris area said to one of Jehovah’s witnesses: “I consider that the leaders on both sides are too extremist. The reformers are demolishing the Catholic Church, not seeming to realize that they will be absorbed by the Marxists. As to the conservatives, they are living 150 years in the past, and this is just as dangerous. This program made a painful impression on me.”
Before the programs had been shown, a Catholic lady in a town on the French Riviera told one of Jehovah’s witnesses not to miss the TV report on the Catholic Church. She hoped it would convince the Witness she was wrong. The following week, after the first program, the lady told the Witness: “I was profoundly shocked and disappointed. I was horrified by the Church’s tendency to tolerate homosexuality. Above all, I was deeply disappointed by French Cardinal Daniélou, who tried to evade all the questions.” The lady ordered a Bible and is now studying with Jehovah’s witnesses.
The week before the first program was televised, a couple studying with two of Jehovah’s witnesses had discussed with them the second chapter of the Bible-study aid The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life. That chapter is entitled “Why It Is Wise to Examine Your Religion.” After the Witnesses had left, the husband, an army officer, referring to paragraph 3 of this chapter, which mentions some clergymen approving of homosexuality, said to his wife about Jehovah’s witnesses: “They really go a bit too far!”
But the day after the first TV program, the wife met one of the Witnesses in the street and said: “Madame, my husband and I were disgusted with what we saw on television. My husband told me: ‘You know, those people are right. They are telling the truth and do not exaggerate. We must go on studying with them.’”
There is no question about it. Sincere French Catholics were genuinely shocked by what they saw on their state television network. But what they need to appreciate is that these things are not really new, although the revelations about them may be. It should make them, and sincere persons everywhere, examine the foundations of their religion. And that is so no matter what religion a person belongs to, for while these television disclosures concerned the Catholic Church, some of the same things shown are going on in the rest of Christendom’s churches.
Have you examined your religion lately? Why not do so in the light of God’s Word of truth, the Holy Bible? Find out from the Creator himself what he accepts and rejects in the way of worship. See what his purposes are for this earth and man upon it. Learn what the very near future holds, not only for the churches, but also for you. Jehovah’s witnesses will be happy to assist you in this examination by discussing the Bible with you free of charge, in the privacy of your own home.

