1983 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses
THE GREATEST MAN ever to walk this earth, the most outstanding figure of all human history, was without question Jesus Christ. It was not his physical stature, his brawn and brute strength, his genius as a military leader, nor his astute political or financial acumen that earned him this reputation. Rather, his great accomplishments as a preacher and teacher distinguished him from all other men.
And what made this man Jesus so great a teacher? Several things. He always spoke the truth. He upheld his heavenly Father’s Word as truth and he urged others to do the same. (John 17:17; 18:37) To those who became his disciples, Jesus said, “You will know the truth, and the truth will set you free,” yes, free from ignorance, superstition and fear.​—John 8:32.
Another reason that Jesus stood head and shoulders above all other teachers was his kind and gentle way of dealing with the lowly and downtrodden people among whom he freely moved. Even opposers admitted that “never has another man spoken like this.” (John 7:46) He was forceful and direct, to be sure, yet never rude, arrogant or inconsiderate. “The crowds were astounded at his way of teaching; for he was teaching them as a person having authority, and not as their scribes.”​—Matt. 7:28, 29.
How did this man Jesus acquire such admirable qualities that characterized him as the Great Teacher? To be sure, he was the only-begotten Son of God, who had left his heavenly abode and had become flesh, a perfect human. But this in itself did not automatically equip him with the wonderful teaching characteristics that he displayed. Rather, at all times Jesus sought to learn what his heavenly Father wanted him to say and to do.
This attitude was apparent from the very beginning of his ministry. The apostle Paul describes Jesus as saying: “Look! I am come (in the roll of the book it is written about me) to do your will, O God.” “Look! I am come to do your will.”​—Heb. 10:7-9; compare Psalm 40:8.
With Jesus the conclusion of the matter was not his presenting himself to his heavenly Father at the Jordan River and being baptized. Six months after his baptism Jesus was saying: “My food is for me to do the will of him that sent me and to finish his work.” A year later he was saying: “The Son cannot do a single thing of his own initiative, . . . because I seek, not my own will, but the will of him that sent me.” Then a year after that he was saying: “I have come down from heaven to do, not my will, but the will of him that sent me.” (John 4:34; 5:19, 30; 6:38) Yes, “the Christ did not please himself” but always sought to do his Father’s will.​—Rom. 15:3.
The principal theme of Jesus’ preaching and teaching concerned “the kingdom of the heavens,” “the kingdom of God.” (Matt. 4:17; Mark 1:15) Many of his illustrations centered on this Kingdom theme. (Matt. 13:10-53; Mark 4:10-34; Luke 13:18-30) When teaching his disciples how to pray, he linked the sanctifying of Jehovah’s name to the coming Kingdom and the doing of God’s will.​—Matt. 6:9, 10.
One is impressed by the way Jesus was constantly seeking to know his Father’s will and good pleasure, right down to the final hours in Gethsemane. There we find him in earnest prayer repeatedly saying to his Father, “Not as I will, but as you will . . . let your will take place.” “Not what I want, but what you want.”​—Matt. 26:39, 42; Mark 14:36.
OTHERS URGED TO FOLLOW JESUS’ EXAMPLE
In all aspects of his ministry Jesus left his disciples the perfect model for them “to follow his steps closely.” (1 Pet. 2:21) The apostle Paul wrote: “You received the instruction from us on how you ought to walk and please God, just as you are in fact walking, that you would keep on doing it more fully.”​—1 Thess. 4:1.
As those first-century Christians followed through on their Kingdom-preaching assignment, they made a spectacular record. In a few years’ time it was said that the good news “was preached in all creation that is under heaven.” (Col. 1:23) What they accomplished amid great adversity and open opposition was due to their relying on Jehovah’s holy spirit as the guiding force in their ministry.
Now what about modern times? Do we find people today who are truly following in the footsteps of Christ Jesus? Yes, indeed! It is no secret that Jehovah’s Witnesses faithfully follow in the footsteps of their King and Exemplar, Christ Jesus, wherever he leads them. They are dedicated to the doing of Jehovah’s will and not their own. They are no part of this Satan-ruled world and have nothing to do with its politics or territorial wars. They are morally clean and worthy of representing the pure and holy God Jehovah as ambassadors and envoys of his righteous Kingdom. The world report of Jehovah’s Witnesses for the past service year gives abundant evidence of these facts.
THE WORLD IS THE FIELD
Concerning this time of the harvest Jesus said, “The field is the world.” (Matt. 13:38) It is therefore most gratifying to review the worldwide field report for the past year, for it shows that a tremendous harvest has been reaped.​—See pages 24-31.
A quick rundown of the figures indicates that the vast majority of the countries have seen increases in many features of the work. For the 205 countries listed, there has been an increase of 4.2 percent in the average number of publishers compared with the previous year. Too, the average number of pioneers increased by 14.3 percent. There were also increases of 7.3 percent in hours and 7.5 percent in Bible studies. The number baptized was way up, 15.6 percent! The Memorial attendance was also up by 4.4 percent in spite of the fact that in 1981 the Memorial was observed on a Sunday.
From country after country come reports of great increases in the number of brothers who have engaged in the auxiliary pioneer work this past year. For example, Sweden said that in April every sixth publisher served in some type of pioneer work. Thailand says that 21 percent of the publishers in that country were in various kinds of full-time service. Portugal reports a 48-percent increase in auxiliary pioneers over their previous peak. In Korea auxiliary pioneers increased 30 percent. “With more ‘front-line warriors,’” they say, “we hope to reap a greater increase in the new service year.” South Africa writes: “In four months’ time a Zulu traveling overseer helped 71 publishers to enroll as auxiliary pioneers and a further 22 to enter regular pioneer service. In each of his past few circuits this brother has helped over 50 persons to become regular pioneers.”
Mexico reports an all-time peak of 113,823 publishers in August. Also their home Bible studies surpassed 111,000. “At regular meetings,” they say, “the attendance is double the number of publishers. In one congregation of 32 publishers the attendance is 255.” Japan passed the 70,000 mark of publishers this past year (72,015 in August, a 19-percent increase). Also their Bible studies greatly increased over the previous year. Japan adds: “We cannot go without commenting on the pioneer spirit. In June we had 25,140 pioneers and that was about 36 percent of all our publishers! . . . We do feel that there will be another big gathering of sheeplike ones before the great tribulation, as Jehovah surely speeds up his work.” In the United States the 613,007 reporting in August was an all-time peak. Particularly exciting was the fact that 75,538 enrolled in the auxiliary pioneer work in April in the United States. This was 24,530 more than the previous peak, in April 1979.
It is not only in the large countries where high percentages were reported but also in small faraway places like the Faroe Islands where they say that in the first 10 months of the service year there was a 23-percent increase in the number of Bible studies and a 24-percent increase in magazine distribution.
But more interesting than the mere figures are the branch reports that relate some of the thrilling experiences the Kingdom publishers have had in their various preaching activities. We are happy to relate some of these as space allows.
FIELD EXPERIENCES
Among those baptized in Thailand this past year was a famous fortune-teller. She is a descendant of a former city chieftain and had inherited priceless amulet charms and many books on spiritism and magic. People would come from far and wide to consult her. A special pioneer placed a booklet with her and on the return visit began a Bible study using chapter 3 in the Truth book. The woman applied what she was learning, and soon she destroyed about $500 worth of spiritistic paraphernalia and amulets that she had inherited. In a short time she was baptized.
Ivory Coast tells about two brothers working from house to house. They met a man who explained in a trembling voice, “I was expecting you! I hope you will excuse me for not having paid the rent for these past three months. Both my wife and mother are ill.” The brothers, realizing that they had been mistaken for the agents of the housing company, suggested that he go to the housing manager and explain his problems. Then they added, “However, we did come to talk about housing, a house you will be able to build and live in yourself without fear of anyone disturbing you for rent money.” They reasoned with him on the basis of the prophecy of Isaiah 65:21, 22. The booklet A Secure Future was placed, and a Bible study was started.
A special pioneer in Chad, returning home, was singing Kingdom songs despite the eerie silence throughout the city. The people were whispering that war was about to explode right in their midst. His singing was overheard by an older, very fervent Catholic man who had earlier chased the pioneer from his door with the words “I have become bald-headed as a Catholic” (meaning that he could not change now). But this particular day, amazed that the pioneer should be singing, he asked, “What makes you so happy when the entire country is in cold fear?” With the man’s own Catholic Bible the Witness explained why the world is in such a frightful mess and pointed to the wonderful hope of an earthly Paradise. A study was started on the spot, and within one week this formerly avid Catholic was attending meetings at the Kingdom Hall. Within three weeks he started divorce proceedings, as he was also a polygamist. After several months the man was baptized and he continues zealously serving Jehovah, bald head and all.
From Ecuador comes this experience. A 10-year-old boy along with his grandmother visiting from Germany called on a woman who had taken the magazines. She requested that they explain the Trinity, and she was very much impressed to see this young boy give her a reasonable explanation as to what the Bible teaches. A local sister then started a Bible study with the lady. When shown that none of the fundamental doctrines of the Catholic Church were based on the Bible, she arranged for one of the most qualified priests available to come to her home. Asked to defend the Church’s teaching on the Trinity, the cross, and so forth, the priest became very confused. He had no knowledge of the Bible. The woman was then convinced that she had found the truth, but her husband remained skeptical, not believing in God or the Bible. However, when he was given the book Is the Bible Really the Word of God? he made rapid progress and, together with his wife, was baptized. Their three children now are also baptized Witnesses. This experience illustrates the three steps necessary for growth​—the boy and his grandmother planted, another sister watered, while Jehovah’s spirit produced the growth to maturity.
The Puerto Rico branch tells about an interested person who was studying with a special pioneer but whose husband showed no desire to do so. One day his five-year-old daughter said, “Daddy, I want to grow up so I can be baptized.” Later she said, “Daddy, please study the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses so that you will not be destroyed and then you can be with us in Paradise.” These words of the young child and the great change in his wife’s conduct made him think. He asked for a Bible study and is making good progress.
Similarly, the Korean branch tells how a mother’s training her boy from infancy had amazing results. The father was an official in the military affairs section of his district office and had deep prejudices against the Witnesses. One day in the absence of the mother, the father forced the boy to go to the store to buy him cigarettes, saying: “Your mother isn’t home and won’t see you.” The boy reluctantly obeyed but came back with two bottles of a cola drink and asked his father to sip on those instead. He told his father that, though his mother couldn’t see him, God could. So because of the steadfast conduct of the boy and his mother and brother, the father eventually became interested and studied to the point of making a dedication.
FAITHFUL AND LOYAL DESPITE OPPOSITION
In Haiti a married woman began studying the Bible, made good progress and attended meetings at the Kingdom Hall. When her husband started to oppose her she continued her study elsewhere. Meanwhile she became pregnant, and her husband wanted her to have an abortion. When she tried to explain to him why her conscience kept her from having the abortion, her husband beat her almost every day in order to induce an abortion. He then chased her and the children out of the house. Finally he divorced her. Nevertheless, she continued making good progress, was finally baptized and now is an active publisher.
Finland reports how one sister experienced a lot of opposition from her husband, yet remained firm for the truth and was rewarded. “On many occasions he beat me black and blue. Once he hit me so hard that I lost consciousness. On another occasion he held a pistol at my temple, threatening to shoot me. But some time later my husband had a change of heart. Not only did he accompany me to the 1982 district convention where I was baptized, but later, when visiting some of his relatives in Sweden, he showed them copies of The Watchtower and Awake!, saying, ‘These are good magazines. We hope you would like to read them, too.’ Now I am hoping that my husband will take the final step for the truth.”
UNDERGROUND ACTIVITIES
In harmony with the yeartext of 1982, Jehovah’s Witnesses have had “plenty to do in the work of the Lord” in more than 200 countries. (1 Cor. 15:58) In 28 of these countries the work is restricted, and yet here too there have been increases. Many thrilling reports filter out of those countries. These indicate angelic direction of the work that is accomplished underground in spite of the obstacles. Some unusual incidental circumstances are seized to interest people in the Kingdom message.
For example, a 55-year-old lady was attempting to cross the street. Just as a car was about to hit her, a sister grabbed her arm and pulled her to safety, saying, “Please take care. We are living in perilous times.” She then explained why the times are so dangerous. The lady said, “Are you one of Jehovah’s Witnesses?” As it turned out she had obtained a Paradise book from among the possessions of her sister who had not been a Witness and had recently died. After reading the book with her Bible, the lady had been wanting to meet one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, and, no doubt by angelic direction, this dangerous incident made it all possible.
From another country where the work is banned comes this experience: “As I was walking past some benches in a park I felt drawn toward a young man who started a conversation about the beauty of nature and the unpleasant world conditions. Soon we began talking about the Bible, and this in turn led to a discussion of 2 Timothy 3:1-5 and Matthew 24:3-42. His interest was aroused, leading to a home Bible study with him and his wife.”
Another writes: “We were walking past a house and noticed watercress growing in the garden. We asked the owners if they knew that the leaves were edible. They answered, ‘No.’ We told them about the antibiotic qualities of this plant and talked about the many terrible diseases in the world. The question was raised whether all the sicknesses will ever be eliminated. Soon we were invited into the home and a Bible discussion followed.”
Here is another example of informal witnessing: “In a secondhand book store a man said, ‘I am interested in ancient history.’ I asked him if he knew which was the oldest and most reliable history book. He did not. So I took a Bible from a shelf and turned to Genesis chapter 10, showing him that here was a chart of the races. In speaking about the Flood and about Noah and his sons, I said they were listed in dictionaries and encyclopedias as historical personages. The man was so impressed, he gave me his address and he is now being visited.”
Where preaching openly is prohibited, funerals and weddings often afford good opportunities to give a witness, since many acquaintances are often present. One brother reported: “At the departure from the graveyard, not a few persons joined us and expressed their thanks for ‘excellent thoughts and hope.’ Two Bible studies were started and return visits were made on other families.”
In Southeast Asia the Civil Intelligence Department rounded up 39 of our brothers and sisters at one of their meetings. The report says, “As if by a miracle the article scheduled to be studied the week after the police action was ‘Happy Are You When People Persecute You.’ All the brothers and sisters continue maintaining their integrity regardless of whatever persecution the Devil brings upon them.”
From an island where the work is banned a brother, after serving his eight-month jail sentence, went about encouraging the brothers to keep busy in the witness work. He feels much stronger spiritually and more dependent upon Jehovah as a result of his court and prison experiences.
One African land reports that in some areas there is sporadic persecution, sometimes very violent, but in other districts the brothers are enjoying relative freedom in their preaching work. In one instance a former member of parliament and a regional minister started to study, and in another area four party men likewise started studying. It is also reported that the pioneer spirit is growing in this country.
Many countries are experiencing various types of civil war​—Ireland, El Salvador, Lebanon and others. But only in very few instances have our brothers suffered physical injury. Their neutrality has proved to be their protection. Reports from these areas also show that Jehovah has prospered the Kingdom-preaching work in spite of the hardships and difficulties.
For example, all the missionaries were expelled from Nicaragua, and the Kingdom Halls have been seized by the leftist government. But this has not stopped the work by any means.
Argentina reports: “Although we are still not recognized as a legal, religious organization, we are moving ahead with our activity.” There has been an 8-percent increase in the number of publishers. The reports from Paraguay are also very encouraging despite the ban on the work.
SPECIAL RELIEF MEASURES
Heavy rains, flooding and violent storms have plagued a number of areas around the world. Whenever the Witnesses are affected, our brothers have come to their aid with special relief.
An example was when the Chichonal volcano in southern Mexico blew up. The branch reports: “Immediate relief measures were instituted for over 200 families of Witnesses affected by the eruption. A group of soldiers in Ostuacán expressed orally what many other persons could easily observe: ‘No other organization has shown such interest in their associates as you have. No one else has penetrated so close to the volcano to render aid.’”
BLOOD ISSUE
The issue of blood transfusions has been faced up to by many brothers around the world. Oftentimes opposition from the doctors, nurses and judges, as well as unfavorable publicity in the public press, has put much pressure upon our brothers, but the result has been a tremendous witness.
The most notorious case this year was the one in Italy involving the Onedas. Brother and Sister Oneda were sentenced to 14 years of imprisonment, have already been in jail more than 2 years and are still awaiting the outcome of their appeal. (For details see Awake!, October 22, 1982.) In the meantime they have received thousands of letters of encouragement from their brothers around the world. This flood of mail has resulted in a mighty witness in behalf of Jehovah and his faithful Witnesses.
DISTRICT CONVENTIONS
Among the highlights of our activities during the past service year has been the series of district conventions. In the southern hemisphere the 1981 “Kingdom Loyalty” conventions were held, whereas in the northern hemisphere the brothers enjoyed the 1982 “Kingdom Truth” conventions.
Concerning the latter series, many expressions of appreciation for the program, as well as for the releases, have been received. Here are a few examples: “Where in Christendom would you find the kind of love that you see here?” “This convention got to the ‘nitty-gritty.’ It didn’t beat around the bush.” “It is one of the most upbuilding, encouraging, positive and spiritual conventions I have ever attended.” “It put us back on the main track; it helped us to reset our compasses.”
After hearing the talk “Beware of Music That Debases,” one sister commented: “This talk showed the importance of paying attention not only to the music we hear but also to the lyrics. As a professional singer I know that music can rape the mind.” Canada writes, “Thank you for taking a clear position on matters such as permissiveness and debasing music​—most timely!” Friday’s talks on pioneering were also a stimulus to many in attendance. One sister explained, “What I appreciated about the part is what it emphasized as the key to success, be it auxiliary or regular pioneering, and that was relying on Jehovah.”
The releases, too, were enjoyed very much. Writes one appreciative mother, “Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! is fantastic for children. My three-year-old daughter is already telling me about the pictures and is eager to learn more.” Sweden writes: “After looking through the new book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth, a brother spontaneously expressed what many felt: ‘This makes me yearn for the field service. It has put a new fire in my bones.’”
In other ways the district conventions sometimes have far-reaching effects. Puerto Rico writes: “The director of sports for the southwest area was so impressed with the order, peace, cleanliness and fine spirit at the assembly that he made us an offer. We could have the use of any of the government recreation facilities free of charge so that we could organize different sports events among the Witnesses. Then it could be announced so that others could come and learn how to organize and act in public. In this way, according to this director, the fine conduct of Jehovah’s Witnesses would rub off on the others. We thanked him very much but also explained that we found it necessary to change the people first through Bible study and the applying of Bible principles. Then they become good associates.”
EXPANSION OF BRANCH FACILITIES
Another evidence of Jehovah’s rich blessing on the Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making work is seen in the expansion of Bethel homes and factories in many parts of the earth. During this past year quite a number of these new facilities were completed and were dedicated, including those in Canada, Ivory Coast, Japan and Korea. In Brooklyn, New York, the 25 Columbia Heights office structure was also completed and dedicated to Jehovah God’s service.
With the completion of the beautiful new branch building in Sweden many businessmen and political figures were greatly impressed by what had been accomplished. The branch reports: “We always try to direct the visitor’s attention to the One behind the achievement. In this way a fine testimony to Jehovah’s glory has been given.”
A few large Assembly Halls and many Kingdom Halls have also been constructed this past year​—all evidence of Jehovah’s blessing on his expanding organization.
Construction of new branch facilities is at present under way in Australia, Britain, Denmark, Germany, India, Martinique, Mexico, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, South Africa and Tahiti, as well as at Watchtower Farms in the United States. Other branches that are looking for new property or planning to build new facilities include Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Chile, Cyprus, Ecuador, France, Ghana, Haiti, Lebanon, Liberia, New Zealand, Peru, Taiwan, Uruguay, Venezuela and Zaïre.
MAGAZINES APPRECIATED
Magazine production and distribution climbed up more than 8 percent this past year. Total printing worldwide was more than 455,000,000 copies! This is evidence in itself of how much these publications are appreciated by the reading public.
From Chile’s report we read: “A special pioneer making a return visit asked the lady what book teaches us the will of God. ‘The Watchtower, of course,’ she said. Our sister proceeded to explain that it was, rather, the Bible. ‘Yes, but what would I do with my recently obtained Bible if I did not use The Watchtower to understand it?’​—Acts 8:31.”
The Awake! magazine is now published quarterly in some 17 different languages and has been received with great enthusiasm in many countries. Reporting on the reception of one of these new quarterlies, Lebanon writes: “The Awake! magazine began to be published for the first time in Arabic and it is certainly much appreciated by the Arabic-speaking brothers. . . . a real source of encouragement.” This nicely expresses the sentiments of many other language groups that now enjoy the quarterly editions of Awake!
NEW PRESSES AND BINDERY EQUIPMENT
There has been a great demand from the field for more literature, and this in turn has put a heavy load on production facilities. Here in the United States alone we have printed 212,427,410 magazines; 20,798,332 books; 11,980,532 booklets; 54,879,418 tracts. With the phasing out of old, outdated lead plates with raised printing surfaces, most of this printing has been done on offset presses. In Brooklyn we have five rotary offset presses with three more on order. At Watchtower Farms three such presses are now running and two more are being installed. In addition there are high-speed rotary offset presses in Canada, Britain, Germany, Japan and South Africa.
By taking parts from two of our M.A.N. presses, a company was able to build for us an offset press that has been installed and is running in Switzerland. So successful was this venture that we now have on order 17 more of these converted presses that will be used in our printing branches around the world.
In addition to the bookbinding equipment in the United States, Germany and Japan, we also have similar equipment in Brazil, Finland and Italy, thus giving these branches the ability to print and bind their own books in addition to printing magazines. Korea, too, will soon get binding equipment. Japan is printing and binding the complete New World Translation in Japanese, for which the branch has orders for more than 1,000,000 copies.
COMPUTER DEVELOPMENTS
The obsolescence of letterpress printing has made it necessary for the Society to move rapidly into computerized phototypesetting. This has been no small undertaking, but with Jehovah’s spirit and blessing, tremendous advancements have been made by our brothers in the United States, Japan, Germany and South Africa. We are now building some 40 MEPS (Multilanguage electronic phototypesetting systems), developed entirely by our brothers, that will be set up in branches that do translating. This powerful MEPS computer equipment will be able to handle up to 250 different languages​—a must if we are to get this good news of the Kingdom published in printed form for all inhabitants of the earth before the end.​—Matt. 24:14.
CASSETTE RECORDINGS
A few years ago we started to record the Bible and other material on cassettes for the enjoyment and instruction of the brothers. These cassettes have been very much appreciated. During the past year Brooklyn produced 3,686,468 tapes of various recordings in addition to those produced by other branches.
PIONEERS
In the last few years the economic pressure on the brothers has greatly increased. It would have seemed, then, that fewer would have the means to support themselves in the pioneer service. However, the figures for the last three years indicate otherwise. The average number of pioneers has gone from 137,861 (1980), to 151,180 (1981), to a new all-time peak of 172,859 (1982). This is an increase of 14.3 percent in just the last year!
A number of branches say that many more brothers have also entered the auxiliary pioneer service this past year. Japan writes: “Most of the territories have been covered every two weeks, three weeks or one month and in general the people’s reactions are rough, but that does not keep the brothers from pioneering.” Pakistan, with only 193 publishers, writes: “A number of sisters saw the possibility of arranging their affairs in such a way that they could enter the regular pioneer service. One sister with a family of five children is up at 5:00 a.m. to begin her day’s domestic duties so that she is free to go in pioneer service after the children are off to school.” Even from a land where the work is banned comes this word: “A good number of the members are serving as auxiliary pioneers.” That certainly is encouraging to hear.
The continued high cost of living is reflected in the great expenditures the Society makes to support the tens of thousands of full-time ministers (special pioneers, missionaries and traveling overseers) in their assignments. In 1982 this field service expense amounted to $20,843,248.53. Were it not for the generous contributions made by Jehovah’s people in all parts of the earth, such support would not be possible. All thanks, then, go to Jehovah for putting it into the hearts of his people to support these full-time ministers in his service.​—Compare 1 Chronicles 29:3-9, 14-17.
Reflecting on what has been accomplished this past year in expanding the Kingdom proclamation, we freely confess that it was only possible because Jehovah gave his people guidance and direction, and an abundance of his dynamic energy. For this we render him our praise and thanksgiving. Our prayer will continue to be: ‘Make us to do your will, O Jehovah, for you are our God.’​—Ps. 143:10.
[Chart on page 24-31]
1982 SERVICE YEAR REPORT OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES WORLDWIDE
(See publication)

