Announcements
◆ The Society now has a limited supply of the book Is This Life All There Is? in grade-two English Braille available on a loan basis. You may receive this 265-page, three-volume set free of charge by writing the Braille Desk. The set must be returned to the Braille Desk after completion of reading or study. These sets are not to be stocked by the congregation.
◆ The Know Jehovah book will be used at the congregation book studies beginning in June or when you complete the present book. It will be good to determine how many publishers will want new personal copies so that these can be Included when ordering.
◆ Literature offer for April: Watchtower subscription, with three booklets, for $1.50, or subscriptions for both The Watchtower and Awake!, with six booklets, for $3.00. May: “The Nations Shall Know that I Am Jehovah”​—How?, with a booklet, for 50 cents. June: New World Translation along with the book Is This Life All There Is?, for $1.25.
◆ Regular pioneers who were appointed on or before February 1, 1975, will be sent a meal ticket for use at a district assembly during this service year. These will be sent to the presiding overseer along with the monthly statement for May. Pioneers, be sure to bring your meal ticket to the assembly and treat it as cash; no replacements will be available.
◆ The April 22 issue of Awake! is built around the subject “Mental Health in a Mixed-up World.” The magazine provides much practical information that many people will be grateful to have and of course, directs them to the only lasting solution. If you would like to have an additional supply of this issue for your congregation, please order right away.
◆ On Saturday. April 12, the Bethel home and factory, including Watchtower Farm, will be closed for spring cleaning; so there will be no arrangement for tours or literature pickup on that day. However, magazine supplies may be picked up.
◆ Congregations with 75 or more publishers might stock one or two copies of the large-print Bible, Aid to Bible Understanding, Comprehensive Concordance, Byington’s translation, Kingdom Interlinear Translation. Diaglott, “Make Sure of All Things,” and “All Scripture Is Inspired of God and Beneficial, the first four of which are cash items. Thus, if a publisher can place one of these and wants to make a call within a day or two he can do so. These should be ordered, however, only if you expect to be able to use them.
◆ New Publications Available:
New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures​—Danish
Human Plans Failing as God’s Purpose Succeeds​—Italian
◆ Publications Available Again:
Watch Tower Publications Index for 1961-1965, also for 1966-1970​—English

