Preach with Endurance and Joy
1 When Jesus was on earth he wanted his followers to share with him in telling others the good news. Thus Luke 10:1 says: “The Lord designated seventy . . . and: sent them forth by twos in advance of him into every city and place to which he himself was going to come.” In verse 17 we learn one result of this preaching tour: “Then the seventy returned with joy.”
2 Each one of us has had the pleasure of experiencing that same reward. There is true happiness in ‘declaring good news to the poor, preaching a release to the captives ‘and a recovery of sight to the blind, sending the crushed ones away with a release and preaching Jehovah’s acceptable year.’ (Luke 4:18, 19) Especially is this true in these days when so many thousands are listening and responding to what Jehovah has said.
3 However, the Bible does not promise the Christian that joy free of problems. No, a variety of difficulties is what we should expect, with happiness resulting if we endure. So, we have cultivated the thinking of the apostle Paul, who said: “When being reviled, we bless; when being persecuted, we bear up; when being defamed, we entreat.” (1 Cor. 4:12, 13) Other apostles also demonstrated the right view when they “went their way from before the Sanhedrin, rejoicing because they had been counted worthy to be dishonored in behalf of [Jesus’] name.”​—Acts 5:41.
4 But perhaps direct persecution is not the problem you face now. Still, do you get opposition from members of your own family? (Matt. 10:21, 35, 36) Jehovah is pleased when we set for them a fine example in Christian conduct, and regular association with your larger ‘family’ in the truth will help you to succeed in this. (Mark 10:29, 30) If your relatives refuse to listen, you can always devote your preaching time to those in the territory who will listen. Jehovah can fill your life with a useful, productive service in many ways you never imagined.
5 Do you have health problems? Have the years slowed you down? If so, be realistic. What youth accomplishes in one way, you might accomplish through other means. The qualities and gifts your years of experience have developed might accomplish much in a field not open to others. Do you witness by letter, telephone, or informally? Do you study so as to participate in meetings, to answer others’ questions, and to build someone up with a word at the right time? If nothing else, do you support by your presence at meetings, by your smiles, by your prayers, those who can serve more actively than you? There are many ways for you to serve with endurance and joy.
6 April is the last month of this Watchtower campaign. Do you have plans for following up all subscription prospects you have located in the previous three months? It would be good for each family to talk this over and to schedule the needed time so that all such calls, including any involving expired magazine subscriptions, can be made before the month ends. The Bible study overseer can help by being certain that all expiration slips have been distributed to the publishers. Have those with whom you have conducted home Bible studies received their three free copies of the April 15 Watchtower?
7 Has your congregation scheduled the two special talks, “Why Look to God as Your Refuge?” and “Are You Really Making Jehovah Your Stronghold?” for late in April or early in May? Be sure you are acquainted with the dates they will be given in your congregation so you can invite interested ones to be there with you. These talks contain information that will surely help those who attended the Memorial and the special talk on March 30. Invite them to be there on these two occasions also.
8 Has your secular employment been affected by the economic slowdown? We hear that some brothers have decided to temporary pioneer, now that they are employed fewer hours. The elders will gladly give immediate attention to your application if you find that you can share in this privilege for a month or so. Loss of employment usually causes hardships, but sharing more fully in field service can bring much joy.
9 April should be a month of great activity for Jehovah’s people. There is much work that needs to be done. Young and old, new and seasoned publishers, should share unreservedly. Preaching and teaching should occupy a large part of our time and attention these days. What a privilege to share in this work! Jehovah will richly bless all those who put forth the effort to preach with endurance and joy no matter what the conditions.
[Blurb on page 1]
Preach Despite Being Spectacles Through Persecution.

