Presenting the Good News​—By Using Questions to Arouse Interest
1 The Great Teacher, Jesus, used questions to arouse interest and to make people think. (Matt. 17:25; 18:12; Mark 11:29, 30) Reading of such effective use of questions makes us want to copy Jesus’ use of them in our field service.
2 When placing single copies of the magazines, many find it very practical to pose a question about one of the articles. Having captured the interest of the individual, then you can go on to call attention to the article and present the magazines. But be prepared to follow through on whatever subject you raised by your question, either with a further comment on the matter, or by pointing out a specific point in the article being presented.
3 Some brothers, too, have had success using the following question, or a variation of it, and you may find it helpful to you. After briefly introducing themselves, they ask, “If you had the power to overcome just one of the problems in the world, which one would it be?” Then, after getting the answer, they refer to a scripture that deals with it. For instance, if the answer is, “I would do away with the corrupt governments,” the householder is directed to Daniel 2:44 to show that arrangements have already been made by God to set up a kingdom that will do away with corrupt governments.
4 In offering the Know Jehovah book, we might say: “In the Bible book of Ezekiel there is an important statement that is repeated 62 times for emphasis and that has meaning for today. Would you like to know what that statement is?” (Pause for reply.) Then, read the title of the book. (See kj, page 32.) Even when offering the Watchtower subscription, you may find it effective to ask questions on an appropriate article to arouse interest; or you may wish to use a question that can be answered by the scripture that appears prominently in the first article of each issue during the campaign.
5 A word of caution, though, in regard to using questions: They should not be used to embarrass people. You may want to suggest possible answers to your question. Or, if your householder hesitates to reply, you may just continue to talk.
6 At first you may find it difficult to use questions, but continue trying. Even if at first you are not successful, you will find that in time you become experienced and effective in their use. They are often helpful to get a conversation going and to draw the householder out that you know his viewpoint better, and are able to build on what interests him.
7 You may find it very helpful to discuss with others in the congregation the use of questions to arouse interest. If you find something that is particularly helpful to you, then pass it on to others so that they too will benefit. The effective use of questions can improve the quality of your field service and stimulate interesting discussions.

