They Appreciate Your Help
1 Jehovah God loves children. They play a part in His grand purpose, and throughout man’s history they have brought joy and fulfillment to the family arrangement. (Ps. 68:5; 127:3-5; 128:3-6) In imitation of his Father, Christ Jesus, too, had tender affection for young people. On one occasion when using a youngster as an example, “he put his arms around” the child. He did not view such’ show of kindness as unmanly. Later, Jesus found time to take some children into his arms and bless them. He enjoyed them, and helping them was a part of his ministry.​—Mark 9:36; 10:13-16.
2 Having the same view as Jehovah God and his Son, how pleased we are to have children as part of the congregation. We want to see them grow up with a love for Jehovah and righteousness. The congregation is interested in seeing young ones progress in the truth so that their ‘advancement is manifest to all persons.’ (1 Tim. 4:15) How happy a congregation is when such ones grow up to serve in various fields of full-time service such as at Bethel, in pioneer and missionary work, or in other ways set fine examples for the congregation.
3 Of course, parents have the primary responsibility to help their children to be pleasing to Jehovah. Keeping in mind that their children are born without belief in God, though with a capacity to do so, will help. Good examples also help. As unbelieving husbands can be “won without a word through the conduct of their wives,” so children can become believers through being eyewitnesses of the godly conduct of their parents.​—1 Pet. 3:1, 2.
4 Initiative and foresight are required if parents are to watch out for the spiritual interests of their children. For example, parents who appreciate this, knowing that their children need association, do more than merely warn them against the results of bad association. They themselves set aside time to be with their children, and then they plan for association with children who also love Jehovah.
5 Raising children today is not easy. So, parents are usually pleased when the congregation as a whole takes a genuine interest in the young folks. They appreciate any help given. Even a word of acknowledgment that it takes time and effort to bring children to meetings and take them along in the field service is encouraging. So, too, is it encouraging to children when elders take a moment to talk to them and let them know how happy the congregation is to have them attend. Where effort and progress have been made, this can be mentioned. It may involve the field service, a student talk, a meeting comment, following along in the Bible, or having been quiet through the entire meeting.
6 Elders, with parental approval, can show young ones they are a part of the congregation by including them in its activities wherever possible. Some may be given assignments around the hall. These may be in connection with cleaning, straightening the chairs, passing out Kingdom Ministry and Ministry School assignments or other matters appropriate to their age and ability. They may be used on the platform to give talks in’ the Ministry School, to participate in demonstrations or to relate experiences.
7 God’s people are like a large family. We all take an interest in others, including young ones. Parents may appreciate help in caring for children during the meetings and assistance in the field service. Let children know they are missed when absent from the Kingdom Hall. Tell them how new ones attending the Kingdom Hall appreciate their good example. Include families with young children when arranging for social occasions. Especially when the father is not in the truth should we be alert to help young ones. We are all interested in doing what we can to help youths to mature and shoulder their responsibility in Jehovah’s organization.
[Blurb on page 4]
Encourage Young Ones to Share in Kingdom Activity.

