Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING APRIL 13
12 min: Song 91. Discuss 1 Corinthians 4:9. (Watchtower, 4/1/74, pp. 215, 216) Then ask audience: What attitude should we take toward opposers? (Acts 7:59, 60) What good often results from opposition? (Luke 21:12, 13) Is persecution a cause for feeling shame or fear ? (1 Pet. 4:16; Matt. 10:28)
15 min: “Preach with Endurance and Joy.” Questions and answers. With paragraph 6 include demonstration of how to offer special April 15 Watchtower and April 22 Awake! Also, report on Watchtower campaign.
18 min: ‘No Weapon Formed Against You Will Succeed.’ Enthusiastic, encouraging talk on 1975 Yearbook, page 94, paragraph 3, to page 119, paragraph 1. Can read excerpts and pose occasional questions for audience. Though can’t cover every point, tell the story. Emphasize that ‘no weapon formed against Jehovah’s people will succeed,’ so should not fear persecution. (Isa. 54:17) On pages cited, highlight the following: (1) Courageously, God’s people waged a counteroffensive against clergy-inspired opposition by distributing the first issues of Kingdom News. (Pp. 97, 98) (2) Severe persecution was endured by Bible Students, and they were “cautious as serpents” (Matt. 10:16) when The Finished Mystery and certain other Christian publications were banned. (Pp. 98-101) (3) Brother Rutherford and other principal servants of the Watch Tower Society were arrested on false charge of sedition. Show nature of court trial and its outcome, citing fulfillment of Revelation 11:3-7, 10. (Pp. 103-109) (4) Bible Students were optimistic despite ‘Babylonish captivity,’ continuing to witness and meet. Imprisoned brothers also held meetings and preached, with good results. (Pp. 109-112) (5) At annual meeting In 1919, confidence was expressed by reelecting Brother Rutherford president. (Pp. 113-115) (6) An outstanding witness resulted from work with the petition to release these imprisoned brothers. Released March 26, 1919, and completely exonerated later. (Pp. 115-119) (7) Emphasize that in 1918 and 1919, with God’s aid, Jehovah’s people endured great hardships and ‘no weapon formed against them prospered.’ (P. 119) Similarly, we can be confident that Jehovah will help His people to endure persecution today.
15 min: Concluding comments. Comment briefly on congregation accounts. Then talk on material in pages 185-187 of Organization book; present in an encouraging manner. Song 87.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 20
Serving Jehovah in Youth
10 min: Song 73. Warmly show how congregation appreciates youths in midst. Give encouraging report on number of young ones in congregation, number conducting studies, making return visits, number having shared as temporary pioneers and how they make fine contribution to congregation in other ways. (Refer to 2 Kings 5:1-19.)
15 min: “They Appreciate Your Help.” Questions and answers.
20 min: Remember the Creator in Youth.
(1 min.) Chairman comments very briefly on Eccl. 12:1. showing that now is the time for young persons to serve Jehovah. Mention that this is a service meeting for youths and we want to hear from them. They face problems that we don’t. Can interview according to age groups. having a few publishers In each of three categories. about ages 7-10, 11-14, 15-18. Adjust this according to young ones available. Ask questions according to what will be most beneficial for congregation and agreeable with parents. Parents can, at home, review with their children questions assigned them ahead of time by chairman. Thereafter, careful advance rehearsal by chairman would be appropriate. He should be sure to hear, by advance rehearsal, what young ones have in mind.
(15 min.) (1) Studying for and attending school classes: What are some of the problems youths face today in attending school? What are some things you believe might be done to assist young people with these problems? What have you been doing or what do you plan to do in overcoming or solving these problems? How has the truth helped in these situations?
(2) Field service and meetings: What are some of the obstacles young people have in sharing fully in field service and meetings? What kind of help from congregation do you especially appreciate? What are your goals or plans for making improvement in field service and meeting attendance or participation? Why do some young persons have difficulty sitting quietly through an entire meeting? Why do you think some miss meetings, and what could be done to help them? What do you feel is improper or disturbing conduct in the Kingdom Hall, and how can those engaging in such be helped to improve?
(3) Association and recreation: What are some problems that young people in the truth encounter in filling their need for good association and recreation? What do you especially appreciate about your opportunities for association and recreation with those in the truth? What do you think you and others can do to help all of you benefit even more from time spent in association with others and in recreation?
(4 min.) Comment on Eccl. 11:9, 10. See 5/73 Kingdom Ministry, page 3, pars. 1-4. While young ones have special problems and needs, yet they are part of the congregation and need to work closely with it and support it. Parents and other adults can do much to assist.
15 min: Concluding comments. Distributing Kingdom News No. 20. Invite publishers to obtain supplies after the meeting. Comment on benefit of tract distribution, as discussed in Society’s letter of February 15. Discuss value of message in Kingdom News No. 20; may read some excerpts. Encourage publishers to read it carefully. Mention what elders have already done in arranging for congregation to have full share in distribution. Tell of territory arrangements and meetings for service. Explain what can be done if some have more tracts than they need and if some need more. Comment on importance of covering territory thoroughly and within allotted time of May 2-11. Show what part young ones can have in Kingdom News distribution. Distributing them under appropriate parental supervision is something they can enthusiastically share in. Older publishers want their help in getting this important work done well and on time! Invite any who have been studying, but have not yet shared in field service, to talk to an elder, if they would like to share in tract distribution. Song 55.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 27
12 min: Song 101. Discuss questions: Why do Jehovah’s witnesses say there is only one true religion? Do they not believe that there are good examples in all faiths? (Watchtower, 2/15/75, pp. 127, 128) Make discussion positive and upbuilding. Include day’s text and comments, if appropriate.
15 min: “Divine Sovereignty” District Assemblies. Discuss with audience Society’s letter. Spend time on that which applies to your congregation.
15 min: Helping Others to Know Jehovah.
(2 min.) Chairman shows it will be good to start now preparing ourselves to offer, during May, the book “The Nations Shall Know that I Am Jehovah”​—How? Each publisher can decide how he will present the book, depending on his ability and the territory.
(11 min.) What might be good introduction for our territory? What comments might be made on scriptures? What else might be said in describing book? How could Scriptural discussion be made very brief, if desired? Discuss with audience this presentation:
‘Lord’s Prayer’ might be used as basis for getting the householder’s attention. After the usual greeting might say: “Those who have a love for God and a respect for the Bible pray the Lord’s Prayer. [Read or quote Matt. 6:9, 10.] Do you think that has any meaning for us today? [Allow for comment.] The Bible itself indicates that it does. For example, Psalm 83:18 helps us to appreciate what it means to have His name sanctified, treated as holy, or cleared of reproach. [Read.] Yes, people everywhere will someday soon know that Jehovah is the Most High over all. This fact is especially made clear in the Bible book of Ezekiel, which is fully discussed in this book, ‘“The Nations Shall Know that I Am Jehovah”​—How?’ We leave it for 50 cents.”
(2 min.) Close with encouragement for all to devote sufficient time to presentation so as to approach people in territory with confidence.
18 min: Concluding comments. Discuss Question Box material with audience. Encourage full support for distribution of Kingdom News No. 20 and make any last-minute suggestions that will help the publishers to have a share. Emphasize short presentation. Mention brief points that might be used. Could have demonstration. Comment on any applicable Announcements. Song 56.
WEEK STARTING MAY 4
15 min: Song 105. In introductory remarks can use day’s text and comments. Branch Letter.
15 min: Questions from Readers. Watchtower issues of 10/1/74 (first and third) and 7/15/74. Talk and discuss with audience. Consider the questions most appropriate for your congregation or select other questions if felt more applicable to your congregation. Show how it is the Bible itself that gives the answer.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—By Using Questions to Arouse Interest.” Questions and answers. Might have demonstration showing how questions could arouse interest in Know Jehovah book.
15 min: Concluding comments. Include talk on May theme, “Evangelizing with Good News for All Mankind.” (Luke 2:10) (Watchtower, 6/1/74, pp. 335-340, paragraphs 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 12, 13, 27, 28) Song 110.

