Announcements
● Literature offer for June: True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It? for a contribution of $1.00. July and August: One of the following 32-page, magazine-size brochures may be offered for a contribution of 30¢: Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!, “Look! I Am Making All Things New,” The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever, and The Government That Will Bring Paradise. As an alternate offer, congregations having a supply of any of the following publications may offer two for $1.00: Choosing the Best Way of Life, Commentary on the Letter of James, God’s “Eternal Purpose” Now Triumphing for Man’s Good, and Is the Bible Really the Word of God? Additional copies of Commentary on James may be ordered from the Society. Congregations should not order the other three books mentioned, since they are out of stock. Use only those books that are available locally. (For obtaining credit, see the guidelines in the Society’s letter of December 21, 1988, to all bodies of elders.) September: Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? for a contribution of $3.00. Small-size books are $1.50.
● The presiding overseer or someone designated by him should audit congregation’s accounts on June 1 or as soon as possible thereafter.
● Since the convention this year will be held on Friday, Saturday, and Sunday, the regular Congregation Book Study will be conducted during the convention week.
● New Publications Available:
Happiness​—How to Find It—​Romanian
“Let Your Kingdom Come”​—Romanian
Listening to the Great Teacher​—Romanian
Reasoning From the Scriptures​—Arabic
Revelation​—Its Grand Climax At Hand!​—Chinese
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth (Small size)​—Indonesian
Watch Tower Publications Index 1986​—Portuguese
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Ezekiel (set of five cassettes; congregation and public: $7.50; pioneers: $6.25)​—German
Listening to the Great Teacher (set of five tapes and a book in an album; congregation and public: $11.25; pioneers: $9.50)​—Danish, Swedish

