Enjoying Theocratic Association
1 Jehovah’s Witnesses refer to one another as “brother” and “sister.” This denotes the close relationship that should exist among all servants of Jehovah God.
2 The term “brother” literally means “son of the same parents.” Do you feel the bonds of a warm spiritual relationship with all of those who are dedicated servants of Jehovah? How can we further cultivate the kind of love that proves us to be a brother or a sister to our Christian associates?
AT MEETINGS
3 Jesus’ disciples appreciated the importance of meeting together. (Acts 2:42, 46; 20:7, 8) We also treasure the privilege of warm Christian fellowship. (Rom. 16:3, 5) However, do the expressions we make at the meetings reveal that we are genuinely concerned about the spiritual well-being of our brothers and sisters? Through our comments at meetings, we can promote love and unselfish interest in the welfare of others. We want to encourage our brothers to be zealous in proclaiming the good news and to be exemplary in all aspects of daily living.​—Heb. 10:24, 25.
4 There are many opportunities for theocratic association before and after the meetings. We should use this time to widen out in our association by welcoming newer ones and getting acquainted with as many as we can. Sharing field service experiences and other upbuilding conversation will contribute to the encouragement of others.​—1 Thess. 5:11, 15.
WHOLESOME ASSOCIATION
5 One cannot walk with God while running in association with those of the wicked and sick society that approves of everything that God abhors. The Bible warns: “Bad associations spoil useful habits.” (1 Cor. 15:33) Some in the congregation may be inclined to invite worldly acquaintances and unbelieving relatives who have no interest in the truth to social gatherings, thinking that this will encourage them to accept the truth. However, is this wise and in harmony with the Scriptures?
6 We have been counseled to be cautious in our dealings with men of the nations, unbelievers, and ordinary persons. (See the November 15, 1988, issue of The Watchtower, pages 15-16.) Why should we have unnecessary social contact with people who still pursue worldly ways and who have not become worshipers of Jehovah? (2 Cor. 6:14, 15) Some who are negligent spiritually may seek out others who also hold on to worldly thinking and ways instead of seeking association with mature Christians who could help them become strong in the faith. They fail to appreciate that attendance at social gatherings with worldly, unprincipled people can weaken their faith and corrupt them.​—Compare 2 Thessalonians 3:14, 15.
7 Everyone wanting to practice the truth should search out associates who are devoted to Jehovah and who will help him to walk in the truth and contribute to his progress in serving God. Our friends and associates can have a profound effect on us. Therefore, how wise it is to seek out the company of godly persons who maintain a close relationship with Jehovah!

