Give Support to the Circuit Overseer’s Visit
1 From October 15, 1946, onward, congregations have been organized into circuits that are served by full-time traveling overseers. For almost 43 years now, both individuals and congregations have benefited from this theocratic provision. (Isa. 1:26) Our continued support of this arrangement will bring us many more rich blessings.​—Eph. 4:7, 8, 11.
PREPARING FOR THE VISIT
2 Once the visit of the circuit overseer has been announced, we can begin to prepare for it. We can make plans to adjust our normal schedule so as to support fully the week of special activity. Some publishers arrange to spend more time in the field ministry by auxiliary pioneering. Others may take a day or two off from their secular work to share in the ministry. Many publishers make special appointments to work with the traveling overseer in some feature of the ministry. Wholehearted support for the field ministry on this occasion brings many rewards.
3 Reports received from the traveling overseers indicate that there can be better support for afternoon return visit and Bible study activity. Could you schedule return visits or a Bible study for an afternoon during this week? The circuit overseer will gladly accompany you, and if you like, he would also be pleased to conduct your study.
PERSONAL ASSISTANCE
4 High on the circuit overseer’s list of priorities is the need to provide additional training for anyone who may be reaching out for greater privileges of service. (1 Tim. 3:1) Do you have questions about your specific assignments or responsibilities? Would you like to improve your ability and personal organization? Are you interested in Bethel service, Gilead, or the Ministerial Training School? Would you like to serve where the need is greater, either within your circuit or elsewhere in the United States? Whatever your spiritual goals may be, the circuit overseer will gladly discuss them with you.
5 If your circuit overseer is married, his wife is likewise a devoted servant of Jehovah. Very likely she is a pioneer and will be in a position to give full support to field service arrangements. Because of her experience and regular participation in the ministry in diverse territories, she becomes skilled in the preaching work. She makes herself available to work mainly with other sisters in the house-to-house service and accompany them on return visits and home Bible studies. She deserves the same warm commendation that Paul gave concerning Phoebe.​—Rom. 16:1, 2.
6 Not to be overlooked is the privilege we have of showing hospitality to the traveling overseer and his wife, if he is married. Many are the brothers who treasure the memories as well as the encouragement they have received because of opening their homes or sharing a meal with these traveling ministers and enjoying pleasant spiritual association with them.​—3 John 5-8.
7 Regular visits by spiritually mature traveling overseers continue to help Jehovah’s people. The degree to which we can benefit individually from this arrangement depends on the extent to which we prepare for and support the circuit overseer’s visit. May all of us be determined to give full support to the next visit of our circuit overseer.

