Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
NOTE: Our Kingdom Ministry will schedule a Service Meeting for each week during the summer. Congregations may make adjustments as needed to allow for attending the district convention and then for a 30-minute review of the program highlights at the Service Meeting the following week. The day-by-day review may be assigned in advance to two or three qualified brothers who will be able to focus on key points. This well-prepared review will help the brothers remember key points for personal application and use in the field. Experiences used and comments from the audience should be brief and to the point.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 5
Song 137
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Suggest field service points from latest magazines. Comment on how these magazines may be used in field service or when traveling to the district convention. Encourage all to share in field service this weekend, including second Saturday magazine day.
15 min: “Seize Every Opportunity to Witness​—Part 1.” Question-and-answer consideration. Encourage brothers to put into practice suggestions given and to make good use of tracts.
20 min: New Topic for Conversation. Discuss scriptures and how they support the points made. Review introductions on “War/​Peace” in Reasoning book, page 14. Then present a well-rehearsed demonstration covering points mentioned in paragraph 5 of article “Proclaim True Peace and Security.”
Song 139 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 12
Song 158
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Commend brothers for material support of congregation and include Society’s acknowledgments of contributions. Outline field service arrangements for this weekend. Discuss highlights of current magazines to be offered.
15 min: “Enjoying Theocratic Association.” Question-and-answer discussion. Include appropriate expressions as to benefits derived from good associations.
20 min: “Proclaim True Peace and Security.” Question-and-answer discussion. Include comment on points brought up on page 8 of the True Peace book and any other points applicable to the congregation’s territory.
Song 31 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 19
Song 78
10 min: Local announcements. Suggest talking points in current magazines, and demonstrate two brief, well-prepared presentations. Highlight The Watchtower in one and Awake! in the other. Encourage all to share in magazine work this Saturday.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With Persuasion.” Question-and-answer coverage. After discussing article, have well-prepared publisher demonstrate how this might be done, using example in paragraph 4 or other practical subject.
15 min: Local needs or talk on article “Young People Ask . . . A Successful Courtship​—Just How Important?” in February 22, 1989, Awake!
Song 197 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 26
Song 210
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Announce arrangements for holiday witnessing. Consideration of day’s text and comments.
15 min: “Give Support to the Circuit Overseer’s Visit.” Questions and answers. When discussing paragraph 2, interview presiding overseer relative to the preparation necessary for the circuit overseer’s visit. Emphasize how the congregation can assist toward making the visit a successful one. Arrange for two or three personal comments from pioneers and publishers on how they have benefited from past visits. Build enthusiasm for next visit of circuit overseer.
10 min: “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Use My Money Wisely?” Qualified brother discusses with two or three young persons the highlights of January 22, 1989, Awake! article. Offer some practical suggestions on how youths can use their finances to advance Kingdom interests.
10 min: “The Responsibility of Discipleship.” Talk based on January 1, 1989, Watchtower article. Encourage all to share in weekend field service arrangements.
Song 16 and concluding prayer.

