Part 1​—Seize Every Opportunity to Witness
1 When writing to the Hebrew Christians, the apostle Paul exhorted: “Let us always offer to God a sacrifice of praise, that is, the fruit of lips which make public declaration to his name.” (Heb. 13:15) One way we can do this is by regularly supporting our congregation’s field service arrangements. Another effective way of offering to God a sacrifice of praise is by seizing opportunities to give an informal witness.
2 During the course of our daily activity, most of us come into contact with other people. If we are alert to recognize the opportunities and then make the effort, we should be able to sow many seeds of Kingdom truth through informal witnessing. It may require no more than a brief comment or a question about world conditions or local concerns to spark a conversation that will open the way for giving a witness. Depending on the circumstances and the reaction of the person, we may even be able to offer literature.
BE PREPARED
3 Successful informal witnessing requires advance preparation. Are we willing to put forth that effort? If we analyze what we will be doing during the course of a day, think about the people we may come in contact with, and consider what we might say to initiate a conversation, we should be mentally prepared and find it much easier to witness informally. Be sure to have tracts, magazines, or other literature on hand that you can offer to responsive ones. What about a Bible? The pocket-size Bible fits easily in a purse or a coat pocket and can be used when the opportunity presents itself. Is there something else we can do in order to be well-prepared?
4 We should keep informed as to current events that relate to Bible prophecy and be prepared to introduce Bible topics for conversation that would appeal to truth-hungry people today. The “Watching the World” and “Insight on the News” features in our magazines are valuable aids in this regard. If we have such news items in mind, we can be confident in introducing a subject with broad appeal.
TAKE THE INITIATIVE
5 Just about any occasion when we come into contact with other people offers the opportunity to give a witness. Even publishers who are hospitalized have taken advantage of their situation and have been effective in speaking about the truth to doctors, nurses, hospital staff, visitors, and other patients. Other publishers use their lunch break at work or at school and time spent waiting for an appointment. Opportunities to give a witness may come while shopping, when on vacation, or when traveling by bus, plane, or train. Some publishers are effective at informal witnessing in their own home when salesmen, deliverymen, neighbors, relatives, and others call on them.​—See 1970 Yearbook, pages 97-8, 231-2, and 263-4.
6 The “Godly Devotion” District Conventions present us with fine opportunities to do informal witnessing. Lapel badges often prompt people to ask us who we are and where we are going. Of course, we can initiate the conversation by telling people that we are delegates to a convention and explain why we are attending. When we stop for gas, eat in restaurants, stay in motels, go shopping, or merely take a stroll, we should look for appropriate ways to witness informally.​—Eccl. 11:6.
7 Heartfelt appreciation for the truth and an awareness of the urgency of our times should motivate us to seize every opportunity to share with others the wonderful message of hope that we have. May we continue to take advantage of every opportunity to sow seeds of Kingdom truth through informal witnessing.​—Matt. 24:14.

