Proclaim True Peace and Security
1 True peace and security can come from only one source, Jehovah God. Micah informs us that Jehovah “will certainly render judgment among many peoples, and set matters straight respecting mighty nations.” The result? “They will not lift up sword, nation against nation, neither will they learn war anymore.”​—Mic. 4:3.
2 Since Jehovah is the only source of true peace, people need to “go up to the mountain of Jehovah” and be instructed about his ways in order to walk in his paths. (Mic. 4:2) They will learn that Jehovah God, by means of his Kingdom, will bring true peace to this earth. But how can we help more people to learn about the Source of true peace and security?
DISTRIBUTE TRUE PEACE BOOK
3 The True Peace book has timely information for people who want to “go up to the mountain of Jehovah.” A doctor living in Finland received a copy of the True Peace book. At the time he did not read it but put it on the bookshelf. Later his wife remembered that they had the book and read it through. She was at once convinced that she had found the truth. She started to study and later was joined by her husband. They are now baptized, and their children also are publishers of the good news. This experience demonstrates the value of getting the True Peace book into as many homes as possible.
4 Our preparation for field service should include a review of the table of contents and the chapters of the book that we think will appeal to people. We can select specific points from the book to use in conversations with householders.
5 You might try the following suggestion. After reading and discussing the scriptures in the Topic for Conversation, call the householder’s attention to page 8 in the True Peace book. If time permits, look up some of the cited scriptures to point out the difference between what God’s Kingdom will do and what human leaders are incapable of doing. Then read paragraph 13. Thereafter, you might ask the householder if he would like to consider some of the points in the next chapter. In this way, a Bible study may be started right then. Otherwise, try to start a study when you make the return visit.
6 It is clear that imperfect man cannot bring true peace and security. In order to have a solid hope for the future, people must put their faith in God. But “how . . . will they put faith in him of whom they have not heard? How, in turn, will they hear without someone to preach?” (Rom. 10:14) Time is running out for people to have the opportunity to turn to the real Source of true peace and security. May we do what we can during the month of June to proclaim the message of true peace to the many honesthearted ones in the congregation’s territory.

