From Our Readers
Selling Blood  I want to express appreciation for the articles on the sale and consumption of blood and blood products. (October 22, 1990) I had no idea that it was so big an industry. How it deepens our appreciation for our Creator, who protects his people by placing a prohibition against the use of blood!
R. L., United States
Parents Separating  The article “Young People Ask . . . My Parents Are Separating​—What Should I Do?” (August 22, 1990) dealt with a situation similar to one I went through some six years ago as a parent. The portion stating that “nursing an angry and vengeful spirit can poison your personality” hit really close to home. Such feelings have persisted in my three children for the past six years. So I sent them a copy of this article as well as a letter explaining how I cared for them. I feel confident the results will be beneficial.
E. B., United States
When Cancer Is Kept Secret  I want to let you know how much I was encouraged by Rie Kinoshita’s story. (October 22, 1990) Her determination to serve God with all her remaining strength has been most stimulating to me. Since I have very good health, it encouraged me to make better use of my Saturdays and evenings for the preaching work. When I feel that I’m too tired, I remember Rie​—and out I go!
T. F., Canada
Tears rolled down my cheeks as I read of Rie’s convictions. I was impressed by her cheerful attitude and her perseverance in the full-time ministry, in spite of her having a serious illness.
M. H., Japan
Spiritual Progress  Thank you very, very much for the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Make Spiritual Progress?” (September 22, 1990) It had so many good suggestions that I could apply. I’ve already read it twice. I’ve also made a list of my spiritual goals (as you suggested), and I’m going to pin it up on my wall.
G. K., United States
Thanks to your article, I am now trying to read the Bible 15 minutes a day. I often spend a lot more time. I have learned so much; it’s amazing!
T. L. P., Canada
Garbage Glut  I liked very much the article “The Garbage Glut​—Will It Bury Us?” (September 22, 1990) Few people recognize the quantity of garbage being produced daily and how dangerous it is for the planet. Thank you for the clarity of your article.
B. S., Brazil
Why God Permits Wickedness  You have discussed this subject in many ways and many times in the past. However, the article in the October 8, 1990, issue was a masterpiece. Everything, from the artwork to the introduction, was beautiful!
G. H., United States
The article helped me to reinforce my beliefs regarding the reasons for wickedness and the hope I have for the future. In turn, my relationship with Jehovah has been strengthened.
J. H., United States
Jaguar  I am 14 years old, and I am writing to say how much I appreciated the article “The Elusive Jungle Cat.” (August 22, 1990) I have always dreamed of seeing a jaguar. You helped me to do so. You made the subject come alive, and I felt as though I were actually there.
M. C., France

