Young People Ask . . .
What About Nightclubs?
“WE NEED some recreation.” “We only go to dance.” “Everyone else is going.” “We just want to have some fun.” Several youths thus explained to an Awake! reporter why they have frequented nightclubs. Such night spots are enormously popular among many youths, and if they exist in your community, you may even have thought about going yourself.
Today, many young people are flocking to the following types of clubs, as described by Friday magazine: “Party time is any time and any time is tonight. For the uninhibited, the party never stops. Dance fever is sweeping the city in a flood of cool drinks, flashing neon lights and upbeat music that won’t let you sit down. ‘Clubs now have something for everyone’s taste. . . . There are clubs that cater to young professionals, college students, gays and the older crowd.’”
For the sophisticated crowd, there are clubs that require a hefty up-front fee, an expensive wardrobe, and even the right behavior pattern in order to gain admittance. For the not so affluent, there are clubs with less lavish settings that offer a party atmosphere at a cheaper price. And for youths too young (or not devious enough) to gain entrance to the adult clubs, there are “juice clubs” and “soda bars,” which are supposedly liquor free.
It is not hard to understand why nightclubs have a strong appeal to many youths. When you are young, it is only natural to want to have a good time. (Compare Ecclesiastes 11:9.) A night of dancing might seem like a healthy way to work off the tensions of school and work. But just how wholesome are nightclubs?
Sonya, a young woman who used to frequent nightclubs, admits: “The idea seems innocent enough. You’re going to dance and enjoy yourself. But oftentimes it turns into much more. You start going on nights when the music and the crowd are liveliest. Soon you know all the regulars, and you too are a regular. The idea is to dance​—and meet someone. And whether that’s your goal or not, it’s always theirs.” Is Sonya exaggerating?
Nightclubs Today
The disco scene of a decade ago became notorious as a breeding ground for sexual immorality, drug abuse, and even homosexuality.a And things have changed little since then. Although the music (in the United States, it is often called house music or simply dance music) and the dance steps have changed, the atmosphere in many night spots is alarmingly reminiscent of the immoral disco scene.
In an article in Life magazine on house music, one nightclub aficionado says: “Dance music at its most elemental has always had a tribal feeling​—pounding beat and an erotic pulse, tugging away until a kind of communal rapture takes hold. Something had been missing in the jungle-of-the-cities, and house music fills that throbbing void.” New York deejay David Piccioni says: “The object is to totally lose yourself all night long.”
In view of recent dance crazes such as the immoral lambada, Mademoiselle magazine declared: “Sex: It’s out of the bathrooms and back where it belongs​—on the dance floor. In the old days (the ’70s), the dance floor was for foreplay and the bathrooms were for sex and drugs. Now that everyone is concerned about AIDS, the bathrooms are for primping and the dance floor is where you watch other people have sex. Or pretend to have sex.” Yes, music can be used to create a mood that dissolves moral inhibitions and arouses sexuality.
Meeting Whom?
Some clubs are also known as places to meet the opposite sex. However, what kind of people might you meet? One girl who formerly traveled the nightclub circuit admits: “Many people there lead immoral lives and are interested in having sex with someone. If attracted to you, they will buy you drinks, drinks, drinks and hang around you all night saying nice, sweet things in hopes that you will give in to their wishes.”
Some places are even designed to accommodate these immoral activities. Doris, a young woman who also used to be a regular at nightclubs, says: “There are clubs that have sitting areas with couches and love seats where many go for kissing and touching. Many married men are there without their wives. Some are there hoping to meet someone for a one-night stand or an affair, and others are looking for a mate.” Concludes Doris: “The atmosphere at nightclubs is very conducive to immorality. Alcohol is consumed in very large amounts till morning hours, and anything goes.”
The nightclub scene has also been connected with heavy drug use. One club owner reportedly said: “The movement is . . . entirely tied into drugs.” Drugs and alcohol can often be found even at supposedly liquor-free juice bars. Jesse, another former regular at nightclubs, adds: “Marijuana and cigarette smoke often fills the air. Most people there dress in a way to excite the flesh: tight and revealing clothing, lewd styles, excessive jewelry.”
Exercising Caution
From ancient times, music and dancing have been used to lure people into misconduct. For example, we read that the Israelites once “sat down to eat and drink. Then they got up to have a good time.” This involved wild music and unrestrained dancing. However, this “good time” was a prelude to rank idolatry and unrestrained loose conduct.​—Exodus 32:6, 17-19, 28.
Christian youths should thus avoid getting into any situation that could quickly become a ‘revelry,’ or ‘wild party.’ (Galatians 5:19, 21; Byington) First Corinthians 15:33 reminds us: “Do not be misled. Bad associations spoil useful habits.” Can a person really immerse himself in a party atmosphere with individuals who “are in darkness mentally, and alienated from the life that belongs to God” and not be adversely affected? (Ephesians 4:18) And as one young woman admits: “Intimate association and friendships can and often do develop [with other nightclub regulars].” How might this affect your spirituality?
Some might reason, though, that the answer is to bring along a group of fellow Christians. However, righteousness can only flourish in a Christian atmosphere. (James 3:18) And the atmosphere at many nightclubs is designed to arouse feelings that are “earthly, animal, demonic,” rather than spiritual.​—James 3:15.
Granted, not all nightclubs go to the extremes discussed herein, nor is it reasonable to make a blanket condemnation of all restaurants that have dancing or entertainment. But Paul counsels us to “keep on making sure of what is acceptable to the Lord.” (Ephesians 5:10) And if you are invited to a place of unknown or questionable reputation, you should exercise the greatest caution with regard to accepting the invitation.​—Proverbs 14:15.
You might ask yourself such questions as: Who are going, and what kind of reputation do they have? What do your parents or other responsible adults know about the place itself? What kind of atmosphere does it have? What kind of people frequent it? Does it cater only to youths? If so, how likely is it to have a wholesome atmosphere? If there is entertainment, what does it consist of? What kind of music will be played? Is it a place that allows patrons more or less to keep to themselves, or is it a social scene that might force you to mix in with others?
Doris, quoted previously, admits: “Satan makes nightclubs appear fascinating, exciting, glamorous, fun​—whatever it takes to lure us.” But don’t be fooled by the glitter of nightclubs! They have proved to be a lethal snare for many youths. Find acceptable, beneficial ways to entertain yourself.b
[Footnotes]
See Awake! of March 22, 1979.
For suggestions along these lines, see chapter 37 of the book Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work, published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
[Picture on page 16]
Many who frequent nightclubs are more interested in immoral sex than in entertainment

