From Our Readers
Women
Your articles on women [“The 20th Century Woman”] were not well done and were also unwholesome. It seems strange that while listing the greater strengths of men there is no mention made that men commit the murders on earth; or when speaking of women’s emotions, it omits noting that violence and murders are usually the consequence of lack of emotional control in men.
S. M., New York
We acknowledge that through history man has dominated his fellowman to his injury, and we have frequently exposed the crimes and violence perpetrated by selfish men. (Ecclesiastes 8:9) In the articles mentioned we tried to present a balanced view of the entire question of men and women and their differences. After mentioning the emotional tendency of many women, the article also stated: “And how many men are always cool, logical and self-controlled?” Men bear a heavy responsibility for the oppression of women, as well as of men, and neither men nor women will ever be able to remove this oppression. There is only one hope for the removal of all oppression, and that is God’s kingdom through his Son, Christ Jesus.​—ED.
I can’t hold back any longer. When I read the articles on “The 20th Century Woman” I knew I just had to write. The way the material deals with men and women, their differences and, most of all, how the woman is viewed by Jehovah and how she should be treated by the man, is very touching. I’ve been the victim of oppression and abuse, and it made me feel very good to know that the public will receive this fine material. I hope that most men will read and appreciate it as well.
S. V., Louisiana
I want to thank you from the bottom of my heart for the articles on “The 20th Century Woman.” As I read I often stopped with a lump in my throat in thankfulness for the wonderful counsel and comfort. All my life I painfully watched and personally felt the agonies of being an “inferior” human creature. Coming to know Jehovah and that he does not consent to the oppression of women by men has been a great relief. I am sure many men who read these articles will see that headship doesn’t mean a harsh macho man. When my husband was an inconsiderate dictator it was difficult to find any love for him. Now it is easy to have deep love and respect for him when, after work, instead of the easy chair it’s the kitchen to give me a hand. Then together we can relax and recount the day’s activities with our boys.
E. S., Connecticut
Hang Gliding
I have been interested in motorless flight since I was ten, and would like to comment on the article “Is It Worth the Risk?” which included thoughts about aerial sports. Due to unpredictable atmospheric conditions, hang gliding is, as the article correctly points out, a sport that entails great risk. Of course, the greatest risk factor in any kind of sport is man himself.
M. S., Germany

