2 CORINTHIANS
Study Notes​—Chapter 7
7:1
let us cleanse ourselves of every defilement: The Greek verb rendered “to cleanse” and related terms (rendered “purifying; cleansing”; “clean”; “pure”) are broad in meaning. These terms can refer to being physically clean (Mt 23:25), ceremonially clean (Lu 2:22; 5:14; Joh 11:55), cleansed from sin (2Pe 1:9), and clean in mind, heart, and conscience (1Ti 1:5; Tit 1:15; Heb 9:14). The verb can also refer to curing disease. (Mt 8:2; 11:5; Mr 1:40-42; Lu 17:14; see study note on Lu 4:27.) Paul uses it here in its broadest sense with regard to being physically, morally, and spiritually clean.
of flesh and spirit: Practices that pollute or damage the physical body may result in defilement of the flesh. Going contrary to the moral values and doctrines taught in the Scriptures defiles the spirit, that is, one’s mental inclination. Together, “flesh and spirit” encompass everything that affects the life of a Christian, physically and morally.
perfecting holiness in the fear of God: In the Christian Greek Scriptures, the words rendered “holy” and “holiness” denote a state of being set aside for Jehovah’s service. The meaning here and in other Bible verses also includes purity in one’s personal conduct. (Mr 6:20; 1Pe 1:15, 16) The form of the Greek word here rendered “perfecting” can convey the idea of progressively bringing something to completion. This indicates that a person does not attain holiness suddenly. Instead, Christians are constantly refined as they strive to come closer to God’s perfect standards. They are motivated by wholesome “fear of God,” one that stems from deep love and profound reverence, or respect, for him.​—Ps 89:7.
7:2
Make room for us in your hearts: Or “Open your hearts to us; Receive us.” The Greek word (kho·reʹo) literally means “to allow (make) room for.” According to one lexicon, it is used here in the figurative sense of “open-heartedness, having a ‘big heart.’”
7:4
freeness of speech: Or “outspokenness; boldness.” The Greek word par·re·siʹa has the basic meaning “boldness in speech.” In effect, Paul is here telling the Corinthians: “I am able to speak to you with great openness (frankness).”​—See study note on Ac 28:31.
7:5
our bodies: Lit., “our flesh.” The Greek word sarx is used here in the sense of physical bodies.
we continued to be afflicted: While in Ephesus, Paul had written his first inspired letter to the Corinthians and had also sent Titus to assist the congregation. Then Paul anxiously waited for Titus to report back to him on the response of the Corinthians but was not able to meet up with Titus immediately. At 2Co 2:12, 13, Paul said that his “spirit felt no relief because of not finding Titus.” (See study note on 2Co 2:13.) Here, at 2Co 7:5, he explains that after he journeyed to Macedonia, his state of anxiety was heightened by intense opposition to his ministry. There were fights on the outside, severe persecution that imperiled life itself. (2Co 1:8) Moreover, there were fears within, that is, worries about the congregations, such as the one in Corinth. When Titus finally arrived and told Paul about the Corinthians’ positive response to his letter, he and his companions felt both physical and emotional relief.​—2Co 7:6.
7:6
the presence of: Here Paul uses the Greek word pa·rou·siʹa regarding Titus, one of his fellow workers. Although many translations render this term “arrival” or “coming,” the rendering “presence” is supported by the way Paul uses it at Php 2:12, to describe his “presence” in contrast with his “absence.”​—See study note on 1Co 15:23.
7:7
your earnest concern: Lit., “your zeal.” The same Greek word is rendered “zeal” at 2Co 7:11. Some scholars feel that the repeated use of the pronoun “your” emphasizes Paul’s conviction that the Corinthians truly felt a deep longing and earnest concern for him. He felt a like concern for them, and they felt similar sorrow over the grief they had caused. Knowing their feelings brought Paul relief and joy.
7:9
saddened in a godly way: That is, the Christians in Corinth not only felt regret but were saddened into repenting. In his preceding letter, Paul had reproved the congregation for tolerating a man who was committing sexual immorality. (1Co 5:1, 2, 13) As a result of taking the reproof to heart, the congregation as a whole adopted the right attitude and quit condoning his sin. In addition, the immoral man sincerely repented of his sin. (2Co 2:6-8; 7:11) The sadness that these Christians felt was godly in that it moved them to seek God’s forgiveness and to correct their course, bringing it into harmony with God’s will.​—See study note on 2Co 7:10.
7:10
sadness in a godly way . . . the sadness of the world: Here Paul distinguishes between two kinds of sadness. “Sadness in a godly way” produces repentance. It is the result of a person’s seeing wrongdoing as a sin against God. This attitude moves him to seek God’s forgiveness and correct his wrong course. Such was the sadness demonstrated by the Christians in Corinth, keeping them on the road to salvation. (2Co 7:8, 9, 11; see study note on 2Co 7:9.) In contrast, “the sadness of the world” may produce in a person natural regrets at being exposed or at having to face unpleasant consequences. However, the person does not feel genuine sorrow over the sin itself or the damage it does to his relationship with God. Such sadness does not move him to seek God’s forgiveness, and it ultimately “produces death.”
repentance: The Greek word me·taʹnoi·a signifies a change in thinking, attitude, or purpose. In this context, repentance involves a person’s wanting to repair or restore his relationship with God. A sinner who genuinely repents regrets his wrong course and is determined not to repeat his sin. He changes his course of action. Paul here states that such repentance leads to salvation.​—See Glossary.
7:11
pure: Or “chaste; innocent.” The congregation in Corinth acted on the counsel Paul gave in his preceding letter by removing an immoral man from their midst. (1Co 5:1-5, 13; see study note on 2Co 7:9.) Because of that, the congregation could again be in a pure state, innocent of the wrongdoing committed. Still, Paul knew that to maintain such purity, they had to keep on the watch against sexual immorality. Later in this letter, he encourages them to do so.​—2Co 12:20, 21.
7:15
obedience: The Greek word for “obedience” is related to the verb hy·pa·kouʹo, which literally means “to hear under,” that is, to hear (listen) submissively. Jesus set a perfect example of obedience to his Father, and “through the obedience of” him, many were blessed. (Ro 5:19) In this context, the Greek word refers to obedience to God’s chosen representatives. Paul here commends the Christians in Corinth for respectfully obeying the direction given by the visiting elder, Titus.​—2Co 7:13-16.
7:16
I may have confidence in you: Or possibly, “I may be of good courage because of you.” Paul commended the brothers in Corinth for the respectful obedience they showed toward the direction that was given by the visiting elder, Titus. (2Co 7:13-15) Their response also had a positive effect on Paul himself; he rejoiced because he knew that he could “have confidence” in them.

