
2 TIMOTHY
Study Notes​—Chapter 2

2:1
my child: Paul uses this expression as a term of endearment.​—See study note on 2Ti 1:2.
keep on acquiring power: Paul encourages Timothy to tap into the unfailing Source of power, Jehovah God. The apostle uses the Greek verb en·dy·na·moʹo, related to the noun dyʹna·mis (power; strength), which is used at 2Ti 1:8 in the expression “the power of God.” One reference work notes that the verb form Paul uses here “indicates Timothy’s need for continual dependence on God, i.e., ‘keep on being strengthened.’” Paul used the same verb at Eph 6:10, where he encouraged the Ephesian Christians to “go on acquiring power in the Lord [Jehovah God] and in the mightiness of his strength.”
in the undeserved kindness that is in Christ Jesus: By using this expression, Paul shows Timothy that “acquiring power” is possible only by means of “undeserved kindness.” (See Glossary, “Undeserved kindness.”) Jehovah generously showed Jesus special kindness or favor, so it could be said that Jesus “was full of divine favor.” (Joh 1:14 and study notes) Jesus, in turn, became a means of extending such kindness to any human who would show appreciation for it. Therefore, the inspired Scriptures mention not only the undeserved kindness of God but also “the undeserved kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ.”​—1Th 5:28; 2Th 3:18.
2:2
these things entrust to faithful men: Paul wants Timothy to pass on, or entrust, to other responsible men the precious truths that Timothy has learned. The word rendered “entrust” suggests that he is to do so with care. (See study note on 1Ti 6:20.) Paul’s direction harmonizes with Jesus’ command that all disciples must teach others. (Mt 28:19, 20) Paul outlines the following progression: Jesus taught Paul who, in turn, taught Timothy who then entrusted those teachings to faithful men who taught still others.
adequately qualified to teach: The Greek word rendered “adequately qualified” can mean “competent” or “sufficient” to carry out a task. In writing to the Corinthians, Paul used the same word to explain that God makes Christians competent for the work he assigns them.​—See study note on 2Co 3:5.
2:3
a fine soldier of Christ Jesus: At 2Ti 2:3-6, Paul uses three illustrations to explain that Timothy​—like all Christians​—needs to be ready to endure hardships and suffering. In verse 3, Paul likens Christians to soldiers, as he does a number of times in his letters. (1Co 9:7; 2Co 10:3-5; Eph 6:10-17; Php 2:25; 1Th 5:8; 1Ti 1:18; Phm 2) A soldier obeys the commands of his superior and expects hardships. Likewise, Christians obey the commands of Christ Jesus and readily suffer adversity. Such adversity includes being hated and even persecuted by others. Paul thus reminds Timothy that “as a fine soldier of Christ Jesus,” he needs such qualities as determination, endurance, and self-discipline.
2:4
involves himself in the commercial businesses of life: No good soldier on active duty “involves himself” (lit., “gets entangled”) in secular or material pursuits. “The commercial businesses of life” (or possibly, “the everyday activities of life”) would distract him, taking his mind and energy away from his activities as a soldier. His life and the lives of others are at stake, so he must ever be ready to act on the orders of his commanding officer. Similarly, Timothy had to stay focused on the ministry, refusing to be sidetracked by other pursuits.​—Mt 6:24; 1Jo 2:15-17.
2:5
in the games: Paul here uses athletic games to illustrate the Christian way of life. Athletes had to compete according to the rules. Inscriptions listing game rules were posted where competitions took place. Bribery was forbidden, and the rules were strictly enforced by the judges. Athletes who broke one or more rules in training or in the contest itself were disqualified. Similarly, Christians must adhere to God’s standards and his requirements for life in order to receive divine approval. Timothy was to do his part “in suffering adversity” and not attempt to lessen his struggle by disregarding any of God’s requirements.​—2Ti 2:3; see study notes on 1Co 9:24, 25; 1Ti 4:7, 8; see also Media Gallery, “A Crown That Can Perish.”
2:6
The hardworking farmer: In this illustration, the Greek word rendered “hardworking” conveys the idea of “toiling; striving” and may suggest laboring to the point of exhaustion. A farmer had to work relentlessly​—sometimes under grueling conditions​—if he hoped to reap a good harvest. Timothy likewise had to be diligent and not self-sparing if he wanted to gain God’s approval.​—1Co 3:6, 7; Col 1:28, 29; compare study note on 1Ti 4:10.
2:7
Give constant thought to what I am saying: The Greek word for “give constant thought to” can also be rendered “use discernment.” (Mt 24:15; Mr 13:14) Paul has just used three illustrations (2Ti 2:3-6); now he admonishes Timothy to think deeply about them in order to apply them in his own life. (Compare study note on 1Ti 4:15.) Paul assures Timothy that the Lord Jehovah will give him the understanding, or discernment, he needs. It is possible that Paul is alluding to the similar fatherly assurance found at Pr 2:6.
2:8
David’s offspring: Or “a descendant of David.” Lit., “of David’s seed.”​—See App. A2.
2:9
the word of God is not bound: Paul has just mentioned that he is being treated “as a criminal.” He uses the same word that described the men​—or criminals​—who were executed next to Jesus. (Lu 23:32, 33, 39) Now, though, Paul highlights a vivid contrast. He may be bound and imprisoned, but no prison or chains can restrict the word of God. (2Ti 1:8, 16) According to one reference work, Paul is saying regarding the opponents of the good news: “They may stop the messenger, but they cannot stop the message.”
2:12
if we go on enduring: This expression echoes Jesus’ promise: “The one who has endured to the end will be saved.” (See study note on Mt 24:13.) Paul and his dear friend Timothy had the glorious hope of ruling with Christ. (Lu 22:28-30) Here Paul stresses that endurance is key to attaining such a hope. He never felt that his hope was guaranteed simply because he was a spirit-anointed Christian. (See study note on Php 3:14.) He knew of anointed Christians who had turned away from the faith. (Php 3:18) However, Paul was confident that he would prove faithful until death.​—2Ti 4:6-8.
2:13
he cannot deny himself: Jehovah cannot act in a way that is contrary to his nature, his qualities, and his standards. (Ex 34:6, 7; Mal 3:6; Tit 1:2; Jas 1:17) He cannot act against his purpose. Therefore, regardless of what course others take, Jehovah will always fulfill his word.​—Ro 3:3, 4 and study note.
2:14
instructing: Or “solemnly charging.” The Greek term Paul uses here can more literally be rendered “bearing thorough witness to.” (Ac 20:24; 28:23) Regarding this term, one reference work says: “It means ‘to testify, give a warning’ in the case of important matters and situations of extreme danger.”
God: Some authoritative Greek manuscripts read “God,” while others read “the Lord.” A few translations of the Christian Greek Scriptures into Hebrew and other languages use the divine name here.​—See App. C1.
not to fight about words: Paul admonishes the Christians in Ephesus to avoid a practice that some false teachers apparently promoted​—battling about words. The Greek term for “to fight about words” combines the noun “word” with the verb “to fight.” This expression is not found in ancient literature that predates Paul’s writings. In his first letter to Timothy, Paul used a related noun literally meaning “word battles.” (See study note on 1Ti 6:4.) The fights may have been about trivial differences in the meaning of words, but the effect could have been harmful and even disastrous.
because it harms those listening: The corresponding Greek phrase includes the word ka·ta·stro·pheʹ (meaning “destruction” or “ruin”) and could also be rendered “because it destroys (ruins) those listening.” Paul chooses strong language to warn against fighting about words, and he tells Timothy to instruct the Ephesian Christians “before God” not to engage in these pointless battles.​—See study note on 1Ti 5:21.
2:15
Do your utmost: Paul uses this expression to urge Timothy to “be zealous/eager, take pains, make every effort, be conscientious,” as the Greek word (spou·daʹzo) is defined in one lexicon. Then, having God’s approval, Timothy would be a good workman. He would have no cause for shame, even if others failed to appreciate his efforts or opposed him.
handling the word of the truth aright: Paul here uses a Greek verb that literally means “to cut straight.” Various suggestions have been made about what Paul was alluding to. For example, as a tentmaker, he might have had in mind cutting a precise, straight line through cloth. Or he may have been alluding to how the term is used at Pr 3:6 and 11:5 in the Septuagint, where the verb describes making one’s figurative path, or road, straight. The verb could also be used in other ways, such as to describe a farmer’s plowing a straight furrow in the soil. In any case, Paul was basically telling Timothy to hold to a straight course when teaching from God’s Word​—to handle it properly, explain it accurately, and avoid turning aside by engaging in debates about personal viewpoints, words, or other trivial matters.​—2Ti 2:14, 16.
2:16
empty speeches: See study note on 1Ti 6:20.
ungodliness: See study note on Ro 1:18.
2:17
gangrene: The Greek medical term gagʹgrai·na describes a disease that often spreads rapidly and that can be fatal if left untreated. Paul uses the term figuratively regarding apostate teachings and “empty speeches that violate what is holy.” (2Ti 2:16-18) He often mentions such spiritually unhealthy teachings in contrast with those that he calls “wholesome [or, “healthful”]” because they are based on the truth in God’s Word. (1Ti 1:10; 6:3; 2Ti 1:13; Tit 1:9; 2:1; see also study note on 1Ti 6:4.) By using the expression “will spread like gangrene,” Paul stresses that empty speeches and false teachings can quickly be transmitted from one person to another within the congregation and can cause spiritual death.​—1Co 12:12-27.
Hymenaeus and Philetus are among them: Paul mentions these two men as examples of apostates, whose teachings Timothy must reject. Hymenaeus and Philetus had deviated from the truth and were also damaging the faith of others by teaching falsehoods, claiming that the resurrection had already occurred. (See study note on 2Ti 2:18.) When Paul wrote his first inspired letter to Timothy, Hymenaeus had already rejected the faith. He had apparently been disfellowshipped, or excommunicated, so that he would be “taught by discipline not to blaspheme.” (See study notes on 1Ti 1:20.) Yet, a year or more had passed, and he had still not changed his course.
2:18
saying that the resurrection has already occurred: Apparently, some of the false teachers in Ephesus, such as Hymenaeus and Philetus, were teaching that dedicated Christians had already been resurrected in a figurative way. Some false teachers may even have twisted Paul’s words to advance their own wrong views. Paul did teach that when a sinner got baptized, he died to his former way of life and was figuratively made alive. However, such a symbolic resurrection of a person did not replace the Scriptural hope of a literal resurrection of the dead. Those who taught that the resurrection had “already occurred”​—denying the hope of a future literal resurrection​—were apostates.​—Ro 6:2-4, 11; Eph 5:14; see study note on Eph 2:1.
subverting the faith: About ten years earlier, Paul was already combating false teachings that undermined the resurrection hope. (1Co 15:2 and study note, 12; compare Ac 17:32.) Those who denied that there was a future resurrection to perfect life, either in heaven or on earth, directly contradicted the inspired Scriptures. (Da 12:13; Lu 23:43; 1Co 15:16-20, 42-44) If Christians allowed their faith to be subverted by wrong views about the resurrection, they would lose their hope of receiving this promised future reward.​—Joh 5:28, 29.
2:19
the solid foundation of God: Paul does not specify what this “solid foundation” refers to, but in his other letters, he uses the term “foundation” to emphasize stability and trustworthiness. For example, he compares the role that Jesus plays in Jehovah’s purpose to a foundation. (1Co 3:11) At Eph 2:20, he speaks of “the foundation of the apostles and prophets.” And he describes the Christian congregation in similar terms. (See study note on 1Ti 3:15; see also Heb 6:1.) In the two preceding verses (2Ti 2:17, 18), Paul urges Timothy to resist apostate teachings. To reassure Timothy that Jehovah’s ways, activities, and qualities are always dependable and enduring, the apostle uses the expression “the solid foundation of God remains standing.”​—Ps 33:11; Mal 3:6; Jas 1:17.
having this seal: A seal could refer to the impression made by a seal or to an inscription indicating ownership or authenticity. (See Glossary, “Seal.”) It was not uncommon for a foundation or another part of a building to bear an inscription identifying its builder, its owner, or its purpose. (Compare study notes on 2Co 1:22; Eph 1:13.) The book of Revelation describes foundation stones that were inscribed with the names of the apostles. (Re 21:14) “This seal” that Paul here mentions features two important statements, as explained in the following study notes.
Jehovah: Paul here quotes Nu 16:5 (according to the Septuagint), where Moses told Korah and his supporters that Jehovah “knows those who are his.” The original Hebrew text uses the divine name, represented by four Hebrew consonants (transliterated YHWH), and the name Jehovah is therefore appropriately used in the main text of this translation.​—See App. C1 and C2.
“Jehovah knows those who belong to him”: Quoting Nu 16:5, Paul apparently uses the account about the rebellion of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram to assure Timothy that Jehovah is aware of those who rebel against Him. He can and will counteract their wickedness. Jehovah was not going to allow first-century apostates to thwart his purpose any more than he allowed Korah and his accomplices to do so centuries earlier. However, as Moses said, Jehovah recognizes those who are faithful to Him. He knows them intimately and expresses his approval of them.​—See study notes on Ga 4:9.
“Let everyone calling on the name of Jehovah renounce unrighteousness”: Paul’s wording suggests that this statement is a quote. Yet, no text in the Hebrew Scriptures exactly matches Paul’s words. Paul has just quoted from Numbers chapter 16, which contains the account of Korah’s rebellion. So it is possible that Paul refers to that same account and echoes Moses’ words found at Nu 16:26. Those loyal to Jehovah in Moses’ day had to take decisive action and separate themselves from unrighteous ones. Likewise, Paul was encouraging Timothy and other loyal Christians to renounce, or turn away from, all kinds of unrighteousness, including what Paul mentioned in the immediate context​—fights about words, “empty speeches,” apostate teachings, and “foolish and ignorant debates.”​—2Ti 2:14, 16, 18, 23.
calling on the name of Jehovah: This part of the statement may allude to the wording of Isa 26:13 according to the Septuagint. The original Hebrew text of that verse clearly refers to the divine name.​—See App. C3 introduction; 2Ti 2:19b.
2:20
in a large house there are utensils: Paul compares the Christian congregation to “a large house” and individuals in the congregation to “utensils,” or household containers. The Greek word for “utensils,” or “vessels,” is often used figuratively in the Scriptures to refer to people. (Ac 9:15; ftn.; Ro 9:22 and study note; 1Th 4:4 and study note; 1Pe 3:7) In the following verses (2Ti 2:21-26), Paul uses this illustration to encourage Timothy to avoid close association with any in the congregation who persistently disregard Jehovah’s principles.
2:21
an instrument: Or “a utensil; a vessel.”​—See study note on 2Ti 2:20.
2:22
flee . . . pursue: See study note on 1Ti 6:11.
youthful desires: When Timothy received this letter, he was already a grown man, possibly in his 30’s. (See study note on 1Ti 4:12.) Still, Paul here urges him to “flee from youthful desires,” or to cultivate self-discipline in combating desires that are common among young people. (Ec 11:9, 10) Such desires would include immoral sexual urges. (Pr 7:7-23; see study note on 1Co 6:18.) The phrase may also refer to such things as greed for money and power, a competitive spirit, and the pursuit of pleasure.​—Pr 21:17; Lu 12:15; Ga 5:26; 1Ti 6:10; 2Ti 3:4; Heb 13:5.
pursue righteousness: See study note on 1Ti 6:11.
those who call on the Lord: Paul encourages Timothy to associate with fellow believers, whom he here refers to as “those who call on the Lord.” (See study note on Ro 10:13.) These fellow Christians would prove to be good association because they had a clean heart. They were clean morally and spiritually, having pure motives and being completely devoted to Jehovah. (See study note on 1Ti 1:5.) They would help Timothy to flee from youthful desires and to pursue good qualities.
the Lord: As the context suggests, “the Lord” apparently refers to Jehovah God. (2Ti 2:19) Some translations of the Christian Greek Scriptures into Hebrew (referred to as J7, 8, 17, 22 in App. C4) use the divine name here.
2:23
reject foolish and ignorant debates: For the third time in this letter, Paul urges Timothy to help the Ephesian Christians to stop fighting over speculative and controversial subjects. (2Ti 2:14 and study note, 16) In his first letter to Timothy, Paul had addressed similar tendencies.​—See study notes on 1Ti 1:4; 6:20.
ignorant: To describe the debates that afflicted the congregation in Ephesus, Paul calls them “ignorant,” or more literally, “uneducated.” Paul may have used the word to suggest that those who engaged in such debates lacked the basic Christian instruction that even a child should have. Certainly, those involved in such debates were failing to apply Christ’s most basic teaching​—love.​—Joh 13:34, 35.
2:24
a slave: Generally, the Greek term rendered “a slave” refers to a person owned by another. (Tit 1:1; Jas 1:1; see study note on Ro 1:1.) Commenting on 2Ti 2:24, one reference work notes: “Although human slavery is a form of degradation, being the slave of God is a mark of great honor.”​—See study note on 1Th 1:9.
a slave of the Lord: The context suggests that “the Lord” refers to Jehovah God. (2Ti 2:19) In the Hebrew Scriptures, worshippers of Jehovah are also referred to as servants, or slaves, of Jehovah. (Jos 1:1; 24:29; Jg 2:8; 2Ki 10:10; 18:12) Paul is instructing Timothy and other overseers about how to handle difficult situations in the congregation. By using this expression, Paul reminds them that they have to submit to God’s instructions and that they have to answer to Him for how they treat fellow believers. The qualities Paul mentions complement the list of qualities required for overseers recorded at 1Ti 3:1-7 and Tit 1:5-9. In a broader sense, every Christian is “a slave of the Lord” and needs to display these qualities.
fight: Although the Greek word for “fight” was generally associated with armed or hand-to-hand combat (Ac 7:26), it can in some contexts refer to fighting verbally (Joh 6:52; Jas 4:1, 2). Here Paul shows that “a slave of the Lord” does not need to join in quarrels or foolish debates. (2Ti 2:14, 16, 23) Rather, he will be more effective if he imitates the mild and gentle manner of the Lord Jesus.​—Mt 11:29; 12:19.
gentle toward all: Paul encourages Timothy to be gentle, or kind, toward all, unlike the quarrelsome and divisive false teachers in Ephesus. (2Ti 2:23) The Greek expression can also be rendered “tactful toward all.” Paul himself had learned to be gentle. Before he became a Christian, Paul was so zealous for the traditions of Judaism that he was far from being gentle, tactful, or kind. He treated Christ’s followers violently and insolently. Yet, Jesus dealt gently with him. (Ac 8:3; 9:1-6; Ga 1:13, 14; 1Ti 1:13) Paul learned, too, that gentleness is not weakness; he never hesitated to speak firmly and frankly against wrongdoing. (1Co 15:34) He refrained from harshness, and he treated fellow believers with tactfulness and love. (1Th 2:8) Paul sought to be as gentle as “a nursing mother.” (See study note on 1Th 2:7.) He wanted Timothy to imitate him in being gentle “toward all,” including disruptive Christians inside the congregation and even opposers outside the congregation. Timothy was to promote, not fights and division, but unity and love.​—2Ti 2:23, 25.
qualified to teach: Paul earlier used the Greek word for “qualified to teach” in a list of requirements for Christian overseers. (See study note on 1Ti 3:2.) Timothy would need to be qualified, or skilled, not only when teaching but also when handling difficult challenges in the congregation. However, the phrase that Paul uses, “a slave of the Lord,” is not restricted to elders; all true Christians need to be skillful teachers.​—Compare Heb 5:12.
showing restraint when wronged: This phrase translates a compound Greek word that means “putting up with evil” without showing resentment. “A slave of the Lord” needs to endure mistreatment patiently, restraining himself from returning evil for evil. (Ro 12:17) Timothy needed this quality when he was wronged by fellow Christians. Paul later says that all Christians can expect to be persecuted. (2Ti 3:12) Logically, then, all would need this quality of “showing restraint when wronged.”​—See study note on Mt 5:39.
2:25
instructing with mildness: In this context, the word rendered “instructing” may also convey the idea of “correcting; giving guidance.” One reference work says that the word means to help a person develop the ability to make appropriate choices. “A slave of the Lord” must offer such instruction “with mildness,” that is, with a humble, meek spirit. He would thus be “gentle toward all.”​—2Ti 2:24 and study note; see also study note on Ga 5:23.
those not favorably disposed: Paul uses a Greek word that in this context refers to people who resist Christian teachings or who place themselves in opposition to them. Paul may have had in mind, among others, those in the congregation in Ephesus who had a negative attitude toward following Scriptural counsel or heeding admonition from brothers taking the lead.
God may give them repentance: When a Christian elder mildly corrects or instructs “those not favorably disposed,” the good result may be repentance, or “a change of mind.” (See Glossary, “Repentance.”) The credit for such a change in thinking and attitude goes, not to any human, but to Jehovah, who helps the wayward Christian make this vital change. Paul goes on to mention some of the beautiful results of such repentance​—it leads the sinner to a more accurate knowledge of the truth, it helps him come back to his proper senses, and it enables him to escape from Satan’s snares.​—2Ti 2:26.
2:26
escape from the snare of the Devil: Paul indicates that some in the congregation had fallen into “the snare of the Devil.” They had apparently become victims of the Devil by allowing him to deceive them into deviating from the truth. (2Ti 2:18, 23, 25) The expression “caught alive by [the Devil] to do his will” may imply that the Devil used lies to trap them unawares. Satan did not kill them, but he manipulated them into serving his purposes. Paul urged Timothy to instruct such ensnared ones “with mildness” so that they might “come to their senses” (lit., “sober up”; see study note on 1Co 15:34). Those who repented could free themselves from the Devil’s snare.

