
A5
The Divine Name in the Christian Greek Scriptures




Bible scholars acknowledge that God’s personal name, as represented by the Tetragrammaton (יהוה), appears almost 7,000 times in the original text of the Hebrew Scriptures. However, many feel that it did not appear in the original text of the Christian Greek Scriptures. For this reason, most modern English Bibles do not use the name Jehovah when translating the so-called New Testament. Even when translating quotations from the Hebrew Scriptures in which the Tetragrammaton appears, most translators use “Lord” rather than God’s personal name.
The New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures does not follow this common practice. It uses the name Jehovah a total of 237 times in the Christian Greek Scriptures. In deciding to do this, the translators took into consideration two important factors: (1) The Greek manuscripts we possess today are not the originals. Of the thousands of copies in existence today, most were made at least two centuries after the originals were composed. (2) By that time, those copying the manuscripts either replaced the Tetragrammaton with Kyʹri·os, the Greek word for “Lord,” or they copied from manuscripts where this had already been done.
The New World Bible Translation Committee determined that there is compelling evidence that the Tetragrammaton did appear in the original Greek manuscripts. The decision was based on the following evidence:
  Copies of the Hebrew Scriptures used in the days of Jesus and his apostles contained the Tetragrammaton throughout the text. In the past, few people disputed that conclusion. Now that copies of the Hebrew Scriptures dating back to the first century have been discovered near Qumran, the point has been proved beyond any doubt.

  In the days of Jesus and his apostles, the Tetragrammaton also appeared in Greek translations of the Hebrew Scriptures. For centuries, scholars thought that the Tetragrammaton was absent from manuscripts of the Greek Septuagint translation of the Hebrew Scriptures. Then, in the mid-20th century, some very old fragments of the Greek Septuagint version that existed in Jesus’ day were brought to the attention of scholars. Those fragments contain the personal name of God, written in Hebrew characters. So in Jesus’ day, copies of the Scriptures in Greek did contain the divine name. However, by the fourth century C.E., major manuscripts of the Greek Septuagint, such as the Codex Vaticanus and Codex Sinaiticus, did not contain the divine name in the books from Genesis through Malachi (where it had been in earlier manuscripts). Hence, it is not surprising that in texts preserved from that time period, the divine name is not found in the so-called New Testament, or Greek Scripture portion of the Bible.
Jesus plainly stated: “I have come in the name of my Father.” He also stressed that his works were done in his “Father’s name”


  The Christian Greek Scriptures themselves report that Jesus often referred to God’s name and made it known to others. (John 17:6, 11, 12, 26) Jesus plainly stated: “I have come in the name of my Father.” He also stressed that his works were done in his “Father’s name.”—John 5:43; 10:25.

  Since the Christian Greek Scriptures were an inspired addition to the sacred Hebrew Scriptures, the sudden disappearance of Jehovah’s name from the text would seem inconsistent. About the middle of the first century C.E., the disciple James said to the elders in Jerusalem: “Symeon has related thoroughly how God for the first time turned his attention to the nations to take out of them a people for his name.” (Acts 15:14) It would not be logical for James to make such a statement if no one in the first century knew or used God’s name.

  The divine name appears in its abbreviated form in the Christian Greek Scriptures. At Revelation 19:1, 3, 4, 6, the divine name is embedded in the word “Hallelujah.” This comes from a Hebrew expression that literally means “Praise Jah.” “Jah” is a contraction of the name Jehovah. Many names used in the Christian Greek Scriptures were derived from the divine name. In fact, reference works explain that Jesus’ own name means “Jehovah Is Salvation.”

  Early Jewish writings indicate that Jewish Christians used the divine name in their writings. The Tosefta, a written collection of oral laws that was completed by about 300 C.E., says with regard to Christian writings that were burned on the Sabbath: “The books of the Evangelists and the books of the minim [thought to be Jewish Christians] they do not save from a fire. But they are allowed to burn where they are, they and the references to the Divine Name which are in them.” This same source quotes Rabbi Yosé the Galilean, who lived at the beginning of the second century C.E., as saying that on other days of the week, “one cuts out the references to the Divine Name which are in them [understood to refer to the Christian writings] and stores them away, and the rest burns.”

  Some Bible scholars acknowledge that it seems likely that the divine name appeared in Hebrew Scripture quotations found in the Christian Greek Scriptures. Under the heading “Tetragrammaton in the New Testament,” The Anchor Bible Dictionary states: “There is some evidence that the Tetragrammaton, the Divine Name, Yahweh, appeared in some or all of the O[ld] T[estament] quotations in the N[ew] T[estament] when the NT documents were first penned.” Scholar George Howard says: “Since the Tetragram was still written in the copies of the Greek Bible [the Septuagint] which made up the Scriptures of the early church, it is reasonable to believe that the N[ew] T[estament] writers, when quoting from Scripture, preserved the Tetragram within the biblical text.”

  Recognized Bible translators have used God’s name in the Christian Greek Scriptures. Some of these translators did so long before the New World Translation was produced. These translators and their works include: A Literal Translation of the New Testament . . . From the Text of the Vatican Manuscript, by Herman Heinfetter (1863); The Emphatic Diaglott, by Benjamin Wilson (1864); The Epistles of Paul in Modern English, by George Barker Stevens (1898); St. Paul’s Epistle to the Romans, by W. G. Rutherford (1900); The New Testament Letters, by J.W.C. Wand, Bishop of London (1946). In addition, in a Spanish translation in the early 20th century, translator Pablo Besson used “Jehová” at Luke 2:15 and Jude 14, and over 100 times in his translation footnotes, he suggested the divine name as a likely rendering. Long before those translations, Hebrew versions of the Christian Greek Scriptures from the 16th century onward used the Tetragrammaton in many passages. In the German language alone, at least 11 versions use “Jehovah” (or the transliteration of the Hebrew “Yahweh”) in the Christian Greek Scriptures, while four translators add the name in parentheses after “Lord.” More than 70 German translations use the divine name in footnotes or commentaries.




God’s name at Acts 2:34 in The Emphatic Diaglott, by Benjamin Wilson (1864)




  Bible translations in over one hundred different languages contain the divine name in the Christian Greek Scriptures. Many African, Native American, Asian, European, and Pacific-island languages use the divine name liberally. The translators of these editions decided to use the divine name for reasons similar to those stated above. Some of these translations of the Christian Greek Scriptures have appeared recently, such as the Rotuman Bible (1999), which uses “Jihova” 51 times in 48 verses, and the Batak (Toba) version (1989) from Indonesia, which uses “Jahowa” 110 times.




God’s name at Mark 12:29, 30 in a Hawaiian-language translation





Without a doubt, there is a clear basis for restoring the divine name, Jehovah, in the Christian Greek Scriptures. That is exactly what the translators of the New World Translation have done. They have a deep respect for the divine name and a healthy fear of removing anything that appeared in the original text.—Revelation 22:18, 19.








Languages and Dialects Containing the Divine Name in the Main Text of the Christian Greek Scriptures
Language or Dialect: Divine Name
Aneityum: Ihova

Arawak: Jehovah

Awabakal: Yehóa

Bangi: Yawe

Batak (Toba): Jahowa

Benga: Jěhova

Bolia: Yawe

Bube: Yehovah

Bullom So: Jehovah

Chácobo: Jahué

Cherokee: Yihowa

Chin (Hakha): Zahova

Chippewa: Jehovah

Choctaw: Chihowa

Chuukese: Jiowa

Croatian: Jehova

Dakota: Jehowa

Dobu: Ieoba

Douala: Yehowa

Dutch: Jehovah

Efate (North): Yehova

Efik: Jehovah

English: Jehovah

Éwé: Yehowa

Fang: Jehôva

Fijian: Jiova

French: IHVH, yhwh

Ga: Iehowa

German: Jehovah; Jehova

Gibario (dialect of Kerewo): Iehova

Grebo: Jehova

Hawaiian: Iehova

Hebrew: יהוה

Hindustani: Yihováh

Hiri Motu: Iehova

Ho-Chunk (Winnebago): Jehowa

Ila: Yaave

Iliku (dialect of Lusengo): Yawe

Indonesian: YAHWEH

Kala Lagaw Ya: Iehovan

Kalanga: Yehova; Yahwe

Kalenjin: Jehovah

Kerewo: Iehova

Kiluba: Yehova

Kipsigis: Jehoba

Kiribati: Iehova

Kisonge: Yehowa

Korean: 여호와

Kosraean: Jeova

Kuanua: Ieova

Laotian: Yehowa

Lele: Jehova

Lewo: Yehova

Lingala: Yawe

Logo: Yehova

Lomongo: Yawe; Yova

Lonwolwol: Jehovah

Lugbara: Yehova

Luimbi: Yehova

Luna: Yeoba

Lunda: Yehova

Luo: Yawe

Luvale: Yehova

Malagasy: Jehovah; Iehôvah

Malo: Iova

Marquesan: Iehova

Marshallese: Jeova

Maskelynes: Iova

Mentawai: Jehoba

Meriam: Iehoua

Misima-Paneati: Iehova

Mizo: Jehovan; Jihova’n

Mohawk: Yehovah

Mortlockese: Jioua

Motu: Iehova

Mpongwe (dialect of Myene): Jehova

Muskogee: Cehofv

Myene: Yeôva

Naga, Angami: Jihova

Naga, Konyak: Jihova

Naga, Lotha: Jihova

Naga, Mao: Jihova

Naga, Northern Rengma: Jihova

Naga, Sangtam: Jihova

Nandi: Jehova

Narrinyeri: Jehovah

Nauruan: Jehova

Navajo: Jîho’vah

Ndau: Jehova

Nembe: Jehovah

Nengone (or, Maré): Iehova

Ngando: Yawe

Ntomba: Yawe

Nukuoro: Jehova

Polish: Jehowa

Portuguese: Iáhve

Rarotongan: Jehova; Iehova

Rerep: Iova

Rotuman: Jihova

Sakao: Ihova; Iehova

Samoan: Ieova

Seneca: Ya’wĕn

Sengele: Yawe

Sesotho: Yehofa

Sie: Iehōva

Spanish: Jehová; Yahvé; YHWH; Yahweh

Sranantongo: Jehova

Sukuma: Yahuwa; Jakwe

Tahitian: Iehova

Teke-Eboo: Yawe

Temne: Yehṓfa; Yehofa

Thai: Yahowa

Toaripi: Jehova; Iehova

Tonga: Jehova

Tongan: Jihova; Sihova

Tshiluba: Yehowa

Tswana: Jehofa; Yehova; Yehofa

Umbundu: Yehova

Uripiv: Iova

Wampanoag: Jehovah

Welsh: Iehofah

Xhosa: Yehova

Zande: Yekova

Zulu: Jehova; YAHWE


(In addition to those on this list, a number of languages and dialects use a form of the divine name in footnotes or in explanatory text.)
Over 120 languages



