
LUKE
Study Notes​—Chapter 16

16:1
steward: Or “house manager; house administrator.”​—See study note on Lu 12:42.
16:6
measures: Or “bath measures.” The Greek word baʹtos is equated with the Hebrew bath measure by some scholars. Based on jar fragments bearing the designation “bath” in ancient Hebrew characters, the capacity of the bath measure is reckoned at approximately 22 L (5.81 gal).​—See Glossary, “Bath,” and App. B14.
16:7
large measures: Or “cor measures.” The Greek word koʹros is equated by some scholars with the Hebrew cor measure that contained ten bath measures. With the bath measure reckoned at 22 L (20 dry qt), the cor measure equals 220 L (200 dry qt).​—See study note on Lu 16:6; Glossary, “Bath,” “Cor”; and App. B14.
16:8
acted with practical wisdom: Or “acted shrewdly (discreetly).” The Greek word phro·niʹmos is here rendered “with practical wisdom.” Forms of the related adjective are rendered wiser in a practical way later in this verse and “discreet” at Mt 7:24; 24:45; 25:2; and Lu 12:42.​—See study notes on Mt 24:45; Lu 12:42.
this system of things: The Greek word ai·onʹ, having the basic meaning “age,” can refer to a state of affairs or to features that distinguish a certain period of time, epoch, or age. In this context, it refers to the present unrighteous system of things and a worldly way of life.​—See Glossary, “System(s) of things.”
16:9
friends: That is, friends in heaven, Jehovah God and Jesus Christ, the only ones who can receive others into “everlasting dwelling places.”
the unrighteous riches: Lit., “the mammon of the unrighteousness.” The Greek word ma·mo·nasʹ (of Semitic origin), traditionally translated “mammon,” is generally understood to denote money or riches. (See study note on Mt 6:24.) Jesus evidently viewed this type of riches as unrighteous because they are under the control of sinful humans, they normally serve selfish ends, and they are often acquired by means of unrighteous actions. The possession of or desire for material riches can also lead to lawless acts. Literal riches can lose their value, so a person having such riches should not put his trust in them. (1Ti 6:9, 10, 17-19) Rather, he should use them to make friends with Jehovah and Jesus, who can receive a person into the everlasting dwelling places.
everlasting dwelling places: Lit., “everlasting tents.” Evidently referring to perfect dwelling places in the everlasting new world, whether this be in the heavenly Kingdom with Jesus Christ or on the Paradise earth under that Kingdom’s rule.
16:13
hate: That is, be less devoted to.​—See study note on Lu 14:26.
be slaves: See study note on Mt 6:24.
Riches: See study note on Mt 6:24.
16:16
The Law and the Prophets: “The Law” refers to the Bible books of Genesis through Deuteronomy. “The Prophets” refers to the prophetic books of the Hebrew Scriptures. However, when these terms are mentioned together, the expression could be understood to include the entire Hebrew Scriptures.​—Mt 5:17; 7:12; 22:40; see study note on Mt 11:13.
pressing forward: The Greek word used here conveys the basic idea of forceful action or endeavor. Some Bible translators have understood this in a negative sense (that of acting with or suffering violence), but the context, the Kingdom of God is being declared as good news, makes it reasonable to understand the term in the positive sense of “going after something with enthusiasm; seeking fervently.” These words evidently describe the forceful actions or endeavors of those who responded to the preaching of the good news about God’s Kingdom, which put them in line to become prospective members of that Kingdom.
16:17
one stroke of a letter: In the Hebrew alphabet current in Jesus’ day, certain characters featured a tiny stroke that differentiated one letter from another. Jesus’ hyperbole thus emphasized that God’s Word would be fulfilled down to the smallest detail.​—See study note on Mt 5:18.
16:18
commits adultery: The Greek verb moi·kheuʹo refers to committing marital sexual unfaithfulness. In the Bible, adultery refers to voluntary acts of “sexual immorality” between a married person and someone who is not his or her mate. (Compare the study note on Mt 5:32, where the term “sexual immorality,” rendered from the Greek por·neiʹa, is discussed.) During the time when the Mosaic Law was valid, having sexual relations with another man’s wife or fiancée was considered to be adultery.​—See study notes on Mt 5:27; Mr 10:11.
a woman divorced: That is, a woman divorced except on account of sexual immorality.​—See study note on Mt 5:32.
16:20
a beggar: Or “a poor man.” The Greek word can refer to one who is very poor, or destitute. The use of this word provides a stark contrast to the rich man in Jesus’ illustration. It is used in a figurative sense at Mt 5:3 in the phrase rendered “those conscious of their spiritual need,” literally, “those who are poor (needy; destitute; beggars) as to the spirit,” conveying the idea of people who are painfully aware of their spiritual poverty and of their need for God.​—See study note on Mt 5:3.
Lazarus: Probably the Greek form of the Hebrew name Eleazar, meaning “God Has Helped.”
16:21
dogs: According to the Mosaic Law, dogs were unclean. (Le 11:27) The dogs that licked the beggar’s sores were apparently scavengers that roamed the streets. In the Hebrew Scriptures, the term “dog” is often used in a derogatory sense. (De 23:18, ftn.; 1Sa 17:43; 24:14; 2Sa 9:8; 2Ki 8:13; Pr 26:11) At Mt 7:6, the expression “dogs” is figuratively used of people who do not value spiritual treasures. Because dogs were unclean animals to the Jews and thus have an unfavorable figurative sense in the Bible, the mention of “dogs” in this illustration clearly indicates the low state of the beggar named Lazarus.​—See study notes on Mt 7:6; 15:26.
16:22
to Abraham’s side: Lit., “to the bosom of Abraham.” The bosom position was one of special favor and close fellowship. (See study note on Joh 1:18.) This figure of speech is drawn from the practice of reclining on couches at meals in such a way that one would lean back on the bosom, or chest, of a special friend.​—Joh 13:23-25.
16:23
the Grave: Or “Hades,” that is, the common grave of mankind.​—See Glossary, “Grave.”
by his side: Lit., “in his bosom.”​—See study note on Lu 16:22.
16:29
They have Moses and the Prophets: That is, the writings of Moses and the prophets, which were read every Sabbath in the synagogues (Ac 15:21) and should have led them to accept Jesus as God’s Messiah and King.

