
MARK
Study Notes​—Chapter 9

9:2
a lofty mountain: Possibly Mount Hermon, which is near Caesarea Philippi. (Mr 8:27; see study note on Mt 16:13.) It reaches a height of 2,814 m (9,232 ft) above sea level. The transfiguration may have taken place on one of the spurs of Mount Hermon.​—See App. B10.
he was transfigured: See study note on Mt 17:2.
9:5
Rabbi: Literally meaning “my great one,” from the Hebrew word rav, meaning “great.” In common usage, “Rabbi” meant “Teacher.”​—Joh 1:38.
9:7
a voice: The second of three instances in the Gospel accounts where Jehovah is reported as speaking directly to humans.​—See study notes on Mr 1:11; Joh 12:28.
9:9
Son of man: See study note on Mt 8:20.
9:17
a speechless spirit: That is, an evil spirit that makes a person unable to speak.
9:20
convulsions: In this particular case, demon activity was associated with epileptic symptoms. However, the Scriptures do not imply that epilepsy is generally caused by demon possession any more than deafness and speechlessness are. (Compare Mr 9:17, 25.) Rather, Mt 4:24 reports that people brought to Jesus ailing ones who included those who were “demon-possessed and epileptic,” drawing a distinction between these two types of individuals.​—See study note on Mt 4:24.
9:25
speechless and deaf spirit: That is, an evil spirit that makes a person unable to speak and to hear.
9:29
by prayer: Some manuscripts add “and fasting.” But the earliest and most reliable manuscripts do not include “and fasting.” These words were evidently added by copyists who advocated fasting and practiced it. They repeatedly included references to fasting where these were not found in earlier copies.​—See study note on Mt 17:21.
9:42
stumbles: Or “puts a stumbling block in front of.” In the Christian Greek Scriptures, the Greek word skan·da·liʹzo refers to stumbling in a figurative sense. In this context, the term may be used broadly to refer to becoming an obstacle to the faith of one who would otherwise follow Jesus and believe in him. It may also involve causing a person to sin or becoming a snare to a person. Stumbling may involve breaking one of God’s laws on morals, losing faith, or accepting false teachings. (See study note on Mt 18:7.) The expression these little ones refers to Jesus’ disciples who may have seemed of little importance from the world’s standpoint but who were precious in God’s eyes.
a millstone that is turned by a donkey: See study note on Mt 18:6.
9:43
makes you stumble: In this context, the Greek word skan·da·liʹzo could also be rendered “becomes a snare to you; causes you to sin.”​—See study note on Mt 18:7.
cut it off: Jesus was using hyperbole. He was saying that a person should be willing to give up something as precious as a hand, a foot, or an eye rather than allow it to cause him to stumble into unfaithfulness. He was obviously not encouraging self-mutilation or implying that a person was somehow subservient to the will of his limbs or eyes. (Mr 9:45, 47) He meant that a person should deaden a body member, or treat it as if it were severed from the body, rather than use it to commit a sin. (Compare Col 3:5.) He should allow nothing to hinder him from gaining life.
Gehenna: See study note on Mt 5:22 and Glossary.
9:44
Some manuscripts read here “where their maggot does not die and the fire is not put out,” but these words do not appear in important early manuscripts. Similar words do appear in verse 48, where there is no uncertainty regarding the text. Evidence suggests that a scribe or scribes repeated the words from verse 48 in verses 44 and 46.​—See App. A3.
9:45
makes you stumble: See study note on Mr 9:43.
Gehenna: See study note on Mt 5:22 and Glossary.
9:46
See study note on Mr 9:44.
9:47
makes you stumble: See study note on Mr 9:43.
Gehenna: See study note on Mt 5:22 and Glossary.
9:48
where: Referring to “Gehenna,” mentioned in the preceding verse. As shown in the study note on Mt 5:22, by Jesus’ day, the Valley of Hinnom (from which the term “Gehenna” is derived) had become a place for burning garbage. By mentioning that the maggot does not die and the fire is not put out, Jesus is evidently alluding to the prophetic words of Isa 66:24. That prophecy is not describing living people being tortured; rather, it tells what happens to “the carcasses of the men” who rebel against Jehovah. Where the fire did not reach, worms, or maggots, would breed, consuming anything not destroyed by the fire. On this basis, Jesus’ words mean that God’s adverse judgment would result, not in torture, but in complete destruction.
9:49
salted with fire: This figure of speech could be understood in two different ways. (1) If the expression is connected with the statements Jesus just made, as recorded at Mr 9:43-48, it would refer to destruction by the fire of Gehenna. Jesus might be alluding to what happened to Sodom and Gomorrah, in the vicinity of the Dead (Salt) Sea, when God “made it rain sulfur and fire” on those cities. (Ge 19:24) In this context, Jesus’ statement “everyone must be salted with fire” would mean that all who allow their hands, feet, or eyes to stumble them or others into unfaithfulness would be salted with the fire of Gehenna, or eternal destruction. (2) If the expression “salted with fire” is connected with what is said next, as recorded at Mr 9:50, then Jesus may have been speaking of a fire that would come upon his followers and work for their good, promoting peaceful relations among them. In this context, everyone​—that is, all his disciples​—would be purified and cleansed by Jehovah’s Word, which burns up all falsehood and error, and also by the fire of persecution or trials, which test and purify one’s loyalty and devotion to Jehovah. (Jer 20:8, 9; 23:29; 1Pe 1:6, 7; 4:12, 13) Jesus may well have had in mind both of the ideas just discussed.
9:50
Salt: A mineral used for preserving and flavoring food.​—See study note on Mt 5:13.
loses its saltiness: Or “loses its strength.” In Jesus’ day, salt was often obtained from the Dead Sea area and was contaminated by other minerals. If the salty portion was removed from this mixture, only a tasteless, useless residue remained.
Have salt in yourselves: Jesus evidently here uses “salt” to refer to the quality in Christians that causes them to do and say things that are in good taste, considerate, and wholesome and that tend toward preserving the lives of others. The apostle Paul uses “salt” in a similar way at Col 4:6. Perhaps Jesus was thinking of his apostles’ arguments about who would be the greatest. Figurative salt makes what a person says easier for others to accept and can thus help to preserve peace.

