R907 : page 1 

VOL. VIII. PITTSBURGH, PA., MARCH, 1887. NO. 7. 



page 1 

THE supply of "FOOD" is exhausted; 
and it will be some time before we will 
have a fresh supply ready. Any who have 
a quantity on hand not in use, will oblige 
us by returning a part, at least. We have 
always plenty of free sample TOWERS. 



THOSE who have "packets" loaned out, 
can procure of us clean papers, and packet 
envelopes to replace such as are too 
much soiled for further use. Order only 
as many as are needed. 



R909 : page 1 

THOUGH our office address is changed 
as noted above, we have not removed, but 
are still in the same place. The building 
fronts on Federal St. No. 40., but our office 
entrance is on Robinson St., and has 
recently been numbered. Our mail would 
come safely, whether addressed to street 
and number or not, but the above will be 
more readily found by strangers. 



R908 : page 1 

THE ONES MEANT. 



Hereafter it will not be sufficient, that 
one write us to send them the TOWER another 
year, without mentioning money or 
their intent to pay at some time, or their 
inability to pay. Say, what you mean. 

Neither will it be sufficient that some 
one write and send us an address without 
money, saying that the party is poor. 
We do not offer to send the TOWER to all 
the poor of the world. To the poor who 
are the Lord's children, and as such are 
sufficiently interested in the truths published 
in the TOWER to write us, and say 



so, and request it— to these only we offer 
it each year, so long as it is published. 

Let such not be backward to ask; we 
are anxious that such should have it. 
Accept it as from the Lord— it is from him. 
Not only are the truths it bears from his 
Word, unfolded to us by his favor, but the 
money with which it is published is all 
consecrated to Him. Hence those who 
have no money to pay for it, can and 
should accept it from Him, as per the notice 
above from Isa. 55:1,2. 

Should you learn of any who have asked 
as above, or who have subscribed and 
paid for the present year, who do not receive 
the paper, advise them to write us 
again, for there surely is some mistake, 
which we will be most glad to have rectified. 
Almost every mail brings some letters 
either without the writers name, or 
with insufficient address. 



R909 : page 1 

THE ANNIVERSARY SUPPER. 

Remember the date for the commemoration 
of the death of Christ, our Passover 
—on the anniversary of his last celebration, 
April 7th., evening. Meet with 
fellow members of the one body so far as 
possible, but eat it alone, if you know of 
none with whom you could celebrate it 
in spirit. If you cannot do better make 
a substitute for wine of raisin juice. 

We will be glad to have as many as 
possible meet with us in this city on that 
occasion. We anticipate a precious season. 
Warm hearts here will make you welcome, 
and endeavor to carry out Paul's and 
Peter's suggestions.— 1 Pet. 4:9; Rom. 12:13; 
Heb. 13:2. Review the subject 
in last (February) TOWER. 



R907 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



"He shall send his messengers with the great 
trumpet [Seventh Trumpet], and they shall gather 
together his elect from the four winds, from one 
end of heaven to the other."— Matt. 24:31. [Sinaitic 



and Syriac MSS. omit sound. 

"Gather my saints together unto me; those that 
have made a covenant with me by sacrifice."— 
Psa. 50:5. 

Millennial Dawn Vol. I. both in cloth 
and paper covers has already sold very 
largely and every mail brings fresh orders 
and grateful acknowledgement of it as 
God's instrumentality of blessing and enlightenment. 
But some of the friends 
connected with the work and the Tract 
Fund declare that they want to see the 
volume in its Fiftieth Thousand by January 
'88, believing that that number of 
such preachers and teachers would do a 
great work in forwarding the truth, blessing 
God's children and honoring their 
Father and Lord. To accomplish so 
desirable a result, it is proposed to reduce 
the paper bound 50 cent edition to one-half 
its present price, and make it hereafter 
25 cts. per copy for any quantity- 
one copy or a thousand copies, postage 
prepaid by us. 

Surely at that price even a child who 
could show the book should be able to sell 
numbers of them wherever thinking people 
are to be found, particularly thinking 
Christians. If you have read it carefully 
yourself, ask yourself how many you can 
place in the hands of readers, and get to 
work at once. The harvest truly is great 
and the laborers are few. Pray ye the 
Lord of the harvest that he will send forth 
more laborers, and if you are not one of 
them, pray that He will accept of your service 
granting you the great privilege of 
being a co-worker with him in filling the 
earth with the knowledge of his glorious 
character and plan— a service which 
angels would fain be engaged in. If you 
are in earnest in your prayer, believe that 
you have the privilege you ask, and go 
forward. The way will open before you. 

Another matter— We remember that 
some who are willing and anxious to 
serve the truth, are so circumstanced 
that they must derive some income from 
their time, to support themselves. Such 
could make no profit in buying the book 
at 25 cts. if they sold it at the same. This 
matter has been arranged for thus: Out of 
the Tract Fund, an allowance of 10 cts. 
per copy will be made for expense money 
to any canvasser. Such, in ordering 



should state the matter clearly thus: 
"Please send me ten copies of Dawn Vol. 
I. paper covers, price $2.50 less "expense 
money" allowance 10 cents each. I 
enclose $1.50." Or reckon it and state 
it in the same manner whatever the quantity 
ordered. 

The supply of FOOD being exhausted for 
the present, will enable those who have 
been using the "packets" to give their 
attention to "DAWN." A plan has been 
suggested by which each one can make a 
thorough canvass of his own and neighboring 
towns. We have prepared circulars 
which give the Table of Contents, and 
Kind words of Commendation, to which 
we have affixed a small slip which calls 
attention to the book, states the price, and 

R908 : page 1 

tells the reader that an agent will call to 
show him the DAWN and to take his order 
for it. These circulars can be sent out by 
the hand of trusty boys or girls, whom you 
can employ. And if you cannot visit all 
your neighbors yourself to show the book 
and take their orders, these same boys or 
girls could do it. [Girls would generally 
succeed best.] You could pay them a 
commission out of each day's sales— so much 
on each copy disposed of. Let them so 
far as possible collect the circulars as they 
show the book, so that the same may do 
to use again and again, until too much 
soiled. Of course you can do better yourself 
than boys or girls could do, but all 
cannot give so much time. 

Now what think you, can we not thus 
bring the thinking people of every city 
and town in contact with the light of the 
Millennial Dawn? The joy, quickening 
and comfort which it will bring to one 
truly receptive heart, should you with 
much effort reach but one, would more 
than repay you, even aside from the joy 
it will give you to be a co-worker with 
God and our Lord Jesus Christ. 

The fact that you have canvassed your 
town with the "Packets" will be no hindrance, 
but rather an aid to the work now 
suggested. Your conversation and their 
examination of FOOD awakened an interest 
or at least a curiosity which passing events 
have not permitted to die out, and they 
are now more ready than ever for Millennial 



Dawn— The Plan of the Ages. Harp 
[the Word of God] in hand, strike up the 
Song of Moses and the Lamb. 
"Wake the song of Jubilee; 
Let it echo o'er the sea." 



R908 : page 1 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Brooklyn, N.Y. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Last March a 
Brother of this city employed me to work 
in his paint store. Every day more or less 
men gathered in the store and would 
engage in argument on different topics, 
and sometimes on religion, and by the 
grace of God I preached to them Christ, 
who is the Saviour of all men, specially of 
them that believe. I explained to them 
how Christ had paid the debt, and there 
was now justification for believers, a crown 
for overcomers, and restitution for the 
world. The grace of God began to work 
in my employer's heart, and one day he 
brought down stairs a large Bible and 
said to me, "William, it is not everybody 
wants that book in his store, but I am 
going to have it here from this on," and I 
praised the Lord. I had the FOOD for 
Thinking Christians that you sent me 
several years ago, and began reading it in 
the store, but he did not believe in restitution, 
and fought hard against it for a 
long time. I tried to get him to read 
FOOD, but he said, "No, that is all man's 
work, I won't have anything but Scripture." 
I said I was glad he wouldn't have 
anything but Scripture, and if he would 
only read FOOD and search the Scriptures, 
he would be surprised to see how the little 
book agreed with the Scriptures. But no, 
he would not touch it. I had almost dispaired 
of him, but I told it to the Lord, and 
left it all with him. I had put the FOOD 
in the show case, where he could see it, 
and one day I came in the store, and 
there he was, behind the counter, all broke 
up, and the tears running down his cheeks, 
and FOOD in his hands. I was sure it had 
entered his heart, as he said, "God bless 
him! God bless him!" and he has been 
preaching restitution ever since. Of course 
you hear from him, and know all about 



it. One day Bro. Hickey came in the 

store, to buy a brush to paste up Eternal 

Torture around the city. I told him about 

restitution, but he, being a regular ordained 

minister of the Presbyterian Denomination, 

could not see it, and thought I was 

a little off. Another day, I was reading 

out of FOOD in the store to a crowd of 

men, and Bro. Hickey was present. He 

came over to me and said, "What have 

you got there?" I told him it was a little 

book called "FOOD FOR THINKING CHRISTIANS. 

He asked me where I got it, and 

I told him. He said he would write to 

you, and he did. You sent him MILLENNIAL 

DAWN, and you know how he was 

closeted for three days with DAWN and the 

Bible, and when he came around to the 

store again, he was very happy, and praising 

the Lord. You know the rest. Dear 

brother, I write this for your encouragement, 

and to let you see how the Lord 

can use one little FOOD; that little book is 

bringing light and peace and joy to many 

a household. I received MILLENNIAL 

DAWN; it is a wonderful book, and has 

the right ring, and I am sure the Lord will 

R908 : page 2 

use it to his honor and glory. I am out 
of employment, and if you will send me 
some packages, I will spread the glad tidings, 
and take subscriptions for the WATCH 
TOWER. 

How I long to be with Jesus, to see him 
as he is, and be like him, to reign with 
him in glory. 

Your brother in Christ, and his labor 
of love, . 

page 2 

Reading, Pa. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Need I tell you? 
My joy continues to abound in the Lord: 
and I am putting forth every effort that 
his name may be magnified in my body. 

I informed you previously that I aided 
Brother Hickey four Sundays in succession. 
I then turned my attention to my 
own immediate neighborhood above Harlem 
Bridge, N.Y., and was instrumental 
in awakening some interest. Sold several 
FOODS and took some subscriptions for 
the WATCH TOWER, a list of which I here 



inclose. The "FOODS" I ordered were for 
this purpose and came duly to hand. 

I left N. Y. on Friday last and held a 
meeting that evening at Easton, Pa. 
Some of the brethren there said it was the 
most interesting meeting we have yet had. 

I preached yesterday (Sunday) in the 
Court House, Allentown, but my audience 
was small, owing no doubt, in a great 
measure to the inclemency of the weather. 

I expect (D.V.) to see you in about a 
week. Until then, farewell. With love to 
your household, I remain yours in the 
glorious Lord. S. O. BLUNDEN. 

Westboro, Mo. 
DEAR BRO. Russell:--The Z.W.T. of 
February received, I was glad to see it 
once more. I hailed it with joy, for its 
teachings lead to a higher plane of life. 
I have read and re-read M. DAWN, and 
every time I read, I see something that I 
overlooked previously; in fact I would 
not be without it for anything. I find, 
the more I read it the more I think of 
my God and every thing he has done and 
created. I used to blame men unmercifully, 
and thought they did not get punishment 
enough for their wickedness, but 
as I become more acquainted with God's 
plan for their redemption, my heart grows 
softer. I gradually take in their situation 
in their fallen nature, and I feel more like 
pitying than blaming them. A Methodist 
Minister said that by talking of this I 
would become unpopular. Such an idea! 
I would like to meet with you April 7th., 
and celebrate the Lord's Supper, but being 
so far away I see no chance of coming. 
Yours in Christ. D. R. D . 

R908 : page 2 

Nillville, Pa. 
DEAR BROTHER: I appreciate the 
teachings of the TOWER very highly, except 
upon one point. You seem to ignore 
or deny the Sabbath kept by our Lord and 
all the Jews— for he was "born under the 
Law," and bound by it so long as it held 
dominion (Rom. 7:4-6). I am not able 
to see clearly, as yet, that the keeping of 
the seventh day (Saturday) is not binding 
on Christians as it certainly was upon 
Jews. It seems to me that the observance 
of Sunday, the first day of the week, instead 



of the seventh, was a change for 
which Papacy is responsible. What say 
you? S. I . 

IN REPLY. 

DEAR BROTHER:-General articles on 
the Sabbath question have already appeared 
in the TOWER (Oct., 1883, Dec, 
1885, etc.) Have you carefully read 
them? If not, read them and wait for Millennial 
Dawn in some of its future volumes 
to deal with the subject at length. 

The Sabbath was a part of the Law. 
It and all other parts of the Law on stones 
was given to the Jew. I never was under 
the Law as a covenant of life, thank God, 
else I would have found it as the Jew did 
a covenant of death. 

As regards the Papacy's substitution of 
Sunday instead of the seventh day, we do 
not dispute it; but had they or any one 
else a right to make a substitute for a law 
that was never given except to the Jew, 
and which even to them ended as a "covenant 
of death" when Christ died for them 
and for all, becoming the end of that covenant, 
its fulfiller? The text you quote 
(Rom. 7:4-6) is against you, and says 
No. No day is commanded to the church. 
We are glad that a day is observed, but 
sorry that any suppose it to be a substitute 
for the day fixed by the Mosaic Law. Such 
bring themselves under a law not put upon 
them by God, but by Rome. I am 
glad to be of those who, in the liberty 
wherewith Christ makes free, am not under 
the law— neither that of Moses, nor that 
of Papacy. 

The Sabbath is not a "moral" law, as 
some claim; there was never any thing 
moral or RELIGIOUS about it. It was not 
a command to worship nor to study nor 
anything of that sort— but merely to DO 
NO WORK. 

It has a typical feature and lesson and 
NO OTHER: it illustrated or typified the 
REST OF FAITH from our own works— rest 
in Christ's merit and sufficiency as the 
one who fulfilled all righteousness for us 
and redeemed us all from death. 

I and every Israelite indeed (antitypical) 
keep this Sabbath or REST, not on one 
day of the week but EVERY DAY. I am 
ALWAYS RESTING. I have FOREVER ceased 
from my own works, ceased trying or 



hoping to justify myself by my own deeds 
or works. 

This glorious peace and rest which I 
enjoy is the antitype of the typical and 
enforced rest or Sabbath-keeping put upon 
the typical people, just as much as their 
Temple and all their sacrifices were types 
of which we have the higher and real 
antitypes. EDITOR. 



page 2 

Brooklyn, N.Y. 
DEARLY BELOVED AND FELLOW LABORER. 

—Grace to you, and peace, from God 

our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. I 

give thanks to my God always, making 

mention of thee in my prayers, (knowing 

thy love and faith which thou hast toward 

the Lord Jesus, and for all the saints) that 

the fellowship of thy faith may become 

effectual. ..for we have much joy and 

consolation over thy Love, Brother! Because 

the tender sympathies of the saints 

have been refreshed through thee. The 

February '87 TOWER has been a refreshing 

draught from the wellspring of truth. 

The "View from the Tower" has confirmed 

our position; "The Lord's Supper" 

has awakened pleasurable anticipations; 

"The Easy Yoke" has been more perfectly 

adjusted; that "The Time is Short" 

has been more fully realized, and our 

grave responsibility more deeply felt; 

"Bible Light on Probation After Death" 

dispels still more fully the awful gloom 

that so recently enveloped us because of 

the God-dishonoring creeds of Babylon; 

"Living by Faith" becomes a sweeter experience, 

and the things that are not seen 

and eternal, more and more real; "No 

Variableness neither Shadow of Turning" 

is the attribute of our God that gives stability 

to every doctrine of his word, and 

is the ground of all our confidence and all 

our boasting, for He hath spoken and He 

will bring it to pass; "Extracts from Interesting 

Letters" stir our hearts within 

us, as we learn of like blessing received 

by other members of the body of Christ, 

and of their work and labor of love in the 

Harvest. 

Altogether we have been strengthened 
and encouraged, hand and heart for the 



warfare and still more greatly rejoice, and 
more fervently thank Christ Jesus our 
Lord that He counted us faithful putting 
us into the ministry. I enclose list of 
subscribers to Z.W.T. 

In Christian Fellowship and Service 
affectionately yours, S. I. H 



R909 : page 2 

COMING IN THE FLESH. 



Rochester, N.Y. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Since removing 
here I have had my faith in the 
correctness of your teachings relative to 
the coming of the Lord a spirit being and 
not flesh, assailed and shaken by parties 
who claim that you are Anti-Christ. 
They base the charge upon what they 
claim is the literal translation of 2 John 7. 
They render it thus: "Who confess not 
that Jesus is coming in the flesh. This is 
a deceiver and an antichrist." If they 
are correct, then to deny that our Lord's 
second coming will be as before, viz. in 
the flesh, is wrong. Looking at the word 
for word translation of the passage in the 
Diaglott I find the Greek word is there 
translated coming, though in the regular 
reading translation in the side column of 
the Diaglott it is rendered did come. 
Doubtless the Diaglott's word for word 
translation gave rise to the application of 
this Scripture against you here. But no 
matter, the question is an important one, 
and I write you to know, if you can solve 
the difficulty. I called upon Prof. Kendricks 
of the Rochester College and asked 
him for the most literal meaning of the 
Greek word in dispute, and he said that 
its most literal meaning was coming. 

Hoping to hear from you soon I am 
Yours respectfully C. G . 

[The above is not the exact wording as 
our brother's letter got mislaid. We recall 
the main points from memory. We 
replied at once as below and now lay it 
before our readers that all may be armed 
on this point.] 

DEAR BRO. G.:-Yours of the 23d came 
duly. I am glad to see the candor with 
which you approach the question which 



you present to me, and that before deciding 
on the matter you write to see what I 
know of it. This is right, and your 
course may save you from being stumbled. 

The Greek word used in 1 John 4:2, 
and that of 2nd John 7, for "is come," 
are from the same Greek root, and might 
like our English words came, come, and 
coming, be used to indicate a past, or 
present, or future coming according to 
the way in which it is used. A strict 
translation of the two words would be (1 John 4:2.) 
came, and coming (2 Jno. 7.); 
but the weight you, and perhaps others, 
give this fact, is not justified, and probably 
arises from an imperfect knowledge of 
the Greek. To make the matter quite 
plain, let me show you how the English 
word coming, may clearly refer to a past 
coming, and let this be an illustration of 
the Greek: for instance when we say- 
It was not the time, but the manner of 
our Lord's coming, that surprised and deceived 
the Jewish Doctors of the Law— 
or that, He who denies that coming, 
stands where the Jew stands to-day, and 
must therefore be an opponent of the 
truth, a contradictor of the Apostle's testimony, 
and hence an opponent of the 
entire work of grace in progress during 
the Gospel age— Antichrist. 

It is after this manner that erchomia is 
used in 2 John 7; and it is repeatedly 
used similarly elsewhere. Take your 
Young's Concordance, turn to pages 181 
and 182. Note the instances in which 
this same word is used in the various tenses, 
past, present and future— came, come, 
cometh, coming. If you will examine 
the context you will find that in the majority 
of cases in which it is used it relates 
to transactions already past, just as in the 
cases under consideration— 1 John 4:2. 
and 2 John 7. 

You mention the literal word for word 
translation of the Diaglott in 2 John 7. 
We agree with it fully, you see, as to the 
literal meaning of the Greek word standing 
alone disassociated from the limitations 
of the sentence. Professor Kendrick 
answered your question as to the literal 
meaning of the word, in the same way; 
so would any Greek scholar. But the 
translator of the Diaglott, as also Professor 
Kendrick, and every other person 
who knows what he discusses, will agree 



with me that the word can be used to refer 
to a past coming, just as our English 
word coming, can; as illustrated in above 
examples. Furthermore, they will all agree 
that the construction of the Greek in 
2 John 7. signifies a past coming. 

You will notice that while the Diaglott 
in its literal translation, gives coming as 
the meaning of the disputed word, yet 
when giving the sense of the sentence, it 
in very unmistakeable terms shows that 
the coming was in the past, there rendering 
it did come. The author evidently 
was guarding the unscholarly against an 
error to which they would be very liable. 
Young's Bible gives only the very literal 
translation, coming, but when posted, 
any one can see from the construction of 
the sentence, that a past, and not a future 
coming is referred to. 

Notice too that nearly all Translators 
would naturally be favorable to the view 
that our Lord's second coming will be 
again in the flesh; for they so expect him 
—among others, the Author of the Diaglott. 
Hence it cannot be claimed that 
they were influenced in their translation 
in our favor. 

Yours in fellowship and service 
C. T. Russell. 

An answer to the above received 
before going to press, says that Bro. G. 
called upon Prof. Kendrick again, to inquire 
concerning the sense of the entire 
sentence (2 Jno. 7.) referred to above. 
The Professor fully agreed with us that 
the reference was to a "coming in the 
flesh" already in the past, and had no 
reference whatever to a future event. 



R909 : page 2 

THE DISPUTED CLAUSE. 

To those who are loath to part with the 
first clause of Rev. 20:5. (See Millennial 
Dawn Note p. 287) we would suggest, 
that it probably crept into the text by accident 
in the fifth century; for no MS. 
of earlier date (neither Greek nor Syriac) 
contains this clause. It was probably at 
first merely a marginal comment made by 
a reader, expressive of his thought upon 



the text, and was copied into the body of 
the text by some subsequent transcribers 
who failed to distinguish between the text 
and the comment. 

However, the repudiation of this clause 
is not essential to the "Plan" as by us 
set forth, as will be clearly shown in a 
subsequent volume of "Millennial Dawn." 
For, the word resurrection, it will be 
shown, has been misapprehended greatly: 
it signifies to raise up. As related to 
man it signifies to bring up to the full 
perfection of manhood— the thing lost 
through Adam. The perfection from 
which our race fell, is the perfection to 
which they will gradually rise during the 
Millennial age of restitution or resurrection 
(raising up). The Millennial age 
is not only the age of trial, but also of 
blessing through resurrection or restitution 
to life— to that which was lost. The 
process will be a gradual one, requiring 
the entire age for its full accomplishment. 
Consequently it will not be until the 
thousand years are finished, that the race 
will have fully attained to the complete 
measure of life lost in Adam. And since 
anything short of perfect life is a condition 
of partial death, it follows that it 
would be strictly true to say, the rest of 
the dead lived not again (did not regain 
fully the life lost) until the thousand years 
of restitution and blessing were complete. 

This much here to prevent stumbling 
upon this point— particulars again, in 
appropriate connection. 



R884 : page 2 

HAVE you not noticed that in the history 
of this planet God turns a leaf about 

EVERY TWO THOUSAND YEARS? 

God turned a leaf, and this world was 
fitted for human residence. About two 
thousand more years passed along and 
God turned another leaf, and it was the 
Deluge. About two thousand more years 
passed on, and it was the appearance of 
Christ. Almost two thousand more years 
have past by, and He will probably soon 
turn another leaf. What it shall be I 
cannot say. It may be the demolition of 



all these monstrosities of turpitude, and 
the establishment of righteousness in all 
the earth. He can do it, and he will do 
it. I am as confident as if it were already 
accomplished.— Talmadge. 



R910 : page 3 

THE PRAYER OF THE CONSECRATED. 

"We seek not, Lord, for tongues of flame, 

Or healing virtue's mystic aid; 
But power thy Gospel to proclaim, 

The balm for wounds that sin has made. 

"Breathe on us, Lord; Thy radiance pour 
On all the wonders of the page 

Where hidden lies the heavenly lore 

That blessed our youth and guides our age. 

"Grant skill each sacred theme to trace, 
With loving voice and glowing tongue 

As when upon thy words of grace 

The wondering crowds enraptured hung. 

"Grant faith, that treads the stormy deep 
If but thy voice shall bid it come; 

And zeal, that climbs the mountain steep, 
To seek and bring the wanderer home. 

"Give strength, blest Saviour, in thy might 

Illuminate our hearts, and we, 
Transformed into Thine image bright, 

Shall teach, and love, and live, like thee." 



R910 : page 3 

"AS THE SERPENT BEGUILED EVE." 

"I fear lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled 
Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should be 
corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ.... 
Such are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming 
themselves into the apostles of Christ. 
And no marvel; for Satan himself is transformed 
into an angel of light. Therefore it is no great 
thing, if his ministers also be transformed as the 
ministers of righteousness, whose end shall be according 
to their works.— 2 Cor. 11:3,13-15. 

The early church was surrounded with 
many bitter and outspoken enemies, but 



against these the apostles never needed to 

warn the sheep. But continually they 

sought to put believers on their guard 

against false teachers, professing much, 

clothed as ministers of light, with morality 

etc., but teaching errors which would 

confuse and befog the minds of the saints, 

and tend to hinder them from the full accomplishment 

of their covenant of self-sacrifice. 

The great shepherd of the 

sheep warned them to take heed to His 

voice and to heed not the voice of strangers, 

intimating that others would seek to 

call the sheep in his name, and to direct 

them, whose leading would be contrary 

to his. --John 10:1-5. 

The apostle Peter referred pointedly to 
this same evil when he said, (2 Pet. 2: 1,2.) 
There were false prophets also among 
the people [Jews], even as there shall be 
false teachers among you who privily [in a 
subtle manner] shall bring in damnable 
heresies, even denying the Lord that 
bought them." 

This does not signify that these teachers 
will deny our Lord as a person, nor 
deny his Lordship or authority over the 
church. Such a teacher never was countenanced 
in the church; none would recognize 
such an one as a Christian at all. 
He would be an out and out Infidel; and 
so open a course would prevent any deception 
of the sheep. On the contrary 
those whom the adversary has used to advance 
errors, have always been loud in 
their professions of faith in the Lord. 
They thus wear a garment of light, as Paul 
calls it, and the more successfully serve 
the error which they "privily" bring in 
and set before the church. 

In this text Peter's words would be better 
translated thus: "The having bought 
them sovereign Lord denying." It is a 
rule in the Greek to put the important or 
central thought first in a sentence. This 
the translators have not generally observed 
in this case, not noticing that the ransom 
is the central thought. In the Greek it 
stands as we quote it above, showing clearly 
that the denying referred to by the 
apostle is a denying of the ransom— denying 
that our Lord gave for us and all men 
"a corresponding price." To deny this, 
is to deny all: for it is the removal of the 
very foundation of all our hopes and of 
Christ's Lordship. For if we were not 



"bought with a price, even the precious 
blood of Christ," then we are yet in our 
sins, condemned still, and without hope. 
If he has not bought us, he is not our Lord, 
and has no right or control, present or 
future. Hence those who deny the ransom, 
really deny the Lordship of Christ, 
no matter how much they may claim to 
acknowledge Jesus as Lord. 

The seriousness of this which Peter calls 
"damnable heresy," is far reaching, and 
leads into a great variety of errors and 
heresies, reflecting against other truths 
and laying a foundation for other errors. 
Peter adds: "Many shall follow their destructive 
ways [destructive of the very foundation 
of hope and its corresponding licence 
in dealing with scriptures which oppose 
them] by reason of whom the way of 
truth [the true way of salvation— through 
the ransom— the way of the cross] will be 
reviled." 

It is against such teachers, who, whether 
knowingly or ignorantly, are serving Satan 
and error, and are the enemies of the 
cross of Christ, that Paul speaks in our 
text. As Satan through the serpent beguiled 
Eve with crafty sophistry, he would 
now through such teachers among you beguile 
and lead astray the chaste virgin 
church espoused to Christ. Of course 
from time to time throughout the age Satan 
has sought to and did test the nominal 
virgin of Christ, but much more so now 
in the end of the age, when the church is 
almost complete, and as he sees the plan 
of God unfolding, and that he has not 
thwarted it thus far, Satan seems to redouble 
his efforts; for as each new ray of 
light shines out for her assistance, in this 
the dawn of the coming day, he matches 
it or counterfeits it, with rays of false light 
to draw attention away from the true. 

Various have been the delusions of our 
subtle adversary, but in this instance as in 
many others, the apostle's words seem to 
apply directly to our day. His words 
were a prophecy to us, now being fulfilled; 
for now the form of error is again presented 
as it was with Eve, 

"YE SHALL NOT SURELY DIE." 

In Eve's case it applied to the first 
death, now it is applied to the SECOND 
DEATH. 



The argument used to Eve was that she 
would not die at all, and when the reality 
of death was established beyond a question 
in the death of Abel, he changed the argument, 
and ever since he has unceasingly 
taught through deceived poets, philosophers 
and priests, heathen and Christian, 
that mankind does not really die, but only 
appears to; that when dead they are 
more alive than ever before. And in 
every age among heathens and Christians 
he has succeeded in gaining a majority to 
believe his lie, in direct opposition to 
God's statement, "Thou shalt surely 
die." "The soul that sinneth, it shall 
die."— Gen. 2:17. and Ezek. 18:4. 

This lie Satan started with, for he was 
a liar (and thereby the slayer of our race) 
from the beginning and abode not in the 
truth (John 8:44.), and he has since kept 
it up, and the sophistries used to back it 
up are truly wonderful, and worthy of such 
a Master deceiver. Upon this lie he has 
built his entire system of error with its 
God-dishonoring doctrines of a present 
or future place of anguish, in which the 
dead are doubly alive and suffering. And 
on it he builds the further idea of the endlessness 
of their torture, that they not only 
are not dead, but cannot ever die; that 
God, though he can create, cannot "destroy 
soul and body in Gehenna"— the second 
death [See October 1886, Tower]. Thus 
for centuries he has maligned God's character 
and cultivated a fear and abhorrence 
of God which repulsed all true love, and 
hindered that depth of consecration in his 
service which can spring only from love 
and appreciation of God and his plans. 

And not only so, but by and in support 
of this same lie, the adversary has warped 
and twisted and perverted the Scriptures 
so that all the exceeding great and precious 
and various promises of God's Word have 
come to mean only what might be interpreted 
in one sentence, thus: You must 
either spend an eternity in awe, fear and 
trembling in the presence of a fiendish 
God, or else in everlasting torture with 
devils. And of the two evils men have 
hoped to get the least, and dreaded almost 
to read the Bible whose every parable and 
symbol was caused to smoke and flame 
and to reflect the words ETERNAL TORMENT, 
under the lurid light cast upon it by the 
adversary, through hymn-books, prayer-books, 



and commentaries, in harmony 

with his original lie, "Ye shall not surely 

die." 

This lie has had a long run, of six thousand 
years; it has served his purpose well, 
and yet serves in most cases. But now in 
the dawn of the morning the light of truth 
begins to shine unto some, showing the 
Scripture to be in perfect harmony with 
God's original declaration, "In the day 
that thou eatest thereof, dying thou shalt 
die" [margin]. At first he merely cast 
odium upon it and was content to let a 
few get free from this error, but it led so 
rapidly from darkness to light that he 
must do something to oppose it, and to 
deceive and ensnare the espoused virgin 
of Christ, as in the past. 

R911 : page 3 

And what could be more taking or deceptive 
now, than the same lie he took at 
first, only newly applied, to the second 
death, instead of to the first. Surely this 
would be his wisest plan; for already he 
had the prejudices of many and a reflected 
bias cast on Scripture to favor his old and 
popular error. Hence as Paul prophesied 
he has concluded to attempt to deceive 
the "virgin of Christ" on this line. He 
now again declares through some willing 
to deliver his message to the church, as 
the serpent did to Eve, the same denial of 
God's sentence against sinners; and now 
as at first declares, "Ye shall not surely 
die"— every human creature that God 
ever made, will be saved everlastingly— 
not one will be cut off from life. 

We have not a full account of the sophistry 
used to Eve, but it was probably one 
or all three of these: Either, that God 
was not able to destroy as well as to create; 
or that he was too loving to punish 
and might be disobeyed with impunity by 
those who would take advantage of his 
mercy and love; or else that God had a 
plan arranged which would be interfered 
with if death were permitted, and which 
must not be interfered with, and that 
hence the threat was only a threat, and 
really a lie on God's part. 

Whether or not those were the arguments 
used to Eve, Paul's words seem to 
indicate considerable argument, and sophistry 
—"As the serpent beguiled Eve by 



his subtil ty." And certainly these are 

the arguments now being advanced by the 

same adversary. And as the light has begun 

to make the old doctrine of eternal 

torture unpopular, it seems as though the 

adversary by one bold move on the same 

line would swing the general sentiment to 

an exact opposite, and past the centre of 

truth. From thinking of God as the great 

monster delighting in the everlasting unmitigated 

torture of billions of his creatures 

—all except the handful of saints, the 

little flock— he would now have them to 

think of God as so loving and gentle and 

weak that he could not carry out his own 

just sentence of death upon wilful sinners, 

that therefore he must coerce all and accept 

an enforced obedience instead of a 

willing one, because he is so oversensitive 

and weak that he could not blot out of existence 

those who after having had the 

fullest opportunity of light and favor under 

the Millennial reign still wilfully and 

deliberately oppose him. How weak such 

an argument! In view of the past six 

thousand years— when we consider what 

God has permitted man to bring upon 

himself of pain, sickness and woe, is there 

room for such conclusions? None; that 

display of God's justice and firmness 

should leave no doubt on this subject. 

The fact that God so loved all while sinners, 

as to redeem them from Adamic 

death and grant to all another, this time 

an individual trial for life, should not be 

mistaken for a weakness on his part, nor 

used as an argument for further trials after 

all have had full individual trial and opportunity. 

It is because we were not wilful 

sinners, against full knowledge and 

opportunity, but sinners through the disobedience 

of one who sinned without full 

knowledge, that God redeemed all, and 

has provided under the Redeemer a second 

trial and second chance of life for all.— 

See "Second Chance" in TOWER of 

December, 1884. 

But glance for a moment at a sample of 
the sophistry now used to beguile the virgin 
of Christ on this subject. The first penalty, 
death, is denied by the claim that it referred 
not to the death of the man, but to the 
death of righteousness in the man. The 
same argument exactly that the adversary 
has used for centuries, is thus taken up again 
to form part of a specious argument, 



that the second death means the reverse 
of that death of man's righteousness, or 
the dying of the sinner to sin— the death 
of sin in him. Otherwise stated, the 
claim is that the first death was a death to 
righteousness making all sinners, and that 
the second death is to be a death to sin 
making the sinners all righteous. What 
perversion! What subtilty, as the apostle 
terms it, is here advanced to entrap the 
feet of Christ's little ones, now escaping 
from darkness to the light. Let us open 
up and examine this sophistical* 
argument. 

We deny both claims: The second 
death has no reference to the death of sin 
in sinners, and the first or Adamic death 
was not the death of his righteousness. 
These are figurative uses of the word death 
drawn from the one great actual death 
illustrated for centuries before all mankind, 
namely, ceasing to be. We have no 
right to object to the proper use of any 
figure, but when any attempt is made to set 
aside the reality entirely, and put a figure, 
based upon it, in its stead, we seriously 
object. The errors into which such a 
course would lead are legion. 

Of the first death, or Adamic death, the 
Apostle says: "By one man sin entered 
into the world and death by [as a result 
of] sin; and so [thus] death passed upon 
all men, by the one offence" (marginal 
reading). "As by the offence of one condemnation 
came upon all men [condemning 



*Sophistry is false, deceptive reasoning. Thus 
for instance, if we should say— (1) Food is essential 
to life. (2) Corn is food. (3) Therefore corn is 
essential to life.— our reasoning would be sophistical. 
That is it would be false, and yet, (if the subject 
were a deeper one) deceptive, in that it goes 
through a form of reasoning to establish a false conclusion, 
which those not accustomed to close thinking, 
are not quick to discern. On such apparent 
reasoning from the Scripture, many hurtful errors 
are based, and accepted without investigation by 
the superficial and prejudiced. 

R911 : page 4 

all to actual death] even so by the 

righteous act of one [by the actual not figurative 

death of Christ] favor has freely 



come to all men, justifying them to life. 
(Rom. 5:12,18.) Those whom we criticize 
claim that the sin (or death of 
righteousness in Adam) was the Adamic 
death, while we with Paul and the entire 
record of Scripture hold firmly that death 
was the penalty for sin inflicted after and 
because of that [figurative death to righteousness] 
sin. 

The penalty cannot be the crime; yet 
these confound the crime (the sin) with 
its penalty, and treat the question as 
though the penalty of sin consisted in becoming 
a sinner. 

But why pursue such a foolish and inconsistent 
theory? it cannot stand the 
least examination. The death penalty 
came after and because of Adam's disobedience 
[figuratively speaking, because of 
his death to righteousness]. Adam had 
all to do with the sinning [ceasing from 
righteousness] and did it wilfully; but he 
had nothing to do with inflicting the 
death penalty which followed as its just 
punishment. 

This penalty was inflicted by God [no 
matter into whose hands he commits the 
power of death as his executioner, Heb. 2:14.]; 
and it was inflicted against 
Adam and all his race, much against their 
wish, and against their every struggle. 
Adam had already become a sinner when 
God inflicted the literal penalty. It was 
because he was already dead to righteousness 
(or had ceased to be righteous) that 
God pronounced the sentence or curse of 
the law against him— "Dying thou shalt 
die." God would not permit one dead 
to righteousness (who had ceased to be 
righteous) to live on everlastingly in that 
condition, and hence he deprived him of 
life— not instantly, but by a dying process, 
the result of casting him out of the garden, 
from access to the life-sustaining trees. 
As it is written: "Because thou hast done 
this [become a sinner— died to or ceased 
from righteousness]. ..unto dust shalt 
thou return." 

The apostle James, also an authority, 
declares that sin when it is accomplished 
bringeth forth death— a return to dust. 
Neither Paul nor James (standard theologians) 
confounded the sin which is 
a ceasing from righteousness, with 
its penalty, which is death actual— a 
ceasing to exist. 



So then the death penalty is a return to 
dust, and is not at all the same as that implied 
in the figurative expression of dying 
to righteousness. It follows the other, 
and could not be mistaken for the other 
except under the deceptive sophistry of the 
original liar, who alas now works most 
successfully through those who have fallen 
away from the truth. 

Nor is the SECOND DEATH, a death to 
sin, a making alive to righteousness again. 
It is never used in such a sense anywhere 
in the Scriptures; only the desire to uphold 
and advance the original lie "Ye 
shall not surely die," coupled with a slight 
respect for some who use their Bibles (and 
could not be led off the track without the 
twisting and plausible and subtle perversion 
of those Scriptures which mention the 
Second Death,) could have induced reasonable 
beings to offer such a subterfuge 
in the name of truth and "New light." 

The Second Death [See October Tower 
1886.] is the same in kind as the First. 
It is inflicted as the penalty of the same 
law, and by the same Law-giver, and upon 
the very same class (wilful sinners fully 
able to have resisted, forewarned, and 
fully forearmed;) as the first death. The 
second death is the penalty of wilful sin 
under the second trial, as the first death 
was the penalty of failure in the first trial. 
This, when seen, establishes the fact that 
God's law is and always shall be the same 
unchangeable law; that He will always 
refuse the privileges and blessings of lasting 
life to those who, when enlightened 
and able, refuse to conform to his just and 
wise arrangements willingly. 

There could be no second death except 
the first death had been cancelled, since 
so far as man is concerned, the first death's 
condemnation passed upon all. And 
since a second trial implies a second 
chance for life, it is manifest that none 
could be granted a second chance for life 
until the first sentence of death was settled. 
And at the same time, a second chance 
for life implies a chance for a second 
death. 

As the law of the Creator is perfect, it 
can never change, hence a second trial, 
(which only a few have yet enjoyed, and 
which for the vast majority will be in the 
coming age of judgment), must be on the 
same conditions as the first, viz.: Obey and 



live forever, disobey and die forever. Not 
to be forever dying but to be dead, extinct, 

R912 : page 4 

"cut off from life" forever— the second 
death penalty for failure under trial, from 
which there is no redemption and no release. 
Such "shall be as though they 
had not been." 

Glance at the uses of the expression 
"Second Death," a glance is sufficient to 
convince any unprejudiced mind. Paul 
refers to it as a possibility in this age only 
to those who have first been enlightened, 
who have tasted of the good word of God, 
who have been sanctified and become partakers 
of the Holy Spirit, and who have 
been able by faith to grasp and apply to 
themselves now the cleansing and justification 
which will belong to the age to 
come. He says, "If these fall away it is 
impossible to renew them again unto repentance.' 
Such wilfull sin on their part 
proves them unworthy of the favor of God 
—the gift of life. 

John the apostle mentions the second 
death when he says: There is a sin unto 
death— I do not say that ye should pray 
for it. (1 John 5:16.) To pray for it 
would be to oppose God's expressed will, 
which we have no right to do. Rather, 
we must study his plan and will and consent 
thereto as the wisest and best for all 
concerned. 

Jesus the Great Teacher spoke of the 
second death using Gehenna as a symbol 
of it. (See October 1886 TOWER.) He 
said, God is able to destroy both soul and 
body [being] in Gehenna (the second 
death), and that it would be better to sacrifice, 
cut off, evil desires and practices 
even though loved as an eye or as a right 
hand and (if it were necessary) enter into 
life maimed, than to be destroyed utterly 
in the second death. 

Paul says that such as wilfully reject the 
favor of God through the ransom after 
they have once fully seen it and partaken 
of its benefits, have no further interest or 
share in the sacrifice, and for them naught 
remains but a fearful looking for of judgement 
which will devour (destroy) them as 
adversaries. He calls attention to the 
type, Moses, and to the fact that those 
under him who would not obey died without 



mercy, (Heb. 6:1-6; 10:26-31,38,39; 
Acts 3:22,23.) and asks whether a 
severer penalty is not due to wilful sin 
against the Great Teacher. The penalty 
under the type, was the taking away of a 
life already forfeited, and to be restored; 
but the severer penalty of wilful rejection 
of Christ is the second death— the cutting 
off forever from life without remedy 
or hope. 

The same law or rule will apply to the 
world in general in the next age: All will 
come to a knowledge of the truth, partake 
of the fruits of the ransom in restoration 
etc., etc., and such as wilfully spurn 
God's favor and cling to sin when able to 
avoid it, are fit subjects for destruction— 
the second death. Of such a class we 
read in Rev. 20:14,15: "Whoever was 
not found written in the book of life was 
cast into the [symbolic] lake of fire." 
"This is the Second death." Again, the 
same class proved unworthy of life in that 
Millennial trial are described (Rev. 21:8.) 
as the "fearful, unbelieving, abominable, 
murderers, whoremongers, sorcerers, 
idolaters, and liars" who have their portion 
[reward] in the [symbolic] lake which 
burneth with fire and brimstone, which is 
[literally] the second destruction. Fire 
is always a symbol of destruction, and 
when brimstone is added in the symbol, 
the destruction is intensified; for burning 
brimstone is a most destructive agent 
against life in every form and degree, 
known to science to-day. 

Now what can any sane man think of 
the classes here referred to as subjects of 
the second death— who after a thousand 
years of most impartial trial, under most 
favorable circumstances, under the judgement 
of him who bought them from the 
first or Adamic condemnation (death), 
and who in spite of all this opportunity 
and favor are pronounced by the judge 
"abominable", and whose names he refused 
to write among those worthy of life? 
Can any sane man think or honestly claim 
that the sentence of second death pronounced 
against these, means that they 
shall die to sin and live to righteousness? 
Surely any not totally blinded by the great 
deceiver must see, that it is because they 
have refused to cease from sin, and refused 
to live in righteousness, that, as the 
"abominable" filth— pestilential, noxious, 



and contagious— they are destroyed in 
(Gehenna) the Second death— outside the 
New Jerusalem, even as the literal filth 
was destroyed in literal Gehenna outside 
the literal Jerusalem. 

Look again, and notice that of the holy 
ones it is written— They "shall not be 
hurt of the second death," and "On such 
the second death hath no power"— and 
ask yourself, how this could be, if, as this 
theory would teach, the second death 
means a ceasing from sin? If the second 
death is a ceasing from sin, it is a grand 
thing, and no one could be hurt by it; all 
would be benefited. In that case the 
saints would be the first to plunge in and 
cease from sin. The fact that on the 
saints the second death has no power, and 
that its power is wholly upon the "abominable" 
rejectors of divine favor, proves 
that it is not a blessing, but a curse— the 
second curse— that it is not a death to sin, 
but a death of the sinner, blotting him 
from existence because of wilful sin. 



R912 : page 4 

CHOOSE LIFE OR CHOOSE DEATH. 

We showed in the October '86 issue that 
the offer in the next age to the whole 
world, was typified in the offer of life or 
death made to Israel through Moses the 
typical lawgiver, which because of the 
weakness of the flesh they were totally unable 
to comply with. 

Now some one wants to know whether 
we think that any would choose death, 
when a full opportunity is granted to all in 
the next age, of taking their choice. We 
answer that if the question were put to 
them in that form, Whether do you choose 
life or death, all would undoubtedly 
choose life; but it will not be put in that 
form. In that trial, obedience will stand 
for life and disobedience for death. So it 
is now: a thief does not choose imprisonment 
nor does a murderer choose the gallows; 
but in knowingly and wilfully 
choosing those crimes they virtually are 
choosing the known penalties. Those 
who will accept of God's plan and choose 
well-doing will be choosing life, and those 
who choose otherwise will be choosing 



death, the declared and sure wages of sin. 
Those who shall experience the second 
death will doubtless not be expecting it. 
By disbelieving God's plain statements 
with reference to it, they will doubtless 
deceive themselves. Such are ever deceiving 
others and being deceived themselves, 
and doubtless the goodness and favor of 
God manifested toward them so long 
(during the Millennium) will lead them 
to believe as some now conclude, that 
God either could not, or would not 
"cut off" wilful sinners. The statement 
is, that they will be deceived 
(Rev. 20:7,8.) by following the 
same deceiver who beguiled Eve and 
who now seeks with the same lie to deceive 
the virgin of Christ— the Gospel 
Church. Doubtless his deception then as 
now will be based upon the same lie, "Ye 
shall not surely die." 

WHAT IT INVOLVES. 

Error is far reaching; one error serves 
as a foundation for another, and so it is 
with this one, "Ye shall not surely die." 
Looked at from one standpoint some 
might say that it could affect other doctrines 
little whether we claim that all will 
be saved everlastingly, or that a comparatively 
small number will be cut off in the 
second death. But such do not see the 
full logical outcome of the proposition; 
for the doctrine of the everlasting salvation 
of all,* in spite of the wills of some, 
proves either that God is so loving, that 
he cannot and would not execute his just 
sentence, "The soul that sinneth it shall 
die," or else that though desiring to carry 
out his sentence he is unable to destroy 
the [souls] beings that he has created. 

If God is unable from either of these 
causes to destroy in the second death, then 
he was unable to destroy in the first death, 
for the same reasons. And if unable to 
destroy them, or in other words, if they 
were not lost in the first death, then the 
Bible teaching that our Lord Jesus gave 
himself a ransom for all and thus saved the 
lost, is false; for if God could not (from 
any cause) destroy them, they were not 
lost and consequently were not redeemed. 

Look at it again from another standpoint 
and we will reach the same conclusion; 
namely, that the everlasting salvation 



of all, stands logically opposed to the 
doctrine of the ransom. And it is for this 
reason that those who deny the ransom 
always sooner or later claim universal 
everlasting salvation. 

None will question from the account of 
the Scriptures, that in the trial of the next 
age there will be some wilful sinners (Jer. 31:28-30; 
Isa. 65:20; Matt. 25:41,46; 
Rev. 20:12-15; 21:8,27; and 
Ezek. 20:29.). And these being on as 
fair and full a trial as Adam was, and with 
greater experience, will be as culpable as 
he, and as worthy of condemnation to 
death under the law, "The soul that sinneth 
it shall die." And since it is recorded 
that "Christ dieth no more," it follows 



*Be it remembered that the TOWER has constantly 
taught the salvation of all from the first death, 
their redemption and recovery by Christ from all 
that was lost in Adam, that thus rescued or saved 
all shall be brought to a full knowledge of the truth 
and then by obedience prove themselves worthy of 
everlasting life or by disobedience prove that they 
merit second death. 

R912 : page 5 

that not one of such condemned ones 
can be redeemed or ransomed as Adam 
was. And it logically follows that if God 
can excuse sinners and clear or acquit the 
guilty without a ransom [corresponding 
price], then, where the guilt will be even 
greater than Adam's, because of greater 
knowledge by experience, then God's 

R913 : page 5 

ways were not equal when he inflicted 
death as the penalty upon Adam and all 
his children, refusing to release them from 
its condemnation until he himself had 
provided the ransom. And if God can 
and will excuse many wilful sinners in the 
next age without a ransom, He could have 
forgiven the one sin of Adam without a 
ransom. Seeing this to be the logical 
conclusion of the theory of everlasting salvation 
of all, four out of five of its advocates 
deny the ransom, and the remainder 
must choose the one or the other position 
as soon as they come to see the two sides 



of the question and their bearing upon 

each other. We recognize the fact that 

God's dealings with our race in the past, 

in condemning sin and sinners, is his one 

unalterable law, which for the security 

and good of his creatures he will not permit 

even himself to set aside, and that 

when he would save mankind from the 

Adamic sin and penalty it must be by 

providing a ransom [a corresponding 

price] for the sinner, in the death of our 

Lord Jesus. This rule being unalterable 

it follows that the wilful sinner in the second 

trial will be condemned to death— 

the second death. And since divine Justice 

and Love could not grant more favorable 

conditions than they will have 

enjoyed, any further trial would be useless; 

and being useless, will not be granted. 

Hence there has been no ransom 

provided for those condemned in the second 

trial; and no ransom being given, 

their recovery from it is impossible. 

Further, notice that if the total number 
of those out of harmony with God in the 
end of the Millennial age, and therefore 
(by believing his lie) deceived by Satan into 
outward opposition (Rev. 20:8.), be 
but ten thousand out of all the billions 
then tried and tested finally, their ransom 
would cost the sacrifice of ten thousand 
redeemers, just as surely as the sin of one 
man cost the death of one as his corresponding 
price— each wilful sinner requiring 
one to pay his price and to redeem 
him. And then all this would be useless, 
since they could have no more favorable 
opportunity in a thousand trials, than God 
promises to all in the second trial. 

In conclusion then, The second death 
like the first is a penalty for wilful sin. It 
means the taking away of the gift of God, 
the taking away of life because not used 
in accordance with his will for the creature's 
good and the Creator's glory. In 
neither is the penalty completed in the 
process of dying, but in the sinner's remaining 
dead— without life. Had the 
penalty been completed in the dying, so 
that the culprit might then be awakened 
free from condemnation, no ransom would 
have been needed, for each sinner in dying 
would pay his own penalty. But no, 
the penalty was real and lasting; for six 
thousand years sinners have died and remained 
dead; and none have been able 



to escape the verdict of the Great Judge. 
There is only one hope of deliverance. It 
is based on the Bible testimony that 
Christ died for our sins, and redeemed us 
from sin and its penalty, death, by paying 
our penalty. And this is man's hope 
of release from the first sentence in due 
time. So surely as a ransom was needed 
from the first penalty, one would be no 
less necessary from the second death penalty. 
But that trial being complete, no 
ransom should or has been provided; 
hence the second death is final and 
irrevocable. 

Let us be on our guard, lest, As the 
serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, 
our minds should be corrupted [warped, 
twisted] from the simplicity which is in 
Christ. Note this simplicity: Life, God's 
gift to man, lost through sin— death passed 
upon all. Christ Jesus, God's gift, became 
a man and paid man's ransom, or 
corresponding price— he died for our sins 
and the sins of the whole world. God 
raised him from death to a higher nature 
and commissioned him to dispense the 
favor which his death secured for all, and 
has appointed the Millennial age for that 
great work of giving men another chance 
for life, under the same perfect, divine law 
which condemned and sentenced Adam; 
and the law, unchanged, still declares 
death to be the wages of sin, and life the 
wages of righteousness, and thus puts the 
lie upon all such statements as that "Ye 
shall not surely die." 



R913 : page 5 

THE ZEAL OF THINE HOUSE. 

"The zeal of thine house hath eaten me up; and 
the reproaches of them that reproached thee are 
fallen upon me."— Psa. 69:9. 

Zeal in the Lord's service is that eager 
arduous active interest in the Lord's plans 
and their development, which is begotten 
of sincerest love for the Lord and for all 
those dear to him. The soul that is really 
in love with the heavenly Bridegroom 
will most naturally express its devotedness 
in such activity. And while ardent love 
is in the heart and prompting to action, 



we cannot contentedly be otherwise than 
active. We will seek and we will find 
avenues for usefulness. Since the special 
work of the Gospel age is the selection 
and development of the church, our zeal 
and service, like that of the Lord and the 
Apostles, should be spent chiefly for the 
church— in searching them out and doing 
all in our power to develop, strengthen, 
and encourage them to persevere to the 
end in the narrow way of sacrifice. It is 
in this service of the house or church of 
God that the Psalmist declares that the 
zeal of the Lord's anointed is expended— 
"The zeal of thine house hath eaten me 
up"— hath consumed all my energies. 

As we engage in that service, a growing 
interest will increase the desire to be more 
and more active until in the end like our 
Lord we can say, The zeal of thine house 
hath eaten me up, hath consumed me. If 
we are following closely in the Master's 
footprints, we will find this consuming 
process going on and increasing from day 
to day. We will find his work consuming 
our time, our energies, our money, our 
reputation, our former earthly hopes and 
ambitions, and every talent we possess 
however great or small; and realizing 
how little it all is, even when judiciously 
used, the language of our hearts will be 
"O for a thousand tongues to sing 

My great Redeemer's praise, 

The glories of my God and King, 

The triumphs of his grace." 

And just as surely as the fire of zeal is 
brightly burning and consuming our sacrifice, 
we will realize also that the reproaches 
of the same class who reproached 
our Lord will fall upon us. The reproaches 
will come thick and fast particularly 
from the nominal church. The world 
will have little interest in either opposing 
or defending us, but will coolly regard us 
with indifference, perhaps think us fanatical 
extremists, and will not desire to associate 
with us lest a measure of the same 
reproach should attach to them. But the 
devotees of Babylon will not fail to point 
the finger of scorn, to shoot the arrows of 
calumny and to instigate open opposition 
against the little flock of the anointed 
cross-bearers. But blessed are those who 
shall endure unto the end, until the zeal 
of God's house has eaten them up, entirely 
consumed them. Those faithful unto 



death shall receive the crown of life. 

We should not be troubled then if we 
find that we are being used up in the 
Lord's service. Through zeal for the 
spread of his truth and the honor of his 
name do you find that your time is so used 
up that you scarcely have enough left 
for your personal necessities? that whereas 
you were once in better circumstances 
when your earnings all or nearly all were 
expended on self, you now find that gradually 
as the necessities of the work seem 
to need it, the hard earned savings of the 
years past are diminishing and with increasing 
prospects of larger demands? 
Do you find that your reputation as a 
Christian and as a man of sound common 
sense is about gone? Do you find that 
your present course if continued will put 
an end to the ambitions you once deemed 
of so much importance? Do you find 
your friends fewer, (but thank God, these 
are generally truer) than formerly? Do 
you find yourself often weary, your energies 
largely spent, and that physical 
strength is actually wearing out in the service, 
in doing what your hand finds to do 
with your might? Then you can truly 
say, The zeal of thy house is eating me 
up. And when your sacrifice is ended in 
the complete exhaustion of all your powers, 
you will have fought the good fight 
of faith, you will have finished your 
course; and as he who has called you is 
faithful, you shall receive the crown of life 
that fadeth not away. 

The measure of our zeal in the service 
is the measure of our love for the heavenly 
Bridegroom who is now looking for his 
jewels, for such as he desires to make his 
bride. And only those who prove by the 
sacrifice of earthly things their supreme 
love for the Lord, will be counted worthy 
of such honor and exaltation. If our harmony 
and sympathy with him and his 
great work for others is so great as to 
prompt us to sacrifice all other ambitions 
and hopes, even unto death, then we are 
giving most satisfactory evidence of our 
love and interest, and will most assuredly 
be chosen; and even now such may reckon 
themselves his bride elect. 

There is no punishment for those who 
do not manifest such zeal. Such service 
is not forced nor unduly urged upon any. 
The Lord does not want for his bride one 



who needs to be forced or even coaxed to 

engage with him in carrying out his plans. 

He wants such as from the heart, and not 

by constraint are in deepest love and sympathy 

with him. He will not take for his 

bride one whose heart is divided, or whose 

love is chilled, or who cannot enter heartily 

R914 : page 5 

into his plans, esteeming it a privilege 
to endure hardness in doing so. 

Those who do not manifest such zeal 
are simply showing themselves unworthy 
of this great favor to which they are called, 
and shall not be numbered among his 
jewels. The marriage of the Lamb is based 
on supreme love and tenderest devotion, 
a matter of choice and by no means 
of compulsion or constraint, and their 
hearts are most truly united long before 
the consummation of their hope. 

It is quite an erroneous idea that it is 
possible to be over zealous in the Lord's 
service. Yet such is the impression which 
many give who receive the truth, yet never 
allow it to spur them to more than ordinary 
activity. If we really appreciate 
the truth, it ought to arouse and utilize 
all the enthusiasm of our nature; not in 
noisy and unreasonable demonstration, 
neither in words only, but in unusual efforts 
by every method which we can devise. 
And if we do so, we will very soon 
find the reproaches of the lukewarm and 
indifferent cast upon us. 

Dearly beloved, let us examine ourselves 
by the tests which the Lord is applying to 
us, and he will soon show us how we personally 
stand in his estimation. And if 
we find that we are falling short of a full 
and complete sacrifice, let us strive yet 
more diligently to fully render that which 
we covenanted to give— our all. Yet let 
none be discouraged as they look at the 
steady steps and more rapid progress of 
Christians of maturer growth. The babe's 
effort to walk and the young child's unsteady 
steps are none the less appreciated 
by the Lord. With continued effort will 
naturally come the strength in due time. 
If you cannot command sufficient courage 
at first to do some parts of the work which 
cost much in the way of self-denial, let 
yourself come to it by degrees. Do something 
at first which you can do, and keep 



on gradually increasing your efforts and 

trying your strength, and while thus endeavoring 

to develop strength go to the 

Lord and ask for more. Ask him to give 

you a fuller realization of the privilege of 

engaging in the work and of suffering for 

the truth's sake. Tell him of your weaknesses 

and your desire and determination 

to overcome them by his help. Do you 

imagine for a moment that he will leave 

you to struggle alone with your infirmities, 

or allow you to be overcome by them 

when you thus lay hold upon his strength? 

Never! no never! 

"That soul which on Jesus hath leaned for repose 

He'll never, no never, desert to its foes. 
That soul, if all powers should endeavor to shake, 
He'll never, no never, no never forsake." 

None are so matured and so sure footed 
as to be able to tread steadily onward in 
the narrow way without constantly invoking 
and laying hold upon divine strength. 
Even our Lord sought frequent opportunities 
for private communion with the 
Father. And if he, the perfect one, needed 
divine help to enable him to sacrifice 
himself, how much more do we need to lay 
hold upon that power to carry us through. 

Watch then and pray that the fire of 
zeal may not go out until it has entirely 
consumed your sacrifice. And when the 
reproaches of them that reproached your 
Lord fall upon you rejoice in your privilege 
of showing your sympathy with his 
sufferings by sharing in the same to the 
extent of your opportunity. When for 
your sake he agonized in Gethsemane's 
Garden you were not there to speak a 
word of comfort. When he stood before 
the High Priest and false witnesses testified 
against him and the lawless authorities 
pronounced him guilty of death, you were 
not there to defend him. When they spat 
in his face and buffeted him and smote 
him with the palms of their hands and 
taunted and reviled him, you were not 
there to resent such treatment, or to give 
him even a look of sympathy. When 
they scourged him and derided him and 
planted the cruel crown of thorns upon 
his brow and nailed him to the cross you 
were not there to sympathize or pity or 
to appreciate the love that prompted to 
such suffering for you. But to fill up our 
measure of the sufferings now, manifests the 
same love which would then, had we fully 



comprehended the situation, have hastened 
to comfort and help so far as possible. 
It is our privilege to share some of the 
ignominy, some of the reproach, and the 
promptness and zeal with which we do it 
will manifest the strength of our devotion 
and love. Mrs. C. T. Russell. 



R914 : page 6 

RISEN WITH CHRIST. 



"If ye, then, be risen with Christ, seek those 
things which are above, where Christ sitteth on 
the right hand of God. Set your affections on 
things above, not on things on the earth; for ye 
are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in 
God."-Col. 3:1-3. 

It is evident that the apostle Paul is 
here addressing a particular class— not 
the world, nor mere believers, but that 
comparatively small class who have 
made a covenant with God of entire consecration 
to his service, even unto death. 
This class, he affirms, is dead (reckonedly), 
and his language also implies that 
they have (reckonedly) risen as new 
creatures, and from these two facts the 
apostle draws certain reasonable conclusions, 
and upon them bases a timely 
exhortation. 

Let us consider first the sense in 
which the consecrated are dead and 
risen, that we may clearly see our present 
position and its responsibilities. 
Once we were dead with Adam in trespasses 
and in sins. That is, we with all 
the rest of mankind were under the condemnation; 
the death sentence had 
passed upon us; and, as we sometimes 
say of a condemned criminal, "he is a 
dead man," although the sentence is not 
yet executed, so we were likewise all 
dead men— reckoned dead already. But 
being redeemed, purchased, from that 
condemnation, we, by faith in that transaction, 
passed from death unto life— from 
under God's condemnation of death, into 
his favor and into justification of life. 
And yet it was only a reckoning— a 
right or title to life, secured, and not yet 
the actual possession of it. 

In due time ("the times of restitution") 



that title would have been made 
good, had we not again lost it— disposed 
of it. None have lost it except those 
who have first accepted of it, and then 
presented themselves to God as living 
sacrifices— holy (because justified), and 
(therefore) acceptable unto him. (Rom. 12:1.) 
This covenant of sacrifice, even 
unto death, is the same covenant which 
Jesus made. All who make it, thus solemnly 
engage to die, to spend and surrender 
human life in God's service. By 
faith (i.e., reckonedly) we are risen 
from the Adamic condemnation (death); 
we have consecrated the life reckoned as 
restored; we have counted ourselves dead 
with Christ as actually we were dead 
with Adam; and further we reckon ourselves 
as though risen with Christ and 
now, like him, no longer human, but 
"new creatures," "partakers of the divine 
nature," and as though seated with 
him "in heavenly places." We are thus 
reckoning to ourselves all the promises 
of God in advance, because we realize 
that "It is a faithful saying: If we be 
dead with him we shall also live with 
him."— 2 Tim. 2:11,12. 

It is in this sense that the apostle 
speaks to us of being both dead and 
risen— dead and risen a second time: 
first dead through sin with Adam and 
redeemed and risen with him and all 
men to human perfection; but now dead 
with Christ our Redeemer as sharers in 
the sacrifice for sin, and risen with him 
as new creatures. 

Actually, we are not yet either dead or 
risen with Christ, but if our covenant 
was sincere, and if our faith in the 
promise of God, who raised up Christ 
from the dead, and that he will raise up 
us also, is firm, we may reckon the transaction 
as sure as though it were already 
actually performed, as though we were 
already in actual possession of the glory 
which shall be revealed in us. 

It is to these embryo "new creatures," 
before whom is set such a sure and glorious 
hope, that Paul gives counsel and 
exhortation, saying: "Mind the things 
above, not the things on the earth; for 
you [as a human being] died, and your 
life has been hidden with the Anointed 
One by God. When the Anointed One, 
our life, shall be manifested, then you 



also will be manifested with him in glory. 
Put to death, therefore, those members 
on the earth— fornication, impurity, 
passion, evil desire, and covetousness 
[money loving], which is idol-worship; 
on account of which things the wrath of 
God is coming [the "time of trouble"]. 

It would scarcely seem necessary to 
thus exhort those who have covenanted 
to become dead to all earthly things, 
even to the sacrifice of life itself; yet 
Paul saw the necessity and did not 
neglect the duty of faithfully warning 
those inclined to forget or ignore their 
covenant. We find him again writing 
to the Philippians, "Brethren, become 
joint-imitators of me, and watch those 
who are thus walking, as you have us 
for a pattern. For often I told you, and 
now even weeping, I say, many walk as 
the enemies of the cross of Christ; whose 
end [if they pursue that course to the 
end] will be destruction, whose God is 
the stomach, and their glory is their 
shame; they who are engrossed with 
earthly things. "-Phil. 3:17-19. 

Our acquaintance with the truth and 
the remembrance of our covenant is all 
that should be necessary to inspire zeal 
and constancy in the Master's service; 
but alas! such is not always the case, for 
many of those called to be saints we now 
see walking as men— minding earthly 
things, cumbering themselves with earthly 

R915 : page 6 

cares, hampering and fettering themselves, 

so as to hinder their usefulness in 

the great work of the present hour, and often 

cutting off all opportunity in this direction. 

The heart thus turned to earthly 

things, and the attention fastened there 

by increasing earthly cares, it becomes 

an easy matter to let the whole current 

of thought and interest turn toward 

earthly things— food, raiment and the 

provision for present and future emergencies. 

In every condition in life it is 

much easier to follow the bent of the old 

nature than to crucify it. 

The earthly things are present with 
us; the world and its ideas and interests, 
in which we also formerly shared, still 
draws us, and we must resist its spirit 
and influence, else we are in no sense 



overcomers. We must be willing to be 
thought peculiar, to be separated from 
their company and to bear the reproach 
of Christ as we go forward, steadily 
pushing aside the earthly interests, while, 
denying ourselves, we spend our time 
and strength and means for the advancement 
of the heavenly kingdom. 

If we are minding the heavenly 
things and not the earthly, we will be 
planning and arranging and endeavoring 
to devise ways and means to advance 
the Lord's work, to spread the 
knowledge of his truth. If our sphere 
is narrow, we will be seeking to enlarge 
it, just as a prudent business man will 
study to increase his business and to 
make the most out of it. 

Some will undoubtedly find that they 
cannot do a great deal in this direction, 
but in all probability they can do something; 
they can at least try. It is a 
very indolent and indifferent steward 
who concludes without an effort, that 
almost nothing, is the full measure of 
his ability to serve the Master. And 
while it is far from our province or intention 
to pass judgment upon any one, 
yet the aggregate of the effort put forth 
to advance the truth is far short of what 
it should be if all the consecrated were 
fully awake to their opportunities and 
privileges, minding chiefly the heavenly 
things, and studying how to most advance 
the heavenly interests, and giving 
to the earthly things only the needful 
thought and attention, such as decency, 
order and honesty require. If all the 
Lord's stewards were spending time, 
physical and mental effort, money, influence 
and every talent as wise stewards, 
and in full harmony with their 
covenant, we would be able to see much 
larger results than we do see. And yet 
the results show a degree of faithfulness 
which gives evidence of some effort on 
the part of many, and great effort on 
the part of some. Our desire here is 
not to discourage any, but to awaken to 
greater diligence the many who should 
be more active and faithful. 

Paul advised the church to take himself 
as an example, and to mark for imitation 
others who walk in harmony with 
their covenant. The daily walk and 
conversation of all the saints, and their 



untiring zeal in the Master's service, 
should be such as to be worthy of imitation. 
Paul's zeal for the truth would 
have made him active and useful in any 
position in life, and we may be sure that 
no position would have held him long 
which furnished no opportunities for the 
divine service to which he had consecrated 
all. He did not permit business 
or worldly prospects, or friends or foes 
to interfere. Nor did he take upon 
himself domestic cares to limit and fetter 
him in the service. Dearly beloved, 
mark Paul and all who so walk, and let 
your zeal abound yet more and more to 
the glory of God. Spend and be spent 
in the service. If you grow weary 
mentally and physically in the service, 
rejoice in the privilege of wearing out 
in it; for when worn out you shall receive 
the crown of life. 

To walk otherwise than in full accord 
with our profession is to walk to that 
extent as the enemies of the cross of 
Christ. To claim to be running for the 
heavenly prize, while actually grasping 
after and minding chiefly the earthly 
things, is to misrepresent the truth; and 
others who mark our course will do 
likewise, mistaking the way. Thus we 
would be misleaders and "enemies" or 
opposers. Let us faithfully push aside 
the earthly cares and ambitions, and 
run with zeal and patience to the end, 
taking heed that we be not stumbling-blocks 
in the way of other runners. If 
ye be risen with Christ, seek and set 
your affections on the things above, not 
on things on the earth; for your interests 
are heavenly. The earthly blessings 
of restitution, and all the good 
things in store for the redeemed natural 
man are not your future portion. Look 
into the exceeding great and precious 
promises of the blessings in store for 
the new creatures in Christ, that you 
may catch more of the inspiration of 
that glorious hope. Then forgetting 
the things behind, press toward the 
mark for the prize of the high calling of 
God in Christ Jesus. 



R954 : page 6 



Dr. S. G. Howe found that the parents 
of one hundred and forty-five, out of three 
hundred idiots, were habitual drunkards. 
He attributed one half of the cases of idiocy 
in the state of Massachusetts to intemperance, 
and he is sustained in his 
opinion by the most reliable authorities. 



R915 : page 6 

"WHOSE WIFE SHALL SHE BE?" 

"They which shall be accounted worthy to 
obtain [attain] that world [age] and the resurrection 
from the dead, neither marry nor are given 
in marriage, neither can [will] they die any 
more; for they are equal [like] unto the angels, 
and are children of God— being children of [by] 
the resurrection."— Luke 20:34-36. 

This passage seems to open up anew 
of late, and furnishes a light upon the 
future not elsewhere provided. We at 
one time held the view that the resurrection 
here referred to was the First 
Resurrection, the resurrection of THE 
CHURCH to spiritual perfection. But if 
so, the Greek word translated resurrection 
should be emphatic, so as to show 
that a special or particular resurrection 
is meant. But on critical examination, 
we find that anastasis as here used is 
not specially emphasized. Besides, as 
we examine the context it is evident 
that not the resurrected condition of the 
Church is discussed, but the resurrected 
condition of the World, as represented 
by the woman who had been married 
successively to the seven husbands. 
Our Lord's reply as above is an answer 
to the query, "In the resurrection, 
whose wife shall she be?" 

The Saducees with whom our Lord 
held this conversation were disbelievers 
in a resurrection. They held that death 
ended all existence forever, as much to 
mankind as to beasts; and they held up 
the case of this woman with seven husbands, 
as an argument to prove that if 
a resurrection should take place, it 
would produce an endless jangle by 
reason of mixed and confused social 
arrangements. 

Our Lord's answer is that they erred 



from not appreciating the power of God 
to control and arrange all the minutia, 
as well as the grander and greater features 
of his plan, and from not understanding 
the Scriptures. The Scriptures 
now opening up in the dawn of 
the approaching Day, disclose to us the 
fact that the world's resurrection (Greek 
anastasis— raising up) will be a gradual 
work covering a period of a thousand 
years, and not a momentary work as 
the Saducees and others, and ourselves 
until four years ago, supposed.* 

Our Lord's answer steps right over 
the Millennial Age or period of attaining 
perfection (resurrection), with the 
answer that they must learn to trust "the 
power of God." His explanation shows 
how it will be in that great everlasting 
future which stretches out beyond the 
Millennium, and to which the Millennial 
Age serves but as a gateway, to admit 
the willing and worthy, and to "cut off" 
the unwilling and disobedient. 

Thus viewed, mark the import of our 
Lord's words: "They which shall be 
accounted worthy to obtain that world 
[age] and the resurrection, neither marry 
nor are given in marriage." It is 
evident from a close examination that 
our Lord refers to a period after the 
world has been tried. The words 
"shall be accounted worthy," show that 
those referred to were not yet accounted 



*The resurrection (lifting to perfection) of the 
Gospel Church will be an instantaneous or momentary 
work, because it will consist only of 
"overcomers" who in the present life shall have 
been tried and found worthy. (1 Cor. 15:51,52 
—"We shall all be changed in a moment") 
But the world's trial or judgment belongs to the 
Millennium or Judgment age, and their resurrection, 
lifting up to perfection, will keep pace with 
their obedience under their trial, the one ending 
with the other in the close of that age— the willing 
or worthy being then fully lifted up, and all 
the unwilling or unworthy and "abominable" 
being cut off in the second death. 

R915 : page 7 

worthy; and that some future trial must 
be undergone by them, which would 



demonstrate their worthiness to attain 
the resurrection, and their right to live 
under the new order of things, where 
sin and sinners are inexcusable and will 
not be permitted. 

The Bible teaches that "in death there 
is no remembrance of God, and in the 
grave [Hebrew sheol, Greek hades,] none 
can give God thanks (Psa. 6:5); and 
that there is no knowledge, nor wisdom, 
nor device, in the grave [sheol, hades,] 
whither all go (Eccl. 9:10.) Hence we 
know that no progress can be made by 
these in attaining or being "counted 
worthy," until the great Redeemer shall 
become their Deliverer to set them free 
from the curse or penalty of the first failure, 
under the first trial, in Eden, and to grant 
each for himself a second trial under 
himself as Judge and Teacher. Thus 
Jesus' words teach a future trial for mankind 
in general, in which the woman 
and seven husbands who were already 
dead, and who were not believers in 
Christ, may have a part. For if the woman 
and her husbands and such like 
were not to have a further trial for attaining 
that world, in which they might 
be "accounted worthy," it certainly would 
have been in order for our Lord to have 
then and there stated the fact plainly. 
We know that some theologians of our 
day would from their erroneous views 
have answered quite differently. Instead 

R916 : page 7 

of saying those who "shall be [future] 
accounted worthy" to attain to the resurrection, 
they, would probably have 
said nothing about a resurrection and 
an age to come and a future trial, but 
would have stated it thus— Those who 
lived perfect lives before they died [that 
would be none] and who believed in and 
fully accepted Christ before they died 
[none of them] went at death [past tense] 
to heaven, while the others all went to a 
place of everlasting torture, where they 
will have too much pain to think about 
their marriage relationship. But, thus 
modern theologians differ in their teachings 
from the Great Master whom they 
claim as the author of their faith and 
teachings. Surely they have gone far 
from the truth, and are teaching for doctrines 



the theories and traditions of men. 
"LIKE UNTO THE ANGELS." 

The word "equal" here is a poor 
translation; the sense is like, as rendered 
above. See Diaglott and Young's Trans. 

Man in his perfection is "a little lower" 
than angels, a human, earthly being, 
while angels are spirit beings. The work 
of perfecting or raising up the fallen 
race to the perfection from which it fell, 
will not change man to a spirit-being 
such as angels are. 

But while men and angels are of different 
natures, they will be alike in some 
respects. The Lord mentions the particular 
point of likeness here referred 
to, viz., that they will no longer marry, 
neither will* they die thereafter. 

The thought is this, the trial or judgment 
of the Millennial age will be so complete 
and the lessons of obedience so well impressed 
upon men that only the "worthy" 
will attain to that condition of perfection 
and on these the lesson of the bitterness 
of sin and the blessedness of obedience 
will be so deeply impressed that eternity 
will not efface it, and they will never again 
choose sin; and consequently "neither 
will they die thereafter. " All who 
attain that age at all will be so, because 
all not "counted worthy," the great Judge 
will "cut off," or "destroy from among 
the people."— Acts 3:23. 

Now let us notice the likeness of men 
to angels, which will abolish marriage after 
the Millennium. Marriage is proper in 
this age. It is of divine arrangement. 
It is the method by which it pleased God 
to create a race— by creating one pair with 
whom he lodged the powers of procreation, 
to "multiply and to fill the earth." 
—Gen. 1:28. And our Lord signified 
his approval of marriage by his presence 
at the Cana wedding, and by his endorsement 
of the Mosaic law which prohibited 
the separation of man and wife. Therefore 
"Marriage is lawful in all etc." 
(Heb. 13:4.) even though this and other 
lawful things be generally inexpedient 
to the saints (1 Cor. 6:12.). See article, 
The Time is Short, February TOWER. 

Angels are probably without sex— neither 
male nor female as we use those terms, 
though like God generally referred to as 



masculine. Man as originally created in 
God's image was probably the same in 
that regard, like unto the angels. Afterward 
"male and female created he them" 
for the very purpose of thus filling or 
populating the earth. And the reasonable 
deduction is that when the earth shall become 
as the "Garden of Eden" and shall 
be fully populated, then the "filling of the 
earth" by the multiplying of the race will 
cease, according to the proper outworking 
of the plan of him who formed 
the perfect man into a perfect pair, for the 
purpose of filling the earth. And we inquire 
why God chose to make the man 
perfect in himself at "first," and then to 
sex him into twain, if it were not for an 
intimation and illustration of what the 
race shall be, when God's plans concerning 
it are full-filled? 

The fact that Adam was without companionship 
among the beasts, and that 
woman became his help-meet does not 
prove that he would not have been as happy 
among companions like himself as originally 
created. Angels are surely meet 
companions for each other, yet not male 
and female. But in the plan God had in 
view, of producing a race from one, who in 
trial would represent all, in order that by 
one also he might redeem all, prevented 
the creation of a companion like himself 
and made proper the division of the one 
into two, mutually adapted to the various 
necessities of the situation. 

So then our Lord's words teach us, that 
when the restitution age and its restoring 
or resurrecting work are complete, all who 
being worthy shall be thus perfected, shall 
be as Adam was at first— in regard to sex, 
and freedom from death— "like unto 
the angels." 

These worthy ones will be "children of 
God,"— becoming such by the resurrection. 
To appreciate this we must remember 
God's manner of using the word 
"children". Only those who bear his 
image and are in harmony with Him, does 
he recognize as His children; others who 
are impure and disobedient and who bear 
the image of Satan, are called "children 
of wrath," "children of the devil," etc. 
In accordance with this, angels are called 
"sons of God," and Adam in his first 
estate (sinless) is called a "son of God," 
and we though not actually released from 



the imperfection are reckoned perfect, being 

justified by faith, our acceptableness 

being in and through merits and perfections 

of our Lord Jesus imputed to us. 

Yet in the fullest sense God will not recognize 

us as sons until our Lord shall present 

us actually perfect before the Father 

in the end of the Gospel age. Then we 

shall in the fullest sense enter into the fullness 

of sonship.— Compare Jude 24,25; 

Col. 1:22,23,28; 2 Cor. 4:14; 5:1-6. 

So too it will be with the world, in the 
Millennial age. Though God has planned 
the work in its every particular, and 
though he so loved the world while sinners 
as to give his Son for their redemption 
and restitution, yet he will not recognize 
them as children, until the "worthy" 
ones have been perfected (raised up to perfection) 
in the end of that age. Meantime 
the world can only recognize God as their 
Father by faith, aspiring to be counted 
worthy to come to that perfect condition 
in which alone they can be recognized as 
God's children, and dealt with as such. 
To be recognized as God's child is to be 
recognized as one entitled to the "liberty 
of the sons of God"— freedom from pain, 
death, etc., etc. Until that grand consummation 
is reached the world can deal 
with the Father only through the Royal 
Priesthood of which our Lord is the head 
or High Priest. 

When this Royal Priest has completed 
the work of judging the world, and shall 
have destroyed evil in every form (including 
wilful sinners of whom Satan is chief) 
he will present to the Father perfect and 
complete, all those counted worthy to attain 
to that age and full perfection of being. 
He will present them then (even as 
the Gospel little flock now) blameless and 
unreprovable before him. (Phil. 2:15; 
Col. 1:22.). Their perfection will be 
that of manhood, while ours is that of the 
new nature to which we were begotten as 
joint-heirs with Christ. (2 Pet. 1:4.). 
Thus the Royal Priest and King will deliver 
up the Kingdom of earth to God 
even the Father, that God may be "all in 
all." God will then be recognized fully 
by all his creatures as they could not recognize 
him while in imperfection and 
sin. And all will then realize that the 
plan of salvation from first to last was of 
the Father and by the Father, however he 



may have used others as co-workers by 

whom to accomplish his glorious and successful 

plan. 

The figure of husband and wife is used 
frequently to represent the closeness of 
union and interest existing between the 
Lord and the church; particularly as 
showing the period of interest before and 
at the time of their uniting: but in no 
case does the figure go farther, to represent 
anything akin to motherhood on the 
part of the church. On the contrary the 
figure, generally used in reference to the 
period beyond our union, represent the 
twain as one— Head and Body; the Prophet, 
Priest and King of the world, during 
its age of trial. 

So then we, in the light of the dawning 
Day, seeing more clearly the teachings of 
the Scriptures and the power of God to 
be revealed during the age of restitution, 
can appreciate the Lord's answer to the 
Sadducees' question— Whose wife of the 
seven husbands shall she be?— in a way 
which it was not possible for them to understand. 
We see, that this woman and 
her husbands, and all other men and women 
who during the Millennial age of 
trial may be proved worthy to reach perfection 
and to enter upon the great Eternity 
beyond, will no longer be male and 
female, but reaching perfection— full restitution 
—each individual will be complete 
and perfect in himself, as Adam was 
before made twain. 



*We here prefer will, or may, rather than can 
as the translation of dunamai, because it gives 
the thought of the text more clearly. Can, would 
make it appear that even though they should 
desire to die, they would be unable to do so; 
whereas the thought is that life is a blessing 
which none would willingly part with, but which 
now, because of sin and its penalty, men cannot 
hold on to. 



R917 : page 7 

HIGHWAY OF HOLINESS. 

C. NORTHRUP. 



"Continuing instant in prayer." (Rom. 12:12.) 
To continue steadfastly in prayer 
is of vital importance. Prayer is necessary 
to the continuance of our spiritual 
life. We cannot continue alive to God 
without prayer any more than we can 
continue to live without breathing. We 
should have stated seasons of prayer, and 
should be continually in the spirit of 
prayer. There is so much for which to 
pray, that we cannot afford to be slack in 
this Christian duty. We are dependent 
upon our heavenly Father for everything 
we need, and it is our privilege to come 
to Him like little children, and to ask 
Him to supply our wants. Are we sorrowful? 
we can go to him for comfort. 
Are we tempted? we can pray for grace to 
overcome. Are we in danger? we can 
cry to Him for help and deliverance. Are 
we in distress? we can seek relief at his 
hands. Are we poor, broken-hearted, despised 
or persecuted? He can supply our 
necessities, heal our wounded spirits, and 
clothe us with blessing and salvation. 
Does the answer to our prayer seem to 
linger; let us not be discouraged and give 
up, but persevere till the desires of our 
hearts be fulfilled, so far as they are according 
to the will of God. Let us continue 
steadfastly in prayer both for ourselves 
and for others, and for all things 
which pertain to the coming of the kingdom 
of God, when his will shall be done 
in earth as it is done in heaven. 

"Distributing to the necessity of saints." 
(Rom. 12:13.) As a rule, God's saints 
are poor. But some are better supplied 
than others. Those who have more than 
they need should share with their brethren 
in necessity. By so doing they benefit 
themselves more than those whom they 
supply. Moreover they know not how 
soon matters may be reversed, so that 
they may need the benefactions of those 
whom they had relieved. By this interchange 
of benefits we show that we are 
members one of another. In ministering 
to our brethren in Christ we minister to 
Christ himself. What saint would not regard 
it an inestimable privilege to minister 
to the blessed Master? It is blessed 
to receive, but it is more blessed to give. 
By distributing to the necessity of saints, 
brotherly love is demonstrated and nurtured 
and increased. The giver and the 



receiver are drawn more closely together. 
It also calls forth thanksgiving and glory 
to God from the recipients, and checks 
the spirit of selfishness in the donors. 
[The greatest necessities to the saints are 
spiritual ones;— THE TRUTH therefore is 
the greatest gift to such; her price is 
above rubies. Hence while doing them 
good in any way we can let us not forget 
their greatest necessity and our grandest 
opportunity of ministering to it.— EDITOR 
Z.W.T.] 

"Given to hospitality." (Rom. 12:13.) 
Hospitality is the "reception and entertainment 
of strangers or guests without 
reward, or with kind and generous liberality." 
It is the opposite of narrow-heartedness 
and selfishness. Abraham 
showed hospitality when he entertained 
the three angels with the best he had. 
Lydia showed hospitality, when, after her 
baptism, she besought Paul and his companions, 
saying, "If ye have judged me 
to be faithful to the Lord, come into my 
house and abide there," and constrained 
them. Publius showed hospitality to Paul 
and his shipwrecked companions, when 
he received them and lodged them three 
days courteously. The Apostle Paul says, 

R917 : page 8 

"Be not forgetful to entertain strangers; 
for thereby some have entertained angels 
unawares." And the Apostle Peter exhorts 
the brethren to "use hospitality one 
to another without grudging." We lose 
nothing by the practice of hospitality. 
There are a thousand ways in which the 
Lord can repay us for our generosity. 
But above all, He enriches us with his 
grace. Our hearts are made better; our 
souls are ennobled. 

"Bless them that persecute you; bless 
and curse not." (Rom. 12:14.) It requires 
grace to bless those who persecute us, but 
grace shall be given if we seek it. The 
Spirit of Christ teaches us to return good 
for evil. Nothing will so break down those 
who ill-treat us as to manifest a Christian 
spirit towards them. Moreover, by so 
acting we adorn the doctrine of Christ 
which we profess. God is thereby pleased, 
and the religion of Christ is commended 
to the world. We should bless others 
as we hope to be blessed of God. To 



curse our fellow-mortals does not become 
us, even though they may have sorely 
wronged us. God has called us that we 
should inherit blessing, though we had 
done worse to Him than our enemies 
could do to us. Amiable is that Christ-like 
spirit which returns blessing for cursing. 
Valiant is the Christian soldier who 
can face the enemy with weapons of peace. 
Victor indeed is he who so rules his own 
spirit as not only to bear reproach, but so 
as to bless the reproacher.— Dawn of 
Morning. 



R917 : page 8 

SHAMEFUL TRAFFIC IN THE CHURCH 
OF ENGLAND. 

A London correspondent writes as follows: 
"The public are not probably aware 
that the system of purchase in the church 
of England is as rife at the present time 
as it ever was in the army. Some interesting 
disclosures on the subject appeared 
in the Pall Mall Gazette recently, from 
the chairman of the 'National Committee 
for Abolishing Purchase in the Church.' 
According to his statement, the traffic had 
almost become a scandal. Livings are 
offered in the most open way by clerical 
agents, the prices are stated in the advertisements, 
and the incomes and advantages 
are set forth as matters usually are 
in the bills of auctioneers. For instance, 
the following advertisement recently appeared 
in a paper:— 

'"Bershire: First presentation, or a 
moiety of advowson; gross income from 
tithe rent charge, and about 230 acres of 
glebe, $8,780 per year. Four beautiful 
churches, about two miles apart. The 
parish can be worked with the assistance 
of two curates. Superior residences, numerous 
principal and secondary bedrooms, 
etc' The very desirable rectory of Crayford, 
near Dartford, has, he says, been 
very much offered for sale.— The net income 
is nearly $5,000 per year. The rectory 
has 'well timbered pleasure grounds.' 
The price was— there is no knowing what 
it now may be-$42,500 in March, 1882. 

"Among the big properties there is also 
'a very valuable and desirable rectory' 



within a short drive of some of the most 
favorable parts of the river Thames. Net 
nominal value of the living, close upon 
$6,000. 'A beautiful church rebuilt and 
enlarged under Sir Gilbert Scott. There 
is a prospect of immediate possession.' 
The clerical agent has much pleasure in 
calling attention to this unusually choice 
property; $60,000 is the price asked for 
it. The same clerical agent offered a rectory 
in the Diocese of St. Alban's; net 
value upwards of $5,000 per annum; price, 
$52,500. Also a very valuable living in 
Yorkshire, of the net value of about $7,000 
a year; price, with a prospect of immediate 
possession, $75,000. For the pastoral 
charge of Yalding, near Maidstone, a very 
old standing dish of certain clerical agents, 
$60,000 was asked, 'subject to the life of 
the present incumbent in his 81st year.' 

"Numerous other instances are given of 
equally fat "livings," which are at the 
disposal of the highest bidder. The publication 
of these facts will not, of course, 
check the traffic in the least; but it will 
undoubtedly give an impetus to the agitation 
for the disestablishment of the 
church, which is fast taking hold in this 
country." 



R917 : page 8 

MARVELS OF PROVIDENCE. 

A celebrated skeptical philosopher of 
the last century— the historian Hume- 
thought to demolish the credibility of the 
Christian Revelation by the concise argument: 
"It is contrary to experience that 
a miracle should be true, but not contrary 
to experience that testimony should be 
false." Contrary to experience that phenomena 
should exist which we cannot 
trace to causes preceptible to the human 
sense, or conceivable by human thought! 
It would be much nearer the truth to say 
that within the husbandman's experience 
there is no phenomena which can be rationally 
traced to anything but the instant 
energy of creative power. 

Did this philosopher ever contemplate 
the landscape at the close of the year, 
when seeds, and grains, and fruits have 
ripened, and stalks have withered, and 



leaves have fallen, and winter has forced 

her icy curb even into the roaring jaws of 

Niagara, and sheeted half a continent in 

her glittering shroud, and all this teeming 

vegetation and organized life are locked 

in cold and marble obstruction; and, after 

week upon week, and month upon month, 

have swept, with chilly rain, and howling 

storm, over the earth, and riveted their 

crystal bolts upon the door of nature's sepulchre 

—when the sun at length begins to 

wheel in higher circles through the sky, 

and softer winds to breathe over the melting 

snows— did he ever behold the long-hidden 

earth at length appear, and soon 

the timid grass peep forth; and anon the 

autumnal wheat begin to paint the field, 

and velvet leaflets to burst from purple 

buds, throughout the reviving forest, and 

then the mellow soil to open its fruitful 

bosom to every grain and seed dropped 

from the planter's hand; buried, but to 

spring up again, clothed with a new, mysterious 

being; and then, as more fervid 

suns inflame the air, and softer showers 

distil from the clouds, and gentler dews 

string their pearls on twig and tendril, 

R918 : page 8 

did he ever watch the ripening grain and 

fruit, pendent from stalk, and vine, and 

tree; the meadow, the field, the pasture, 

the grove, each after its kind, arrayed in 

myriad-tinted garments, instinct with circulating 

life; seven millions of counted 

leaves on a single tree, each of which is 

a system whose exquisite complication puts 

to shame the shrewdest cunning of the human 

hand; every planted seed and grain 

which has been loaned to the earth, compounding 

its pious usury thirty, sixty, 

a hundred fold, all harmoniously adapted 

to the sustenance of living nature, 

the bread of a hungry world; here a tilled 

cornfield whose yellow blades are nodding 

with the food of man; there, an unplanted 

wilderness— the great Father's 

farm— where he "who hears the raven's 

cry" has cultivated, with his own hand, 

his merciful crop of berries, and nuts, and 

acorns, and seeds, for the humbler families 

of animated nature, the solemn elephant, 

the browsing deer, the wild pigeon 

whose fluttering caravan darkens the 

sky; the merry squirrel who bounds from 



branch to branch, in the joy of his little 
life— has he seen all this? Does he see it 
every year and month and day? Does he 
live, and move, and breathe, and think, 
in this atmosphere of wonder— himself the 
greatest wonder of all, whose smallest fibre 
and faintest pulsation is as much a 
mystery as the blazing glory of Orion's 
belt? If he has, and if he does, then let 
him go, in the name of heaven, and say 
that it is contrary to experience that the 
august Power which turns the clods of the 
earth into the daily bread of a thousand 
million souls, could feed five thousand in 
the wilderness.— Edward Everett. 



R918 : page 8 

A RANSOM-IN WHAT SENSE? 

Those who hold to the Word of God 
on the subject of the RANSOM, have no 
need whatever to go outside of that word 
for full denunciation of all who oppose it. 
Our Lord and the apostles use words 
stronger and severer than we would otherwise 
feel at liberty to use. But it is right, 
nay, a duty incumbent upon us, to apply 
their words "damnable heresy" etc., 
where they belong— to the doctrine of 
NO RANSOM, to which they apply them. 
What else is a teacher's duty? He has 
no other duty. He must not speak his 
own opinions, and he must not neglect to 
call attention to the errors which the inspired 
apostles fortold and described, 
though of course the advocates of such 
errors will not appreciate either the 
apostle's words or the faithfulness of those 
who call attention to them. This, too, 
is what we must expect. These think the 
only possible application of the apostle's 
words uncharitable. So also the great 
Master of the apostles was considered uncharitable, 
when He declared that there 
was only one door into the sheepfold. No 
other name is given under heaven or 
among men whereby we must be saved, 
and no other way than by the ransom. 
All who attempt to lead to salvation in 
any other way are branded by the Lord 
"thieves and robbers." So long, then, 
as we have strength, we shall endeavor to 
point out to these leaders, and those led 



by them, that they are building on a sandy 
foundation, without the only ROCK for a 
foundation, and that consequently, all 
their faith building reared thereon, must 
sink, and ultimately fall. 

Yet we must be content, as were the 
Apostles and the Master himself, to be 
counted of such their enemies, because we 
tell them the truth. But even at this cost 
thank God, we are able to save some from 
the snare of the "great Adversary"— 
"that old serpent." 

We cite the no ransom advocates to 
1 Tim. 2:6., which alone out of hundreds 
of texts, should convince them of their 
error. It is right to the point, and no 
amount of twisting can turn it aside. 
Will they not take it up, and convince 
and convict themselves of the "damnable 
heresy" of their teachings, and abandon 
the heresy, and accept the truth? Why 
not? We know this would cost the overthrow 
of much of the error built upon 
their sandy foundation, and we know that 
this would be hard for the self-willed to 
do, but is it not the best thing they can 
do,— turn right around, and confess the 
error of their teachings, since they left the 
rock, and return to it? But if they have 
done this willingly— if they have knowingly 
and deliberately counted the blood 
of the covenant wherewith once they had 
been sanctified, common, (Heb. 10:29.) 
denying its redeeming and sin-cleansing 
power, such, we know, will not return, 
for the Apostle declares their repentance 
"impossible." (Heb. 6:4.) But doubtless 
some, we hope many, of the deceived 
ones are merely blinded, and have not 
wilfully rejected the only gateway to the 
fold of God, and to lasting life. 

These no ransom advocates, by the way, 
will never admit that they deny it; but 
claim to believe in a ransom in some other 
sense, just as if there could be any other 
sense than the one— a price instead of— 
"a corresponding price." We request 
them to take that text (1 Tim. 2:6.) 
with its connections, examine the word 
ransom therein in the Greek and in the 
Syriac, as well as in the English, and 
please show in WHAT sense they believe in 
the ransom therein taught. It is high time 
for honest men who do not wish to be deceived, 
who think the word ransom as 
here used, may have a sense different 



from bought, to examine the matter, and 
find out to a certainty what it does mean. 
It not only meant bought, but bought 
with a price which CORRESPONDED to the 
thing purchased— a life for a life, a being 
(soul) for a being, in the sense of instead 
of or in the place of. We hope they will 
not dodge the question by telling us what 
they think the text does not mean, but 
take up the text and handle it thoroughly 
and show in WHAT SENSE "the man Christ 
Jesus gave himself a corresponding price 
for all." Handle this text thoroughly 
and honestly, and accept of its teachings 
as final, and you accept of the ransom in 
the same sense we do,— the only sense 
which lutron and antilutron have. There 
is no getting around this text. If they 
are resolved not to accept of its testimony, 
it would be far more honorable to deny it 
and reject it as uninspired, and cast it 
away; and with it all those Scriptures 
which teach that our Lord was the ransom 
or substitute for all men, giving for them 
the thing which they had lost all right to, 
—a "corresponding price." 


