From Our Readers
Procrastination  The article “Procrastination​—The Thief of Time” (April 8, 1995) was written in a practical and humorous way. As I read it, I found myself laughing at myself, since I have the terrible habit of procrastinating.
F. B. H., Brazil
I have been a chronic procrastinator most of my life, so this was timely information for me. It was well written, and I plan to use the information to help me structure my time better. Often I have wanted to write a letter of thanks for different articles and never got it done. Now I finally have accomplished that!
M. H., United States
I was leafing through the magazine when I noticed the article. I read the introduction, thinking I would read the rest of the article later. But the opening words said: “Stop! Don’t put this article down!” I realize now that I have allowed myself to be robbed of time because of procrastination.
A. E., Italy
I am a tailor, and procrastination had been a way of life for me. I ignored making lists, delegating at the appropriate time, and planning for interruptions. But now I have learned to put your suggestions to use, and I am enjoying the rewards.
S. N., Nigeria
Last Days  As a full-​time evangelizer, I would like to thank you for our journals. As I was reading the featured series of articles in the April 22, 1995, issue, “Are These the Last Days?,” I thought to myself, ‘How clear, direct, and well illustrated these articles are!’ The layout, superb photography, and captions truly brought the points home and made the articles easy to read and comprehend. It was a delight to offer such material to our neighbors!
J. B., United States
Shingles  I read your article “Shingles​—Coping With the Pain.” (April 22, 1995) Three days later I developed a skin rash that closely resembled the description of shingles in your article. I went to the doctor and told him I thought I might have shingles. Sure enough, he told me to “go to the head of the class”​—my diagnosis was correct! Since the disease was discovered in an early stage, he said I would be spared much of the pain that most shingles patients get. Thanks for your article!
K. B., United States
Matreshka  Thank you for the article “Matreshka​—What a Doll!” (April 22, 1995) As I read it, I was struck by the way it was written. The photos are beautiful! I have been fascinated by this doll since I was little, but I did not know anything about its origin. Now I’ll have to persuade someone to buy one for me!
M. T., Italy
Abortion  The article “Young People Ask . . . Abortion​—Is It the Answer?” caught my attention. (March 8, 1995) Twenty-​four years ago, when I became pregnant at 15 years of age, I experienced the same flood of emotions as the girls mentioned in the article. The baby’s father encouraged me to have an abortion, but I decided to have my baby. My priest wanted me to give my baby up for adoption. I never set foot in the Catholic Church again! My parents, though, were supportive. I began thinking about giving my baby a solid spiritual upbringing. When Jehovah’s Witnesses came to our house, I accepted a Bible study and was soon baptized. Today I am happily married. And my son? He is serving at the headquarters of Jehovah’s Witnesses. I shudder to think about the first alternative​—abortion. It is not the answer!
G. J., United States

