





LIFE STORY
A Lifetime of Lessons From Our Grand Instructor
AS TOLD BY FRANCO DAGOSTINI

ARMED checkpoints, burning barricades, cyclones, civil wars, and evacuations. Those are some of the hazards my wife and I faced in the pioneer and missionary work. Still, we wouldn’t trade our way of life for anything else! Through it all, Jehovah has supported and blessed us. As our Grand Instructor, he has also taught us valuable lessons.​—Job 36:22; Isa. 30:20.



THE EXAMPLE OF MY PARENTS

In the late 1950’s, my parents emigrated from Italy to Kindersley, in Saskatchewan, Canada. Shortly afterward, they learned the truth, and it became the center of our lives. I remember that, as a child, I spent long days in the ministry with my family, so I sometimes jokingly say that I “auxiliary pioneered” at the age of eight!




With my family, about 1966



My parents were poor; yet, they set a fine example in sacrificing for Jehovah. For instance, in 1963 they sold many of their belongings to raise money to attend the international convention in Pasadena, California, U.S.A. In 1972 we moved some 1,000 kilometers (about 620 mi) to Trail, British Columbia, Canada, to help in the Italian field. My father worked as a janitor. He turned down promotions so that he could focus on spiritual activities.
I am grateful for the example my parents set for me and my three siblings. That laid a solid foundation for my theocratic training, which included a lifelong lesson: If I seek the Kingdom first, Jehovah will look after me.​—Matt. 6:33.



A FIRST TASTE OF FULL-TIME SERVICE

In 1980, I married Debbie, a beautiful sister with clear spiritual goals. We wanted to enter full-time service, so Debbie started pioneering three months after our wedding. One year into our marriage, we moved to a small congregation where there was a need, and I joined her in the pioneer service.




On our wedding day, 1980



In time, we became discouraged and decided to move away. First, though, we spoke with the circuit overseer. He lovingly but honestly told us: “You are part of the problem. You are focusing on the negative aspects of your situation. Instead, if you look for the positive things, you will find them.” It was just the counsel we needed. (Ps. 141:5) We immediately applied it and soon realized that there were, in fact, many positive aspects. Several in the congregation wanted to do more for Jehovah, including young ones and some who had unbelieving mates. That was a powerful lesson for us. We learned to look for the good and to wait on Jehovah to correct a situation that may seem challenging. (Mic. 7:7) We regained our joy, and things improved.
The instructors in our first pioneer school had served in foreign assignments. As they showed slides and spoke of the challenges and the blessings they had experienced, they kindled our desire to serve as missionaries. So we concluded that we wanted to take up this service.




At a Kingdom Hall in British Columbia, 1983



To work toward that goal, in 1984 we moved to French-speaking Quebec, over 4,000 kilometers (2,485 mi) away from British Columbia. That meant embracing a whole new culture and language. Another challenge was that we were often low on funds. One time, we subsisted by gleaning leftover potatoes in a farmer’s field. Debbie got very creative with preparing potato dishes! Despite the challenges, we focused on persevering with joy. Moreover, we saw that Jehovah was looking after us.​—Ps. 64:10.
One day, we received an unexpected telephone call. It was an invitation to serve at Canada Bethel. We had previously applied for Gilead School, so we had mixed emotions about Bethel service. But we accepted the invitation. When we arrived, we asked Brother Kenneth Little, a member of the Branch Committee, “What about our Gilead applications?” He replied, “We’ll cross that bridge when we come to it.”
One week later, we were at that bridge because Debbie and I were invited to attend Gilead. So we had a decision to make. Brother Little told us: “No matter what you choose, on some days you might wish you had chosen the other. One path is not better; Jehovah can bless either.” We accepted the invitation to Gilead, and over the years, we have seen the truth of Brother Little’s advice. We’ve often quoted his words to others who have had to choose between assignments.



LIFE AS MISSIONARIES





(Left) Ulysses Glass
(Right) Jack Redford



We were thrilled to be among the 24 students enrolled in the 83rd class of Gilead that was held in Brooklyn, New York, in April 1987. Brothers Ulysses Glass and Jack Redford were our primary instructors. Five months flew by, and we graduated on September 6, 1987. We were assigned to Haiti, along with John and Marie Goode.




In Haiti, 1988



Gilead missionaries had not been sent to Haiti since 1962 when the last of them were expelled. Three weeks after graduation, we found ourselves serving in Haiti, deep in the mountains, with a small congregation of 35 publishers. We were young and inexperienced, and we were by ourselves in the missionary home. The people were impoverished, and most could not read. During those early missionary days, we experienced civil unrest, coups d’état, burning barricades, and cyclones.
We could learn much from the resilient, joyful brothers and sisters in Haiti. Many had a hard life, but they loved Jehovah and the ministry. One elderly sister could not read; yet, she knew about 150 scriptures by heart. Everyday conditions strengthened our conviction to keep preaching the Kingdom message as the only solution for mankind’s problems. It warms our heart to see how some of our early Bible students came to serve as regular pioneers, special pioneers, and elders.
While in Haiti, I met Trevor, a young Mormon missionary, and we had the opportunity to discuss the Bible on a few occasions. Years later, I received an unexpected letter from him. He wrote: “I am getting baptized at an upcoming assembly! I want to return to Haiti and serve as a special pioneer in the same area where I was a Mormon missionary.” He did just that for many years, along with his wife.



EUROPE​—THEN AFRICA





Working in Slovenia, 1994



We were assigned to serve in a part of Europe where the Kingdom work was opening up. In 1992 we arrived in Ljubljana, Slovenia, near where my parents were raised before they moved to Italy. War was still raging in areas of the former Yugoslavia. The branch in Vienna, Austria, as well as the offices in Zagreb, Croatia, and Belgrade, Serbia, had been overseeing the work in the region. Now each independent republic was to have its own Bethel arrangement.
That meant adapting to yet another language and culture. The locals would say, “Jezik je težek,” which means “The language is difficult.” How true that was! We admired the loyalty of brothers and sisters who readily accepted organizational adjustments, and we took note of how Jehovah blessed them. Once again, we saw how Jehovah always lovingly corrects matters and at the right time. Our years in Slovenia reinforced many lessons we had learned and taught us new ones.
But more changes were ahead. In 2000 we were assigned to Côte d’Ivoire, in West Africa. Then in November 2002, because of civil war, we were evacuated to Sierra Leone. An 11-year civil war there had just ended. It was difficult to leave Côte d’Ivoire so abruptly. However, the lessons we had learned helped us to keep our joy.
We focused on the productive territory and on our loving brothers and sisters, who had endured years of war. They were materially poor, but they wanted to share what they had. One sister offered Debbie some clothes. When Debbie hesitated to accept, the sister insisted, saying: “During the war, brothers in other lands supported us. Now it’s our turn to help.” We made it our goal to imitate their example.
We eventually returned to Côte d’Ivoire, but simmering tensions there exploded once more. So in November 2004, we were evacuated by helicopter, fleeing with only one 10-kilogram (22-lb) bag each. We slept on the floor at a French army base for the night, and we were flown to Switzerland the next day. When we arrived at the branch at about midnight, the Branch Committee and the Ministerial Training School instructors along with their wives warmly welcomed us with many hugs, a hot meal, and lots of Swiss chocolate. We were deeply touched.




Addressing refugees in Côte d’Ivoire, 2005



We were temporarily assigned to Ghana and then back to Côte d’Ivoire after the civil unrest had calmed down. The kindness of the brotherhood helped us through these unsettling evacuations and temporary assignments. Debbie and I agreed that although such brotherly love is the norm in Jehovah’s organization, we would never take it for granted. In fact, even those turbulent times turned out to be a valuable part of our training.



TO THE MIDDLE EAST





In the Middle East, 2007



In 2006 a letter from world headquarters informed us of a new assignment in the Middle East. Once again, that meant new adventures, challenges, languages, and cultures. There was much to learn in this politically and religiously charged environment. We loved the variety of languages in the congregations and saw the unity that results from following theocratic direction. We admired the brothers because most of them courageously endured opposition from family members, schoolmates, workmates, and neighbors.
We attended the 2012 special convention in Tel Aviv, Israel. This convention was the first time that Jehovah’s people in the region had assembled in such a large number since Pentecost 33 C.E. What a memorable occasion!
During those years, we were sent to visit a country where our work is restricted. We brought some of our literature, shared in the field ministry, and attended small assemblies. Heavily armed militia and checkpoints were everywhere, but we felt safe as we discreetly moved about with the few publishers.



BACK TO AFRICA





Preparing a talk in Congo, 2014



In 2013 we received a very different assignment​—to serve at the branch in Kinshasa, Congo, a vast country rich in natural beauty but plagued by extreme poverty and often beset by armed conflict. Initially we said, “We know Africa; we’re ready.” But we still had so much to learn, especially when it came to traveling with limited infrastructure. We found many positive things to focus on, which included the perseverance and joy of the brothers despite economic hardship, their love for the ministry, and their effort to attend meetings and assemblies. We saw firsthand how the Kingdom work moved ahead only because of Jehovah’s support and blessing. Our years of full-time service in Congo left a deep impression on us and enlarged our extended family.




Preaching in South Africa, 2023



At the end of 2017, we arrived in yet another assignment​—South Africa. This is the largest branch we have ever served in, and even our Bethel assignments were new to us. Once again, there was much to learn but past lessons helped to guide us. We love the many brothers and sisters who have been enduring for decades. And it is amazing to see the Bethel family working in unity despite the variety of races and cultures. Jehovah’s blessing of peace is evident, as his people put on the new personality and apply Bible principles.
Over the years, Debbie and I have received exciting assignments, adapted to different cultures, and learned new languages. It has not always been easy, but we have constantly felt Jehovah’s loyal love through his organization and the brotherhood. (Ps. 144:2) We trust that our full-time service training has made us better servants of Jehovah.
I treasure my upbringing by my parents; the support of my dear wife, Debbie; and the excellent examples among our worldwide spiritual family. As we head into the future, we are determined to keep learning the lessons offered by our Grand Instructor.



