“Home Sweet Home”​—In Critical Times
HOME is the haven where a family contentedly lives, relaxes and works together. A happy family with a joyous spirit makes “home” delightful. Unforgettable family experiences, humorous incidents and joint activities over the years build up fond memories of “home.” True is the expression of years gone by​—the lyric of slower days—​entitled “Home, Sweet Home.” Rhythmically the lyric sounds forth: “Mid pleasures and palaces though we may roam, be it ever so humble, there’s no place like home.”
Yes, “home” is what we make it. Have you fond memories of your youthhood home? Did you contribute in former days toward its pleasurableness and happy spirit? Is your home a happy one today? What are you doing today toward making it a place of peace and unitedness? Or, on the other hand, is your contribution one that brings divisiveness, even uproar and disintegration?
The Bible shows that every family on earth owes its name to the grand Creator of families, Jehovah God. To him, knees properly bend in reverence and prayer. (Eph. 3:14, 15) It is the course of wisdom to follow the Bible way toward keeping our families united in these ‘critical days.’ The Bible spells out the way to make “home” a happy place where all members cooperate together with a healthy, wholesome spirit. This contributes toward family joy. Happy, united families ascribe glory and strength to Jehovah their God.​—Ps. 96:7.
A family is in fact a circle of friends bound together by ties of kinship. The parents are the God-appointed directors of this circle, which also includes minor ones, the children. The family circle today is under attack, heavy assault. It is a target just as in archery, where arrows fly to zero in for a bull’s-eye hit at the center. It is assaulted by the glitter of materialism and the desire to purchase new things beyond the family budget. Father would like to buy a shiny new car. Mother wants the latest gadgets for the house. The children want to control the television and spend long hours watching new TV programs, arguing that these shows are harmless. They say that their friends have seen the programs and their parents have approved them. Children demand dangerous freedoms and become careless as to their associates.​—1 Cor. 15:33.
Then, domestic peace is further disrupted by misunderstandings between parents. Wives complain that husbands do not talk to them enough and go their own way. Husbands feel that wives are too aggressive, at times seeming to usurp headship. In some cases husbands have even abdicated headship. (1 Cor. 11:3) Children feel that they are being scolded too often. (Prov. 22:15) The family circle bulges with strains that finally cause breaks.
This is the type of constant bombardment that can go on day and night against the modern family in this shaky world. With families reaching the breaking point, fresh problems arise that threaten the whole human social structure. Has it come to the point where it is impossible for a united family to operate? Is it too difficult to create and maintain the wholesome family spirit, the attitude of family loyalty and togetherness? Not at all!

