Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N, Y., DECEMBER 1, 1917 


No. 23 


THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD 


"The night is far spent, the day is at hand; let us therefore east 

"Ye are the light of the world."- 
^ There is a depth of meaning in these words that the human 
mind cannot comprehend. This was especially true With reference
 to the statement of the Master when the disciples heard 
him say, "Ye are the light of the world/' They could not grasp 
the meaning of his words ; for the holy Spirit was not then 
given. Only the new creature in Christ can have an appreciation
 of the meaning thereof, and the extent of appreciation is 
in proportion to his spiritual development. 

In all the languages of the earth, light is a symbol of truth 
and life. The sun is the great light of the earth, and sustains 
a relationship to the earth and its products designedly 
analogous to that of God to the universe. As all light of the 
earth emanates from the sun, so all truth and life proceed from 
Cod. As light is adapted to the eye, so truth is adapted to the 
mind; and in proportion as we perceive and receive the truth, 
the light increases in our lives. Beginning with the sun and 
tracing out the analogy we find that all nature is really 
symbolic. This does not come by accident, but designedly so. 
It is not an accident that the sun and moon are symbols; for 
we read, "God said . . . Let them be for signs." — Gten. 1:14. 
The antithesis of light is darkness. It symbolizes evil, 
wickedness, error, sin, death and everything that is undesirable
. Light, therefore, is a symbol of righteousness, truth, 
life, and the blessings incident thereto. 

BIGHT TO LIVE LIMITED 
One of the principles of God's arrangement is that all 
righteous beings nave the right to live. Truth is the expression 
of righteousness. Hence it follows that all must have the truth 
before they can know the way to life. As an illustration: The 
sun is a great light which gives light to the earth and life to 
the vegetation of the earth. The sun is requisite to the growth 
and development of plant life. Plants will not grow and flourish
 in darkness, but will sicken and die. So it is with all who 
have life — they must have the light from the Great Light. The 
Scriptures describe Jehovah as a "sun" (Psalm 84:11), as "a 
consuming fire" (Hebrews 12:29), and a great "light, in whom 
is no darkness at all." (1 John 1:5) God, is the origin of 
light, and is therefore the origin of life* Where the sun 
shines, darkness flees before its rays. Where the countenance 
of Jehovah is made to appear, darkness and unrighteousness 
flee away. To this the Apostle referred when he said, "Times 
of refreshing shall come from the presence Iface] of the Lord." 
—Acts 3:19. 

THE OBEAT LIGHT 
In the Genesis account of creation we read that **God 
made two great lightB; the greater light to rule the day 
and the lesser light to rule the night: he made the stars 
also." (Cten. 1:16) The stars here symbolize that class 
to which Abraham belonged. Abraham had little light, but 
great faith. The moon symbolizes the Mosaic law given the 
Jews, to the exclusion of all others. Since the time of Adam, 
disobedience and darkness prevail over the earth, and gross 
darkness over the people. To the Jews God gave some light 
through the terms of the Law Covenant, which is symbolized 
by the moon. As we know, the moon does not give forth her 
own light, but reflects the light received from the sun. And so 
it is with the Law Covenant. It could not be appreciated by 
those living prior to the opening of the Gospel age. The law 
reflects the light from the Gospel of Messiah s kingdom, which 
Gospel was first preached to Abraham. (GaJatians 3:8) Only 
those who have received and accepted the light of the message 
of Messiah's kingdom can now appreciate the light coming from 
the Law Covenant, which foreshadows better things to come. — 
Hebrews 10:1. 

GREATER LIGHT 
At the close of the Jewish age there came into the world 
Jesus, the Son of God. Although born under the Law Covenant, 
he was greater than the law. Being a perfect man, he could 
comply with the terms of the law. This he did, and went beyond
 its requirements in the fulfilment of God's great plan. 
From Adam to Jesus there had been no true light in the world 
whatsoever. When Jesus came he declared, "I am the Light of 
the world." Again the Scriptures record of him: "He was 
. . . the true Light which Hghteth every man that cometh 
into the world." (John 1:9) The Light then was local; only 


off the works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light. ' ' 
'— Romans 13:12; Matthew 5:14. 
a few saw it; for it shone in a dark place; and to those who 
did see it the Master declared, "Blessed are your eyes, for 
they see."— Matthew 13:16. 

In proof that light is a symbol of life we quote the words 
of the Master: "Then spake Jesus unto them, saying, I am the 
Light of the world; he that followeth me shall not walk in 
darkness, but shall have the light of life." (John 8:12) It 
follows then that all who have the right to life must have the 
light. Those who have no light have no right to life. All 
those who will ever have the right to life must have the light ; 
and since it is God*s purpose that every man shall have a 
chance to accept life the time must come that every man will 
see the light. Hence we read, "It is the will of God that all 
men shall be saved and brought to an accurate knowledge of 
the truth."— 1 Timothy 2:3, 4. 

HOW WE GET THE LIGHT 
If Jesus was the Light of the world, why did he say to 
his disciples, "Ye are the light of the world"? 

In answering this question we recall the words of the Master
 (John 9:5) : (( As long as I am in the world I am the 
Light of the world." When Jesus said, "Ye are the light of the 
world," he spoke prophetically; for it was not then true, except
 in the sense that they reflected his Spirit. In the fuller 
sense it was true after his crucifixion and resurrection, and 
after the giving of the holy Spirit to the consecrated at Pentecost
. He spake, however, of things that were to be as though 
they were. In one sense the disciples, as his representatives 
acting under his authority, were then the light of the world; 
for they reflected the light. But the time was to come, and did 
come, when they constituted the light of the world because they 
were in him as members of his body. This has been true with 
reference to every Christian who has abode in Christ and has 
had the words of Christ abiding in him. 

The ransom-price provided by the death and resurrection of 
Jesua was, at the time of his ascension into heaven, made available
 for the use of those who throughout the Gospel age should 
offer themselves to God in full consecration. The disciples 
were consecrated prior to Pentecost, but not justified. Hence 
their spirit-begetting could not take place until Pentecost. 
Those of the church receive the light only at the time of consecration
 and of the receipt of the merit of the Master's sacrifice ; 
and when they have been accepted by the Father and begotten 
of the holy Spirit, the illumination follows. These who are in 
Christ are members of his body. It is proper then to say that 
from the Jordan till now, The Christ is the light of the worl 1. 
for the reason that The ChriBt includes all those who have the 
Spirit of Jesus and who are walking in accord with the term^ 
of their covenant. 

This is very beautifully pictured by the golden candlestick 
in the Holy of the Tabernacle. The candle-stick was all of one 
piece, composed of gold, and represents those begotten to the 
divine nature, the centre-burner representing Jesus^ and the 
other burners representing the body members. The oil therein 
pictures the holy Spirit, and*. the light coming from the burning
 of the oil represents the illumination possessed by those 
who are in Christ, possessing his Spirit. This illumination 
constitutes such the fight of the world. 

WHAT WE SHALL DO 
Behold what a favored position the body members occupy! 
God is the great Light from whom cometh all light and life. 
Jesus is the express image of the Father; and through him the 
fully consecrated are privileged to be a reflection of Jehovah's 
light in the earth. When we realize this fact we can , better 
understand why the Apostle refers to the Christian as an ambassador
 of Christ's kingdom, and can better appreciate the 
responsibilities that rest upon us because of this light and 
privilege. 

Seeing the favored position which the members of the body 
this side the veil occupy with relation to Jehovah and to the 
great Master, St. Paul was evidently desirous of impressing this 
thought upon all Christians when he wrote: "The night is far 
spent, the day is at hand ; let us therefore cast off the works of 
darkness, and let ur put on the armor of light." — Romans 
13:12. 


(355-356) 


[6174] 


DitCEMBBR 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(356-357) 


The Apostle Paul had more information then than had 
any one else — more information than it was lawful for him 
to tell. (2 Cor. 12:1-5) Two things he states positively; 
namely, "The night is far spent" and "The day is at hand/' 
The "night" here refers to the long period of sin and death 
prevailing from the fall to the establishment of the Messianic 
kingdom. At the time the Apostle wrote, 4182 years of that 
great dark night had passed; and since he wrote these words, 
more than 1800 years additional have passed away. So the 
Christian today has the privilege of standing in the very dawn 
of the morning, when the light of the kingdom is breaking 
upon the earth and soon will shine forth in its resplendent 
glory. "The day" that "is at hand" is the thousand-year day 
of Christ, during which the Sun of Righteousness shall shine 
with healing in his beams, bringing light and life to all of the 
groaning creation who will accept the blessing upon the terms 
offered. Therefore because of this wonderful position which 
the people of God occupy, the Apostle admonisnes them that 
they should cast off all works of darkness and put on the 
whole armor of light. 

WORKS OF DABKNESS 

"Works of darkness" are those deeds that will not bear the 
fullest light of the new dispensation — any and all things that 
are out of harmony with truth and righteousness. The Apostle 
Paul enumerates some of these specifically, as follows: "Fornication
, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, 
and covetousness, which is idolatry: for which things* sake 
the wrath of God cometh on the children of disobedience: in 
the which ye also walked some time, when ye lived in them. 
But now ye also put off all these; anger, wrath, malice, 
hlasphemy, filthy communication out of your mouth. Lie not 
one to another, seeing that ye have put off the old man with 
his deeds." "Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which 
are these: adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, 
idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, 
seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, 
and such like." — Colossians 3:5-&; Galatians 5:19-21. 

These works of darkness also include self-esteem in a 
superlative degree, selfishness and injustice. The light -bearers 
cannot have any fellowship with these. Anything that has a 
tendency to bring darkness into the life and to exclude tight 
should therefore be cast off, as works of the flesh and the 
devil. 

THE AEMOE OF LIGHT 

Then says the Apostle, "Put on the armor of light." This 
means the armor of God; for "God is light." In Ephesians 
6:10-17 the Apostle describes the armor of light, specifying the 
parts. He admonishes the Christian to have his loins girded 
with the truth. The girdle is a symbol of servitude, thus testifying
 that every light-bearer should be a servant of the truth. 
We are also to have on the breast-plate of righteousness* The 
breast-plate fitted over the vital organs — heart, etc. This 
signifies that the light-bearer should always have a righteous, 
pure heart. To have the "feet shod with the preparation of the 
Gospel of peace" means that we should see to it that the fiery 
trials that come upon us should not make us resentful, but 
rather that we should cultivate peace under all circumstances, 
that our feet may not be burned with these fiery trials. "Above 
all things taking the shield of faith," means to know the Word 
of God and to rely upon it; and to "take the helmet of salvation
 " symbolical of an intellectual understanding and appreciation
 of the Word of God, and "the Sword of the Spirit" 
means to have the Word of the Lord and be trained, as a good 
soldier, in its skilful use. 

It will be observed that the Apostle enumerates six parts 
of the armor; whereas the panoply of a Roman soldier consisted
 of seven parts. That part not named is the greaves, 
which fitted over the front part of the leg. This very beautifully
 symbolizes the Vow which the feet members are permitted 
to have; and as their face is always toward the enemy, they 
should be protected with this part of the armor. The Christian
's protection is light, whose beams search every nook and 
corner of earth's impurities, and enable him to dispel such from 
his own life. 

Continuing, the Apostle admonishes, "Walk honestly as in 
the day"; that is to say, as though we were living in the full 
light of that day of Christ— the day of the reign of Messiah 
in righteousness. While we are not fully in that day, yet the 
new creation should live as nearly up to the perfect standard 
as possible. "Honestly" means to be honest in business matters, 
honest with the Lord, honest with his message, honest with the 
brethren, and honest in everything in connection with his 
service. Honesty is the result of light. 

Furthermore, the Apostle says, "Not in rioting and drunkenness
." Evidently he does not refer here to the grosser sins 
which these words imply, but to the more refined from the 


world's standpoint — things which we would term indulgence 
in time-killing, intoxication with money-making, or with any 
earthly thing that would draw our attention away from the 
Lord and his service. Then he concludes his argument with 
the strongest and most important exhortation, saying, "Avoid 
strife and envying." 

One who indulges in the things previously mentioned by 
the Apostle would injure himself particularly. But one who 
indulges in strife and envy shows a bad condition of heart 
which might bar him from the kingdom, and which might result 
in great injury to others and hinder their development. These 
are fruits of the flesh; and in proportion as we yield to suoh 
improper desires, in that proportion, will the flesh prosper and 
the new creature languish and draw near unto death. On the 
contrary, the sons of God are to seek more and more to put on 
the Lord Jesus Christ; that is to say, to put on the qualities 
of meekness, forbearance, long suffering, patient endurance, 
gentleness, kindness and love. Each should nave the disposition 
to serve by love, being humble and submissive to the Lord's 
will. Make no provision for the' flesh, but let it die from 
neglect. 

THE CHBISTIAN'S ADVANTAGES 

Those who have the light are greatly advantaged above 
those that have not the light. Since Jesus was crucified 1884 
years have passed. Down through the age of sacrifice, along the 
narrow valley of trials and tears, the light-bearers of God, as 
members of the body of Christ, have walked^waiting, hoping, 
and praying for the return of the great Light, the Bridegroom, 
Many of these faithful ones have ceased from their labors and 
slept, awaiting the coming of the King. As this little band of 
lightbearers have passed along through the world, others not' 
ing their manner of living and devotion to truth and righteousness
, have turned aside to walk with them awhile. 

In this connection we are reminded of the parable of the 
wheat and tares. The wheat have been the lightbearers, while 
the tares have been mingling with them, aided somewhat by 
the light which has been shed forth by the true Christians. In 
the harvest a separation is now taking place. Of necessity the 
light reproves the darkness; and the breach widens between 
the merely nominal and the true Christians. All those who 
are striving to keep their covenant are in the light, Hence the 
Apostle says to such, "Ye are not in darkness" ; while all those 
are still in darkness who call themselves Christians but who 
persecute those who have the light. 

THE LIGHT-BEAEEES 

In the context the Apostle contrasts those who have the 
Light with others who have not. The light-bearers have ever 
looked for the return of the great Light, Christ Jesus. He 
did not say at what hour and day he would come, but stated 
in such clear phrase what might be expected that the true lightbearers
 can appreciate the times in which they are living. To 
them St. Paul says, "Of the times and seasons, brethren, ye 
have no need that I write unto you," {I Thess. 5:1-6) This 
was true because, having the light, they would be able to discern
 the presence of the greater Light, the Bridegroom. Then 
adds the Apostle, "For yourselves know perfectly that the day 
of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night." A thief comes 
in time of darkness, and of course would not be observed by 
those who are asleep or in the dark. At the second coming of 
our Lord all who were awake and had the light would be able 
to discern Jesus. The Apostle states that those who have the 
light will recognize the presence of the great King. Then he 
proceeds to tell us what is our duty, saying, "But ye, brethren, 
are not in darkness, that that day should overtake you as a 
thief. Ye are all the children of light, and the children of the 
day: we are not of the night, nor of darkness. Therefore let 
us not sleep as do others; but let us watch and be sober." See 
also Matthew 24:42-44. 

As these faithful followers of the Lord waited in the early 
dawn of the new dispensation, their hearts were made glad 
by the knowledge of the presence of the Bridegroom; and as 
this knowledge came to them they joined in the cry, "Behold 
the Bridegroom!" Since then every one who has come to a 
knowledge of the Lord's presence has involuntarily said, "Behold
 the Bridegroom!" 

SOOFFEBS AND OPPOSEBS 

On the other hand, nominal Christians, being in darkness, 
have become offended at the exuberance manifested by the 
true light-bearers. Their time is devoted to social uplift and 
and various other things that are popular with the world ; and 
they understand not why the true light-bearer does not participate
 with them. Therefore nominal Christians have become 
scoffers, as the Apostle Peter foretold they would: "Where is 
the evidence of his presence? ... all things continue as 
they were from the beginning," — 2 Peter 3:4. 

At this moment we see the whole world in a state of war. 


[6175] 


(358-359) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N, Y. 


The nations are growing- weaker; and soon the various factions
 will see the necessity of stopping the war before all are 
entirely destroyed. Doubtless then the various elements — the 
financial, political and ecclesiastical — will be saying, "Peace!", 
and temporary peace will be established by the united action 
of the Papacy and the Protestant churches and the kingdom of 
this world. Referring to this time, the Apostle says, "For when 
they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction 
cometh upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and 
they shall not escape." — 1 Thessalonians 5:3. 

THE GREAT COMPANY 
The Scriptures point out that there is another class of 
Christians who love the Lord, who love to be associated with 
the true light-bearers, and yet who are fearful of holding forth 
the light lest it should bring persecution upon them. These are 
consecrated to the Lord, but have only a small measure of his 
Spirit. They are described by the Master as those whose lamps 
are almost empty of oil, or whose supply of oil is running low. 
This means that their supply of the spirit of truth is nearly 
exhausted. They do not fully appreciate the value of the whole 
armor of light. They do not possess the zeal peculiar to the 
Lord's house (Psalm 09:9) ; but being overcharged by the cares 
of this life and fearing persecution and suffering, these believe 
that they can best pursue a more moderate course and refrain 
from actively testifying for the Master and his cause. These 
may be said, therefore, to be not walking in the full light, not 
appreciating their privileges. 

Doubtless some of this class are in present truth, and some 
amongst the Babylonish systems. The Psalmist describes 
them thus: "Such as sit in darkness and in the shadow of 
death, being bound in affliction and iron: because they rebelled 
against the words of God and contemned the counsel of the 
most High." (Psalm 107:10, 11) The Lord Jesus describes 
them as the "foolish virgin" class, who are aroused to their 
privileges too late to have their vessels filled in time to enter 
into the kingdom, — Matthew 25:1-13. 

THE LESSON FOB THE CHTTROH 
Thus we see that the worldly do not understand the 
Christian because they never had the light, and that the great 
company do not see and appreciate present truth because their 
light is burning low. The lesson then that we should gather 
is to keep our lamps trimmed and burning. Or, to use another 
figure, we are to profit thereby. We are togive close attention 
to the words of life contained in God's Word, that we may 
come to an exact knowledge of the truth. Whether the error 
be one of doctrine or conduct, it must be purged away, so that 
the pure light of divine truth may^ shine out as clearly as 
possible through our daily lives. This evidently is what Jesus 
had in mind when he said, "Ye are the light of the world. A 
city that is set on a hill cannot be hid. Let your light so shine 
before men that they may see your good works, and glorify your 
Father which is in heaven." — Matthew 6:14, 16. 

The light cannot shine out brightly to the glory of God 
unless our lamps are cleaned, trimmed and brightly burning. 
Some of the' Lord's dear children seem very indifferent to the 
matter of trimming their lamps and letting their light shine. 
They gat some truth and some error, and hold them bothtogether
. As a result, their light does not shine brightly; for 
the vessel is darkened by the error. Again, some may have the 
light, but fail to let the truth have the proper place or effect 
upon their characters; and so the light m them is very dim, 
because of the uncleanness of the medium through which it 
passes. The admonition of the Scriptures should be kept in 
mind: "Light is sown for the righteous." (Psalm 97:11) 
The Apostle referred to the proper condition of the light-bearer 
when he said, "Ye are our epistles . . . known and read of 
all men." The world cannot read and understand the Bible; 
but they can read and understand one's daily life. Again, the 
Apostle said, "We are made a spectacle [literally, a show or 
theatre] for men and angels." Therefore the eyes of all are 
upon the light-bearers; and they should see to it that they 
avoid everything which .has a tendency to shut out the light 
and preclude it from shining. — 2 Corinthians 3:2; 1 Corinthians
 4:9. 

As far as we permit prejudice, pride, selfishness, selfesteem
, combativeness, crookedness, injustice or unrighteousness
 to interrupt the freedom with which we receive and hold 
forth the light of truth, in that same proportion will the light 
rapidly decline or retrograde, and such a course persisted in 
will ultimately lead such a one into utter darkness. Hence 
Jesus said, "If thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full 
of darkness. If therefore th« light that is in thee be darkness, 
how great is that darkness! The light of the body is the eye; 
if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full 
of light. "-^Matthew 6:22, 23. 


DARKNESS SETTLING DOWN ON THE EABTH 

The Scriptures indicate that when the last member of the 
little flock is gone all the light left in the earth will be that 
possessed by the great company class. Since every spirit-begotten
 one must finish his course before the resurrection of 
the ancient worthies, it follows that between the time of the 
change of those who compose the great company and the 
resurrection of the ancient worthies there will be a brief period 
during which darkness will completely cover the earth and 
gross darkness the people. This day is rapidly approaching. 

"The path of the just is as a shining light that shineth 
more and more unto the day of perfection." (Proverbs 4:18) 
We are coming near to the end of our earthly journey — therefore
, near to the day of perfection. Should we not, then, expect
 the light to shine brighter and brighter upon our pathway
? Surely the Lord will fulfil this promise to his people, 
and is fulfilling it to them. If that light is shining brighter, 
shall we be stumbled and blinded by it? Or shall we appreciate 
what the Lord is doing for us and permit the manifestation 
of his loving kindness to stimulate us to greater love and zeal 
for him, his cause and his people? 

PRIVILEGES NOW GBEAT 
When first we read the Studies in the Scriptures and 
rejoiced in the light there found, we learned through their 
author that there would be seven volumes. We have looked 
forward with joyful expectancy to the coming of that time 
when we would have the Seventh Volume. The laborers in 
the harvest field realize that we are drawing nearer and 
nearer to the end of the harvest. Now the Seventh Volume has 
come to us; and it throws a great flood of light upon Revelation
 and Ezekiel, in harmony with what is contained in the 
other six volumes of Studies in the Scbiptukes and the 
Bible. Shall we not take this as a favor from the Lord, and 
as the fulfilment to us of his promise? 

How are we receiving that light and responding to it? 
"Well," answers one, "I have not yet been able to fully receive 
The Finished Mystery as the long promised Seventh Volume." 
Others are openly opposing it, notwithstanding the Lord's manifested
 favor upon its publication and distribution. We might 
wonder if all are appreciating fully the light that is shining 
upon the pathway. W T e recall that there were some who did 
not appreciate the other volumes for a time, and that some 
did not appreciate the Vow when it was given to the church. 
Indeed, some good, conscientious, fully consecrated brethren at 
first opposed it. When the Vow was first published by 
Brother Russell a certain sister found many objections to it; 
but being desirous of doing the Lord's will she called upon a 
brother to point out to her where it is advantageous for one 
to take the Vow. There followed a conversation between them, 
about as follows: 

"Sister, do you see anything in that vow that is out of 
harmony with your consecration to the Lord?" "No," she 
answered, "I do not" "Do you see anything in it to which 
the Lord would object?" "No, I do not." "Do you see anything
 in the Vew to which the devil would object?" "Ah, yes ! " 
she exclaimed, "I see many things in it to which the devil 
would object." "Then," replied the brother, "if you oppose the 
Vow would you not be agreeing with the devil and disagreeing 
with the Lord?" She at once saw the point. 

Now suppose we apply the same rule to "The Finished 
Mystery," Volume VII of Studies in the Scriptures. Let 
us ask ourselves, Is there anything in it contrary to the message
 of Messiah's kingdom and the great doctrine of the 
ransom? To this we must answer, No! Is there anything in 
it to which the heavenly Father or the Lord Jesus would object 
because out of harmony with his Spirit? To this we must 
also answer, No. Is there anything in it to which Satan would 
object or be opposed? Ah yes, certainly! for it pulls off the 
mask and exposes a system which Satan has builded up by 
blinding good Christian people. It shows that the great Papal 
system is Satan's counterfeit of Messiah's kingdom. It shows 
that the Romish system is the "mother" described as a 
"harlot"; and that nominal Protestantism constitutes the 
"daughters." It shows how these together constitute "Babylon
" and how they have made "drunk" the kings and rulers of 
the earth. It shows how the evil spirits have operated and 
will continue to operate under the chief of devils — Satan. It 
shows that "great Babylon" must fall, how Satan himself will 
be destroyed, and pictures the glories of the kingdom class in 
the "temple" condition beyond the veil. 

"THIS HONOR HAVE ALL HIS SAINTS" 

Has not this light that has fallen upon our pathway 
thrilled our hearts with joy in proportion as we have appreciated
 it? Surely, then, great are our privileges now, not only 
to feed upon this additional food, that the Lord has given us, 


T6176] 


Dbckmbrr 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(359-361) 


but to pass it on to others in "Babylon" and get the attention 
of thoae who have a hearing ear, that they may hear and flee 
therefrom; and even to tell the world that the present unrighteous
 systems soon must pass away, to be supplanted with 
the glorious kingdom of Christ Jesus. All the true lightbearers
 will therefore appreciate the privileges now given to 
them of having the light and of giving it out to others. Who 
is on the Lord's side? "Know ye not that to whom ye yield 
yourselves to obey, his servants ye are whom ye obey?" — Romans
 6:16; Exod. 32:20. 

For nearly nineteen centuries this little band of lightbearers
 have been shining forth in the world, reproving the 
darkness. For a long time it seemed that darkness might 
triumph; for the bearers of light have been suffering at the 
hands of the children of darkness. But now we are approaching
 the end of the reign of sin and death. The Prince of Darkness
 is marshalling all of his forces for the final crucial conflict
. The storm is raging in every quarter, and the waves of 
human passion are lashing against the thrones of earthly institutions
. This great time of trouble is striking terror to the 
hearts of many. But the true light-bearer takes courage in 
this hour of great trial; for. knowing that it is evidence that 
the kingdom is at hand he hears the words of his Captain 
saying, "Behold T come quickly; hold that fast which thou 
hast; let no man take thy crown." (Revelation 3:11) And 
again says the Apostle, "Cast not away your confidence which 
hath great recompense of reward ; for ye have need of patience 
[endurance] that after ye have done the will of God, ye might 
receive the promise." — Hebrews 10:35, 36. 

THE BLESSINGS OP THE KINGDOM 

Down into the depths of the great storm that is now 
upon the world, the light-bearers may soon go; but beyond 
its blackness and terror, these faithful ones will rise triumphant
 over death and be ushered into the glorious light of the 
sons of God, The Lord Jesus, speaking to the faithful with 
reference to this time, says, "Then shall the righteous shine 
forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father" — Matthew 
13:43. 

As St. Paul states, the whole creation is groaning and 
travailing in pain, waiting far the full manifestation of the 
Rons of Light. (Rom. 8:19-23) What a glorious day it will 
be for the poor world when the light has completely driven 
away the darkness, and when the sunlight of God's love with 
healing and blessing will shine into the hearts and minds of 
all! Through the mouth of his Prophet Jehovah gave a wonderful
 and beautiful picture of the blessings that shall come 
to the world at that time. He said, "And his feet shall stand 
in that day upon the Mount of Olives, which is before 
Jerusalem on the east; and the Mount of Olives shall cleave 
in the midst thereof toward the east and toward the west and 
there shall be a very great valley; and half of the mountain 
shall remove toward the north, and half of it toward the 
south. And ye shall flee to the valley of the mountains, . . 
. and the Lord my God shall come and all the saints with 
thee."— Zech. 14:4, 5. 

The olive is a symbol of light, peace and divine blessings 
through the holy Spirit. A mountain is a symbol of a kingdom
 of light, peace and divine blessings through the holy 
Spirit of God. The Prophet Joel states that during the Gospel
 age the Spirit of the Lord is made manifest to his servants
 and hand-maidens — to those who have made a full consecration
 to follow in the footsteps of Jesus. The Prophet 
then adds that after these days — namely, at the conclusion of 
the Gospel age when all the light-bearers of the kingdom 


class are developed — then God will pour out his Spirit upon 
all flesh. Then the light will begin to shine and increase in 
the hearts and minds of the people. 

VALLEY OP BLESSINGS 

In the above prophecy the phrase, "his feet" has reference 
to Jehovah, and signifies the divine law established on the 
earth through Messiah's kingdom of righteousness, the earth 
being referred to as Jehovah's foot-stool, which he will make 
glorious. The Prophet states that "the mount shall cleave 
in the midst thereof, toward the east and toward the west." 
The east is the position of the rising sun. The cleaving of a 
mountain in the midst thereof from east to west would cause 
the formation of a valley between the two portions, a part 
of the mountain being on the north and a part on the south. 
The north is the position of the Pleiades, and represents the 
throne of Jehovah, and therefore in the picture would represent
 the heavenly phase of God's kingdom. The south 
would represent the position or condition of the earthly phase 
of that kingdom. The sun rising in the east would shine 
clear through the valley, which extends east and west between
 the two parts of the mountain; that is to say, between 
the heavenly and earthly phases of God's kingdom. 

This pictures how the "Sun of Righteousness" with healing 
in his beams shall shine from the beginning to the ending of 
the Millennial reign of Christ. The valley filled with light 
represents the valley of blessings and life; and during the 
Millennial reign the people who come into this valley or 
condition of blessing will be healed, uplifted and blessed. The 
glorious and life-giving light will drive out all darkness, 
ignorance, superstition and death, and bring everlasting 
blessings to all who will receive it. Let us picture to our 
minds the millions returning from the tomb and entering this 
valley of blessings, there to receive the balm of Gilead which 
the Lord has so graciously provided for the binding up of 
broken hearts and comforting of them that mourn. Millions 
who have been torn from their loved ones by the great enemy 
death will be brought again together; families long separated 
will be reunited. They shall "come with songs and everlasting
 j°y u P<>n their heads; they shall obtain joy and gladness, 
and sorrow and sighing shall flee away."— Isaiah 35:10. 

The glorious reign of Christ completed, all the human 
race tried and tested, all wickedness and unrighteousness 
destroyed from the earth, no longer will there exist any 
necessity for the Gospel light, represented by the sun, nor 
the law, represented by the moon. "And the city [the holy 
government] had no need of the sun, neither of the moon 
to shine in it; for the glory of God did lighten it and the 
Lamb is the light thereof. And the nations [peoples fully 
restored] shall walk by the light thereof, and the kings 
[perfect men] of the earth do bring their glory into it, and 
the gates of it shall not be shut at all by day; for there shall 
be no night there." — Revelation 21:23-2o. 

The bringing of such blessings to the poor groaning 
creation will be the great privilege of the sons of God. 
"Behold what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon 
us, that we should be called the sons of God!" (1 John 3:2) 
Behold, what a wonderful prospect is set before those who 
are privileged to be counted as light-bearers in the earth 
during the age of sacrifice and suffering, to those who are 
faithful unto death! What an inspiration to faithfulness and 
loyalty to the Lord! 

"For soon astonished men shall see 
The laurels of thy victory; 
And thou with grace and glory crowned, 
Mayst lavish blessings all around." 


NEHEMIAH ENFORCES THE LAW OF THE SABBATH 


[ This article was a reprint of that entitled 


'Nehemtah's Correction of Sabbath-Breaking," published in issue of November 13, 
1899, which please see.] 


MY REDEEMER 


"When first I heard of Jesus, so marred upon the tree, 
T felt no glad emotion as though he died for me; 
T saw no kingly beauty majestic, grand or brave; 
I turned away, despising his proffered aid to save. 

"But when I came to know him his precious name grew sweet, 
And like the tinted rainbow love arched the Mercy- Seat, 
And when through beams of glory the light shone from his 

face, 
All other objects faded before his matchless grace. 


"When first I heard the tidings how God's beloved Son 
Designs to bless the fallen since Adam's race begun, 
What could I do but praise him — make vault of heaven ring! 
And own him as my choicest — Redeemer, Lord and King! 

"0 Rose of rarest odor! Lily white and pure! 
O Chiefest of ten thousand, whose glory must endure! 
The intfre I see thy beauty, the more I know thy grace, 
The more I long unhindered to gaze upon thy face!'* 


[«177] 


THE ADVENT OF THE MESSIAH 

[The eleventh and twelfth paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled "Gift3 to Our King," published in issue 

of January 1, 1906. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled "Birth of the Man Christ Jesus/' 

published in issue of December 15, 1907. Please see the articles named. 1 


DIVINE PROTECTION AND DELIVERANCE 

fWith the exception of the following paragraphs this article was a reprint of article entitled "The Feet of Him," published in 

issue of December 1, 1911, which please see.] 
DECEiruER o0. — Quarterly Review 

NATURAL ISRAEL TYPICAL OF SPIRITUAL ISRAEL (JOD 'S CAKE AND PROTECTION- OF THE NATURAL ISRAELITES ILLUSTRATIVE OF SPIRITUAL 

BLESSINGS TO THE CHURCH — PERILOUS TIMES OF THE EVIL DAT — COMFORTING WORDS OF LIFE — WARNING 
VOICES AND WHOLESOME COUNSEL NECESSARY. 

"With Jehovah there is loving kindness, and with him is plenteous redemption/' — Psa. 130:7. 
This lesson is intended for a review of the history of the "He that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will 


children of Israel during the period covered by the last 
quarter's lessons, namely, about two hundred and seventy 
years. We realize that natural Israel was typical of spiritual 
Israel, and the experiences which came to them illustrated 
the experiences of the church. The spiritual Israelite therefore
, receives much instruction by carefully noting the history 
of the natural Israelite, and can enter more heartily into their 
experiences and rejoice with them in their songs* of deliverance
. It is suggested by those who arranged the lessons that 
Ave read the 123rd and 124th Psalms. Tnese psalms are indeed
 beautiful, and suggest the loving kindness and protecting 
power of Jehovah over his faithful children. We, as spiritual 
Israelites, realize that we are still in the land of the enemy, 
and we know of no more fitting promises to apply to the 
present time than those contained in the 91at Psalm which 
have been an inspiration to the church throughout the many 
centuries of its existence. 

In the midst of the "perilous times" of this "evil day," 
and of the warning voices of prophets and apostles pointing 
out snares and pestilences and subtle dangers on every hand — 
and in the midst, toq, of a realizing sense of the actual existence
 of such evil besetments and perils — how precious to the 
saints are the assurances of divine protection and care and 
personal love! 

We call to mind the gracious promises of our Lord — "The 
Father himself loveth you;" "Fear not, little flock; it is 
your Fathers good pleasure to give you the kingdom ;" and 


love him and will manifest myself to him; . . . and MY 
Father \\i\] love him, and we a\ ill come unto him and make 
Our abode with him. . . . Peace I leave with you, my 
peace I give unto you. Let not vour heart bo troubled, 
neither let it be afraid."— John 16:27; 14:21, 23, 27; Luke 
12:32. 

TIMELY WARNINGS— WHOLESOME OOTJNSEL 

But warning voices and wholesome counsel are also necessary
; and he is not wise who turns a deaf ear to them, -and 
takes cognizance alone of the comforting assurances which 
are designed only for those who faithfully "watch and pray 
lest they enter into temptation." Every soldier of the cross 
needs to heed the Apostle's warnings — "Take unto you the 
whole armor of God, that y$ may be able to withstand in the 
evil day, and haying done all. to stand;" and again, "Let us 
fear lest, a promise being left us of entering into his rest, 
any of you should seem to come short of it;" and fear also 
"lest, as the serpent [Satan] beguiled Eve, through his 
subtlety, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity
 that is in Christ;" "for grievous wolves shall enter in 
among you, not sparing the flock. Also of your own selves 
shall men arise, speaking perverse things to draw away disciples
 after them," "Behold/* said our Lord, "I Bend you 
forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as 
serpents and harmless as doves." — Eph. 6:13; Heb, 4:1; 2 
Cor. 11:3? Acts 20:29, 30; Matt. 10:16, 


INCREASED OPPORTUNITIES FOR SERVICE 


Many years ago Brother Russell proved from the Scriptures
 that a federation would be formed between the various 
nominal church systems, and that this federation would cooperate
 with the civil powers in the. exercise of control over 
the people. This federation is now practically an accomplished
 fact. Only a short time ago at a great mass meeting 
in Carnegie H;ilK New York City, Protestant and Catholic 
ministers and Jewish Rabbis united in an effort for Bible 
study, ignoring the name of Jesus Christ. That ecclesiasticism
 is now cooperating with the civil powers is patent to 
every thinking mind. "Pastor Russell foresaw this coming 
federation and repeatedly called the attention of The Watch 
Tower readers thereto. As far back as 1805, in an issue of 
Ths Watch Tower he set forth that John the Baptist and his 
experiences were typical; that in the antitype it would probably
 be the privilege of the consecrated, before the close of the 
harvest, to call attention to the tacit union and concurrent 
action of the church systems and civil powers of the land; that 
this would be displeasing to those in authority, especially to 
the ecclesiastics; that trie proclamation by the truly consecrated
, calling attention to this unholy alliance, would probably
 bring upon them certain trying experiences and would 
be a great honor to everyone joyfully participating in this 
work. 

It is apparent that the nations of earth are hopelessly 
divided on political and military issues, and that their only 
hope of establishing peace is by the intervention of ecclesiastical
 powers. The head of the Papal system has already made 
overtures to the civil powers, looking to the establishment of 
peace. It may be expected that he will make further representations
 to this end, and that the "nobles" of the Protestant
 systems will join with him, and that as a consequence 
these ecclesiastics will be given more prominence by the civil 
powers. The Scriptures in many -places describe this unholy 
alliance as Babylon, and likewise show that the evils concerning
 Babylon should be made known. 

"The Finished Mystery" — Volume VII of Studies m the 
Scriptures — without question contains an exposition — such 
as never before published — of the evils committed by Babylon, 
of the unrighteous relationship between ecclesiasticism and 


civil powers, the effect that a knowledge of these facts will 
have upon the people, and how Babylon's fall wiU be accomplished
. The Watch Tower subscribers are familiar with the 
further fact that Brother Russell as the Laodicean messenger 
repeatedly emphasized the fact that there should be a strong, 
vigorous witness of the truth to the world in the last days of 
the church's experiences this side the veil, and that the giving 
of this witness to the truth would probably result in the restraint
 of the antitypical "John" class; for the message when 
given will constitute a rebuke to Babylon. 

In harmony with this conclusion the Scriptures also show 
that the "vine of the earth" must be gathered, and the juice 
must be squeezed out of the grapes, constituting this "vine of 
the earth/' Since the Lord has shown that this message must 
be given to the church nominal, and since this message is 
contained in the Seventh Volume — "the point of the sword'' — 
the question now is, Who of the consecrated will join in using 
that point? Everything leads to the conclusion that the dark 
night referred to m the Scriptures, in which no man can 
work, is rapidly approaching and whatever work is done with 
reference to harvesting the vine of the earth must be done 
quickly. To this fact the brethren throughout the country 
are awake. Many are very anxious to enter the field and to 
spread far and wide the message contained in Volume VII. 

We realize that many of the colporteur brethren were 
compelled to leave the service in 1914 because they had u^ed 
all their worldly substance in the great work accomplished. 
that year. The Master of the harvest may be always relied 
upon to provide the means to accomplish his work, and now 
he has put it in the heart of a dear brother to come forward 
with a contribution to be used especially for the smiting of 
Babylon. This fund can be used to aid those colporteurs to 
enter the work, who have heretofore been hindered because of 
their financial condition. The Society has adopted what is 
believed to be the most economical plan, one which will enable 
the greatest number with this small means to again engage 
in the cotporteur work. The plan is that one hundred copies 
of Volume VII will be billed to each colporteur who needs 
assistance to get started in the work, free of charge, and that 


(362-365) 


[6178] 


Dkc*mbkr 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(365 366) 


the sale of this number will give to such colporteur a working
 capital on which he or she may go ahead in the work and 
continue in it until the finish. By this method we believe 
that fully a half million copies of The Finished Mystery 
may be placed in the hands of the people by the end of the 
year. We therefore suggest that everyone who desires to 
engage in the colporteur service, but who cannot do so because
 of their financial condition, and who by reason of the aid 
above suggested could do so, write us immediately for territory
 and for further instructions. The time seems opportune 
for the great drive that will divert the symbolic waters from 
Mystic Babylon, and thus hasten her downfall, preceding the 
full establishment of the kingdom of peace. The Psalmist 


declares that God will grant to his saints the privilege and 
honor of declaring these judgments written. — Psalm 149:5-9. 

Surely the saints beyond the veil have a keen, interest in 
the conclusion of the work, and every saint this side the 
veil will have a keen interest in that work. We believe that 
all the consecrated will appreciate the privilege of now participating
 with gladness of heart in this laboring. The time 
is short. Our responsibility is great. Let ua then do with 
our might what our hands find to do, laboring diligently 
while it is called clay. A little while and we shall finish our 
course and by his grace be permitted to have the Lord's approving
 smile and be forever with him. 


INTERESTING LETTERS 


THANKTTJL FOR CONTINUATION or HARVEST WORK 
Dear Brethren: — 

We believe we would be remits in our duty and obligation 
to you and to our dear Lord, if we did not make known to 
you our determination of continued steadfastness. 

We take this time and manner to assure you of our sympathy
 and cooperation in your "labor of love/* "Daily will 
we remember at the throne of heavenly grace the general 
interests of the harvest work/* "trusting that the Chief 
Reaper will make all things work together for good." 

We are so thankful for the provision made for the continuation
 of the work, and we are sure our dear Lord's 
blessing will be on all who share in this service. 

With much Christian love, Winfield Ecclesia. — Kans. 
VETOES THE SUGGESTION 
Editorial Committee, The Watch Tower, 

Brooklyn, New York. 
Dear Brethren: — 

My attention is just directed to the suggestion in "Harvest
 Sif tings Reviewed " reading as follows: "Would not 
Brother Walter Page, a former vice president, make a much 
better President than Brother Rutherford?" 

As I am the only Brother Page who ever served as a vice 
president of the Society I presume I am the one referred to, 
although my name is not Walter but William. Under existing
 conditions I must emphatically veto the suggestion, and 
among other reasons are the following vital oiies: 

The President of the Society must needs be of tested, 
proven financial ability to handle its various important business
 transactions. 

He should be an able public speaker to properly present 
the object and w T ork of the SocrETY in its public meetings. 

I do not possess these essential qualifications and Brother 
Rutherford does; and in addition our dear Brother has a 
rounded, developed Christian character { the most essential 
factor) ; and understanding the work of the Society and 
having 1 it well in hand, he is in my judgment the Lord's best 
qualified agent to continue in charge of the interests and 
work of our Society. 

Yours in our dear Redeemer, W. E. Page. — Ioica. 

GOD'S ARMOR THE ONLY PROTECTION 

Dear Brethren; — 

Since reading in Volume VII, page 126, the paragraph 
that states God may soon allow the minds of many of hi3 
little ones to become an open battleground upon which the 
fallen angels shall be judged, I have felt prompted to tell you 
that I have been tried along this line. For some time before 
I knew anything of the Seventh Volume I had several attacks, 
the memory of which makes me shudder. It seemed as if 
something gripped my forehead and forced me to doubt God. 
I struggled against the malignant influence. God did not 
eeem to be anywhere at all. In awful fear and anguish I 
went to the W T ord of God and pleaded for his promised help. 
If it had not been for divine aid I would have lost my mental 
balance, but God did not fail me in my time of need. Each 
attack proved less severe than the former. Still the tight 
feeling about my head remained. It was very harassing and 
had a depressing effect and I struggled to get rid of it. At 
last I came to the conclusion God must be allowing it for a 
purpose and that I had better count it a "light affliction which 
is but for a moment." After submission to the will of God, 
I read the aforesaid paragraph in Volume Seven. It came to 
me with strange force and almost scared me, but the peace of 
God through faith in the Father's power came to me and now 
I am no longer troubled with the gripping feeling in my head. 
When I cried to God for guidance he brought clearly to my 
notice the armor of God for the mind, mentioned in Ephesians 
6:17. Day by day, I put on these different pieces, and the 
result is wonderful. Please pray that I may continue to do 


so. This is my only safe-guard. I may not have been as 
faithful in the past as I ought to have been, and perhaps that 
is why the adversary came so close. "Now thanks to God 
who giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ" 
"He will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able, 
but will with the temptation also make a way of escape that 
we may be able to bear it.'* The Morning Kesolve, the Vow 
and the Manna are a great help daily. 

Your sincere sister in Christ, J. M. 

LOVE AND ZEAL NEVER MORE MANIFEST 

Dear Brethren in the Lord: — 

During the twenty -three years I have enjoyed the "present 
truth" it was my blessed privilege to visit the Bible House 
in Allegheny from time to time, remaining three months during
 the summer of 1902; and after the headquarters were removed
 to Brooklyn, I came to the "Bethel'* several times a 
year, and while living in Philadelphia, during 1910, 1911, I 
spent the first Sunday in each month at Brooklyn. During the 
past four years, and especially since our dear Brother Russell
's death, I have been almost daily at the Bethel Home. 
In view of the foregoing 1 believe I am in a position to say 
for your encouragement that never in all these twenty-three 
years have I witnessed more harmony, more love, more fervent
 zeal, more joyful service, and in fact more of the Lord's 
Spirit, than is manifested among the dear friends in the 
"Bethel" at the present time. This seems to be a very strong 
evidence of the Lord's favor and blessing upon the management
 and upon the faithful co-laborers at the Tabernacle and 
in the Home. 

After considerable thought upon the matter, I am firmly 
convinced that the opposition to the present management is 
but a subtle effort of the adversary to "throw dust" into the 
eyes of the Lord's people, and thus to thwart the further publication
 and circulation of the Seventh Volume, if possible. 

And why should there be any objection to the Seventh 
Volume on the part of any one? Who is most interested in 
its suppression? Is there anything in this volume which the 
Lord would disapprove? Surely not! It speaks for itself. 
Is there anything in it which Satan would wish to oppose? 
Yea, verily! For does it not lay bare the evils of his government
; and will it not cause the complete overthrow of his 
kingdom, when once the truths of Revelation and Ezekiel are 
fully comprehended by the people, after "a stone has been 
bound to the book and it has been cast into Euphrates?" — 
Jeremiah 51:60-.64. 

A similar ruse was employed by the great adversary in 
1908. Ostensibly, the opposition was directed against the 
Vow, and our beloved Pastor was made the target of every 
manner of vilification at that time; but the real issue was the 
truth about "The Covenants!'* 

In re the Seventh Volume: it was my privilege some years 
ago to suggest to Brother Russell the title, "The Finished 
Mystery," which he then approved as "very good." And the 
fact that this very title was selected and used by the Society 
is strongly convincing to my mind that our beloved Pastor 
beyond the veil has supervised the writing and publication of 
this work. So much for external evidence. 

And what is the internal evidence? Let each one read for 
himself and ask the question, "Gould anyone have so clearly 
and harmoniously revealed the hidden things of God except 
the hand of the Lord had been upon him':" Nay, verilv! It 
would have been impossible! THE FINISHED MYSTERY 
is indeed the "seventh plague," and it will do its work! As 
for myself, I want to have a little share in bringing about the 
"Fall of Babylon." 

Pray for me, that I may be faithful even unto death. 

With Christian love, Yours in "that blessed hope," 

Gertrude W. Seibert. — A T . Y. 


[6179] 


(366-367) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


THINKS THE SUGGESTION A GOOD ONE 
Deab Bbethren: — 

I was glad to see your recommendation that all the brethren
 give a copy of Volume Seven to their relatives and friends 
this Christmas, and thus have a share in accomplishing The 
Fatx of Babylon, If Tnrc Watch Toweb subscribers would 
each give away on an average of 10 copies of Vol. VII (which 
are offered at half price, 30c each, plus expressage. in lots of 
10), that would mean at least 300,000 copies of The Finished
 Mysteby distributed this Christmas time! Some can 
give away more than ten copies. 

Am now boarding with a Catholic family, and they ask 
me many questions. They seem to have hearing ears. 
With Christian love, yours in his service, 

Axna J. Gillespie. — Iowa. 
CONTINUED APPBECIATIOKS OF VOLUME SEVEN 
"How can I keep from singing? I feel as did the ruler 
of the marriage feast in Cana when he snid: 'Thou has kept 
the good wine until now.' Surely, surely, Volume Seven is 
from the Master. I fully agree with every thought presented 
therein thus far. Just to think that our dear Master revealed 
to me last fall the significance of the living creatures of 
Ezekiel and the four beasts of Rev. 4:6, which has proven 
to be the KEY to Ezekiel and Revelation. My heart falls 
prone before Him in praise and thanksgiving for his wonderful
 manifestation of grace and love. The chariot mentioned 
on page 63 is wonderful. Of course, the little flock are 
bound to have a chariot to ride in before they could go to 
heaven. And who would desire BETTER horsemen than 
Ezekiel and John? And if it be the Lord's will that we go 
in a whirlwind of anarchy we need not fear, for our horsemen 
are perfectly trained and our chariot was made by the Lord 
himself. What a privilege! 'The cup which my Father hath 
given me shall I not drink it?' 'This is the victory that 
overcometh the world EVEN" OUR FAITH.' 'Have faith in 
God/ Have faith in tbe truth. Have faith in the Seventh 
volume." J. P. W,, Ky. 

"What a rich legacy our dear Pastor has left behind him! 
And I wish to express my thankfulness and appreciation to 
each one of those who had any part in getting this volume 
out, and more than this, I pray that each one may be granted 
a special blessing from the heavenly father as a reward for 
their labor of love for the dear saints everywhere," 

R. A. W., Conn. 
"Have read with deep interest and profit the illuminations 
of Revelation and Ezekiel. How wise and so wonderful that 
God should thus hide these things until these great institutions
 should have served his purpose and demonstrated to an 
astonished world the subtle and deceptive power of the 
adversary 1 How glad we are that his end and complete 
binding is so near at hand! May this fact and the glorious 
era of peace and good will to follow, stimulate us all to 
greater zeal and faithfulness until our change come." 

R. I., Ont. 
"My heart burned (glowed) with love as I eagerly read 
from 'To the King of kings and Lord of lords,' then the 
publishers' preface which I have reread, heartily endorsing it 
as given by the 'Chief Reaper* who fills our hearts with love 
for God and for his people, causing me to rejoice and give 
praise to the Lord for this further evidence of His blessed 
favor. I was graciously permitted the opportunity to finish 
its contents in a little over one week/' 

Mrs. L. E. M.. Mo. 
"I have read enough of Volume Seven to impress me with 
the certainty that its individual title 'The Finished Mystery 1 
well applies. It is indeed a wonderful interpretation of the 
two books of the Bible which the clergy have declared for 
centuries contained no message for mankind. Some of the 
able expositors of present truth in giving to the world the 
above named volume have made easy reading matter of Revelation
 and Ezekiel. It will surely be blessed of God in conveying
 a better understanding of the symbolic language of 
Scripture. It is indeed a fitting apex to the pyramid of Biblical
 interpretation by that 'faithful servant. Pastor Russell, 
who though dead, yet speaketh." S. W. M., Mich. 

"In my early childhood my mother had impressed upon 
my mind that, in time, Revelation would be understood. I 
used to ponder over the plagues, angels, etc. I knew the 
beast was the Roman Catholic church but I could not understand
 the plagues. In due time I learned. Volume Seven 
came as a complete surprise, and is proving a great pleasure." 

M. H. D., Tenn. 
"When Volume Seven was handed to me, the surprise 
made me almost gasp for breath. I am deeply thankful to 
God for this book and for the loving labors of every hand 
that has helped produce it." G. K., Okla. 


"Imagine my very happy surprise when on opening my 
P. O. Box I found Volume Seven! Oh, how delighted I was! 
I am wholly unable to express any appreciation to you for 
so kindly remembering me. Truly our heavenly Father 
knoweth "what things we have need "of and 'is supplying all 
our needs according to his riches in Christ Jesus.' " 

H. R., Tewas. 
"We cannot tell you how much we are anticipating enjoying
 Volume Seven nor of the hearts full of thankfulness and 
love to God and to you, as we read it. We surely realize 
that the Lord is using the same channel in dispensing meat 
in due season, We assure you of our loyal support now and 
to the end and recognize that our dear Brother Rutherford 
was surely chosen of the Lord to lead the church to the end 
of her journey." A. E. W. W., Ohio. 

"I am eighty -two years old and have often wondered, 
'Would I live to see the Seventh Volume of the world's most 
wonderful series of God's mysteries unfolded?' 'Praise the 
Lord, my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy 
name."' G. II., W. Va. 

"We accept Volume Seven heartily and fully as the last 
and final serving at our heavenly Father's table, what has 
been so sumptuously spread with delieious viands of truth 
from Jehovah, by His dear Son through that 'Faithful {Servant
' our dear Pastor. We also perceive it to be the fiery 
chariot that will separate the Elijah and Elisha classes." 

E. A. S. W., R. L 
"I feel that my cup of joy overflows. I rejoice that it 
is due time for this solemn message, and I desire to use 
Volume Seven as the 'chariot* that shall help me mount to 
the skies." Mbs. E. B., Mass. 

"The arrangement of Volume Seven, of chapter and verses 
with comments, is most satisfying. It makes the Sword of 
the Spirit shine brighter and renders its use more facile and 
effective. There is much in it to incite heart-searching as to 
faith, loyalty and love; much to arouse us to watchfulness. 
and to admonish 'My soul, be on thy guard'; much to cause 
thanksgiving and praise. To all who in any measure had any 
share in compiling the Seventh Volume I send my thanks and 
assure them of my prayers ascending to our heavenly Father 
in their behalf. Theirs has been a labor of love and of 
sacrifice. It may bring them persecution and suffering. If 
so, let ours be the privilege of building around them a wall 
of prayer to help comfort and sustain them." L M. F., Pa. 

"The way Volume Seven came to me was a great surprise — 
without any notice of its being off the press! I assure you it 
brings us much rejoicing and blessing of heart, and this is 
only a beginning of what we will receive by our further 
studies of this volume." E. L. M., Ind. 

"Volume Seven is precious beyond any dollar value — I 
would be glad if the payment were a thousand times more, 
I've only had time to taste a little of this 'meat in due season
' and oh! it's so good. Oh, how good God is! His ways 
are past understanding." Mrs. I. W. L., Neb. 

"The Lord has indeed multiplied my blessings this day 
by the safe and unexpected arrival of the Seventh Volume. 
My joy was so evident when the post woman delivered it 
that she had to know about it and was glad to get Volume 
One for herself. ( My cup runneth over.' 

"At our Praise meeting tonight the testimonies were full 
of thanksgiving for this very precious completing volume. The 
immediate effect of the short time already given to Volume 
Seven is a heart full of gratitude to God and a reiteration 
of my consecration to him; also deep thankfulness to our 
Lord Jesus, who has girded himself during this harvest neriod 
and is serving us with so rich a feast culminating in Volume 
Seven, through that 'faithful servant,' our beloved Brother 
Russell (who seems very near to us though parted from us for 
a brief while). The preceding six volumes are made still 
more precious by the possession of the Seventh. Truly we 
are thoroughly furnished." F. H. W., Scotland. 

"Brethren, I cannot fully express my appreciation and joy 
in the Truth, and especially for Volume Seven." 

L. G. M., N. y. 
"Volumo Seven has brought a rich blessing to me. How 
thankful we are that we can trust all things to our blessed 
Master, knowing of a truth that his storehouse is full of 
rich blessings for those that love him, and are called according
 to his purpose!" 0. W. H., Ohio. 

"One of the grandest things in Volume Seven appealing 
to me is that it is thought that 1918 may be the year that 
the church will be taken from the world. That is the greatest 
desire I have." Mrs, L. E. B„ Miss. 

"Thanks for having confidence to believe that the dear 
Volume would be appreciated. Yes I want to say may the 


[6180] 


DecKmbSr 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(354-371) 


dear Lord bless the compilers, publishers, editors, mailers, and 
the brethren for their zeal for him. The book is indeed a feast 
to the children of God." J. D. G., Ga. 

"In reading Volume Seven, 'my soul shall be satisfied as 


with marrow and fatness and my mouth shall praise Thee 
with joyful lips.' I greet my Watch Tower with eager hands 
and thrilling heart; for to me it is the blest tie that binds us 
all in him and brings sweet fellowship." M. M., Kan. 


DATE OF DISTRIBUTION— SUNDAY, DEC. 30 


The B. S. M. Volunteer Matter bearing the title THE FALL 
OF BABYLON, is being shipped to the various classes ordering 
the same. It is expected that the classes will have these papers 
by the latter part of December. Sunday, December 30th, is the 
date set for the distribution of this B. S. M. Where the territory
 is large and cannot be covered in one day, then we suggest 
that the work be continued on the 31st and on January 1st, the 


latter being a holiday. Please distribute none of these papers 
before December 30th. It will be well to neatly fold each 
paper and place under the door or in private letter boxes. 
Previous to the date set the territory should be systematically 
divided and eacn. one desiring to work assigned to his or 
her territory, that the work may be done thoroughly and 
quickly. h 


IN RE MILITARY SERVICE 


A number of the brethren throughout the country are asking 
us with reference to non-combatant service. The Selective 
Draft Act passed by Congress May 18th, this year, provides 
that no one is exempt from service which the President may 
declare is non-combatant. The President, up to the present 
time, has not denned what is non-combatant service, and, as 
we are advised by a high official, it is his intention not to do so. 
When Congress convenes again it is our understanding that the 
matter will be taken up and that body asked to define what is 
non-combatant service. Thus it is seen that at this time there 
is no such thing as non-combatant service that is officially defined
. 

As the law now stands, nobody aside from the President has 


any authority to define what is non-combatant service, so then 
if the Local Board of Exemption announces to any one that 
they will be given non-combatant service, such a statement is 
very indefinite and uncertain. In all probability no noncombatant
 service will be defined for several months in the* 
future. 

We have been asked how many adherents to the International
 Bible Students Association there are in the United 
States. From the names on our Watch Tower list we would 
answer, there are approximately 75,000 adherents. How many 
of these are fully consecrated we do not know. There are 
millions who support much of the doctrine taught by Pastor 
Russell and the I, B. S. A. 


IMPORTANT NOTICE 


Few realize the amount of work necessary to bring up all 
the Good Hopes accounts for the year, and to credit individually 
the thousands of monthly remittances and carry them forward 
to the voting-share record, Last year it was necessary to use 
an extra force of assistants for over six weeks. This year we 
adopted the method of sending out the proxy blanks first, so 
that each one who had voting shares could fill out quickly and 
return. It has been found necessary to close all records on 
November 30th, in order that there may be time to have the 
individual records listed, checked, verified and signed in time 
for the election, Jan. 5th. 

Proxies, to be valid for voting, must be dated and signed 
by the shareholder. Have the signature witnessed. Additionally
 all proxies must be certified by the Secretary and President 
of the Society. Such proxies are then Voting Certificates. Even 
though you expect to be personally present at the Annual 
Meetings, you must sign and send your proxy to the Secretary 
so that it may be properly certified and returned to you. Do 
not wait until the convention convenes. Such delay would 


cause confusion and would probably be too late. All proxies 
should be in the hands of the Secretary no later than Dec. 10th. 
After being certified they will be returned to you by mail, or 
delivered to you or to your proxy in person at the convention. 
Write nothing on the back of the proxy blank except your instructions
 to the party who holds your shares. Use a separate 
sheet for orders or letters. 

We shall make no reply to any further papers sent out by 
the opposition. We realize it is only a desperate attempt on 
the part of the adversary to hinder the harvest work which is 
shaking the very foundations of his kingdom. We prefer above 
everything else the approval of our Lord; and the evidence of 
his blessing upon the work of the past year, and especially 
during the last few months is,, to our mind, abundant evidence 
of his approval, and we therefore leave the matter in his hands, 
knowing that he is well able to care for his own, and bring the 
full truth to light in his own time. We have nothing to hide 
and nothing to fear, but a great and glorious work to do 
quickly* — Nehemiah 6:3. 

