Fine Increase “Beyond the Mountains”
HAITI was the first black republic in the West to gain independence. Its name comes from the Arawak Indian language and means “mountains.” Indeed, there is an old Creole proverb that says: “Beyond the mountains are mountains.” This is a good description of the Haitian countryside.
In recent years something remarkable has been happening here “beyond the mountains.” Increasing numbers have responded to the preaching of the good news of the Kingdom and taken their stand for Jehovah and his appointed King. (Isaiah 60:22) By 1980 an average of almost 3,000 publishers were reporting field service each month, and the branch office in the capital city of Port-au-Prince was too small to care for their needs. New premises were needed. So in November 1984 construction of a brand-new facility was begun in Santo, a delightful location on the outskirts of Port-au-Prince.
First the property had to be enclosed by a 4,000-foot-long wall. A local company made the concrete panels for this wall, but local Witnesses were hired, and many volunteers worked weekends, to accomplish the project. Then the building construction work was begun, and over a period of three years, as many as a hundred volunteers from the Port-au-Prince congregations helped out on weekends. Members of the International Volunteer Construction Worker Program came from the United States, Canada, and other countries​—many at their own expense—​to lend a hand.
As construction progressed, an unforeseen problem developed. On one side of the property, there is a ravine. During the rainy season, river waters flood down the ravine, causing considerable erosion. This would eventually have caused the collapse of the fence around that part of the property. So a retaining wall was built right in the riverbed, and the property is now well protected from the rampaging waters that run by during the rainy season.
With Jehovah’s help, a fine facility was eventually completed. The branch is a U-shaped structure made of concrete and block. Its left wing has eight bedrooms, a laundry, and a library. The right wing is the literature depot. In the front part of the building, a spacious lobby comfortably accommodates the brothers who arrive from different parts of the country at various times during the month in order to pick up magazines and literature for their respective congregations. The front also houses the offices, dining room, and kitchen.
Along with the branch office, a new Assembly Hall seating about 3,000 was also built on the property. Two sides of the hall are open, so that those seated inside are constantly cooled by the prevailing winds​—a welcome relief from the hot Haitian sun. There is also a modern, fully equipped kitchen and facilities to serve refreshments, as well as a baptismal pool and a carpenter shop. The grounds are tastefully landscaped with tropical shrubs and flowers.
By the beginning of 1987, the number of Witnesses “beyond the mountains” had increased to more than 4,700. What a grand event it was for all of these to come together on January 25, 1987, for the dedication of these two fine buildings! Some foreign brothers who had worked on the site earlier returned with their families to share the occasion.
The dedication program began in the early afternoon with the various members of the Branch Committee explaining the great need that existed for the new buildings because of the fine increase that was taking place in Haiti. After a short intermission, the 5,384 in attendance were treated to a slide program showing the various stages of the construction work.
Finally, the dedication talk was given by Charles Molohan, a visiting zone overseer from Brooklyn, New York. Brother Molohan spoke of the importance of building for true Christian worship. He discussed how Noah and his family were among the earliest construction workers, and their faithfully completing their work assignment meant survival for the human family, as well as the continuation of true worship on earth. Another ancient building project was Herod’s temple, but this was eventually destroyed because it was not used to promote true worship. (Matthew 23:38) Today, we must be busy building faith and other Christian qualities if we are to avoid a similar eventuality.
It was truly a stimulating and joyful occasion. When it was over, all present returned to their respective homes knowing that this new construction in the land “beyond the mountains” will continue to play a vital role in the gathering of true worshipers in this part of the Caribbean.
[Pictures on page 31]
Views of the Assembly Hall (top right) and of the new branch

