Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Guinea Welcomes “Divine Peace” Conventioners
THE first four days of 1987 saw the first district convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses ever held in the Republic of Guinea, West Africa. Though Guinea is a predominantly Muslim country where the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses is not yet officially recognized, the Witnesses there have earned a reputation as good, kind, peaceable people. It was because of this reputation that the government opened the doors wide to receive the “Divine Peace” conventioners.
Among the delegates were nine missionaries who traveled from Freetown, Sierra Leone, in a van and on two motorcycles. At the border, they had to cross a river on a ferry that consisted of three dugout canoes with planks laid across them. Once they had safely crossed with the vehicles, the missionaries asked: “How much do we have to pay?” “You people are Jehovah’s Witnesses,” was the reply. “No charge.”
What about customs and immigrations? “Don’t worry about it,” they were told. “Everything has been taken care of. Just wear your lapel cards.” Hundreds of other delegates were having similar experiences. Not only had the government of Guinea allowed free passage across the river separating Guinea from Sierra Leone and Liberia; they had waived customs and immigration formalities for anyone possessing a “Divine Peace” lapel badge! One circuit overseer, who came from Liberia, said: “The lapel badge was far better than a passport.”
The Guinean government was helpful in other ways. They provided a vehicle to transport Witnesses from the capital, Conakry, to the convention city of Guéckédou, over 400 miles away. They authorized the purchase of gasoline for the vehicles that had come from Freetown. They directed the hotel nearest the convention site to reserve all their rooms for the Witnesses. They also sanctioned the use of the city hall for the convention, providing it free of charge.
The district governor, who is the highest official in that part of the country, hosted 11 delegates at his own residence. He was also among the 1,132 who listened to the public talk on Sunday.
Jehovah God will not forget such kindness shown to his servants.​—Matthew 10:42; 25:40.

