Teach Those With Limited Reading Skills
 1. What challenge may we encounter in the ministry?
1 While engaging in our ministry, we occasionally encounter the challenge of teaching the truth to people who have difficulty reading. What can we do?
 2. How and why do we accord dignity to those with limited reading skills?
2 Respect Their Dignity: It is a person’s heart condition, not his secular education, that matters to Jehovah. (1 Sam. 16:7; Prov. 21:2) Therefore, we do not look down on those with limited reading ability. Such ones will be more likely to accept our help when we demonstrate respect and patience. (1 Pet. 3:15) That may involve not insisting that the person read a text or a paragraph. As a person progresses in learning precious Bible truths, he may become more eager to improve his reading ability so as to experience the joy of reading God’s Word “in an undertone day and night.”​—Ps. 1:2, 3.
 3. What teaching methods may be used to teach those with limited reading ability?
3 Teaching Methods on Bible Studies: Pictures are an excellent teaching and memory aid. You might ask the student his observation about a picture in the publication you are using. Then use specific questions to help him understand what the picture teaches. Use scriptures that teach certain points of the picture. The pictures may also be used to review the lesson. Do not cover too much material at one time. Emphasize the theme and the main points of the lesson, and avoid introducing outside material. Read the scriptures directly from the Bible, and use questions to make sure the student understands what was read. This may increase his desire to improve his reading skills so as to search for more Bible truths on his own.
 4. How may we help our student to improve his reading ability?
4 Aids to Improve Reading: People with limited reading skills or who have had little opportunity to learn to read fluently may understand and retain information very well. You might encourage such ones to use available audio recordings of our publications. Listening closely to the reader while following along in the printed copy, even repeating the words in an undertone, will help the person to improve in his reading skills. He may also find the brochure Apply Yourself to Reading and Writing to be helpful. In some areas, the elders may also arrange reading classes in the congregation. These practical suggestions may assist us in helping those with limited reading skills to understand “the holy writings,” which are able to make them wise for salvation.​—2 Tim. 3:15.

