Announcements
“BE TRANSFORMED BY MAKING YOUR MIND OVER”—Rom. 12:2, NW.
Aware of the transforming power of God’s Word of truth, Jehovah’s witnesses and their associates world-wide desire to have this power work in their behalf. It aids them to make their minds over, no longer fashioning their lives after this present system of things, but learning to know and to do the “complete will of God”. With the enlightened outlook that God’s Word gives them they want to assist others also to gain life-giving knowledge. During September they will collectively put forth a special effort to make calls on those who have obtained literature published by Jehovah’s witnesses and encourage them to start home Bible studies. To this end they will present the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures and the book What Has Religion Done for Mankind? on a contribution of only $2. The New World Translation and the companion book are of unequaled value in the field of Bible study and research, as they give in understandable present-day English the sacred secrets of God’s Word and his gracious purposes toward right-minded persons. You, too, may learn these precious truths and have a share in passing them on to others. Send your inquiries to the branch office in your country. See list on second page.
PREPARE FOR TWO CONVENTIONS
Readers of The Watchtower are invited to attend the district assemblies of Jehovah’s witnesses, the majority of which will be held September 5 to 7, 1952. For details of these assemblies and locations and other dates, see the July issues of this magazine. These district assemblies we hope will take care of your convention needs for 1952.
The year 1953 will be blessed with a worldwide assembly, a convention arranged for in New York city’s Yankee Stadium. Then people from all parts of the United States, Canada and the rest of the world will convene. What an assembly that will be, by Jehovah’s undeserved kindness! If you have never attended a convention of Jehovah’s witnesses, be sure to go to a district assembly this year. Enjoy that and we feel sure your appetite will be whetted for the 1953 international gathering. We urge you to attend this year, and prepare now for next year’s world-wide assembly. We hope you will receive the blessings of both these conventions.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of September 28: God’s Spirit Essential to Maturity, ¶1-20.
Week of October 5: God’s Spirit Essential to Maturity, ¶21-26; also, A Mature View of Dedication.

