Christians Suffer Violence in the Philippines
AMONG the evidences Jesus gave as marking his second presence and the end of this system of things was that his followers would be hated and killed for his name. (Matt. 24:3, 9) A striking example of the fulfillment of this prophecy took place Sunday evening, April 20, 1952, as Jehovah’s witnesses were at a circuit assembly in Solana, Cagayan, Philippine Islands. One witness was killed and more than 32 were injured by gunfire and stabbings as city officials attacked their gathering.
The trouble started toward the end of the concluding address of the assembly when an attacker, on the complaint that his little boy had been slapped by one of the conventioners, grabbed one of the young attendants and endeavored to drag him out of the private assembly lot. Other attendants interfered and so the attacker pulled out a gun, which the attendants succeeded in forcibly removing from him, but not before he had shot one of the attendants in the shoulder. Bested in a fight, he ran away for help. Shortly thereafter the mobsters gathered and began throwing stones at the assembled witnesses, as well as firing shots wildly. The assembly as a result was thrown in a semipanic with women screaming and trying to take refuge in a big house on the assembly grounds. The shooting continued and the attackers kept moving in closer. One witness escaped through the enclosing cordon and ran to the municipal building for help. There, upon his identifying himself as one of Jehovah’s witnesses, he was severely beaten and in endeavoring to escape was shot down in front of the municipal building.
In the meantime the attackers, having exhausted their supply of bullets, drew bayonets and knives. A number of the witnesses escaped through the cordon, but most of them sought shelter in the big house on the grounds, under it or on top of it. The attackers closed in on them, slashing right and left. The chief attendant (usher) was stabbed to death through the heart. Others suffered multiple wounds, one witness of 65 years having five stab wounds. Four of the women witnesses were also wounded.
A Gilead graduate who serves as a circuit servant ran five miles and swam the wide crocodile-infested Cagayan river to summon the aid of the Philippine Constabulary. If it had not been for the timely arrival of these soldiers it is probable that many more of the witnesses would have been killed. These soldiers disarmed the attackers and restored order at once. Using an army truck and a commandeered ambulance, they made six trips to the provincial hospital with the more seriously wounded ones. In fact, they did everything they could for the witnesses. The secretary of national defense was interviewed by a spokesman for the witnesses and given personal thanks for the efficient action taken by the Tuguegarao P. C. command in the matter.
Indicative of the fear that the attackers had instilled in the people of this area, the constabulary felt it necessary to supply nine guards to the attorney for the witnesses as he went to Solana to file the charges against the officials responsible for the attack. The constabulary offered to house and feed the key witnesses in their barracks until the trial to avoid their being intimidated. None of them accepted the offer although they thanked the constabulary for it.
At the funeral of the murdered witness his surviving fellow witnesses were exhorted to continue faithful in the service. Their spirits were very confident and not one of them was downhearted or discouraged. Even the wounded in the hospital were rejoicing. The one who went to the municipal authorities for help and who was beaten and shot had to be taken to Manila for treatment of his right leg, fractured by the shot. He was operated on and is recovering splendidly. All others who were wounded are likewise recovering well.
Jehovah’s witnesses in the Philippines expressed themselves as thankful to Jehovah that the whole incident was not more costly in lives and suffering. Far from being daunted by it they rejoice that it resulted in a mighty witness being given. Steps are being taken to bring the wrongdoers to justice.

