‘Ethiopia Stretches Forth Her Hands’
“LET Ethiopia eagerly stretch forth her hands to God.” (Ps. 68:31, AT) Within the past two years missionaries trained at the missionary school of Jehovah’s witnesses at Gilead, South Lansing, New York, have entered Ethiopia, there to make known the good news of the established kingdom of Jehovah God and to bid the prisoners “Go forth”. The following two letters were received from two of the first Ethiopians who took their stand for Jehovah and made a break for freedom.
“DEAR BROTHERS:
“Jehovah God bless you. I hear so much about you through your letters which say Hello to me that I want to write that you should know that I thank you for all things what you say. I am glad you took time as brother though you never saw me before to face. I want that you know how happy I am that Jehovah God and Society send to Ethiopia his witnesses to tell us truth and what we need to know about Bible. I for long time believe Bible and want to be Christian and say that I am Christian. But when people ask me what means to be Christian I don’t know for what to tell them. Now, thanks to Jehovah our God, I can answer to them what means to be real Christian and witness of Jehovah. I so pray to know about new world and that all Devil’s world soon end at Armageddon. I start at once to witness to people and try to hold studies for them but they don’t believe me what I tell them, saying that they never heard this thing before. But I not discouraged cause I know it is truth. They laugh to me and say I have new religion but I say my religion older than theirs cause Abel was Jehovah’s Witness and many other times Bible tells about these who witness for Jehovah. This makes them mad to me but I no care but only look for sheep who want to know about Kingdom. Brothers, I happy to see what you say to me through your letters to brothers here and hope that you know that my theocratic love go to you like you to me. May Jehovah use me much to get gospel preached in Ethiopia before Armageddon.”
“TO ALL MY BROTHERS IN WORLD WHO SO KIND TO ASK ABOUT ME AND SEND LOVE,
“I have to give you short statement telling you how much your ask about me mean and how much I owe thanks for love you show for me as new brother. I now tell something to you about how the Almighty God Jehovah’s witnesses are walking in this new field, this place called Ethiopia. First I must tell you how I come to truth. My name is Regassa Jota, old 23 years, was borned in west pagan part of Ethiopia in Wallega province. I learn Italian and Amharic during time Mussolini take Ethiopia and then I hear some the first things about God through Catholic. I want to serve true God but many things seem to me not right. After emperor return to Ethiopia I go to school. During these years I like to hear Bible from those who claim to be missionary of God calling selves Sudan Interior Mission. I interest much as I want to serve God and preach to others. I go to their school to be missionary but I see things I don’t like to see from them. I also have many questions they don’t answer. I find that they commercial God’s Word for sale and that they not true servants as they claim. Still I study and preach for them because I want to serve God. I ask questions about trinity and many things that they scared to answer. They tell me I must accept what they say about things, but one day while I out preaching for Sudan Mission, I hear about Jehovah’s witnesses that nobody like them. I go to make visit with them and find Brother Woody who tell me many things about God’s Word like I never hear before. I glad inside great much when I go back to school for the things which I now hear. I bring other boys with me to Jehovah’s witnesses. I want for them to hear many things too. They like. Things which I learn from Jehovah’s witnesses I ask about in Missionary school and they become very angry of me and cannot answer questions. I begin to know that I at last find truth cause nobody can make successful argument against what I now tell the people from Jehovah’s witnesses. From school I receive my eat, my house, and my clothes. My home over 1,000 kilometers away and I have nobody but God to help me. I take stand for truth. Now I happy great much more than I can tell you cause I find truth and now can preach about Kingdom as brother to people like you brothers who send me love. I now preach all time and place many booklet to let people know about Kingdom. I in truth for almost two months but I hope Jehovah open way for me soon to return to my country where are many persons I know who be glad to learn about God’s kingdom and also be Jehovah’s witnesses. I pray God give me the knowledge and faith to spread truth in this country before Armageddon come to destroy all. I wish some day I see all you brothers which the brothers here tell me so much about. Maybe some day I see you even if it is after the new world. Even if I don’t see, please I ask you to know that I glad to be your brother in his service and I praise to great Jehovah. Your telling me salutations by your letter to brothers here mean much to me and I hope this letter make you glad to hear from me like I glad to hear from you.
“Your brother to witness for Jehovah.”

