Do You Remember?
Have you read recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you will doubtless recall these points:
● How are we to understand the apostle Paul’s words at Acts 20:18-21?
From the “first day” that he entered Asia, Paul ‘bore thorough witness.’ This he did “publicly and from house to house,” searching for spiritually minded persons, then teaching them on a regular basis and later making shepherding calls as necessary. All of this provides a fine pattern for the work that Jehovah’s Witnesses are doing today.​—7/15 pp. 11-13.
● What is meant by the reference at Psalm 72:16 about there being ‘an overflow of grain on the top of the mountains’?
With God’s blessing, the soil would produce abundantly. Usually, mountaintops are not places where grain flourishes. So this is a beautiful picture of the plenty that was to be enjoyed, initially under the reign of King Solomon and finally under the rule of Jesus Christ.​—8/15 p. 8.
● Why did Jeremiah refer to Jehovah as “King of the nations”?​—Jer. 10:7.
Jehovah is the outstanding King, the Supreme One, the One who dominates all other kings. The Most High has demonstrated his superior kingship by taking action against the rulers of the nations, as when he gave the Israelites the victory over Kings Sihon and Og.​—8/15 pp. 19, 20.
● Why did Jeremiah say: “You have fooled me, O Jehovah”?​—Jer. 20:7.
Jeremiah was fooled in a beneficial way. God’s word had exercised a persuasive influence on him. Jehovah had proved stronger than Jeremiah’s weakness, making it possible for the prophet to endure in the divine service to its completion.​—9/1 p. 31.
● From what tree are the “good” and “bad” figs mentioned at Jeremiah 24:1, 2 obtained, and what do they represent?
The symbolic figs came from the nation of Israel. The ‘good figs’ represented the repentant remnant of the nation, whereas the ‘bad figs’ stood for the unfaithful ones. The modern fulfillment is to be found in true Christians, as contrasted with unrepentant Christendom.​—9/15 pp. 18, 19.
● Why has the truth about Christ’s 1,000-year reign been distorted?
During the first century C.E. the apostles exercised a restraining force that preserved the purity of Christian teaching. However, not long after they died an apostatizing from the true faith took place. This eventually led to the development of a host of conflicting sectarian views.​—10/15 pp. 5, 6.

