Meetings Incite to Fine Works
1 Two essential features of our worship are attending congregation meetings and sharing in field service. The two go hand in hand. One influences the other. Christian meetings incite to fine works, the finest of which is the Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making work. (Heb. 10:24) If we were to quit attending meetings, we might soon cease to preach because we would not be incited to do so.
2 At weekly meetings, we receive spiritual instruction designed to motivate us to preach. The urgency of the times is kept before us, impelling us to take the Bible’s life-giving message to others. We are encouraged and strengthened to endure in the preaching work. (Matt. 24:13, 14) By taking advantage of opportunities to comment at the meetings, we become more accustomed to expressing our faith before others. (Heb. 10:23) By enrolling in the Theocratic Ministry School, we receive training to be more effective ministers and to improve our teaching skills.​—2 Tim. 4:2.
3 How Service Meetings Incite Us to Preach: All of us are encouraged to look over the material in Our Kingdom Ministry ahead of time. This information is then impressed on our minds as we attend the Service Meeting and see presentations demonstrated from the platform. When in field service, we can think back on Our Kingdom Ministry, recall the presentations that were demonstrated, and thereby give a more effective witness. This has been the experience of many publishers.
4 As a follow-up to Service Meetings, some make appointments with others to share together in the ministry. Publishers have field points fresh in mind and are stimulated to try them out because these meetings have encouraged them to have a share in the preaching work each week.
5 There is no substitute for our Christian meetings, where we gather with fellow worshipers and are incited to fine works. If our ministry is to flourish, we must regularly attend the congregation meetings. May we show appreciation for this wonderful provision from Jehovah by “not forsaking the gathering of ourselves together.”​—Heb. 10:25.

