Older Ones Preach Without Letup
1 As people grow older, many of them focus on retiring from their regular secular work and enjoying a carefree life during their remaining years. They may feel that they have worked hard enough and now deserve a rest. Or they may just want to enjoy life, whatever is left of it.​—Luke 12:19.
2 As Jehovah’s dedicated servants, we have a different focus on life. We know there is no retirement from God’s service. Our outlook is positive because we keep “everlasting life in view.” (Jude 21) Years of accumulated knowledge and experience may improve a person’s discernment and insight. This could enable one to become wiser and more balanced and to manifest a deeper appreciation for life. All these attributes serve one well as a minister of the good news.
3 Growing old is not just a matter of physical aging; it also involves one’s mental attitude. If you expect to live a long time and you strive to stay young in your outlook, your chances of doing both may increase. Older people can enrich their lives by increasing their spiritual knowledge and sharing it with others.​—1 Cor. 9:23.
4 Real-Life Examples: At the age of 86, one sister said: “When I meditate on the 60 years that have gone by since I learned the truth, God’s reassuring promise wells up in my heart. Yes, Jehovah who will act in loyalty with loyal ones is letting us reap bountiful joy.” (Ps. 18:25) One elderly brother recalled how the death of his wife came as a severe shock to him, after which his health deteriorated badly. He said: “Yet, by Jehovah’s undeserved kindness, I revived sufficiently to be able to enter the pioneer service two years later. How grateful I am to Jehovah that my health has actually improved with this increase in preaching activity!”
5 How commendable it is that so many older ones are determined to continue preaching to whatever extent their health and strength permit​—without letup! They have good reason to exclaim: “O God, you have taught me from my youth on, and until now I keep telling about your wonderful works.”​—Ps. 71:17.

