Announcements
● Literature offer for November: New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures along with book “Let Your Kingdom Come” for contribution of $4.50. December: My Book of Bible Stories for a contribution of $2.50. The “Look!” brochure can also be offered for a contribution of 30¢. January and February: Any two of the older pocket-size books the congregation has in stock for a contribution of $1.00. May include Choosing, Commentary on James, “Eternal Purpose,” Evolution (old edition), Good News, Holy Spirit, Peace and Security (old edition), This Life, Truth, and World Government.
● It is important that brothers planning charters to visit Brooklyn Bethel or Watchtower Farms first correspond by mail with the offices at each location. Please provide information on the number coming and the dates for each location. The Society will provide directions and the route chartered buses must take. Address your mail to the Bethel Office, 124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, NY 11201 or Route 1, Box 300, Wallkill, NY 12589.
● Congregations should begin ordering the 1988 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses on their November literature orders. (The 1987 Cost List, paragraphs 7-10, gives date congregation should submit order.) The Yearbook will be available in Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Norwegian, Portuguese, Spanish, and Swedish. Until the Yearbook is available and shipments are made, it will appear as “Back Ordered” on congregation invoices. Yearbooks are controlled stock items (See the Cost List, paragraphs 23-25.) and will cost $1.00 for congregation and public; 50¢ for pioneers. Regular and special pioneers on the list before July 1, 1987, may receive a free copy for which the congregation may request credit.
● New Publications Available:
Aid to Bible Understanding (Volume 8, Sin-Z)​—German
Reasoning From the Scriptures​—Cebuano, Iloko, Tagalog
United in Worship of the Only True God​—Shona
A Secure Future​—How You Can Find It—​Fijian
Tract No. 14​—Danish, French
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
The First of Kings (set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—German
● Out of Stock in U.S.A.:
The Two Babylons​—English
Is There a God Who Cares?​—Japanese
● The following publications are now available in grade-two English Braille:
Examining the Scriptures Daily​—1988 (four volumes: $5.00)
Theocratic Ministry School Schedule for 1988 (free upon request)
To obtain Braille publications, please send a separate order to the Society’s BRAILLE DESK, giving the name and address of the person who will use them. Include remittance for purchase. Do not include with congregation orders for printed literature.

