Doing the Necessary Things to Please God
1 Pleasing our Creator is of primary importance to us, for “Jehovah is finding pleasure in those fearing him.” (Ps. 147:11) Our desire is to please the true God, as Enoch did. (Heb. 11:5) There are some necessary things that we must do. These would include ‘abstaining from blood,’ in accord with the divine command recorded at Acts 15:28, 29. As you will recall, this matter was recently considered at our 1987 “Trust in Jehovah” District Conventions.
2 Being admitted into a hospital, especially in an emergency situation, can bring about circumstances that severely test our faith and integrity. Preparation must be made in advance in order to minimize difficulties that may arise. For example, it is vital that you always carry an up-to-date medical card that is properly filled out and signed. Another very important precautionary step is to be sure that your doctor is informed in advance, if possible, of your nonnegotiable stand on the blood issue.
TALK TO YOUR DOCTOR
3 Reports show that some have been lax in talking with their doctor in advance, before an emergency arises. Although they may have informed their doctor that they are Jehovah’s Witnesses, they failed to explain clearly their position regarding the use of blood, and they did not determine whether he would respect their wishes. If you have a doctor but have not personally talked to him about such matters, you should do so the next time you visit him. If it does not appear that you will otherwise visit your doctor in the foreseeable future, it is recommended that you endeavor to make an appointment at your earliest convenience.
4 At the “Trust in Jehovah” District Convention, practical suggestions were given as to things that should be discussed with your doctor, as well as the manner in which this should be done. Emphasis was placed on the need to show respect for the position of doctors, not being antagonistic or displaying a superior attitude. Such a negative approach would be unwise and self-defeating. Compared to our doctor, we may be experts in God’s Word, but we should give him due honor as an expert in medical matters. (1 Pet. 2:17) Please do not discuss nutritional and other nonmedical treatments with medical doctors in the context of our stand on blood. Your individual views on such matters may cause them to lose sight of the fact that your position regarding the use of blood is primarily a Scriptural stand.
WHAT TO SAY
5 When you next visit your doctor, tell him that you have a brief but very important matter to discuss with him before getting to any medical reason for your visit. Then cover the following eight points outlined at the “Trust in Jehovah” convention: (1) You appreciate his skill and your good relationship with him as your doctor. (2) You have a fundamental conviction that he needs to be aware of. (3) For religious reasons you absolutely cannot take a blood transfusion, even in an emergency. (4) You realize this may complicate things, but you cannot alter this ethical stand. You hope he will offer his best treatment within this limitation, as many other physicians are doing. (5) This also applies to any other doctor he may arrange to care for you. (6) You will accept any added risk and sign release forms, and you request that your position be written into office and hospital records. (7) Provide him a copy of the article reprinted from a medical journal in Awake!, June 22, 1982, pages 25-7. (8) You appreciate the opportunity to explain this position, which is so important to you now and in the future. These eight points should be presented briefly, in a nonargumentative, serious, and appreciative manner. Your congregation will have received copies of the reprint of the medical article.
6 Experience has shown that such advance efforts toward establishing a good relationship with doctors and clearly informing them of your stand is very helpful when an emergency arises. If your resolute position is presented in a reasonable and respectful manner, your doctor is more likely to be understanding and cooperative. Our complying with Jehovah’s commandments will be pleasing to Him and will result in His continued blessing.

