Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 1
Song 172
10 min: Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry and local announcements.
25 min: “Seeking the Kingdom First.” Questions and answers. Have an experienced publisher demonstrate presentation in paragraph 4.
10 min: Question Box. Discussion with audience by presiding overseer. Highlight information regarding which books may be used in home Bible studies. Those mentioned should be used if available in the language of the student.
Song 146 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 8
Song 71
 8 min: Local announcements, August field service report, including “Outstanding New Peaks,” and accounts report. Mention Society acknowledgment of all contributions, including donations to Society Kingdom Hall Fund and for missionary travel.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—By Handling Conversation Stoppers.” Questions and answers. As time permits, briefly demonstrate suggestions for handling conversation stoppers.
15 min: Encouragement From the Pioneers. Interview two or three who have taken up the regular pioneer work during the past year. What motivated them to enroll as pioneers? What obstacles were in their way and how did they overcome them? What encouragement would they offer to others who want to enter the pioneer work? Auxiliary pioneers may be interviewed similarly if there are no new regular pioneers in the congregation.
 7 min: Examining the Scriptures Daily. Talk based on the day’s text and comments. Encourage daily consideration of text. Invite all to share in weekend magazine-day activity.
Song 21 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 15
Song 221
 7 min: Local announcements. Announce special field service arrangements for November 26 where this is a designated holiday.
18 min: “Helping Inactive Ones.” Question-and-answer discussion. In connection with paragraph 4, service overseer gives a five-minute demonstration of how he sets up visits and what publication will be used by the two elders making the initial call.
20 min: Youths, Do You Have Spiritual Goals? Talk by experienced brother, encouraging young persons to set spiritual goals. Many tempting worldly goals face youths today. World exerts strong influence. What attitude should we have toward these temptations? (1 John 2:15, 16) Why? (1 John 2:17) Since world is passing away, it would be unwise to pursue riches and a position in this world. (1 Tim. 6:9, 10) Instead, we should be active in Jehovah’s service today. (Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20) Could set goals such as reaching national average of hours for publishers, making return visits, conducting a Bible study, getting baptized, helping other young ones, helping the elderly, auxiliary pioneering, regular pioneering, serving where the need is greater, missionary service, and Bethel service. (Matt. 6:33) Why is a lifetime of serving Jehovah the best goal to have? (Eccl. 12:1) By setting spiritual goals, we receive help from Jehovah and draw close to him and his Son. (Jas. 4:8) Interview two or three exemplary youths who are pursuing spiritual goals in their life and have been blessed by doing so, or interview older ones who have set goals and achieved them.
Song 183 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 22
Song 48
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Announce arrangements for magazine-day service.
20 min: “Doing the Necessary Things to Please God.” Question-and-answer coverage.
15 min: Local needs. Secretary may discuss reporting field service time and Bible studies. Stress that individual reports are due promptly at the end of each month.
Song 96 and concluding prayer.

