Presenting the Good News​—By Handling Conversation Stoppers
1 With each opportunity we have to give a Kingdom witness, our heartfelt desire should be to present the message in the best, most effective, way possible. Even in the face of difficult circumstances, Hebrews 13:15 reminds us: “Let us always offer to God a sacrifice of praise, that is, the fruit of lips which make public declaration to his name.” Our readiness to make skillful use of the Reasoning book in handling conversation stoppers will improve the quality of our ministry.
2 There may be several reasons why a householder might use a potential conversation stopper. While many persons may be sincere, others are deliberately evasive or seek to break up the effectiveness and continuity of our presentations. If we are familiar with some of the suggestions in the Reasoning book, we can assess the situation quickly and respond appropriately. (Prov. 25:11; Isa. 50:4) This could pave the way for a fine witness that otherwise may have been missed if we were not prepared to meet this challenge. Why not give serious thought to how you might respond to some common potential conversation stoppers?
3 “I’M NOT INTERESTED”: Notice that practically all the suggested responses on page 16 of the Reasoning book involve asking the householder some tactful, direct, and thought-provoking questions. This is a good approach, since it gets the householder talking. It may reveal his thinking and feelings. This, in turn, may help you to direct the conversation further.
4 When a person says “I’m not interested,” have you ever asked: “Would you be interested if I could show you from the Bible how all crime, war, and racial tensions will be removed?” Try it. Others have had good success using such questions.
5 “I’M BUSY”: As with all other potential conversation stoppers, this one can be briefly acknowledged and then used as a springboard to present an abbreviated message. Perhaps you might use the first suggestion on page 19: “Then I’ll be very brief. I called to share just one important thought with you.” You can then state the essence of the current Topic for Conversation on religion.
6 Where it is determined that the householder is genuinely busy, this should be recognized, and a thought-provoking question can be raised that you can offer to answer at another time. Using the latter approach, one publisher had the householder come looking for him, wanting an immediate answer to the question. Aren’t such results worth the time and effort we might spend in preparing to handle potential obstacles we face in the ministry?
7 The opening comments on page 15 of the Reasoning book remind us that the Kingdom message is both thrilling and faith-strengthening. It has the ability to transform the lives of those who listen. Recognizing these facts, every Kingdom proclaimer should want to give a superior sacrifice, “the young bulls of our lips,” when sharing in the witnessing work. (Hos. 14:2) Do not allow potential conversation stoppers to diminish the quality of your service or dampen your joy. Make good use of the Reasoning book as you present the good news.

