Question Box
● Why should we study two publications with new ones, even though they may get baptized before finishing both books?
As we teach the truth to new ones, some individuals will understand and accept it faster than others. Some may qualify for baptism in a relatively short period of time. However, it is important that all of those coming to know Jehovah be “filled with the accurate knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual comprehension, in order to walk worthily of Jehovah to the end of fully pleasing him.” (Col. 1:9, 10) By studying completely the Live Forever book and then United in Worship or True Peace, new ones will be helped to do this.
Through an initial study of a book on fundamentals, followed by a book that covers Christian qualities, the student receives well-rounded-out knowledge. He also learns basic principles that govern personal conduct and worship vital to a person’s becoming a true Christian. Each one coming into Jehovah’s organization needs to become full grown in powers of understanding as to what is involved in basic Christianity.​—1 Cor. 14:20.
Additionally, experience has shown that to be full grown in powers of understanding, the help of a mature teacher is needed. As important as it is to read the publications personally and attend meetings where they are studied, such does not always produce the “wisdom and spiritual comprehension” the new one needs for serving Jehovah acceptably. To achieve the stature of a full-grown man in powers of understanding, a personal Bible study with a teacher is essential. (Acts 8:30, 31) Thus, even though a person may get baptized before completing his study of the above-mentioned books, the course of wisdom dictates that his home Bible study should continue until he has completed the study of both books with one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. The one conducting the study may report the time, the return visit, and the Bible study until the second book is finished, even though the student has been baptized.

