Seeking the Kingdom First
1 Every reasonable person wants to enjoy a long life under peaceful conditions. This is a normal desire, and such may be attained by ‘seeking the Kingdom first.’ (Matt. 6:33) However, instead of seeking the Kingdom, people today do so many things that detract from enjoyment of life. Overindulgences and excesses seem to be the order of the day. Dangers to life itself abound. Disruptive violence and civil disorders have spread to parts of the earth once noted for a more tranquil way of life.
2 Still, we know that if a person gives priority to ‘seeking the Kingdom,’ his life will be affected for good. Jehovah will lengthen his days and add years to his life.​—Prov. 3:1, 2.
VALUABLE ASSISTANCE
3 During the month of November, we will be working to help people seek the Kingdom and pursue the goal of life by offering the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures along with the excellent Bible study aid “Let Your Kingdom Come” for the contribution of $4.50. What a privilege we have to help others in this way! We want to be ready with talking points that might stimulate interest in righteoushearted ones and help them to see how these publications will be beneficial to them in seeking the Kingdom first. What can we say?
4 If the householder appears to be religiously inclined, after introducing yourself you may wish to say: “People who are interested in improving their way of life may show this by following a particular religion. But many who do so are still unhappy. Why is this so? The Bible gives us this reply: [Read 2 Timothy 3:1, 2, 5.] It is readily seen from what we have read that merely having a form of worship is not enough. Well, what does God expect of us? Notice the answer given here at John 4:23: [Read.] The Bible itself will help you to learn more about the religion that has real value. May I leave you this easy-to-understand translation along with this book for $4.50?”
5 If the edition of the New World Translation you are offering includes the feature “Bible Topics for Discussion” in the back, you may suggest that the householder make use of this to get clear insight into each subject under discussion by referring to the cited scriptures.
6 You may find a person who already has the New World Translation. If so, then simply try to interest him in a copy of the “Kingdom Come” book. You might say: “Certainly belief in God’s Kingdom would be an important part of the religion that God approves. May I offer you this book that is designed to familiarize you with the many references to the Kingdom found in the Bible you have already? It is yours for just $1.00.”
OUR GOAL
7 Our goal is to help honesthearted ones learn about Jehovah and motivate them to seek the Kingdom first. This will build up their hope of life under righteous conditions. Offering the modern-language New World Translation and the “Kingdom Come” book with its clear, direct, and yet appealing style will help us reach our goal. Let us be enthusiastic in performing our ministry!

