From Our Readers
The Slimming Nightmare
I want to tell you how much I appreciated the article “The Slimming Nightmare.” (November 8, 1982) It is such a common problem today. I know because I recently recovered from it and I could relate personally to the article. I felt as though it was written especially for me.
S. L., California
Thank you for the article “The Slimming Nightmare.” Our daughter had anorexia nervosa. Our experience with this terrible disorder underlined the importance of getting immediate medical attention. The cure takes hard work on the part of the individual, but the cooperation of parents and other children in the family is also extremely important. Is it worth it? To our family it was. We again have a healthy daughter who gave birth last April to our first granddaughter.
W. D., California
Celsius Versus Fahrenheit
Kindly be reminded that 60° C. equals 140° F. exactly and not 108° F. as you would have it in your article “A World’s Fair Spotlights Energy.” (October 22, 1982) This warrants an “errata.”
P. H., Canada
The article was explaining a principle of geothermal energy and was showing how, as you go down into the earth, the ground temperature increases at the rate of 3 degrees Celsius per 100 meters. So if you were to dig down 2,000 meters, you would get water not of 60 degrees but 60 degrees hotter than you started with. The difference between freezing and boiling on the Celsius scale is 100 degrees, but on the Fahrenheit scale it is 180 degrees. So on the comparative scale a difference of 1 degree Celsius becomes 1.8 degrees Fahrenheit, and a difference of 60 degrees Celsius becomes a difference of 108 degrees Fahrenheit. It is true that on the absolute scale 1 degree Celsius is 33.8 degrees Fahrenheit, and 60 degrees Celsius is 140 degrees Fahrenheit.​—ED.
About Shyness
I want to thank you for the article “What Can I Do About My Shyness?” (November 8, 1982) My shyness was so severe that I imprisoned myself in my own house. Friends who might visit me would stay away because of my reluctance to visit them back. Now I’ve had a dramatic change after applying the suggestions on how to conquer shyness, discussing things with people, visiting friends, and so forth. I am glad that I’m no more a prisoner of shyness.
O. O., Nigeria
Appreciating Creation
I have enjoyed reading your magazine for years, but I just had to write to express my heartfelt appreciation for the beautiful article “Appreciating Jehovah’s Creations” in your issue of January 22, 1983. In this world, where it is not considered popular to show appreciation to God, and we are encouraged to give credit to “nature” for the beauty of the heavens and the earth, it was very refreshing to hear the credit go to the rightful recipient, God. It draws us closer to our Creator to recognize the works of his hands and the love shown in that he created these things for our enjoyment.
N. N., Texas

