Pleasing God While at School
SCHOOLS are a fine provision. They provide for students useful knowledge on a wide range of subjects. And they teach many important skills. Yet, at the same time, secular schools today are a source of danger to youths who desire to please God by living in harmony with the righteous principles of the Bible.
In many schools drugs are common. Marijuana is smoked in bathrooms and heroin is peddled in hallways. Also, sexual immorality is rampant; unmarried pregnant students now being common in some schools. For Christian youths, schools present other dangers that can adversely affect their standing with God. So a student must be careful if he is to benefit from school, rather than be ruined by its worldly influence.
Right Motive
There are a variety of reasons why persons seek a secular education. Some youths desire a university diploma to set them up for a well-paying job. Others go through the motions of getting educated in order to better their social standing. But what about a youth whose desire is to please his Creator, Jehovah God?
Such a youth appreciates that there is superior knowledge and a finer skill than any offered by secular schools. This is knowledge of Jehovah and his purposes, and the skill of teaching others this knowledge. So a Christian youth’s motive in wanting an education is quite different from that of most of his schoolmates. He is not ambitiously looking for advancement in the economic or social structure of this world. Rather, he desires an education so as to be better equipped for a lifetime of dedicated service to God.
Advantages and Practical Benefit
Thus Christian youths should apply themselves conscientiously to their studies while at school. One of the advantages of doing this is that it broadens one’s ability to think and reason on matters. Also, young persons will find that throughout life it is to their advantage to be proficient in reading and writing. They will also find it helpful to be able to calculate accurately and quickly, to have a general knowledge of human affairs, of history, of geography, of science, as well as to know a language other than their native tongue.
It is certainly of practical benefit to have a good basic education. This will aid Christian youths to talk and serve with understanding in many situations. (1 Cor. 9:19-23) The apostle Paul’s speech on Mars Hill is a fine example of combining Bible knowledge with other things that one has learned. As a result of his wide range of knowledge, Paul on that occasion was able to give a thorough witness about God’s purposes.​—Acts 17:22-31.
In getting an education, it is good to seek knowledge and skills that can be used in supporting oneself financially. Such a course is in keeping with the example set by the apostle Paul, who said: “You yourselves know that these hands have attended to the needs of me and of those with me.”​—Acts 20:34.
So while at school perhaps one can learn some trade or occupation. There may be opportunities to learn carpentry, painting, machine work, dressmaking, cooking or typing. There are many kinds of work for which young Christians can prepare that may enable them to support themselves financially while they direct their main efforts in teaching God’s Word to others.
Keeping on Guard
While seeking to obtain the greatest benefit from school, it is, at the same time, vital to be constantly aware of the dangers. The Bible pointedly warns: “Do not be misled. Bad associations spoil useful habits.” It also says: “Let fornication and uncleanness of every sort or greediness not even be mentioned among you, just as it befits holy people; neither shameful conduct nor foolish talking nor obscene jesting, things which are not becoming, but rather the giving of thanks.”​—1 Cor. 15:33; Eph. 5:3-5.
Even if fellow students are not fornicators or drug addicts, it does not mean that they are good associates. They may tell obscene jokes, talk foolishly and not hesitate to cheat or in other ways be dishonest. Rather than keep company with such persons, the Christian can choose to associate with those who have regard for decency and principle. He should ever be on guard against associations or activities that could cause him to violate Bible principles.
But there are other dangers against which Christian youths must be on guard. These, too, can lead them into a course opposed to that taken by their Master, Jesus Christ, and thus adversely affect their standing with God.
Worldly Politics
The course taken by Jesus was one of nonparticipation in any form of worldly politics. He said of his true followers: “They are no part of the world, just as I am no part of the world.” In keeping with his own words, Jesus took purposeful steps to avoid being pressured into political office.​—John 17:16; 6:15.
But what is the situation in schools today? Is there a similar danger of becoming involved in worldly politics? Almost everywhere, it seems, students are getting involved in political issues. This has led to demonstrations, rioting and violence in schools throughout the world. Whether school politics are in the form of these eruptions or of a quieter classroom variety, Christians are under pressure to become involved, to participate.
What will Christian youths do? They will want to guide their conduct in harmony with the teachings of God’s Word and the example of Jesus Christ. What matters to them most should not be what other students think, or even what their teachers say, but what their Creator Jehovah God thinks and says.
What is the purpose, for example, of classroom elections of officers or class leaders? These actually serve to train young persons to participate in the machinery of worldly politics. Is this what a Christian youth wants to train for? Would Jesus Christ, who said, “I am no part of the world,” want his true followers to train to participate in worldly politics?
The faithful stand of young Christians in these matters often impresses and gains the respect of teachers and fellow students alike. For example, a youth at a Christian assembly at Asahikawa, Japan, related:
“When I was in my second year in high school the class elected me to their committee. So I explained that Jehovah’s witnesses as Christians cannot take part in worldly politics. My classmates brought up many objections, but finally they reluctantly took me off the committee.
“Shortly afterward the teacher in charge of my class called me and said he wanted to know about my faith. He did not believe that there was any connection between the existence of God and human living. He said that belief in God is only for weak people. However, with full reliance on Jehovah I witnessed to him. Finally he said, ‘I would like to know all about your faith,’ and gladly contributed for some Bible literature.”
Songs and Salutes
Singing songs that exalt people, institutions or nations is common in some schools, and so is the saluting of some national emblem. Christians find joy in singing songs and sharing in other exercises that give praise to Jehovah God. But what about giving praise to men, nations or institutions?
True Christians profit from the example of the three faithful Hebrew servants of God named Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego. Babylon’s ancient ruler King Nebuchadnezzar set up a huge golden image, and the order was issued to all present: “At the time that you hear the sound of the horn, the pipe, the zither, the triangular harp, the stringed instrument, the bagpipe and all sorts of musical instruments, you [must] fall down and worship the image of gold that Nebuchadnezzar the king has set up. And whoever does not fall down and worship will at the same moment be thrown into the burning fiery furnace.”​—Dan. 3:5, 6.
These three Hebrews refused to pay homage to this image or emblem to which the State required everyone to give praise. It was not that they were rebellious youths; rather, they simply believed in giving all honor and praise to Jehovah God.
As nationalism increases throughout the world today many young Christians will meet with similar situations. What can a youth do if his Bible-trained conscience does not permit him to salute emblems or sing songs that exalt the nation or his school?
Where such situations are foreseen, it would be proper for a youth to explain his beliefs to his schoolteacher or principal ahead of time. It will impress the teacher if he makes matters plain in his own words. A reasonable teacher, who respects the individual’s conscience, will arrange for a student to be excused from such ceremonies. The experience of a young Christian in Sapporo, Japan, illustrates how such situations may be handled.
“During my second year in middle school, a gymnastic meeting was held, and this included a flag-raising ceremony. Knowing this ahead of time, I immediately went after class dismissal to the teacher’s room and made my position plain to the teacher, telling him that I could not take part in the flag-raising ceremony. The teacher seemed taken aback, and told me that this was not worshiping the flag, but was just a matter of paying it respect.
“I explained that taking one’s hat off and other such services toward the flag amounted to worship, and that I could give this only to Jehovah God. At last, after some discussion, the teacher kindly excused me. At the gymnastic meet, I did not take part in the ceremony, but only in the races. Afterward, I was able to witness from the Bible to my fellow students concerning my reason for not taking part in the ceremony. I was very happy that the teacher showed respect for my stand.”
Physical Culture
While sports are profitable for bodily development, training of the mind and instilling appreciation of spiritual things are of far greater importance, as the Bible says: “Bodily training is beneficial for a little; but godly devotion is beneficial for all things, as it holds promise of the life now and that which is to come.— 1 Tim. 4:8.
However, suppose schools make participation in kendo, judo, boxing or other martial arts compulsory, what should the Christian do? He will want to follow his Bible-trained conscience. The following experience of a young person who graduated from high school in Fukui City, Japan, and became a full-time pioneer preacher illustrates the blessing that can come to one who does.
“I went ahead of time to the physical culture teacher and explained that, since Christians do not strive with one another, I wanted to do extra reading during the judo hour. However, he did not grant this permission. So I explained to him the words of 2 Timothy 2:24, that ‘a slave of the Lord does not need to fight, but needs to be gentle toward all,’ and Isaiah 2:4, that ’they will learn fighting no more.’ But still he refused to acknowledge my position, stating that judo was required as a group exercise, and that if I did not take part I would not be able to graduate.
“Being determined, I once again explained my position. I had the teacher read the June 15, 1964, Watchtower article ‘Youths, Keep Your Integrity While at School.’ Appreciating that there was nothing rebellious in my attitude, the teacher then did some investigating. Finally, he told me, ‘It will be all right to refrain. Just put on the judo uniform, and that will be sufficient.’ However, that would have looked to other people as though I were taking part in judo. It smacked of compromise. So I refused to put on the uniform. For a time the teacher insisted, but when he saw my firm stand he did not say anything more. I got very low marks for sports, but this did not prevent my graduating.”
Preparing for a Lasting Future
Young Christians must carefully guard their steps in order to please God while at school. (Ps. 16:8) If they do this, secular education can serve as a valuable aid in helping them to use their lives to honor the Creator, Jehovah God. By balancing secular education with the more important Bible education, young people today, like the youthful Timothy of the Bible, may treasure up “for themselves a fine foundation for the future, in order that they may get a firm hold on the real life.”​—1 Tim. 6:19.
Imperfect man, with his life-span of seventy or eighty years, is able to touch merely the fringe of knowledge. But those entering on the eternity of “the real life” will find it limitless in its educational opportunities. It is well worth while now to reach out, not only for a good secular education, but also for knowledge and understanding of God’s purposes that lead to eternal life.​—John 17:3.

