Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you will doubtless recall these points:
● What is the primary function of elders in the Christian congregation?
Their primary responsibility is to care for the spiritual interests of the congregation. This calls for their taking the lead in the proclamation of the “good news,” and in teaching, helping, reproving, correcting, exhorting. They must be actively interested in the spiritual welfare of each individual.​—Pp. 598-600.a
● In what sense is the way leading to life narrow?​—Matt. 7:14.
It is narrow in that it restricts those who follow it from doing things that would result in injury to themselves and/​or to others.​—Pp. 621, 622.
● Why could Jesus say, “I have conquered the world”?​—John 16:33.
Jesus triumphed over the world by not becoming like it. He did not permit himself to be absorbed by the world.​—P. 638.
● What identifies a person as being in “want of heart”?​—Prov. 6:32; 10:13, 21; 12:11.
A person in “want of heart” is one who is inexperienced or who ignores the serious consequences that could result from a wrong course. Besides lacking good motive, he is a person without heart appreciation.​—Pp. 659, 660.
● How can we understand Psalm 16:7, where David speaks of his kidneys as correcting him?
In the Bible, the kidneys represent what a person really is, his underlying personality. Being situated very deep in the body, the kidneys could be spoken of as being in the innermost recesses of a person. In the case of David, the advice of Jehovah had become a part of his personality. That advice was embedded deep inside him, as it were in the kidneys. So, his kidneys, that is, the advice of Jehovah embedded inside David, could correct him during the wakeful hours of the night.​—Pp. 664, 665.
● How might a person guilty of gross wrongdoing also become guilty of sin against the congregation, making it necessary for him to seek the congregation’s forgiveness?​—Compare 2 Corinthians 2:7.
The gross wrongdoing of one of its members may, in some cases, give a congregation a bad name in the eyes of others. Through its representative elders, the congregation cannot forgive the wrongdoer for serious sin itself, as this is done by Jehovah God. But the elders, upon determining whether the wrongdoer is truly repentant, can forgive him for whatever reproach, trouble and sorrow his sin may have brought upon the congregation.​—P. 693.
[Footnotes]
All references are to The Watchtower for 1977.

