Announcements
FIELD MINISTRY
A person who believes God’s Word has every reason to speak boldly when he shares its message with others. This does not mean that he lacks kindness and consideration for others, but he is not apologetic about the teachings of the Bible. He knows that they are the truth, and he confidently shares them with others. This Jehovah’s witnesses will continue to do during September as they call on people everywhere to share with them the good news that the Bible contains, doing so both by their spoken word and by offering Bible literature to interested persons on a small contribution.
ANNUAL MEETING OF MEMBERS
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania is a corporation formed and used by Jehovah’s witnesses for the advancement of the Society’s work of preaching the “everlasting good news” in conformity with the holy word of Jehovah God, the great Provider of the Kingdom and the Kingdom message. Yearly this corporation has its business meeting, which in 1965 falls on Friday, October 1, 1965, at the office of the Society located at 4100 Bigelow Boulevard, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213.
Letters of notice will be sent to the members of the corporation. The members can ensure their receiving the notice and accompanying proxy by making certain that the secretary’s office has the present mailing address of the member to which the notice is to be sent.
While the purpose of here making mention of the annual meeting is to remind those who are members to provide the Society’s secretary with their present mailing address, mention is also made of the fact that any reader of The Watchtower is welcome to attend the annual meeting.
DOES YOUR RELIGION SUSTAIN YOU?
What does your religion mean to you? Is it a serious part of your life? Do you depend upon it to sustain you? Then take this matter to heart: The Bible foretells the complete downfall of the religious systems of both Christendom and the pagan world! In addition, prophecy warns of the desolate condition of those who have relied upon them. Why would God allow this? What must you do to have God’s protection? You need the 704-page hardbound book “Babylon the Great Has Fallen!” God’s Kingdom Rules! Send only 75c.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
September 26: What Comes First in Your Life? Page 520.
October 3: Jehovah Blesses the Putting of His Kingdom First. Page 526.

