Boldly Speaking God’s Word with His Spirit
SPEAKING boldly means speaking courageously, speaking without fear, speaking with confidence. It means being outspoken, having freeness of speech.
Boldly speaking God’s Word certainly is what the early Christians did. Note Peter’s outspokenness when asked by the officials by what authority a man lame from birth had been healed: ‘If you are asking us about a good deed done to an ailing man, let all of you know that it was done in the name of the man you recently impaled but whom God raised from the dead, yes, Jesus Christ!’ And when charged no more to speak in Jesus’ name, the apostles replied: “Whether it is righteous in the sight of God to listen to you rather than to God, judge for yourselves. But as for us, we cannot stop speaking about the things we have seen and heard.”—Acts 4:7-20; 5:29.
What accounted for their boldness? For one thing, their having been with Jesus, even as their foes were obliged to acknowledge. (Acts 4:13) Also, their being filled with God’s holy spirit: “They were one and all filled with the holy spirit and were speaking the word of God with boldness.” (Acts 4:31a) Not one whit behind the other apostles was Paul. No sooner had he been converted than he began “speaking boldly” God’s Word to the Jews, and he kept on speaking boldly, even as the inspired record repeatedly states.—Acts 9:28; 13:46; 14:3.
Just as the opposition of rulers, religious and political, did not stop the early Christians, so it is not stopping those who are sincerely and intelligently following in their footsteps today. Eloquent proof of this is being given by Jehovah’s witnesses behind the Iron Curtain and in such lands as Spain and Portugal. We have an important message to give, to the honor of Jehovah and the salvation of men, and there is not much time left for giving it. Some of our enemies threaten physical violence, others use ridicule, but, not fearing what men may think or do, we must continue to speak God’s Word with boldness.—Jer. 1:17.
If we have this boldness, we will not be waiting for opportunities to come to us to speak God’s Word, but we will be making them by sharing in the house-to-house ministry and by incidental witnessing. So let all Christian ministers be boldly speaking God’s Word with holy spirit, in particular during the month of September, in keeping with its theme.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, January 1. 1964.

