Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you should recognize these important points. Check yourself.
● Who will be resurrected from the dead?
All persons in Sheol-Hades, the common grave of dead mankind, will receive a resurrection.—P. 74.a
● Of what is Gehenna a symbol?
Jesus used Gehenna, a valley near Jerusalem that served as an incinerator, to symbolize complete, endless destruction with no hope of a resurrection.—Pp. 107-110.
● What steps could one take to find answers to one’s Bible questions?
You could refer to the Subject Index or Scripture Index in the Watch Tower Publications Index and also consult Bible dictionaries and concordances. If the questions were relative to one particular text, you would do well to read the context.—Pp. 124-127.
● Why is materialism a deadly philosophy?
It causes people to forget God and to concentrate on material things, which cannot give them eternal life.—Pp. 133, 134.
● What steps can a Christian take to settle a personal difficulty with another person?
(1) Go to the other person and discuss the matter. (2) If he does not listen, take along one or two mature Christian brothers as witnesses. (3) Speak to the representatives of the congregation about the matter.—P. 298.
● What is the “new commandment” of love?
It is that Christians love to the extent of being willing to give up their lives for one another, as Jesus did.—Pp. 210, 211.
● How, in the near future, will God provide a banquet for all the peoples, as promised at Isaiah 25:6?
In God’s righteous new order there will be provided sufficient rich spiritual and material food to satisfy all persons then alive.—Pp. 244-246.
● What are the four words the Greeks use to express the idea of love?
(1) Agápe—principled, godly love is a fruitage of God’s spirit. (2) Philía—affection felt for friends. (3) Storgé—natural affection between family members. (4) Éros—romantic love between the sexes.—P. 203.
● Why can it be said that Jehovah’s witnesses are unworldly and yet not antisocial?
They refuse to share in the immoral practices, degraded entertainment and false religion of the world. So it can properly be said that they are unworldly. However, they do not take part in social or political revolutions, and thus they are not antisocial, against society.—Pp. 421-423.
● What motivates some persons to return to God’s organization after they at one time drifted away from it?
They experience the frustrations and spiritual famine of the world, and they hear of the happiness and spiritual prosperity in Jehovah’s organization.—P. 488.
[Footnotes]
Page numbers refer to The Watchtower for 1965.

