VOL. XXIX. OCTOBER 1 No. 19 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 291 

More Miracle Wheat 291 

Seven-Headed Wheat Discovered 291 

Is Surgery a Cure for Crime? 291 

Churches Plunging Into Hypnotism 292 

Vow Letters Not a Few 293 

What Constitutes a Church? 293 

"The Evil One Toucheth Him Not" 294 

Parables of the Kingdom 297 

Saul and David in Review 298 

Hell Hath Enlarged Herself 300 

Watch Tower Bibles— New Edition 302 

New Edition of the Debates 302 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 303 

page 290 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each MAY stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



HALIFAX THREE DAYS' CONVENTION 
OCTOBER 15, 16, 17, 18 



In compliance with the request of the Newfoundland 
and Nova Scotia friends, a General Convention will be held 
at Halifax, N.S., October 15-18. 

Sessions will convene at 10 a.m. and 2.30 and 7 p.m. each 
day. On Thursday, Friday and Saturday in St. Paul's Hall, 
Argyle Street. On Sunday the meetings will be held in Orpheus 
Hall. All Believers in the Atonement by the precious 
blood will be welcomed. Boat excursions from Boston. Excursion 
rates on New England and Provincial railroads on 
"Certificate Plan" are hoped for. 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S SERMONS 



The cheapest way in which Brother Russell's sermons 
can be had regularly every week by the year in foreign lands 
is through the ENQUIRER, price $1.00 (4 shillings, or 4 marks, 
or 5 francs); this includes postage. Order through any of 
our Branches. 

Nine journals are now publishing Brother Russell's discourses 
weekly, and through these Present Truth reaches 
probably 800,000 people regularly. If only one in a hundred 
reads it means a wide influence for the honor of the Lord. 

VOLUNTEER MATTER, 1908 



We still have plenty and it is excellent; all who have 
the time and strength may use this opportunity to serve in 
the "Harvest" field. 



R4250 : page 291 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
MORE MIRACLE WHEAT 



OUR notice of the "Miracle Wheat" grown in Virginia, 
the grower reports, has caused him lots of trouble 
answering letters and returning money sent for small 
samples. He has shown us representative stalks of the wheat 



and photos of its growing in the field, fully corroborating all 
that we have published respecting the same. But he refuses 
to sell any of it until he has secured a fair stock, which will 
be in a few years hence. 

Meantime the matter has brought out the fact that others 
are also propagating "Miracle Wheat," as witnessed by the 
subjoined reports. We advise farmers to begin at once to 
inspect their wheat before cutting and cull out for seed the 
choicest, fullest heads or most "stooled." Our thought is 
that in this natural way God is preparing for the Millennium, 
when "the earth shall yield her increase." 

SEVEN-HEADED WHEAT DISCOVERED 

W. W. Ward, of Dayton, Washington, has discovered a 
new variety of wheat that has seven distinct heads united to 
a common base. And each head is larger than the ordinary 
wheat. Ward figures that the new variety will yield as high 
as 280 bushels to the acre, with an average of 200 bushels. 

Hundreds of farmers have visited the Ward ranch and 
are intensely interested in the new wheat. All have asked 
for a few pounds of the seed, but Ward is figuring upon 
further experiments and plans to plant all of this year's crop 
next season, enlarging his present area to about three acres. 

Ward has been experimenting for five years to get a 
wheat that will yield bigger crops, but never expected anything 
like the seven-headed variety.— Sioux City Tribune. 



Neither of the above notes relate to what is termed 
"Alaska" wheat grown in Idaho, which we understand 
had been repudiated by Government experts. 

IS SURGERY A CURE FOR CRIME? 



Is the modern criminal to be reformed by means of the 
surgeon's knife? Is our whole penal system— reformatories, 
jails, and asylums for criminal lunatics— to be abolished, 
while society depends for protection, and looks for the elevation 
to a higher moral standard of the thief and the murderer 
to a few inches of steel wielded by the hand of a strong-nerved 
genius of science? 

Recent miracles of surgery, such as those performed by 
Dr. Bernard Hollander, who has recently claimed that criminals 
should be judged according to a medical standard, suggest 
that we are on the eve of a revolution in our treatment 
of the criminal and insane, and that in a few years a dozen 
cuts of the lancet will effect a greater change in the moral 
equipment of the Ishmaelites of society than years of confinement 
in a jail. 

Look at the case of Holzay, otherwise known as "Black 
Bart," the terror of half-a-dozen states in America. No 
treasure on board a train was secure against his evil designs; 



no plans of the detectives were sufficient safeguard against 

his desperate courses. "Black Bart" stole and murdered 

with impunity; but in a slack moment he fell into the hands 

of the police and his criminal career was closed by a sentence 

of imprisonment for life. In a few weeks he was removed 

to the criminal lunatic asylum, and the prison surgeons, deliberating 

long and anxiously over his case, came to the conclusion 

that "Black Bart's" crimes were not so much the result 

of "cussedness" as a sheer inability to run in the straight 

and narrow path. His brain was affected by a tumor; remove 

the growth, they said, and it's a thousand chances to 

one that "Black Bart" will become a fairly decent member 

of society. The operation was performed, and in six weeks 

the nature of the once desperate criminal had completely 

changed. The knife, while removing the tumor, would seem 

to have removed his evil passions as well; his old blood-thirstiness 

had disappeared, and prison-wardens, who formerly 

hesitated to approach him unless in couples, found him 

as harmless as, and more tractable than, a child. 

Not long since a Welsh railway porter fractured his 
skull by falling off a truck. He was trephined, and apparently 
got well, but always suffered from epileptic fits. His 
usual alertness deserted him, and instead of being a bright, 
intelligent man, he became drowsy and listless, indifferent 
to all that was going on around him. In this condition he 
was taken to the Liverpool infirmary, where it was found 
that the old hole in the skull was an inch long, and that a 
flap of skin, including the old scar, was directly attached to 
the brain. What did the surgeons do? They scraped the 
folds of the brain clear of this skin, and placed between the 
brain and the bone a thin plate of gold in order to prevent 
them sticking together again. Over this the skin was neatly 

R4250 : page 292 

drawn and securely sewn. A week later the patient was 
sitting up in bed; in a month or less he was reading the 
newspapers, and taking a keen and intelligent interest in the 
busy world around him. The instruments of the surgeon 
had saved him from becoming a human log; they had 
brightened his brain, and sharpened his faculties as no treatment 
in an asylum could have done. 

A somewhat similar case was that of Jay Lentz, employed 
as a foreman at the Great Western mines at Harmon, 
in Virginia. He was caught under a fall of slate, his skull 
was broken, and a piece of his brain was torn from the main 
structure. Of course, his mental condition immediately 
changed for the worse. The doctors, faced by a terrible 
problem, resolved on heroic measures. The shattered brain 
was neatly dressed. A healthy yearling calf was tied down, 
her skull cut away, and a lobe of the brain removed and 
fitted into the cavity of Lentz' head. Slow, but sure, was 
the miner's progress towards recovery. As his physical health 
improved his old-time intellectual brightness came back, 
until he was able to resume his ordinary occupation in life. 

More marvelous still, however, is a case in which the 



surgeon's knife has been used to restore the moral faculties, 

with a boy as the subject. The boy is Carl Fredericks of 

Hoboken, whose brain is so peculiarly formed, say the doctors, 

that if left alone he would never do right. The growth of 

the brain matter has installed in him a tendency toward perpetual 

evil. Let us rid his skull of the excess, said the surgeons, 

and see if any moral improvement is visible. Certain 

parts of the brain, which were considered to cause the trouble, 

were cut away, and the effect was surprising. Carl is growing 

good; his wicked tendencies are gradually disappearing, 

and it is expected that in a few years he will have his full 

quota of moral faculties.— London Exchange. 

CHURCHES PLUNGING INTO HYPNOTISM 



About a year ago, two ministers of New England decided 
to try methods analogous to those used by Spiritists, 
Eddyists, Mormons and Hypnotists for the cure of diseases. 
They met with a measure of success, as do the others. The 
news of their methods is spreading, and a prominent publishing 
firm, with a Methodist D.D. at its head, is now sending 
circular letters to ministers everywhere, advertising two 
new books which they publish, explaining how the work can 
be carried on by any preacher along hypnotic lines. 

We print below extracts from a long article in the 
Kansas City Star, detailing the fact that Rev. A. T. Osbron 
of its city, is endeavoring to use hypnotism to regain his hold 
upon his dwindling congregation of Methodists. We quote: 

"It has been said of life insurance that 'You have to die 
to win.' Similarly the policy of the church has been to hold 
out promises of a happy reward to the faithful, but they had 
to die to get it. 

"The reason Christian Science numbers its converts by 
the thousands while the orthodox church complains of a 
falling off in membership is this: Christian Science holds out 
the offer of help to the afflicted, rest to the weary and health, 
wealth and prosperity for all. Its helping hand is extended 
now. Its promise of happiness is in this life. 

"The old church with its policy of 'suffer all manner of 
evil for great is your reward in heaven,' cannot compete with 
a creed which holds out such promises of immediate 
well-being. 

"The Rev. Mr. Osbron believes that all Methodist ministers 
not only should preach the gospel, but should "heal the 
sick" and comfort by the divine power in them. In his little 
church at 925 Newton avenue, Dr. Osbron has undertaken a 
movement portentous for the church and to humanity. It is 
a movement which its founder hopes will grow and encompass 
the earth. It is interesting to listen to the opinion of 
this prophet of the church that is to be. 

R4251 : page 292 

'"The fact that men care little about theory or doctrine,' 



said Mr. Osbron, 'explains why very sensible men become adherents 

to such unscientific and non-Christian organizations 

as the Spiritualist or Christian Science church. The truth is 

a large part of their membership is totally unfamiliar with 

the doctrines to which they have subscribed. Visible facts 

attracted them. They wanted results and that was all they 

cared for. Their interest was aroused by what the church 

did, not what it taught. 

"No one can deny that in practice the Christian Scientists 
do a great deal of good— that they relieve pain and cure 
some diseases! These are indubitable facts. 

"Many thousands there are who would gladly testify to 
the efficacy of their manner of treatment, and in the face of 
such a multitude of witnesses we can but hold our peace. 
True, it is urged that many of their patients die without 
medical aid. Just so do the patients of the doctors die in 
spite of their medicines. 

"The orthodox church must utilize the marvelous healing 
powers of suggestive or psychic therapeutics. This power 
has been possessed by individuals from the earliest times. 
By its means the early church-men performed miracles of 
healing by touch. Of late it has been disregarded by the 
church and the attention of followers called only to the 
miracles of other days. Quacks and charlatans have seized 
upon the psychic power and used it for their personal aggrandizement. 
It is time for the church again to take up this, 
their allotted task, and obey the Scriptural injunction, 'heal 
the sick,' as a part of the church's ministrations to its 
followers. 

"My method is in no sense that of the Christian Scientist. 
The Scientists deny the reality of pain, disease and sin. I 
believe they are very real. But I also know that much suffering 
can be relieved and many physical ills cured by suggestion 
and prayer. 

"There are thousands wandering in the shadow of insanity 
who might be saved by proper suggestion. It is 
astonishing to discover the number there are who are constantly 
harassed by fear in various forms. They screen these 
fears and fixed ideas from their friends, and suffer in silence 
until nervous breakdown, suicide or crime is the certain end. 
All these could be cured, criminal tendencies removed and 
the reform schools all but emptied by the proper use of 
hypnotic suggestion." 

"The minister's meeting of the Methodist church in 
Kansas City, after a discussion of a favorable character, appointed 
a commission consisting of the Rev. Ernest Claypool, 
the Rev. Daniel McGurk and the Rev. Arthur Barton, to keep 
in close touch with the movement, and to make an official 
report to the body on the first Monday of September next 
as to the class of work done." 



Let us not be misunderstood. We fully agree that the 
human mind can either greatly assist or hinder a disease or 
its cure. We advise all to mentally resist everything undesirable, 



mental and physical; and that God's children obey 
their Lord's advice and "cast all their care upon him," realizing 
that fear is a most dangerous thing, except the fear of 
displeasing God. But how sad it is to see professed ministers 
and professed people of God, rushing into Satan's trap, 
wholly negligent of and as above scoffing at the essence of 
the Master's teaching. He that saveth his life shall lose it 

R4251 : page 293 

and he that loseth his life for my sake and the Gospel's shall 
find it— preserve it unto life eternal. How remarkably few 
understand that the call of this Gospel Age is "to suffer with 
Christ," and to "be dead with him" that we may by and by 
live and reign with him. 

Let us, who are awake to the true situation act accordingly 
—avoiding Hypnotism, Spiritism and Occultism (demonism) 
in their every form of deception, and let us do all we 
reasonably can to spread a knowledge of the Truth to all 
people, especially to Christians. 



R425 1 : page 293 

VOW LETTERS NOT A FEW 

VOW letters from individuals and classes continue to 
pour in upon the Editor. He is glad to have them 
and requests that you excuse the impossible pleasure 
of answering every one of these by letter. He thinks 
none the less of some who have "sat down and counted the 
cost" before taking the Vow. 

Some of the letters wish that the matter had been presented 
sooner, as it might have saved them some painful experiences. 
Others find it "just in time" to forewarn and 
forearm them. One Colporteur reports that the first three 
parties canvassed one morning were Spiritualists. The 
thoughts presented in connection with the Vow held him 
back, and that night he made the Vow his own before the 
Lord. 

So many as recognize it as the Standard lifted up by 
the Lord (Isa. 59:19) for our help and for the assistance of 
others with whom we have influence— such of course will be 
prompt to take it and sure to keep it. Time will tell. Meantime 
those who have taken it relate that they experience 
fresh blessings and we rejoice with them. 

"Offer unto God thy thanksgiving: and pay thy vows 
unto the Most High; and call upon me in the day of trouble: 
I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me. But 
unto the wicked God saith, What hast thou to do to declare 
my statutes, or that thou shouldst take my covenant in thy 
mouth!" Psa. 50:14-16 and see 19-21. We can spare room 
for only one letter at this time: 

BELOVED PASTOR:- 



I can only add multiplied emphasis to the many expressions 
of joy and gratitude already given by the friends respecting 
the Vow and all the articles pertaining thereto, 
every word of which I have eagerly read and weighed and 
applied to myself. 

Very humbly I registered my Vow to the Lord, dear 
brother, not as one of those who had no special need of its 
protection, but as one who was in sore need. Reared in an exceedingly 
affectionate home and accustomed to excessive 
demonstration of love and affection, the breaking of the 
home ties when I entered the Colporteur work brought me 
much loneliness which the Adversary no doubt saw much 
sooner than I myself did and cunningly acted upon. My 
confidence in the Lord's people was unlimited— and not until 
recently have I seen the great danger confronting us all in 
this direction. The mistakes that I have been led into are 
painful memories, but I thank God have prepared me for his 
blessing. I am glad for the Vow— I am desirous of all the blessing 
it can bring. I remember at his throne every day all who 
have taken it. May his grace be richly with us all. 

With much love for you and deep appreciation of your 
faithful devotion to the Lord and careful attention to his 
flock, I am, 

Yours in the hope of perfect love, 



R4251 : page 293 

WHAT CONSTITUTES A CHURCH 

SINCE the appearance of the article, "The One 

True Church," we have received several communications 

inquiring as to the right or privilege 

of a portion of the congregation to split off and 

hold meetings by itself as a separate and distinct 

Church. As already pointed out in the article referred 

to, our Lord's words inform us of his willingness to 

recognize any two or three of the faithful, consecrated 

ones when they meet together in his name, and that 

the presence of the Head with such members constitutes 

a Church, in the Scriptural sense. 

But while this is true it is also true that the teachings 
of our Lord and of his apostles and the practices 
of the early Church all agree with the thought that the 
New Commandment, "that ye love one another as I 
have loved you," implies such a close fellowship of 
spirit amongst all of the Lord's dear people as will 
lead them to desire to come together rather than to disintegrate 
into smaller groups. We should notice carefully 
the words, "As I have loved you"; that they signify 
a very deep, earnest love and not a mere tolerance. 
The Lord loved us to the extent of giving his life for 
us, and the Apostle points to him as our example and 
declares, "We ought also to lay down our lives for the 
brethren." This is the love wherewith he loved us. We 



are to remember, too, that this is not a sectional or 
sectarian love for class or party in the Church, but is 
for all, because they are his. True, it is not possible 
to love all to the same degree of appreciation, but all 
are to be loved to the degree of a willingness to lay 
down our lives for them; because even the humblest of 
the Lord's little ones has a claim on the noblest of 
them, for does he not belong to the same great army of 
the redeemed, enlisted under the captaincy of Immanuel 
in the fight against sin and with a covenant agreement 
with his Master to lay down his life in his service? 
How could we help but love those who have 
devoted their all to the same Master whom we serve— 
and the fact that the Master accepts of such and is not 
ashamed to call them brethren is the best of reasons 

R4252 : page 293 

why we also should accept them and not be ashamed 
of them, but on the contrary love them and be glad to 
serve them, even to the extent of laying down hours or 
days of life itself in their assistance. 

Everything connected with the Spirit of the Lord 
and the instructions of his Word seem to antagonize 
the thought of division amongst the members of his 
Body. A beautiful illustration of this is found in the 
fact that the dear friends everywhere, as they grow in 
grace and knowledge, seem to become more and more 
imbued with the desire to come together— in the one-day 
conventions and still more so in the general conventions; 
and in these the thought is often expressed 
that our longings and fellowship for one another will 
not find complete satisfaction until we gather with our 
Lord and all his faithful in the General Assembly of 
the First-born, "whose names are written in heaven." 

We all remember the Apostle's arraignment of sectarianism; 
and it is well that we take note of the fact 
that he attributes it to a partisan spirit with which he 
had no sympathy and to which he refers as an evidence 
of carnality, fleshly-mindedness, indicating an immature 
development along spiritual lines. He says, 
"While one says I am of Paul, and another I am of 

R4252 : page 294 

Apollos, and another I am of Cephas (Peter), are ye 
not carnal? Is Christ divided?" (I Cor. 3:3,4.) He 
goes on to say that none of these redeemed us, but 
Christ alone, and that we are all baptized into his Body 
and therefore are related to each other, because we are 
related to him our Head; and he proceeds to say that 
there should be no schism in the Body; that is to say, 
no split, no division. 

Whether we are conscious of it or not, dear friends, 
it is doubtless true that a spirit that favors a division 
of the class, where such a division would not be due to 



distance hindering a proper gathering at one place, 
must be a spirit of sectarianism or partisanship. 
Sometimes this is a result of a brother desiring to be 
leader and wishing for a fuller opportunity for the exercise 
of his talents as a servant of the Church. At 
other times, as in the case the Apostle mentions, 
it is due to partisanship on the part of a portion of the 
Church who are desirous of following leaders, even 
when the leaders themselves do not desire it, as in St. 
Paul's case cited. In any event it would do us good in 
this connection to scrutinize our own hearts individually 
rather than to judge one another in this matter. 
Quite possibly in some places where there is a disposition 
on the part of some to split off and hold separate 
meetings there may be some real cause or reason; but 
the better way would be to correct that difficulty and 
remain united. Unconsciously sometimes the Lord's 
people become too narrow and control Church arrangements 
too much along the lines of the will of the majority, 
rather than endeavor to arrange such a programme 
as would as nearly as possible please, profit 
and happify all. 

The Apostle's exhortation is that we "consider one 
another to provoke unto love and good works." This 
signifies not merely that we should consider the tastes 
and preferences of the better educated or the naturally 
more noble or rich or refined, but that we should seek 
to consider all the dear members of the Body. It is 
easy comparatively to love the refined, the educated 
and the well-developed spiritually, and to love these is 
in harmony with what our Lord suggests that even the 
Gentiles do, "If ye love them that love you what thank 
have ye? do not even the publicans and sinners the 
same?" The brotherly love to which the Apostle refers, 
saying, "Hereby we know that we have passed 
from death unto life, because we love the brethren"— 
this love is not merely the love of the refined and elegant 
and accomplished and noble-minded. Many people 
love those who have not passed from death unto 
life. But it becomes an evidence of our having passed 
from death unto life if we love the brethren, of whom 
the Apostle intimates that many are ignoble; yea, even 
saying that "God hath chosen the mean things of the 
world." It is when we come to the place of loving 
those of the brethren who are naturally mean that we 
may consider it an evidence of the new nature being in 
control of the mind. We love them not for their meanness, 
nor for their ignorance, nor for their stupidity, 
nor for their poverty, but because they are his and because 
all his are ours, because they are enlisted under 
the same banner in the same fight with ourselves; because 
the Father hath acknowledged them as his children 
in the begetting of his Spirit. These reasons call 
for our love, for our sympathy and our help one for 
another in climbing Zion's Hill. 

Our Lord intimates that our love for him will be 



gauged by our love for the brethren, and the Apostle 

points out to us that as the Lord's compassion and 

grace are given to each of us in proportion to our 

needs, so our sympathy and love should be manifested 

to others according to their needs. To seek chiefly the 

company of those who are of our own plane of development, 

mental or spiritual, is to please ourselves, and 

the Apostle points out that we should love one another 

or serve one another and not please ourselves, pointing 

out further that even Christ pleased not himself. Furthermore 

he points out that as in our physical bodies 

we sometimes bestow more care upon a deformed hand 

or foot to cover the deformity than we do upon one 

that is natural, so we are to do in the Body of Christ; 

those who are most in need of our sympathy and assistance 

and fellowship should receive it, that the 

whole Body of Christ may be edified, built up and knit 

together in the bonds of love as the members of Christ 

under him who is the Head. 

We need each member of the Body, as the Apostle 
intimates, and as the trying times before us become 
more strenuous we all more and more need the actual 
cooperation and assistance and sympathy and love of 
each other. Let us, therefore, avoid schism as well as 
"ism" and let us have that spirit of oneness appropriate 
to the Body, for we are all one in Christ Jesus and 
members one of another. Let us seek more and more 
to see eye to eye in all these matters. 



Question.— Is it proper to choose as an Elder one 
who has not participated in symbolic water baptism? 

Answer.— While we urge that all of the consecrated 
and all who profess faith in the ransom and a full 
consecration to the Lord be accounted and dealt with 
as brethren and members of the Church, irrespective 
of their obedience to the water symbol, we would not 
think it either wise or in harmony with the Lord's 
teaching to select such a one to the eldership of the 
Church. We could not consider such a one sound in 
"the faith once delivered to the saints." We could not 
consider him as well developed in the Truth, even 
though we accept him as a brother. We could not, 
therefore, consider him a proper person to be specially 
chosen to instruct others respecting the divine plan, 
etc. 



R4252 : page 294 

"THE EVIL ONE TOUCHETH HIM NOT" 

"We know that whosoever is begotten of God sinneth 
not; but he that is begotten of God keepeth himself, 



and the Evil One toucheth him not."— 1 John 5:18. 

THIS text is not a guarantee of eternal salvation to 
those begotten of the holy Spirit. It is not a 
guarantee of their salvation from trials, temptations, 
difficulties, etc., as some have seemed to suppose. 
It does signify, however, that those consecrated believers 
whom God has accepted and who have been 
begotten again to a newness of life, to a new nature, 
are under special divine supervision. They will not 
sin (wilfully) because their seed remaineth in them, 
the begetting power of the holy Spirit. This seed being 
in them, they cannot sin wilfully. If they should sin 
wilfully, it would imply that the holy seed, the begetting 

R4252 : page 295 

of the Lord's Spirit in them, had perished; that 

they were no longer New Creatures in Christ Jesus, for 

whom old things had passed away and all things had 

become new. It would mean that they had turned 

again, as the dog to his vomit and as the sow to wallowing 

in the mire— to sympathy with sin and things contrary 

to the divine Word and its spirit. 

The Apostle declared that our Lord Jesus, the first 
begotten of the Spirit, will keep all these younger 
brethren begotten of the Spirit; keep them from the 
touch of the Evil One, from the injury which Satan 
would otherwise do them. As we have already suggested, 
this does not mean that they will be kept from 
trials, from temptations of the Adversary, for even our 
Lord was exposed to temptations from him; and these 
temptations, trials, oppositions, persecutions, we see 
to be necessary for our Christian character and for 
our development in our Redeemer's likeness of heart. 
The promise, therefore, signifies that in the midst of 
these temptations of the Adversary the Lord provides 
his faithful with such protection, such defense, such 
assistance, as is not only necessary for them to come 
off victors but to keep them from yielding to temptation. 
It is in harmony with this that we are taught to 
pray, "Abandon us not in temptation, but deliver us 
from the Evil One"— suffer him not to touch, to injure 
us, to overthrow us, to destroy us. 
"God moves in a mysterious way, 
His wonders to perform." 

While the Lord is abundantly able to work miracles 
for the protection of his faithful followers and for their 
deliverance from the Evil One, and while we feel sure 

R4253 : page 295 

that if every other means failed, a miracle would be 
wrought in our interest, nevertheless we are not to anticipate 
that the Lord will use miracles, but are to expect 
that generally he will use means, and oftenest 



human instrumentalities, for the protection and deliverance 
of the members of his Body, who abide in his love 
and are seeking to do those things pleasing to him. 

"IF POSSIBLE THE VERY ELECT" 

From the day of Pentecost until the present time 
the Lord's dear sheep have been beset by the same great 
Adversary, and have had fiery trials, and have also had 
the protection of him that was begotten of God, the 
Lord Jesus, who is keeping the faithful from the power 
of the Adversary. But the Scriptures unanimously 
point us to the end of this age as a time for special 
trial and testing, not only upon the world but also upon 
the Church, for "judgment must begin at the house of 
God." It is respecting this coming time that the Apostle 
forewarns the Church, saying, "Take unto you the whole 
armor of God, that ye may be able to stand in the evil 
day." He implies that the evil day with which this age 
shall end will have the severest trials ever known to 
God's people, and that they will have the greatest need 
ever known for the armor of truth and righteousness. 
The same fact is referred to by our Lord in addressing 
the sixth phase of the Church, the Church of Philadelphia. 
He says, "Because thou hast kept the word of my 
patience, I will also keep thee from the hour of temptation 
which is coming upon the whole world to try them 
that dwell upon the face of the whole earth." (Rev. 3:10.) 
The seventh stage of the Church, the Laodicean, will 
come into that hour of temptation; and we believe that 
it is already in part upon us. What we would have all 
see is that the time ahead of us must be very peculiarly 
a time of trial and testing, else it would not be so strikingly 
referred to in the Word of God. Nor do we wish 
to arouse the fears of the Lord's people, to terrify. Our 
thought is rather to offer the consolation which will 
keep them in perfect peace; as it is written, "Thou wilt 
keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on 
thee." The Lord's promises, exceeding great and 
precious, are enlarged before our minds at the same 
time, really in advance of the coming of the hour of 
temptation and trial, so that the man of God may be 
thoroughly furnished, thoroughly prepared. 

Our Lord's words respecting the temptations and 
trials of the Church assure us that this class shall have 
nothing to fear, that they will be kept, that it will not 
be possible for them to be tempted, for with every temptation 
the Lord will provide a way of escape. Let us 
remember in this connection the Apostle Paul's words 
respecting our day and its trials, "God will send them 
strong delusions that they may believe a lie, because 
they did not have pleasure in the truth." (2 Thess. 2:11.) 
What we do desire is that each consecrated child of 
God may see the way of escape which God has provided 
and may use the same, and thus be in line with the 
Lord's provision and amongst those shielded ones, the 



very elect— "called, chosen, faithful."— Rev. 17:14. 
THE WAY OF ESCAPE 

If it be conceded that we are down very close to the 
hour of temptation, when the Evil One will be permitted 
to bring extraordinary delusions and trials to bear upon 
the world and the nominal Church, then we are in the 
time when we ought to be looking about us to see what 
way of escape the Lord has provided for us. We believe 
that many of our readers will agree with us that 
the Lord's special provision for keeping us from the 
power of the Evil One is the Present Truth, which he 
has supplied largely through the WATCH TOWER publications. 
If any one is disposed to controvert this point, 
we shall not dispute it, but be glad if he has received 
more efficient assistance from other quarters, glad if by 
any means the Lord is upholding him, strengthening 
and arming him for the trials and besetments just before 
us. 

But whatever the channel of divine blessing by 
which the Lord would keep his own secure and restful 
in the coming time of stress, we may be assured that 
our personal cooperation is necessary to our deliverance. 
"Keep yourselves in the love of God" (Jude 21) 
was never a more necessary command to the followers 
of Jesus than at present; and we may expect that the 
temptation of this hour will be considerably along that 
line of abiding in God's love. This in turn will imply 
a love for the brethren; as the Apostle has suggested, 
"He that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, 
how can he love God whom he hath not seen?" (I John 4:20.) 
Indeed, the intimation clearly is that "The love 
of many shall wax cold." (Matt. 24:12.) A cooling of 
our love toward God will mean a loss of our desire to 
please him in our own thoughts and words and doings, 
which will include a cooling of our love for his service 
in the dissemination of the Gospel message and the 
gathering and feeding of the household of faith. Various 
things will conspire to this end— the love of money, 
the love of pleasure, the love of self, the love of earthly 
things in general, all of which were consecrated, devoted, 
before we received the spirit of adoption. If our 
love grows cold it will determine that we are not such 
as would be worthy to associate with our Redeemer in 
his Kingdom glory. 

R4253 : page 296 

In no way will this loss of the "love divine, all love 
excelling," be more manifest than in respect to our 
sentiments and conduct toward the fellow-members of 
the Body of Christ. The Apostle tells us of what our 
attitude of mind toward these should be, namely, that 
as Christ loved the Church and laid down his life on 
our behalf, we ought also to love the brethren so that 



we would be willing to lay down our lives on their behalf, 
in their interest. The love that would give up 
life itself for the brethren may certainly be expected to 
sacrifice smaller things in their interest. And indeed 
such are the tests which the Lord permits, declaring 
that he who is faithful in that which is least will be 
faithful also in much. It is therefore for us to see, to 
note, to criticise whether or not we have this love for 
the brethren which the Lord declares he will accept as 
love for himself, and without which we cannot be his 
disciples; for this was the new commandment which he 
gave to us, saying, "A new commandment I give unto 
you, that ye love one another as I have loved you."— 
John 15:12. 

LOVING THE MEAN THINGS 

It would indeed be easy to love the brethren and to 
lay down our lives for them if they were all like our 
dear Master and exemplar; but they are not. The inspired 
Apostle tells us that amongst the brethren are 
not many noble, not many great, not many wise, not 
many learned, not many rich. Again he says that God 
hath chosen the mean things of the world. Are we 
astonished at this? Does it seem like a reflection on 
the Church of Christ? Do we ask why divine grace has 
passed by some of the noblest of our race and accepted 
some of the meanest to discipleship? The answer of 
our Lord is, "Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in 
thy sight." The explanation is that many of the great, 
rich, learned, noble, have not sufficient humility to receive 
the divine message in the proper manner. They 
realize themselves to be superior to the majority and 
think it but just to have this acknowledgment; and, 
failing to see the divine arrangement, they assure themselves 
that if anybody will be saved it will be themselves, 
for they are the finer and nobler specimens of 
the race. They see not that God looketh upon the 
heart instead of upon the outward man, and that however 
weak and ignoble and fallen a person, his heart, 
his will may be thoroughly turned into harmony with 
God and to the service of righteousness. They fail to 
see that in God's sight such a meek and quiet spirit, 
such a humble dependence upon the Redeemer for salvation, 
such a faithful looking to the Lord for grace to 
help in every time of need, is much more pleasing in 
the divine sight than is the more proud attitude of the 
nobler ones; and that such humble, trustful, appreciative, 
faithful ones the Lord has designed shall be participants 
with Christ in his excellent glory, not because 
of the perfection of their flesh, but because of the perfection 
of their hearts, their wills, which continually 
strive to bring every thought and word and deed into 
harmony with the divine will. 

Now then, we may see why the Lord enjoined upon 
us that we should love one another, and rather implied 



that it would be a difficult matter to do so at all times, 
to make allowances for the weaknesses of the flesh and 
the imperfections of judgment in one another. And 
this is exactly what the Apostle John declares, saying, 
"We know we have passed from death unto life because 
we love the brethren." (I John 3:14.) Thus he intimates 
that a love of the brethren will be so difficult a 
matter as to constitute an absolute proof to us that we 
have passed from death unto life, from the death state 
in Adam, and have become New Creatures in Christ. 
It is easy enough to love some of the brethren. We 
are apt to love those who are about on our own plane 
and of our own style and liking; but the Lord anticipated 
this and said, "If ye love them that love you, 
what thank have ye? [What proof have you that you 
have passed from death unto life?] Do not the publicans 
and sinners the same?" (Luke 6:32.) It is 
easy enough to love some of the refined or wealthy or 
naturally noble or the educated, those who are on 
our own level or a little above, as respects earthly 
things. But this does not fill the Lord's requirement. 
We are to love one another as he has loved us. (John 13:34.) 

R4254 : page 296 

He commends his love to us in that it is to each 

according to his needs. The more noble, the less of 

the Lord's grace is sufficient for them; the more degraded, 

the more of the Lord's grace is necessary and 

will be supplied. Thus we are to love the brethren; for 

those who are less noble, yea, those whom the Apostle 

declares are amongst the mean things of this world 

from the world's view-point, will need our love the more 

because of a natural depravity and weakness and imperfection. 

And if we love as Christ loved, we shall be 

glad to give our lives to each and for each according to 

the needs of each, laying down our lives for the brethren 

in moments or hours or as each may need our help. 

Ah, what a new, what a different view is this of the 

love of the brethren! The practice of it would cut off 

some of our special fellowships with those who need 

our assistance little, and would transfer our fellowship 

and sacrifice of time to those of the brethren who need 

it more. And what a blessing, what an uplifting would 

come to some of the meaner ones, and what a blessing 

from the Lord would come more and more into our own 

hearts as we become more and more copies of him in 

thought and in deed! 

We have already pointed out that the time of trouble 
coming upon the world will be a result of the loss of 
love and the outworking of selfishness— no peace to 
him that goes out nor to him that comes in, for every 
man's hand shall be against his neighbor— for himself. 
This signifies almost a complete loss of confidence 
throughout the world. Shall we not suppose 
reasonably that this trial is the one which will begin at 



the house of God? May we not reasonably conclude 
then that the trial which will come upon the Church will 
be the same kind; namely, a testing of our love for the 
brethren and of our applications of the principles 
which the Lord has laid down for our dealings with the 
brethren? We believe that this is so, and that the 
Lord will judge his people along this line of love, which 
is the law of the new nature and the fulfilling of all law. 
Whoever lacks the spirit of love will possess correspondingly 
the spirit of selfishness, the spirit of the 
Adversary, the spirit of ambition, of pride, of anger 
and malice, and hatred and strife against all those who 
oppose or even seem to oppose his interests. Let us 
remember that such sentiments even in the heart, 
though unexpressed, are most dangerous to the new 
nature. Those who have such sentiments in their hearts 
are surely very close to the point where the Adversary 
would be able to touch them, influence them, injure 
them, bring them under his power, and very close to 
the place where the Lord would be willing to reject 
them from discipleship and to allow the Adversary to 

R4254 : page 297 

have them; even as in Judas' case, to whom the Lord 
said, "What thou doest, do quickly." 

But let us, on the other hand, make use of the various 
blessings and instructions which the Lord has 
given us; let us put on the whole armor of God; let us 
make our own the various truths which the Lord has 
put into our hands; let us apply them, put them on as 
an armor; let us be strong in the Lord, in the power, 
the armament which he supplies in his Word, and let 
us see to it that the spirit actuating us is that of love, 
which will be ready to sacrifice everything for the 
fellow-members and to count it all joy thus to lay down 
our lives for the brethren. Let us remember that not 
only is there a special blessing to those who shall assist 
the brethren, even the weakest of them, but that there 
is a special threat against those who shall harm or 
stumble or injure even the least of the Lord's little 
ones! 



R4254 : page 297 

PARABLES OF THE KINGDOM 

OUR DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

In a discourse on the "Parable of the Sower" (commonly 
so designated), as recorded in the 13th chapter of Matthew, 
a dear brother in the Truth, an Elder, by 
the way, of another local ecclesia, recently gave utterance 
to the following explanation or rather application, 
briefly summarized thus: 



"This parable divides mankind into four different 
classes, the wayside soil representing the children of 
disobedience (Eph. 2:2), the rocky ground representing 
all the incapables, including all heathens, idiots, 
etc., the thorny ground representing all the consecrated 
believers who fail to carry out their consecration vow, 
thus bringing no fruit to perfection, and go into the 
Second Death, and the fourth class representing all of 
the Lord's people." 

The writer's mind may be somewhat unduly balanced 
and his vision considerably beclouded, hindering 
him from receiving the force of the above application; 
but it does appear to me with an irresistible force of 
persuasion that the brother mentioned has taken by 
far too wide a scope, not by any means intended by the 
Master. From previous studies along these lines I 
would not understand that it would be your presentation 
of the matter, nor that it would be in harmony 
with the plan in general, wherefore I place myself as 
an inquirer, earnestly desirous of understanding it correctly. 
The force of the lesson, it appears to my mind, 
is almost entirely lost if we venture to apply it to the 
world at large, so much the more as the Master in his 
explanation of it very plainly and most emphatically 
asserts and reasserts that it applies exclusively to 
those who hear the word of the Kingdom as presented 
by himself, the Master Sower, the same being carried on 
through the instrumentalities of his chosen servants, 
the twelve apostles. "When any one heareth the word 
of the Kingdom, etc., this is he that received seed by the 
wayside; he that received seed into stony places is 
he that heareth the word; he that received seed into 
thorny ground is he that heareth the word; he that 
received seed into good ground is he that heareth the 
word..." From this it appears evident that the 
fourfold division does not in any sense of the word apply 
to the world of mankind at large which collectively 
are called "children of disobedience" or "children of 
wrath," but only to a certain limited class of all people, 
nations and tongues, first Jews and then Gentiles. 
Surely this would exclude from the four-fold division 
of the parable all the heathens who have not even 
heard the name of the King; it would equally exclude 
all deprived of reasoning abilities, the idiots, infants, 
etc.; and furthermore it would exclude from the category 
the great majority of so-called Christendom, 
whose hearing faculties have been greatly neutralized 
by the Antichristian systems of error, strong delusions 
in every conceivable form. Thus the four-fold division 
merely applies to a limited number, viz., those who 
hear the Gospel in its purity and not a perverted so-called 
Gospel. In other words it would comprise those 
only who by the Apostle Paul are designated the "honored" 
class, honored to hear the Gospel, whoever or 
wherever they be, or however they receive it. 

To the mind of the inquirer, even the majority of 



those who read the Bible do not hear the word of the 
Kingdom, because their minds are warped, twisted, 
prejudiced and beclouded, as was the case with the 
majority of the nation to whom as a servant the King 
first came. Before coming into Present Truth the 
writer of these lines had never heard the Word of the 
Kingdom, though he had made the Bible his special 
life study. Without going into any details whatever 
as far as the parable is concerned, thus briefly I submit 
to you the two views, both of which cannot be correct 
or in full harmony with the plan. 

In this same connection I shall take the liberty to 
trespass upon your valuable time, dear Pastor, in presenting 
to you another question, of less import perhaps, 
but of great interest, closely related to the one 
mentioned above. It refers more particularly to the 
"Parable of the Wheat and Tares," immediately following 
the other parable. These two obscure presentations 
of the Kingdom from different viewpoints being 
explained by the Master, conveys to the mind of the 
disciple, the learner, quite a few foundational truths, 
and consequently I have made the same a matter of 
profound and reverent study. 

While recognizing that the true wheat wherever 
found is acceptable to the Lord, and that in this harvest 
he will so supervise the issues of the work so that 
all the wheat will be garnered, nevertheless it appears 
to me that the world at large does not constitute the 
wheat-field, but only a portion of it. By reading the 
Acts of the Apostles, which constitutes a history of the 
sowing time of the present age about to close, we are 
naturally forced to the conclusion that the Lord had a 
definite choice in the matter as a part in his election or 
selection of the little flock, and that he outlined for his 
wheat-field mainly the nations of Europe, original and 
transplanted. I understand that North America, Africa, 
Australia, etc., are mainly transplantations of the 
various nations of Europe, and of a comparatively recent 
date. St. Paul, who was one of the most prominent 
sowers under the directions of and in harmony 
with the Chief Sower, carrying on what Jesus began 
both to teach and to do (Acts 1:1), was very explicitly 
directed to take his course toward Europe, and the 
Macedonian cry was irresistible when he was in doubt 
in taking the last step and would have preferred to 
take another course. Pressing onward toward the 
northwest he reached the most influential cities and 
the best seaports, by means of which the Gospel was 
carried to all the civilized world of that time until 
finally the Lord directed him to the imperial city of 
Rome, though he was conducted thither in a different 

R4255 : page 298 

way than he might have preferred if he had had the 
choice in the matter. Indications are strongly in favor 



of the view that he reached as far as Spain. However 
that may be, we know that it was his intention, and we 
do know that at the end of his active career he says 
that the Gospel had been preached under the whole 
heavens, evidently meaning the whole civilized world, 
residing around the Mediterranean Sea, and though 
this would not exclude a number of Asiatic provinces 
and the upper coast of Africa, it is a matter of history 
that since then Europe has been the great centre of 
ecclesiastical activity— the wheat-field in which shortly 
after the enemy sowed the tares of error. Neither at 
that time nor since has the Gospel of the Kingdom 
been generally sent to the aborigines of Africa, South 
America or Asia. Fragments of Truth at most have 
reached these benighted but ransomed people, but it 
does not on that account seem correct to say that they 
are included in the Lord's wheat-field mentioned in the 
parable. As a farmer may not despise the wheat that 
is found fruitbearing outside the regular wheat-field, 
especially if the latter is almost entirely overgrown by 
tares, necessitating that the ears of wheat be picked 
out one by one; so the Lord's people, the saints, whether 
picked from amongst the tare-field of Christendom 
or from amongst benighted heathenism are just as precious 
in his sight. But in view of the facts as recorded 
on the pages of prophecy and history, would it not 
be perfectly correct to say that the wheat-field is somewhat 
limited in its dimensions, and certainly does not 
include the whole planet? 

If the inquirer be incorrect he will be greatly indebted 
to you, Brother Russell, for putting him right, 
as you have done and are still doing in so many other 
perplexing questions. 

Furthermore, I am also writing you on behalf of 
the little class in this place whom I have the sweet 
privilege of serving in my humble capacity, and if the 
above suggestions, presented to you by way of inquiry, 
appeal to you as sufficiently important for other classes 
kindly give it room in ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

Apologizing for the length of the questions, and 
anticipating your kind favors in this as in all other 
directions, I am, 

Your fellow-servant in the Truth, very cordially 
and respectfully, L. JOSEPH LARSEN,-Wis. 



R4255 : page 298 

SAUL AND DAVID IN REVIEW 

-2 SAMUEL 5:12.-SEPTEMBER 20.- 

Golden Text:— "And David perceived that the Lord 
had established him king over Israel, and that he 
had exalted his kingdom for his people Israel's sake. 



OF the two men in review Saul certainly had the 
more favorable opportunities at the beginning 
of his life. Nature seemed to have so specially 
fitted him for the office of king that when he was brought 
to the attention of the people, they, recognizing these 
natural traits, received him without hesitation. For a 
little while, he walked in humility, carefully seeking to 
do the Lord's will, but not having fully submitted himself, 
it was not long until there was a combination of 
his own will mixing with that of the Lord. The result 
was disobedience, failure, a troubled mind growingly 
perverse almost to the point of insanity, and finally an 
ignominious death. The flaw in Saul's character was 
his lack of a full consecration to the Lord, his maintaining 
a certain amount of self-will. This seemed to have 
been the difficulty. A similar difficulty affects all who 
fail to make their calling and election sure. Whether 
they go into the Second Death or the Great Company, 
the fault of the failure lies in neglect to surrender fully 
to the Lord every interest of life and to accept in faith 
his leadings, his providences in all the affairs of life, 
seeking to do his will and ignoring— mortifying— self. 

David's character was in sharp contrast to that of 
Saul. Less favorably circumstanced at the beginning 
of his career, not so tall and commanding in appearance, 
probably of a less wealthy family, and possibly 
with no better mental endowment by birth, David's life 
and its results are in sharp contrast to those of Saul. 
Look wherever we will in his checkered career, we see 
courage and determination exercised along right lines, 
proper lines. He was not a wild animal hunter, but to 
protect the flock he slew the lion and the bear. He was 
not a pugilist nor a gladiator; yet at the proper moment 
he was ready to risk his life for the defence of his people. 
He appreciated highly the honor that had been conferred 
upon him in his anointing for the kingship, yet 
he held this with modesty— never boasted of it and never 
rashly attempted to hasten the divine programme. He 
endured patiently the opposition of the king, yet treated 
the members of the royal family with profoundest respect; 
and finally, instead of thrusting himself on the 
nation as king and demanding his acceptance, he still 
waited patiently the Lord's time. One of the results of 
studying the lives of great and good men is in seeing 
the way in which they were able to make the world 
better. 

"Lives of great men all remind us 

We can make our lives sublime, 
And, departing, leave behind us, 
Footprints on the sands of time." 

Many of those who have risen to prominence in the 
world have left no footprints that we can see; but when 
the Lord sets great examples before us, he shows us the 
footprints, and how some lead downward and others 
upward. Saul was of the former class, David 



of the latter. The important point to be noticed 
by us all is how much these footprints diverge, that 
we may avoid the one and profit by the other. 
The secret of David's success was not the mere 
fixity of his purpose, but additionally the fact that his 
purpose was kept fully in accord with the divine will. 
Even in telling to King Saul the story of his conflict 
with the lion and the bear, he gave glory to God as having 
delivered them into his hands. And so throughout 
his entire career. We notice this same desire, to give 
God the glory of his successes, and to realize that whatever 
failures there were in his life were either his own 
weaknesses or divine blessings in disguise. Thus we 
see David's whole existence exemplifying the words of 
holy writ— "In all thy ways acknowledge him," "and 
he shall give thee the desire of thine heart." 

VALUE IN HIGH IDEALS 

As we look about us in the world, and in the nominal 
church, we see vast numbers of mankind without 
any ideals, without any ambition. Alas, poor things! 
How can they ever have any pleasure or reach any noble 

R4255 : page 299 

goal when they see none? Looking again, we perceive 
some with only mean and groveling ambitions, worse 
than none. Poor creatures! Born in sin, shapen in iniquity, 
and perhaps reared in unfavorable environments, 
they are seriously handicapped in comparison 
with some others of the fallen race, less depraved and 
more favored. Looking again, we see a third class with 
noble worldly ambitions, seeking for wealth, influence, 
power, with a desire to use these honorably, nobly, not 
to the injury of their fellow-creatures, but to some extent 
the opposite. These are to be congratulated as 
having better motives in life than the first two classes. 
They were possibly better born and possibly had better 
environment. 

We look again and find a fourth class, whose eyes 
have by the grace of God been lifted from earthly 
things to the heavenly. To these, "Old things have 
passed away and all things have become new." The 
vision of heavenly joy, heavenly fellowship, heavenly 
service, has so transformed their minds that, although 
their flesh may still be weak, nevertheless they overcome 
by the new mind. This is the class which the 
earth could never satisfy. A new standard of values 
has come to them; and they both feel and know that the 
things of this life are "not worthy to be compared with 
the glory which shall be revealed in us." They find these 
things in comparison but loss and dross. This is the 
class which the Lord has under his special care and instruction. 
Because they have made their consecration 
to him, he is showing them something of the height 



and depth, the length and breadth of the "deep things" 

of God. Thus he is giving to them, through his 

knowledge and grace, a power divine, which is working 

in them both to will and to do his good pleasure. The 

secret of their attainment of this favored position is 

that, having heard of the grace of God, their hearts responded. 

They gave themselves to the Lord and the 

work of grace progressing in them is his work. "For 

we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto 

good works."— Eph. 2:10; Jas. 1:8. 

A DOUBLE-MINDED MAN IS UNSTABLE 

But now again we must recognize a division; for 
"they are not all Israelites who are of Israel." Some of 
this fourth class are more responsible and some less 
responsible as to the things which the Lord has shown 

R4256 : page 299 

them respecting his character and his plan. Some take 
a less positive stand and seek to gain the things of this 
world, its honor, as well as the honor of God and the 
world to come. In doing this, they are not heeding the 
words of the Master, who assures all his disciples that 
such a course would mean failure, that they would 
neither please the world nor would they succeed in 
pleasing the Lord. Such may eventually be brought to 
life eternal, but they are not the wise virgins. They 
will not reign in the Millennial Kingdom. The Lord is 
seeking those who worship him with all their hearts, 
with all their souls, with all their strength, and with all 
their minds. These whole-souled ones are the class 
the Lord is specially seeking as the Queen of the Millennial 
Kingdom, the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, and joint-heirs 
with him. He has already foreordained that only 
such may be members of the royal family and partakers 
of the divine nature, saying, "Whom he did foreknow, 
he did also predestinate to be conformed to the image 
of his Son." To these he will give grace and glory, and 
no good thing will he withhold from them, because they 
walk uprightly. Their hearts are upright, and their 
intentions are loyal to God and to his laws of justice 
and love. Let us get fixed in our minds the peculiar 
quality of this overcoming class, which is to constitute 
the Kingdom as Christ's joint-heirs, that they must be 
loyal to God, consecrated, determined, and full of faith 
and trust. 

These qualities cannot be expected to come to us 
instantaneously. Rather they are the gradual growth 
and development of the new mind, but the principle 
must be in the heart before development can be made 
along these lines— the principle of loyalty and determination. 
The little word "will" has its very important 
place, then, in the Christian's character. He must be 
a wilier, and the will must be rightly directed into full 



harmony with that of God. 

CARVING OUT THE IDEAL 

We said a moment ago that a high and good ideal 
is proper, is necessary, in every successful life. But to 
have the ideal will amount to nothing unless we are 
patient in its development. It is said of the great 
sculptor, Michael Angelo, that looking upon a block of 
soiled marble he began work upon it with hammer and 
chisel, apparently recklessly knocking off great blocks 
and pieces here and there. When asked what he was 
doing, he said, "I see an angel here and must get him 
out." He had the ideal in his mind, then laboring 
strenuously for the attainment of it, sculptured the angel 
out of the block of marble. So it must be with every 
successful life. We must have the ideal. We must see 
the angel. Then we must labor for its attainment, 
carefully, patiently, and prayerfully. The ideal set before 
the Christian is not only angelic, it is more; it is 
divine. Nothing less can be made out of the Apostle's 
words, God hath "given unto us exceeding great and 
precious promises, that by these ye might be partakers 
of the divine nature." 

The same thought is elsewhere presented by St. 
John. Now are we the sons of God, but it doth not yet 
appear how great we shall be made, what glory and 
honor shall be ours, but the Apostle assures us, "We 
know that when he shall appear we shall be like him; 
for we shall see him as he is." If then we are to be 
made like him by the "change" of the "First Resurrection," 
if we are to see him as he is, then we may 
apply to ourselves the glorious things of the Lord and 
his excellency, respecting which the Apostle says, "Him 
hath God highly exalted and given him a name which is 
above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee 
should bow, of things in heaven and things on earth 
and things under the earth;" and again, "He has 
ascended far above all principality and power and 
might and dominion and every name that is named." 
If we shall be like him and share his glory, then all this 
glory belongs to the glorious ideal which God himself 
has presented to our gaze. Who with such in view 
would not be willing indeed to submit himself to the 
blows of the Lord! Who would not be willing to endure 
the necessary chiselings and polishings! Who would 
not be willing to submit himself to tribulation, knowing 
that "Tribulation worketh patience, and patience, 
experience, and experience, hope"! These things shed 
abroad in our hearts make us neither barren nor unfruitful 
in respect to the knowledge of God, but obtain for us 
an abundant entrance into his everlasting Kingdom, 
in association with him who loved us and bought us 
with his precious blood. 

THE LORD HAD ESTABLISHED HIM 



Our Golden Text is quite in line with what we have 
just received, and shows us afresh the secret of David's 

R4256 : page 300 

successes and the line along which we also should be 

exercised in developing character which will be pleasing 

to the Lord. To some in David's place the thought 

would have been, "The Lord is very partial and has 

simply elected me to be the recipient of his favors. He 

cares more for me than for any other person in the 

nation." With this thought would have come a measure 

of vanity and pride which would have been very injurious 

to David (and to all others). These might also 

have said, "The Lord has seen that I am the fittest 

person in all this nation to be its ruler; and any person 

who does not fully agree with this sentiment is out of 

accord with the Lord and should have my frown and 

disapproval." Had David taken a position such as this 

it would have worked out a wrong character in him; and 

such a position taken by others would likewise work injuriously. 

It makes them boastful, arrogant, unloving, 

and unfits them for proper service to the Lord. 

David's thought on the subject was the proper one. 
He perceived that the Lord had established him king 
over Israel and that he had exalted him king for his 
people Israel's sake. So, too, we should remember that 
God has a purpose in the selection or election of the 
Church. As the Apostle says, "We are chosen for a 
purpose." God's purpose is a Kingdom which shall 
bless the world. And he has many others, angels and 
men, whom he could have chosen for this great purpose, 
and by his providence could have moulded and fashioned 
them for the accomplishment of his will. But by 
his mercy he has chosen "not many wise, not many 
noble, not many mighty," but "the weak things of this 
world" for the carrying out of his plans. Let this 
thought keep us very humble, very near to the Lord. 
Let us strive to learn the lessons necessary to fit and 
prepare us for the ruling, judging and uplifting "all the 
families of the earth." 



R4256 : page 300 

HELL HATH ENLARGED HERSELF 

--ISA. 5: 11-23. -SEPTEMBER 27.- 

Golden Text:— "Wine is a mocker."— Prov. 20:1. 

THE Lesson Committee assigned this as a temperance 
lesson: and undoubtedly it has in it a warning 
against intoxication. Nevertheless in our 



judgment, the context being considered, other matters 

are more reprehended in the lesson than intemperance. 

Undoubtedly there would be "woe to them that rise up 

early in the morning that they may follow strong drink; 

that tarry late into the night, till wine inflame them." 

However, they would be only moderate drinkers evidently 

who would, beginning so early, only by night 

become inflamed or drunken. We certainly can heartily 

endorse the thought that any indulgence of alcoholic 

spirits is dangerous— that intemperance lies 

at the foundation of many woes of life, sapping the manhood, 

the vigor, and undermining the moral sense and 

general character. We rejoice that the eyes of men's 

understanding are opening to more proper appreciation 

of the importance of this evil and that great good 

is resulting, not only to individuals, but to communities. 

Since the exhilarating effects of alcohol evidently 

deceive many, we think it well here to introduce a 

clipping which bears directly upon the subject. 

"ALCOHOL OUT OF THE RACE" 

"The contestants in the Marathon Race, which is 
run on April 19 from Ashland to Boston, twenty-five 
miles, were notified this year in the following terms: 
Alcohol in any form is positively forbidden before, 
during and immediately after the race. It never does 
good, and usually does harm. Disregard of the foregoing 
shall be considered sufficient grounds for disqualification 
by the physician in charge.' 

"In previous Marathon races some men who had 
become fagged had resorted to alcohol and other stimulants, 
and some of them fell unconscious soon after 
taking the stimulants. This year the six prominent 
Boston physicians who examined the one hundred and 
twenty-four men entered— one hundred and three of 
whom started and seventy-five finished— stated that 
the condition of the men was far superior to that of 
the previous year. So far as can be learned, no alcohol 
or drugs were used. No runner collapsed, and the 
record of physical endurance in this, the greatest race 
in America, if not in the world, is a wonderful one. 
The twenty-five consecutive miles, up hill and down, 
were run in an average of less than six minutes each, 
which is only a minute and a half slower than the majority 
of mile races on the best cindered tracks. Previous 
Marathon records were smashed, because the 
men depended on long and careful training rather than 
on stimulants. Alcohol was ruled out of the race, as 
it will be out of every contest of brawn or brains." 

R4257 : page 300 

SCOPE OF OUR LESSON 

The chapter of which our lesson is a part commences 



with a parable in which our Lord represents 
Palestine as his vineyard and the Jews as the choice vine 
of his planting, from which he would look for much 
fruitage of a choice quality. Instead it brought forth 
worthless grapes. Hence through the Prophet and 
parable he declares that having done everything reasonable 
and proper for the fruit, he would now take 
away its hedging and allow it to be trodden down by 
the wild beasts and to lie waste. (Vs. 1-7.) This parable 
our Lord almost duplicated and we may understand 
therefore that while it may have had some application 
to Isaiah's time as the period of 70 years desolation, 
nevertheless really the fulfilment on a still larger 
scale took place at the time of our Lord's first advent, 
when, because of their wrong condition of heart and 
rejection of him, he declared their house left desolate, 
and, as the Apostle says, "Wrath is come upon them to 
the uttermost." Verses 24 to 30 continue this thought 
and show the mighty power which caused the fall of 
the Jewish polity. 

The intervening verses, namely, from the 8th to the 23rd, 
treat of the reasons why the Lord was displeased 
with them and rejected them. 

(1) Their selfishness was foremost amongst their 
sins— the desire to join house to house, farm to farm- 
to become rich was put as the most prominent sin because 
that desire leads to other sin. As the Apostle 

suggests, "The love of money [wealth] is the root of 
all evil." The result of this was shown to be a land 
scarcity as respects the poor, and the Lord's resolution 
that he would punish such selfishness so that the 
homes would become desolate, empty, and the mansions 
uninhabited and the fields unfruitful, so that the practice 
of iniquity, injustice, lovelessness, spell "failure" 
in the end. 

(2) Next comes the verse 1 1 of our lesson, in which 
the Lord reprehends strong drink, the inflaming influence 

R4257 : page 301 

of wine, and the music and feasting indulged in 
by the wealthy who added house to house and field to 
field. It is evident that the wealthy consume considerable 
liquor and often without becoming seriously intoxicated, 
but no doubt the liquor has its influence in 
helping them promote selfish propositions, which disregard 
the interests of others, so that sometimes 
iniquities are hatched into activity which in sober 
sense would not have been countenanced. This is the 
essence of the Lord's complaint— "They regard not the 
work of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his 
hands." Money-making, feasting, music absorb the 
attention of the great and influential, which means the 
disregard of the more important things of the divine 
plan— the things to which typical Israel, as well as the 
things to which Spiritual Israel during this Gospel 



Age, have been called. 

(3) The result of all this was that the masses, lacking 
the proper influence from their more talented leaders, 
became expatriated— separated from the hopes and 
ambitions which were Israel's as a nation— the poor 
lost the ideals necessary to their progress in a good 
way and instead got wrong ideals along the line of selfishness, 
pride, worldliness— ideals which they would 
have longed to follow had they possessed the talents 
and ability. Thus the wrong influence of those intoxicated 
with the love of money and of pleasure not only 
affected themselves, but the whole people of Israel. 
Correspondingly in Spiritual Israel we find similar 
conditions. 

Verse 13 points out the effects of the wrong course 
upon the people, as seen from the divine standpoint. 
The Israelites had practically become the slaves of 
their brethren, the rich. They were in practical captivity 
through a lack of knowledge. The most honorable 
of them were famished from lack of proper ideals 
and nourishment from the prophecies of the Lord in 
instructions of his Word, and the whole multitude was 
parched with thirst, lacking vigor, vitality and energy 
as respects the Lord's great purposes, to which he had 
called them to be his special people. Similar conditions 
apply now to Spiritual Israel— Christendom. 
The greatest minds of the world have become absorbed 
in wealth and pleasure-getting, and direful have been 
the results upon the masses of Christendom. The people 
find themselves really starving, hungry and thirsty. 
They have not satisfied their cravings from an earthly 
standpoint, because under present conditions this is 
impossible, and as for spiritual food and drink these 
have been taken away by the evolutions of the higher 
critics, who plainly tell the people that the Word of 
God is not the bread of Truth, but poisonous food- 
error. As a result the masses of Christendom today, 
while prosperous outwardly as never before, are not 
really contented, but hungry for wealth and pleasure, 
and especially for happiness, which they will never 
find in the direction in which they are seeking it. 

HELL HAS OPENED HER MOUTH 

The word "hell" in verse 14 is sheol in the Hebrew 
and signifies the grave, the tomb, the abyss— oblivion. 
To the Israelites this may have meant that because of 
the wretched condition of the poor classes and the accumulation 
of lands, etc., in the hands of the wealthy, 
there was a great increase of mortality, of the death 
rate. But the application to Spiritual Israel may be a 
spiritual one, a reference to the fact that the spiritual 
hopes and ambitions of many are going down into 
oblivion— that faith is perishing among the people. 
How true this is! The Prophet says that thousands 
shall fall to one who stands. Oblivion is rapidly swallowing 



up the multitude, including also those who have 
once rejoiced in faith. The mean man is brought 
down and the great is humbled, and also the lofty— the 
proud. The full scope of this judgment of the Lord on 
Christendom is not yet manifest, but in the end the 
Lord of hosts shall be exalted and honored in respect 
to the judgment he will bring upon the people and the 
righteousness he will manifest. Then the gentle 
lambs will feed in the pastures which he will provide 
and the wastes which the profligate had taken possession 
of as their own shall be turned over to others 
whom they would not recognize. 

DRAW INIQUITY WITH FALSEHOOD 

Another statement of the evils which caused the 
overthrow of typical Israel is shown in verse 18. A 
special wound had come upon the influential ones who 
had been disposed to use falsehood as cords in carrying 
forward their inequitable schemes. It may be 
safely said that falsehood is the outgrowth of selfishness 
and that nearly all the lying that is done in the 
world is in its interest to accomplish iniquity. The 
Prophet's words are, "Woe unto them that draw iniquity 
with cords of vanity." These are represented as 
scoffing at the second coming of Messiah. Inflamed 
with the wine of Babylon and with their love of money 
and pleasure they disbelieve the glorious promises of 
Messiah and his Kingdom and say, "Let him make 
speed, and hasten his work, that we may see it; and 
let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw nigh and 
come that we may know it." In other words they claim 
to be in full accord with the Lord, to be perfectly ready 
for his Kingdom if he had one and if it ever will come. 
They claim to be wise and call those who trust in the 
Word of the Lord fools and tell them that if they had 
the knowledge of the Higher Critics they would no 
longer trust to the Bible. 

CALL EVIL GOOD AND GOOD EVIL 

Continuing the picture the Lord declares that there 
will come woe to them because they have called the 
evil things which they practice good, and because 
the good things, truth and equity, they have 
treated lightly and spoken of as evil— nonsensical. 
They, Higher Critics, call darkness light, and the light 
of truth they call darkness. They put the bitter of 
error instead of the sweet of truth. This will mean to 
them very shortly trouble. The Lord continuing says 
that "woe will come unto them because they are so 
wise in their own eyes and prudent in their own sight." 
They have a wisdom and prudence which is of the 
earth earthy— sensual, devilish. They neglect the wisdom 
which comes from above, which is "first pure, 
then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full 



of mercy and good fruits." They are mighty to drink 
the wine of Babylon, intoxicating from the dark ages— 
they can swallow these doctrines and not be intoxicated 
by them as are the masses. They are men of 
strength and can drink mingled strong drink— strong 
doctrines. 

These strong doctrines may perplex the masses of 
Spiritual Israel, but these strong men have a way of 
taking all the creeds, all the doctrines, and mingling 
them together, declaring their full harmony and that 
separately and as a whole they are splendid. Thus at 
this present time they are making a union of all the 
different creeds and saying that any strong-minded 
person should be able to drink all these creeds without 

R4257 : page 302 

injury. The Prophet says that these are they "which 

justify the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness 

of the righteous from him." If, for instance, 

a professed servant of God shall declare that he disbelieves 

practically all the teaching of God's Word, they 

stand ready to justify him in his wickedness, if he 

claims the right still to continue to pose as a servant of 

God. Why? For a reward. That they may in so doing 

justify their own belief and that they may maintain 

their standing and honor of men in silence and 

pose as strong-minded men, able to drink much strong 

drink. They are ready, also, to take away the righteousness 

of the righteous, to subdue those who speak 

the Truth, to slander them, to say all manner of evil 

against them falsely. Why? They do this also for a 

reward. Because they desire to be on the popular 

side and to retain the rewards which are accorded 

such. 

R4258 : page 302 

The lesson to all who seek to be in harmony with 
the Lord is that they are not to follow the course of the 
great and the influential of Christendom, but to follow 
the Lord, to hearken to his Word, and to humbly follow 
in the footsteps of our dear Redeemer. 



page 302 

WATCH TOWER BIBLES-NEW EDITION 

WE have concluded to get out two editions of the 
WATCH TOWER BIBLES. We expect to be ready to 
begin filling orders for them between October 1st 
and 15th. Your orders may be placed at once, in harmony 
with the following descriptions: 
It will be noticed that none of these Bibles is quite 



so cheap as the cheapest of last year. There are two causes 
for this: (1) To our special helps of last year we have 
added about 300 pages of new matter, so that the comment 
represents the TOWERS of the past 30 years, as well as the 
DAWN-STUDIES and tracts and sermons, etc., published in newspapers. 
(2) Our cheapest book this year has linen instead of 
paper lining and thus corresponds in binding to the next to 
cheapest of last year. 

BIBLE NO. 1918, PRICE $1.65, POSTPAID 

Minion type, India paper, references, French seal (best 
sheep) binding, red under gold edges, silk head-band and 
marker, linen lined, maps, TOWER and DAWN 
Comments, Instructor's Guide, Berean Topical 
Index, Difficult Texts Explained, Spurious passages 
noted. This additional matter will fill about 
500 pages. Size, 5x7x1 inch. 

BIBLE NO. 1928, PRICE $2.50 POSTPAID 

This Bible is exactly the same as No. 1918, 
except that the leather is genuine Levant Morocco 
leather and leather lined. This should be a very 
durable binding— fine-grained leather. 

BIBLE NO. 1938, PRICE $3.00 POSTPAID 

This Bible is of a larger size and of a bolder, blacker 
type. It is rather large for a pocket (5-1/2x7-1/2x1-1/4), but is 
light and convenient for handling. The helps are the same 
as in those described above. India paper, red under gold 
edges, silk head binding and marker. We are binding these 
only in the better leather, Levant Morocco, recommended as 
very durable. See representation below of bold-faced type. 
Calf lined. 

BIBLE NO. 1948, PRICE $3.25 POSTPAID 

This Bible is exactly the same as No. 1938, except that 
it contains additionally the Bagster Bible Concordance, Index 
of Proper Names, Alphabetical Bible Index, etc. Size 
5-1/2x7-1/2x1-1/2. Sample of type below. 

WATCH TOWER HELPS SEPARATE 

About 500 pages, on India paper, in paper covers, 50 
cents; in plain cloth binding, 75 cents each; in cheap 
leather binding, $1.25 each. Our advice 
is that as the Bibles cost so little more all 
who can should procure them. Besides 
it is very convenient to have the Scriptures 
and the helps under the same cover. 
Any regular TOWER reader who cannot 
purchase these helps, even in their 
cheapest form, may state his case to us, 



as a brother in Christ has kindly offered 
to supply a few paper-bound copies to 
such. 



R4249 : page 302 

NEW EDITION OF THE DEBATES 

A NEW edition of the White-Russell Debates has been 
prepared for us by the Cincinnati ENQUIRER. The 
previous edition was of 200,000, this edition 300,000. 
These are revised, the stenographers' and printers' 
blunders being remedied. The type used is larger and the 
several topics are made very conspicuous. 

Already we have orders for one-half of the new edition 
and we invite further orders, to be filled after the Convention, 
September 15th. The price is 5 cents per copy, 10 for 
30 cents, 40 for $1.00. 

We know of nothing better than this for awakening an 
interest in the Truth. The Truth shines the more brightly 
in contrast with the error. And then some will read both 
sides who would not read our side alone. When the Eaton-Russell 
Debates were published one brother said to another, 
"John, here, Brothers Russell and Eaton are to debate their 

R4250 : page 303 

differences and these are to be published. I will get these 
and then you can see the two sides in contrast." "No," said 
the brother, "I do not care to read them." Later, when the 
reports were received and read by the brother in the Truth, 
he said to the other, "John, here, read what Dr. Eaton says; 
never mind what Bro. Russell says, since you are so opposed: 
just read Dr. Eaton's side." The brother read as requested 
and then could not restrain his curiosity respecting the other 
side. He read, and, being an honest man, was convinced 
and is now active like his brother in scattering the good tidings. 



page 303 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V. (E)* 

Questions on Study V.— The Author of the Atonement. 

NOVEMBER 1 

(12) Name one of the chief battles of the Christian 
seeking to be a good soldier, loyal to the Captain of 
his salvation. P. 112, par. 1. 



(13) Why is fixity of will essential to our victory? 
P.112, par. 2. 

(14) What was our Lord's third temptation in the 
wilderness? Explain the intimations and suggestions 
of the Adversary's words as they would apply to our 
Lord. P.112, par. 2. 

(15) What was there in Satan's past career that 
probably led up to this request? What ambitions of 
his were not fully satisfied? Why would he evidently 

have preferred to have our Lord as a partner in the dominion 
of earth and under better conditions than those 
of the reign of sin and death? P. 113, par. 1. 

(16) Did Satan's temptation imply a new remedy 

for sin and his willingness to cooperate in its application? 
What may we reasonably surmise as respects 
Satan's motives, etc.? P. 114, par. 1. 

(17) What was our Lord's decision and was it hard 
to reach? P. 114, par. 2. 

(18) Are the Lord's brethren subject to temptations 
along this same line? P. 114, par. 3. 

NOVEMBER 8 

(19) Cite illustrations of Satan's temptation of the 
Church to seek for other means of saving the world 
than that which God has outlined in the Scriptures and 
tell why other plans than the Lord's seemed to many 
preferable. P.l 14, par. 3,4. 

(20) Do these temptations to the brethren come in 
various forms? If so, state some of these— especially 

some prevalent in our Lord's day. P.l 15, par. 1; P. 116, par. 1. 

(21) Since our Lord was not fallen, depraved, but 
holy, harmless, separate from sinners, how could he be 
"tempted in all points like as we are"? P.l 17, par. 1. 

(22) Mention some of humanity's weaknesses and 
besetments and explain the difference between these 
and the temptations of our Lord and his "brethren." 
P.l 17, par. 1. 

(23) Since the temptations of the New Creatures 
are thus different from the temptations of those of the 
world, explain the relationship between the weaknesses 
of the flesh and temptations of the spirit or new nature. 
P.l 17, par. 2. 

(24) Quote and cite the Scripture which declared 
that the Captain of our salvation was made "perfect 
through suffering," and state whether or not this signifies 
that he was imperfect as a man and attained human 
perfection, or what does it signify? P.l 18, par. 1,2. 

NOVEMBER 15 

(25) What motive is Scripturally assigned to our 

Lord as influencing him in his consecration and sacrifice? 
Quote and cite the Scripture. P. 118, par. 3. 

(26) What four different features of joy actuated our 
Lord? Let us discuss these one at a time. P.l 18, par. 4; 



P.119, par. 1,2,3. 

(27) Was this joy set before our Lord as a certainty 
or as a contingent reward for faithfulness? and 

if the latter to whom was he to be faithful and to what 
degree? P.119, par. 4. 

NOVEMBER 22 

(28) Did our Lord learn obedience through the 
things which he suffered in order that he might become 
a Son of God? If not, for what did he suffer? Quote 
and cite the Scriptures demonstrating this. P. 120, 

par. 1,2,3. 

(29) To whom did our Lord Jesus demonstrate or 
prove his fidelity and what results followed? P. 120, par. 4. 

(30) Apply this same principle to the Church, the 
Body of Christ, and explain what we should expect in 
ourselves and in each other, and in God's dealings 
with us. P. 120, par. 5. Discuss this matter thoroughly. 

NOVEMBER 29 

(31) When we read in the Scriptures that our Lord 
was made "in the likeness of sinful flesh" just what 
does this signify— that he was a sinner?— that he was 
just like a sinner?— or what? Cite the Scripture and 
paraphrase it so as to bring out its proper thought. P. 121, 
par. 1. 

(32) What bearing would the doctrine of the ransom 
have in respect to the above questions? If Jesus 

had been born of a human father and thus partaken 
of a blemished, fallen, human nature, like sinful flesh 
in general, could he have been our Redeemer, our ransom? 
If not, why not? P. 122, par. 4. 

(33) We read, "Himself took our infirmities." 
Does this signify that the man Christ Jesus was born 
with human infirmities? Cite the occurrences of the 
statement in the Old and New Testaments and explain 
their proper signification. P. 122, par. 2. 

(34) Our Lord, according to the Scriptural accounts, 
was in some respects less vigorous than some 

of his disciples and some other men at the time of his 
death. How could this be, if they were born imperfect 
and he was a perfect being, unblemished? Explain 
the philosophy. P. 122, par. 3; P. 123, par. 1. 

(35) Does Matthew's Gospel offer an explanation 
of the Prophet's words under consideration, "Himself 
bare our sicknesses"? What is the inferable explanation? 
P.124, par. 1,2. 

(36) Did our Lord Jesus use his own physical 
strength in the healing of sickness or was it done by 
special outside strength supplied? P.124, par. 3. 



"Five years ago DAWN-STUDIES, VOL. V., was reset, and 



unfortunately the type was not exactly same size as before; and 
hence page for page they differ. The references given in these 
Berean Studies apply to the present edition, a copy of which 
postpaid will cost you but 30c. But keep your old edition, for 
unfortunately the New Bible helps refer to its pages. 



page 305 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 