Announcements
◆ Literature offer for March and April: Continue to offer subscriptions for The Watchtower, with three booklets, for $1.50, or subscriptions for both magazines, with six booklets, for $3.00. If subscription offer is not accepted, offer two magazines and the three booklets for 25c. May: Truth book for 25c.
◆ Kingdom News No. 22 will be distributed from May 1 to 10. The Society will consign tracts to each congregation without these being ordered. The number sent to each congregation will be at the rate of 100 per publisher, including regular and special pioneers, based on the peak number of publishers so far during the 1976 service year. If you receive more than needed, inform the office in writing of the number you wish sent next time. Special pioneers in isolated territory will be sent their supply directly from the Society. This time, circuit and district overseers, and special pioneers with congregations, will obtain tracts from congregation’s supply.
◆ The Society is again arranging for a limited number of regular pioneers to serve temporarily as special pioneers in isolated territory during two or three summer months. The minimum requirement will be 150 hours in field service. Each assignment is organized for a team of two. Before writing to the Society, arrangements should be made for a partner (give partner’s name when writing) and a car that is in good condition. Some financial assistance will be provided.
◆ The special report card listing attendance and partakers at the Lord’s Evening Meal and total regular pioneers should be sent to the Society by the presiding overseer immediately after that meeting.
◆ The Society is sending a manuscript for the discourse “Who Is Jesus Christ, so that We All Need Him?” to be delivered on March 28. The speaker assigned by the body of elders may prepare an outline from the material and deliver the talk extemporaneously if he desires.
◆ Elders and ministerial servants are requested not to write for a “Certificate for Ordained Minister” unless a certificate is specifically needed to establish evidence of “ordination” with officials. The publisher’s identification card usually suffices for use at hospitals, prisons or other institutions.
◆ The Watch Tower Publications Index for 1971 through 1975 will be ready late in March. Orders for it may be submitted after March 20. This is a cumulative index. It covers the Society’s publications for 1975 and includes the entries from all the annual Indexes back through 1971. The cost is $1.00 for congregation publishers, 50c for pioneers.
◆ Picture postcards of the Society’s Brooklyn headquarters are available in English and Spanish with notes of description on each card. A set of ten costs 25c.
◆ New Publications Available:
One World, One Government, Under God’s Sovereignty—Italian
Why Does God Permit Wickedness?—Turkish

