Encourage the Young People Among Us
1 There is a large percentage of youthful ones in the congregations. These young people certainly need and deserve the encouragement of older ones, and their help in making advancement.
2 Jehovah God himself views with great interest and joy the young people who serve faithfully. (Luke 18:16) Remember how he backed up young Daniel and his companions. They were transported by an enemy king to a faraway land, where paganism and nationalism were dominant. But did these young people break integrity or keep silent as to their belief in Jehovah’s sovereignty? Did Jehovah forsake them? The Scripture account says: “As for these children, the four of them, to them the true God gave knowledge and insight in all writing and wisdom.” As a result it became evident even to the king that the wisdom that they had was far superior to that of all the priests of Babylon.—Dan. 1:17-20.
3 We can be sure that, while those four Jewish boys were still at home, their parents had given special care to see that they developed spiritual strength, for the family arrangement was one of the most important features of Israelite life. Parents and other adult members of the congregation, are you helping the young persons among you to become real praisers of God? What can you do?
4 Do not take their efforts for granted. Young people have proved to be a real asset to congregations. Many, by their fine conduct, have ‘adorned the teaching of our Savior, God.’ (Titus 2:6-10) This has given an effective witness to schoolteachers and others. Youths who manifest Christian behavior at conventions have glorified Jehovah and have brought greater respect for Jehovah’s witnesses in the community. Many young persons also do well in field service, even aiding others to take their stand for the truth. Commend them for the good they do.
5 Ask yourself: ‘When was the last time that I stopped to talk to the young folks at our Kingdom Hall, not merely to say “Hello,” but showing genuine interest?’ In conversation with these young people you can help them to set attainable goals—not too high for them to reach at their age. It may be the goal of preparing comments for meetings, beginning to use the Bible in the field or witnessing to at least one person each week at school. Many may be able to be temporary pioneers, particularly during school vacation periods.
6 Also, in order that young people might realize that they are a recognized, appreciated part of the congregation, give them things to do at the Kingdom Hall according to their age and ability. They can be encouraged to welcome newcomers and to share in Kingdom Hall maintenance, such as cleaning and caring for the grounds.
7 Among the youths at our meetings are some whose parents are not Jehovah’s witnesses. Have you considered making a friendly visit on the parents of these young folks? This would encourage the youths, and you might be able to aid the parents to get a better attitude toward the truth.
8 You who are parents, of course, have a special responsibility to spend time with your children, showing real interest in their spiritual growth. While helping others, do not neglect your own family. Your children need you to converse with them, to listen to them, to be interested in them, and, not simply to give them orders, but to reason with them. Help them to see how the truth applies in all the ways of life and to take real pleasure in serving Jehovah. Do this, and Jehovah will help you to keep them on the road to life.—Deut. 6:6, 7.
9 In making plans for field service, it would be a fine thing for parents and elders to give consideration to the youths, perhaps planning times after school as well as on weekends. As you are able, personally work with them and help them to learn how to improve their effectiveness in presenting the good news. If we encourage them now, they will be both an honor to Jehovah and a source of joy to all of us in the days to come.

