Engage in Memorial-Season Activity
1 Once every year Jehovah’s people have an occasion for very special observance. This is the Memorial of the death of our Lord Jesus Christ. Jesus has been resurrected into the heavens. Having there presented the value of his sacrifice, he owns all humankind. As God’s high priest he administers life-giving benefits to all who call upon God with faith in his sacrifice. We can look for his help in every time of need.—Heb. 4:16.
2 Certainly such a provision of our Father Jehovah is something to be thankful for, and the commemoration of this sacrifice with all it means is something to advertise to the widest possible extent.
3 To help truth-seeking persons to know about God’s life-giving provision, special arrangements have been made for this Memorial season. On Sunday, March 28, seventeen days before the celebration of the Lord’s Evening Meal, there will be a special public talk on the very appropriate subject “Who Is Jesus Christ, so that We All Need Him?” Let’s do our utmost to enable others to attend the public talk as well as the Memorial on April 14.
4 The April 15 Watchtower also highlights our need for Jesus Christ. Free copies of this special issue will be sent to each congregation—three for each Bible study being held by congregation publishers and pioneers. If you are conducting Bible studies, you will receive, through the Bible study overseer, three copies for each of your studies. As you give them to the Bible student, encourage him to give them to people at work, to relatives, neighbors and so forth. Aid the new one to see the need of rousing in others interest in Jesus Christ. Perhaps the student will even engage in the field service with you, if qualified.
HELP ALL TO ATTEND MEMORIAL
5 Those new ones who attend the public talk should be invited to attend the celebration of the Lord’s Evening Meal on April 14, after 6:00 p.m., Standard Time. Make arrangements to help them to attend. Printed Memorial invitations should also be given to others who have shown some interest. Besides those attending home Bible studies, there are persons who have taken literature or have shown some interest in conversation. Why not review your house-to-house record and make a call on each interested one. These may be shown that this special observance is the only one commanded by Jesus Christ and that all who profess Christianity should by all means be present to observe this most important event of the year.
6 Parents may take their children on these calls, thus impressing upon the children the importance of the occasion and the need to help others to attend. Children may also bring friends and classmates.
7 Elders, particularly the Bible study overseer, should stimulate and give direction to this notification work so that all can participate. Thus they will actually be sharing, in a fuller way, in this vital observance.

