Give Aid Through Book Study Groups
1 The congregation book study conductor has a part of God’s flock to care for, and he should be well acquainted with the circumstances of everyone in his study group. (Prov. 27:23) Not that he pries into their personal affairs. But he should know what each one has to face. Some of them work under difficult conditions, having little free time from their jobs; some have physical infirmities, or sick ones at home; some have unbelieving mates or families, while others enjoy more favorable conditions in a fine family of Jehovah’s witnesses.
2 So the conductor concerned for the flock will try to be aware of the spiritual condition of each one. How does he get to know this? By talking personally with them at the study and at the Kingdom Hall, and by visiting their homes. Also he gets to know them by accompanying them in the field service. The field overseer, too, can assist by informing him of needs and by making the Publisher’s Record cards available for the conductor to see.
3 The primary interest of the study conductor should be in people, not merely their time in the field. His objective is to help everyone to grow in spirituality. He wants to develop a like spirit in the brothers, namely, a real interest in the people to whom they speak. Thus, none will share in field service just to put in a report for the month, but because of their dedication to Jehovah and their love of people, wanting them to get life.
4 This objective puts a responsibility upon the conductor. In giving personal help, rather than trying to take too heavy a load all at once, he will accomplish more by giving special attention to one or two persons at a time. After a person advances spiritually, the conductor can help another. Others can share in this, too. No doubt there are other experienced publishers in the group who will be delighted to be of service.
5 The study conductor, by manifesting interest in each brother and sister in his group, can develop a real family atmosphere. Any timidity and coolness will give way to love and warmth, and all will get real joy out of the study and their service to Jehovah.

