Question Box
● Is it permissible to live in the territory of one congregation but attend meetings elsewhere?
Generally speaking, it is best to attend the meetings of the congregation holding the territory where you live. In most cases this proves to be in the best spiritual interests of the family, since it ordinarily makes it convenient to attend meetings, share in field service in territory close by and take advantage of help provided by the elders.
It is recognized, however, that individual circumstances vary. Such factors as one’s secular work schedule, having an unbelieving mate or transportation problems may lead someone to conclude that it would be more advantageous spiritually to attend another congregation. Each family head bears responsibility for his own household. After considering all the factors involved, he will have to decide what is best. He may want to discuss matters with the elders to get the benefit of their advice before he makes a decision. Perhaps they know of overlooked advantages that would result to the family in attending the congregation holding the territory where they live, or possible disadvantages that may be encountered in transferring to a neighboring congregation. Often it is easier for the congregation holding the territory to render loving assistance. And the home of the family might be used as a book study location within the congregation holding the territory. But in the final analysis, the elders will want to encourage the family head to decide in a way that will ensure the best spiritual benefits to his family. There is no reason to be critical of his decision when made.
In metropolitan areas, there is often a large number of congregations located in a concentrated area. There may be a number of reasons why the elders may decide that the interests of the work would be advanced by a transfer of publishers. For example, there may be territory adjustments in connection with the formation of a new congregation, or to give additional territory to a congregation covering its assignment frequently, or to strengthen a congregation having few publishers or mature brothers to take the lead. The elders in each congregation can outline what seems to be advisable and request that each family affected consider it. In many instances, there likely will be no problems in making the suggested adjustment. Again, each family head will have to weigh all the factors and decide if such a transfer should be made. The same would be true of elders, ministerial servants or pioneers who are asked if they can transfer elsewhere to assist a congregation needing help. (See “Question Box” in February 1973 Kingdom Ministry.)

