Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 29
Appreciating and Encouraging the Youths in Our Midst
15 min: Song 73. Introduction. Interview of young ones of various ages. While expressions should be in one’s own words, at rehearsal chairman can help those interviewed to get thoughts well in mind. Such questions as these might be used: Why do you like to come to meetings? How have family discussions helped you to come to know Jehovah? How has instruction at home and at the meetings helped you in school? Why are you glad that you are on Jehovah’s side? Why do you feel that it is important to share in field service?
18 min: “Encourage the Young People Among Us.” Talk and audience discussion. Acknowledge what young folks are doing in the congregation and point out opportunities for them. Outline any service arrangements the congregation has made in their behalf.
12 min: Youths, Keep Pioneer Service as Your Goal! Discussion of Branch Letter, highlighting how youths can be temporary pioneers during school vacations (some even while going to school) and can use this experience as stepping-stone to goal of being regular pioneers. Temporary pioneering also affords opportunity for adults to increase their disciple-making work.
15 min: Closing comments. Include experiences of young folks who are making opportunities to preach and conduct studies. (If time allows, relate experiences involving young publishers, on pages 6, 83 and 87 of 1976 Yearbook. Include item on “Bethel Service.” Song 39.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 7
14 min: Song 30. Introduction. (Have audience read scriptures and comment on them.) Highlight privilege we have to share in fulfillment of Matthew 24:14. Others cannot ‘call upon the name of Jehovah’ unless there are preachers sent forth. (Rom. 10:10-15) Now is the time to invite others to take of “life’s water free.” (Rev. 22:17) Include recent experiences had in house-to-house work.
18 min: Presenting the subscription offer. Discussion and demonstration. Give reasons why we desire The Watchtower to go into homes regularly on subscription basis. Pick out articles from recent issues to illustrate fine information going to subscribers. Present the subscription positively. As stressed in February issue of Our Kingdom Service, we want to communicate with the people and get them to express themselves so we know their thinking and can better reason with them. You know the value of The Watchtower. With conviction, point out why others should have it.
How can March 15 issue of The Watchtower be used effectively? (Perhaps experienced teen-age publisher might demonstrate.)
Theme: Will Things Get Better? (Title of opening article)
“Good morning. My name is . . . I am making brief calls on neighbors this morning to share with them God’s promise of a world without crime [other conditions could be used, if preferred]. Of course, conditions are getting so bad today that many sincere people are saying, ‘Where is all of this heading? Will things ever get better?’ Perhaps you have given this some thought, too. [Permit reply, if person inclined.] Did you know that Jesus foretold the very things we are experiencing today? Note his words here as quoted from the Bible. [Hand extra copy of March 15 issue to householder and, after directing attention to quotation of Luke 21:25, 26, 28 on page 163, read from your copy.] Note, while Jesus knew these bad times were coming, he gave a real basis for hope. Things will not just keep getting worse with no hope of relief. This article in The Watchtower [point to title of article] discusses how God will soon remove these wicked conditions and bring peace and happiness to mankind. Notice what is stated in conclusion on page 164. [Read next-to-last paragraph of article.] This article is a sample of what is published in The Watchtower every two weeks. I am sure you would enjoy having it come to you regularly so you may benefit from its encouraging message. I can arrange for twenty-four issues to come to you during the year for only $1.50.”
Householder does not subscribe, but accepts two magazines and three booklets. Ask audience: What else should concern for the person move us to do? Where interest is shown, be sure to try to start a study, whether subscription is obtained or not.
13 min: “Give Aid Through Book Study Groups.” Discuss with audience by questions and answers.
15 min: Concluding comments. Briefly summarize what was learned at meeting tonight. Emphasize that we are interested in people, also sharing in house-to-house work to find them. Discuss highlights of pages 258 and 259 of 1976 Yearbook, showing how all can ‘add luster’ to the truth.—Titus 2:10, NE. Song 33.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 14
10 min: Song 37. Spiritual benefits in attending an assembly. (Talk) Consider first part of insert down to section “Our Christian Conduct.” Include information on recommended assembly city and dates for congregation, as determined by elders from chart.
15 min: Conduct at assemblies. (Questions and answers) Discuss material in insert from “Our Christian Conduct” down to “Rooming.” Show how much of the counsel applies also at circuit assemblies and at our own congregation meetings. (Mention that publishers should save insert; it will be considered in coming months.)
25 min: Reflecting the “new personality” in every way. Discussion of Ephesians 4:25-32. Introduce with reference to need to “put on the new personality,” in verse 24. (1) Read verse 25. Why is being truthful important in our relationship with one another? (2) Read verses 26 and 27. (a) How can one be “wrathful” and yet not sin? (b) Why should the cause for anger be eliminated quickly? (3) Read verse 28. How should the Christian obtain necessities and things to share with those in need? (4) Read verse 29. How can proper use of the tongue be upbuilding? (5) Read verse 30. How can one ‘grieve’ Jehovah’s spirit? (6) Read verses 31 and 32. (a) How will kindness, compassion and a forgiving attitude help ‘take away from you’ bitterness and abusive speech? (b) How has Jehovah set the perfect example? Show how this relates to our Kingdom service.
10 min: Concluding comments. Encourage all to share fully in disciple-making. Accounts report. Song 94.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 21
15 min: Song 42. Introduction. Discuss with audience page 121 and paragraph 1 on page 122 of Organization book. Look up scriptures. Highlight importance of preaching with a view to making disciples. If some recently started Bible studies, have experiences related. (Prepare these in advance.)
15 min: Presenting subscription offer. Briefly review points made in front-page article in February issue of Our Kingdom Service on need for effectively communicating with people. Emphasize that literature placements are not our main goal, but are a means to help people learn truth. We are interested in people. By adapting the presentation appearing under the service meeting for the week of March 7, have experienced publisher demonstrate offer, using opening article in the April 1 issue. Publisher obtains subscriptions; tries to start study, but householder too busy then; time set for later in week. Chairman concludes with encouragement to all to present subscriptions and to make return visits on all who show interest.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News—Continuing Studies Started with Booklets.” Audience participation. Demonstrate points in article.
15 min: Concluding comments. Talk on paragraphs 1-4 of article on “Engage in Memorial-Season Activity.” Discuss how all can assist new ones to come to special talk on March 28. Song 43.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 28
Appreciating Our Christian Meetings
18 min: Song 5. Meetings—Always Important to God’s People. Talk and audience participation. In Moses’ time all, including children, were present. (Deut. 29:10, 11) Under Law, parents took much time teaching children. (Deut. 6:5-9) At festivals Israelites heard much; also at meeting every seven years all listened to reading of entire Law. (Deut. 31:10-13) After Babylonian exile, Jews regularly met in synagogues, there to give consideration to God’s commandments. Christians follow this pattern in their meetings. (See Aid, pp. 1564, 1565.) Briefly show purpose of our congregation meetings.
12 min: Stay Close to Congregation. Talk; involve audience. All of us know need to be led by God’s spirit. (Rom. 8:9) God’s spirit active when brothers gathered together for discussion of spiritual things. (Rom. 1:11, 12) While we incite one another to love and fine works on different occasions, what is best time? Is it not usually at meetings? (Read, discuss Hebrews 10:23-25.) Discuss ways in which we may strengthen and encourage others at meetings; include need to prepare for and comment at meetings. Need to encourage those in our book study group and those with whom we are conducting home Bible studies to attend meetings. Cover Question Box.
20 min: Special Effort to Help All Attend Memorial. (Paragraphs 5-7 of article “Engage in Memorial-Season Activity.”) Audience participation.
Discuss scriptures that may be used in calling on others, inviting them to attend: Commanded by Lord. (Luke 22:19) To know Jesus as ‘bread of life’ essential for life. (John 6:51) His sacrifice a basis for removal of sins and approach to God. As High Priest he can help us. (Heb. 4:15, 16) May include demonstration of how publisher invites someone to come, what to discuss.
Build appreciation among brothers for Memorial: Must have due respect, understanding its purpose; should be at peace with brothers (1 Cor. 11:17-20); must discern that emblems represent blood and body of Jesus Christ that was offered for us.—1 Cor. 11:27-29.
10 min: Concluding comments. Song 99.

