Yeartext for 1976
“Awaiting these things, do your utmost to be found finally by him spotless and unblemished and in peace.”​—2 Pet. 3:14.
It seems that Christians are always in expectation. They are always looking forward to something. In connection with our year’s text the apostle Peter advised us to look for the whole universe visible to us to break up. Why? Because the day of the Lord is near. It will come, and it is going to come very unexpectedly, like a thief. So Peter, addressing Christians, said: “Think what sort of people you ought to be, what devout and dedicated lives you should live!”​—2 Pet. 3:11, NE.
As followers of Christ Jesus we want to walk in his footsteps and we know that Jesus gave a very fine “public declaration before Pontius Pilate.” Paul wrote Timothy about this and said: “I give you orders that you observe the commandment in a spotless and irreprehensible way.” (1 Tim. 6:13, 14) In the same letter he further admonished Timothy and all of us: “Guard what is laid up in trust with you, turning away from the empty speeches that violate what is holy.” (1 Tim. 6:20) In these days we must be alert. We cannot be sitting down doing nothing. We must be busy! If we are, then we must “go . . . and make disciples of people of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy spirit.”​—Matt. 28:19.
If we went around spotty and blemished we would not look very suitable so as to fill the role of a disciple maker.
With all the trouble and distress in the world today it is certainly necessary for us to be at peace with one another. We must love one another and thus maintain that perfect bond of union. (Col. 3:14) If we keep ourselves spotless, unblemished and at peace, we will certainly be approved worshipers of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah and be able to remain in his spiritual paradise along with all our brothers and sisters who have dedicated their lives to do the will of God too. Now there are over 38,000 congregations of Jehovah’s witnesses around the world where God’s people are assembling every week. Here we encourage one another and build one another up spiritually. Are you there among this happy throng helping others? We should always keep in mind that “God recommends his own love to us in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.” (Rom. 5:8) Now are we going to show real love for him by living good clean lives?
Let us keep alert, awaiting the things that will come in the very near future. We must, with God’s help, keep ourselves spotless and unblemished and in peace toward one another and especially toward God, who loved us so much.

