From Our Readers
Kidney Disease  The article “‘It’s Only Temporary!’—My Life With Kidney Disease” (November 22, 1996) succeeded in encouraging my husband and me at a particularly critical moment. Like the writer of the article, my husband has begun peritoneal dialysis, and it has been difficult. Sometimes desperation gets the better of us. But your article was a great comfort, reminding us that renal insufficiency is only temporary and will soon be eliminated by God’s Kingdom, along with all other illnesses.
V. Q., Italy
Reading about a man who never took either his family or his worship for granted in spite of a lifelong struggle with disease brought tears to my eyes. I am a healthy, 18-year-old full-time evangelizer, and I realize how often I take my health for granted. Lee Cordaway’s faith and attitude were really encouraging to read about.
J. S., United States
In 1992, at the age of 11, I learned that I had kidney disease, which eventually led to kidney failure. I had to go on dialysis. I am glad you explained the process so well because people always wonder how it works. It encouraged me and also my friends to read that the condition I face today won’t always be here.
A. H., United States
I’ve had a lump in my throat since I read the article about Lee Cordaway. I could not believe that he died! My husband and I wish to send our love to his dear wife and family. It puts into perspective the petty problems I worry about in my life. What a dear, faithful Christian man! I am encouraged by his example.
F. H., United States
Although I’m only ten and don’t have a disease, I enjoy such encouraging articles. I wish Lee Cordaway could read this letter, but I know he won’t be able to until his resurrection in Paradise.
E. T., United States
Pilgrims  I wanted to tell you how much I appreciated your article “The Pilgrims and Their Struggle for Freedom.” (November 22, 1996) I didn’t learn the real story about the Pilgrims in school. But I have gotten so much education from your articles!
S. B., United States
Alternative Rock  I am 18 years old, and the article “Young People Ask . . . Alternative Rock—Is It for Me?” was well written. (November 22, 1996) I like alternative rock, so I thought the article would offend me. But when I finished it, I felt only appreciation. I suffer from depression, and I realize that my choice of music can either worsen my depression or help me cope with it. I liked the way the article asked, ‘Why not find music that cheers you up?’ Thank you for this encouraging and practical advice.
J. D., United States
The information was incredibly accurate and unbiased. I find some of this music appealing. Thank you for giving cautions without condemning the entire category of music.
S. C., United States
Animal Tales  I like to read the articles you publish about animals. Since I had never heard of the platypus, the article “The Enigmatic Platypus” (December 8, 1996) amazed me! In the same issue, the article about the charming friendship between an animal and humans, “This Kudu Remembered,” also touched my heart. How nice it is when humans show love and respect for animals!
F. A., Brazil

