From a Tiny Acorn to a Mighty Oak
● A tiny acorn, resembling a miniature egg in an eggcup, loses its hold on the tree and drops to the ground. Buried by a scurrying squirrel and then forgotten, the seed sprouts. In time, it becomes a majestic oak, the mightiest of Britain’s native forest trees.
Celebrated in history and myth, the oak can live more than a thousand years. Some reach 130 feet [40 m] in height! Old oaks are remarkable for their massive trunks and spreading boughs. While Britain has two native species of oak trees, worldwide there are about 450 varieties. What identifies them all is their seed, the tiny acorn.
The oak tree hosts a greater variety of wildlife than any other British tree. This includes large numbers of insect species. Many caterpillars love to feast on the oak’s tender summer leaves. But the tree defends itself. Maturing leaves develop unappetizing tannins.
Every part of the tree is inhabited. The vast array of insect life attracts a multitude of birds and spiders. Beetles bore away under the thick, fissured bark. Owls and colonies of bats lodge inside hollow trunks. Small animals such as mice, voles, rabbits, badgers, and foxes find shelter among the roots.
The oak has its own disposal agents. Each year a quarter of a million leaves fall from a full-grown tree. Fungi and bacteria decompose the leaf litter and recycle nutrients back into the soil. Some years, a tree will produce 50,000 acorns. Most are gathered or eaten by birds and animals. Mites and beetles dispose of dead wood, and fungi feed on the bark.
Oak timber is exceptionally strong and durable. It has long been a favorite for building houses and making fine furniture. It is ideal for making barrels in which to age beer and wine. And sturdy sailing ships built of oak helped the British Navy to dominate the seas for many years.
Oak timber is still valued. And the tree, an integral part of the British landscape, is justly admired for its strength, dependability, and endurance. From a tiny acorn grows a mighty oak—yet another marvel of creation!
[Picture on page 18]
The oak can live more than a thousand years and reach 130 feet [40 m] in height and more than 40 feet [12 m 30 cm] in girth
[Picture Credit Lines on page 18]
Tree: © John Martin/Alamy; acorn: © David Chapman/Alamy

