Keep Unity by Speaking the Truth
UNTIL now world peace and unity have been nothing more than a dream. Try as men will, they remain divided, and that not only by religious differences and racial prejudices, but also by political ideologies. And no wonder, since the hearts of these “kings” or world rulers are “inclined to doing what is bad, and at one table a lie is what they . . . keep speaking.”—Dan. 11:27.
The facts cannot be gainsaid, lies are divisive. The “god of this system of things,” Satan the Devil, has blinded the people to the truth, making them selfish, jealous, violent and lustful. It therefore follows that only when Satan and his demons are abyssed after Armageddon can men hope to have peace and unity among all mankind.—2 Cor. 4:4; Rev. 20:1-3.
Among true Christians there already are peace and unity, for they heed the fine Scriptural counsel: “Now that you have put away falsehood, speak truth each one of you with his neighbor . . . speaking the truth, let us by love grow up in all things into him who is the head, Christ. From him all the body, by being harmoniously joined together and being made to co-operate through every joint that gives what is needed, according to the functioning of each respective member in due measure, makes for the growth of the body for the building up of itself in love.”—Eph. 4:25, 15, 16.a
Speaking the truth, of course, means speaking in line with the Word of God, the Bible, for, as Jesus said regarding it, “Your word is truth.” The sciences of geology and archaeology have time and again proved Bible history true; human experience daily bears out the wisdom of Bible principles; current history testifies to the accuracy of Bible prophecy, and the facts show the Bible is singularly free from conflict with proved science.—John 17:17.
Note an example. In ancient times there were many myths about what supported the earth; among the best known being that it rested on the shoulders of the giant Atlas. But thirty-five hundred years ago a Bible writer wrote in harmony with scientific fact when he stated that the earth had no visible means of support, for God is “hanging the earth upon nothing.”—Job 26:7.
Why does speaking Bible truth result in unity? Because it takes a good heart to speak the truth. Jesus said: “Out of the heart’s abundance his mouth speaks.” The truth has to be first in one’s heart, and if it is there it will set one free, even as Jesus showed. Free from what? Free from false religion, from oppressive traditions, from unsound political ideas and philosophies, from fear and hatred of strangers and of one’s neighbors. Speaking the truth frees truth lovers from bitterness, faultfinding and envy.—Luke 6:45; John 8:32.
Yes, getting the truth in one’s heart causes one to think God’s way, to think of doing something to help others. God is love, he is the personification of unselfishness. Getting his truth in one’s heart makes one unselfish, and unselfishness unites, for it is concerned with the well-being of others instead of thinking just of its own interests.—1 Cor. 13:5; 1 John 4:8.
As you get the truth into your heart you will begin to speak it out. If you are the head of a family, you have a special obligation to do so. That means you must arrange for your family to study the Bible together at regular times, which study of Bible truth will cause your family to be drawn closer together, to be in unity. And united families coming together with one another in obedience to the command ‘not to forsake the assembling of ourselves together, and so much the more as you see the day of Jehovah approaching,’ results in congregations at unity.—Heb. 10:24, 25.
While it is true that out of the heart’s abundance the mouth speaks, yet at times this speaking might be somewhat restrained because of love of ease, or fear of man or too great concern for material things. These snares must be avoided, for the obligation is upon all to speak the truth. All must teach others the things they have been taught. Having heard the invitation, “Come!” they must now say “Come!” to still others.—Rev. 22:17; Matt. 28:19, 20.
That the way to Christian unity is by speaking the truth is being demonstrated on a worldwide scale by the Christian witnesses of Jehovah; this unity especially standing out in times of stress and when they meet at large assemblies.
Are you among the happy united ones speaking the truth? If not, let Jehovah’s witnesses help you to become one of them.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, May 1, 1963.

