VOL. XXIII. NOVEMBER 1, 1902. No. 21. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 323 

Insanity of the Doukhobors 323 

"Away from Rome" Movement 

in England 325 

Jewish Woes in Roumania 325 

Our General Conventions 326 

The Blight of Sin and Its Only 

Cure 327 

He Gave Them Judges 330 

Who Is Worthy? 331 

They Also Have Erred Through 

Wine 333 

Interesting Questions Answered 334 

page 322 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



VOLUNTEER MATTER SENT PREPAID. 

It is our intention that the Volunteer matter shall always 
go to destination prepaid, and this is our contract 
with the printer who is shipping them for us. Should you 
at any time be charged for the transportation you will now 
know that it is a mistake, and will please advise us at once 



that we may have the error corrected. 

PRICES OF DAWNS UNIFORM. 

The special prices on Dawns to our subscribers and to 
colporteurs is to permit them to make expenses and still 
to sell the cloth-bound edition in all volumes and languages 
at 35 cents each— and no more,— except when sold in 
small out-of-the-way places where they cannot be had by 
freight, and must therefore cost additional for mail or express 
charges, when the price shall be 45 cents and not more. 
These terms apply to the United States and Canada, and 
any orders received henceforth will be understood to be 
based upon these terms. (Canadian colporteurs will be 
allowed the proper amount of the customs duty to permit 
them to conform to this rule.) We are convinced that the 
sale of the Dawns at so low a price will inure to the general 
advantage of the cause we serve, and the wholesale rate is 
based on this belief: the foreign translations and larger 
English volumes are supplied considerably below cost. 



R3097 : page 323 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
INSANITY OF THE DOUKHOBORS. 



VARIOUS are the forms of insanity or mental 
unbalance. The whole world of mankind is 
mentally unbalanced some to one degree 
some to another degree, as the result of original sin 
and its death sentence which assails all the energies 
—mental and moral as well as physical. All are not 
wicked to the same degree or in the same manner. 
Some are insanely jealous, some insanely cruel, some 
insanely covetous or selfish, and the Doukhobors 
furnish an illustration of insane unselfishness. The 
lesson is that none of us have good sense enough to 
direct our own courses. All need the divine aid provided 
for us in the Word of God. Those who do 
accept this divine guidance by full consecration and 
submission to the holy spirit are Scripturally said to 
possess "the spirit of a sound mind," and to be 
"wise" with a wisdom which cometh from above. 
It will be remembered that about three years ago 
the public press gave detailed accounts of the arrival 
in Canada of about 4,000 Russian peasants styled 
Doukhobors, who were emigrating on account of 
their religious convictions— refusal to serve in the 
Russian army, etc., etc. Next we learned that they 
were in conflict with Canadian marriage laws because 



R3098 : page 323 

averse to perpetual marriage obligations and ceremonies. 

Now we learn that their false conceptions 

of liberty have taken a new form and that they have 

concluded that it is not right to deprive horses and 

cattle of their liberty, making them servants and menial 

slaves. In consequence their fields are idle and 

their good harvests unreaped while their horses and 

cattle disport themselves at liberty. Consequently 

many are likely to die of privation during the approaching 

winter. Truly conscience is a dangerous 

thing unless instructed by God's Word and thus 

guided by the spirit of a sound mind. Concerning 

these people and their troubles we give some extracts 

below. 

The Boston Transcript remarks that it is "a religious 
mania, the like of which has perhaps never 
been seen in this country," and continues:— 

"Fully four thousand Doukhobors, who settled in the 
Yorkton district, Northwest Territory, will starve or 
freeze to death, or be on the verge of starvation this year, if 
the Dominion Government does not take active steps to prevent 
their present religious mania from going further.... 
Nearly every one of the Doukhobors seen was clad in the 
lightest of cotton garments. They would afford no protection 
from an October breeze, to say nothing of a severe 
winter blast; and they say they will wear no other. In 
many of the houses visited a bag of flour was the only food 
visible. The Doukhobors will eat a few vegetables; but in 
few instances had they even brought them into their homes. 
Men originally strong were gaunt, hungry wrecks; and on a 
recent trip into Yorkton for flour a dozen big men, harnessed 
like mules to a heavy wagon, almost fell by the roadside 
through exhaustion and starvation. The women, so 
far, have escaped any of the work that must fall on the men 
since they have discarded the use of animals; but, if this 
year's crop is to be harvested, they will soon have to harness 
themselves up to the heavy wagons as the men do. 
They have made absolutely no provision for the future; and, 
what is perhaps worse, the religious mania that possesses 
them is becoming more intense and is spreading. The attempt 
by the Dominion Government to help these people has 
apparently had no effect. How it will end will probably be 
told when the intense cold of that district sets in." 

The London Morning Journal says of this 
matter:— 

"These 'maniacs' are apparently simply a gentle Christian 
sect who have been suddenly seized with the question which 
Buddhists answered trenchantly enough many a century 
ago. Asking themselves by what right they dared to exploit 
any living and sentient creature with capacities of pleasure 
and independence as great as their own, they became strict 
vegetarians. But the Russian idealist is capable of a fierce 
consistency. Be he tyrant or nihilist, Tolstoyan or Doukhobor, 
he makes no pact with ideas. Having ceased to slay 



animals for food, the Doukhobors could find no sanction for 

R3098 : page 324 

subjecting them to the servitude and mutilation of the farmyard. 

They released their horses and cattle, renounced eggs 

and milk, wool and leather, and now they are attempting 

to live on bread and water— clad, we suppose, in cotton. 

It is a hardy enterprise, but, unless indeed, like Pythagoras, 

they have scruples about beans, there is no reason 

why they should fare worse than the millions of good Buddhists 

who even strain water lest there should be life in it." 

Quite true, millions of Buddhists died in the recent 
famine in India, refusing to eat animal food— the 
animals starving also. We regret to note a similar 
delusion and false conception of holiness creeping in 
amongst "Vegetarians";— a disposition to consider 
the eating of meat "unclean" and "unholy"; a disposition 
to consider themselves superior to meat-eaters, 
and to despise them;— to call them "cannibalistic," 
etc. We offer no objection to those who claim that 
they have better health as a result of a purely vegetable 
diet: it is every man's duty to supply to his 
system the diet which will in his judgment yield the 
largest degree of comfort and efficiency in his case. 
But we do object to the claim of special sanctity and 
acceptableness with God on account of a purely vegetable 
diet. Those who take that position are distinctly 
setting themselves up as wiser than God, and holier 
than our Lord Jesus who not only ate animal food 
(lamb and fish at least) but who miraculously created 
fish for food. (John 6:11; 21:6-11.) The inspired 
Apostle "bound" the question and settled it (Matt. 16:19; 
18:18; Acts 15:28,29): the Apostle Paul declaring: 
"Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in 
the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving 
heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of devils; 
...forbidding to marry and commanding to abstain 
from meats which God created to be received 
with thanksgiving by them that believe and know the 
truth." (I Tim. 4:1-4.) Realizing man's natural unsoundness 
of judgment, Christians should "not lean 
to their own understanding" but should seek the wisdom 
of God, and nowhere is this wisdom better illustrated 
than in him who was "holy, harmless and 
separate from sinners." Whatever our Master did 
and taught it would be blasphemy for us as his disciples 
to call wrong or sinful for us or for others. 

Mr. A. St. John, an Englishman who became 
converted to Tolstoyan philosophy instead of Christianity, 
and who recently visited America in the interest 
of the Doukhobors, gives his views of their 
present craze in the "Midland Herald" (England) as 
follows:— 

"The time of emigration, of change of circumstances, of 
unsettlement and resettlement, proved to be a perhaps severer 



strain on the character of these peasants than all their 
sufferings in the Caucasus and Siberia. They were worn 
out to some extent, I think, in body and spirit, and they 
came into circumstances where the work was new to them, 
and they came into an atmosphere— well, perhaps where a 
little materialism prevailed. At one time some of them 
seemed lazy and unreliable— and then some of them seemed 
to become demoralized and materialized. There were cases 
of quarreling and fault-finding here and there. The leading 
men were mostly in Siberia. The state of affairs was 
lamented. I don't know what has come over our people. 
They are quite changed. If only we had our Siberian exiles 
here; then it would be quite different.' This is the sort of 
thing I heard occasionally. Many were sad and ashamed. 

"But the old spirit was there still. And now it has revived, 
I think. And I suppose that, in reaction from the 
period of materialism, has come a time of heightened spirituality 
(what shall we call it?). Some have gone to great 
extremes. One letter told me of a man who had fasted 
thirty-six days, and was not expected to live. But for the 
most part it has been evident from their letters that they 
have been for some time quietly and carefully thinking out 
the problems of living in their present surroundings while 
fulfilling the highest demands of conscience. Thus, tho 
some feel inclined to give up milk and butter, yet they do 
not want their children and old and sick folk to suffer in 
consequence. And while they feel compunction in making 
animals work for them, those same animals whom they can 
see enjoying so immensely the free life on the prairie, yet 
they do not wish to sell them to others, nor by giving up old 
habits too suddenly, or too wholesale, to entail suffering on 
the weak, or unpreparedness for emergency... 

"What I want to impress upon people here is that these 
are— a great many of them at least— thinking peasantry. 
They are not all the same. That is one of the points in 
which I am so proud of them. They have their conservative 
old stagers and their moderates and their progressives. 
They have their formalists and their broad freethinkers. 
And they are human, oh, so human! Of course the Canadians 
don't understand them. But if the Canadian Government 
goes on with the kind and sympathetic forbearance 
that it has hitherto pursued, and if we will wait and watch 
what comes of it all, we may learn a lot." 

"Let your moderation be known unto all men," 
says the Apostle. A live conscience needs to be 
"taught of God" in order that moderation and not 
mental unbalance shall result. The truth in its purity 
will seem erratic enough to worldly people who cannot 
comprehend it, and every other peculiarity should 
be carefully avoided. Conscientious blunders are 
amongst the most injurious. Note the mistaken conscientious 
conviction of Saul of Tarsus that he ought 
to persecute Christians. Note also the claim of Seventh 
Day Adventists that they must work on the first 
day of the week if they would have divine approval 
and everlasting life. As an illustration of a misguided 



conscience and its baneful effect in social affairs 
we mention the case of an editor's wife. She at one 
time took pleasure in assisting him in his work. By 
and by a deluded and misguided conscience told her 
that God wished her to be editor in chief and publish 
what she pleased. When the editor demurred that 
he dare not abandon his stewardship, the deluded 
conscience told its owner that she should no longer 
co-operate, but more, that she should break her marriage 
covenant in deserting her husband and home, 
and that she should say all manner of evil against him 
falsely, until such time as he would yield to her the 
liberties of the journal— which her conscience told her 
was God's will. 

The moral of all such lessons is, "Be not wise 
above what is written." "Study to show thyself approved 
unto God, a workman that needeth not to be 
ashamed,— rightly dividing the Word of truth." 

R3099 : page 325 

"AWAY FROM ROME" MOVEMENT IN ENGLAND. 



The Fortnightly Review contains an article from 
the pen of Rev. Arthur Galton, a clergyman of the 
Church of England, who formerly went over to the 
Roman Catholic communion but returned. Rev. Galton 
in serious vein declares "that he has been made 
the spokesman for one hundred and fifty secular clergymen" 
of the Roman Catholic church, pledged "to 
work jointly as a corporate body, by constitutional 
means and through canonical methods, for the reformation 
they desire" in the Roman Catholic Church 
and its "unlawful authority." He declares: "It is 
obvious to everyone who studies history with an impartial 
mind, that the English people and the Roman 
court are incompatible," and adds:— 

"Between the Norman conquest and the middle of the 
fourteenth century, when our rulers generally were strong, 
when our sense of a national and an independent life was 
growing, that incompatibility and the friction caused by it 
are manifest in contemporary annals. The grievances then 
complained of were dealt with by legislation in the century 
that followed. These grievances, to sum them up shortly, 
were all attributed to the misgovernment, the cupidity, and 
the ever-growing usurpations of the Roman court. Some of 
our forefathers entered the Christian Church with a grateful 
and generous devotion for the Roman bishops, which 
continued until their sentimental affection was destroyed by 
the scandalous reality. Their practical experience of the 
methods and officials of the Roman court forced them to 
repudiate its authority, for political, financial and ethical 
reasons. In spirit, in aims, in methods and institutions, the 
English people and that narrow oligarchy of Italians, which 



pretends to be the Catholic Church, are by their respective 

qualities necessarily opposed to one another. Religious 

questions enter much less into the mutual estrangement between 

Rome and England than most theological controversialists 

imagine. Numerous and flagrant individual cases, 

as well as the general effects of the Roman system in political 

and ecclesiastical affairs, must compel serious thinkers 

to ask themselves whether the Papal Government, as such, 

has any religion at all, except in phrases; or whether it can 

have had any, as a corporate institution, since the pontificate 

of Nicholas the First. The most prominent and abiding 

impression conveyed by the papacy, since the ninth 

century, is that it has been a political and financial organization 

masquerading in a theological disguise for the attainment 

of temporal domination." 

"The writer and his friends see no hope of a reform by 
any ordinary means. Their plan is to combine, and to act 
together. They do not wish to make a new sect, nor do 
they wish to be merged into the Church of England. They 
intend to set up a bishop of their own, the validity of whose 
orders cannot be challenged by the papal theologians, or 
doubted by any Catholic. They wish to work still among 
and for their own people. The details for this are all arranged. 
For the lawfulness of this course, they appeal to 
ancient precedent and to the regulations of canon law. It is 
admitted, as they argue, that in a case of necessity, if lawful 
requests be denied by the existing authorities, the sufferers 
may provide an alternative authority for themselves. Few 
people, who know and face the facts, can deny the existence 
of grave abuses, which are a danger to faith and morals, as 
well as a violation of constitutional and canon law. Few, 
probably, can say with any truth that they expect a reformation 
by ordinary means, and through the Curia. The utterances 
of the Pope, the declared policy of his advisers, 
the growth of the religious orders, the whole condition of 
affairs in the Papal Church, proclaim surely a state of necessity. 
This of itself clears the reforming movement from 
that charge of schism to which it might be liable in ordinary 
times. These reformers look upon themselves as 
Englishmen by inheritance and birth, but not quite as 
Englishmen in church affairs. Their attitude, both with 
regard to Rome and Canterbury, is similar to that of certain 
communities in early days who were allowed, without 
any taint of heresy or schism, to be ministered to by their 
own bishop, and not by the local bishops where they happened 
to reside. These reformers, then, propose to establish 
a subsidiary or strangers' bishop. They mean to repudiate 
the jurisdiction of bishops who are merely delegates 
and nominees of the Roman court. By severing themselves 
from the abuses and the usurped authority of that mundane 
organization, they do not abdicate their rights in the Catholic 
Church, they do not give up their reverence for the 
lawful and primatial authority of the Roman bishops, nor 
do they forget the precedence which is due by right to the 
historical position and the long services of their venerable 
See. If the papacy will only accept an unreasonable service, 



and continue to assert an unlawful authority, the 

charges of heresy and schism recoil of necessity upon itself. 

The position of these new reformers, with regard to 

Rome, is precisely the position and attitude of our own reformers 

in the sixteenth century." 

"The reformers, for whom this article is written, have no 
drawing toward these neo-Anglicans, whom they consider 
more Romanized and narrow than the Romans. They bid 
them remember the position, the traditions, and the history 
of the English Church which they appear so strangely to 
have sophisticated or forgotten. They implore them to realize 
that the existing Curia may be broken to pieces, or may 
be broken away from lawfully, but it will never yield to persuasion, 
or grant any constitutional reform. Those who 
know it are compelled to give up all hope of reformation 
and reunion by means of it. Those who have only a theoretical 
imagination of it, who dream about it as an ideal, 
are surely ill-advised and worse, not to profit by the experiences 
and warnings of those who knew it only too well 
through its mundane, arbitrary, scheming, and un-English 
administration." 

JEWISH WOES IN ROUMANIA. 



"It is the time of Jacob's trouble," as the prophets 
foretold. The poor Jews are subjected to tribulations 
in one country after another by so-called 
Christians who are totally ignorant of real Christianity. 
Now it is Roumania that persecutes, and all 
right-minded people are pleased to note that Mr. 
Hay, U.S. Secretary of State, has addressed a communication 
to the great powers of Europe calling attention 
to the fact that the "Berlin Conference" of 
European Powers (1878) created Roumania a separate 
State upon condition that its laws should maintain 
religious liberty, and that this arrangement is 
being violated. Whether the appeal will bear any 

R3099 : page 326 

fruit is doubtful; but it can surely do no harm to thus 
lift up a voice for Justice. 

Concerning the persecutions the Roumanian Bulletin 
(London) says:— 

"These conditions of life, humiliating tho they be, would 
not in themselves have sufficed to render the lot of the Roumanian 
Jews desperate, for it is conceivable that even without 
civil rights and opportunities of culture human beings 
may still manage to live with some degree of comfort. It 
soon became clear to the Roumanian Government, however, 
that a large and increasing unassimilated element in the 
country would inevitably lead to serious social and economic 
complications, and accordingly measures were taken to 
guard against this fresh danger. These measures have had 



for their object the increase of misery and of the difficulties 
of life among the Jews, with the ultimate view of keeping 
their numbers stationary. 

"In pursuance of this terrible policy, almost every form 
of Jewish economic activity has been the subject of restrictive 
legislation aimed ostensibly at aliens in general, but in 
reality affecting only the Jews. They have been expelled 
from the revenue service, the tobacco regime, and the railway 
organization. They are excluded from government 
tenders and contracts. They are placed at the mercy of their 
Christian competitors in trade, who alone are allowed to be 
members of chambers of commerce. Their participation in 
the management of financial corporations and joint-stock 
companies is severely limited. They may not act as brokers 
in any trade, and they and their agents are excluded from 
grain and cattle markets. Their expulsion from the drink 
traffic has ruined thousands of them. It is calculated that 
20,000 were reduced to beggary by the law of 1884, which prohibited 
them from trading as pedlars." 

The Roumanian government evidently desires to 
force the Jews to emigrate, and the Jews are doing 
so as rapidly as possible. On this point the Spectator 
(London) says:— 

"They wish to reach America, but the Americans will not 
receive them unless they can prove that they are not paupers; 
and as they are two hundred thousand in number, the 
collection of the necessary funds is a work of difficulty and 
time. In Roumania they have absolutely no rights, and live 
at the mercy of a population which hates them to such a degree 
that their parliament has declared all Jews to be foreigners, 
altho they have been resident for centuries. 
Neither Germany nor Austria will do anything for them, 
and it seems impossible for Western Europe, which is more 
tolerant, either to protect them or to find them a new 
habitat." 



R3099 : page 326 

OUR GENERAL CONVENTIONS. 

OUR two Annual Conventions (one at Des Moines, 
Iowa, the other at Washington, D.C.) belong 
to the past. The first, held September 13-15, 
served a large western district, and was attended 
chiefly by friends residing in Iowa, Illinois, Minnesota, 
North and South Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas, Arkansas 
and Texas,— the attendance at the largest session 
being about 350. The interest of those present 

R3100 : page 326 

was both deep and fervent, as attested both by words 
and looks. God's blessing was with us, our cup of 
joy and sympathy ran over, and we trust continued to 



do so after our return to our homes, so that the convention's 
joys and blessings reached and is still refreshing 
many times the number privileged to be in 
attendance. Thirty symbolized their consecration by 
water immersion. The convention was addressed by 
a large number of speakers, of one heart and one 
mind. The Christian Church kindly put its meeting 
house at our disposal on the entire day of the baptism 
service, which was preceded by a discourse explanatory 
of its deep import from our standpoint. 

Each Convention seems better than the one previous, 
which at the time seemed so full of divine favor 
as to leave nothing to be desired. The last convention, 
at Washington, was no exception to the general 
rule in this respect: it was the largest we have 
ever had in point of numbers, and so far as we were 
able to judge, a fuller measure of the holy spirit could 
not be looked for ever, in the earthen vessels. Over 
800 attended;— about 550 to 600 of these being from 
abroad— from Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, Michigan, 
Tennessee, Kentucky, Alabama, Illinois, Kansas, 
California, Georgia, North and South Carolina, 
Virginia, West Virginia, New York, New Jersey, 
Massachusetts, and Ontario. 

The Calvary Baptist Church edifice of Washington 
was kindly put at our disposal for a discourse 
on baptism, which was followed by the immersion of 
45 sisters and 42 brothers, amongst the latter being 
five formerly ministers, one Methodist, one a Second 
Adventist and three Baptists. Two of the latter remarked 
that they had immersed many without understanding 
the true significance of the ceremony or 
of the command back of it. 

Like the Des Moines Convention, this one concluded 
with a Love Feast— though truth to tell the 
sessions throughout were love feasts with the Lord 
through his word and spirit and in prayer and praise. 
The "Pilgrim" brethren, supported by the Elders of 
the local congregation, and by the colporteurs to the 
number of about thirty, bade goodby to the convention 
visitors in general who (about 500) filed past 
them, led by such of the number as were the chosen 
Elders of various congregations, numbering about 
forty. Many eyes were dimmed with tears of joy and 
sympathy, and many lips expressed longing for the 
great Convention mentioned by the Apostle, when all 
the Elect shall meet in glory;— "the General Assembly 
and church of first-borns, whose names are written 
in heaven." Many too were the ejaculations of 
praise for divine blessings upon the eyes of our understanding, 
and of prayer for continued leading and 
instruction in the right ways of the Lord; and "The 
Lord bless thee and keep thee" seemed to be upon 
every lip. 

In one way these Conventions are quite expensive, 



R3100 : page 327 

but in another way they are very inexpensive. 

Probably $5500 or $10 per head, would not be too 

high an average estimate as respects the visitors; and 

about the same amount per capita for the home congregation. 

But who can estimate the value of the 

knowledge and spiritual uplift thus secured, and carried 

to other hundreds in every direction? Good results 

have already been noted also from quartering 

the friends with Christian families of Washington. 

Several have already become interested and are reading; 

and we doubt not the Washington Church will 

have a blessing in numbers as well as in interest and 

love and zeal— tho in these last respects it is difficult 

to imagine any great improvement, above what was 

shown by their untiring efforts to serve and please the 

brethren and in the careful preparations made 

beforehand. 

"Praise God from whom all blessings flow." 



R3100 : page 327 

THE BLIGHT OF SIN AND ITS ONLY CURE. 

"As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness 

even so must the Son of Man be lifted up: 
That whosoever believeth in him should not perish but have 
everlasting life."— John 3:14,15. 

ISRAEL'S experience in the wilderness prolonged 

thirty -eight years on account of 

their unreadiness, lack of faith to enter Canaan 

at first, was doubtless a season of valuable instruction 

in various ways; tho very little is told us 

respecting this period. Evidently those years of 

drilling in the laws, sacrifices, etc., brought the people 

to a comparatively moral and religious condition; 

so much so that their next prominent sin was 

in the nature of boasting of their holiness— pride of 

heart. Admitting degradation and sin and faithlessness 

in the past, they felt that they had made great 

progress and should no longer be dealt with as formerly. 

Admitting that it had been necessary for 

Moses and Aaron to rule them imperiously, they 

denied that this was any longer necessary; and 

under the leadership of Korah, Dathan and Abiram, 

quite a sedition developed;— the influence extending 

so far that it included two hundred and fifty leaders 

and most prominent men of Israel. Their contention 

was that all Israel was now holy (Num. 16:2,3); 

and that, therefore, Moses and Aaron should 

no longer be considered the only ones with whom 

God would communicate,— the intimation being that 



they were endeavoring to perpetuate a hierarchy 

which God had not established, and which true Israelities 

should not recognize. 

There is a lesson here for spiritual Israelites: It 
teaches us not to become heady or highminded or 
boastful or proud of spiritual attainments and godliness. 
It teaches us that in God's estimation there is 
no holiness that does not include humility and full 
submission to the divine arrangement. It reminds 
us also of the prophesied rebellion that will take 
place in the close of the Millennial age, amongst 
those who will have reached perfection under the 
Millennial Kingdom, some of whom will manifest 
their unfitness for eternal life by their lack of full 
submission to the divine arrangement. 

Moses called to him the representatives of the insubordination; 
kindly and patiently he reasoned with 
Korah, the one who responded to his call, pointing 
out to him the Lord's arrangement; from the others 
he received but an insulting refusal to discuss the 
question. This kindness, forbearance and endeavor 
to help those whose feet were slipping out of the 
way, all the more commends the leader to our sympathy 
and appreciation, and teaches us to be gentle 
and patient with "those that oppose themselves" to 
the divine order. (2 Tim. 2:25.) But we are not to 
expect success in every instance, even as Moses had 
no success in this case; where the heart is wrong it 
cannot be guided by reason; and pride, boastfulness 
and ambition are evidences of a wrong condition of 
heart. 

So far from endeavoring to use force against these 
men, Moses took them at their word and invited them 
to display the powers, privileges and divine authority 
which they claimed; and appointed that they 
should the next day meet with himself and Aaron and 
let the Lord by his providences decide matters. 
Korah's influence over the whole congregation was 
evidently very great; it is generally easier to influence 
people by telling them that they are better 
and greater than they had previously supposed— it 
works upon their pride. However, the Lord spared 
the people, tho he gave an illustration of his indignation 
against their assumptions,— by causing the 
earth to open and swallow up these three leading 
"holiness" rebels, their tents, families, etc., and by 
causing a plague to break out in the camp, in which 
the two hundred and fifty chief men who had joined 
in the conspiracy, died. One lesson here is that we 
should beware that our holiness is of the proper kind 
—not self -righteousness, but submission to the 
righteousness which is of God. Although these men 
did not die the Second Death, but will, in due time, 
share in the benefits of the great atonement accomplished 
by the antitypical Priest, nevertheless, they 
typified persons who enjoying great favors of the 



Lord misappropriate these, applying them selfishly 
and in pride, will die the Second Death, and with 
them their allies, sharers in their sin. 

One would suppose that so striking a manifestation 
of the divine will would thoroughly correct the wrong 
spirit amongst the people, and show them the difference 
between their boastful self -righteousness and 
the righteousness of full submission to the divine arrangement 
which alone could have the divine approval. 
But not so; human perverseness is shown 
in the fact that on the next day the leaders of Israel 

R3100 : page 328 

assailed Moses and Aaron with the charges that they 
were unholy men, murderers— that they had killed on 
the previous day, by some power of their own, some 
who were truly the Lord's people. As a consequence 
the Lord's indignation was enkindled against the people 
and they were spared, by the interposition of 
those whom they had traduced, only after 14,700 of 
their number had perished by pestilence. This same 
spirit of pride, rebellion, and its consequences may be 
noted in our day; how many there are who, because 
not right at heart, are in more or less sympathy with 
those with whom the Lord has no sympathy! They 
have seen "heady" ones rise up in the congregation 
of the Lord, seeking to draw away disciples after 
themselves, and afterward have seen these rejected of 
the Lord, instead of becoming great leaders as they 
expected; they have seen how, in the Lord's providence, 
the earth (worldliness or various false ideas) 
swallowed them up, buried them in oblivion so far as 
leadership was concerned; yet after witnessing the 
Lord's dealings with these, in putting them out of the 
light of present truth, etc., they are still sympathetic 

R3101 : page 328 

with them and complain that their fall into the darkness 
and oblivion was not of the Lord, but the fault of 
his "faithful." These resemble the Israelites who 
blamed the loss of these "renowned" would-be leaders 
upon the Lord's truly appointed servants, Moses and 
Aaron. Let us learn from this lesson to be always 
on the Lord's side, and to keep our hearts so free 
from prejudice, pride and self-will, that we may always 
be able to discern which is the Lord's side in 
every controversy. Those who do not so, are likely 
to lose their spiritual life as the 14,700 in this type 
lost natural life. 

After impressing the lesson of divine appointment, 
the Lord called for the rods of the chief men of every 
tribe— Aaron representing the tribe of Levi, and these 
rods were laid over night in the Most Holy; they were 
brought forth the next morning in the sight of all the 



people, and no change had taken place in any of them 
except the one belonging to Aaron, which was covered 
with buds, blossoms and almonds. Thus did the 
Lord emphasize his choice of the tribe of Levi and of 
the Aaronic priesthood, and impress the lesson of 
their recognition upon all Israel. So, too, the Lord 
has chosen Christ as the High Priest of our order, 
or profession, and the Church and household of faith, 
to be associated with him in the work of the ministry. 
These will ultimately be made known to all who desire 
harmony with the Lord; to all who will enter 
into the Millennial Canaan;— all the people will then 
know that God puts a wide difference between the 
"household of faith" and various teachers of morality, 
higher criticism, etc., who have denied the faith and 
who are attempting to teach upon other lines than 
those laid down in the Scriptures, of which the cross 
of Christ is the center. The light, the vitality and the 
fruits of righteousness are centered in the household 
of faith, and this will be made manifest to all. 

Two other incidents of about this time— the close 
of the wilderness detention,— were the death of 
Miriam, Moses' sister, and the death of Aaron, his 
brother. The forty years being about completed, the 
people were ready now, under the Lord's direction, 
to enter Canaan. Kadesh Barnea had evidently remained 
the center of their encampment, and their 
Tabernacle had evidently continued there, tho of necessity 
so large a body of people with their flocks and 
herds must have roamed over quite an extensive 
area during those thirty-eight years, and of this we 
find various indications. (Num. 33:19-36.) The Canaanites 
probably feared an invasion and had to 
some extent fortified the country in the vicinity of 
Kadesh Barnea, the southern borders of Canaan, and 
perceiving now that the Israelites were preparing to 
move, they made an attack upon them and took some 
prisoners;— probably by way of forewarning and intimidating 
them. This was the occasion for the vow 
mentioned in verse 2, that the cities of the Canaanites 
should be utterly destroyed when taken. 

Verse 3 need not be understood to mean that Israel 
vanquished the Canaanites and destroyed their cities 
at this time; it is rather to be viewed as a parenthesis, 
an explanation that afterward, during the campaign 
of Israel in Palestine, God in harmony with their 
vow, did deliver to them the cities of the land, and that 
they did destroy them. They called the place Hormah 
as a remembrance of their vow. The right of such 
a total destruction of an enemy and his property 
would not be allowed in the civilized world to-day; 
we are to remember, however, that the Lord in these 
dealings with Israel was making types far reaching 
in their significations. In the type, the Canaanite 
and his citadels, etc., represented sin, its enticements, 
its blandishments and strong entrenchment in the 



weaknesses of the flesh. No compromise or truce 

with sin is to be made on the part of the new creature; 

it is to be a war of extermination;— and this 

was the signification of the type. It helps us to understand 

the matter much better, too, when we know 

that those Canaanites who were destroyed were not 

turned over by the Lord to devils for eternal torment; 

—but simply went down into the great prison-house 

of death, just the same as their fathers had done before 

them, only in a different form of death. It mattered 

nothing whether these died of pestilence or by 

the sword;— the time will come, anyway, when they 

shall all be brought forth from the prison-house of 

death by the great Redeemer, the antitypical seed of 

Abraham, to have an opportunity of coming to a full 

knowledge of the truth that they may be saved;— 

and that everlastingly, if they will, upon condition of 

their obedience and heart-conformity with the 

divine will. 

Israel made a request of the Edomites (descendants 
of Esau, their father Jacob's brother) that they 
might pass through their country with a view to 
entering Canaan from its eastern side instead of from 
the southern. The Edomites refused the request, and 
thus compelled a long and tedious journey around 
their territory through a very arid, barren country. It 
was here that the people so recently claiming to be "all 
holy" became so discouraged that they again wished 
that they were back in the land of Egypt and murmured 

R3101 : page 329 

against God and against Moses and against 
the manna upon which they were still being fed. It 
was at this juncture as a punishment for their impatience 
and their despising of the Lord's leading and 
provision for them, that the Lord sent them the 
plague of 

THE FIERY SERPENTS 

Whether the Lord specially created these serpents 
or whether he merely took advantage of circumstances 
and conditions, as when he sent them the 
quail, we do not know, nor does it matter. In God's 
miracles he generally uses means to every end; 
these are to us miracles because we do not fully comprehend 
the means employed. As for instance, if we 
could imagine the knowledge of the method of telephoning, 
or the method of wireless telegraphy to be 
entirely blotted from the knowledge of man, the results, 
told in succeeding ages to people who knew not 
of the methods, would be miracles; we do not class 
them as such, because we understand the modus 
operandi. The fierceness of the attack of the serpents 
and the great mortality resulting amongst the Israelites 



might cause us to wonder; but we are to remember 
that it is estimated that in India, even at the 
present time "several thousand people annually die 
from the bite of the cobra." One writer describing the 
bite of a certain Brazilian serpent, says: "Even in 
those cases where the sufferer recovers, for a time the 
system is injured and the latent virulence of the poison 
can hardly be eliminated from the same even at the 
cost of festers, boils and ulcerations which last for 
many years. The nervous system is also very much 
affected as giddiness and paralysis are usually 
amongst the evidences of the strong venom which 
this reptile extracts by some inexplicable chemistry 
from perfectly harmless food." 

The people had learned something through their 
experiences, and hence needed not to be told that this 
visitation of the fiery serpents was a chastisement from 
the Lord for their murmuring and rebellion. We are 
to learn in this connection to differentiate between 
such experiences on the part of the Israelites and similar 
experiences on the part of the world in general. We 
are to remember that by the Law Covenant which 
God made with Israel at Mt. Sinai, he specially 
pledged their protection from disease and every adverse 
influence so long as they were faithful and loyal 
to him, and specially threatened that disloyalty and 
unfaithfulness would be punished by sickness, calamities, 
death, etc. --Lev. 26:3-46. 

To the Israelite, therefore, sickness and pestilence 
meant divine wrath— to the other nations it meant 
the ordinary course of events; they were neither protected 
from the various death scourges of the world 
nor were these death-dealing scourges specially sent 
upon them. 

The people came to Moses confessing their sin and 
asking his mediation with the Lord on their behalf; 
and, God-like, he did not stop to chide them when they 
were penitent and remorseful, but presented their case 
before the Lord most heartily. The Lord heard and 
answered the petition, but in a roundabout manner, 
well calculated to impress upon them their dependence 
upon him,— and to provide for us, spiritual 
Israelites, a great spiritual lesson. The remedy for 
the bites of the serpents was a look at a brazen (copper) 
serpent fastened to the top of a pole, said pole 
probably being carried about throughout the camp 
of Israel, that all the sick, suffering ones might have 
the opportunity of looking upon it and thus being 
healed. 

We are not to question the meaning of this as a 
type, for our Lord himself in our Golden Text declares 
it. The serpent on the pole represented Christ 
on the cross. True, the serpent represents sin, vileness, 
evil, pain, suffering; while our Lord Jesus could 
be our Redeemer only because he was holy, harmless, 
separate from sinners. The question arises then, 



Why was the serpent used to represent our Lord? 

Why was not Moses instructed to make a brazen 

dove, or a brazen lamb— as representative of the 

meekness and harmlessness and purity of him who 

died for us? We answer that a correct appreciation 

of the answer to this question is the key to an understanding 

of the great atonement provided by God for 

man, through the "Man Christ Jesus; who gave himself 

a ransom for all, to be testified in due time." (I Tim. 2:5,6.) 

The serpent represented the atonement 

transaction better than any other emblem could. The 

serpent in Eden was Satan's agent and representative 

in the alluring of our first parents into sin: in this 

sense of the word the bite of that serpent, the devil, 

upon our race through our first parents, is destroying 

all the human family in death,— with the attendant 

pains and sufferings on account of which the Apostle 

declares, "The whole creation groaneth and travaileth 

in pain together." (Rom. 8:22.) It is impossible to get 

rid of the sin-virus of "that old serpent;" there is no 

R3102: page 329 

remedy that we can apply: mankind can only look to 
God for help; and the help which God provides is 
through the sending of his Son, the undefiled One. 
Nor will it do that that undefiled One should visit us 
and know our troubles and sympathize with us, and 
counsel us how to get rid of sin. No, this is not sufficient, 
he may not contradict or undo the Father's 
decrees, tho he may fulfil them— he may take our 
place, he may bear our penalty. And thus the Apostle 
expresses it, "He who knew no sin was made sin for 
us," that we might be made right in the sight of God 
through him. The serpent then represented sin, in 
every sense of the word; and as the whole world was 
serpented or inoculated our Lord must take the 
place of the sinner in order that the sinner might get 
free from the sentence; and this is why it was a serpent 
that was raised on the pole. "He was made sin 
for us"— treated as the one in whom centered the sin 
of the whole world. 

As the bitten Israelite looked to the brazen serpent 
and was healed in response, so in the antitype we 
who are bitten by the serpent of sin, and who are 
writhing and dying under its virus must look away 
with the eye of our understanding (now the eye of 
faith),— we must look unto Jesus. We must see him 
as the serpent, as the one who took our place, bore 

R3102: page 330 

our sin-penalty, became our substitute, and thus 
bought us from under the sentence of death. It was 
not sufficient that the Israelite looked into the sky or 
looked at a lamb or looked at a bird overhead, it was 



necessary that he look at the brazen serpent. So 

with us, it will not do that man look at Jesus in various 

lights and shadows, some believing one thing 

and some another respecting him; for according to 

the divine arrangement only the one kind of faith in 

Christ is efficacious— and that is the faith which recognizes 

him as the ransomer, as our substitute, "Made 

sin for us." Men may get some blessing from looking 

at Jesus as a great, model man, a great Jew, a 

great teacher, etc.; they may find such a look profitable, 

morally, mentally, physically; but from such a 

view they cannot get eternal life, they will still perish 

from the bite of sin unless they do more than this;— 

only those who view him as the antitype of the serpent 

in the wilderness have his promise of forgiveness, 

and acceptance with God unto eternal life. 



R3 102: page 330 

"HE GAVE THEM JUDGES." 

-JUDGES 2:7-16-NOVEMBER 16- 

"They cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he 
saveth them out of their distresses."— Psa. 107:19. 

ISRAEL'S HISTORY from the time of the 
division of Canaan amongst the tribes until 
the anointing of Saul to be their king, a period 
of 450 years*, is called the period of the judges- 
Joshua being the first judge and Samuel the last. 
These judges were evidently not elected to their position, 
but raised to it providentially. But as these 
judges had no power or authority, collected no revenues 
and held no office which they could entail upon 
others, it follows that any power or influence they 
possessed was a personal one, and to give it weight 
or force implied a proper acknowledgement of them as 
divinely appointed or raised up. This arrangement 
led the people continually to look to God for their 
helpers and leaders rather than to engage in an ordinary 
claptrap of politics in which personal ambitions 
and spoils would dominate and control. God 
did the nominating, and the people in proportion as 
they would come into harmony with him took cognizance 
of his choice (and practically endorsed it or 
voted for it) by their acceptance of the judge. There 
may have been a more methodical procedure in some 
instances, as is intimated in our lesson (verse 7), where 
the elders of Israel who had witnessed God's miraculous 
interposition on their behalf and who outlived 
Joshua, seem to have constituted the judges in the 
different tribes. 
This arrangement by which God gave Israel its 



judges is in considerable harmony with his dealings 

with spiritual Israel during this Gospel age— raising 

up for them from time to time special counselors, deliverers, 

ministers. Similarly Spiritual Israelites are 

not to caucus and wire-pull and decide for themselves 

who shall be their spiritual leaders; but are to regard 

the Lord as the great Chief Captain, and to look to 

him to raise up from time to time such spiritual chieftains 

as he may please. The acceptance of the leadings 

of these as God's appointees does not necessarily 

mean their selection by ballot, but may be indicated 

merely by giving ear to their teachings in harmony 

with the Word of the Lord. The lead of such spiritual 

lieutenants of divine appointment will always be 

marked by spiritual victories and the bringing of the 

Lord's people into closer heart-relationship with him. 

Any leadership which does not produce such fruits is 

evidently not of the Lord; the spirit of the Lord leads 

not to bondage, ignorance or strife, but to love, joy, 

peace of heart, liberty of conscience. 

Israel needed no congress or legislature, for it had 
one Lawgiver— the Lord— and the Law given at Mt. 
Sinai was to be perpetually the guide to the nation. 
The priests and Levites under the Law were the appointed 
helpers of the people in things pertaining to 
God— to instruct them in the Law and represent 
them in the typical sacrificing, atonement work, etc. 
In each tribe, also, the elders, according to their capacity, 
had charge of the civil affairs of the tribe. 
As for soldiers and a war department, they had none. 
The divine Law was to separate them from other 
nations, and if they would remain faithful to the 
Lord he was to be their protector against all 
antagonists. 

Similarly spiritual Zion in every congregation is 
to look out from amongst themselves fit men for the 
services needed; God's Law is to keep them separate 
from the schemes and warfares and entanglements of 
the world; they are to be his peculiar people, and his 
pledge to them is that all things shall work together 
for their good so long as they abide faithful to him. 
They, therefore, need no armies armed with carnal 
weapons, although they are all soldiers of the cross, 
pledged to fight against sin, especially each within 
himself, and to lay down their lives for each other— 
"the brethren." 

If the Book of Judges be read as a fully complete 
history of Israel for those four and one-half 
centuries, it would be a discouraging picture, and to 
some extent give the inference that they were continually 
in sin and idolatry, and suffering punishment 
therefor. But this would be an unfair view to take. 
On the contrary, the record passes by the happy period 
of Israel's prosperity, and specially points out their 
deflections from obedience to God and punishments 
for such transgressions and the deliverances from 



their troubles through the judges or deliverers whom 
God raised up for them. That this was in many respects 
a favorable time for the Israelites is implied 
in the Lord's promise, "I will restore thy judges as at 
the first, and thy counselors as at the beginning." 
-Isa. 1:26. 

Incidentally the story of Ruth and of the parents 
of Samuel (I Sam. 1) give us little glimpses of 
the other side of the matter— of the God-fearing piety 



*Millennial Dawn, Vol. II, Page 49. 

R3 102: page 331 

prevalent amongst many of the people, the happiness 
and contentment enjoyed. In our own day if we 
judge of the affairs of the world wholly by the daily 
history and details, in the newspapers, we might get 
the impression that crimes, strikes and accidents and 
imprisonments constituted the whole life in our 
own land; the great mass of the people attending to 
the ordinary affairs of life are scarcely mentioned. 
In accordance with this are the following lines from 
Whittier in which he rejoices in this land of liberty 
and blessing, notwithstanding the unfavorable reports 
thereof which go out to the world daily through the 
press,— 

"Whate'er of folly, shame, or crime 
Within thy mighty bounds transpires, 

With speed defying space or time 
Comes to us on the accusing wires; 

"While all thy wealth of noble deeds, 
Thy homes of peace, thy votes unsold, 

Thy love that pleads for human needs, 
The wrongs redressed, but half is told!" 

The Israelites had been instructed by the Lord 
to utterly exterminate the people of the land, which 
extermination we saw in a previous lesson prefigured 
our conquests as spiritual Israelites over the desires 
of the fallen nature. Israel, however, settled down to 
enjoy the Land of Promise without fully exterminating 
the condemned ones; and the false religion of the 
latter, later on contaminated the Israelites through 
friendship and fellowship; and thus these whom God 
had condemned gradually alienated the hearts of many 
from their full, proper loyalty to the Lord; seducing 
many of them into a lascivious idolatry. So with the 
spiritual Israelites who do not wage a valiant battle 
against the natural desires of their own fallen flesh— 
they find shortly that the flesh prospers at the expense 
of the spiritual life and that truces with the flesh 
mean that their love for the Lord is gradually cooled 



until some form of idolatry creeps in— the love of 
money, or of praise of men or of self, etc., dividing 
with the Lord the love and reverence of their hearts. 

We are not to suppose that all the Israelites fell 
away into idolatry; we are rather to understand that 
a considerable number of them became alienated for 
a time, repeatedly, from the love and worship of the 

R3103 : page 331 

Lord, and thus repeatedly brought upon them the 
Lord's disfavor. Verse 16 supports this thought, 
suggesting to our minds that our lesson is a condensed 
statement of the whole period of the judges- 
over four hundred years. Applying this to spiritual Israel 
we are not to expect that the Lord's displeasure 
with his people would delay until they had fully and 
completely gone into idolatry to self or wealth or 
fame; but rather that when some of the affections of 
the heart begin to go out to other things, the Lord's 
chastisements would be sent to reprove and rebuke 
and correct, while still there is in our hearts something 
of obedience and love toward him;— before the 
world, the flesh and the Adversary should have time 
to capture us completely. 

These records of divine chastisements, and Israel's 
subsequent repentance, and the Lord's deliverances, 
were all proofs of the divine love and care for 
that consecrated people. So far as we have information 
divine power was not exercised thus upon the 
other unconsecrated nations, for their reproof and 
correction, etc. They were left as strangers, foreigners, 
aliens from God and from his promises. So 
now the Lord's corrections in righteousness, his chastisements, 
etc., are evidences of special protection and 
care and relationship to the "house of sons." It is 
because of our acceptance in Christ and our consecration 
to the Lord, that he, in turn, has accepted us 
as sons and gives us the experiences, trials and difficulties 
needful to our testing and character-development; 
and it is to the intent that we may realize the 
treachery and the seductive influences of our own 
fallen natures, represented by the Amalekites and 
Canaanites, and that we may utterly destroy these, 
and thus come eventually into the condition mentioned 
by the Apostle when he declares that the consecrated 
should bring every thought into captivity to 
the will of God in Christ.-2 Cor. 10:5. 

When fleshly Israel learned one lesson after another, 
and as fast as each was learned sent a cry of 
loyalty up to God, his power was exercised on their 
behalf and their deliverance was effected. So with 
the Spiritual Israelite when he recognizes the true 
situation and with thorough repentance turns unto 
the Lord and cries for deliverance from his own weaknesses 
and imperfections according to the flesh;— his 



prayer is heard and his deliverance is provided for 

with the assurance that the Lord's grace is sufficient. 

The condition of the spiritual Israelite is represented 

in our Golden Text, "They cry unto the Lord in their 

trouble and he saves them out of their distresses." 

Such a cry to the Lord, however, implies that the sins 

and weaknesses of the flesh were contrary to the transgressor's 

will; it implies that in some manner he was 

seduced or entangled by the world, the flesh or the 

Adversary and that his heart is still loyal to the Lord 

and to the truth. All such who cry unto the Lord in 

sincerity and faith shall be heard, shall be delivered,— 

his grace is sufficient for us. 



R3103 : page 331 

WHO IS WORTHY? 

IN THE VISIONS of the Apocalypse we read 

of a wonderful scroll in the right hand of the 

great King who sits upon the throne of universal 

dominion. This scroll is a forceful representation 

of the divine plan, originally existing only in the 

mind of God, and which could not be made known to 

men until some one was found worthy to open the 

seals and display it to view. But "no one in heaven nor 

in earth was able to open the scroll, neither to look 

thereon," until one came whom the Revelator describes 

as the "The Lion [the strong one] of the 

tribe of Judah, the root of David," of whom the testimony 

is given— "Thou art worthy to take the scroll 

and to open the seals thereof; for thou wast slain and 

R3103 : page 332 

hast redeemed to God by thy blood out of every kindred 
and people and nation; and hast made them unto 
our God a kingdom and priesthood; and they shall 
reign on the earth."— Rev. 5:1-5,9,10. 

Excepting the bare promise (written on the outside 
of the scroll— verse 1) of salvation through the 
Seed of the woman, nothing could be known of the 
wonderful scheme for human restitution until the Son 
of God, having left the glory of the spiritual nature, 
took our nature and by the sacrifice of himself redeemed 
us from death. Then, having his righteousness 
imputed to us by faith, we are counted worthy 
to look upon the scroll as he opens the seals one after 
another. 

Great was the favor bestowed upon the Strong 
One of the tribe of Judah, in being permitted to open 
the seals— to carry out and make manifest the grand 
designs of infinite love— and great is the privilege of 
those who are permitted to look thereon as the seals 



are opened. It is not our purpose here, however, to 
treat of the peculiar symbols relating to the opening 
of the seals, but rather of what constitutes worthiness 
in us to look thereon, and what favor of God to us is 
implied in this privilege of looking. 

The knowledge of God's purposes is due only to 
those able and anxious to co-operate with him in their 
development; for God does not display his plans to 
satisfy mere idle curiosity. First, then, if we would 
comprehend what is revealed within the scroll we must 
have faith in what is written on the outside— the 
promised redemption through the precious blood of 
Christ— and must be sincerely desirous of knowing the 
details of God's plan in order to an earnest co-operation 
with it. In other words, there must be the earnest 
inquiry arising from a heart grateful for the promise of 
life through the Redeemer— "Lord, what wilt thou 
have me to do?" Such, and such only, are worthy to 
know, and such only ever come to see, in the sense of 
understanding and appreciating, the deep things of 
God written within the scroll. Such are the called according 
to the divine purpose, to be educated in and to 
serve the truth. Such are the righteous for whom the 
light (truth) is sown. Such was our Lord's attitude 
when he said, "Lo, I come to do thy will, O God." 
(Heb. 10:7.) He was meek and lowly of heart and 
ever ready to render implicit obedience to the will of 
God; and it is to those who are similarly meek that 
he was sent to preach the good tidings (Isa. 61:1)— 
to open the scroll. "The meek will he guide in judgment; 
the meek will he teach his way." (Psa. 25:9.) 
If any man have this evidence of worthiness— this acquaintance 
with the truth— let him rejoice in his privilege 
and by his works manifest his continued 
worthiness. 

This worthiness is inquired for not only at the 
beginning, but all along the path of light. If we are 
not found worthy by the various tests applied from 
time to time, we cannot proceed in the path of light; 
and unless the unfaithful ones arouse themselves to 
greater diligence and watchfulness, the light that already 
is in them will become darkness. And how 
great, how intense must be the darkness of one cast 
out of light! (Matt. 6:23.) To find the glorious hope 
that once inspired our hearts slipping away and the 
truth whereon we built that hope beginning to seem 
like an old song or an idle tale, or as relics of the past 
to be displaced at any time by any plausible subterfuge 
of error which our wily adversary may be pleased 
to palm off as advanced divine truth, are indications 
that should arouse any one who discovers them to a 
realization of the fact that he is going into darkness— 
a darkness that will only become the more intense as 
he slips and slides along the backward track. 

All along the way, as we have said, we will find tests 
applied to prove our worthiness to proceed from 



knowledge to knowledge and from grace to grace. 
Who is worthy?— worthy to receive the truth, worthy 
to continue in the truth, worthy to suffer and to endure 
hardness as a good soldier for the truth, and 
finally to be exalted to power and great glory when 
truth and righteousness shall be exalted in the earth 
and their glorious triumph begun? 

Jesus said, "If any man will come after me, let 
him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and 
follow me." (Luke 9:23.) At the very beginning of 
our course we each found the cross confronting us, 
and had we not taken it up we would not have been 
counted worthy even to look with intelligent appreciation 
into the precious truths of God's plan. And 
as we advance from step to step and find the truth increasingly 
precious— sweeter than honey from the 
honey comb— we have these additional evidences of 
continued worthiness and should greatly rejoice in 
them as such. Our possession of these truths has thus 
far proved us meek enough to discard the popular 
theology of the nominal church and be counted as 
heretics, turncoats, fanatics, cranks, or whatever our 
former friends are, in their ignorance, now pleased to 
term us. And it has proved us meek enough to bear 
willingly this reproach for the great joy of thus realizing 
the Lord's approval, and of seeing by faith the 
great blessings in store for us if faithful unto the end. 

But "let him that thinketh he standeth take heed 
lest he fall;" for sudden and sharp will be many of the 
tests applied to prove our continued faithfulness. The 
world, the flesh and the devil all conspire to allure, 
ensnare and overcome us. The world will present its 
allurements through friends or wife or husband or 
children. They will try to encroach upon the clearly 
defined line which you have drawn between yourself 
and the world. Then the flesh will grow weary in 
fighting the good fight of faith, weary of the reproaches 
of the world, weary of the alienation of 
former friends and weary of the self-denying, sacrificing 
and daily cross-bearing life. Then if you turn 
aside for a moment to ponder on these things the 
devil will quickly see his opportunity and will cunningly 
devise some trial specially suited to your peculiar 
condition of mind, and a crisis comes in your experience, 
the result of which will prove the exact 
strength of your devotion to God and his truth. These 
tests God permits and even desires to have come upon 
us, in order that we may be thoroughly tried and 
proved either worthy or unworthy of the great reward 

R3104: page 333 

he has in keeping for those who remain faithful unto 
death. 

The Lord is seeking his precious jewels. Many 
of them are indeed diamonds in the rough. The real 



diamond is a noble, loyal, faithful character, devoted 
and uncompromising in its allegiance to God. Sometimes 
the circumstances of life have deprived such of 
education or culture and have left them only sufficient 
means for the barest necessities of life. But no matter, 
God's eye is on them: character is what he is 
looking for, and in due time, when that character is 
sufficiently developed, confirmed, tested and proved 
worthy of exaltation, he can and will add to it all the 
glories of knowledge and wisdom and grace and 
beauty. But first he will subject it to all the necessary 
tests. If it is a true diamond it will receive and it 
will also transmit to others the light of divine truth. 
Nothing so gloriously reflects the light as the diamond; 
and nothing so gloriously reflects the truth as 
the worthy character of the true and faithful saint. 

Another way of testing a diamond is to put it under 
pressure. If it is a real diamond it will stand the 
pressure, for the diamond is the hardest substance 
known; but if it is not a real diamond it will go to 
pieces and thus prove itself spurious. So God allows 
us to come under the constant pressure of years of 
toil and care and self-sacrifice to see how we will endure; 
and blessed is that diamond-proved character 
that endures to the end.-Jas. 1:12; Matt. 10:22. 

Sometimes the tests come in the way of trials 
of faith, and we are called upon to prove ourselves 
whether we be in the faith (2 Cor. 13:5) when some 
subtle errors are presented to us as advanced truth. 
But if we know the voice of the "Good Shepherd" 
we will not be easily beguiled. We remember the inspired 
counsel, "To the law and the testimony: if 
they speak not according to this word it is because 
there is no light in them" (Isa. 8:20); and to the law 
and the testimony we go, and, relying implicitly upon 
this as the infallible teaching of the Spirit of God, 
we are enabled to arrive at definite, clear and positive 
doctrine. We are not left in doubt as to what is truth, 
but are enabled to give a solid Scriptural reason for 
the hope that is in us, on which hope we dare implicitly 
to rest our faith, and with humble boldness to 
successfully withstand the assaults of error. But oh, 
how dead to selfish ambition, how fully devoted to the 
will of God such must be! 

Let us, dearly beloved, as we realize that thus far 
God has counted us worthy to look upon the scroll of 
his plan which has been unsealed for us by our blessed 
Lord Jesus, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, prove our 
worthiness to continue to look therein and to read 
the wondrous things of his law, by faithful obedience 
and loyalty to it in all things. Let us not undervalue 
our great privilege in being counted worthy to suffer 
some reproach and some hardness as good soldiers 
for the truth's sake; and also in being counted worthy 
to have some part in the blessed ministry of reflecting 
the light of divine truth; let us prove ourselves jewels 



of rarest value, diamonds indeed, heartily receiving 
and beautifully transmitting to others the light of 
truth, and faithfully enduring the severest pressure 
that God may permit to come upon us; for, if faithful 
in these small things we shall in due time be counted 
worthy also to reign with Christ in power and great 
glory. Let us not be like some who have only a little 
good earth on the surface of their hearts while the 
heart is really hard and stony. Let the good seed of 
divine truth sink down and take deep root, and then 
let it branch out in the light and bear its abundant 
fruitage to the Master's glory. So shall we be accounted 
worthy to see the King in his beauty and to 
live and reign with him as his beloved bride and joint-heir. 
And when to the "worthy Lamb that was slain" 
the voices of the multitudes ascribe blessing and 
honor and glory and power, they will also exclaim, 
"Let us be glad and rejoice and give honor to him for 
the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath 
made herself ready."— Rev. 5:13; 19:7. 



R3104: page 333 

THEY ALSO HAVE ERRED THROUGH WINE. 

-ISAIAH 28: 1-7 -NOVEMBER 23.- 

THIS is set before us as a temperance lesson. We 
will not say that it was not built upon certain 
conditions obtaining in Isaiah's time— that 
intoxication was a crying evil amongst the Israelites; 
but we do say that in our understanding this is a 
prophecy belonging specially to our day— whatever 
may have been the force, meaning or application in 
the day in which it was written. The whole tenor of 
this chapter as well as the following one, the twenty-ninth, 
in our judgment, proves this. Ephraim, used 
by the prophet as a name for the ten tribes of Israel 
in contradistinction to the two tribes called Judah, 
would seem to represent in our day nominal Christendom, 
and the drunkards of Ephraim would represent 
the intoxication of Christendom— not literal alcoholic 
intoxication, but the intoxication of error, of false 
doctrine, of human schemes and plans, the spirit of 
man and of the adversary in contradistinction to the 
spirit, the teaching of the Lord. This intoxication 
is referred to later on by the same prophet, saying, 
"They are drunken, but not with wine; they stagger 
but not with strong drink. For the Lord hath poured 
out upon you the spirit of deep sleep [spiritual stupor], 
and hath closed your eyes." (Isa. 29:9-12.) It 
is again referred to as the wine of Babylon with which 
all people have been intoxicated.— Rev. 17:2; 18:3. 
The fall of nominal spiritual Israel, the fall of 



Babylon in the great time of trouble now approaching, 
is described in verses 2,3. All who do not get 
rid of this intoxication of error, even tho members 
of the spiritual house, will have their portion with the 
world and with hypocrites in this coming storm, which 
will wreck completely our present civilization, social, 
political, financial and ecclesiastical. The glory 

R3104: page 334 

of Babylon at the present time is as that of a beautiful 
flower, but it shall quickly fade, its riches and its 
pride will cause it to be the more quickly devoured 
—as are the first fruits of the summer— by the lawless 
ones, the anarchists, who will be bred of discontent, 
and who will be developed rapidly as a result of the 
iniquity that will prevail because of this drunkenness 
of Babylon with false doctrines and false expectation 
and blind stupor to the great changes of dispensation 
now taking place. 

The explanation of a blindness, stupor and drunkenness 
so general as to affect not only the priests and 
prophets but all the people of Christendom, is referred 
to in verse 7. Babylon has had indeed the 
golden cup of the Lord's Word in her hands and has 
affected to give from it to the people the spirit of the 
Lord, but instead she has filled the cup and presents 
as the teaching of God's Word intoxicating errors 
which have misled the so-called Christian world. 
Thus the Adversary has used the nominal Church of 
God as his tool to deceive all that dwell upon the 
face of the whole earth— to misrepresent the divine 
character and plan. (Rev. 14:8.) Thank God for the 
promise that the time is coming when that old serpent, 
the devil, Satan, shall be bound a thousand 
years that he shall deceive the nations no more until 
the thousand years are finished!— Rev. 20:3. 

In the midst of such a general declaration of the 
drunkenness of mystic Babylon and the storm of 
divine indignation about to overthrow churchianity, 
it is comforting to find that the Lord breaks in upon 
the narrative, suggesting that in the midst of such 
general intoxication of error there will be a residue 
of God's people whom he can approve and bless. 
Verses 5,6, call the little flock to our attention— the 
Lord's jewels. In the midst of all this confusion incidental 
to the fall of Babylon, the Lord himself will 
crown his faithful with glory and beauty. Even in 
the present life his truth in their hearts shall cause 
their faces to shine, and their table shall be spread 
even in the midst of those who are their enemies, who 
will be compelled to admit that these have meat to 
eat that the world knoweth not of and that they have 
a filling of the Lord's spirit that gives them joy and 
peace even in the midst of trials and difficulties. It 
will be more than this; for very shortly it will mean 



that they shall receive at the Lord's hands the crown 
of life— be changed and receive the fulness of divine 
favor and blessing— glory, honor, immortality and 
joint-heirship with their Redeemer in his Kingdom. 
These enlightened by the Lord and filled with his 
spirit will have sounder judgment even in the present 
life and be able to do valiantly in disputing and disproving 
the spirit of error and its proud and boastful 
claims; and by and by, when changed and made partakers 
of the Kingdom glories, the Apostle assures 
us that these shall be amongst the judges of the 
world, saying, "Know ye not that the saints shall 
judge the world?" They will then with their dear 
Redeemer occupy the place of judgment during the 
Judgment Day, the Millennial Age, and overcome 
all the forces of error and darkness and evil, so that 
eventually the Lord shall bruise Satan under their 
feet, wholly overthrow his kingdom and influence, and 
establish in its stead the Kingdom of God under the 
whole heavens, destroying all who would corrupt the 
earth, bringing it, in harmony with the Lord's prayer, 
to that condition in which God's will shall be done 
on earth even as it is done in heaven. 



R3105 : page 334 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 
POSITION OF THE WORLD IN MILLENNIAL AGE. 



Question.— Are the sins of the world class all canceled 
at death? or, is only their Adamic penalty paid? 
and do they have an individual penalty still to pay? 

Answer.— The sins of the whole world are paid, as 
far as divine justice is concerned— that is to say— God's 
account against Adam and his posterity has been sold, 
transferred and set over to him who purchased the same 
with his own precious blood. 

The sins of the world are not canceled, so far as 
they are concerned; but a way is opened up, under the 
New Covenant, by which each can obtain a release. 
The terms are that when brought to a knowledge of 
Christ and the redemption in him each for himself shall 
will to reform and no longer to serve sin, but to serve 
the Redeemer and to obey him. 

In view of this opportunity of retracing steps, it is 
proper for us to say that every word and action on the 
part of the world is either building up character or undermining 
it— either blessing or injuring the doer— 
either increasing or decreasing the number and weight 
of his stripes of punishment, all of which will be 
corrective. 



Thus we may say that the Adamic penalty is set 
aside until such time as the individual shall have been 
granted a trial on his own account. If in this trial on 
his own account he sins wilfully refusing to follow the 
instructions of his Redeemer, he will be dropped back 
again into the original penalty— "returned into sheol" 
—which will be the Second Death. 

Thus seen, the only individual penalty they have to 
pay will be that represented in their own degradation. 
We might include in this penalty any sins which they 
might commit in the present life against any degree of 
light; for such sins bring a special searing of conscience 
which the same deeds committed in ignorance would 
not bring. Hence all who thus sin against light receive 
proportionately a deeper degradation and will have correspondingly 
the more difficulty in extricating themselves, 
and returning to perfection under the favorable 
conditions of the next age. 

The world of mankind are not reckoned as coming 
into existence a second time, but as having their previous 
existence revived and continued, with the privilege 
of accepting Christ under the New Covenant, and 
being regenerated by him, and thus attaining life- 
resurrection by judgment, which will progress throughout 
the Millennial age, and reach completion at its 
close— those who accept there will reach perfect life, 

R3105 : page 335 

while those who reject will there be destroyed in the 
Second Death. From this standpoint the only effect of 
good and evil in the present life will be upon man's own 
conscience and character. 

In respect to I Pet. 4:6, briefly, I understand this 
to mean: that for instance we who hear the Gospel and 
who accept its terms have a two-fold standing— or are 
viewed in life from two different standpoints. The 
world views us and judges us according to the flesh, as 
human beings, just the same as the remainder of the 
world, but God judges us differently— to him we are 
new creatures, and he judges us according to our spirit, 
will, intention, and not according to the weaknesses and 
imperfections of the flesh. Hence it is that although 
we know that in our flesh dwelleth no perfection, nevertheless 
"The righteousness of the law is fulfilled in us" 
—because God judges us not according to the flesh but 
according to the spirit. 

USE OF FERMENTED WINE. 



Question.— Is there any prohibition in the Mosaic 
Law respecting the use of fermented wine? Was the 
use of unfermented grape juice not authorized by the 
Jewish arrangement? 



Answer.— We do not know of any place in the 
Mosaic Law in which the priests of that system were 
prohibited the use of wine. But if you know of such 
a statement kindly draw our attention to it. But even 
if this had been the case, it would not typify our Lord's 
life from Jordan to Calvary; for the Scriptural declaration 
respecting our Lord is that he did use wine. You 
remember they said of him, "Behold a wine-bibber and 
a glutton"— not, we presume, because he over-indulged, 
in either eating or drinking, but simply because he was 
less abstemious in respect to food and drink than John 
the Baptist, his Forerunner. 

The prohibition of leaven would certainly apply 
as much to liquids as to solids during the Passover season 
amongst the Jews; but it is a mistake to suppose 
that wine contains any leaven after it is made. Leaven 
is sometimes added to grape juice in order to hasten the 
fermentation; but when the fermentation has all worked 
off the remaining wine is purer, freer from ferment 
and everything that would produce ferment than ever 
it was before. So far as we are aware, the Jews had 
no method of preserving grape juice unfermented. 
Their bottles were made of skin, and our Lord's parable 
shows that if new wine (grape juice) were put into old 
skin bottles that had lost their elasticity, the ferment 
would burst them, and the wine be lost; and hence the 
custom of putting new wine into new bottles, which 
would resist the strain of fermentation. Since the fermentation 
of grape juice sets in speedily, you can readily 
see that there would be no wine in all Palestine that had 
not finished its working or fermentation several months 
before the Passover season. 

There are few persons more appreciative than ourselves 
of total abstinence from all intoxicating liquors; 
yet we do not permit our opposition to intemperance 
to warp our judgment in respect to the use of wine 
mentioned in the Scriptures. I explain the difference 
between the customs of that time and this by the fact, 
first, that they had a comparatively mild wine, which 
contained only a small quantity of alcohol, the product 
of the grape; and further, by the fact that their climate 
and other conditions were less inclined to lead to excesses 
than are ours. As you perhaps have noticed, we 
generally use, as "fruit of the vine," at our Memorial 
Supper, at Allegheny, either hermetically sealed grape 
juice, or the strained juice of crushed and stewed 
raisins. 

Some tell us that the Hebrews never use the ordinary 
fermented wine during the Passover week. They 
no doubt are honest in intention, although they misrepresent 
the facts. For instance, if they inquire of a 
Hebrew— "Do the Jews during the Passover week use 
the ordinary wine?" the Hebrew would answer, "Oh, 
my, no, never— never!" From this they draw the inference 
that he means that they use nonalcoholic wine, and 
perhaps they are foreigners of tongue to each other, 



and but imperfectly catch each other's thoughts and 
unintentionally deceive each other. But what the Hebrew 
did mean was that he would not think of buying 
any wine which he would use during Passover week 
from any ordinary wine-seller— just as the strict Hebrew 
would not think at any time of buying his meat 
from an ordinary butcher, but only from a Hebrew 
butcher, whose beef was killed in the presence of a rabbi, 
and duly attested to have been killed according to the 
Mosaic Law. This to the Jew would be clean meat, 
while any other would be unclean. Similarly would the 
orthodox Jew act in respect to his wine, especially that 
used during the Passover week. It must come through 
what he recognizes as the legitimate channels guaranteed 
that no leaven ever came in contact with it, and 
that no Gentile ever had anything to do with it. To 
satisfy ourselves on the subject, we procured from a 
very particular Jew a bottle of the kind of wine thus 
approved. We found it to be of the ordinary alcoholic 
kind. 

YOUR HOUSE LEFT DESOLATE. 



Question.— Were the Jews cast into outer darkness 
about A.D. 70? or five days before the crucifixion, 
when our Lord said, "Your house is left unto you desolate."? 
-Matt. 8:12; 23:38. 

Answer.— As a house, or nation, Israel was rejected 
of the Lord at the time of the crucifixion, because of 
unpreparedness to receive the Lamb of God, the Messiah; 
but while the nation was there rejected and could 
no longer hope to be the seed which should be the 
blesser of all nations, nevertheless, in selecting the new 
nation, the holy nation out of every kindred, people 
and tongue, God was pleased to give the first opportunity 
of identification with the new nation to any of 
the fleshly Israelites who were Israelites indeed, and 
without guile. Consequently the Gospel went first to 
them and was confined to them for three and a half 
years,— Cornelius being the first Gentile convert. All 
of the period from our Lord's crucifixion down to the 
utter destruction of the Jewish polity A.D. 70, was the 
period of testing to that people: some of them, in right 
condition of heart, were accepted into the light and 
privileges then due; others, unworthy, were rejected 
from all divine favor and were in consequent darkness 
respecting transpiring events and ultimately felt the 
severity of the trouble figuratively called "weeping and 
gnashing of teeth." 



page 337 



SEMI-MONTHLY. 