A New Tool to Help People Learn God’s Requirements
“ITS simple, direct, and kind approach will produce results beyond expectations. The subjects are presented in such an uncomplicated and pleasant manner that any sincere, searching person will be moved to say, ‘God is really among you.’” (1 Corinthians 14:25) So said one of Jehovah’s Witnesses from Thailand when describing the new brochure, What Does God Require of Us? It has been released by the Watch Tower Society at the “Messengers of Godly Peace” District Conventions during 1996/97.
This 32-page, full-color brochure is designed as a Bible study course. It covers the basic teachings of the Bible. The wording is simple and concise, explaining clearly what God requires of us. Readers should have no difficulty understanding it. How may you conduct a Bible study in this new brochure?
Use the questions. There are questions at the beginning of each lesson. In parentheses after each question, you will find the numbers of the paragraphs in which the answers are found. These questions may be used both as a preview and as a review teaching aid. For example, at the beginning of a home Bible study, you might ask the student the questions so as to get his comments. Rather than correcting any wrong answers immediately, you could proceed with the study. At the end of the lesson, you could go back to the questions to see if the student is now able to answer them in harmony with the Bible.
Look up the scriptures. In each lesson, short statements of Bible truths are accompanied by supporting scriptures. Since most of the scriptures are cited, not quoted, it is important to encourage the student to look these texts up in his own Bible. He needs to read and meditate on God’s Word before he can apply it in life.—Joshua 1:8.
Highlight the pictures. The brochure is generously illustrated with photographs and paintings—more than 50 pieces of artwork in all. These are provided not only for visual appeal but also as further teaching aids. For example, the last two lessons (one page each, on facing pages) are entitled “Helping Others to Do God’s Will” and “Your Decision to Serve God.” The photographs that spread across the two pages trace the spiritual progress of the same person, showing him witnessing informally, sharing in the house-to-house work, making his dedication, and finally getting baptized. By directing the student’s attention to these pictures, you help him to see the steps that are required in order to serve God.
What if an interested person does not read well or is unable to read at all? The Society is making this new brochure available on audiocassette in a number of languages. The cassette contains the text of the brochure as well as many of the cited scriptures. It is recorded as follows: The first question is read, followed by the paragraph (or paragraphs) answering it, along with some of the cited scriptures. Then the next question is read, followed by the text and scriptures that answer it, and so on. The student can listen to the recording as he prepares for the study. The cassette can also be used when conducting the study.
Those present at the convention were eager to use this new brochure in their field ministry. For example, just days after receiving the brochure, two pioneers (full-time evangelizers) from the United States placed it with a young couple on whom they had been calling. When the couple looked at the table of contents, the lesson “Practices That God Hates” caught their attention. “I was always taught that God could never hate—he’s all love,” said the young woman. “This is the one I’m going to read first.” When the two pioneers returned the following week, the young woman said: “I was reading the new brochure. It’s so hard to do all the things we should. Jehovah isn’t pleased with us—we aren’t married. But we have made a decision. We have made arrangements to get married next Friday.” Embracing the pioneer couple, they added: “We apologize for not having the regular study, but this is a big weight off of us.”
By all means, use the new Require brochure. It is a fine tool to help others learn God’s requirements.
[Pictures on page 17]
How will you use the new brochure?

