Kingdom Proclaimers Report
“They Will Not Prevail Against You”
IN A Central American country, 15 armed men took two of Jehovah’s Witnesses from their home by force and brought them to a group of 75 men armed with clubs and machetes. They insulted the Witnesses with obscenities and turned them over to another group of about 350 similarly armed men. They expected that the two brothers would become fearful and would compromise their Christian neutrality by joining their patrol. (Isaiah 2:4) But the Witnesses stood fast and refused to join the military operation. So they were thrown into prison, while members of many of the churches compromised and went off to the hills with the patrol.
The next day the brothers were taken to the main town for another hearing. As they walked along, the guards told them they were brainwashed. The brothers replied: “It is certainly true that we have been brainwashed! Now we do not do harm to anyone; we are not thieves, drunkards, adulterers.” When the official gave them a hearing, he showed kindness and congratulated them, saying, “If everyone was like you, things would be different . . . and may your God Jehovah protect you.” They were then released.
Why the persecution of harmless, peaceful Christians who are upholding God’s standards of righteousness? It is because they are “no part of the world” and its political activities. (John 17:16) What a comfort to know that although Satan and his world will fight against servants of Jehovah, they will not prevail! (Jeremiah 1:19) This was proved true in this country, and the official in charge is to be commended for understanding the neutral position of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
□ The words of Jeremiah also proved true in an experience from an African land where the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses is restricted. After describing the hardships the brothers undergo in trying to help people learn more about Jehovah’s wonderful purposes, the report says: “Due to the neutral position of Jehovah’s people, scores of our brothers are imprisoned, frequently for successive terms. They are severely beaten, whipped, and pressured in every way to violate their Christian consciences. In one case, after brutal beatings failed to break a brother’s integrity, some soldiers conspired to murder him. When a superior officer learned of their plot, he personally intervened and secretly had him transferred to another city, thus saving his life.”
This persecution has not stopped Jehovah’s Witnesses from preaching the good news as God has commanded. (Matthew 24:14) Jehovah sustains them by his spirit and blesses their faithful stand. The report from this country also states: “In spite of extreme physical hardships, hunger, disease, a fierce civil war, and persecution, there has been a 17-percent increase in the average number of publishers.” Memorial attendance increased 21 percent, and 21 percent of all publishers served as pioneers during April 1984.
So our brothers are happy even though they are persecuted. They trust in Jehovah and are reminded of the words of Jeremiah: “They will be certain to fight against you, but they will not prevail against you, for ‘I am with you,’ is the utterance of Jehovah, ‘to deliver you.’”​—Jeremiah 1:19.
[Picture on page 27]
Jehovah sustains his persecuted Witnesses

