Cultivating Intimacy With Jehovah
 1. What did one sister come to realize about her spiritual routine?
1 “I have been existing in the truth for the past 20 or so years by just going to meetings and engaging in the field ministry,” admitted one Christian sister. However, she continues: “I have come to the conclusion that although these things are important, they alone cannot sustain me when things start getting difficult. . . . I realize now that I have to readjust my thinking and begin a meaningful study program so that I can really get to know Jehovah and come to love him and appreciate what his Son has given us.”
 2. Why is it important to cultivate intimacy with Jehovah?
2 Building a close personal relationship with Jehovah takes effort. It requires more than merely following a routine of Christian activity. If we fail to commune regularly with Jehovah, in time he can become to us like a once-close friend with whom we have lost touch. (Rev. 2:4) Let us examine how personal Bible study and prayer can help us to cultivate intimacy with Jehovah.​—Ps. 25:14.
 3. What approach to personal study will help us to draw close to God?
3 Prayer and Meditation Vital: Personal study that nourishes the heart involves more than underlining key points in the study material and looking up the cited scriptures. It calls for us to reflect on what the information reveals about Jehovah’s ways, standards, and personality. (Ex. 33:13) Getting to understand spiritual matters touches our emotions and moves us to think about our own lives. (Ps. 119:35, 111) Personal study should be done with the objective of drawing close to Jehovah. (Jas. 4:8) Serious study requires time as well as the proper setting, and regular study takes discipline. (Dan. 6:10) Even if your life is very busy, are you setting aside time each day to meditate on Jehovah’s marvelous qualities?​—Ps. 119:147, 148; 143:5.
 4. How does prayer in connection with personal study help us to cultivate intimacy with Jehovah?
4 Heartfelt prayer is a vital part of meaningful personal study. For Bible truths to stir our hearts and move us to “render God sacred service with godly fear and awe,” we need God’s holy spirit. (Heb. 12:28) Therefore, we should open each study period by begging Jehovah for his spirit. (Matt. 5:3, ftn.) As we ponder the Scriptures and use the study aids provided by Jehovah’s organization, we open our heart to Jehovah. (Ps. 62:8) Undertaking study in this manner is an act of worship by which we express our devotion to Jehovah and strengthen our attachment to him.​—Jude 20, 21.
 5. Why is it important for us to meditate on God’s Word each day?
5 As with all relationships, our relationship with Jehovah must be nurtured continually in order for it to keep growing throughout our lives. May we, therefore, buy out time each day to draw close to God, knowing that he, in turn, will draw close to us.​—Ps. 1:2, 3; Eph. 5:15, 16.

