Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting November 10
Song 212
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Have two realistic demonstrations of how to use the suggestions on page 4 to present the November 15 Watchtower and the November 22 Awake! in your territory. In each case, both magazines should be offered as a set, even though only one is featured. Have one of the demonstrations include an explanation of how our worldwide work is financed.​—See The Watchtower, p. 2, or Awake! p. 5.
15 min: “Prove Yourselves Ready.”a Invite the audience to comment on what helps them to keep the anxieties and distractions of the present system of things from consuming time that would be better spent in spiritual pursuits.
20 min: How Do You Choose Your Associates? Audience discussion based on Worship God book, pages 47-9. Using the questions and cited scriptures in paragraph 13, invite audience to comment on Bible principles that should guide us in choosing our associates.
Song 127 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 17
Song 96
12 min: Local announcements. Outline special field service arrangements for November 27. Review “Use the Worship God Book to Conduct Bible Studies.” Interview one or two publishers who have had interesting field service experiences using the current literature offer.
15 min: Cultivate a Giving Spirit. A talk by an elder, based on the November 1, 2003, Watchtower, pages 26-30.
18 min: “Commendation Refreshes.”b Include comments on the Family Happiness book, pages 49-50, paragraph 21. Invite brief comments by individuals who were encouraged by words of commendation from others.
Song 58 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 24
Song 213
12 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Have two separate demonstrations of how to use the suggestions on page 4 to present the December 1 Watchtower and the December 8 Awake! A different scripture from the one suggested on page 4 may be used. In each case, both magazines should be offered as a set, even though only one is featured. In one of the presentations, demonstrate offering the magazines informally on public transportation or in some other appropriate local setting.
10 min: Question Box. Talk by an elder.
23 min: “Cultivating Intimacy With Jehovah.”c Use the questions that are provided. Draw comments from the audience on how the scriptures apply. Arrange in advance for one or two to offer comments on what has helped them to improve the quality of their personal Bible study.
Song 202 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 1
Song 138
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for November. Mention literature offer for December. Briefly review one or two suggested presentations. Explain how publishers can use the Watch Tower Publications Index to find additional presentations.​—See the September 2001 Our Kingdom Ministry, p. 2.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: Adequately Qualified to Teach Others. Audience discussion based on the June 1, 2000, Watchtower, pages 16-17, paragraphs 9-13. Being able to teach effectively is a primary goal in our ministry. Our success in helping sheeplike ones depends on our ability to convey the Kingdom message in a way that informs and motivates them. Discuss the following questions: (1) What is the difference between preaching and teaching? (it-2 p. 672 par. 2) (2) Why are some hesitant about trying to conduct a Bible study? (3) How can we improve our teaching ability? (4) How can we make sure our student gets the sense of what he is learning? (5) What goal should we try to help the student to achieve?
Song 70 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

