“Prove Yourselves Ready”
1 In his great prophecy regarding the conclusion of this system of things, Jesus cautioned against becoming absorbed by the mundane concerns of life. (Matt. 24:36-39; Luke 21:34, 35) Since the outbreak of the great tribulation can occur at any time, it is imperative that we heed Jesus’ admonition: “Prove yourselves ready, because at an hour that you do not think to be it, the Son of man is coming.” (Matt. 24:44) What can assist us in this regard?
2 Combating Anxieties and Distractions: One of the spiritual pitfalls we must guard against is “anxieties over livelihood.” (Luke 21:34, ftn.) In some lands, poverty, unemployment, and the high cost of living make it difficult to obtain the necessities of life. In other lands, acquiring material possessions is commonplace. If concern over material things begins to dominate our thinking, we are in danger of losing our focus on Kingdom realities. (Matt. 6:19-24, 31-33) Christian meetings help us to maintain that focus. Do you make it your aim to attend every meeting?​—Heb. 10:24, 25.
3 The world today is full of distractions that can easily rob us of precious time. Computer use can become a snare if one spends inordinate amounts of time browsing the Internet, reading and sending E-mail, or playing computer games. Countless hours can be lost to television, movies, hobbies, secular reading, and sports, leaving us with little time or energy for spiritual pursuits. While recreation and relaxation can provide refreshment temporarily, personal and family Bible study yield everlasting benefits. (1 Tim. 4:7, 8) Do you buy out time to meditate on God’s Word each day?​—Eph. 5:15-17.
4 How grateful we can be that Jehovah’s organization has arranged a program of spiritual instruction to help us “succeed in escaping all [the] things that are destined to occur, and in standing before the Son of man”! (Luke 21:36) May we take full advantage of these provisions and ‘prove ourselves ready’ so that our faith may be “a cause for praise and glory and honor at the revelation of Jesus Christ.”​—1 Pet. 1:7.

