Announcements
● After January 1, 1980, congregations may submit orders for the 1979 bound volumes of The Watchtower and Awake! These will be available in English, French, Italian, Portuguese and Spanish. Order Dutch and German after February 15. Volumes are $3.00 each. There are no pioneer rates. PAYMENT SHOULD NOT ACCOMPANY ORDERS. These will be charged to the congregation’s literature account.
● Congregation accounts should be audited on December 1, or as soon as possible thereafter, by the presiding overseer or someone he appoints.
● During their meeting in December, elders should review arrangements for providing assistance to brothers in the book study groups. The secretary should keep book study conductors informed of the publishers who may need attention in their respective groups. A written list with needed information should be supplied every three months. Thus a list will be available when the service overseer visits each book study.
● Please study carefully the instructions in the Theocratic School Schedule for 1980. You will note that adjustments have been made in the timing allotted for presentations as well as the manner in which they should be handled. School overseer will want to be sure that all in the congregation understand the new arrangements.
● Literature offer for December is the New World Translation and any 50c book you may have in stock except Truth, Family Life, Choosing, Commentary on James and the School Guidebook. January: Watchtower subscription for $2.50 with one of the following books as a free gift: Great Teacher, Holy Spirit, World Government or Man’s Salvation. February and March: Any of the 50-cent books in congregation stock except Choosing, Commentary on James, Family Life, Truth or School Guidebook. If needed, following books may be ordered: Great Teacher, Holy Spirit, Man’s Salvation and World Government.
● New Publications Available:
Making Your Family Life Happy—Finnish, French, Italian, Korean
Man’s Salvation out of World Distress at Hand!—French
Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century—French, Norwegian
Acts of Apostles (Cassette recordings)—Finnish
● Available in Braille:
Cassette recordings of Acts of Apostles in English with Braille labels for use by the blind. Obtain by writing Society’s Braille Desk and remitting $3.00 for each set at time of ordering. Cassettes should not be stocked by congregation.
A limited supply of the brochure Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century (1 volume) in grade-two English Braille. May obtain on a free loan basis or purchase and keep permanently for a remittance of $1.00. Address orders to attention of Society’s Braille Desk. These items should not be included in congregation literature orders nor stocked by the congregation.
● Family Life book to be used in congregation book study in January.

