Parents—What Are Your Children Learning?
1 To learn means “to gain knowledge or understanding . . . by study, instruction.” Parents can and should actively promote and participate in the spiritual development of their children, for this is Biblical. (Deut. 6:6, 7) With this purpose in view, My Book of Bible Stories has proved to be a valuable tool.
2 The capacity a child has for learning is great. A difficult language is usually learned easily, with little conscious effort being put forth on the part of the child. The mind of a young child is like a clean slate, which can be written upon with ease. Much more is being accomplished by the study of this book than just memorizing stories. Consider the moral lesson in the case of a small child as told in a letter from his family: “Our baby Samuel is 18 months old and can’t say much yet. But he understands the meaning behind the beautiful large pictures. He knows, for example, not to hit kitty with a stick because Jehovah didn’t like Cain anymore after he did that to Abel.”
3 One way thinking ability can be developed is by asking questions, particularly using the question, Why? For example, Why did Adam and Eve sin against God and eat the fruit? Why was that bad? Why should they have listened to God? If your mother tells you not to eat cookies or cake that she has prepared for supper, why should you obey her? If an elder asks all the brothers to sit down because it is time for a meeting to start, why should you do it? If schoolmates want you to disobey your parents or what the Bible says, why should you resist them? Questions of this nature help a child to develop thinking ability and to prepare him for the future.
4 Teaching in the family in ancient Israel was primarily the responsibility of the father, with the mother assisting. (Prov. 1:8) What were some of the things the Hebrews taught their children? Fear of Jehovah. (Ps. 34:11) To honor their father and mother. (Ex. 20:12) To respect older persons. (Lev. 19:32) Obedience. (Prov. 4:1) Practical training for adult living. (Eccl. 12:13, 14) Education in reading and writing.
5 For Christian living today, the same basic principles must be taught to our children. It brings real pleasure to our hearts to see these young ones learn of Jehovah and acquire thinking ability, and just imagine how it must please Jehovah. My Book of Bible Stories is a wonderful aid for parents in teaching their children. So, from time to time on our service meeting program, we will include a discussion of portions of My Book of Bible Stories with a few children. Specific stories will be considered. The one assigned this material with the children will pose simple questions in order to draw out their comments, such as, What is the story about? What do we learn from the picture? Why should we either follow that example or not follow it? Have them explain the meaning of what they are learning. This is similar to what was presented in the drama about young Samuel a few years ago. His father had taught him the ‘10 Words’ (Ten Commandments). However, he was not just to memorize them, but was to be able to explain them, thus revealing understanding. Whether conducting this portion with children on the platform or studying with them at home, help them to acquire understanding and display thinking ability.
6 Parents will want to study the material with their children beforehand, and yet not prepare them with rehearsed answers. Encourage ALL children in the congregation to bring their Bible Stories book to the meeting when this portion is considered. Our children make up a large and valuable part of the Christian congregation, and we know that all will enjoy and benefit from their participation in the program. They too are included in the expression: “Every breathing thing—let it praise Jah.”—Ps. 150:6.

