Presenting the Good News—With the “New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures”
1 Every reasonable person wants to live. However, today many people do very little to prolong life. Overindulgences and excesses seem to be the order of the day. Violence and civil disorders are spreading to parts of the earth formerly noted for peace and for law-abiding citizens. Reports continue to be published that respect for life seems to be at an all-time low.
2 However, we know that if a person follows God’s Word, the Bible, his life will be affected for good. Jehovah will lengthen his days and add years to his life.—Prov. 3:1, 2.
3 We have a valuable aid in the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures and what a privilege is ours to offer it together with a book for a contribution of $2.50. We should be ready with talking points that might appeal to those searching for the way to life. In the following paragraphs are some suggestions you may wish to use in presenting the Bible and book.
4 If you feel the householder is a religiously inclined person, after introducing yourself you may wish to say: “Many persons are interested in bettering their way of life and so follow some religion. But they are still unhappy. Part of this unhappiness stems from their failure to find fellowship with others in a real international Christian brotherhood. Well, such an international brotherhood is going to be a reality earth wide. Note the words here at 2 Peter 3:13. [Read.] The Bible will help you learn more about God’s promises. May I leave this clear, English translation with you together with this book, both for $2.50?”
5 There is another way you may highlight the value of the New World Translation in aiding the reader to get a quicker, clearer understanding of scriptures. For example, after introducing yourself you might say: “Some reports say that more and more husbands and wives are disagreeing. Some are even getting divorces after having been married for some time. However, the Bible has valuable counsel on how one could avoid disagreements and divorce. To illustrate, notice how helpful this New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures is in its concordance section. Here under the word ‘Husband(s)’ some fine scripture references are found. See what it says about a husband and a wife?” (Read phrases from the following: Eph. 5:25 and 1 Pet. 3:1.) “Other fine subjects are found in this concordance of more than 100 pages. May I leave the Bible and this book for $2.50?” Of course, other words from the concordance may be selected depending on what you feel works best. You may use the word “Earth” and tie in 2 Peter 3:13, highlighting God’s promise for something new.
6 In whatever way we offer the Bible, our goal is to have each honest-hearted one who can, take the Bible and read it together with the book. An enthusiastic presentation of this fine publication will certainly help us reach honest-hearted ones with the good news.

