How Can You Make Wise Decisions?
“A WISE person will listen and take in more instruction,” said Solomon, king of ancient Israel. Most of us have at times made unwise decisions simply because we neglected to listen to the advice of others.​—Proverbs 1:5.
Those words of Solomon were later set down in the Bible, along with others of the “three thousand proverbs” that he composed. (1 Kings 4:32) Can we benefit from knowing and heeding his wise sayings? Yes. They help us “to know wisdom and discipline, to discern the sayings of understanding, to receive the discipline that gives insight, righteousness and judgment and uprightness.” (Proverbs 1:2, 3) Let us discuss five Bible-based guidelines that can assist us in making wise decisions.
Consider Long-Term Consequences
Some decisions will have significant consequences. Therefore, try to determine ahead of time what these will be. Beware of letting the appeal of short-term benefits blind you to possibly undesirable long-term consequences. “Shrewd is the one that has seen the calamity and proceeds to conceal himself, but the inexperienced have passed along and must suffer the penalty,” warns Proverbs 22:3.
It may be helpful to put down on paper what the short-term and the long-term consequences will be. The short-term results of choosing a certain job may be good pay and enjoyable work. But could the long-term consequences include having a job without a real future? Might it eventually require that you move elsewhere, perhaps away from friends or family? Might it subject you to an unhealthy environment or be so uninteresting as to leave you profoundly frustrated? Weigh the pros and cons, and then decide what should have priority.
Take Sufficient Time
Hastily made decisions can easily turn out to be unwise. Proverbs 21:5 warns: “The plans of the diligent one surely make for advantage, but everyone that is hasty surely heads for want.” For instance, infatuated teenagers should take their time before deciding to cement a relationship in marriage. Otherwise, they may experience the truthfulness of what William Congreve, English playwright of the early 18th century, said: “Marry’d in haste, we may repent at leisure.”
Taking sufficient time, however, is not to be confused with procrastinating. Some decisions are so important that wisdom dictates they be made as soon as reasonably possible. To delay needlessly could prove costly either to ourselves or to others. Postponing a decision may be a decision in itself​—possibly an unwise one.
Be Open to Counsel
Since no two situations are exactly alike, two people may not always make an identical decision when facing similar problems. Still, it is helpful to hear how others have decided matters resembling ours. Ask them how they now evaluate their decision. In choosing a trade, for example, ask those already engaged in this trade to tell you both sides of the story. What have they found to be the benefits of their choice, and what have been the drawbacks or possible dangers?
“There is a frustrating of plans where there is no confidential talk,” we are warned, “but in the multitude of counselors there is accomplishment.” (Proverbs 15:22) Of course, when seeking counsel and learning from the experience of others, we ought to do so in full recognition that we personally must make the final decision and also bear the responsibility for doing so.​—Galatians 6:4, 5.
Heed a Well-Trained Conscience
The conscience can help us make decisions in harmony with the basic principles we choose to pattern our life by. For a Christian, this means training the conscience to pattern itself after God’s thoughts. (Romans 2:14, 15) God’s Word tells us: “In all your ways take notice of him, and he himself will make your paths straight.” (Proverbs 3:6) Of course, in some areas two persons​—each with a well-trained conscience—​may reach different conclusions and thus make different decisions.
A well-trained conscience will rule out such leeway, however, when actions directly condemned by God’s Word are at issue. For example, a conscience that has not been trained by Bible principles may allow a man and a woman to test their compatibility before marriage by simply living together. They may think that they have made a wise decision, reasoning that it will prevent them from rushing into an unwise marriage. Their conscience may not condemn them. Yet, anyone who shares God’s views on sex and marriage will decide against such a temporary and immoral arrangement.​—1 Corinthians 6:18; 7:1, 2; Hebrews 13:4.
How Your Decisions Affect Others
Often, your decisions may affect others. So never deliberately make an unwise​—even stupid—​decision that could jeopardize precious relationships with friends and relatives or, above all, with God. Proverbs 10:1 notes: “A wise son is the one that makes a father rejoice, and a stupid son is the grief of his mother.”
On the other hand, realize that at times it is necessary to choose between friendships. To illustrate, you may decide to reject formerly held religious views that you now know to be contrary to the Scriptures. Or you may decide to make major personality changes because of your desire to pattern your life after divine guidelines that you have now accepted. Your decision may not please some friends or relatives, but any decision that pleases God is a wise decision.
Wisely Make the Greatest Decision
Unknown to people in general, everyone today is faced with making a decision between life and death. A similar situation faced the ancient Israelites camped on the border of the Promised Land in 1473 B.C.E. Acting as God’s spokesman, Moses told them: “I have put life and death before you, the blessing and the malediction; and you must choose life in order that you may keep alive, you and your offspring, by loving Jehovah your God, by listening to his voice and by sticking to him; for he is your life and the length of your days, that you may dwell upon the ground that Jehovah swore to your forefathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob to give to them.”​—Deuteronomy 30:19, 20.
Bible prophecy and chronology show that we are living in “critical times hard to deal with” and that “the scene of this world is changing.” (2 Timothy 3:1; 1 Corinthians 7:31) The foretold change will climax in the destruction of a bankrupt human system, which will be replaced by God’s new world of righteousness.
We are on the threshold of that new world. Will you enter to enjoy everlasting life on earth under God’s Kingdom? Or will you be removed from the earth when Satan’s system is eliminated? (Psalm 37:9-11; Proverbs 2:21, 22) The decision about what course to follow now is yours to make, truly a decision that is a matter of life or death. Would you welcome help in making the right decision, the wise one?
Deciding for life involves first learning of God’s requirements. The churches for the most part have failed to convey these requirements accurately. Their leaders have often misled people into believing falsehoods and doing things displeasing to God. They have neglected to explain the need for making a personal decision to worship God “with spirit and truth.” (John 4:24) So most people do not. But note what Jesus said: “He that is not on my side is against me, and he that does not gather with me scatters.”​—Matthew 12:30.
Jehovah’s Witnesses joyfully assist people to gain a better knowledge of God’s Word. They conduct regular Bible discussions with individuals or groups at a time and place convenient to them. Those who want to take advantage of this provision should either contact local Witnesses or write to the publishers of The Watchtower.
Of course, some may already have a basic knowledge of what God requires. They may even be convinced of the truthfulness and reliability of the Bible. Still, a number of them have put off making a decision to dedicate themselves to God. Why? There may be several reasons.
Are they possibly unaware of the importance of doing so? Jesus clearly said: “Not everyone saying to me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ will enter into the kingdom of the heavens, but the one doing the will of my Father who is in the heavens will.” (Matthew 7:21) Bible knowledge alone is insufficient; action is required. The early Christian congregation set the pattern. We read about some in the first century: “When they believed Philip, who was declaring the good news of the kingdom of God and of the name of Jesus Christ, they proceeded to be baptized, both men and women.” (Acts 2:41; 8:12) Thus, if a person has embraced God’s Word heartily, believes what it says, and has brought his life in line with God’s standards, what prevents him from being baptized in symbol of his dedication? (Acts 8:34-38) Of course, to be acceptable to God, he ought to take this step willingly and with a joyful heart.​—2 Corinthians 9:7.
Some may feel that they do not have enough knowledge to dedicate their life to God. But everyone starting out on a new course in life has a limited amount of knowledge. What professional will claim that he knew at the beginning of his career what he knows today? Deciding to serve God simply requires a knowledge of basic Bible teachings and principles, coupled with a sincere desire to live accordingly.
Do some delay their decision for fear that they may fail to live up to it? A reasonable concern about failure is involved in many human commitments. A man who decides to marry and raise a family may feel somewhat inadequate, but making a commitment serves as an incentive for him to do the best he possibly can. Likewise, a young person with a new driver’s license may have some fear of having a traffic accident​—especially if he is aware of statistics that show young drivers to be proportionately more accident-prone than older ones. This knowledge, however, can be beneficial, moving him to drive with greater caution. Refraining from getting a license is by no means the solution!
Decide for Life!
The Bible shows that the present political, economic, and religious global system and those who support it will soon pass from the earth. Yet, individuals who have wisely decided for life and who act accordingly will remain. As the nucleus of a new world society, they will take part in making the earth a paradise, as God originally intended. Would you, under God’s direction, enjoy participating in this joyful work?
If so, decide to study God’s Word. Decide to learn the divine requirements for pleasing God. Decide to meet them. Above all, decide to carry your decision through to completion. Briefly stated, decide for life!
[Pictures on page 4]
Take sufficient time for serious decisions
[Picture on page 5]
Be open to counsel in choosing a career
[Pictures on page 7]
Those who decide to serve God now will take part in making the earth a paradise

