The Good News Bears Fruit in São Tomé and Príncipe
MOST people have probably never heard of São Tomé and Príncipe. These islands are not usually advertised in vacation brochures. On a world map, they look like tiny spots located in the Gulf of Guinea off the western coast of Africa, São Tomé sitting almost on the equator and Príncipe a little to the northeast. The rainy, humid climate has produced luxurious rain forests, covering the slopes of mountains that rise to over 6,600 feet [2,000 m].
These tropical islands, surrounded by blue waters and palm-fringed beaches, are inhabited by a friendly, warmhearted people, whose mixed African and European origins have resulted in a pleasant blend of cultures. The population of 170,000 is occupied with the main export, cacao, or with farming and fishing. In recent years, obtaining even the food for the day has been a challenge.
The last decade of the 20th century, however, witnessed one event that has greatly affected the lives of increasing numbers of people on these islands. In June 1993, Jehovah’s Witnesses were legally registered with the government of São Tomé and Príncipe, thus bringing to a close a long and often difficult chapter of the history of Jehovah’s Witnesses on these islands.
Seeds Sown Under Hardship
It appears that the first Witness came to this country in the early 1950’s when prisoners from other Portuguese colonies in Africa were sent to work in labor camps on the islands. The Witness, an African pioneer, or full-time minister, was deported from Mozambique because he preached the good news of God’s Kingdom in that land. This lone Witness kept busy, and within six months, there were 13 others who shared in spreading the good news. Later, other Witnesses under the same circumstances arrived from Angola. During their imprisonment, they seized every opportunity to share the good news with local inhabitants.
By 1966 all the brothers serving terms in São Tomé had returned to the African mainland. The small group of Kingdom publishers left behind carried on courageously. They were persecuted, beaten, and imprisoned because they met together for Bible study, and there was no one to visit or encourage them. The country achieved independence from Portugal in 1975, and slowly but surely the seeds of Kingdom truth began to bear fruit.
Expansion and Building
The very month of the legal registration in 1993, there was a peak of 100 Kingdom publishers. That same year, special pioneers came from Portugal. The efforts they put forth to learn Portuguese Creole endeared them to the local people. The search to find land for a Kingdom Hall then became a priority. Upon hearing of this need, a sister named Maria donated half the land on which she had her small home. The plot was big enough for a large Kingdom Hall. Maria did not know that because she had no surviving relatives, this property was being eyed by ambitious developers. One day a prominent businessman came to talk to Maria.
“What I hear about you is not good!” he warned her. “I hear that you donated your land. Don’t you know that it is worth a lot of money because it is right here in the city?”
“If I offered the land to you, how much would you pay me?” asked Maria. When the man did not answer, Maria continued: “Even if you gave me all the money in the world, it would not be enough because money cannot buy life.”
“You do not have children, do you?” the man asked.
To end the conversation, Maria said: “The land belongs to Jehovah. He lent it to me for so many years, and now I have given it back to him. I am looking forward to living forever.” Then she asked the man: “You do not have everlasting life to offer, do you?” Without saying one more word, he turned and walked away.
The result was that a splendid two-story building was constructed with the help of qualified brothers from Portugal. It has a full basement, a spacious Kingdom Hall, and living quarters. It also has classrooms for holding schools for elders, ministerial servants, and pioneers. Two congregations now have their meetings in it, making it a fine educational center for pure worship in the capital.
In Mé-Zochi, there was a congregation of 60 zealous publishers. Since meetings were held in an improvised Kingdom Hall located in a banana grove, the need for an appropriate Kingdom Hall became obvious. This was made known to city hall, and sympathetic officials offered a choice lot on the main street. A fine Kingdom Hall was built in two months with the help of brothers from Portugal, using the quickly built method. The local people could hardly believe what they saw. A Swedish engineer involved in a building project in the city was amazed to see the brothers and sisters in action. “This is unbelievable!” he remarked. “Jehovah’s Witnesses, here in Mé-Zochi, using a quickly built method! This is the way we should organize our project.” The Kingdom Hall was dedicated on June 12, 1999, with an attendance of 232. The hall has become a principal attraction for visitors to the city of Mé-Zochi.
A Historic Convention
A historic event for Jehovah’s Witnesses in São Tomé and Príncipe was the three-day “Divine Teaching” District Convention in January 1994​—a first in these islands. It was held in the finest air-conditioned auditorium in the country. Can you imagine the joy of the 116 Kingdom publishers at seeing a crowd of 405 and for the first time watching Bible dramas and receiving convention releases? A tropical beach was the setting for the baptism of 20 dedicated persons.
A novelty that caught the attention of the public was the unique lapel badges worn by the delegates. The presence of 25 visitors from Portugal and Angola added international flavor to the convention. A bond of warm Christian love quickly developed, and tears rolled down the faces of many at the final session when they said good-bye.​—John 13:35.
Journalists from the National Radio came and interviewed the convention overseer. They also broadcast excerpts of several of the discourses. It was indeed a historic occasion, and to these long-isolated faithful Witnesses, it helped to make Jehovah’s visible organization seem so much closer.
Bearing Fruit to Jehovah’s Praise
When the Kingdom message bears fruit, it produces fine conduct that brings praise and honor to Jehovah. (Titus 2:10) One teenage girl enjoyed what she was learning from her weekly Bible study. Her father, however, prohibited her from attending congregation meetings. When she respectfully explained to him the importance of Christian meetings and her desire to attend, he promptly expelled her from his home. Apparently, he thought that she would do what many other young people do​—quickly move in with a man who would provide for her. When the father learned that she was leading an exemplary, chaste life as a Christian, he was moved to take her back and grant her complete freedom to serve Jehovah.
Another example is that of the leader of a musical group. He became disillusioned with his immoral way of life. While searching for a purpose in life, he was contacted by the Witnesses. When he started to live according to the moral standards of the Bible, he became the talk of the town. Soon he saw the need to end all unwholesome associations. (1 Corinthians 15:33) He then took the vital step of getting baptized in symbol of his dedication to Jehovah.
Several youths were looking for the true religion. Their search led them to discussions with the pastors of several evangelical groups, but the result was further confusion and disillusionment. Consequently, they became violent vagrants and scoffers at anything religious.
One day, one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, a missionary, was on his way to conduct a Bible study and came by the place where these young people were. The group wanted the missionary to answer some questions and led him to a backyard, where he was invited to sit on a small stool. What followed was a barrage of questions on such subjects as the soul, hellfire, life in heaven, and the end of the world. The Witness answered all their questions from the Bible that the gang leader lent him. An hour later, the leader, named Law, said to the missionary: “When we asked you to come and answer questions, our intention was to ridicule you, as we have done with people from other religions. We felt that no one could answer those questions. But you did, and you did it using just the Bible! Tell me, how can I learn more about the Bible?” A Bible study was started with Law, and soon he started attending meetings. Shortly after that, he abandoned the group and gave up his violent way of life. Within a year, he dedicated his life to Jehovah and was baptized. He is now serving as a ministerial servant.
One local custom that has become strongly entrenched is that couples simply live together without the benefit of legal marriage. Many have lived together for years, and they have children together. They find it hard to accept God’s viewpoint on the matter. It is heartwarming to see how God’s Word helped one person to overcome this obstacle.​—2 Corinthians 10:4-6; Hebrews 4:12.
Antonio understood that he should legalize his marriage and made plans to do so after the corn harvest when he would have some money for the marriage feast. One night just before the harvest, thieves came and stole his crop. He decided to wait for next year’s crop, and once again it was stolen. When yet another attempt to obtain funds for his wedding failed, Antonio realized who his real opposer was. “Satan will not play with me any more,” he said. “In a month and a half, we will be married, with or without a feast!” So they were, and to their surprise their friends provided chickens, ducks, and a goat for the wedding feast. After registering their marriage, Antonio and his wife​—along with their six children—​were baptized in symbol of their dedication to Jehovah.
To Príncipe Island
Occasional visits to the 6,000 inhabitants of Príncipe have been made in recent years by the circuit overseer and pioneers from São Tomé. The islanders were most hospitable and eager to hear what the Witnesses had to say. After reading a tract left with him, one man looked for the pioneers the next day and offered to help them distribute more tracts. The pioneers explained that this was a work they should do, but the man insisted that he should accompany them from door to door so that he could introduce them to the householders with the recommendation to listen carefully. The man finally left, but not before commending the pioneers on the important work they were doing.
In 1998 two pioneers from São Tomé moved to Príncipe, and soon they were conducting 17 home Bible studies. The work continued to expand, and before long the Congregation Book Study averaged 16 in attendance, and more than 30 attended the public talk. The need for a meeting place was presented to city hall, and happily, land was granted to build a Kingdom Hall. Brothers from São Tomé volunteered to build a small Kingdom Hall that also has accommodations for two special pioneers.
Without a doubt the good news is bearing much fruit and increasing on these remote islands. (Colossians 1:5, 6) In January 1990 there were 46 publishers in São Tomé and Príncipe. During the 2002 service year, a peak of 388 Kingdom proclaimers was reached! Over 20 percent of the publishers are in the full-time service, and about 1,400 home Bible studies are being conducted. The 2001 Memorial attendance reached an all-time peak of 1,907. Yes, on these tropical islands, the word of Jehovah is moving ahead speedily and is being glorified.​—2 Thessalonians 3:1.
[Box/Picture on page 12]
Popular Radio Broadcasts
  A publication that is greatly appreciated on these islands is Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work.a Every two weeks, a 15-minute program with that title is presented on National Radio. What a thrill to hear the broadcaster ask, “Young people, how do you know if it’s real love or infatuation?” and follow with a reading of a portion of the book! (See chapter 31.) A similar broadcast presents selected parts of the book The Secret of Family Happiness.b
[Footnotes]
Published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
[Picture on page 9]
First Kingdom Hall in São Tomé in 1994
[Pictures on page 10]
1. Quickly built Kingdom Hall in Mé-Zochi
2. A historic district convention took place in this auditorium
3. Happy baptismal candidates at the convention
[Picture Credit Line on page 8]
Globe: Mountain High Maps® Copyright © 1997 Digital Wisdom, Inc.

