From Our Readers
Clothes  I am writing to you regarding the article “The Kind of Clothes We Wear—Does It Really Matter?” (February 8, 1999) I appreciate the work you do in providing us with the “food at the proper time.” (Matthew 24:45) But some of the comments in the article seemed to express personal opinions. To write that “T-shirts advertising your favorite movie or sports star . . . might nudge you toward hero worship—idolatry” is unwarranted. It is possible to like, even admire, an athlete without breaking any Bible commandment.
M. D., France
We appreciate these frank comments, but it was not our intention to make rules or to establish a dress code. Our article encouraged readers to use “soundness of mind” in making their own choices of clothing. (1 Timothy 2:9, 10) The comment regarding T-shirts was not dogmatic but acknowledged the possibility that wearing certain styles might harm the wearer himself. While there may be nothing wrong with admiring an individual’s skill or talent, would it be wise for a Christian to wear something that might give others the impression that he admires the life-style and morals of someone who does not live by Bible standards?—ED.
Siberian Exile  I was so moved by the breathtaking story of Lembit Toom, “Half a Century Under Totalitarian Tyranny” (February 22, 1999), that I could not wait to express my appreciation. It took great faith in Jehovah God for him to be able to survive such challenging times. The new freedom our brothers in the former Soviet Union are experiencing is well deserved.
J. D., United States
Singing Tree  Heartfelt thanks for the articles you publish on nature. I particularly appreciated the article “A Tree That Sings.” (March 8, 1999) I did not know anything about the whistling thorn. After reading about the melody it produces with its long thorns and hollow galls that vibrate in the wind, I reflected on Psalm 96:12, 13: “All the trees of the forest break out joyfully before Jehovah.” In its own way, this unusual tree praises Jehovah.
M. D., Italy
Rio de Janeiro  As a Carioca, an inhabitant of Rio, I found your article “Rio de Janeiro—Beautiful and Challenging” (March 8, 1999) to be both appealing and informative. Rio’s image has suffered greatly because of sensationalistic journalism.
O. D. C., Brazil
As always, your information was carefully prepared. You avoided presenting a prejudiced view of the poor, who are often blamed for Rio’s social problems.
V. R. L., Brazil
Letter to Parents  I was very much encouraged by the article “A Special Letter to Their Parents.” (March 8, 1999) It was what I should have written to my own parents. They were good examples in attending Christian meetings, being regular in the ministry, and showing hospitality. My father was a ministerial servant; he must have been very busy with congregation duties. Yet, he often planned recreation for us, and we never felt envious of our schoolmates. He died in a traffic accident on his way home from a Christian convention, and our life changed drastically. But remembering his Kingdom-first life-style and my mother’s faith, I have been moved to continue serving Jehovah.
S. K., Japan

