Meeting the Demand in Switzerland
By “Awake!” correspondent in Switzerland
HONEST-HEARTED persons in rapidly growing numbers are showing keen interest in what the Bible says as to the meaning of present critical world conditions. This has caused a great upsurge in the demand for the Bible literature of Jehovah’s witnesses, requiring enlargement of their printing facilities. Such has been their experience, not only at their world headquarters in America, but also in other lands.
To illustrate: In 1954 the branch of the Watch Tower Society in Switzerland was producing Watchtower and Awake! magazines in German and French at the rate of 188,500 per month. In 1959 this figure increased to 402,345, and in 1970 thus far the average monthly production has risen to 1,554,190 magazines. These magazines are now being mailed to 85 lands where German and French are used.
In Switzerland itself the growth of the Kingdom-preaching organization has been steady. The number of those actively spreading the good news of Jehovah’s kingdom has increased over the past five years by well over thirteen hundred, reaching a recent peak of 7,525. Without doubt this has had much to do with the increased demand for literature explaining the Bible.
Little wonder, then, that a new branch office and factory became an urgent need. Back in July 1967, efforts were already being made to locate a suitable site. Finally a place was chosen, and work commenced on the new building in February 1969. The property is situated in the town of Thun, close by the Lake of Thun, having a fine view of the majestic mountains there.
Dedication of the new branch quarters was planned for May 16, 1970. Adding to the interest of the occasion for the local Witnesses was the fact that representatives were on hand from Austria, Italy, France, Germany, Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg. They had come for special consultation with N. H. Knorr, president of the Watch Tower Society.
Early in the program Willi Diehl, branch servant for Switzerland, summarized the growth of the Kingdom work from the time when C. T. Russell, the Society’s first president, suggested that a Swiss national living in the United States of America return to his own land and take up work in the ‘Lord’s vineyard’ there. A small office of the Society was opened in Yverdon. In time it was moved to Geneva and later to Berne, where a printing establishment was set up.
In the mid-20’s a large branch building took shape in Berne, where Bible publications were being produced in fourteen languages. In those days the Switzerland branch also served as Central European office of the Society. But now the demand for literature was taxing those facilities that seemed so ample forty years ago.
Visitors at the dedication could see that this new branch is practically double the size of the old one. The five-story building is built on a foundation that is 197 by 118 feet. There are 53 living rooms and plenty of space for office, factory and storage space. Its basement has a fine Kingdom Hall, as well as kitchen and dining room.
President Knorr, who brought with him the love and greetings of the large staff of the Brooklyn, New York, headquarters of the Society, spoke to the assembled audience about ancient structures that were related to the true worship of Jehovah​—the tabernacle in ancient Israel and the glorious temple built by Solomon. These, he said, were types or shadows pointing to the real spiritual temple, made up of Christ Jesus and the 144,000 who will be associated with him in heaven. (Eph. 2:20, 21) Though dedicated to the same true worship, the speaker continued, this new branch office was not the truly important thing. Rather, God’s interested in people, particularly those who use such buildings and serve wholeheartedly in the furtherance of Jehovah’s work in the earth.
At the conclusion President Knorr delighted the audience with information about expansion of the Lord’s work in many other lands.

