Service Meetings for January
Week Starting January 1
Song 133
 7 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
13 min: “Preach With Insight.” Discuss main points, and have one or two presentations demonstrated. Let the congregation know what older books are currently in stock.
25 min: “1996 ‘Messengers of Godly Peace’ District Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses.” Question-and-answer coverage by secretary. First, read December 15, 1995, convention assignment letter. Then, after considering third paragraph of article, read opening and closing paragraphs of Recommended Lodging List from convention. Emphasize need for all to select accommodations from Recommended Lodging List, whether a person is attending a local convention or one outside the assigned area, as noted in paragraph 12 of the article. In the section “Your Cooperation Is Appreciated,” stress that the Bible principles of honesty, obedience, loving concern for others, and so forth, apply even if it appears that no one in the congregation will be using hotel rooms. Commend those cooperating with the Society’s rooming arrangement.
Song 28 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 8
Song 138
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Give appropriate commendation for financial support of local and worldwide work of getting the good news preached.
15 min: The Protective Value of the Advance Medical Directive/Release Card. Elder discusses with congregation the importance of each one properly filling out the Advance Medical Directive/Release card and carrying it at all times and the need for children to have the Identity Card always with them. As the title of the card suggests, it provides advance notice of what is wanted (or not wanted) as to medical care. Why is this done each year? A current card is more persuasive than one that might be considered to be out-of-date or no longer a reflection of one’s convictions. The document speaks for you if you are unable to speak for yourself. Cards will be given out tonight. They should be filled out carefully at home, but they are not to be signed. As has been done for the last two years, signing and witnessing will be done at the Congregation Book Study locations, under the supervision of the book study conductors. Those who sign as witnesses should actually see the cardholder sign the document. This will be done following the book study during the week of January 15. (See page 2 of January 1994 Our Kingdom Ministry for details on procedure. See also letter of October 15, 1991.) All baptized publishers may fill out Advance Medical Directive/Release card. Unbaptized publishers, by adapting language from this card to their own circumstances and convictions, may wish to write out their own directive. Parents can help their unbaptized children fill out the Identity Card. Briefly mention the provision made in the Question Box of the December 1995 Our Kingdom Ministry for health-care power of attorney (proxy) forms to be filled out by any baptized publisher who desires to do so.
20 min: “Be Doers—Not Just Hearers.” Questions and answers. As time permits, discuss the importance of obedience, based on Insight book, Volume 2, page 521, paragraphs 1 and 2.
Song 70 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 15
Song 77
12 min: Local announcements. Briefly discuss growing problem of not-at-homes. Encourage publishers to redeem the time by taking the initiative to approach people who may be passing by, standing on the sidewalk, or sitting in cars.
15 min: Local needs. (Or “Guard Your Sense of Urgency,” a talk based on October 1, 1995, Watchtower, pages 25-8.)
18 min: “Return to Save Some.” Review suggested presentations. Recommend the goal of starting studies in the new book, Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life.
Song 156 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 22
Song 200
 5 min: Local announcements.
20 min: “Benefit From the Theocratic Ministry School for 1996—Part 1.” Talk by school overseer. Review directions provided for student assignments in Theocratic Ministry School instructions, which appeared in the October 1995 Our Kingdom Ministry.
20 min: “Speak With Boldness.” Talk and discussion to be handled by an elder. Review local Sunday service arrangements. Give commendation for good support, and offer suggestions where improvement is needed.
Song 92 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 29
Song 31
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Witnessing During Inclement Weather. Many have to cope with severe cold, heavy snow, or rain during the winter months. A group of three or four publishers discuss how they are able to maintain a good share in the ministry in spite of bad weather. Many congregations work rural territories during summer months, concentrate on city territory during the winter, and arrange meetings for service in the territory to cut down on excessive travel. Some save apartment buildings for bad days. Keep car groups small to avoid excessive waiting. Break up house-to-house work with some return visits. Wear suitable clothing to keep warm and dry. Use the telephone or do letter writing when it is not wise to go outdoors. Discuss any other ideas that you have found to be practical in your area.
20 min: Offer the Revelation Climax Book During February. Explain why the book of Revelation was long viewed as a mystery beyond our understanding. Review paragraphs 6 to 9 on page 8, showing why this book is needed. Encourage publishers to have these thoughts in mind so that they will have a basis for talking points at the door. Refer to “The Framework of the Book of Revelation” on pages 98-9, and show how this can be used to give an overall view of the book of Revelation. Call attention to the striking illustrations inside the front and back covers and how they might be used to start a conversation. Remind all to pick up copies for use in service this weekend.
Song 143 and concluding prayer.

