Speak With Boldness
1 During recent years publishers in some areas are finding it increasingly difficult to speak to people at their home. Many report that in their territory more than 50 percent of the people are not at home when calls are made from house to house. As a result, much of the time spent is unproductive.
2 Years ago many people were found at home on Sunday, which was generally viewed as a day of rest. Customs have changed. It is common today for people to work at secular jobs, care for family needs such as shopping, or be involved in recreation, which also takes them away from home. So even on Sundays, contacting people from house to house has become a problem.
3 When people are not at home, it obviously means that they are somewhere else. Since our goal is to talk to people, why not speak to those we do meet—on the street, in the marketplace, or in the workplace. It was Paul’s custom to approach “those who happened to be on hand,” to give them a witness. (Acts 17:17) This proved to be a productive form of witnessing then, and it is a productive form of witnessing in our day.
4 When we go from house to house, we usually see people walking by casually or perhaps waiting for someone. On a nice day, they may be sitting on a park bench or working on or washing their car. A neighborly smile and a friendly greeting may be all we need to start a conversation. If they live nearby, we could even mention that we likely just missed them at their home and now we are glad that we have this chance to speak with them. By taking the initiative to show a little more boldness, many have enjoyed rewarding experiences.
5 Boldness Gets Results: One brother related that he approaches people who are standing, waiting for a bus, walking along leisurely, or sitting in their car. With a warm smile and a cheerful voice, he takes the approach of a friendly neighbor who just wants to visit. In this way not only has he placed much literature but he has also started several Bible studies.
6 Another brother and his wife were calling from door to door when they encountered a woman walking along carrying a large bag of groceries. They struck up a conversation, commending her for her diligence in looking after the needs of her family. “But who,” they asked, “can supply the needs of mankind?” That sparked the woman’s interest. A brief conversation led to an invitation to her home, where a Bible study was started.
7 So the next time you are witnessing from door to door, whether on Sunday or on another day of the week, and you find that people are not at home, why not muster up a little more boldness and speak to people you do meet—on the street or elsewhere? (1 Thess. 2:2) You may have a more productive ministry, and you will experience greater joy in your service.

