From Our Readers
Living Together or Marriage?
I really appreciated your articles on “Marriage​—Is It Necessary?” (July 8, 1986) I could not keep those for myself. I had to tell a friend of mine who is living with her boyfriend. The testimony worked. They will get married very soon. Thank you very much.
C. D., France
Avoiding Being Raped
I have to thank you for the item entitled “Best Weapon: Screaming” that gave advice on avoiding being raped. (August 22, 1980, “Watching the World”) While walking from one village to another recently, a man pursued me and made a violent attempt to rape me. I screamed and shouted aloud for help. Two men ran out from the bush to rescue me, and the rapist ran away. Thanks again.
E. A. A., Nigeria
Mystery Behind the Occult
Thank you very much for publishing the articles on “The Mystery Behind the Occult,” and especially the article “The Demons Controlled Me.” (August 22, 1986) At first, I felt reluctant to read the item because I myself had been under the influence of the demons, and the remembrance of it is still painful to me. However, I overcame this feeling and found the articles enlightening and also encouraging.
E. T., England
The Unborn Child
Thank you for publishing “A Letter From the Mother of an Unborn Child.” (July 22, 1986) I, too, had an abortion eight years ago, and as time goes on, the pain deepens. It was comforting to know that someone else understood. If I would then have read an article such as this, I would not have had the abortion. Now I await Jehovah God’s new system when abortions will be done away with and I’ll be free of my guilt.
K. P., United States
Artificial Eyes
I enjoyed reading the article “Peering Into the World of Artificial Eyes.” (August 8, 1986) I am 15 years old, and when I was 6, I had to have my eye removed because of a tumor. I now have to wear an artificial eye. Whenever you tell people that you have an artificial eye, they always think that it’s glass. But the answers the doctor gave will help others to understand. As I have got older, I have often wondered whether it has made me look different and not pretty. Most people don’t realize that there is anything wrong with my eye. My parents and I are glad that we have the hope that Jehovah will put my eye right and correct all other illnesses in the new system.
C. T., Wales
Salty Drink Saves Lives
I would like to thank you for the article “A Salty Drink That Saves Lives!” (September 22, 1985) My father-in-law had a serious attack of dysentery that lasted three days. I remembered this article and applied its counsel to my father-in-law. As soon as I gave him the solution of water, sugar, and salt, he began to feel better; and the day after, he had completely recovered. I am sure it was this salty drink that did the trick.
A. Q., Italy

