From Our Readers
Divorce
I have just reread your article “Is This Divorce Necessary?” (June 8, 1982) My husband has committed adultery, and I am now waiting for my divorce to go through. Your article describes exactly how the children and I feel. I shall pass this article on to my husband to read, hoping he’ll come home again. He’s been a good husband up to now. The basic trouble was lack of communication. Thank you for all your good work.
P. F., England
Baby Care
Our baby was three days old when I read your article “Johnny, Please Be Quiet!” (September 8, 1982) No better “food” could have been received at a more proper time. I’ve read the article four times already and keep it within reach so I can look it over again. It’s especially encouraging to read over at two o’clock in the morning when our little girl doesn’t want to go back to sleep. Thanks for a beautiful article.
R. D., South Carolina
How thankful I am to you for your recent article on crying babies. We have twin boys, now 15 months old, who cried constantly for six months. We had read similar advice and tried to follow it as much as we could. Now you’ve confirmed that we did the best for our babies. Although I wish I had had this magazine 15 months ago, it’s no less appreciated at this time. Please keep publishing helpful information for us parents so that we can raise our children in the right way.
J. F., Florida
I really appreciated the article “Johnny, Please Be Quiet!” I especially liked the part telling of Jesus’ mother wrapping her newborn in cloth bands to soothe him. I had a baby a few weeks ago. The first night home was tiring, the baby would not sleep. So as a last resort I wrapped her up in a blanket and she slept like a lamb. And she’s been resting well ever since. I also liked the thought that a baby’s crying is its communication to its parents.
Y. G., Florida
In the article “Johnny, Please Be Quiet!” mention was made of showing affection to the child. Among other accepted expressions of affection “tickling” was suggested. Some time ago I discussed with a pediatrician the subject of tickling a child. He emphatically stated, “Tickling a child is child abuse.” Perhaps further inquiries would cast more light on the subject.
M. J., Ohio
We agree that intensive and excessive tickling of a child so as to overexcite and even torment it would be child abuse. Not so, however, with a little playful caressing and tickling as mentioned in the article. Such would be good fun for the child, giving it a feeling of being loved.​—ED.

