Do You Remember?
Have you appreciated reading the recent issues of The Watchtower? Well, see if you can answer the following questions:
□ What basis do spiritual shepherds have for taking the initiative to contact some disfellowshipped ones to see if they might be moved to repent?
Even while the Israelites were in exile and yet unrepentant, Jehovah, like a shepherd, took the initiative to search for them, sending his prophets to them. Christian shepherds are interested in helping any repentant ones who might be like lost sheep. (Compare Luke 15:4-7.)​—4/15, pages 21-3.
□ How does Jesus’ illustration of the prodigal son show what our feelings and actions should be when someone is reinstated in the Christian congregation? (Luke 15:22-32)
Our goal ought to be to imitate the father, who showed happiness at the return of his prodigal son. Hence, we should freely speak with the reinstated brother and encourage him now to make progress in the truth.​—4/15, page 25.
□ What practical precautions can be taken to avoid becoming a victim of crime?
Whenever possible, avoid being out in dangerous areas at nighttime. Conceal your jewelry, and carry such items as cameras in a shopping bag. Be cautious about walking right along the edge of a sidewalk, especially if you are carrying a briefcase or a bag. (See Proverbs 3:21-23.)​—5/1, pages 5-6.
□ Why does the prophecy at Zephaniah 2:3 say: “Probably you may be concealed in the day of Jehovah’s anger”?
Salvation to life depends on faithfulness and endurance. (Matthew 24:13) Hence, only those who conform to God’s righteous standards and keep speaking the pure language will be concealed in the day of Jehovah’s anger. (Zephaniah 2:1, 2)​—5/1, page 14.
□ What is involved in putting God first in family life?
Parents and children must worship Jehovah and measure up to his standards as set out in the Bible.​—5/15, page 5.
□ Why has Jehovah not immediately punished sinners?
One reason is that God’s name must be made known in all the earth. (Compare Romans 9:17.) Another is to allow time for settling the issues of God’s sovereignty and man’s integrity, which resulted from the rebellion in Eden. Also, God’s long-suffering gives erring ones the opportunity to repent and to mend their ways. (2 Peter 3:9)​—5/15, pages 11-12.
□ What facts testify that the Bible is of superhuman origin?
The Bible was written by some 40 different writers, who were from all walks of life and who lived over a period of 1,600 years; yet all these writers followed one basic theme. This internal harmony of the Bible would be impossible if left to chance or mere human direction.​—6/1, page 5.
□ What strange deed and unusual work, foretold at Isaiah 28:21, will Jehovah perform in our day?
The warning at Revelation 17:16 shows that Babylon the Great’s political paramours will one day turn on her. As a result, Christendom will be completely destroyed along with all the other false religions. This will be Jehovah’s strange deed and his unusual work for our day.​—6/1, pages 22-3.
□ What should Christian women bear in mind regarding the use of jewelry and makeup?
The Bible does not forbid employing such beauty aids. (Exodus 32:2, 3; Esther 2:7, 12, 15) But modesty should prevail. A woman could easily come to imitate worldly styles, using an excess of lipstick, cheek coloring, or eye shadow, even as did Jezebel. (2 Kings 9:30) Care needs to be taken so that cosmetics are not applied with a heavy hand and the jewelry used is not gaudy.​—6/1, pages 30-1.
□ How did the Israelites escape “all the evil diseases of Egypt” that were prevalent in early times? (Deuteronomy 7:15)
Apparently they escaped such ailments largely because of observing the advanced hygienic practices commanded in the Law covenant.​—6/15, page 4.
□ Why has God decreed that humans must not eat blood? (Genesis 9:3, 4; Leviticus 17:10, 11; Acts 15:22-29)
Life is a gift from God and human life depends on the life-sustaining liquid tissue called blood. (Psalm 36:9) By respecting blood as special, humans show their dependence on God for life. Therefore, the central reason for God’s decree regarding blood was, not that taking in blood could be unhealthy, but that blood had special meaning to God.​—6/15, pages 8-9.
□ How may Christian parents and youths fortify the likelihood that a minor’s objection to blood transfusion will be respected?
Though not legally an adult, a Christian youth should be able to explain clearly and firmly what his strong religious objection is to taking blood. Parents can hold practice sessions with their children so that these gain experience in explaining their own convictions.​—6/15, page 18.
□ How were women greatly blessed during Jesus’ earthly ministry?
Jesus began a work that brought comfort, hope, and a new dignity to women of all races. He taught women deep spiritual truths. (John 4:7, 24-26) During his ministry, he accepted the ministration of women as he traveled throughout the land. (Mark 15:40, 41)​—7/1, pages 14-15.
□ What teaching techniques of Jesus have parents found effective with their children?
Parents do well to use illustrations to make Christian truths appeal to the hearts of their young children, and they may use well-thought-out questions to discern what their older children are really thinking. (Compare Matthew 17:24-27.)​—7/1, page 26.
□ Why should we pursue loving-kindness?
The quality of loving-kindness endears us to God and to others. It promotes hospitality and makes us more considerate. It strengthens the bonds within the family and the Christian congregation. Above all, loving-kindness brings glory to Jehovah.​—7/15, page 22.
□ Why is it possible for a Christian to be misled in the matter of association? (1 Corinthians 15:33)
A person may appear friendly and agreeable, but if he does not share the Christian’s concern for Jehovah’s service or even believe the Bible, he is a bad associate. Why? Because his life is based on different principles, and things that are important to a Christian may have little meaning to him.​—7/15, page 23.
□ Why is Judgment Day a time of hope?
Judgment Day is a period of a thousand years. It will be presided over by God himself with his Son, Christ Jesus, appointed by God to act as Judge. This will be a time to restore to mankind the perfect human life that Adam lost for his offspring. (1 Corinthians 15:21, 22)​—8/1, pages 5-7.

