Announcements
● Literature offer for November: New World Translation and True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It? for contribution of $4.50. December: My Book of Bible Stories for contribution of $2.50. New “Look!” brochure will be used as alternate offer for 30¢. January and February: Any of the following books for a contribution of 50¢: Choosing, Commentary on James, Evolution (old edition), Holy Spirit, Life Does Have a Purpose, Peace and Security (old edition), This Life, World Government. Congregations may request credit for all books obtained by publishers and pioneers. The pioneer rate for the pocket-size books for this campaign is 30¢ each for regular and special pioneers. Supplies of Choosing, Commentary on James, and Holy Spirit may be ordered from Brooklyn.
● Selective Service regulations require that all men register for the draft when reaching 18 years of age. All of those required to do so should take care of the matter promptly, viewing it as a Christian’s obligation to the superior authorities. Elders will want to have this in mind when young brothers are nearing the age of 18 and give them appropriate reminders. Questions as to the young Christian’s responsibilities in this regard may be answered by the elders.
● The Society has produced a new 32-page booklet for the special purpose of helping persons of Hindu background. The title of the booklet is Victory Over Death​—Is It Possible for You? (vi). Congregations that have English-speaking persons with this background in their territory may wish to order a small supply of these booklets. As these become available in other languages, announcement will be made.
● Congregations should begin ordering the 1987 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses on their November literature orders. (See the 1986 Cost List, paragraphs 7-10 for the date you should submit your order.) The Yearbook will be available in Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Norwegian, Portuguese, Spanish, and Swedish. Until the Yearbook is available and shipments are made, these will appear as “Back Ordered” on congregation invoices. Yearbooks are controlled stock items (See the Cost List, paragraphs 23-25.) and will cost $1.00 for congregation and public; 50¢ for pioneers. (Yearbooks in Italian will cost $1.50 for congregation and public; 75¢ for pioneers.) Regular and special pioneers on the list before July 1, 1986, may receive a free copy for which the congregation may request credit.
● New Publications Available:
Sing Praises to Jehovah (Large size)​—Finnish, French, German, Norwegian, Spanish
Sing Praises to Jehovah (Small size)​—Danish, Finnish, French, German, Norwegian, Spanish
True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It?​—German, Korean
United in Worship of the Only True God​—Cibemba, Hungarian
Worldwide Security Under the “Prince of Peace”​—Croatian, Danish, Dutch, German, Hungarian, Norwegian, Portuguese, Swedish
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth​—Faroese, Greenlandic
Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Unitedly Doing God’s Will Worldwide —​Croatian, Danish, Dutch, German, Norwegian, Portuguese, Swedish
“Look! I Am Making All Things New” (Brochure)​—Croatian, Danish, Dutch, German, Norwegian, Portuguese, Swedish
The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever​—Croatian
The Government That Will Bring Paradise​—Malagasy, Sango
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Job (set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50) ​—German
Leviticus (set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—Italian
● Out of Stock in the U.S.A.:
Margolis Bible​—English
Life Does Have a Purpose​—English

