Do Your Utmost by Sharing in Full-Time Service
1 “The greater the effort, the greater the blessings,” said the convention speaker. He then asked those in the pioneer section at the “Divine Peace” District Convention to raise their hands if they agreed. Do you remember the response? Next, the speaker enumerated some of the blessings that one receives by persevering in full-time service​—increased spirituality, skill in using the Bible, privileges of service in God’s organization, living letters of recommendation, and an improved personality, to mention a few.
2 The most important blessing one can strive for is God’s approval. It is worth doing your utmost to attain, said one full-time minister, the apostle Paul. He spurred Timothy on with the words: “Do your utmost to present yourself approved to God.” He also encouraged Timothy to obtain that approval by being “a workman with nothing to be ashamed of, handling the word of the truth aright.” (2 Tim. 2:15) We, too, can strive for God’s approval, and pioneering will afford us the opportunity to do our utmost in the most important work being done on earth today.
FULFILL YOUR DEDICATION IN FULL-TIME SERVICE
3 Pioneering can be a most satisfying way to fulfill one’s dedication to Jehovah. To be successful, pioneers must put spiritual things first in their lives. Their minds should not be loaded down with anxieties over material things to the point that they lose their efficiency. They learn to let Jehovah bear their burdens by casting all their anxieties on him. (1 Pet. 5:6, 7) One sister, after ten years of pioneering, said: “Jehovah is the one who knows my problems and can solve them. Can I serve anyone better than him?”
4 Did the convention speaker’s definition of dedication cause you to think seriously about full-time service? He quoted Jesus, who said: “If anyone wants to come after me, let him disown himself . . . and continually follow me.” (Matt. 16:24) The apostle Paul prayed that the love of his fellow Christians might abound more and more, with a view to their being filled with righteous fruit. (Phil. 1:9-11) In your case, could this mean entering pioneer service? One sister in her 80’s, after half a century of full-time service, said concerning pioneering: “What if Jesus Christ would ask you himself?”
5 Have you thought about how pioneering can help you fulfill your dedication? If you can make room for it, the benefits are many. One young pioneer sister from the Netherlands said after just one year of pioneering: ‘When you are busy serving Jehovah every day, you become more and more conscious of his purpose. Your personal relationship with him improves also because you study more and pray more intensely. You get to know Jehovah better as a Person.’ Would you like to get to know Jehovah better as a Person?​—John 17:3.
ELDERS TO HELP PIONEERS
6 If a pioneer has some difficulty in meeting the hour requirement for the month, he should note the reason on the back of the Field Service Report form (S-4) now used. To give appropriate help, direction, and counsel, the elders should become familiar with the information published in the insert of the February 1978 Our Kingdom Service.
7 During December the elders should arrange for a meeting of all the regular pioneers to discuss information provided by the Society especially for that meeting. It is recommended that this meeting be conducted by the presiding overseer and the service overseer. The meeting should be spiritual, practical, and encouraging​—designed to meet the needs of the local pioneers. It should help them to continue doing their utmost in the full-time service.

