Equipped to Reason by Using Godly Knowledge
1 The apostle Paul was equipped to reason by using godly knowledge. Acts 17:17 says that “he began to reason in the synagogue with the Jews . . . and every day in the marketplace with those who happened to be on hand.” To the Corinthians he wrote that their spiritual weapons were “powerful by God,” enabling Christians to ‘overturn reasonings and every lofty thing raised up against the knowledge of God.’​—2 Cor. 10:4, 5.
2 We, too, are equipped with powerful information, enabling us to reason with whomever we happen to meet in our ministry. Like Paul, we meet people with many religious persuasions, philosophies, ideologies, and human theories. Paul invited them to reason, and we can do the same.
BY USING REASONING BOOK
3 Our Reasoning book helps us to have confidence in speaking with people. It contains the facts that are necessary to help individuals reach proper conclusions and make sound decisions. Thus, we can courageously speak with individuals regardless of their education or background. For example, if a controversial subject such as hellfire or neutrality comes up, we can simply say: “Recently I read something on that subject, and I would like to share it with you.” Then we can bring out our Reasoning book and carry on a conversation based on the contents. With the Reasoning book we can feel relaxed about discussing nearly any subject a person may bring up. Always having our Reasoning book with us in field service, ready for use, will help us to be “equipped for every good work.”​—2 Tim. 3:17.
IMPORTANCE OF CONVERSING
4 We need to do more than just preach to people; we need to reason with them so that they will see why our message is important, why it applies to them, and how it affects them personally. To do this effectively, we need to put people at ease so they will listen to the Kingdom message. Our ability to converse in a natural manner with a sincere desire to help others learn the truth can make us successful in our ministry. Being familiar with the Reasoning book can help us achieve these goals.
5 Jesus recognized and responded to the desperate spiritual needs of the people. We need to be motivated in the same way. Because of personal pursuit of material things and the exclusion of spiritual interests, men have become wayward in their thinking, resulting in mental, emotional, and physical breakdown. (1 Tim. 6:9) We can provide the help that is needed by using our Reasoning book, which assists us to converse on many major topics of life, such as marriage and family problems, abortion, drugs, and other difficulties people may face. For instance, one sister used the Reasoning book on a return visit to discuss the subject of marriage, since the young couple she was calling on were living together without being married. On her next visit a Bible study was started, and the young couple stated that as a result of their previous discussion, they had made plans to legalize their union.
6 We are interested in reaching the hearts of people. Our warm and sincere approach can help us do this. Proverbs 16:24 says: “Pleasant sayings are a honeycomb, sweet to the soul and a healing to the bones.” Our Reasoning book can help us to present the Kingdom message in a skillful and appealing way, attracting honesthearted ones to the truth.

