Peace and Security​—A Reliable Hope
1 Most people today desire peace and security. But real peace, along with security, has been elusive for this world. Millions live in areas that have been devastated by war. Countless others feel that finding peace and security is hopeless because of terrorist activity or guerrilla warfare. Many fear leaving their heavily secured homes after dark when criminal elements seem to take over. Few indeed are those whose lives are tranquil.
2 Last April when we offered the book True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It?, over one million books were placed in the United States. As Christians we heed the command of Jesus: “Wherever you enter into a house say first, ‘May this house have peace.’ And if a friend of peace is there, your peace will rest upon him. But if there is not, it will turn back to you.” (Luke 10:5, 6) As representatives of the God of peace, we approach people peacefully.​—Eph. 6:15.
EXAMPLES AS PEACE SEEKERS
3 Obviously, Jehovah’s people must live peacefully in their communities and congregations in order to recommend a peaceful message. We must be examples of peace-seeking people. Peter wrote fellow Christians to “be found finally by him spotless and unblemished and in peace.” (2 Pet. 3:14) How do we become examples as peace-seeking Christians?
4 First, we maintain peaceful relations with Jehovah, the God of peace. We recognize his authority as Supreme Sovereign, and we are obedient to his commands. (Ps. 34:14) Peace, a fruit of his spirit, must be evident in our lives.​—Gal. 5:22.
5 Our example as peace-seeking Christians must also include respect for human authorities. This would include governmental authorities, schoolteachers, employers, parents, and elders. (Rom. 13:1, 2; Col. 3:22; Eph. 6:1; Heb. 13:17) By leading quiet and peaceful lives we adorn our message. We demonstrate that we want to “pursue the things making for peace and the things that are upbuilding to one another.”​—Rom. 14:19.
CURRENT OFFER PROMOTES PEACE
6 During November we will share our hope by offering the book True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It? along with the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures for a contribution of $4.50. Since peace and security are on the minds of millions of people in this troubled world today, this offer is most timely.
7 The first two chapters of the book contain excellent talking points. You may wish to read to the householder the first two paragraphs on page 5. Or you could refer to paragraph 11 on page 8, where God’s sure promises are contrasted with what human leaders promise. See also paragraphs 28 and 29 on pages 20-1. Be sure to call back on all who show interest or take the offer, endeavoring to start a Bible study.
8 Let us continue telling those who seek peace and security of the truly reliable hope guaranteed by Jehovah, the God of peace, teaching them how it will be accomplished through his Kingdom in the hands of Jesus, the Prince of Peace. (Isa. 9:6, 7) May our example of peaceful living continue to recommend us as Christians who “seek peace and pursue it.”​—1 Pet. 3:10, 11.

