Presenting the Good News​—With the New World Translation
1 God’s Word exerts tremendous power upon its hearers. Look what it has done for us. What it says is more powerful than anything that men can devise or speak. (Heb. 4:12) Truly, its worth is beyond compare!
2 Even though the Bible is the world’s best-seller, there are many homes without one. And among those who do have a Bible, many do not read it. Some translations are difficult to understand. So getting a modern-language translation may be just the thing that will encourage more people to read God’s Word. Their use of the New World Translation can aid them in getting the sense of the Scriptures. Can you help others to benefit from it? The month of November will afford us a fine opportunity to do so. Here are some suggestions you may wish to use in presenting the Bible along with the book True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It?
3 One way to highlight the value of the New World Translation is by featuring the section “Bible Topics for Discussion.” For instance, you could say: “The Bible has much to say about the lasting happiness that Jehovah’s government will bring. To illustrate, notice how helpful the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures is in its ‘Bible Topics for Discussion’ section. Here under the subject ‘Earth’ some fine scripture references are found. See how long peace will exist under that government.” (Read Psalm 72:7 and Isaiah 9:6, 7 under the subheading “A. God’s purpose for the earth.”) “Other fine topics are found in this section of the Bible. May I leave the Bible and this book with you for a contribution of $4.50?” Of course, other Bible topics can be selected depending on what you feel is appropriate for the occasion.
4 If you find that a householder has only a few minutes to converse, you could briefly discuss the Topic for Conversation but take the time to read the scriptures. Thereafter, show him the index of books in the front of the Bible. You could also say: “You will notice that the Bible I have uses language that is easy to understand.” Then show the book and make the offer for the suggested contribution.
5 Another outstanding feature of the New World Translation that will help its reader to get a clear understanding of many scriptures is the 92-page index of Bible words. After having used the Topic for Conversation, you could illustrate its value this way: “There seems to be little peace today even within families. The rising divorce rate is evidence of this. Some married couples do not seem to be able to get along together. But the Bible has valuable counsel on how happiness can be obtained in the home. Note how helpful the index of Bible words is in the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures. Under the subject ‘Husband(s)’ some good Scriptural references are given. Consider what it mentions about a husband and a wife.” (Refer to Ephesians 5:25 and; 1 Peter 3:1.) “This helpful aid can be yours along with the book True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It? They are just $4.50.”
6 Not to be overlooked are the valuable features found in the appendix of the New World Translation. The table of the books of the Bible is also very useful and provides interesting facts regarding each book​—the writer, the place where it was written, when writing was completed, and the time period covered.
7 Of course, to present the Bible effectively requires preparation. Take a few minutes to consider what feature of the New World Translation you could highlight to show its practical value. Speak with sincerity and conviction and help others to benefit from the powerful influence it can have on their lives.

