VOL. XVI. JULY 15, 1895. No. 14. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items: Missionary Envelopes, 

Tracts, etc 162 

Views from the Tower 163 

Consolation 165 

Walk by this Rule 167 

Bible Study: Journeying to Canaan 168 

Bible Study: The Report of the Spies 169 

Encouraging Letters 170 

page 162 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS "-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. 

Our supply of envelopes is exhausted, until our new lot shall come 
to hand; which will not probably be before Aug. 15. Orders received 
meantime will be filled in rotation. Prices, postpaid by us, are as follows: 
100 for 25 cents, 1000 for $2.00. We recommend the use of these 
as a good service of the truth. They should be going constantly in 
every direction. They are seen and read by postal employees, carriers, 
and often by the households as well as by the friends to whom they are 
addressed. 



REMEMBER YOUR TRACT PRIVILEGES. 

We now have a supply of almost all the back numbers of the Old 
Theology Tracts except No. 3, and it will be reprinted soon. All TOWER 
subscribers are privileged to order these freely, without charge, for gratuitous 
circulation. In ordering state how many you can use judiciously. 
Give only one or at most two tracts to one person at one time. More 
are less likely to have attention. 



DAY BY DAY. 

"Make a fence of trust around to-day, 



Fill the space with loving work and therein stay. 
Look not through the shelt'ring bars upon to-morrow; 
God will help thee bear what comes of joy or sorrow. 



R1839 :page 162 

A WISE WORLDLY CONCLUSION. 

The Arkansas Baptist relates the following: "Three or four traveling 
men were stopping for a day and night in an Arkansas village, and 
having heard that a revival was going on, intended going to it at 
night; but after playing checkers for three hours in the afternoon with 
the preacher who was conducting the meeting, they concluded his ministry 
would do them no good. This is no idle tale, but a record of the 
facts." 



R1838 :page 163 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



ONE of the notable events of our day was the recent 

peace-demonstration on the occasion of the opening 

of the Baltic canal. The canal was projected by the grandfather 

of the present German Emperor and begun by his 

father; and, as intended, it will doubtless be of great benefit 

to Germany's commerce as well as to her navy. The German 

Emperor determined to make the occasion of its opening 

a forcible reminder of the blessings of peace on earth 

and good will toward men, and invited all the great governments 

of "Christendom," and Turkey as well, to send 

to it their representative battle-ships or peace-makers. 

They came: over a hundred of the most awful engines 
of war; and they made, as they steamed through the canal, the 
most remarkable exhibition of the kind ever witnessed on 
earth. The cost of the vessels and their armament represented 
hundreds of millions of dollars; and one salute fired 
simultaneously by 3,500 guns consumed in an instant thousands 
of dollars' worth of powder, and produced, as it were, 
a voice of mighty thunder such as never before was heard. 
Of course, while telling them that this was a peace-demonstration, 
the Emperor feasted his guests royally. He could 
well afford to do so, for the people would foot the bill, 
which in this case is stated to have been in round figures 
$2,000,000. 

As the eye of the mind beholds the pageant we inquire 
—Who are these Christian nations? And for what purpose 
have they built these floating fortresses? Are they to defend 
civilization and Christianity from barbarous foes seeking 
their destruction? No; the barbarian savages never 
dreamed of such death-dealing devices. It was not the fear 



of these that led to the construction of these vessels. Perhaps 
there once were such savages, and mayhap these are 
the vessels by which they were conquered long ago, and 
therefore they are symbols of peace and good will toward 
civilized man? No; not one vessel in the entire 
number had ever been in battle: they were all new vessels 
of the most modern type. Vessels launched ten years ago 
would be too antiquated for such a naval parade; indeed 
would be almost useless in warfare against one of these modern 
vessels. Why then were hundreds of millions spent 
in building these vessels? and why are other millions spent 
annually in keeping them manned, armed and provisioned 
for war? 

Ah! the only answer is that the name Christian, as 
applied to nations, is a mistake. Although Christianity has 
done much for the nations of Europe and America— bringing 
them civilization and a measure of liberty and some 
ideas of justice and decency— it has not converted them as 
a whole, nor more than a small minority. To many it has 
merely brought enlarged ambitions of selfishness which are 
scarcely restrained by public weal and sentiment. The nations 
have not been converted from principles of selfishness 
to principles of love: and none know this better than the 
rulers. They know that they dare not trust each other— 
that if one got much more power than the other, so that she 
dared to do it with impunity, she would not hesitate to 
steal away their liberties for her own gain; "might would 
make right." Hence it is a race for power, for self-defence 
against each other. Such a peace evidently rests upon a 
poor foundation. 

How much the world needs a general government, a 
good government, a righteous government, a paternal government, 
that would really "speak peace to the nations" 
and bid them spend time and treasure and blood in a nobler 
cause than destroying one another financially and literally. 
Six thousand years of experience proves that such a government 
cannot be organized amongst the fallen sons of Adam. 
For even though a few might be found able and willing to 

R1838 : page 164 

do their best, their efforts would be handicapped by others 
seeking to do their worst while deceiving the people and 
posing before them as patriots. And even the best intentioned 
would be in great danger of being corrupted by 
power. 

But as God's people read the great, divine plan of the 
ages they see that God has for centuries been selecting and 
preparing, under Christ their head, a peculiar people, "a royal 
priesthood," who, with Christ their Chief Priest, shall shortly 
rule and bless and help up, out of sin, degradation and 
death, all the families of earth. They pray for that promised 
Kingdom of God— "Thy kingdom come, thy will be 
done in earth as it is in heaven." They realize that when 
God's Kingdom is in control, the present implements of 
human destruction will be of no further value, and human 



energies will be otherwise invested. But first the great battle 
of the Great Day of God Almighty must be fought. The 
nations realize faintly, even while they cry, "Peace, peace," 
that a conflict impends: and hence in the language of 
Scripture the weak are saying, "I am strong." (Joel 3:10.) 
This is the real meaning of the naval display at Kiel. The 
nations desire to impress each other with their strength, 
hoping thus to put off the evil day of war. 

But the world in general is not deceived by the cries 
of Peace! Peace! Even though they do not see the glorious 
outcome as we see it, they see the "battle," the "irrepressible 
conflict," and know the real meaning of the recent 
peace-demonstration. We quote from the London Spectator 
as follows:— 

"And yet the irony of the situation is very keen. It 
was a grand festival of peace and constructive industry, but 
its highest glory was the presence of the fleets prepared at 
vast sacrifices of treasure and of energy solely for war and 
for destruction. An ironclad has no meaning, unless it is a 
mighty engine for slaughter. There is but one phrase which 
describes fully the grandeur of that 'peaceful' fleet, and this 
is that it could in a day destroy any port on earth, or sink 
the commercial navies of the world, if gathered before it, 
to the bottom of the sea. And what depths of human hatred 
were concealed under all that fair show of human amity. 
One squadron was French, and its officers were panting to 
avenge on that exultant Emperor the dismemberment of their 
country. Another was Russian, and its Admirals must have 
been conscious that their great foe and rival was the Power 
they were so ostentatiously honoring, and had only the day 
before broken naval rules to compliment the Emperor's 
most persistent and dangerous foe. A third was Austrian, 
whose master has been driven out of the dominion which 
has made the Canal, and jockeyed out of his half -right in 
the province through which the Canal in its entire length 
winds its way. And there were ships from Denmark, from 
which Holstein had been torn by its present owners, and 
from Holland, where every man fears that some day or 
other Germany will, by another conquest, acquire at a blow, 
colonies, commerce, and a transmarine career. The Emperor 
talked of peace, the Admirals hoped for peace, the 
newspapers of the world in chorus declare that it is peace, 
but everything in that show speaks of war just past, or, on 
some day not distant, to arrive. Never was there a ceremonial 
so grand in this world, or one so penetrated through 
and through with the taint of insincerity." 



We noticed not long since that in France some of the 
theaters were presenting scenes from the New Testament. 
Now a "Sacred Opera," Christ, composed by the celebrated 
pianist, Anton Rubinstein, now deceased, is being presented 
at the City Theater of Bremen, Germany. 

The tone is reverent, the building is hung with dark 
drapery, and no applause is permitted. The prologue opens 



with a shepherd scene in which the wondrous star appears 
over the manger. Soon the heavens open and the Annunciation 
angel appears surrounded by a heavenly host and 
declares the Redeemer's birth, when follows the joyful song, 
"Glory to God in the highest, Peace on earth, good will 
toward men." The music changes, a Moorish king and 
retinue appears, then one from the North, and finally a 
third from India. Each sings of his own greatness, but also 
of that longing which the whole world feels for something 
better. The door of the manger opens and the infant 
Jesus with his mother and Joseph are seen in a flood 
of light. 

Then follow scenes in our Savior's life:— his baptism 
at Jordan, by John, who preaches the Kingdom of Heaven 
at hand, and who salutes Jesus as the Lamb of God which 
taketh away the sin of the world; the temptation in the 
wilderness, in which our Lord is represented in white garments, 
while Satan is represented behind him in black garb, 
etc. Scene 3 represents the sermon on the mount. (Matt. 5.) 
As each beatitude falls from the lips of the great 
Teacher, the disciples repeat quietly the word, "Blessed." 
But presently when the hungry clamor for bread, the miracle 
of the loaves and fishes is represented, followed by the 
awakening of the son of the widow of Nain. 

Another scene represents our Lord driving the tradesmen 
and money-changers out of the temple, saying, "My 
house shall be called a house of prayer, but ye have made 
it a den of thieves." The scene shows the buyers, sellers, 
children, etc., in oriental dress, scurrying across the stage 
before the scourge of small cords. Then Caiaphas and the 
Pharisees appear, demanding his authority and taunting 
him. Our Lord's answers are given in dignified form, tone 
and music. 

Then follows the scene of the Last Supper; Gethsemane's 
agony; the trial before Caiaphas, Herod and Pilate; 
the latter represented with great dramatic effect, followed 

R1839 : page 164 

by the dragging away of the Master to execution. The 
crucifixion scene is omitted because the stage is insufficient 
in size. A scene representing Judas' remorse is brought in 
and the whole concludes with a representation of St. Paul 
preaching in bold strains the gospel of the cross of Christ. 

It is truly remarkable that worldly men, we presume 
as a financial speculation, are finding that the common 
people are hungering for the gospel of the Son of God, 
while the preachers of various denominations declare that 
they cannot attract them with grand organs, and singers, 
and free seats, and essays upon science, art, politics, etc., 
which contain but little food for the soul— little of the 

R1839 :page 165 

bread of everlasting life. Thus while the colleges and 
churches are explaining away our Lord's miraculous birth 



and all of his miracles, God finds defenders and mouthpieces 
for his truth, even amongst non-professors. 



The latest development of Protestant union is called 
"The League of Catholic Unity," which, acting along the 
lines laid down in 1888 at the Lambeth (England) Conference, 
sets forth the following four rules as the basis of union: 

"1. The Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments, 
as 'containing all things necessary to salvation,' 
and as being the rule and ultimate standard of faith. 

"2. The Apostles' Creed, as the baptismal symbol, 
and the Nicene Creed, as the sufficient statement of the 
Christian faith. 

"3. The two sacraments ordained by Christ himself: 
baptism and the supper of the Lord, ministered with unfailing 
use of Christ's words of institution, and of the elements 
ordained by him. 

"4. The historic episcopate, locally adapted in the 
methods of its administration to the varying needs of the 
nations and peoples called of God into the unity of his 
Church." 

This league has been joined by quite a number of 
ministers. 



The Coptic Catholic Church of Abysinnia seems disposed 
to unite with the Roman Catholic Church; and the 
pope is supplying money for the establishment of Roman 
Catholic schools among them. 



A splendid specimen of Roman Catholic love for Protestantism, 
the Bible, the American flag and the Public 
School, was given in the great city of Boston, on July 4. 
Boston (like New York and several other large cities in the 
United States) has a large foreign population, and hence 
the Roman Catholics, under the name of the Democratic 
party have had control of the city government for years. 

It is usual for Patriotic orders to celebrate by parade, 
etc., the Nation's birth, and this was done by the Patriotic 
Sons of America and the "American Protective Association," 
unsectarian organizations whose special object is the preservation 
of American liberties, and especially the protection 
of the Public School from the hostile attacks of Romanists. 
The R.C. Board of Aldermen refused permission to 
take along a "float" representing a New England school 
house, and two of their number, knowing the loving and 
liberal spirit of their supporters, prophesied trouble and it 
is believed encouraged it by their utterances, so that their 
expectations were realized. But the A. P. A. people thought 
that they should cling to a shred of liberty on the day of 
its celebration and obtained the Governor's consent and 



that of the Police Commission, which is of his appointment, 
and did parade as intended. 

The parade was to emphasize the value of the public 
schools as nurseries of freedom; and a miniature "Red School 
House," of the pattern general throughout New England, 
led the procession guarded by 300 policemen. It was 
mounted on wheels and drawn by horses covered with American 
colors. At its door stood a man dressed with striped 
pants and starry coat, representing "Uncle Sam," the promoter 
and protector of the public school system. At one 
of its windows stood the Rev. H. F. H. Miller, a Baptist 
minister, with an open Bible before him resting upon an 
American flag; and near him stood Prof. H. H. Lincoln, 
the first and for forty years a school teacher in East Boston. 

The procession got along fairly well until Saratoga 
street was reached, when the mob, which lined the sidewalks 
hooting and using vile and insulting language, grew aggressive. 
The minister and the Bible were the mark for tobacco 
quids and gobs of mud. As the school house was known 
to be the chief objection, the police were massed near it; 
but when the school house and police were past the mob of 
Romanists closed in upon the rear of the procession with 
most foul and insulting language, and women joined in 
spitting upon and striking the marchers. The mob cut off 
the rear of the procession, assaulting it with stones, etc. 
The result was two killed and many wounded severely. Of 
course the decent people of Boston are all hurt by the 
wound given to the fame of their city. 

The lesson is that however much the pope and his cardinals 
and bishops and Protestant ministers may desire unity between 
their system and Protestantism, the fact remains that there is a 
wide gulf of bitter feeling between their people and all the 
institutions of liberty. Poor creatures, they are so blinded 
by priestcraft and superstition that they are scarcely accountable. 
Thank God! the time is not far distant when they shall 
all "come to a knowledge of the truth" under the instruction 
of the "royal priesthood." Then the blind eyes shall 
be opened, and no doubt many will be saved by the Redeemer 
from their present malicious, antichristian, murderous 
spirit, which surely is unfit for any place in or under 
the Kingdom of God's dear Son.— 1 John 3:15. 

While God's consecrated saints should see all this 
clearly, they are to take no part in such parades and battles. 
We have a greater battle and labor: a battle with spiritual 
wickedness and an overcoming of our own carnal tendencies. 
The world will fight its own battles, some on each side, but 
we must wait for the salvation that shall be brought unto us 
at the revelation of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 



R1839 :page 165 
CONSOLATION. 



"Trust in the Lord and do good: so shalt thou dwell in the land, and 
verily thou shalt be fed. Delight thyself also in the Lord; and he shall 
give thee the desires of thy heart. Commit thy way unto the 
Lord; trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass; and he 
shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and 
thy judgment as the noonday. Rest in the Lord and 
wait patiently for him."— Psa. 37:3-7. 

WHILE the Word of God abounds in precepts and 
admonitions, in warnings and instructions, and 
while it lifts high the standard of moral excellence— so high 
that in our weak and fallen condition we cannot attain unto 
it, and in our efforts to do so in the midst of a crooked 
and perverse generation we must of necessity encounter the 

R1839 : page 166 

wrath of all the powers of darkness strongly entrenched in 
the hearts of fallen fellow-men, this same blessed Word 
comes to the faithful children of God in the very midst of 
this battle of life with sweet and refreshing consolation. 

Consolation! What is it? Oh, you who have never enlisted 
under the banner of the cross, you who have never 
made an honest endeavor to withstand the powers of darkness, 
to fight the good fight of faith, to stem the current of 
your own fallen nature's tendencies, or to contend earnestly 
for truth and righteousness in the midst of a crooked and 
perverse generation, what can you know of the sweets of 
divine consolation? It is the balm for wounded spirits on 
the battle fields of time; the cooling draught for fainting 
souls hard pressed by the relentless foe; the soothing caress 
of a loving hand upon the fevered brow of a noble contender 
for truth and righteousness; the gentle whisper of 
hope and courage when the heart and flesh begin to fail- 
that is consolation, divine consolation, the only consolation 
that has any virtue of healing and refreshing in it. But it 
is reserved only for those noble souls who are faithfully 
bearing the burden and heat of the day; while those who 
listlessly drift with the current of the world's favor, and of 
the downward tendencies of the carnal nature, can never 
have an intimation of its sweetness. 

It is to the faithful soldiers of the Lord that the above 
words of the Psalmist are addressed— to the persecuted, 
tempted and tried. Hear them, tempest-tossed and fainting 
souls: they were long ago penned by the Lord's prophet 

R1840 : page 166 

for your edification— "Fret not thyself," but "trust in 
the Lord and do good, so shalt thou dwell in the land, and 
verily thou shalt be fed." How strong is the Lord, how 
wise and good! His promises have never failed to those 
that put their trust in him. We may feel that our efforts 
to be good and to do good are very unproductive, and that 
the opposition from within and without is very strong; but 



it is when we are weak— when we thus realize our own incompetency 

—that we may be "strong in the Lord and in 

the power of his might." Let us endeavor to make straight 

paths for our feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of 

the way, and then lay hold of the Lord's strength to help 

us pursue our course in the narrow way of difficulty and 

trial. The fact that we are weak and lame does not separate 

us from the love and power of God; for "he knoweth 

our frame, he remembereth that we are dust." He knows 

that we have the treasure of the new nature in earthen vessels, 

and therefore it is that, while we strive to overcome, 

we have his proffered sympathy and aid and the imputed 

righteousness of Christ for our all-sufficient covering. "Trust 

in the Lord and do good; so shalt thou dwell in the land; 

and verily thou shalt be fed." Our food and shelter will 

be sure: he will never leave nor forsake his own, but will 

make all things work together for good to them. 

"Delight thyself also in the Lord, and he shall give 
thee the desires of thine heart." This delight in the Lord 
is a still more advanced step in the Christian life. It is a 
blessed thing to learn to trust in the Lord; but it is when 
continued trust and responsive providences have ripened 
into personal acquaintance and fellowship with God that 
we learn to delight in him. Yes, it is when heart answers 
to heart, when pleading prayer brings recognized answers 
of peace, when the divine care and love are specially seen in 
the guidance of our way: in a word, when we come to feel 
that the Father and the Son have so clearly manifested 
themselves to us that we can recognize their abiding presence 
with us. Ah! then it is that we begin to delight ourselves 
in the Lord. Then, however dark may be the way, 
or however heavy may be the storm that rages about us, the 
balm of divine consolation is always there, so that the child 
of God, though often troubled on every side, is not distressed; 
though perplexed, he is never in despair; though 
cast down, he is not destroyed; and though persecuted, he 
is never forsaken. 

To delight thus in the Lord is to have the affections 
centered in him; it is to have the heart in such sympathy 
with righteousness and truth as to see in God the fountain 
of all goodness and truth, the one altogether lovely. The 
Psalmist expresses such an attitude of heart when, personifying 
our Lord Jesus, he said, "I delight to do thy will, 
O my God: yea, thy law is within my heart." And again, 
"O how love I thy law! It is my meditation all the day." 
And again, when he says, "O God, thou art my God; 
early will I seek thee: my soul thirsteth for thee, my flesh 
longeth for thee in a dry and thirsty land where no water 
is. ...Because thy loving kindness is better than life, my 
lips shall praise thee.... My soul shall be satisfied as with 
marrow and fatness, and my mouth shall praise thee with 
joyful lips when I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate 
on thee in the night watches. Because thou hast been 
my help, therefore in the shadow of thy wings will I rejoice. 
My soul followeth hard after thee: thy right hand upholdeth 
me."— Psa. 63. 



Such an experience springs only from the felt consolations 
of divine grace in times of sore and pressing need, 
and however great the afflictions or the trials of faith, patience 
and endurance that lead to such an acquaintance with 
God, there is great cause for rejoicing in them; for 
"E'en sorrow, touched by heaven, grows bright 

With more than rapture's ray, 
As darkness shows us worlds of light 
We never saw by day." 
When the heart has been thus centered in God, it is 
its most natural impulse to commit its way to him. As one 
has beautifully expressed it— 

"We'd rather walk in the dark with God 

Than go alone in the light; 
We'd rather walk by faith with him 
Than go alone by sight." 
And how precious is the promise to those who thus 
learn to trust in the Lord and go on doing good, no matter 
how obstinate or fierce may be the persecution it may excite, 
and who delight in the Lord and confidently commit 
their way to his loving wisdom. Surely they shall have the 

R1840 : page 167 

desires of their heart, and no good thing will he withhold 
from them. Their fervent prayers avail much, and in his 
own good time their righteousness, however misrepresented 
and evil spoken of now, shall be brought forth as the light 
—clear, cloudless and widely manifest; and their judgment, 
the justice and righteousness of their hearts, as the noonday. 
And even while we remain here as aliens and foreigners 
in the enemy's land, verily we shall be fed, both 
with the temporal bread and with the bread of heaven for 
our spiritual sustenance. "Rejoice in the Lord, O ye 
righteous, and give thanks at the remembrance of his 
holiness." 

But the Psalmist adds one more important word of 
counsel to the Lord's beloved children. It is this— "Rest 
in the Lord, and wait patiently for him." Do not make 
the mistake of expecting him to give you the desires of 
your heart at the very instant of your request; to make 
your path peaceful, easy and pleasant as soon as you commit 
your way to him; and at once to bring forth your 
righteousness as the light and your judgment as the noonday. 
He has not promised to do that. Time is necessary 
for the working out of his kind providences in our individual 
affairs; for God works on philosophical principles and 
for lasting and blessed results. So— 

"If not to-day, be thou content, poor heart! 

God's plans, like lilies pure and white, unfold; 
We must not tear the close-shut leaves apart; 
Time will reveal the calyxes of gold." 

This waiting, under severe trial or affliction, will indeed 
be a blessing in disguise, if the soul be rightly exercised 
unto patience, endurance, faith, hope, meekness, long-suffering 
kindness and true Christian fortitude. And it 



will be in the darkness of these waiting seasons that the 
blessed stars of hope will shine the brightest, and the bright 
Morning Star, the harbinger of day, will shed his beams 
into the deepest recesses of our hearts. "They that wait 
upon the Lord," says the Prophet (Isa. 40:31), "shall renew 
their strength; they shall mount up with wings as 
eagles; they shall run and not be weary, and they shall 
walk and not faint." 

Blessed promises! and, to the praise of his abounding 
grace, his saints of the past and present all bear ample testimony 
of their fulfilment. 

"Who need faint while such a river 

Ever flows our thirst to assuage? 
Grace, which, like the Lord, the giver, 

Never fails from age to age." 



R1840 : page 167 
WALK BY THIS RULE. 



"And as many as walk according to this rule, 
peace be on them and mercy."— Gal. 6:16. 

PEACE, rest of mind, tranquility of soul, is the 

happiness that all men crave, yet seek for in vain, 

because they seek it where it cannot be found. God created 

man for his own pleasure (Rev. 4:11; Isa. 43:7) and in his 

own image, so that man's true pleasure, happiness and 

peace should be found only in harmony, fellowship and 

sympathy with his Creator, that thus the fellowship 

of the Creator and the creature might be responsive. He 

wanted that love should respond to love, admiration to admiration, 

virtue to virtue, and grace to grace, in the Creator 

and the creature, as face answers to face in a glass. In 

this natural attitude of the Creator and the creature generous 

benevolence and filial gratitude combine in mutual 

happiness. God is happy in the realization and in the exercise 

of all the noble traits of his glorious character, which 

happiness is enhanced by appreciation of the same on the 

part of his creatures, and by manifestation in them of the 

same qualities and dispositions of mind and heart. And 

likewise man must both realize and exercise the noble endowments 

of his nature and form a character modeled after 

that of his heavenly Father and meeting his approval, if he 

would find that true happiness which consists in the approval 

of his own conscience and of his Creator and Judge, 

in whose favor is life, and "at whose right hand there are 

pleasures forevermore."— Psa. 16:11. 

True, all men have lost much of the original likeness 
of God, but this does not alter the fact that they still crave 
the happiness and peace which can never be found except 
under the natural, original relations to his Creator. No 



matter how deep a man may sink in sin, how far he may 
stray from the path of rectitude, how low and vile he may 
become, he still remembers that he is a man, a member of 
that noble though fallen race which God created in his own 
likeness, and he knows and feels his degradation. He 
knows that he was made for higher and nobler ends than 
those toward which he is ever tending, although he has 

R1841 :page 167 

neither inclination nor desire to strive toward those nobler 
ends, not having the fortitude to resist the inherited and 
long-cultivated bias of his fallen nature. 

In this painful realization of the absence of true happiness 
and peace of mind and heart, men have sought for happiness 
and peace in ways in harmony with the more or less 
depraved tendencies of the fallen nature— in the poor substitutes 
which pride, ambition, strife, rivalry, wealth, fame, 
power, etc., have to offer; but the happiness they find in 
these is only delusive, and at most very short-lived. The 
bubble of success may burst in an instant, and the peace and 
happiness built upon it be utterly wrecked. 

There is no peace, therefore, to any man except in the 
reestablished relationship between himself and his God. 
And since this relationship of sons can only be reestablished 
through Christ, there is no peace to any man out of 
Christ. "There is no peace, saith the Lord, to the wicked." 
(Isa. 48:22.) And "if any man be in Christ, he is a new 
creature; old things have passed away, and behold all 
things have become new" (2 Cor. 5:17): he has "passed 

R1841 :page 168 

from death unto life," and has found the peace which the 
world can neither give nor take away. He realizes himself 
a son and heir of God. And to these justified sons and heirs 
of this age God has not only granted his recognition, but 
also his special favor, in offering to them exceeding great 
and precious promises— to become sons of God on a higher 
plane, and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, his only begotten 
Son, the conditions of which relationship are that we follow 
in his footsteps of sacrifice, even unto death. 

Those who thus covenant with God are begotten of the 
spirit of God, and as many such as are thenceforth led of 
the spirit of God, they are the recognized sons of God 
(Rom. 8:14), while those who fail to recognize, appreciate 
and accept the great favor offered, lose the benefit of their 
reckoned justification in this age. 

It is to these new creatures, begotten and led of the 
spirit of God, that the words of our text are addressed— As 
many such as walk by this rule, peace be on them and 
mercy. The rule referred to is the rule of the new creature 
mentioned in the preceding verse— "For in Christ Jesus 
neither circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, 
but a new creature." Forms and ceremonies are not 
the rule, but the new life itself, the new creature filled with 



the holy spirit of God and led of the spirit. "Walk in 
the spirit," says the Apostle, "and ye shall not fulfil the 
lust of the flesh; for the flesh lusteth against the spirit, and 
the spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary the one 
to the other."-Gal. 5:16,17. 

To as many as walk by this rule are promised peace and 
mercy— mercy, because our best efforts to walk after the 
leading of the holy spirit will be imperfect; but God who 
judges our heart's desires and efforts is merciful and will 
not exact from us more than we are able to perform. And 
therefore, notwithstanding our lameness and halting steps 
in following the lead of the spirit, he gives his blessed peace 
to all them that walk by this rule— the rule of the holy 
spirit, the rule of the new creature. 

Now if any man be in Christ, a new creature, he has 
put away the old man— the carnal nature, which is enmity 
against God and is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed 
can be— with all his evil deeds, which the Apostle thus 
enumerates (Gal. 5:19-21), "Now the works of the flesh 
[the carnal nature] are manifest, which are these: Adultery, 
fornication, uncleanness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, 
emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, 
murders, drunkenness, revellings and such like, of the which 
I tell you before, as I have also told you in time past, that 
they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom 
of God." 

While we might wonder that the Apostle, in addressing 
the saints, should make mention of the grosser forms of sin 
which could only be predicated of those who have fallen 
from grace, when we consider, we see that it would not 
have done to leave these out, because they belong to the 
category of evils which are opposed to the spirit of God, 
and can have no place in his Kingdom. Then, again, they 
are the abominable ends to which the lesser evils inevitably 
tend, as the nature of sin is always progressive. The Apostle 
gives fair warning that those who do such things, no 
matter how loud may be their professions, have no inheritance 
in the Kingdom of God; and therefore they have no 
right to the fellowship of the saints upon whom, and the 
cause of Christ in general, they bring only disgrace. 

But the effect of the rule of the spirit, in all those who 
are truly new creatures, begotten of God and led of his 
spirit, is very differently described by the Apostle. He says, 
"But the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, 
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against 
such there is no law. And they that are Christ's have 
crucified the flesh with the affections and desires." If we 
are living according to the rule of the new nature, following 
the leading of the spirit of God, then we must have these 
fruits in some measure, even from the very start of our Christian 
experience; and if we are following on to know the 
Lord and to walk in the spirit, these fruits are surely growing 
and becoming more and more manifest to all with whom 
we are associated. 

If those who are in Christ would observe this principle, 
and deal with each other as new creatures, much discord 



would be avoided; for the motives and endeavors of the 
"new creature" would be considered, and not the frailties 
or mistakes of the "earthen vessel." "Let us follow the 
things that make for peace."— Rom. 14:19; 1 Thes. 5:13. 



R1841 :page 168 
JOURNEYING TO CANAAN. 
-JULY 28, NUM. 10:29-36.- 



Golden Text— "Come thou with us and we will do thee 
good; for the Lord hath spoken good concerning Israel." 

THERE are two phases of Israel's typical character; 

one in connection with the tabernacle service, in 

which the whole camp of Israel represents the world, and 

in which the priesthood, Aaron and his sons, and the tabernacle 

service of sacrifices, etc., represent Christ and the 

Church and the great work of atonement for the sins of the 

world. The other phase of its typical character is that in 

which the whole nation, regarded as the chosen people of 

God, represent God's chosen people of the Gospel age and 

their journey, under the divine direction and leading, from 

the bondage of sin into the blessed Canaan rest of justification 

by faith in Christ, which is also a foretaste of that still 

more glorious rest that remains for the people of God beyond 

the Jordan of death, in the heavenly Canaan, whence 

all the hosts of sin will have been forever expelled. 

To this latter phase of the type the Apostle Paul refers 
in his letter to the Hebrews (3:8-19; 4:1,2). Here the 
Church is warned against failure to enter into the heavenly 
Canaan, by the example of fleshly Israel in its wayward 
course from Egypt to Canaan; and the fact is pointed out 
that a whole generation of them forfeited that privilege and 
died in the wilderness, because of unbelief and departing 
from the ways of God. In unbelief, they murmured against 
the divine leading, and their carcasses fell in the wilderness. 

R1841 :page 169 

Then he adds, "Take heed, brethren, lest there be 

in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from 

the living God."-Heb. 3:12. 

While he speaks (Heb. 4:9) of the rest that remaineth 
for the people of God, referring to the final rest, the 
heavenly Canaan, the glorious spiritual condition beyond 
the vail of the flesh, he also speaks of a present rest— the 
blessed foretaste of the rest that remaineth in the heavenly 
Canaan, the rest of faith, saying,— "For we which have 
believed do enter into rest."— Heb. 4:3. 

In this view of the type, let us examine it, that we may 
see the more clearly our own blessed privileges and our responsibilities 
on the higher plane of the spiritual Israel of 



God; for though we who have believed do enter into the 

Canaan rest of faith now (4:3), our course with reference 

to the rest that remaineth for the people of God (4:1) 

—the heavenly Canaan— is still aptly represented, as the 

Apostle Paul shows, by the wilderness journey and its wonderful 

divine leading. Think of it! There was a numerous 

host of men, women and children suddenly emancipated 

from four hundred years of bondage, with only a few days' 

preparation and but a scanty outfit, traveling through a 

barren, trackless wilderness toward an unknown land promised 

to their fathers. There were hostile nations about them, 

and many privations and dangers to be expected by the 

way. But what had they to fear? Had not the God of 

heaven promised to go before them and to lead them all 

the way? 

Just so it is with the Church. The true Church is the 
Church in the wilderness (Rev. 12:6,14; Luke 15:4; Hos. 2:14; 
Isa. 51:3; Cant. 8:5)— separate from the world, 
and under the divine protection and guidance. It is 
a company of widely varied degrees of growth and development 
in the spiritual life. There are babes in Christ and 
a host of those more or less slowly approaching maturity. 
And God is leading us all through the trackless wilderness 
of this present evil world. He is our shield and our guide, 
our glory and our defence; and it is our part to faithfully, 

R1842 : page 169 

follow where he points the way. Our bread and our water 
are sure, and our joy is to realize that his presence is in 
our midst, and that he is able to bring us to the promised 
inheritance. Let us follow his leading, and not be wayward, 
as was the faithless generation which fell in the 
wilderness. 

Referring again to the type, and comparing our own 
experiences, we see that the Lord pursues much the same 
methods with his people now as then. The leading of the 
Lord is by the way of that experience and discipline 
which tend to develop character. And to such discipline 
every "Israelite indeed" will faithfully submit, while those 
who will not do so are thereby proved unworthy of the 
promised inheritance. Let us not be of that unworthy 
class, but humbly and patiently seek to profit by the experiences, 
rough though they be, and by all the discipline and 
teaching so necessary to fit us for the glorious inheritance 
of the saints in light.— Col. 1:12. 



R1842:page 169 

THE REPORT OF THE SPIES. 

-AUG. 4, NUM. 13:17-20,23-33.- 

Golden Text— "The Lord is with us; fear them not."— Num. 14:9. 



STILL bearing in mind the typical character of Israel's 

experiences; that the consecrated Gospel 

Church is her antitype; and St. Paul's statement (1 Cor. 10:11) 

that these things are written for our admonition, let 

us consider the important lessons of the scrap of history 

before us. In reading the full account, included in Num. 13:14; 

Deut. 1:1,2,19-36, several thoughts are brought 

forcibly to our attention; viz., (1) That "without faith it 

is impossible to please God." (2) That the faith which 

God expects to find in us is a reasonable faith, having for 

its basis a good, solid foundation justifying its exercise. 

(3) That treason against God will not go unpunished. 

(4) That God hears and answers intercessory prayer on 
behalf of his people, except in the one case of treason. 

(5) That fidelity to the truth will in due time be gloriously 
rewarded, though for a long time the faithful may suffer to 
some extent on account of the unfaithful. 

Let us consider the illustration of these principles. 
God gave to Israel abundant evidence of his love and 
power and of his special favor toward them above all the 
families of the earth. With a mighty hand and an outstretched 
arm he brought them out of Egypt, across the 
Red sea, fed them with manna in the wilderness, caused 
the barren rock to bring forth refreshing waters, gave them 
his law amidst the inspiring scenes at Sinai and led them 
through the desert with the pillar of cloud and of fire, the 
emblems of his presence. 

When they came to the borders of the promised land 
their faith was put to the test by the reports of the spies and 
their conflicting counsel as to the ability of Israel to go up 
as the Lord commanded and possess the land. Ten of the 
twelve discouraged the undertaking and counselled disobedience 
to the divine command, while the other two, with 
Moses, reminding the people of the fact that the Lord in 
whom they had abundant reason to trust would go with 
them, counselled that they go up immediately and possess 
the land, and that, with the Lord on their side, they were 
abundantly able. The latter was the language of faith and 
obedience; the former of cowardice and rebellion. 

To the evil counsel the people hearkened and became 
mutinous against Moses and the faithful spies, declared 
their purpose to return to Egypt, and were about to stone 
these faithful ones to death and choose from among themselves 
a leader to guide them back to the land from which 
God had delivered them. --Num. 14:1-4,10. 

Just here God interfered on behalf of his servants, and 
declared his purpose against the disloyal hosts of Israel, 
saying to Moses, "I will smite them with the pestilence 
and disinherit them, and will make of thee a greater nation 
and mightier than they." (14:12.) What a suggestion of 
personal honor and preferment was this to Moses— that his 
own posterity should inherit the blessing, instead of this rebellious 
host. And then it would relieve him at once 
of all the labor and care and weariness of leading, instructing 
and judging this people, and permit him to spend the 



remainder of his days in the tranquility of domestic life. 
Such a course, too, on the Lord's part would have been 
entirely consistent with his plan and perfectly just; yet for 
the time it would have been misunderstood by the world at 
large; for the attention of all the nations had been attracted 
to the wonderful power of Israel's God, and in 
such a case they would be ready to take up a reproach against 
him and say that his power had failed and that he was unable 
to fully accomplish the deliverance of his people. 

But Moses was more mindful of the Lord's honor 
than of his own. "And Moses said unto the Lord, Then 

R1842 : page 170 

the Egyptians will hear it,. ..and they will tell it 

to the inhabitants of this land; for they have heard that thou 

Lord art among this people.... Now if thou shalt 

kill this people as one man, then the nations which have 

heard the fame of thee will speak, saying, Because the Lord 

was not able to bring this people into the land which he 

sware unto them, therefore he hath slain them in the wilderness. 

How beautiful this self-forgetfulness in its zeal for 

God, this humility and patient endurance and the loving 

spirit that could so tenderly pray for the wayward and even 

mutinous hosts that conspired against his life! What a lesson 

is here for every one filling a responsible position in the 

body of Christ! 

But mark how the faithful man of God frames his petition 
in harmony with God's law. He does not ask that 
the Lord might clear the guilty, persistently wilful sinners, 
contrary to his law, but that only so far as might be consistent 
with his just and holy law he would pardon the iniquity 
of his people as he had done in the past, and not utterly 
consume them in his just wrath. Hear him: "And now I 
beseech thee, let the power of my Lord be great, according 
as thou hast spoken, saying, The Lord is long-suffering, and 
of great mercy, forgiving iniquity and transgression, and by no 
means clearing the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the fathers 
upon the children unto the third and fourth generation. 
Pardon, I beseech thee, the iniquity of this people according 
unto the greatness of thy mercy, and as thou hast forgiven 
this people from Egypt even until now."— Num. 14:17-20. 

Now mark the answer— "And the Lord said, I have 
pardoned according to thy word"— according to the word 
of his own holy law, whose promise of mercy to the erring 
(though not to wilful, determined sinners) Moses had pleaded 
on behalf of Israel. This mercy could be extended to 
the young, but not to the adults who were inexcusable; and 
this was now the tenth time they had rebelled against the 
Lord, showing their hearts strongly set to do evil. In this 
they were a type of a class of wilful sinners in this still 
more favored Gospel age who, having been once enlightened, 
etc., nevertheless, afterward prove disloyal to God 
and come under condemnation to the second death. 

The Lord told Moses and Aaron to say to them, "As 
truly as I live, saith the Lord, as ye have spoken in mine 



ears, so will I do to you. Your carcases shall fall in this 
wilderness;. ..but your little ones, which ye said should 
be a prey, them will I bring in, and they shall know the 
land which ye have despised."— Num. 14:28-33;l-4. 

Here was a type of the value of intercessory prayer on 
behalf of those who sin not unto death. (1 John 5:16.) 
Let us bear in mind this privilege and duty of intercessory 
prayer for all such, and for our encouragement let us remember 
God's dealings with his faithful ones of old. And 
let us beware of any thing approaching to disloyalty to 
God— of any disposition to rebel against him and return to 
Egypt, the world; and also of that lack of faith which indicates 
a serious lack of appreciation of all of God's favors 
and leading in the past and which therefore fails to trust 
him for the future. 

Beloved, the Lord has led us in the past by a way we 
knew not. It has not always been an easy way, but it has 
always been a safe way, a profitable way though often a 
rough and thorny one. True, it has been a way of privation, 
a lonely, wilderness way, but it has been good for that 
discipline and training so necessary to fit us for the greater 
blessings of the Canaan beyond. And has not the glory 
of the divine presence and favor been sufficient to compensate 
for all the barrenness of the wilderness way? Ah, yes! 
we hear you say; and our hearts respond, Amen! 

"Oh, what are all earth's gilded toys 

Compared with heaven's eternal joys? 

Or even to the feast now spread 

For pilgrims through the desert led? 

Oh, sweeter far the wilderness, 

With all its bleak, wild barrenness, 

Than all the city's pomp and pride 

Without our heavenly Friend and Guide. 

Its manna is a foretaste sweet 

Of heavenly bounty all complete; 

Its cloudy pillar, guiding light, 

Are earnests of the future bright." 
Let us keep the wilderness way and rejoice as we go. 
See Poems and Hymns of Dawn, p. 57. 



R1843 : page 170 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BROTHER:— I enclose report and order for more 
books. The small-pox scare is about over, and I am again 
taking orders— nearly as many orders for sets as for single 
copies. 

To-day I have been confined to the house, and a Seventh 
Day Adventist has been with me nearly all day, talking 
on the plan of the ages and reading the DAWNS. He 
can find nothing in the DAWN to object to, and he is now 



reading the TOWER, of Nov. 1-15, '94, which I think will 
clear him on the subject of the Law. I have met 
him often, and we have had many talks and prayers 
together. 

I placed several DAWNS in the East End when I first 
came here, and a group of six now meets once a week at a 
private house for prayer and the reading of the DAWNS. 
Pray for us, that we may all remain faithful and do all the 
Lord would have us do. 

Yours in the Lord's service, WM. T. McCLAIN. 

[This city in Mississippi was threatened with small-pox 
and cut off from communication with other cities. The colporteur 
was unable to get away and the people were too excited 
to be canvassed for DAWN; so he sought out some who had 
already purchased and read, started a meeting and introduced 
the WATCH TOWER. God is ready and willing to make all 
things work together for good to his people, if they are but 
willing, obedient and faith full.— Editor.] 



page 170 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-We are unable to colporteur 
to-day owing to the inclement state of the weather, and I 
take this opportunity to write you. 

I heartily thank you for the concern you seem to have 
for me, and also for the help and encouragement that you 
have given me in the past. My brother, you do not know 
how anxious I am to serve the Lord in an acceptable manner. 
I realize that the Lord has been very gracious in 
leading me out of Babylon; and the fact that I was glad 
to withdraw from the Presbyterian church and the Y.M.C.A. 
shows that my love for the truth is pure and that I 
greatly appreciate the call to run for the glorious prize that 
is to be rewarded to the Church of Christ. I believe I 
know now what consecration is, and daily I strive to be 

page 171 

an overcomer— to please the Lord in all things. I remember 
that it is one thing to be called, but quite another thing 
to be chosen. The Lord says— "To him that overcometh 
will I grant to sit with me in my throne." It is the faithful 
overcomer who is chosen. And then I want to be 
more zealous in the Lord's work— in disseminating the 
truth. I realize that now is the time to work, because the 
dark night is fast approaching when no man can work. 
Your Brother in Christ, WM. P. CAUSER. 



R1843 :page 171 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Many thanks for your kind and 
welcome letter. It is always so refreshing to my soul to 



receive a letter from the office. 

Well, praise the Lord! He has yet his people, filled 
with his spirit of love and peace, left in the world, though 
they are but few. Then it is a comfort to know that one 
is not entirely alone yet; and I am so apt to think so, sometimes, 
when I look around me and find only such a little 
handful who care to walk not after the flesh, but after the 
spirit— so few who want to be fully the Lord's and to follow 
the Lamb whithersoever he goeth, in the narrow way 
to life; so few trusting in the great and glorious promises 
of God, or believing in so great and blessed salvation as 
we do. 

I am glad that the Lord has not left his children in 
darkness concerning his plan, but has made everything so 
plain for us, even informing us of the appointed times and 
seasons for the accomplishment of the different features of his 
wonderful plan. It would indeed be a gloomy thing for us, 
if God had left us entirely in uncertainty and darkness now, 
so we could see nothing of the impending great events, the 
time of trouble, the harvest work, the Lord's presence and 
the soon establishment of his Kingdom, "the restitution of 
all things spoken," the Jewish question, and all these important 
truths now so clearly seen and so much appreciated 
by God's saints. I am glad we are yet in the path that is 
shining more and more for the just and the faithful children 
of God, being led by his spirit to see and understand 
the promised "things to come." 

In answer to your inquiry about the number of Danish 
DAWNS disposed of in Denmark up to date, I am pleased 
to say that five hundred of the books are already among 
the Danes, most of them in good hands, I believe. The 
English lot is nearly all sold; but as yet I have sold only a 
few single copies of the German, and about half a dozen 
of the Swedish translations. 

The Swedish brother here, Bro. Holm, would be very 
happy to engage in the work, but is hindered now; he will 
write you a letter soon. The Danish brother, who I mentioned 
to you was canvassing around in his neighborhood, 
has opened his house for meetings where the truth can be 
freely proclaimed by voice. I was there on Easter Sunday, 
and about twenty intelligent people were present to listen 
to the discourse on the plan of the ages. Many questions 
were asked and answered. 

My new-found brother in the Lord is daily growing 
in love and knowledge of the truth. He has been with me 
two weeks now, canvassing. 

Wishing you all an abundant measure of the favor and 
blessing of God, I am 

Yours in Christ, JOSEPH S. WINTER. 

[This is the Brother mentioned in our last issue, laboring 
as Colporteur in Denmark.] 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I went up to Wesson on Sunday, 
and talked on the Scriptures to a little gathering there. 



Had a good delivery of DAWNS on Monday. What a stir 
the books have made there! Some oppose it very bitterly, 
while others defend it fervently. Some are searching it just 
to find something to criticize, and they accuse it falsely of 
many things, but their accusations do not agree. Even 
this I believe results in good, for the few who defend it 
read it with the more care. God is able to make the wrath 
of men to praise him. One brother said that he had heard 
much against it, and read it carefully to find the statements 
attributed to it, but he read it through without finding them. 
He said it cost him a few cents, but he would not take five 
dollars for it. 

In love and haste, H. W. DEMING. 

[Yes ! the truth is a sword in the present harvest, as it 
was in the Jewish harvest. (Matt. 10:34.) As the Apostle 
declares, it is either "A savor of life unto life [tending toward 
life eternal], or of death unto death [tending in some 
toward the second death, as they array themselves, in prejudice, 
in opposition to the truth]." 

We are pleased to see the colporteurs growing more 
earnest and careful, not only to plant the truth, but to water 
it.-EDITOR.] 



DEAR BROTHER:-Brother McPhail's visit has stirred 
up the people of our little village more than anything else 
has done for years. Both believers and infidels say, 
"What new doctrine is this? This restitution is something 
we have never heard of." Although we have been talking 
about this truth and distributing tracts and lending TOWERS 
and DAWNS for years, they do not seem to grasp the idea 
until they receive an object lesson such as the chart is capable 
of giving. One infidel neighbor, who attended one 
of Brother McPhail's meetings, was deeply impressed. At 
the close of the meeting he asked a very reasonable question, 
and our good brother answered it satisfactorily to all present. 
Previous to that he could not be induced to read 
anything but Ingersoll; but now he is investigating the 
truths contained in the first volume of DAWN. May the 
Lord, by his wondrous truth, open the blind eyes! 

The Church here also has been awakened to renewed 
energy and closer fellowship as a result of our dear brother's 
visit and ministry. Much of the misunderstanding has 
been removed, for some existed as a result of early training 
and preconceived notions. A neighbor, who is an unbeliever, 
kindly offered us the use of a vacant room in his 
house in which to meet for worship and study of the Word, 
and we meet once a week. 

Our desire is to keep close to Christ and let him lead 
us in all things, and to grow in grace and knowledge of the 
truth. Of course we are misjudged and evil spoken of by 
some; but we expect that; and we are endeavoring by 
his grace to show the true spirit of Christian love toward 
all. May the good Lord help us to stand in this evil day 
against all the wiles of the enemy! 



I must tell you of a remark that was made before 
Brother McPhail reached us. One of the brethren was 
speaking of his coming to hold some meetings to some 
parties, and they replied that they presumed he was like all 
other preachers— that he would hold a few meetings, take 
up a collection at every meeting, get all the money he 
could, and then leave the village. But to their surprise the 
brother came quietly, without any pomp or show, held four 
good meetings, and went as quietly as he came, without 
even mentioning money, and left an influence which no 
other man has ever left. And they do not know what to 

R1843 : page 172 

make of it. We thank the dear Lord for sending him to us 
to help us; and I take the liberty to tender to you, on 
behalf of the Church here, our thanks for the part you have 
had in this matter of sending the brother here. We hope 
that he may find it convenient to come again. 
I send greeting on behalf of the Church. 
Yours in the one hope, JOHN N. LATHWELL. 



page 172 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Herewith is a letter from 
Brother James A. Church, which nearly explains itself. I 
need only add that Mrs. Church is a daughter of a Presbyterian 
minister to whom (Dec. 27, '87) I sent DAWN, VOL. 
I., and (Apr. 27, '89) VOL. II. Some portions of the letter, 
underlined with my blue pencil, are of general interest, and 
I would suggest that they be printed. 

Mr. W. M. Wright. Dear Sir:-You will probably 
be surprised to receive a line from me a stranger, but the 
matter will explain itself as you read. 

You probably remember that some years ago you gave 
my wife's father the first two volumes of M. DAWNS. How 
long they laid in his library, I do not know, but about five 
years ago my wife, while at home on a visit, saw the books 
and became interested. 

When we took God's Book and drew our theology from 
it instead of man's teachings, we find that now we have discarded 
all the theology that we were brought up on except 
the Ransom; and how different that is as set forth in the 
DAWNS and TOWERS from the limited and emasculated doctrine 
as taught in the theology of the churches. 

I write to let you know the results (or some of them), 
for it is sometimes a pleasure to find after many days the 
result of the bread cast on the waters; and it is an encouragement 
that if one only sows the seed that it will 
spring up somewhere, though perhaps not at the point we 
intended and hoped to reach. I know that we would like 
much to hear from some of the seed we have scattered since 
we made up our minds on this subject. Some fruit (a very 
little) we can see, but with the majority it is all a matter of 



faith as to how it germinates or where. Fortunately we are 
not held responsible for the fruits, all our part is to do the 
present duty and sow the seed, and leave the results with the 
Master. 

Our old associates in the church regard any one that 
has cast off human tradition as of course gone to the bad, 
and their reports as to our views and belief are not much 
to be relied on, for they class all that do not accept tradition 
as astrays and out-casts. We would not for the world 
go back to the views that we were brought up on. I wonder 
that Christian people can be so blinded by their prejudices 
that they will not read or examine the subjects. If 
they did, and took the teachings of the Bible, I cannot see 
how they could escape coming to our conclusion. 

Very truly yours, JAMES A. CHURCH. 

Another brother has written me, among other matters, 
the following commendable sentiments:— 

"My desire is to make the things of the 'Kingdom' 
more and more my care, that I may appreciate more clearly 
the blessings coming to all in it, and to be infused more 
and more with earnestness in making my calling and election 
sure. 

"Thank God, his plan is so consummately arranged 
that in due time it will be fully wrought out without the 
jarring of one imperfection in the agents he commits it to. 
Corruption, incapacity, ignorance, envy, strife and every 
form of sin and imperfection may mar present man-made 
plans, teaching all the exceeding evil of evil; but when the 
fulness of time has come, God's elect, selected because 
they loved righteousness and hated wickedness during the 
time iniquity abounded, will come on the scene and put an 
end to the troubles from which no man could escape, if God, 
even the Most High, did not thus provide a Savior. 

"Thus holding, and, as we can, proclaiming God's 
purposes in Jesus, and using all diligence to add to faith, 
virtue, to virtue, knowledge, to knowledge, temperance, to 
temperance, patience, to patience, godliness, to godliness, 
love, we may know that we will gain an abundant entrance 
into the Kingdom. 

"This course will naturally separate us from those relying 
on, and working to maintain, present governments, 
thinking them to be of God, and our views to be erratic 
and anarchistic; and the more they affiliate with present 
kingdoms, and try to bolster up their waning powers, and, 
added to this, the more they understand the trend of our 
faith, the more surely we must become unpopular." 

Your fellow servant, W. M. WRIGHT. 



DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-It is with 
great pleasure that I am trying in my weak way to do what 
I can to serve my Master, as I deem it my duty to do. I 
have been holding meetings every Sunday for nearly two 
months, though the attendance is somewhat small; but this 
is because the locality is thinly settled. I can say that the 



people seem to take great interest and that these doctrines, 
although new to them, they find when rightly administered 
are old and reliable. I tendered them my services free of 
charge, if they were willing to spare the time to come and 
listen, although it is quite a task for me to walk five miles 
and back as I do every Sunday and I am getting quite old 
and crippled somewhat with rheumatism; yet I thank God 
that I am able to this much. Pray for me, that I may be 
able at all times to do my Master's will, and that though the 
road be rugged and steep I may have the strength and ability 
to climb to the top. 

Enclosed you will find a small order for DAWNS. I 
could not have succeeded in getting any one to subscribe, 
had I not first got them interested. I think before long 
nearly all in the neighborhood will have a set. 

Yours in Christ, PETER HEBERT. 



R1843 : page 172 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Please send as soon as 
possible the Plan of the Ages Wall Chart. Brother Draper 
wishes to give a lecture on the Chart before going home. 
I wish you could have seen him yesterday, as he was looking 
it over with my husband and myself. Tears would fill 
his eyes and his face light up with a deeper appreciation of 
God's love and his plan for the Church. It is truly grand! 

Some of the people here say of us as a little band, the 
reason they live such good, pure lives is, they want to reign 
over some one. Is not that encouraging? I tell you this 
to let you see how we are holding up the banner of Christ. 
Praise God for his spirit! It seems strange that back of all 
their treatment of us they look to us to live a better life 
than other professing Christians; and I am very glad of it, for 
it makes us stronger. We long to hear some voice other 
than our own proclaiming the truth, and would be glad of 
a visit from one of the brethren sent out by the Tract Society. 

Yours in the truth, MRS. S. J. PORTER. 

[Yes; surely we who have a knowledge of God's great 
plan should also be "partakers of his holiness," if we partake 
at all of the spirit of the Truth: and "If any man 
have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his." "What 
manner of persons ought we to be in all holy living and 
godliness. "--EDITOR.] 



page 173 
