Personal and Family Bible Study Are Vital!
 1. What special concern does the Governing Body have for us at this time, and why so?
1 As in the first century, the Governing Body has deep concern for the welfare of Jehovah’s people. (Acts 15:6, 28) As the dark clouds of the great tribulation draw closer, it is vital that every Kingdom publisher have a solid relationship with Jehovah. How will you use the time previously allocated to the Congregation Book Study? All are encouraged to use this time for family worship. Wise use of this time will permit us to dig deeper into God’s inspired Word and draw from its life-giving waters.​—Ps. 1:1-3; Rom. 11:33, 34.
 2. How might our personal family worship evening be arranged?
2 Family Worship Evening: Family heads are encouraged to shoulder their responsibility before Jehovah to ensure that a meaningful, regular program of family Bible study is followed. (Deut. 6:6, 7) Single brothers and sisters with no family responsibilities will be able to use this time for personal Bible study and research. It is vital for all of us to ‘buy out the opportune time’ for study and meditation in order to maintain the spiritual strength needed in the face of ‘wicked days.’​—Eph. 5:15, 16.
3, 4. What suggestions are offered as to material that we may use, and with what focus in mind?
3 What to Consider: The Watch Tower Publications Index or Watchtower Library on CD-ROM can help you locate information that will make your Bible study periods a delight. Families may consider articles from The Watchtower, such as the regular features “Keys to Family Happiness,” “Teach Your Children,” and “For Our Young People.” Also, Awake! contains the “Young People Ask” series and fascinating articles about the wonders of creation.
4 Unhurried Bible reading can impress godly principles and lessons on the minds and hearts of all in the family. (Heb. 4:12) On other occasions, you might watch and discuss one of the videos produced by the organization. There is ample opportunity for ingenuity and creativity. Why not ask your family members what they would enjoy?
 5. Why is personal and family Bible study so important in our life now?
5 Why Important Now: Strengthening our spirituality will prepare us to “stand firm and see the salvation of Jehovah.” (Ex. 14:13) Parents need divine guidance for raising children “in among a crooked and twisted generation.” (Phil. 2:15) Children need help to deal with the deteriorating moral climate in schools today. (Prov. 22:3, 6) Couples do well to strengthen their “threefold cord” with Jehovah. (Eccl. 4:12) Let us, then, make wise use of the time remaining to build ourselves up on our “most holy faith”!​—Jude 20.

