Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting October 13
Song 174
10 min: Local announcements. Outline local arrangements for the special tract campaign to begin on October 20, and encourage all to pick up a supply of tracts if they have not already done so. Briefly review the sample presentations for the October 1 Watchtower and the October Awake! found on page 8. Since many publishers have been offering these magazines for a few weeks, invite those in the audience to relate an experience they have had.
35 min: “New Congregation Meeting Schedule.”a As time permits, read cited scriptures and invite audience to comment on them.
Song 216
Week Starting October 20
Song 113
 5 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
20 min: Maintain Joy in the Ministry. Encouraging talk based on material from paragraphs 11-17 on pages 24-25 of The Watchtower of July 1, 2005. Include an interview of one or two longtime faithful servants of Jehovah. What has enabled them to maintain joy when people are unresponsive?
20 min: Prepare to Offer the November 1 Watchtower and the November Awake! After giving a brief overview of the magazines, ask the audience which articles they think might be of special interest to many people in the local territory. Have them relate why. Invite the audience to suggest an appropriate question that they plan to use to start a conversation and a scripture from the article to use before offering the magazines. Speaker concludes by demonstrating how each magazine might be offered, using the sample presentations on page 8 or another presentation designed to appeal to people in the local territory.
Song 148
Week Starting October 27
Song 30
 5 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments.
10 min: Local needs.
30 min: “Personal and Family Bible Study Are Vital!”b As time permits, read cited scriptures and invite audience to comment on them.
Song 142
Week Starting November 3
Song 100
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for October.
20 min: The Theocratic Ministry School for 2009. The school overseer discusses with audience the new Theocratic Ministry School as outlined under “Instructions” in the Theocratic Ministry School Schedule insert. Focus on adjustments being made. Encourage all to be diligent in fulfilling assignments, in preparing to comment on Bible highlights, and in applying the comments given weekly by the school overseer based on Benefit From Theocratic Ministry School Education.
15 min: Enhance Your “Art of Teaching.” Service overseer or other qualified elder identifies and comments briefly on five key factors involved in effective teaching as set forth in paragraphs 5-18 on pages 9-12 of the January 15, 2008, Watchtower. Interview one or two publishers who feel that this information has helped them improve their teaching ability.
Song 91
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

