From Our Readers
Unborn Children
I have four very lovely children. I have never been touched so personally as I have with the “Letter From the Mother of an Unborn Child.” (July 22, 1986) I have taken innocent lives from two people no one will ever know. And to think that Jehovah was their only friend hurts me, so that I can hardly bear it. I am now studying with one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, and I am sincerely trying to apply myself. This letter has made me realize what an awful thing I have done. I want that mother to know that her letter has given me the heartfelt courage and determination to teach my living children everything that I learn about Jehovah so that their lives can be saved. I understand now what the scripture means, ‘receiving in one’s self the full recompense.’ [Romans 1:27] Thank you so much.
T. S., United States
I have just finished reading “A Letter From the Mother of an Unborn Child,” and I found it very disturbing. Disturbing because I, too, am a mother of an unborn child. I also have three beautiful children, and when I look at them I wonder how I could have done such an awful thing. Though I was not in the truth at the time of the abortion, I still had guilt feelings. Now that I know about our wonderful Creator, Jehovah, I am tortured even more that I did this terrible thing to one of his creatures. I, too, would like to reiterate what the mother said in the letter. If there is someone out there thinking about having an abortion, please stop. The memory truly does haunt you for the rest of your life. Seek Jehovah and his righteous ways and rely on him to help you. Please don’t make the same mistake that we did.
Another Regretful Mother, United States
I wish to express my appreciation for the “Letter From the Mother of an Unborn Child.” I, too, am tormented by this ever-present guilt. Unlike the lady in the article who has three beautiful children, now I am not able to have any children. My conscience will not let me forget that I also murdered my own child. I have learned the truth now, and my reliance on Jehovah helps me to bear this. With deepest regret.
C. D., United States
I do not understand why you had to print the “Letter From the Mother of an Unborn Child.” I understand that it was meant to prevent potential abortions, which I thoroughly agree with. However, many of us have come into the truth leaving behind life-styles that permitted such things. When we came to know Jehovah and his loving tender mercies, we counted on his forgiveness for this terrible sin. The article made me feel as if I should carry this guilt around with me constantly.
Trying to serve Jehovah with a clear conscience, United States
The letter was an expression of the writer’s feelings, and it was not intended to burden anyone else with her guilt feelings. We can certainly have confidence that if we confess our sins to God and correct our ways, God will not only forgive our sins but cleanse us from all unrighteousness. (1 John 1:9) Though God’s forgiveness is genuine, it does not in this present system of things remove all the physical and emotional consequences of one’s actions. We are assured, though, that in God’s new system of things, the former things will not be called to mind, neither will they come up into the heart. (Isaiah 65:17) The letter was published to show the sad consequences resulting from taking a human life.​—ED.

