Approaching Your Doctor
1 As announced at the district assembly, in November we will have a special campaign with the new Blood booklet and brochure. How, though, can you best do your part in the campaign?
2 First, there is the matter of getting to see your doctor. Perhaps you can simply stop by his office and ask to speak with him for a minute or two to give him some material for your medical file. Or you might choose to phone ahead and ask his secretary “for a two-minute appointment, not as a medical visit, but just to leave with him some information and to give him a document to put in the family medical file.” Make it clear that you will be brief. Of course, if you have or want a regular appointment anyway, that would be a fine time to present the booklet and brochure to him.
3 When speaking with him, you could in your own words make a few brief comments, such as: “As you know, I am one of Jehovah’s Witnesses and so for religious reasons I do not accept blood. In order to help you in treating me (and my family), I want to give you an interesting new booklet that each doctor, lawyer and judge in the country is receiving. I’m sure you’ll find the medical and ethical information interesting. Also, I’d like you to read this short brochure and add it to my medical file. I’ve signed this document, so you can see that it represents my position.”
4 Remember, the principal reason for our objection to blood is religious, so there is no reason to argue with the doctor about the medical aspects of blood. Be sure to express your appreciation for his continued care and consideration. And assure him that you respect his skill and dedication as he treats you (and your family) in accord with your religious convictions.
5 Before visiting the doctor, you can write (or type) at the bottom of page four of the brochure something like this:
“Dear Doctor ․․․․․․․․․․․․:
The above represents my own personal beliefs as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. For religious reasons I (and my family) cannot accept blood transfusions. I am willing to bear full responsibility for this, and I appreciate your respect for my convictions.
(Signature)”
6 You can sign it ahead of time, or when you are with him. Be friendly, kind and understanding. If he asks some questions or makes comments, you can direct his attention to appropriate points in the booklet or brochure. In any event, be sure to urge him to read the brochure before adding it to your permanent medical file.
7 If your family uses a lawyer, present the booklet and brochure to him, mentioning that it contains information on an issue that many in the legal field are concerned about. Tell him that all doctors, lawyers and judges are receiving copies.
8 Also, if you are personally acquainted with any nurse, lawyer, judge or medical doctor (as well as medical or law student), check with the brother coordinating this campaign about presenting the booklet and brochure to that person. When speaking with such an acquaintance, simply make brief observations about the importance of the topic and the extent to which the material is being distributed. Urge him to read this new material.

