Bear Witness to the Truth
1 In three and a half years, Jesus performed a multitude of good works, ranging from resurrecting the dead to laying the foundation of the Christian congregation. Yet, the purpose of Jesus’ ministry was remarkably simple: ‘To bear witness to the truth.’—John 18:37.
2 Jesus went to great lengths to teach his disciples many things that they had never before known about Jehovah, making them aware of responsibilities that touched every aspect of their lives. Yet, what was required of them could be summed up in the command to “bear witness” to the truth, by the lives they lived and by their expressing their faith to others.—John 15:27.
WORK ASSIGNED TO THE CHRISTIAN CONGREGATION
3 The work of the early Christian congregation reflected the importance attached to Jesus’ command. Clearly, all that a Christian does in his daily life should be a “witness to the truth,” helping others to embrace the Kingdom hope. Along with this we should feel impelled always to “offer to God . . . the fruit of lips which make public declaration to his name.” (Heb. 13:15) Though threatened and abused, the apostles declared: “We cannot stop speaking about the things we have seen and heard.”—Acts 4:20.
4 With that in mind, the congregation is planning a full month of activity during October, when the Awake! subscription will be featured. Where individuals may not be able to take a year’s subscription, why not offer a six-month subscription and a 25c book, for $1.00? You may have good success doing this.
5 The October 8 issue has interesting articles on “Races” that you may be able to use to start conversations and direct attention to the reassuring Bible principle stated in Acts 10:34, 35. Or, you may prefer to use another topic. In any event, we encourage you to prepare something before going out so that you can “impart what is favorable to the hearers.”—Eph. 4:29.
6 Most of us find that time is in short supply. In deciding how your available time is going to be used this month, do you find that a good share in the Kingdom proclamation is high on your list of priorities, or does it tend to be obscured as something incidental? Remember that time is one of our most valuable resources and wise use of it has a direct bearing on how much we are personally able to do in sharing the good news with others.
7 The need for witnessing both by our lives and by our words continues to increase since “the fields . . . are white for harvesting.” (John 4:35) People are becoming more disillusioned so they need to hear the truth. Vigorous activity in “public declaration in front of many witnesses” assures us a “firm hold” on many rich blessings.—1 Tim. 6:11, 12.

