Can You See Your Advancement?
1 Think back to the time when you first learned the truth. That marked a turning point in your life. Your course took a new direction toward doing the will of God. (1 John 2:17) If you have applied yourself, your advancement should be manifest.—1 Tim. 4:15, 16.
2 Advancement is an integral part of true worship. To stand still is to hold back. Every provision of the congregation is directed toward helping us to advance spiritually to the “full-grown man” instead of remaining “babes.” (Eph. 4:11-15) In time, solid spiritual food should replace milk, enabling learners to become teachers.—Heb. 5:11-14.
HOW MANIFESTED?
3 Advancement can be shown in the disciple-making work. At first, many of us were timid, hesitant to speak up. In time, we began to use the Bible to start Scriptural discussions. Have you done that? Have you also followed through, making return visits to start your own Bible study?
4 Advancement becomes apparent at the meetings. Initially, many are slow to offer comments. As they become more involved and appreciative, they feel motivated to participate. When they realize how the Theocratic School can speed up progress, they are eager to enroll. Very likely you have done that. Do you also take the initiative to approach the instructor for counsel after each talk? This shows a desire to advance and contributes to your progress.
5 It is also good to see evidence of family advancement. At one time, for many of us, there was little to hold our family together. When we put emphasis on spiritual things, common interests began to draw us together. We found that doing things together could be enjoyable. Has that been your experience? It may be that now you plan together as a family for recreation, meetings and field service, as well as for regular family discussion of God’s Word. Surely you will agree that bridging the communication gap, learning to express ourselves freely and respectfully, is a major factor in advancing spiritually as a family.
6 Advancement can be manifested in other ways. When you were new, you may still have tended to evaluate things by worldly standards. As your spirituality increased, you began to view things from a spiritual standpoint. (1 Cor. 2:14-16) If your spirituality has continued to grow, likely you have found that much time formerly consumed in personal pursuits is now being used in more worthwhile ways. Instead of an unconcerned attitude toward others, now you have a genuine interest in helping them. (Gal. 6:10) If you have progressed to the point where the value of all things is determined on the basis of how they affect your relationship with Jehovah, you can feel confident that you have ‘pressed on to maturity’ and are in line to “inherit the promises.”—Heb. 6:1, 12.
7 Can you see evidence of this kind of advancement in your life? Of course, all are different and progress varies according to individual circumstances. No one should judge another. (Rom. 14:4) Each can assess the extent of his own advancement, seeking to improve in areas where his progress has been slow. Rest assured that Jehovah will continue to help you.—Col. 1:9-11.

