Presenting the Good News—With the Life Book
1 We live in a time of increasing skepticism. Many people doubt the existence of a Creator. Others view him as a cold, remote Being—unconcerned about mankind. People do not realize how much their view concerning God affects their lives. We know that without a relationship with Jehovah life lacks purpose. But how can we help them? Our new book, Life Does Have a Purpose, can change their thinking. It deals with many of the objections regarding a Creator. With fine logic, the book builds appreciation for what Jehovah has done and will yet do.
2 Now how can you use the book to good advantage? Here are some suggestions: First, get acquainted with its contents. What chapters might be effective in your territory?
3 In your area, are people skeptical about the very existence of a Supreme Being? Then chapter 1, “Life Does Have a Purpose,” would be powerful. Use some of the questions raised in that chapter.
4 Or, do the householders generally accept the idea of a God but feel that he has little personal concern for them? Then you may wish to use chapter 10, “Does God Count You Personally Important?” Strive to think in terms of what approach will lead to meaningful conversations. Often, these will, not only permit you to place the book, but lead the way to a Bible study.
5 In speaking to the householder, you might pose this question: “Do you feel God cares about us? Some people have doubts because there is so much suffering and injustice in this world. Many have reasoned that since there are billions of people on this earth, How could I ever expect God to notice or care about me? Perhaps you may have felt that way at times. If so, let me show you something very reassuring from the Bible. [Read Acts 10:34, 35.] This shows that everybody has an equal opportunity before God, who is impartial. He is genuinely interested in any individual who is obedient to his will. That means that he is personally concerned about your well-being and would be pleased to see you gain salvation. Note what is stated here: [Refer to Life book, page 108, ¶2. Read first sentence and 1 Timothy 2:4 as quoted.] This is assurance to you and me that we can personally draw close to God and he will provide what we need for a happy and secure future.”
6 If your territory includes a college or technical school, you may want to make a special point of thoroughly covering it in appropriate ways during November. Young persons are frequently eager to discuss the purpose of life. This publication explains the purpose.
7 We have in the Life book a publication that deals with the views of many persons today. By our flexibility we can succeed in leaving the book, and, more importantly, can aid some to learn the answers to their questions concerning a Creator and the purpose of life.

