Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 2
20 min: Song 102. Announcements. Request each family head to bring name and address of family doctor(s) and/or lawyer to meeting next week. Read congregation service report for September. Have some relate good experiences involving tract distribution or other activity during September. If time allows, interview some parents about how they learned the truth and how this has been a blessing to the family.
20 min: “Bear Witness to the Truth.” Discuss with audience. Comment on extent congregation as a whole is sharing in declaring the good news locally, offering suggestions where improvement is needed. Outline activity for October, encouraging all to share. Briefly review new subscription rates as outlined in July Our Kingdom Service.
20 min: Preparing for Conversations. Success in talking to people depends largely on the extent to which we prepare. October 8 Awake! features subject of “Races” and related problems. Could use this as a topic for conversation, being careful to avoid controversial aspects. Might begin this way: “I think all of us would like to live in a peaceful world where we could enjoy some of the better things in life. But, it seems that every effort made to achieve that always ends up in failure because people are divided in so many different ways. Don’t you feel that these divisions separating people around the world are a real barrier to peace and prosperity? [Allow for response.] The prospects for improving the situation would be very dim except for one very encouraging fact: God is not partial and he does not favor any group of people over another. [Read Acts 10:34, 35.] God has promised that he will soon remove all barriers that divide people, making it possible for them to live in unity and equally share the good things that make life enjoyable.” Refer to Awake! page 23, for further comments.
Have this presentation demonstrated. Give suggestions on possible ways to adapt conversation to what people in your community are talking about or show how another article in a current magazine could be used. Song 88 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 9
18 min: Song 54. Announcements. Briefly review history and progress of your congregation since it was formed. Show increases and evidences of Jehovah’s direction. Include experiences from older ones who can show progress of true worship in the community.
20 min: “Can You See Your Advancement?” Questions and answers. Interview some who can tell what helped them to make advancement or some who can tell why advancement can be seen in others. Show how all can manifest their progress in congregation activities this week.
22 min: Jehovah’s Witnesses and the Question of Blood. To be handled by brother in congregation who is coordinating campaign.
Cover Branch Letter. Tie in facts about number of local hospitals, doctors, and so forth to extent you have obtained such. Highlight benefits. Briefly outline campaign, using points under subheading “Objective in letter of August 14, 1977. Deal mainly with role of ones in congregation in general in visiting own doctors. Stress why publishers should not take it on themselves to visit all doctors; should check with one assigned to coordinate efforts.
Have adults (or family heads) fill out slips, listing own name and name and address of doctor. (In cities having a city overseer, also list congregation name.) Separate slip for each doctor or lawyer. Publishers should also fill out slip for any doctor, lawyer, judge, hospital administrator or nurse that they know on personal basis and so can best approach. Invite suggestions as to obtaining lists, using contacts at hospitals, knowledge of medical or nursing schools, and so forth. Explain that slips will be given back later so publisher can deliver booklet and brochure (or just brochure).
Brief remarks on “Studying the Blood Booklet.” Deal mainly with how publishers can best prepare and benefit from three studies; encourage extra preparation. Song 79 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 16
20 min: Song 40. Announcements. Elder discusses with a group of young persons, preferably ages sixteen to twenty-two article “What Are Young Persons Thinking?” in Watchtower of August 15, 1977. Analyze thinking of many youth in world; get comments on how this compares with what they have seen locally. Consider how this information is useful when witnessing to young persons. For example: We can acknowledge that many rely on only themselves. Might link general ‘live-for-today’ outlook with pessimistic view youth have about future, leading into consideration of what Bible says. Could use fact that youths tend to think future will be worse as a way of interesting them in God’s means of bringing better future. Also, comments on how this information might help Witness parents understand better what sons and daughters are exposed to.
20 min: “Let Them Praise the Name of Jehovah.” (Ps. 148:12, 13) (Group discussion including an elder, parent, child and study conductor.) Children are a sizable part of every congregation. Bible directs them to attend meetings, make public expression of their faith. (Deut. 31:12, 13; Matt. 21:16) Their efforts are appreciated. At meetings for service, they sometimes outnumber adults. But commonly reported that children going together cover territory in fraction of time taken by adults. Often just offering two magazines for 10c. Result: Territory covered frequently, but few keep records or call back. Elder discusses problem with group. (1) Parent: Commend for effort to study with family, bring to meetings and aid them to share in service. Should see that they are prepared, equipped in advance. If at all possible, should accompany to supervise conduct and training. Fine way to follow up training in family study. (2) Child: Commend for willingness to share in service. (Eccl. 12:1) Relate examples showing how young publishers got good results. How youngsters can help: Take seriously. Prepare in advance. Keep record of placements, follow up interest. Maintain proper decorum. Be respectful of adults. (3) Study conductor: Discuss ways to organize group to minimize problem. Can encourage parents to shoulder their responsibility; offer practical suggestions and help. When working from car, parent may take two or three children, letting them take turns accompanying. Check on them regularly in the territory. Encourage them to follow up placements.
As time permits, get expressions from audience of what various ones have done to help children “praise Jehovah.”
20 min: Elder discusses with audience ways that all can help our young people through example and encouragement. Reassure young people of our interest in them. Discuss pressures at school, need to be able to talk to parents or mature fellow Witnesses. In trying to help them, one congregation found: Many felt older ones did not talk to them. Most wanted the elders to go with them in service. Invite young people to express themselves. Discuss ways all could show more personal interest in them, for their encouragement. Mention any point of counsel needed by young people locally, giving kindly, upbuilding advice. Close meeting urging all to rely on Jehovah. (Isa. 40:30, 31) Song 97 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 23
20 min: Song 38. Announcements. Include Accounts Report. “The Problems of Working Women.” (g77 9/8 p. 7) Brother discusses main points of articles with three or four sisters to show how information can help us in service. What adjustments might we have to make in view of this situation in many homes? What could be done to contact many who are not at home? Why are women often busy when we call? What topics for conversation might be of greater interest to most women? Invite audience to comment as time allows.
20 min: Prepare locally.
20 min: Getting the “Spirit” of Jesus’ Field Instructions. If Jesus were to conduct a meeting for service, we would all be there and listen. He did! Matthew chapter 10. Instructions given to twelve apostles before they were sent out by two’s. Analyze how we can apply his counsel locally. (1) Note how he felt about people’s spiritual needs. (Matt. 9:35-38) “So,” (Matt. 10:1) sent forth apostles. While no authority to heal sick, do we feel “sent forth”? (Vs. 5) We should. (Matt. 24:14) (2) What should we stress? (Matt. 10:7) Urge them to look into Bible where Kingdom is dominant theme. (3) (Vs. 8) Not only refrain from charging for witness given, but demonstrate attitude of generosity—really want to give of self. This will keep us going with right motive. Verses 9 to 14 deal with instructions regarding staying in homes of the people. While we seldom do this today, learn from attitude Christ taught. Positive wishing of peace toward householders and only if they do not allow you to help them do you ‘shake dust off your feet.’ Not negative view of people, rather hoping for good outcome. How can this outlook be kept? (4) (Vss. 16-22) Apostles going into hostile territory; local religious leaders would instigate trouble. Since they must declare good news among wolflike opposers, should be “cautious as serpents”—moving away from trouble where they could, not foolhardy—yet innocent of any wrong, not repaying in kind to opposers. How do principles apply locally? If arrested, should not worry about what to say before courts; holy spirit helps. Does not mean we should refrain from preparing for field service, but shows we should ask for God’s spirit.
What can we learn from Matthew chapter 10? Should follow Jesus’ example: Be genuinely concerned about people; avoid confrontation with opposers when possible; highlight the Kingdom hope; do not cease telling out the good news.
We are still under his command and have his assurance that as we continue, he is with us. (Matt. 28:19, 20) Encourage audience to bring new Life book next week. Song 24 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 30
20 min: Song 72. Announcements. “Approaching Your Doctor.” To be handled by brother in the congregation who is coordinating the campaign.
Discuss how to go about seeing family doctor (or lawyer). Why it is best to be brief, clear, kind. Short demonstration of brother presenting booklet and brochure to doctor. (Follow wording in article.) Urge all to get ideas in mind, then put in own words. We are not trying to get each doctor into a long discussion, but want to encourage him to read material. Explain why some may be asked to deliver only brochure to their family doctor. Call attention to what to write on back of brochure. Could also demonstrate very brief presentation of booklet, and possibly brochure, to friend who is a nurse. During meeting or afterward, return slips to publishers with matching supplies. (If it is certain that there will be ample brochures for campaign, you could give each publisher or family head a personal copy to keep. We will not use brochure in field service.)
20 min: Holding Fast Our Integrity. Scriptural discussion. What is this godly quality and how can we hold fast to it? (1) Define: Moral soundness, blamelessness, completeness. Christian integrity is not to an ethic or ideal but to a person, Jehovah. (Ps. 26:1-3) (2) Hold fast in Jehovah’s strength and because we love him and do not want to lose relationship with him. (Ps. 119:1-3) (3) Job’s experience reveals issue involved and right course to follow.—Job 2:3-5; 27:5, 6.
Consider with audience ways integrity is tested in matters of daily conduct, not just when violently persecuted. (4) Why are young Christians today often faced with great tests of integrity? (Eph. 5:3-5) (5) How can those in divided households face difficult trials? (Matt. 10:35, 36) (6) Stress the means for relief in all circumstances: Prayer, begging for holy spirit, study with view of keeping faith strong, drawing comfort from elders and others in congregation. (Phil. 4:6, 7) Is it possible, although being imperfect, to remain blameless? In Bible sense of word, Yes. Not absolutely perfect but devoted at heart like David. (1 Ki. 9:4) (7) Benefits: Clean conscience and sure hope for future. Avoid frustrations and confusion of those in world.—Ps. 37:18, 19, 37.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News—With the Life Book.” Discuss offer for November, making comments regarding what approaches may be effective in your territory. Demonstrate two of these. May need to discuss what arrangements would help most in striving to reach college students in territory, since it is often not possible to visit dormitories on campus. Song 44 and prayer.

