Do You See Only the Outward Appearance?
1 As we conduct our public ministry, our first impression of some people may make us hesitate to share the good news with them. For example, how would you react if a fierce-looking man always eyed you suspiciously when you called on his neighbor who had shown interest in the truth? A pioneer sister who experienced this decided to approach the man and speak to him. He greeted her rudely. But, amazingly, he listened to the Bible’s message and with some excitement agreed to study. As a result of the sister’s not judging by outward appearances, the way was opened for this man and his wife to learn the truth.
2 Another sister was initially frightened by the outward appearance of a long-haired young man but persisted in witnessing to him briefly whenever he came into the store where she worked. Her efforts bore fruit, and the young man is now a baptized Witness. What will prevent us from hastily concluding that such ones will not respond?
3 Imitating the Example of Jesus: Jesus knew that he would give his life for everyone. Hence, he was not put off by the external appearance of others. He realized that even those with unsavory reputations might be willing to change if given the proper help and incentive. (Matt. 9:9-13) He tried to help both rich and poor alike. (Matt. 11:5; Mark 10:17-22) May we not judge the people we meet in the ministry by their outward appearance, blinding ourselves to what might be a good heart condition. (Matt. 7:1; John 7:24) What can help us to imitate Jesus’ outstanding example?
4 Through our study of the Bible, we have come to appreciate that God’s Word has the power to change one’s thinking, conduct, and personality. (Eph. 4:22-24; Heb. 4:12) Therefore, while exercising due caution, we should keep a positive attitude and leave the rest in the hands of Jehovah, the One who reads human hearts.​—1 Sam. 16:7; Acts 10:34, 35.
5 May our impartial sharing of the good news with all sorts of people, regardless of their outward appearance, contribute to the great harvest work in these last days.​—1 Tim. 2:3, 4.

