We Are Taught by Jehovah
1 Under divine direction an international educational program now operates in 233 lands. Nothing this world has to offer can compare with it. Our Grand Instructor, Jehovah, is teaching us how to benefit ourselves now as he also educates us for eternal life.​—Isa. 30:20; 48:17.
2 Schools of Divine Education: Consider the schools currently in progress for the benefit of Jehovah’s people. The Theocratic Ministry School, conducted weekly in some 87,000 congregations, trains millions of Kingdom publishers to be effective ministers of the good news. Have you enrolled in it? Are you among the thousands who have attended the two-week Pioneer Service School? Perhaps the reduced hour requirement for regular pioneers will enable more to pioneer and qualify to attend this school. The two-month Ministerial Training School, now conducted in principal languages around the world, is equipping unmarried elders and ministerial servants to take on greater theocratic responsibilities. Periodically, all elders and ministerial servants receive specialized instruction in the Kingdom Ministry School.
3 Facilities at the Watchtower Educational Center in Patterson, New York, are being used to house three special schools, which provide advanced theocratic training. The five-month course of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead prepares ministers for missionary work in foreign fields. Branch Committee members from around the world attend a two-month course on branch organization. In May 1999 a new two-month course for traveling overseers began with a class of 48 students from the United States and Canada. All of Jehovah’s servants ultimately receive fine benefits from the training Jehovah is providing through these various schools.
4 Taught for What Purpose? A member of the Governing Body stated: “Our current educational program is designed to bring all of Jehovah’s people everywhere into the fine condition of maturity described at Proverbs 1:1-4.” May Jehovah continue to give each one of us “the tongue of the taught ones.”​—Isa. 50:4.

