VOL. XII. SEPTEMBER, 1891. NO. 9. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

PERILOUS TIMES AT HAND. 

"This know also, that in the last days perilous times 
shall come."— 2 Tim. 3:1. 

Realizing that we are now living in the very 
times referred to by the Apostle, some may inquire, 
How can this be? Are not these times, 
in comparison with times past, specially favorable 
to the prosperity of the Church? Time 
was when fire and sword and guillotine and rack 
were systematically employed to exterminate 
the true saints of God, when the Word of God 
was a book prohibited, and when the prison and 
the dungeon rewarded the faithful searching of 
the Scriptures. And is there not also more 
truth due and understood now than formerly, 
as well as full liberty— if a man is pleased to 
exercise it— to believe and teach, either in private 
or in public, whatever he believes to be 
truth? 

Yes, such are the favorable conditions of our 
day. Never, in all the history of the Church, 
has there been a day of such privilege and blessing 
—such increase of knowledge and general 
intelligence, such facilities for the general diffusion 
of knowledge and such breadth of individual 
liberty— of conscience, of speech and of 
action as today. The spirit of liberty is abroad 
in the earth, and though the wily enemies that 
once fettered and handcuffed and imprisoned 
it still live, and would fain imprison it again, 
they regretfully realize that the soaring eagle is 
on the wing and may never be pinioned again. 
But hand in hand with all these advantages, 
strange to say, comes the Church's greatest peril. 
True, there is little peril to physical life, or 
earthly property; but these to the true saints 
are of minor importance, for they count not 
their earthly life dear unto them, if by any means 
they may attain the divine nature and glory to 
which they are called. The peril of these times 
is to the spiritual nature of the saints and to their 
valuable property in the exceeding great and 
precious promises of God, which are all yea and 
amen in Christ Jesus. Subtle influences are now 
at work seeking to dwarf and extinguish the 
spiritual life and to rob the saints of their glorious 
hope, to sap stealthily the very foundations 
of Christianity, and thus effectually to overthrow 



the whole superstructure of the Christian 
faith in the minds of many, causing them thus 
to stumble and lose their glorious inheritance 
as joint-heirs with Christ. The present besetments, 
being of this subtle character, are the more 
calculated to delude and ensnare, so that if one 
allows himself to be for a moment off his guard, 
the agencies of the adversary will gain an advantage 
and use it to entrap the unwary one. And 
God will permit such snares because those only 
who are loyal and faithful, and therefore ever 
watchful, are counted worthy to escape their 
strong delusion. "Watch ye, therefore, and pray 
always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape 
all these things that shall come to pass, 
and to stand before the Son of man."— 
Matt. 21:36. 

R1319:page 114 

The Apostle forewarns the Church, not only 
of the certainty of such perils, and of their 
character, but also of their manner of approach. 
On one occasion he said, "For I know this, 
that after my departing shall grievous wolves 
enter in among you, not sparing the flock. 
[Such were the great and destructive papal 
powers.] Also of your own selves shall men 
arise, speaking perverse things to draw away disciples 
after them." (Acts 20:29,30.) Some of 
these Paul and the early Church encountered in 
that day. Paul was often in perils among false 
brethren who, concerning the faith, had made 
shipwreck, and who greatly withstood his words 
—his efforts to build up the Church in the most 
holy faith. (2 Cor. 11:26; 1 Tim. 1:19; 2 Tim. 4:14-17.) 
And he shows that from such false 
brethren, brethren who have erred from the 
truth and become teachers of false doctrine, 
will come the Church's greatest peril in these 
last times. (2 Tim. 2:16-18; 3:5.) And in 
order that we might recognize and beware 
of them, he very minutely described them, 
though the clear significance of the warning is 
somewhat beclouded by a faulty translation, 
which reads as follows:— 

"For men shall be lovers of their own selves, 
covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient 
to parents, unthankful, unholy,* truce-breakers, 
false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers 
of those that are good; traitors, heady, 
highminded, lovers of pleasure more than lovers 
of God; having a form of godliness, but 
denying the power thereof; ever learning, and 
never able to come to the knowledge of the 
truth." 



The description as here translated, the reader 
will observe, is incongruous; for men of such 
villainous character could have no form of godliness. 
Read the description again and consider 
—How could a proud, covetous, boastful 
blasphemer, a truce-breaker, a false accuser, incontinent 
and fierce, a despiser of those that 
are good, a heady, highminded, pleasure-loving 
traitor, have any form of godliness whatever, 
or deceive any one in this respect. Such a fierce 
character and bold blasphemer could not possibly 
palm himself off as a child of God; nor 
would he attempt it. The fact is that our translators 
did not fully comprehend the Apostle's 
language, and in rendering it into English they 
put the heaviest possible construction upon the 
Greek words, and thus the picture of these persons 
is overdrawn. Thus, for instance, the Greek 
word here rendered "blasphemers" (verse 3) 
is blasphemos, which signifies one speaking 
injuriously or an evil-speaker. Now, judging 
merely by the word, regardless of the context, 
we would not know whether in this instance the 
evil speaking is carried to the extent of revilings 
or not; but as it stands related to the 
context— in view of the after statement that 
these have a form of godliness (verse 5), though 
lacking its real power— we must conclude that 
those milder or more subtle forms of evil-speaking, 
which would be consistent with hypocritical 
forms of godliness, are referred to, and therefore 
that our English word blaspheme, though 
it means evil-speaking, is too strong a term by 
which here to translate the Greek word blasphemos; 
for the full and generally understood significance 
of the English word blaspheme is— 
"To speak of the Supreme Being in terms of 
impious irreverence, to revile or speak reproachfully 
of God, Christ, or the Holy Spirit— to 
speak wickedly of, to utter abuse or calumny 
against, to speak reproachfully of."— Webster. 

So also the word apeithes, rendered "disobedient," 
signifies not persuaded; and the expression 
"disobedient to parents" would consequently 
signify not of the same persuasion, or not of the 
same mind as were the parents. The word anosios, 
rendered "unholy," which signifies unkind 
or unholy, would likewise, in view of the context, 
be better rendered by the milder English term, 
unkind. The word aspondos, rendered "truce-breakers" 
(verse 3), signifies irreconcilable or implacable 
—i.e., stubborn or constant in enmity. 
The word akrates, rendered "incontinent," signifies, 
more properly, without strength, or without 
self-control. Though this thought is also in the 
English word "incontinent," a coarser meaning 



generally attaches to the word. The word anemeros, 
rendered "fierce," signifies not mild, savage. 
That is, it may be a great or a small lack 



*The Sinaitic, the oldest and most reliable MS., omits 
the words, "without natural affection," they being no part 
of the original text. 

R1319:page 115 

of mildness, amounting in some cases to savage 
bitterness. But, again, the fierce or savage 
idea is not compatible with any pretentions to 
godliness, as intimated in verse 5. The word 
aphilagathos, rendered "despisers of those that 
are good," would thus be better rendered not 
friendly to the good. 

Thus revised, the Apostle's language reads as 
follows: "For men shall be lovers of their own 
selves [selfish], covetous, boasters, proud, evil-speakers, 
not of the same mind as were their 
forefathers [i.e., devisers of new doctrines], 
unthankful, unkind, irreconcilable, false accusers, 
without self-control, not mild, not friendly 
to those that are good— traitors, heady, high-minded, 
lovers of pleasure more than lovers 
of God [i.e., preferring their own will or pleasure 
to the will or pleasure of God]; having a 
form of godliness, but denying the power thereof; 
ever learning, and never able to come to a 
knowledge of the truth." 

It should be observed also that the word 
men, in verse 2, is emphatic in the Greek text, 
as shown in the Emphatic Diaglott, thus indicating 
that a particular class of men is here referred 
to, which, according to the description, 
can be none other than those mentioned in 
Acts 20:29,30, viz.: men "of your own selves 
[men of your own company, men whom you 
have hitherto regarded as members of the body 
of Christ, and who still claim to be such], who 
shall arise speaking perverse things [perverting 
the truth. But why, you ask, should any one 
who had once received the truth desire to pervert 
it? The Apostle answers that their object 
is] to draw away disciples after them." And for 
this purpose, of leading away disciples after 
them, they keep up the form of godliness, although 
they deny its power— the only power by 
means of which any of the fallen race can be 
reckoned godly or righteous in God's sight- 
viz.: the power of the precious blood of Christ, 
which cleanseth us from all sin, as long as we 
appreciate and accept this salvation through 



faith in his blood. 
R1320:page 115 

Well may we inquire, as we realize that we are 
living in the last days here referred to, Is there 
such a class of enemies to the truth and to the 
Church actually in existence to-day? Truly, the 
voice of prophecy has never set up a false alarm, 
or foretold an uncertain event. The perilous 
times have come and the foretold perils are all 
about us. Side by side in the same communities 
with the humble, faithful, consecrated 
saints— in the same little assemblings together 
of those who have escaped from the bondage 
of Babylon, in the same households, and often 
at the same table of the Lord, there has also been 
developing a class who are "lovers of their 
own selves [selfish], covetous [of honors and 
distinction and the praise of men— ambitious], 
boasters [as though the credit of the truth now 
due and received were in some way due to them, 
and as though they had a right therefore to alter 
and amend it at their pleasure], proud" [of 
that knowledge which should be received with 
only humility and thankfulness, and which can 
be retained only under these conditions]. 

Because the light of newly unfolding truth 
has dawned upon their pathway, they, in common 
with the faithful saints, no longer are of 
the same mind as were their parents; but the 
goodness of God thus manifested to them, 
instead of cultivating in them a spirit of thankfulness 
and co-operation, which is its design, 
seems to arouse a spirit of pride and ambition, 
which does not long hesitate to make merchandise 
of the truth for ambitious ends, however 
trivial and foolish those ends may be. And in 
pursuance of the ambitious policy, by degrees 
they become "evil-speakers [against the doctrine 
of Christ and those who believe and teach it] 
unkind, unfriendly to those that are good [who 
hold fast the truth in righteousness], and false 
accusers" [of such]. As they proceed in this 
way they seem to lose all former strength of 
Christian character. They become irreconcilable 
to the truth, so that neither Scripture, nor 
reason, nor the example of the faithful, has 
power to restore them. Loving their own wills 
more than the will of God, they grow more and 
more proud and boastful of their attainments- 
high-minded and heady. Not submitting themselves 
to the Head of the body, Christ Jesus, 
they are ambitious to head new factions themselves, 
and thus they turn traitors to the truth. 

They claim, too, to be very earnest students 



of the Word of God; and so they are, but they 

R1320:page 116 

never come to a knowledge of the truth. They 
are after something new, some new and peculiar 
"find" in the mine of God that will attract 
the wondering gaze of many curious disciples. 
But, alas for their purposes! there are no such 
real curiosities in the blessed Word of God; but 
the zeal of these ambitious ones is equal to the 
emergency, and one after another the actual 
truths are beclouded, distorted and perverted to 
this ignoble end and presented as newly found 
truths. And the unwary receive them as such, 
not recognizing at first that they are subversive 
of the entire system of divine truth. Thus their 
faith in the truths already learned is unwittingly 
undermined; they are caught in the snare of 
the enemy; and as they continue to give ear to 
these seductive influences they become more 
and more entangled, until, having lost their 
anchorage, they find themselves adrift on a vast 
sea of unbelief, floating they know not whither. 
Like their leaders, they may retain the form of 
godliness but have lost its power. 

But there is another feature of the description 
of these false teachers, whose ambitions place 
so many perils in the pathway of the saints, 
which should not be overlooked. Verses 6 and 8 
describe, or rather illustrate, the manner in 
which the influence of such teachers will be 
brought to bear upon the Church. Their opposition 
is not expressed in bold, defiant terms, 
and emphasized and enforced with vehemency. 
As here intimated, their policy is crafty, deceitful, 
sly, under pretentions of godliness, love of 
truth, and zeal for the truth. Their influence 
will be exerted somewhat after the manner of a 
vile class mentioned in verse 6 who "creep into 
houses and lead captive silly women laden with 
sins and led away by various inordinate desires." 
Not that such will be the actual immoral character 
of these teachers, but that their policy 
will be similarly seductive. 

Their actual course is more particularly described 
in verse 8 thus: "Now as Jannes and 
Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist 
the truth: men of corrupt minds [corrupted or 
turned aside from the truth], reprobate concerning 
the faith." Thus we are shown that 
the opposition to the truth will be manifested 
in a subtle, deceptive course similar to that of 
those opposers of Moses. They opposed Moses 
by doing something similar to what he did, thus 
confusing the people. God had given Moses 



power to do certain miracles in order to prove 
to Israel that Moses was his divinely empowered 
agent. And Satan forthwith empowered 
his agents to duplicate those miracles to some 
extent, though not perfectly, thus endeavoring 
to confuse the minds of the people and to unsettle 
their confidence in Moses and his leading 
and teaching. 

Just so it is to-day: the studied effort of false 
teachers— false brethren developing in the very 
midst of the Church— is to offset the truth by 
plausible forms of error, to unsettle confidence 
both in the truth and in all teachers of the 
truth, thus to lead away disciples after them 
and their theories. And in consequence of 
the allurements of these false teachers, and 
of the unfaithfulness of many to the love and 
service of the truth which they have received, 
a class in the midst of the Church will give 
much encouragement to the ambitions of these 
false brethren; "for," says the Apostle (2 Tim. 4:3,4), 
"the time will come when they will 
not endure sound doctrine, but after their own 
desires [desires for something new] shall they 
gather to themselves teachers, having itching 
ears [for new and strange things]; and they 
shall turn away their ears from the truth, and 
shall be turned unto fables." 

Nor will this class be only a small minority; 
for, in order that the faithful may not be discouraged 
when brought face to face with these 
things, they are forewarned (Psa. 91:7) that, 
before this conflict ends, a thousand shall fall 
at their side and ten thousand at their right 
hand. Thus realizing that God foreknew it all 
and that the accomplishment of his glorious 
purposes is not in the least endangered thereby, 
they may still have confidence and joy in view 
of the glorious consummation of his plan and of 
their promised position in it. 

But how shall the faithful believers act towards 
these false brethren in their midst? 
Shall they take them by the hand as formerly 
and bid them God-speed? Shall they recognize 
them as brethren in Christ when they have denied 
the faith, when they have rejected salvation 

R1320:page 117 

through the precious blood of Christ and 
now claim it of God as their just right, as the 
reward of their own righteousness after they 
have, as they say, slain the enmity that is in 
them? Are such indeed our brethren? are 
they owned of God as sons? and shall we indeed 
walk with them and be guiltless? What 



does the Apostle say we shall do? He says, 
"From such turn away." (Verse 5.) "Be not 
ye partakers with them; for ye were formerly 
darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord: 
walk as children of light. .and have no 
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, 
but rather reprove them." (Eph. 5:6-11). 
And the Apostle John (2 John 1 1) emphasizes 
Paul's counsel, saying, "If there come any 
unto you and bring not this doctrine, receive 
him not into your house, neither bid him God-speed; 
for he that biddeth him God-speed is 
partaker of his evil deeds." 

Such "evil men," says Paul (verse 13), "shall 
wax worse and worse [more and more bold and 
aggressive, as they receive encouragement from 
that rapidly increasing class who will no longer 
endure sound doctrine], deceiving [others] and 
being deceived" [themselves— becoming more 
and firmly intrenched in the snares of their own 
weaving, so as to make it impossible to extricate 
them]. But, nevertheless, the time is coming 
when they shall proceed no further; for 
their folly shall be manifested unto all men, as 
was the folly of Jannes and Jambres, who could 
not forever withstand the teachings of Moses, 
the servant of God.— Verse 9. 

Then Paul proceeds to call attention to the 
ground of Timothy's confidence in himself as 
a faithful teacher of divine truth, saying, "But 
thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of 
life, purpose, faith, longsuffering, charity, patience, 
persecutions, afflictions which came unto 
me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra; what 
persecutions I endured: but out of them all the 
Lord delivered me." (Verses 10,11.) Such are 
always the marks of a true teacher. His doctrine 
will be that which the most thorough investigation 
of the Scriptures most clearly proves 
and establishes beyond all peradventure. His 
manner of life will be consistent both with his 
faith and with his consecration to the Lord. 
His purpose will be the building up of the 
Church in the most holy faith. His faith will 
be positive and clear— not mere guess work, 
but knowledge, based upon the sure Word of 
God, with whom is no variableness nor shadow 
of turning. And his great love for the Church 
will be manifest as was Paul's, and as was Moses' 
love for Israel, by longsuffering, patience and 
meek endurance of persecution, both from an 
opposing world and from false brethren arising 
in the midst of God's people. And in such 
persecutions no true teacher will be lacking; for 
"all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall 
suffer persecution." (Verse 12.) Such has been 



the experience of every true teacher that God 
has ever raised up to deliver and guide his 
people. Witness Noah, Moses, Paul and Luther. 

But, beloved, our advice to you in these perilous 
times, when error is taking on its most baneful 
and deceitful forms, and when it is finding 
its most active agents amongst false brethren 

R1321 :page 117 

and sisters in your very midst, and when fidelity 
to truth, therefore, occasions the severing 
of some of the tenderest social ties you have 
ever known, even among those with whom you 
once held sweet converse as you walked together 
to the house of God— yes, in these times 
let us again urge the counsel of Paul— "Continue 
thou in the things which thou hast learned 
and hast been assured of, knowing of whom 
thou hast learned them;" for it is written (John 6:45), 
"They shall be all taught of God." 
Whoever the human agent may be that God has 
made use of to bring you to a knowledge of the 
truth, he was simply an index finger to help 
you trace it for yourself on the sacred page; 
and in humility and faithfulness he made no 
greater claim than this, assuring you that the 
holy Scriptures to which he ever and continually 
pointed are indeed "able to make you wise 
unto salvation through faith which is in Christ 
Jesus;" and that "all Scripture given by inspiration 
of God is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, 
for correction, for instruction in righteousness, 
that the man of God may be perfect, 
thoroughly furnished unto all good works." 
Therefore, dearly beloved, what you have 
learned concerning God's glorious plan of the 
ages, and concerning your privileged place in 

R1321 :page 118 

that plan, as heirs of God and joint-heirs with 

Jesus Christ, his Son, and concerning the conditions 

upon which you hold this precious 

promise and may finally realize it, and concerning 

that great foundation doctrine of our redemption 

from sin and death through the precious 

blood of the man Christ Jesus who gave himself 

a ransom for all, upon which fact rests the 

whole superstructure of the wondrous and glorious 

plan, hold fast these things, knowing of 

whom you have learned them. This precious 

truth is God's message to you, not man's. No 

such high and glorious hope could ever have 

entered the mind of mortal man, had not God 

revealed it by his spirit, as he has done through 



faith in his Word, in his own due time. It is 

all in that Word. Search and see for yourselves; 

and be not faithless but believing. It comes not 

to you on the miserable authority of vain imagination, 

or dreams, or doubtful visions, but 

on the authority of God's most holy and authentic 

Word. True, it is almost too good to 

believe, but is it not just like our God? Does 

it not gloriously illustrate the breadth of his 

mighty mind, the scope of his marvelous wisdom 

and power, and the depth of his love and 

grace? 

Continue, therefore, in the things which thou 
hast learned, and hast been assured of (having 
proved them yourselves from the Scriptures), 
and be not of them who turn away their ears 
from the truth and are turned unto fables. And 
observing those who have a form of godliness, but 
who, nevertheless, by their false teachings deny 
the power thereof, "from such turn away," and 
"have no fellowship with the unfruitful works 
of darkness, but rather reprove them." We 
cannot serve two masters; we cannot espouse the 
cause of truth and the cause of error as well; 
nor can we retain the friendship of God and 
of the advocates of error also. Who is on the 
Lord's side? let them rally around the Lord's 
standard. All told, they will only be a "little 
flock." Like Gideon's band, the company now 
gathered by the proclamation of the harvest-message 
of truth must be tested and sifted until 
only the loyal, faithful, true hearted, brave 
and valiant soldiers of the cross remain; and to 
these, though their numbers be small, will 
the laurels of victory belong when truth and 
righteousness finally prevail. Let no man boast 
of numbers now when the highest interests 
of the elect of God are all bound up with 
the faithful few, to whom it will be the Father's 
good pleasure to give the kingdom. 

"Count me the swords that have come." 
"Lord, thousands on thousands are ready." 

"Lo, there are too many, and with them are some 
Whose hearts and whose hands are not steady. 
He whose soul does not burn, 
Let him take up his tent and return." 

"Count me the swords that remain." 

"Lord, hundreds on hundreds are daring." 
"These yet are too many for me to attain 

To the victory I am preparing. 

Lead them down to the brink 

Of the waters of Marah to drink." 

"Lord, those who remain are but few, 



And the hosts of the foe are appalling, 
And what can a handful such as we do?" 

"When ye hear from beyond my voice calling 
Sound the trump! Hold the Light! 
Great Midian will melt in your sight." 



R1321 :page 118 

"Temptations never give us notice. Can we 
expect them to do so? The sailor does not expect 
to have notice of every gale of wind that 
blows upon him. The soldier in battle does not 
reckon to have notice of every bullet that is 
coming his way. By what apparatus could we 
be kept aware of every advance of the evil 
one? The very essence of temptation often 
lies in the suddenness of it. We are carried 
off our feet before we are aware. Yet we must 
not say, because of this, 'I cannot help it;' for 
we ought to be all the more watchful, and live 
all the nearer to God in prayer. We are bound 
to stand against a sudden temptation, as much 
as against a slower mode of attack. We must 
look to the Lord to be kept from the arrow 
which flieth by day and the pestilence which 
walketh in darkness. We are to cry to God for 
grace, that, let the gusts of temptation come 
how and when they may, we may always be 
found in Christ, resting in him, covered with 
his divine power." — C. H. Spurgeon. 



R1318:page 119 
WHAT OF THE NIGHT? 



Watchman! watchman! what of the night? 
"Shadows and darkness encircle me quite; 
Earth is enshrouded in midnight gloom, 
Black as the pall that envelopes the tomb; 
Watchers are few, and mockers are bold— 
The heavens are starless— the night-air is cold. 
I am weary; O would that this night were gone. 
I will watch for the day till the morning dawn." 

Watchman! watchman! what of the night? 
"In the east appeareth a glimmering light: 
Faint it gleams— but 'tis rising now, 
And streaming afar— 'tis the morning's brow. 
Shadows are passing— the Day Star is out, 
The glory is flashing and leaping about, 



And the golden tints that are poured o'er the earth 
Foretell of the bursting morning's birth." 

Watchman! watchman! what of the night? 
"Day rushes onward all cloudless and bright. 
And warmth, and light, and beauty are driven 
To the farthest bound of the far-off heaven. 
Flashing flames from the throne of God 
Are bathing the world in a golden flood. 
Seraph and cherub are crowding it on, 
And the pure in their rapture are skyward gone." 

Watchman! watchman! what of the night? 
"Bursts on my vision a ravishing sight: 
The Lord is in sight with his shining ones, 
And the splendors of twice ten thousand suns. 
He has come! Lo, the night-watch of sorrow is o'er, 
And the mantle of midnight shall shroud me no more. 
Pilgrim and Stranger, haste to thy home, 
For the morning, the beautiful morning, has come!" 
D. T. Taylor. 



R1321 :page 119 

THE PROPHET LIKE UNTO MOSES. 



DEUT. 18:15-22, AND ACTS 3. 

In these Scriptures is to be found our subject. 
In the former is the prophecy of Moses, and in 
the latter Peter touches on its fulfilment. To 
find an apostle dealing with the fulfilment of 
prophecy is a great advantage, as it is one of 
our best safeguards against error and uncertainty. 
It is here, as it frequently happens elsewhere in 
similar cases, minute details are not dealt with: 
only broad outlines. Peter identifies the Prophet 
like unto Moses, and indicates the sphere and 
scope of his mission, together with its results. 
The likeness is not of a personal kind, either in 
nature or character; but is to be found rather 
in position and work. Nor is this likeness at 
all exact, being that of antitype to "type," 
reality to "figure," or substance to "shadow." 

I. As "our Passover," Christ is the Prophet 
like unto Moses. When the Passover was instituted, 
"the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron 
in the land of Egypt, saying, This month shall 
be to you the beginning of months; it shall be 
the first month of the year to you.'" There is 
an adequate reason for this. The life which 
man derives through the first Adam is condemned; 



and God has never entered into covenant 
with man on the basis of condemnation. 
In the institution and observance of the Passover, 
the people were typically passed over from 
death unto life. Their physical lives were preserved 
when others were destroyed; and that 
preservation is a type of a more widely extended 
and enduring one. In the treatment of the 
Passover lamb, there are at least two points which 
ought to be specially noted. First, as to the 
blood: "They shall take of the blood and strike 
it on the two side posts and on the upper doorpost 
of the houses wherein they shall eat it... 
and the blood shall be for a token upon the 
houses where ye are; and when I see the blood 
I will pass over you and the plague shall not be 
upon you to destroy you when I smite the land 
of Egypt" (Ex. 12:1-28). Very early the eating 
of blood was prohibited: "Flesh with the 
life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall ye 
not eat" (Gen. 9:4). This prohibition was 
frequently repeated, and a specific reason assigned 
for it: "For the life of the flesh is in the 
blood; and I have given it to you upon the altar 
to make an atonement for your souls; for it is 
the blood that maketh an atonement for the 
soul" (Lev. 17:11). The shedding and sprinkling 
of the Passover blood is a striking "figure" 
of giving "life for life"— the requirement of 

R1321 :page 120 

divine justice before the condemned could be 

justified. It was only a "figure," however— the 

reality came afterwards: "Forasmuch as ye 

know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible 

things, as silver and gold. ..but with the 

precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without 

blemish and without spot" (1 Peter 1:18-19). 

The other point is as to the flesh: "They shall 

eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire, and 

unleavened bread, and with bitter herbs they 

shall eat it... with your loins girded, your 

shoes on your feet, and your staff in your hand; 

and ye shall eat it in haste; it is the Lord's 

Passover." Through the blood-shedding, the 

life of the Israelites was preserved; but the wilderness 

journey was before them, and they had 

to eat of the flesh as well. This feature, too, 

is a striking "figure" of the Lamb of God— 

"our Passover." Through the shedding of his 

precious blood we have life. But that is not all. 

The journey of life has to be pursued, the enemies 

of life have to be overcome, the work of 

life has to be accomplished, and the discipline 

of life has to be perfected. In all this there is 



wear and tear— weariness and exhaustion; but 

R1322 : page 120 

our strength is renewed by heavenly food: 
"My Father giveth you the true bread from 
heaven: for the bread of God is he that cometh 
down from heaven and giveth life unto the 
world.... He that cometh to me shall never 
hunger, and he that believeth in me shall never 
thirst" (John 6:27-58). 

II. As "the Resurrection," Christ is the 
Prophet like unto Moses. Typically, the Israelites 
were "bought" before they began their 
journey; but they did not travel far until they 
were brought face to face with another divine 
lesson. "The Egyptians pursued after them, 
all the horses and chariots of Pharaoh, and his 
horsemen and his army, and overtook them 
encamping by the sea." With the sea before 
them and Pharaoh's host behind, the children 
of Israel saw no way of escape, and in terror 
they cried out: "Because there were no graves 
in Egypt hast thou taken us away to die in the 
wilderness?" By divine appointment Moses had 
"bought" them with blood, and by the same 
authority he had to deliver them with power. 
He was not overcome, either by the faint-heartedness 
of the people, the power of Pharaoh, or 
the untowardness of the position: "Fear not," 
(said he) "stand still, and see the salvation of 
the Lord." He "stretched out his hand over 
the sea," "the waters were divided," and the 
children of Israel passed through "upon the dry 
ground." "The Egyptians pursued and went 
in after them." Moses again "stretched forth 
his hand over the sea," and "the waters returned 
and covered the chariots and the horsemen 
and all the host of Pharaoh." "Thus the 
Lord saved Israel that day out of the hand of 
the Egyptians" (Ex. 14). This transaction is 
a striking "figure" of the deliverance to be 
effected by Christ from the bondage and power 
of death, hades, and the devil. In reference 
to the "figure," the Apostle Paul says the people 
"were all baptized unto Moses, in the cloud 
and in the sea" (1 Cor. 10:2); and he teaches 
that baptism is an emblem of both death and 
resurrection (Rom. 6:3,4). Some theologians 
would have resurrection without ransom, others 
would have ransom without resurrection; but the 
Prophet like unto Moses is both: "Forasmuch 
then as the children are partakers of flesh and 
blood, he also himself likewise partook of the 
same; that through death he might destroy him 
that had the power of death, that is, the devil; 



and deliver them who through fear of death were 
all their lifetime subject to bondage" (Heb. 2:14,15). 
Pharaoh held fast his captives until 
the typical lamb was slain; so, until the antitypical 
Lamb was slain, the devil held fast his 
captives. When the typical lamb was slain the 
power of Pharaoh was broken; so, the power of 
the devil was broken when the antitypical Lamb 
was slain; and complete matter-of-fact deliverance 
became a mere question of time. Ransom 
and Resurrection follow each other like cause 
and effect— just as sure as the one has been paid 
the other will be accomplished. "I will ransom 
them from the power of the grave; I will 
redeem them from death: O death, I will be 
thy plagues: O grave, I will be thy destruction: 
Repentance shall be hid from my eyes" 
(Hosea 13:14). 

III. As "the Life," Christ is the Prophet 
like unto Moses. The order of events in the 
type is significant: first the Passover; then 

R1322:page 121 

the deliverance from Egypt; and afterwards the 
giving of the law. So it is with the antitype: 
first the death of Christ for the life of the race; 
then the resurrection of the race; and afterwards 
the giving of "the law of the Spirit of 
life" to the race. In the type, Mount Sinai is 
the scene of the law-giving "glory;" in the 
antitype, Mount Zion is the scene of "the glory 
that excelleth." "For ye are not come unto 
the Mount that might be touched, and that 
burned with fire, nor unto blackness, and darkness, 
and tempest, and the sound of the trumpet, 
and the voice of words; which voice they that 
heard entreated that the word should not be 
spoken to them any more. ..but ye are come 
unto Mount Zion, and unto the city of the living 
God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable 
company of angels, to the general 
assembly and Church of the firstborn, which are 
written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, 
and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and 
to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, and 
to the blood of sprinkling which speaketh better 
things than that of Abel" (Heb. 12:18-24). 
In the type, one nation was delivered from 
Egypt, and led to Mount Sinai to receive the 
law; in the antitype, all nations are to be delivered 
from hades, and led to Mount Zion to 
receive the law. "And it shall come to pass in 
the last days that the mountain of the Lord's 
house shall be established in the top of the 
mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; 



and all nations shall flow unto it. And many 
people shall go, and say, Come ye, let us go up 
to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of 
the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his 
ways, and we will walk in his paths; for out of 
Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the 
Lord from Jerusalem" (Isaiah 2:2,3). This 
feature of the likeness between Christ and Moses 
being of supreme importance, it is necessary to 
consider it somewhat in detail. The likeness 
between "figure" and reality very often runs 
into broad contrast; and in no feature is this 
more observable than in the present one. The 
Apostle Paul deals largely with it in his epistles; 
and perhaps no passage could be found more 
graphic or sublime than that in 2 Cor. 3. In 
that short chapter are crowded together more 
ideas than are to be found in some volumes; 
and it is our present purpose to enumerate and 
emphasize some of them. 

1. The "figure" was written "in tables of 
stone;" the reality, "in fleshly tables of the 
heart." Stone is a fitting figure of human hearts 
petrified by sin. Of those upon whom the seed 
of the kingdom falls, a large proportion are 
found to be "stony ground." This condition 
of man was foreseen and provided for. "A 
new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit 
will I put within you; and I will take away the 
stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give 
you a heart of flesh" (Ezek. 36:26). Moses rehearsed 
all the words of the law unto the people; 
the Prophet like unto Moses not only rehearses 
the law, but opens the minds and the 
hearts of the people to receive it. The disciples 
were made aware of this soon after he rose from 
the dead. "Then opened he their understanding, 
that they might understand the Scriptures" 
(Luke 24:45); and this operation has been going 
on ever since, as all true believers can testify, of 
whom Lydia— "whose heart the Lord opened" 
(Acts 16:14)— may be taken as a sample. Moses 
carried the law to the people in his hands; 
Christ carries the law to the people in his heart. 
"Lo, I come; in the volume of the book it is 
written of me, I delight to do thy will, O my 
God; yea, thy law is within my heart" (Psa. 40:7,8). 
Love begets love. If we would open 
another's heart, we have to lay bare our own. 
God acts upon this principle; and God manifest 
in flesh was an embodiment of it. "Herein 
is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved 
us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for 
our sins" (1 John 4:10). This is the law of 
love, as it is "the law of faith" (Rom. 3:26); 
and faith "worketh by love" (Gal. 5:6). 



2. The "figure" was ministered "in letter;" 

the reality is ministered in "spirit." The "figure" 
is the "old" covenant; the reality is the 
"new." Some theologians would fain find the 
reality of the present figure in the letter of the 
Gospel. Not so the apostles— they never used 
one letter as the figure of another; they used 
one letter— "the letter"— as the figure of a 
higher and much superior force— "the Spirit." 
"Our Gospel" (says Paul) "came not unto you 

R1322:page 122 

in word only, but also in power, and in the holy 

Spirit, and in much assurance" (1 Thes. 1:5). 

"For the kingdom of God is not in word, but 

in power" (1 Cor. 4:20). Change the form of 

the letter, or the word, as you may, and you do 

not assist man to break his fetters— you merely 

change the form of his slavery. He exclaims 

still, "O wretched man that I am! who shall 

deliver me from the body of this death?" (Rom. 7:29). 

It is only through "the ministration 

of the Spirit" that man obtains freedom. "The 

Lord is that Spirit; and where the Spirit of the 

Lord is, there is liberty." Its ministration is 

"the perfect law of liberty" (James 1:25). 

"The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because 

the Lord hath anointed me to preach good 

tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to bind 

up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to 

the captives, and the opening of the prison to 

them that are bound; to proclaim the acceptable 

year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance 

of our God; to comfort all that mourn; to appoint 

unto them that mourn in Zion, to give 

unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for 

mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit 

of heaviness; that they might be called trees of 

righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that 

he might be glorified" (Isa. 61:1-3). 

3. The "figure" was "the ministration of 
condemnation" and "death;" the reality is 
"the ministration of righteousness" and "life." 
The law of Moses is "holy, and just, and good" 
(Rom. 7:12). It is the ministration of condemnation 
and death to man because he is unholy, 

unjust, bad. That which is right must 

always condemn that which is wrong. The law 

could do nothing else. It never was intended 

to do anything else. In proportion to the information 

it gives, it condemns. "I was alive 

without the law once; but when the commandment 

came, sin revived and I died" (Rom. 7:9). 

Man's radical need is Life. The law has 

neither promise nor power of life in it; and therefore 



it cannot meet his need. "If there had been 
a law given which could have given life, verily 
righteousness should have been by the law; but 
the Scripture hath concluded all under sin, that 
the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be 
given to them that believe." (Gal. 3:21,22). 
"The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus" 
is the law of righteousness. The operation of 
this law accomplishes in man what the law of 
Moses could never do. "For what the law 
could not do in that it was weak through the 
flesh, God, sending his own Son in the likeness 

R1323 : page 122 

of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in 

the flesh: that the righteousness of the law might 

be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, 

but after the Spirit" (Rom. 8:2-4). Some 

teachers who despair of obtaining righteousness 

by the law of Moses seem to think that it is obtainable 

by the law of conscience. That is a 

great mistake. The Jew has the law of conscience, 

as well as the law of Moses, and he has 

failed to obtain righteousness, either by the one 

or the other, or both combined. The fact is, 

the weakness of the law of Moses is through the 

flesh; and conscience in this respect is no exception 

to the other elements of the flesh— all 

are weak, and all are sinful. For righteousness, 

man must look much higher than himself. 

His only hope is in the Righteous One. "Behold, 

the days come, saith the Lord, that I will 

raise up unto David a righteous Branch, and a 

King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute 

judgment and justice in the earth: in his days 

Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell 

safely; and this is the name whereby he shall be 

called: THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS" (Jer. 23:5,6). 

Moses taught righteousness, and enforced 

it by sanctions; it is the Prophet like 

unto Moses "who of God is made unto us wisdom, 

and righteousness, and sanctification, and 

redemption" (1 Cor. 1:30). Moses imparted 

righteous words and righteous motives; in addition 

to these, the Righteous One imparts 

righteous life— the power which embodies righteous 

words in righteous deeds. Nor is this the 

power of imitation merely; it is the power of 

being. "He that doeth righteousness is righteous, 

even as he is righteous" (1 John 3:7). 

It is "the Spirit of life" permeating the "new 

man" as really as the blood permeates the "old." 

4. The "figure" was "glorious;" the reality 
"excelleth" in glory. Moses was with the Lord 
forty days and forty nights "on Mount Sinai, 



and did neither eat bread nor drink water." 
When he came down Aaron and all the children 

R1323 : page 123 

of Israel saw that "the skin of his face shone; 

and they were afraid to come nigh him" (Ex. 34:28-30). 

Even the ministration of condemnation 

and death was given in glory. "But if 

the ministration of death, written and engraven 

in stones, was glorious, so that the children of 

Israel could not steadfastly behold the face of 

Moses for the glory of his countenance;... 

how shall not the ministration of the Spirit be 

rather glorious? For if the ministration of condemnation 

be glory, much more doth the ministration 

of righteousness exceed in glory. For 

even that which was made glorious had no glory 

in that respect, by reason of the glory that excelleth." 

Our ideas of the glory of the Prophet 

like unto Moses, and of his ministration, are 

naturally contracted and very inadequate. We 

know something of the sufferings of Christ; but 

comparatively little of the glory which is to follow. 

Peter, James, and John, however, had a 

"vision" of it; and they tell us that "His face 

did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white 

as the light" (Matt. 17:2). Saul of Tarsus, 

too, had a "heavenly vision," and after it he 

was three days without sight, and neither did 

eat nor drink" (Acts 9:9). But, of all highly-favored 

ones, the saintly witness of Patmos 

stands pre-eminent, and his description of the 

Glorious One is graphic and sublime in the extreme: 

"I was in the Spirit on the Lord's Day, 

and heard behind me a great voice, as of a 

trumpet, saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the 

first and the last.... I turned to see the voice 

that spake with me;... and I saw one like 

unto the Son of man, clothed with a garment 

down to the foot, and girt about the paps with 

a golden girdle. His head and his hairs were 

white like wool, as white as snow; and his eyes 

were as a flame of fire; and his feet like unto 

brass, as if they burned in a furnace; and his 

voice as the sound of many waters. And he 

had in his right hand seven stars; and out of 

his mouth went a sharp two-edged sword; and 

his countenance was as the sun shineth in his 

strength. And when I saw him I fell at his feet 

as dead. And he laid his right hand upon me, 

saying unto me, Fear not; I am the first and the 

last, I am he that liveth and was dead; and behold, 

I am alive for evermore, amen; and have 

the keys of hell and of death" (Rev. 1:10-18). 

That is an inspired conception of the present 



glory and majesty of our Lord and Savior Jesus 
Christ. Perhaps we are to receive no fuller 
description of it until that day when we are to 
see it for ourselves. He is glorious in retinue, 
glorious in person, glorious in position, and 
glorious in power and authority. "All power 
(said he) is given unto me in heaven and in 
earth" (Matt. 28:18). The glory of Moses 
has been "done away," the glory of Christ 
"remaineth:" "For. ..the government shall 
be upon his shoulder; and his name shall be 
called Wonderful, Counsellor, the Mighty God, 
the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. 
Of the increase of his government, and peace, 
there shall be no end, upon the throne of David, 
and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish 
it with judgment and with justice from 
henceforth even for ever. The zeal of the Lord 
of Hosts will perform this" (Isa. 9:6,7). The 
lawgiver of Israel put a veil on his face when 
he spoke to the people; and that veil was typical 
of the blindness of their hearts. "If our 
Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost; 
in whom the god of this world hath blinded 
the minds of them that believe not, lest the 
light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is 
the image of God, should shine unto them." 
"For God, who commandeth the light to shine 
out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to give 
the light of the knowledge of the glory of God 
in the face of Jesus Christ."— 2 Cor. 4:3,4,6. 
5. The "figure" was a present possession; 
the reality is an object of hope: "Seeing then 
that we have such hope, we use great plainness 
of speech." It would be well for us to note 
that "the ministration of the Spirit" is an object 
of hope. Many plume themselves with the 
conceit that they have that ministration now in 
all its fulness. Not so the apostles. Paul makes 
their position clear: "By manifestation of the 
truth (wrote he), commending ourselves to every 
man's conscience in the sight of God." "In 
all things approving ourselves as the ministers 
of God.. .by the Holy Spirit, by love unfeigned, 
by the word of truth, by the power of 
God, by the armor of righteousness on the right 
hand and on the left." "In nothing am I behind 

R1323 : page 124 

the very chiefest apostles, though I am 
nothing. Truly the signs of an apostle were 
wrought among you in all patience, in signs, 
and wonders, and mighty deeds" (2 Cor. 4:2; 
6:4-7; 12:11,12). Who is there in the present 
day that can show such a record? And yet 



to Paul "the ministration of the Spirit" was 

an object of hope. One of his statements to the 

Corinthian believers is somewhat enigmatical: 

"Ye are our epistle, written in our hearts, known 

and read of all men." Mark: Believers are 

an epistle, that epistle is written in the apostle's 

heart, and it is known and read of all men. 

How can an epistle which is written in one man's 

heart be known and read of all men? It was 

Paul's hope that these believers would one day 

be "manifestly declared to be the epistle of 

Christ," which was written in his heart. "Our 

hope of you is steadfast, knowing that as you 

are partakers of the sufferings, so shall ye be 

also partakers of the consolation." "We are 

your rejoicing, even as ye also are ours in the 

day of the Lord Jesus" (2 Cor. 1:7-14). "We, 

brethren, being taken from you for a short time 

in presence, not in heart, endeavored the more 

abundantly to see your face with great desire." 

"For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? 

are not even ye in the presence of our 

Lord Jesus Christ at his coming" (1 Thes. 2:17,19). 

These believers were not then 

"manifestly declared to be the epistle of Christ," 

but it was Paul's hope that they would be so declared, 

and that hope was written in his heart. 

When is "the epistle of Christ" to be "known 

and read of all men?" When it becomes like 

its writer— the Christ: "Beloved, now are we 

the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear 

what we shall be; but we know that when he 

shall appear we shall be like him; for we shall 

see him as he is" (1 John 3:2). Why is the 

epistle to be like its writer? These words spake 

Jesus, and lifted up his eyes to heaven and said, 

"Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son that 

thy Son also may glorify thee....O Father, 

glorify me with thine own self, with the glory 

which I had with thee before the world was. I 

have manifested thy name unto the men which 

thou gavest me out of the world. ...I pray 

for them.... Neither pray I for these alone, 

but for them also which shall believe on me 

through their word; that they all may be one; 

as thou, Father, art in me and I in thee, that they 

also may be one in us; that the world may believe 

that thou hast sent me. And the glory 

which thou gavest me I have given them; that 

they may be one, even as we are one; I in them 

and thou in me, that they may be made perfect 

in one; and that the world may know that thou 

hast sent me, and hast loved them, as thou hast 

loved me" (John 17:1-23). Mark: Christ 

prays that he may be glorified; Christ prays 

that believers also may be glorified; Christ 



prays that he and they may be glorified, "that 
they may be made perfect in one;" and Christ 
prays "that they may be made perfect in one, 
that the world may know" that the Father hath 
sent him. When that marvelous prayer has 
been answered— as answered it certainly will be 
—then will believers be "known and read of 
all men— manifestly declared to be the epistle 
of Christ." Not written by that compound and 
antagonistic process which prevails at present; 
"but with the Spirit of the living God." Not 
in some crooked, cramped, contradictory, or 
undecipherable hieroglyphics— such as the best 
of us are; but in characters so clear that "the 
wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err" in 
reading them. Not limited to one nation, like 
the figure; the reality— the epistle of Christ— is 
to be sent to all the "ends of the earth," and 
will be "known and read of all men." 

6. The "figure," in its sanctions, did not extend 
beyond the first death; the reality, in its 
sanctions, includes the "second death." That 

R1324 : page 124 

there is to be a second death is clearly revealed: 
"The fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, 
and murderers, and whoremongers, and 
sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have 
their part in the lake which burneth with fire 
and brimstone; which is the second death" 
(Rev. 21:8). As the first death terminates the 
first life, so the second death may terminate the 
second life. Some theologians teach that there 
will be two terminations to one life; as well 
might they teach that there have been, or will 
be, two beginnings to one life; the Scriptures 
teach no such doctrine. There is a radical difference 
between the law regulating the first death 

R1324 : page 125 

and that regulating the second. The first death 
comes upon the entire human race (Adam excepted) 
independent of individual will. "As by 
one man sin entered into the world, and death 
by sin; and so death passed upon all men, in 
whom [margin] all have sinned" (Rom. 5:12). 
On the contrary, the second death will reach 
no man independent of his will. When "the 
marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath 
made herself ready," an offer of the water of 
life is to be made to every man. "The Spirit 
and the bride say, Come. And let him that 
heareth say, Come. And let him that is athirst 
come. And whosoever will, let him take the 



water of life freely" (Rev. 22:17). The only 
obstruction, or limitation, to the enjoyment of 
life as then to be offered will be the will of the 
hearer— "whosoever will, let him take the water 
of life freely." How very different that will be 
from the state of things prevailing now. Then 
will be in full force the law of life and death 
depicted by the prophets. "The soul that sinneth 
it shall die. The son shall not bear the 
iniquity of the father, neither shall the father 
bear the iniquity of the son; the righteousness 
of the righteous shall be upon him, and the 
wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him" 
(Ezek. 18:20). "And it shall come to pass that 
every soul which will not hear that prophet 
shall be destroyed from among the people" 
(Acts 3:23). "The water of life freely" then 
unto everyone who "will" receive it; "destruction 
from among the people" then unto everyone 
who "will not hear that prophet." There 
are those who say, deliverance from the second 
death may be expected; but the Scriptures utter 
no such word. They give no uncertain sound 
as to deliverance from the first death; but touching 
deliverance from the second death they are 
silent. While we ought to be prepared to speak 
whatever the Scriptures speak, we ought also to 
be prepared to be silent on whatever the Scriptures 
are silent. 

In conclusion: (1) It is simply impossible to 
compress "the ministration of the Spirit" so as 
to bring it within the limits of the present age. 
There is in that ministration a galaxy of life, 
and light, and liberty, and love, and power, and 
righteousness, and glory, and blessedness, which 
is altogether incompatible with the present state 
of things. The more determinedly the work of 
compression is driven, the more conspicuous becomes 
its failure; and therefore, of necessity, 
we have to look forward to post-resurrection 
times for the beneficent fulness of that ministration. 
As that is so, it may be asked: (2) Is 
there no part of the "ministration of the Spirit" 
now? Most certainly there is. "Simeon hath 
declared how God at the first did visit the Gentiles, 
to take out of them a people for his name" 
(Acts 15:14). "Of his own will begat he us 
with the word of truth, that we should be a kind 
of first fruits of his creatures" (Jas. 1:18). 
Those being taken out from the others now are the 
"first fruits." So is it as to the blessedness enjoyed 
now by those who are taken out. "In 
whom also after that ye believed ye were sealed 
by that Holy Spirit of promise, which is the 
earnest of our inheritance" (Eph. 1:13,14). 
But, the "first fruits" are not the "lump," 



nor is the "earnest" the "inheritance." The 

"first fruits" and the "earnest" are indications 

of the nature of the "lump" and of the "inheritance, 

and pledges, too, that the "lump" 

and the "inheritance" will follow in due time. 

"For if the first fruits be holy, the lump is also 

holy; and if the root be holy, so are the 

branches." "O the depth of the riches both 

of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How 

unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways 

past finding out!"— Rom. 11:16,23. 

JOSEPH MOFFITT. 



R1324 : page 125 

It is said that the Jewish population of Russia 
doubles its numbers in thirty years, while the 
native population doubles only in ninety years, 
and the population of Europe only in one 
hundred and fifty years. The Russians therefore 
fear the time when they will be outnumbered. 

The Jews who are being driven by persecution 
to Palestine, although unable to understand 
each other's language, have all some 
knowledge of Hebrew, which, it is said, is rapidly 
becoming a living tongue in the Holy 
Land. 



R1324 : page 126 

LETTER TO THE CHURCH AT ALLEGHENY. 



[Brother Russell's letter to the Church at 
Allegheny is published below as of interest to 
all TOWER readers.] 

Odessa, Bessarabia, Russia. 
August 1st, 1891. 

TO THE DEAR BRETHREN AND SISTERS OF 
THE CHURCH AT ALLEGHENY --Greeting to 
you all in the name of our Redeemer and King. 

We are thus far upon our long journey and 
are feeling weary from so constant travel; but, 
thank the Lord, we both are quite well— spiritually 
and physically. We pray for you all the 
same heavenly blessings. 

You will be pleased to learn that our journey 
is proving profitable to us, as hoped. I will 
not give details or particulars now (leaving 
that for a general report in the TOWER), but will 



merely say that we already appreciate the situation 
of Europe much better than before. 

You will be glad to learn that during our 
journey we have met several who manifested a 
deep interest in God's great plan of the ages, 
and who said they would procure and read 
DAWN, and search the Scriptures to see whether 
these things be so presented therein. One of 
these was a Hebrew with whom we rode from 
Dresden to Vienna. The gentleman (a merchant) 
had a noble and intelligent face, and 
until he so informed us we did not surmise him 
to be a Jew. We had inquired of him respecting 
the laboring classes— their daily wages, etc., 
and conversation turned upon the proportion 
of Catholics and Protestants, and finally to the 
subject of true heart-religion. He remarked 
that although almost all the people of Austria, 
except the Jews, are counted as Roman Catholic 
Christians, yet a truly religious spirit is 
lacking. He said that there were strong evidences 
that a persecution of the Jews in Austria 
may soon break out which would lead to as 
great or greater affliction upon that race than 
is now being experienced in some parts of 
Russia. 

We assured him that these things must so be; 
that God through his prophets had clearly 
pointed out that he would permit persecution 
in all lands in order to drive out the Jews and 
to give them no rest; and further, that the 
Scriptures showed that the time for this was 
now due; but that while Israel feels the trouble 
sharply, this trouble (Isa. 26:16-19) is really 
unlike all others of the past 1800 years upon 
that people— it is not a mark of divine disfavor, 
but, contrariwise, of favor; for by it the 
Lord would awaken them from present lethargy 
and contentment among the nations, to cause 
their hearts to long for the Promised Land as 
an everlasting possession, because his time has 
now come to re-gather in Palestine the faithful, 
longing Jews and to remove from their 
hearts the blindness of unbelief. 

But, we inquired, what evidences do you see 
of a persecution of the Jews in Austria. "Very 
strong indications," he answered; "for instance, 
stories are being circulated among the 
ignorant to the effect that the Jews kidnap 
Christian children and kill them and drink 
their blood; and the same class is told that 
if it were not for the Jews they would all be 
prosperous, money plentiful, wages high, etc. 
Why," said he, "one labor agitator publicly 
declared recently that the only remedy for the 
grievances of the poorer classes is to kill all 



the Jews. He said, 'We must do with them as 
was once done with the French at Seville' 
(—massacre them). That man," he continued, 
"is well known as a bad man: he had already 
done penal service (once for making counterfeit 
money); yet so greatly was that man appreciated 
for his hatred of the Jews that he was 
elected to the Austrian Parliament by a large 
majority." 

We then briefly pointed out the matters detailed 
in MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., how that 
God's Word reveals his plan: that as Israel had 
1845 years of favor, which terminated with their 
rejection of Messiah, Jesus, so they were to 
have 1845 years of disfavor (during which 
period the Gospel Church would be selected), 
after which favor would return to Israel and 
their blindness of unbelief in Messiah be removed. 
As we proceeded to quote and to 

R1324 : page 127 

cite the prophecies referring to this "double," 
our friend began to note the passages, saying, 
"I am greatly interested in all this, for I am 
an Israelite." 

We assured him of our love for all who are 
Israelites indeed, and proceeded to point out that 
the "double" was completed in 1878; that in 
that very year a Jew was the leader in the Berlin 
Conference of Nations; and that there began 
the preparation for Israel's return to God's 
favor and to Palestine. We pointed out that 
as they as a nation were 37 years in falling, so 

R1325 : page 127 

they would be 37 years in rising again to 
nationality, and that the present and prospective 
persecutions in all lands were but parts of 
the favor of God to bring them as a people to 
a condition in which all sincere Israelites would 
be blessed by Messiah, the Truth and the 
Kingdom. 

The Hebrew friend and another traveling 
companion from Ireland, who overheard the 
conversation, are to receive the DAWN, and at 
once begin careful studies of these things. 
May God's blessing be upon them as they 
search, and may the true light— Christ— enlighten 
them both in all things pertaining to 
his name and Kingdom. 

One of the most interesting of our experiences 
thus far was our visit to Brother Joseph 
Rabinowitch at his home in Kischenev, Russia. 
He welcomed us warmly, as did all the family, all 



of whom are believers in the Lord Jesus. We 
had a pleasant and, we trust, a profitable visit, in 
which we learned what we could of the work, 
past and present, among the Israelites. 

We found Brother Rabinowitch pleasantly 
and comfortably situated: his home, office 
and new hand press for printing tracts are 
alongside of, and connected with, a new and 
very neat house of worship, which will seat 
about one hundred and twenty-five persons. 
We were struck with the close correspondence 
in many particulars between his work among 
the Israelites and our work among Christians. 
He finds the Israelites looking for a Kingdom 
of God, but disbelieving in Jesus as the Redeemer 
and King. We find Christian people 
trusting in Christ Jesus as Redeemer, but ignorant 
and disbelieving concerning the Gospel of 
the Kingdom. He finds many Jews anxious, 
privately, to know about the Redeemer, but fearful 
to incur the odium of their co-religionists. 
We find the same yearning and fear among 
Christians concerning the Kingdom. Undoubtedly 
both parts of the work (for it is one work 
in the sense of being under the one Lord) are 
making greater progress than appears on the 
surface. A heart work is in progress, much of 
which will bear no fruit until the great time of 
trouble has further unsealed the vision and the 
understanding. 

Brother Rabinowitch has the New Testament 
and quite a number of tracts printed in what 
he terms Hebrew-Russo-German jargon— the 
only language which the lower classes can 
fully comprehend. Kischenev contains about 
50,000 Israelites, so he has an excellent location 
for his work. 

We found him well acquainted with the 
teachings of DAWN and in deep sympathy with 
the same. We took sweet counsel together of 
the Lord's work and each other's experiences, 
and of the necessity for holding fast to the 
word of the Lord's testimony. 

Fearing that he was inclined to preach Christ's 
first advent and his sacrifice for sin almost to 
the exclusion of the Kingdom, we urged that he 
forget not the Lord's instruction upon this subject 
—"This Gospel of the Kingdom must be 
preached in all the world for a witness." We 
urged that in presenting the subject to the mind 
of an Israelite, Christ Jesus the Redeemer of 
men would be much more acceptable, if presented 
from the standpoint of Christ Jesus the 
King, about to establish his long-promised Kingdom 
—to make which an everlasting Kingdom he 
died ("the just for the unjust") 1800 years ago. 



Brother Rabinowitch replied that he well 
knew the truth of what we said, but that though 
he had not totally neglected the subject of the 
coming of Christ as the King, yet he had heretofore 
felt that the second coming of Christ and 
the Kingdom then to be established were subjects 
for those more advanced in Christian 
knowledge, and that, therefore, his discourses 
in the past had been chiefly in proof that Jesus 
of Nazareth was the Messiah foretold by the 
prophets. 

R1325 : page 128 

Our advice to him was, that the Church had 
for eighteen hundred years preached thus, and 
to little effect; and that the Lord's Word now 
pointed out a new message for Israel, saying: 
"Comfort ye, comfort ye my people: speak ye 
comfortably to Jerusalem and cry unto her that 
her appointed times are accomplished, for she 
hath received of the Lord's hand double for 
all her sins." (Isa. 40:1,2.) We suggested 
that this meant a preaching to them of the return 
of divine favor to them as a people before 
they had believed in Christ, and that with this 
return of God's favor would come the opening 
of the long-blinded eyes to recognize in Christ 
Jesus the Sun of Righteousness whose beams of 
blessing were already shining upon them. 
While assenting to the proposition, that without 
a full acceptance of Christ there is no possibility 
of everlasting salvation for either Jew or 
Gentile, we urged that a measure of blessing 
was about to come to the people of Israel in 
order to reveal Christ to all who are Israelites 
indeed. We reminded him, also, of the Lord's 
declaration that the knowledge of the Kingdom 
about to be established constitutes no insignificant 
part of the Gospel which the Lord wished 
to have preached in all the world, but which so 
many Christians had lost sight of— "This Gospel 
of the Kingdom must first be preached in all 
the world for a witness." In this connection 
we related to him our experiences with the 
Hebrew merchant en route for Vienna, and his 
interest so keenly and so quickly awakened 
by the fulfilment of the prophecies of Isaiah 
and Jeremiah, now manifestly in progress in its 
due time. We believe that the Kingdom will, 
hereafter, have a still more important place in 
Brother Rabinowitch's preaching, and we doubt 
not that the results will proportionately increase, 
to the praise of the Great King, in the turning 
away of blindness from Israel. 

At parting we knelt in prayer with Brother 



Rabinowitch and his family in the forepart of 

the Chapel, each committing the other to the 

love and care of the one Lord whose work we 

each serve, though in different spheres. We 

left, extending our warm thanks to all for the 

kind hospitality received, and with our best 

wishes for their future welfare, receiving the same 

good wishes from each of them. At the railway 

station we were again greeted by Brother 

Rabinowitch and his son John (a very promising 

young man of about twenty years, from 

whom we hope to hear very soon in the Lord's 

vineyard). They had come to see that we experienced 

no difficulty with our tickets and baggage, 

and especially for a final good-bye and 

"God bless you." Both father and son kissed 

me (a custom much more usual among men 

here than in America), saying, "Pray for us 

when you are at Jerusalem, the City of the 

Great King, and especially when on the 

Mount of Olives." We assured them that 

we would do so, and asked their prayers also 

with us. 

And now, beloved in the Lord, Farewell. 
When at the Mount of Olives, as everywhere, 
be assured that the Church of Christ at Allegheny, 
as well as the saints everywhere scattered 
abroad, will be remembered and loved 
and prayed for by my beloved helpmate, Sister 
Russell, as well as by myself. 

Truly your brother and servant, 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL. 



page 128 

When you change your address, state where from, as 
well as where to. 

If needful to write a second time about any order, give date 
of previous order, how money was sent and full particulars. 

The price of this journal was advanced to 60 cents a year, 
last January, when it assumed the present form. The additional 
charge does not cover the additional expense. 

The offer of the MILLENNIAL DAWN in paper covers at 
15 cents to those who give a portion of their time in helping 
to circulate it has heretofore been made only to those 
who purchased as many as ten copies of any single volume 
at one order. We have many inquiries for smaller quantities, 
however, and have decided that hereafter we will 
supply as few as five copies of any one of the three volumes 
in paper covers at colporteur's rate, 15 cents each, 
five for 75 cents. 

Please do not ask us to deviate from this rule. We 
must have system to avoid waste of valuable time. If 
you want more than five of a kind take ten; if more, then 



take twenty, thirty or forty. Remember that the books for 
colporteurs are put up in packs of fives, tens and twenties. 



R1325 : page 129 
