How Can You Get Better Use from Your Clothes?
CLOTHING is one of man’s basic needs. For a large segment of earth’s population it constitutes a major expense. Hence the matter of getting the best use from clothes is likely of concern to you. But what can you do personally to get better use from your clothing and thereby reduce your expenses?
Making a Wise Selection
The initial step involves making a wise selection when buying clothes. To avoid laying aside a garment long before having gotten full benefit from it, you will usually find it best to stay away from fads or extreme styles that are quickly outdated. Purchasing basic garments of fine quality whenever possible will prove to be more rewarding. Being designed to last longer, such garments are often somewhat more conservative in style. But this is no disadvantage. As a more conservative garment does not tend to stand out as much when styles change, one is less likely to stop wearing it as new styles begin to predominate. Additionally, fine quality clothing fits better and maintains its shape and overall good appearance much longer.
Before making a purchase, you do well to examine clothing carefully. Is there evidence of good workmanship? Are buttons fastened securely? Is the stitching close and even? Are buttonholes and hems finished neatly? Do pockets and linings consist of tightly woven, unstarched cloth? Has there been no skimping with material? Is there enough cloth in the seams so that it will not pull away from the stitching? Do zippers work easily? Is the weave close and firm? If you can answer the applicable questions in the affirmative, this is a good indication that you are examining a garment of desirable quality.
Consideration should also be given to the labels or tags. These reveal much about what might be expected from the item of clothing in the way of shrinking and fading. Moreover, the directions given for care will be helpful in the future.
Not to be overlooked are the expenses that may result after the garment is purchased. Especially persons with modest income have to be concerned about getting clothes that will not run up cleaning expenses and that can be mended so that the sewing is not too noticeable. Garments of a mixture of colors will prove to be more satisfactory in this regard than those of solid color.
Attention should be given as to how new clothes will fit into your present wardrobe. You will derive fuller use from an item of clothing (such as a tie, pair of pants, sports coat, blouse or skirt) that matches other garments you already have. Buying women’s stockings of the same color has an added advantage. When a “run” develops in one of the stockings, the other one can be used as a spare.
Of course, purchasing clothes of the right size is also important. Subjected to extra strain, a garment that is too tight will pull out of shape and wear out sooner. If sleeves and trousers are too long, they will show signs of wear at the edges much sooner than those of proper length. Clothes that call for major alterations often cannot be made to fit well and therefore wear out sooner.
When clothing is bought for children, consideration must be given to growth. This does not require purchasing clothes that are much too large. It is better to select clothing with features that make adjustments possible. These include cuffs on pants as well as tucks, seams and pleats that can readily be let out.
Proper Care
Once the selection is made, clothing must be cared for properly. Therefore be guided by the directions given on the label for laundering or cleaning. Do not delay in caring for split seams, tears and stains. As dust and dirt have a deteriorating effect on clothes, regularly brush garments, especially the pockets and the cuffs of trousers. Avoid overloading pockets, since this spoils the appearance of a garment and reduces its useful life.
The less clothes have to be pressed, the longer they will last. Rotating clothes and giving them a rest is therefore beneficial. Coats, trousers and the like should be hung up carefully so that the pressing will renew itself. As knit garments tend to stretch, they should be folded neatly rather than placed on hangers.
When storing out-of-season clothes, make sure that they are clean. Spots and stains attract such pests as moths and carpet beetles. Woolen garments should be protected with a mothproofing product. By placing clothing in dust-free containers and storing them in a cool, dry place, you can do much to prevent mildew or mold.
Yes, proper care of well-chosen clothes can go a long way in making them last and look better longer. Often this requires just a little more thought, time and effort. But the investment is well worth it.

