VOL. XXXI MARCH 15 No. 6 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

A Layman on the "New Theology" 99 

The Shepherd and His Flock 100 

Money Changes All Things 101 

Verging on Danger 101 

"All Deceivableness of Unrighteousness" 102 

Is the Mediator an Advocate? 104 

When God Covenanted with Abraham 105 

"He is Not a Jew— Outwardly" 106 

Note Further Misinterpretation 106 

Sin and Sickness Related 107 

Our Easter Lesson 108 

Faith, the Channel of Blessing 108 

Re Berean Studies in the Scriptures 110 



Re Fifth-Sunday Local Conventions 110 

Some Interesting Letters Ill 

page 98 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



R4586 : page 98 

BROTHER RUSSELL IN EUROPE AND AFRICA 



Brother Russell proposes a very hasty European tour. Incidentally, 
at the instance of the newspaper people connected 
with the publication of his sermons, he will extend the journey 
to Jerusalem and the Great Pyramid in Egypt. A brief outline 
of his journey follows: 

Leave New York April 5, arrive Cherbourg (France), April 
11; Paris, April 12; Basle (Switzerland), April 13. (Here an 
all-day meeting with French and Swiss brethren is proposed.) 



Rome, April 14; Naples, April 15; Alexandria (Egypt), April 
18; Cairo (and Pyramids), April 19; Port Said, April 20; 
Jaffa, April 21; Jerusalem and vicinity, April 21-24. 

Return same route to Rome, April 30; Venice (Italy), May 
1; Vienna (Austria), May 2; Warsaw (Russia), May 3, arriving 
7:42 a.m., leaving midnight. (An all-day meeting is proposed.) 
Berlin, May 4, arriving 11:25 a.m., leaving 10 p.m., 
May 5. Here we hope to meet many German friends as well 
as representatives from Norway, Sweden and Denmark. May 
6, Barmen-Elberfeld; London, arriving Charing Cross Station, 
5:12 p.m., May 7. 

London meetings, May 8, 15 and 21. The intermediate dates 
are open for the various cities of England, Ireland and Scotland 
as reports may be received at our London branch office. 

page 98 



1910-SUMMER CONVENTIONS-1910 

Louisville, Ky., June 17-19.— Brother Russell will be present 
on the 19th and be the principal speaker. 

Chicago, 111., June 24-26.— Brother Russell will be present on 
the 26th and be the principal speaker. 

Lake Chautauqua (Celeron Auditorium), July 30th to Aug. 
7.— This will be the chief or General Convention of the year. 
Specially favorable excursion rates have been secured. The 
cheapest rate will be for those who will start their journey 
July 29. On that date tickets should be bought to Chautauqua 
for one fare plus $2. Another date will be announced 
later at one and one-half fare for the round trip. Full particulars 
then. We merely announce the dates now that all 
desiring to attend may make timely arrangements. The location 
is ideal. Specially low rates of board for the nine days 
or less will be secured at cottages and hotels on the lake shore 
at $1.00 per day and up. Numerous little steamers plying 
the lake will afford easy communication with the Auditorium. 



ONE-DAY CONVENTIONS TO BE ADDRESSED 
BY THE EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL: 

WASHINGTON, D. C, MARCH 13 

Morning and evening sessions, Masonic Temple, Ninth and 
F streets, N.W., 10:30 a.m. Praise, Prayer and Testimony 
meeting. 7:30 p.m. Brother Russell will address the friends. 
Discourse for the Public, New National Theater, at 3 p.m. 
Subject, "The Overthrow of Satan's Empire." Visiting friends 
will be heartily welcomed. 

ALLENTOWN, PA., MARCH 20 

All meetings in Lyric Theater, 25 North Sixth street. 



Praise, Prayer and Testimony meeting at 10 a.m. Address 
for the interested at 1 1 a.m. Afternoon service for the Public 
at 3 p.m. Subject, "Man's Past, Present and Future." Visiting 
friends will be warmly welcomed. 

BOSTON, MASS., MARCH 27 

Praise, Prayer and Testimony Meeting at 10:30 a.m. Evening 
meeting for the interested at 7:30. Morning and evening 
meetings at Franklin Union Hall, Berkeley street, near junction 
of Tremont street. Afternoon session for the Public at 3 p.m. 
in Tremont Temple, Tremont street, between School and 
Broomfield streets. Subject, "Man's Past, Present and Future." 
Visiting friends will be heartily welcomed. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., APRIL 3 

Morning services at 10:30 o'clock in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, 
13-17 Hicks street, two blocks from P.R.R. Annex 
Ferry and five minutes' walk from Brooklyn Bridge entrance. 
Question meeting in the same building at 8 o'clock, preceded 
by a half hour's song service. Discourse for the Public at 3 
p.m. in Brooklyn Academy of Music, on Lafayette avenue, St. 
Felix street, and Ashland place. Subject, "Overthrow of 
Satan's Empire." Visiting friends will be warmly welcomed. 



R4581 : page 99 

A LAYMAN ON THE "NEW THEOLOGY" 

[A STRIKING AND ABLE REVIEW OF DR. ELIOT'S VIEWS.] 

THE following from The Religious Herald 
contains considerable truth and is well worth 
the reading as bearing on matters seen from 
THE WATCH TOWER:- 

"You have probably seen in the papers 
references to the definition of the new theology 
given by Dr. Eliot, president emeritus 
of Harvard College, and for thirty-five years 
the first citizen of Massachusetts, if not of 
New England. But second-hand newspaper 
accounts are apt to be inaccurate; I thought you might 
like to see the original, and accordingly am enclosing a 
copy of the Harvard Theological Review, under separate 
cover, containing his lecture. 

"Dr. Eliot has been much criticized, but for my part I 
admire his courage and honesty. Now, as always, he 
speaks the truth as he sees it, without fear or favor. Too 
many of the advocates of the new theology pursue the 
policy which a Methodist minister in a neighboring parish 
explained to me; they express their views freely at ministers' 
meetings, but have a tacit understanding not to mention 
them to the pews. And this respect for the tender 



feelings of the superstitious ones (!) who occupy the 
pews is, after all, not impolitic; for if the new theology 
were understood by the average layman, he would find it 
so hard to distinguish from the old atheism that, according 
to his temper, he would stay at home and save his money, 
or would try to get a new pastor installed. 

"The Methodist clergyman I mention tells me that a 
great majority of the younger ministers of that Church, 
in this part of the country, are believers in the new 
theology. A majority of the Protestant ministers that I 
know hereabouts adhere to it, including most of the 
younger men. 

"You will see that Dr. Eliot's lecture consists of two 
parts. The first, which is negative, is practically undistinguishable, 
so far as I can see, from ancient atheism. 
In fact, the new theology, as I understand it, in its advanced 
form, has less belief in a God (considered as a 
personality, with conscience and will), who created the 
universe and the living creatures in it, than David Hume, 
Edward Gibbon, Thomas Payne, Voltaire, and J. J. Rousseau 
had. 

"As to the positive part of the new theology— well, I 
shall wish to know what you think of it. 

"It is easy for me to understand this state of mind of 
the atheist, agnostic, or materialist, and in this age so 
many of the foremost intellects, especially on the Continent, 
deny all evidence of the existence of God, that I am 
not surprised to learn that any man holds such views. 
But to deny positively, on the one hand, all those conceptions 
of the Creator that seem natural to man, and then, 
without adhering to the logic of atheism, agnosticism, or 
materialism, to set up the hazy, and, to my mind, illogical 
view of God which is presented in this new theology, 
hardly seems normal, nor does it seem as if it could ever 
acquire many earnest followers among the common people. 
It seems to me to bear strong internal evidence of its 
origin in the study of the skeptical professor of theology, 
and to have, if I may use the expression, a perhaps unconscious 
but yet hypocritical origin. Of course, when I 
say this, I do not at all refer to Dr. Eliot. 

"But let us put ourselves for a moment in the place of 
the man who has been ordained to the Christian ministry, 
who has lost faith and lacks the courage to turn his back 
on his calling and his friends, to confess himself a failure, 
and to begin life anew. To such a one the new theology 
appeals strongly; it saves his consistency; it saves his 
salary; it saves him from the humiliation that open 
apostasy would involve. Skeptics commonly feel more or 
less dislike of an ex -priest; the faithful consider him an 
apostate. But by embracing the so-called new theology, 
he holds his pastorate or lectureship and wins reputation 
as being learned, liberal and progressive. 

"Whatever the cause may be, the so-called new theology 
seems to be dominant in most Protestant theological seminaries 
in Germany, England and the northern part of the 
United States, or where not dominant, to be rapidly increasing 



its influence. 

"You will note in Dr. Eliot's lecture that in denying 
the existence of a conscious personal God (as distinguished 
from the God who is the sum of all living souls, human 
and brute, good, bad and indifferent alike), he denies all 
hope of a future life. 

"How curious, also, the misunderstanding of the mission 
of pain on pages 399 and 400. The most ordinary intellect 
ought to see that if there were no pain in the world, a baby 
would chew off its own fingers; a cat, or even a child, 
would walk into the fire before intellect had taught him 
his danger; and so on to the end of the chapter. 

"Perhaps one might think that because this lecture was 
delivered at Harvard it is too extreme a statement of the 
New Theology. But the New Theology is world-wide. For 
many of its disciples it has no God (except as the soul of 
the universe may be a God, if one can grasp that idea), no 
inspired Bible, no heaven-sent Savior of the world; its 
fundamental principle, if I have been able to make it out, 
is the absolute and positive negation of any supernatural 

R4581 :page 100 

power whatever in the past, present or future, with all 
that that implies. And as far as its professors and votaries 
have come under my observation, it is, in this fundamental 
principle, pretty much the same at Harvard, Union, Yale, 
Chicago; very much the same among Episcopalians, Methodists 
and Baptists as it is among Unitarians and 
Congregationalists; and it seems to have won a large 
majority of the young clergy of the Protestant Churches 
in this section. There are minor differences, of course; 
Dr. Eliot's position is the advanced logical position, 
towards which all the others are tending, but which not 
all have yet reached. Some men, moreover, are entirely 
subject to the influence of the new theology; others are 
influenced partly by the new and partly by the old in all 
stages of progress, but in general acquiring a little more 
of the new leaven and losing a little more of the old each 
year. 

"Well, this is rather a long letter on theology from one 
who is not a theologian. My interest is not wholly, perhaps 
not chiefly, theological; it is rather practical and sociological. 
I have long been convinced that the Church 
could not adopt Darwinism without being killed by it, and 
the New Theology is largely the effect of Darwinism on 
the Church. 

"We all know that there is a sort of elective affinity 
between unbridled democracy and atheistic socialism. By 
unbridled democracy, I mean the kind which gives to the 
Sea Island negro the same political weight as to his former 
master; which gives to the half -pauper, half-vicious 
denizens of the slum districts of our great cities the same 
voting power as the independent householder or business 
man possesses; aye, which gives them more, since as they 
are more numerous, they who pay no direct taxes are allowed, 



in effect, to levy them on those who do, by electing 
aldermen and other officers as worthless as themselves 
—the sort of democracy which really believes the old 
maxim, "Vox populi, vox Dei." This may seem like political 
heresy to many, but when the new theology shall 
have destroyed the common man's belief in God, the feeling 
of moral obligation to him and to our fellows, as 
his children (as it will do if it is not vigorously opposed), 
and when the Marxian missionaries shall have 
made as much progress in teaching their gospel of robbery 
to the negroes of the South and the poorer classes of our 
cities as they have already made on the Continent, and 
are making in London, we shall begin to appreciate what 
sort of a Vox Dei the Vox populi of a godless people can 
be. This affinity between extreme democracy and atheistic 
socialism has long been strikingly manifest on the Continent; 
it begins to be seen in England and America. The 
North of Germany, I am told, is so far won by atheistic 
and Marxian socialism— the so-called Social Democracy— 
that the existing order is chiefly maintained in the German 
Empire by the Catholic South, the country districts, and 
the well-drilled bayonet. 

"And to me, one of the most interesting things in connection 
with the so-called new theology is the fact that so 
many of its disciples are showing about as much affinity 
for militant socialism as the atheism of the Continent 
shows, and for the same reasons. This, of course, is not 
true of all its disciples or teachers— is emphatically not 
true of Dr. Eliot— but it seems to me to be a tendency of 
the system. 

"Christianity teaches that man is inclined to sin; that 
his natural impulses are often bad; that he needs human 
government as well as Divine guidance; "the powers that 
be are ordained of God." The majority of the followers 
of Marx and many of the professors of the New Theology 
alike deny the existence of God (in the sense in which 
the Church has heretofore understood that existence), 
and the tendency of man to sin; they say that man's natural 
impulses are good and for the most part teach that 
salvation lies in the destruction of poverty and misery. 
Christianity teaches brotherly love, but forbids robbery 
and even covetousness. Marxian socialism pretends to 
advance brotherly love, but its maxim is the appropriation 

R4582 : page 100 

of all the means of production (farm and factory alike) 

to the use of the State, without compensation; and the 

majority of its apostles, knowing well that it can never 

succeed where Christianity prevails, wage constant and 

bitter warfare on the Church. And it is from their camp 

that the attacks on the doctrine of a future life, as tending 

to make contented slaves of men in this world, most frequently 

come. That rather astounding doctrine has to 

my knowledge resounded from at least three or four of 

the pulpits of this country within the last year, without 



exciting remark or answer, so far as I have heard. 

"The inter-relations or inter-actions between Darwinism, 
the New Theology (or its equivalent, for most practical 
purposes, the old skepticism) and Marxian socialism 
are interesting and in a way important, but much too large 
for a friendly letter." 



R4582 : page 100 

THE SHEPHERD AND HIS FLOCK 

VOGUE, a secular journal, may not have keen 
spiritual vision, but it surely sees some 
earthly things rationally, as the following 
extract clearly proves:— 

"Although the masculine non-church goer 
has for a long time attracted the disapproving 
attention of Church writers as well as 
of a large number of the clergy, who have 
sternly rebuked him from the pulpit, he 
stubbornly continues to pursue the even 
tenor of his way. And worse than this, whereas in days 
gone by he alone was to any great extent open to the 
charge of backsliding in such respect, of late years his 
wife and daughter in increasing numbers have taken to 
omitting regular church attendance, and that without the 
least loss of caste, except, perhaps, in small, conservative 
communities. 

"Why is it that men and women who not only lead respectable 
lives, but who devote much of the time they can 
spare from the most pressing personal claims to what are 
incontestably good works, are today so frequently to be 
counted among those who habitually absent themselves 
from divine service? This is the question over which 
many good parsons are in despair, and it is but natural 
that they should be, for between their concern for the 
souls of their communities, and the prospect of being left 
without employment, they have much to worry them. It is 
also the question that is perplexing church councils, which 
are at their wit's end to devise methods of persuading 
(coercion being no longer permissible in the Protestant 
communion, at least) people to come back into the fold. 
But in spite of all the perturbation and efforts at reform 
on the part of the religious agencies of the age, the number 
of the non-church goers keeps on increasing at a rate 
alarming to those who regard Sunday observation, according 
to ecclesiastical formula, as the only test of character, 
and the only hope of salvation. 

"Perceiving the trouble churches are in over the drifting 

R4582:page 101 

away of their congregations, ex-President Eliot, of 
Harvard, not long ago submitted to an interested world his 



plan of a new religion, but although it was cordially received 
by the public, the ecclesiastics would have none of 
it. The projected system failed to provide for any phase 
of current ecclesiasticism, including the ministerial office, 
mysticism and the like, and, therefore it is not surprising 
that they frowned upon it, and refused to permit it Christian 
sanction. But whether the Protestant leaders like it or 
not, the only hope of winning the majority of those who 
have forsaken the Church back to affiliation with religious 
groups is the reduction of Church system, as nearly as 
practicable, to the two principles— Love Thy God With 
All Thy Heart and Thy Neighbor As Thyself. In spite 
of ecclesiasticism the more enlightened classes are already 
engaged in conjuring out in a myriad practical ways the 
command of neighborly love, and it is only by a convincing 
presentation of the claim of God upon the loyalty of 
the race, that the majority of the unchurched can be 
made to include that also in their creed of life. 

"The right of private judgment— fought for and won 
centuries ago— is what is now being exercised by the non-church-goer, 
and what he asks of the ethical leader is not 
high-priced choirs to discourse glorious harmonies, or 
sacerdotal vaudeville of any kind. These aids to crowd-drawing 
do not touch the core of the matter. His demands 
are more serious and fundamental, for he believes that the 
hour has come when the Church must go back to the 
Master, and seek from him a new interpretation that 
shall fit the requirements of this age." 



R4582:page 101 

MONEY CHANGES ALL THINGS 

ASSUREDLY the public prints assist in keeping 
the world straight— sometimes by sarcastic 
allusions like the following from the Easton 
Call. Undoubtedly the intelligence and 
freedom of the press should be credited with 
much of the advantage of our day over 
that termed "the dark ages." We quote:— 

"One of the most amusing phases of 
the sacerdotal vaudeville this country is witnessing, 
is the way schools and colleges of 

the denominational kind are trying to shake off their religious 
connections in their greed to get hold of some of 
Mr. Carnegie's money. It is a well-known fact that Mr. 
Carnegie has no gifts for institutions ruled by church 
boards and trustees. To comply with this condition, 
Dickinson College, always regarded as a Methodist institution, 
has been turning all kinds of somersaults. The 
trustees of that college met in Philadelphia recently and 
passed resolutions, denying that the Methodist Church had 
any control over Dickinson College whatever, and forbidding 
the journals of that Church from publishing any such 



statement. The president of the college was also instructed 
to report his college as "nonsectarian" in the 
future. So that the reforms that once caused men to be 
tortured and burned at the stake, now come voluntarily 
to the tune of the Carnegie funds. 

"Soon we may expect to see Lafayette College saying 
good-bye to the Presbyterian fathers and falling in line for 
something more substantial than the dope handed down by 
John Calvin. 

"Of course, the ecclesiastical gentlemen are making 
a stubborn fight to preserve the special privileges of the 
clergy. They say that if you take away the religious 
foundation, the colleges will go to pieces. This reminds 
us of a story: Some years ago a large manufacturing 
plant at High Bridge, New Jersey, was discovered on fire 
at night. A message was sent to Phillipsburg for aid and 
one of the local companies loaded its engine on a car 
and went to High Bridge, but arrived after the buildings 
had burned. Early the next morning an Irishman arrived 
in Phillipsburg from High Bridge. 'Well, Pat,' asked 
some one, 'how did our boys make out last night at the 
fire?' 'Sure, and they did nobly well,' answered Pat; 
'after strinuous ifforts, they succeeded in savin' ivery 
bit of the ground on which the great buildings were 
built.'" 



R4582:page 101 

VERGING ON DANGER 

THE following from the Censor shows how the 
people, as represented by their spokesmen, 
are thinking. Our admonition to our readers 
is, "Seek ye first the Kingdom"! "Be content 
with such things as ye have"! While 
seeing the strife and trouble coming on 
the world take no part in it. "Wait ye upon 
me, saith the Lord" ! In his own time and 
way our God will right every wrong and 
Messiah's Kingdom shall bless all the nations 
of the earth. We quote:— 

"While it is a pitiful confession of their own abject 
weakness, when the people do without food as the only 
means of protecting themselves from robber monopolies, 
a vast amount of good may flow from the present food 
strike, nevertheless. While to do without meat can be 
nothing more than a temporary expedient, for the Beef 
Trust, as one paper says, can save until next month the 
meat you refuse to eat this month, at which time it can 
restore old prices, with a little something by way of interest, 
the movement, as a most forcible agitation, is bound 
to result in something, although we may feel sure that the 
'passes' now being made by politicians in office will never 
result in much. 



"Surely this general blind uprising of the people should 
carry a warning to Pierpont Morgan and those under him 
at Washington and elsewhere. The strike is a mild but 
distinct danger sign, and if Mr. Morgan had ever had time 
to read history a little bit he would see it. The extortionate 
price of food is not Hunger, but it verges on 
Hunger. Our masters should know that it is dangerous 
to fool with the popular stomach. So undeveloped is the 
average man, that the stomach is still lord of life. To 
get food is still the main incident of existence. Our 
masters, if they are wise, would know that it is possible 
to oppress the people to any extent that pleases them, so 
that they but have the sense to stop short of hunger. The 
average American can be deluded, abused and robbed to an 
extent that is amazing, just as long as those who spoil him 
leave him enough to eat to keep him from starvation. He 
has no ambition, to speak of, beyond filling his stomach, 
and he will tolerate conditions that give him less than that. 
Leave him enough to eat to keep him from positive starvation, 
and he will do little more than murmur. But don't 
go beyond that point. That tyrants, oppressors and robbers 
have occasionally overstepped that limit has caused 
results which have made history. They will tell you that 
the French Revolution was a great protest against 

R4583 : page 102 

feudalism and a great uprising for democracy. Stuff! The 
French Revolution was a hunger strike pure and simple. 
"How long present conditions persist in this country, 
depends on how soon our masters force us to the hunger 
point. Revolutions and reforms are not results of reasoning 
of the popular brain, but of feeling of the popular 
stomach. The people in the mass have small power of 
reason, and have never had much. Our degree of progress 
is the amount of increased nervous sensitiveness in 
the human stomach. Until we reach the hunger point there 
will be no reform in this country. The plunderers of 
privilege will continue to ride our necks until the insistent 
call of our stomachs forces us to assert our torpid manhood. 

"The food strike is a thing the Censor foresaw years 
ago. Who knows but it is the beginning of that revolution 
which we must have to restore our liberties? For it is a 
matter of history that all oppressors are blinded by their 
own success and keep going until they go too far— past 
the danger point of hunger. Thus I feel certain that while 
there may be breaks in the system of despoiling the people, 
seasons of temporary relief, this matter may be considered 
as merely in its incipiency. The present discrepancy between 
wages and prices is not a new thing; it is not of today 
or yesterday or last year. This conspiracy is nearly 
fifty years old. Ever since the Civil War the conspirators 
have been toiling to secure control of the government, and 
organize their little game. It is within the last five years 
only that they have perfected the vast scheme of plundering 
the people through monopoly of all sources of distribution. 



Will they quit now or be satisfied? It is not to be 
expected." 



R4583 : page 102 

"ALL DECEIVABLENESS OF UNRIGHTEOUSNESS" 

"The energy of the Adversary, with all powers and signs and wonders 
of falsehood, and with every deception of iniquity to 
those who are perishing, because they admitted not the 
love of the Truth, in order that they might be saved. On 
this account God will send an energy of delusion to their 
believing the falsehood."— 2 Thess. 2:9-11— (Diaglott). 

DO WE forget that the Apostle's solemn words 
apply particularly in this harvest time, and 
specially to the closing years of the harvest? 
We are now in the time above all others 
when we may expect strong delusions, not 
only upon nominal Christendom, but upon 
those who have been specially favored with 
the light of Truth now shining. Should we 
not expect that the next five years of the 
harvest would clearly demonstrate the truthfulness 
of this prophecy by St. Paul? 

Some of the strong delusions are apparent enough- 
Spiritism, Theosophy, Christian Science, Church Federation, 
the Adversary's means of distracting the hearts and 
heads of some who otherwise would be Bible students. 
So far as we understand the prophecies of the Bible, these 
delusions will have wonderful power upon the world of 
mankind and especially in Christendom, which will gain 
power during the next few years. As the Apostle expresses 
it, these delusions will have their power largely 
because God's people have not been sufficiently awake to 
the privileges of Bible study— they have reverenced creeds 
rather than the Word of the Lord. They have worshipped 
and served and sought to be in accord with Churchianity 
rather than with the Truth. Hence, they are unfortified; 
they are without the Christian armor which St. Paul 
urged, saying, "Put on (therefore) the whole armor of 
God, that ye may be able to stand... in the evil day, 
and, having done all, to stand."— Eph. 6:11-13. 

But our special thought properly centers upon ourselves 
and those who, with us, have been favored of the 
Lord with the illumination of this harvest time. Will all 
of those who have heard the harvest message and rejoiced 
in it be safe in this "evil day," or will there be some strong 
delusions for them also— for their testing, their sifting? 

Other Scriptures assure us that the great hour of trial 
coming upon the whole world must begin with the Church 
—"with the house of God"— with those professing to be 
saints. St. Peter implies this when he says, "If it begin 
first at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the 



Gospel of God?" (I Pet. 4:17.) St. Paul gives the same 
thought, saying of the Church, "Every man's work shall 
be made manifest; for the day shall declare it; because it 
shall be revealed by fire; and the fire shall try every man's 
work of what sort it is." (I Cor. 3:13.) The intimation 
is that the severity of the testing will come first to the 
saints. In whatever proportion our doctrines include 
fallacies, errors, in that same proportion will be the severity 
of our testing. Those whose faith structure contains 
little of wood, hay and stubble will suffer least; while 
those who have more of these combustibles will suffer the 
more. 

Be it noticed that all the creeds handed down to us 
contain many errors and that the test of our loyalty to the 
Truth was our willingness to renounce these and to replace 
them with the gold, silver and precious stones of the 
Divine Word. For one reason or another this matter of 
confessing error and relinquishing it is a severe trial to 
many. It tests loyalty to God and his Word. It tests humility 
of heart. It tests willingness to confess our errors. 
It tests love for the brethren. However trifling the mistake 
it requires an overcoming courage to declare it, to 
renounce it. This has been the procedure for the past 
three hundred years, as God's people have emerged more 
and more from the smoke of the "dark ages." Because of 
these difficulties and tests the progress out of darkness into 
the full, clear light has been slow. At every step of the 
journey Light and Truth have been slandered, opposed, 
vilified, persecuted, and the advocates of Truth have been 
pilloried and roasted either figuratively or literally. 

Our Adversary, intent upon maintaining his hold upon 
the minds of God's people, has fought every inch of Truth 
for the past four centuries. He has made it hot for those 
whom the Lord has by his grace been leading step by step 
into the clear light of the knowledge of the glory of God 
and of his wonderful Plan of Salvation. Shall we wonder 
if our Adversary still pursues the same course and with 
still greater vigor than ever— with still more "energy" 
than ever? By no means! We accept his present opposition 
as the fulfillment of Scripture and we expect no 
cessation, but rather a further aggressiveness on his part 
to the end of the harvest. 

It is not necessary for us to assume that only the devilish 
are used by Satan. Satan uses as his agents in opposing 
the light, in persecuting those who go on in the path of the 
just, which shines more and more, the very best people he 
can get hold of. The pathway of the Church shows from 
the first that the Adversary has succeeded in using good 
as well as bad men in the accomplishment of his purposes 
—and undoubtedly the better the man the more acceptable 
would he be as Satan's servant and the more influential. 
Note the case of Saul of Tarsus, instigator and assistant 

R4583 : page 103 

in the murder of St. Stephen; note the fact that St. Paul 



tells us that he acted in all good conscience, and verily 
thought he did service to God and not to Satan, who 
blinded his eyes. Note the case of John Calvin, who, with 
many noble traits of Christian character, was so led astray 
by the Adversary, so blinded, that he used his high office 
in Geneva to burn a fellow-Christian at the stake. Doubtless 
he also thought that he did God service. Note also 
that scribes, priests and Pharisees were responsible for 
the death of our Lord and thought that they did God service. 
Of them St. Peter says that they did it ignorantly, 
for had they known they would not have crucified the 
Prince of Life. And so, doubtless, it is today, and will be 
until near the close; some, loyal of heart, may be amongst 
our enemies— slanderers, murderers. Like St. Stephen, 
let us pray for them. 

But we cannot hope thus of all— especially now when 
the light of Truth is shining so much more brightly and 
when the Lord is especially testing the loyalty or disloyalty 
of those professing his name, with a view to their 
separation and to the determining of their eternal destinies. 
No doubt some who will be of the "Great Company" will be 
more or less deceived of the Adversary by the strong delusions 
of this hour. Such in their blindness and deception 
may set forth darkness for light and light for darkness. 
They may do it with great positiveness, but scarcely, we 
think, with bitterness— anger, malice, envy, hatred, strife 
—works of the flesh and of the devil. 

Is it inquired, why? since this Saul of Tarsus was so 
bitter? We reply that that great persecutor of the Church 
had not yet received the begetting of the holy Spirit. He 
could not, therefore, sin against it and "grieve the holy 
Spirit of promise." On the contrary, those who will constitute 
the "Great Company" will all be of the consecrated and 
spirit-begotten class. All so begotten of the holy Spirit 
must have the Spirit of Christ. If it be lost the result 

R4584 : page 103 

would not only mean loss of the illumination and going 
into outer darkness, but also a total loss— the extinguishing 
of the Spirit of begetting— the Second Death. Let us 
not forget that the Spirit of God is the Spirit of love- 
meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, brotherly 
kindness, love. 

Some one has said, "It is but one step from the sublime 
to the ridiculous," because of the facility of human imagination. 
Similarly it might be said that right and 
wrong, Truth and untruth, may be so viewed as to change 
the sentiment almost instantly. Hypnotists act upon this 
power and so do attorneys. As the case may be, the client 
will be pictured by the one attorney as the representative 
of every grace and virtue, and by the opposing counsel the 
same traits, acts and words may be distorted and a beautiful 
character be represented as hideous, mean of motive, 
puerile and false of conduct. Thus the Apostle wrote, 
"Unto the pure all things are pure; but unto them that are 



defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure."— Titus 1:15. 

Your great Adversary's endeavor, therefore, is to 
poison our minds, to introduce thereinto impurity, anger, 
malice, envy, hatred and other works of the flesh and of 
the Adversary. To the extent that he succeeds in poisoning 
our hearts he alienates us from the Lord and from all 
those who are in accord with him; and this is his object. 
He succeeds best through human instrumentalities. We 
all know that if one dog becomes affected by hydrophobia 
every other animal is more or less in danger of becoming 
mad through even slight association— and infection. Thus 
Satan's "strong delusion" spreads from one to another 
until many be defiled by the root of bitterness. And to the 
mind, the heart, once embittered and out of alignment 
with the Divine view of things, everything takes on different 
colors and the end of the matter is far-reaching; as 
the Apostle intimates, "Lest thereby many be defiled." 

The embittered or impure heart sees things from its 
own standpoint. The evil tongue once started may "set 
on fire the course of nature," as St. James declares; and 
that evil tongue is itself ignited from Gehenna— the Second 
Death. (James 3:6.) That is to say, the evil, malicious, 
baneful, slanderous, back-biter is already himself 
bitten by the Adversary, and, unless cured, his would 
surely be a case of Second Death. And the same rule 
would apply to all bitten by him. The Scriptures, therefore, 
continually urge God's people to observe the Golden 
Rule— to do, to say, to think of others as they would be 
thought of, spoken of and dealt with. They continually 
urge upon us the putting away of bitterness, evil-speaking, 
busy-bodying, that we may the more fully and the more 
completely put on Christ and be more fully under the control 
of his holy Spirit of love, meekness, patience, long-suffering 
and kindness. 

"If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them" 
(John 13:17), is the Lord's message. The Lord is not now 
speaking to those who need to be forced and pounded into 
proper shape, in accord with the Divine character. He 
will deal with that class during the Millennium under the 
New Covenant, when his Mediatorial Kingdom will bring 
them into subjection forcibly. Now the Lord is speaking 
to another class of an entirely different disposition: He 
seeketh such to worship him as worship him in Spirit and 
in Truth— such as love him and love his righteous requirements 
of the Golden Rule, and beyond this, the high standard 
of the New Commandment— to love one another to the 
sacrificing point, as he loved the Church and gave himself 
for the Church. 

The Lord is now seeking merely the class called— the 
"little flock" who possess the Lord's Spirit or disposition, 
and love the brethren to the self-sacrificing point. It is 
incumbent, therefore, that all who would be recognized of 
the Father as possessing the character-likeness of the Lord 
Jesus should resist and put away, mortify, deaden, 
every unholy, unloving, unjust sentiment, as they would 
avoid the virus of hydrophobia or of a contagious disease. 



In a word, while we still urge as always growth in knowledge, 
we also admonish as always that growth in grace 
must be proportionate, if we would be pleasing to the Lord 
and accepted as joint-heirs with Jesus in his Kingdom. 
Whoever unkindly, untruthfully, slanderously, wickedly, 
underhandedly, insinuatingly with others may speak or 
act towards us, we must not dare to render evil for evil, 
nor railing for railing, but "be kind and gentle towards 
all." 

In fact, we must not even entertain an unkind thought 
respecting those who oppose us, but, as Michael would 
not speak evil of Satan, but said, "The Lord rebuke 
thee!" so must it be with us. And here notice the slanders 
of Satan. His own mind, full of ambition, accredited 
the Almighty with the same and told Mother Eve that 
God had forbidden her eating of the tree of the knowledge 
of good and evil because he desired to keep his human 
children in ignorance and under mental slavery. He even 
declared that the Almighty had falsified when he declared 
that the wage or penalty of disobedience in the matter 
would be death. As Satan could and did speak evil of the 
highest dignities, so his followers, misguided by his Spirit, 
speak slanderously of us. But as Michael dare not bring 
against Satan an accusation of railing, so let us beware 
that we do not retaliate upon those who speak evil of us 
and say all manner of evil against us falsely, because of 
our faithfulness to the Lord and his Word. A little while 
and the faithful will all be rewarded. 



R4584 : page 104 

IS THE MEDIATOR AN ADVOCATE? 

SOME speak of "The New Covenant Advocate." 

Is such an expression true respecting 

our Lord Jesus? Is he the Advocate of the 

New Covenant? We answer, No. Our 

Lord is the Mediator of the New Covenant, 

but not its Advocate. He is its Mediator in 

the sense that he is referred to in the 

prophecies as the one who will fulfill his 

Office. He began his work at his consecration 

and continued it faithfully to Calvary. 

By that consecration and faithfulness unto death he became 

the surety of the New Covenant— the assurance or 

guarantee to us that the Covenant will ultimately go into 

effect, and that he will be the one through whom it will 

be made effective. He is the Mediator of the New Covenant 

since he ascended up on high, in that he is co-operating 

with the Father in the carrying out of the Divine purpose 

of the selection of the Church as members of his 

Body— sharers in the sufferings of Christ and in the glory 

that shall follow. Soon the Mediator will have received 

to himself every member of his Body, all whose names are 



written in the Lamb's Book of Life. Then the Mediator 
complete will begin his work officially. The merit of the 
Mediator's sacrifice, now loaned or imputed to us, the 
Church, for our justification and sanctification, he will 
then, as Mediator between God and men, apply on behalf 
of Israel and all who may become Israelites under the 
New Covenant provisions, which will immediately go into 
effect. For a thousand years the great Mediator will stand 
between God and man— because God cannot accept or deal 
with the sinful of heart. These during the Mediatorial 
Kingdom will receive full enlightenment and instruction 
and assistance, to the intent that they may be lifted out 
of their sin and death condition up to perfection and everlasting 
life. Not until they shall have reached actual 
perfection at the end of the Millennium will the Mediator 
step out of his Office and thus bring together God and 
restored mankind— all the children of Adam except the 
Church, the "great company," and those who die the Second 
Death. As soon as the Mediator thus steps from 
between God and men, mankind will become responsible 
directly to God, and Justice without mercy will prevail. 
None will need or deserve mercy, because, having enjoyed 
God's mercy for a thousand years and having been perfected 
thereunder, they will be fully able to maintain their 
standing on the plane of Justice, if their hearts be loyal 
and true. 

It can be readily seen that the world thus under the 
Mediator during the Millennium will need no Advocate, because 
they will have no dealings with the Father, but 
merely with Christ, the Mediator. 

Note the difference between the above and the 
Church's attitude to the Father and the Son during this 
Gospel Age. We are introduced to the Father at once, 
because our hearts are in the right condition— desirous 
of knowing and doing of God's will to the extent of our 
ability and trusting in the merit of Christ's sacrifice already 
applied on our behalf. When we consecrate our 
lives after the example of our Redeemer— "to suffer with 
him," "to be dead with him," that we may live and reign 
with him— the Redeemer, according to the Father's Plan, 
becomes our Advocate, endorses our petition, applies his 
merit on our behalf and becomes guarantor for us, that we 
may be loyal to God, or die the Second Death. As our 
Advocate, our Lord does not stand between the Father 
and us, but stands with us as our Elder Brother, as Chief 
Priest over his own House of Priests. "For both he that 
sanctifieth and they who are sanctified, are all of one; 
for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren; 
saying, I will declare thy name unto my brethren; in the 
midst of the Church will I sing praise unto thee."— 
Heb. 2:11,12. 

The Redeemer purposes no mediatorial work in behalf 
of the Church. He is not styled our Mediator, but our 
Advocate. "We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus 
Christ the Righteous." (I John 2:1.) Instead of standing 
between the Father and us, as during the Millennium he 



will stand between the Father and the world, he introduces 
us immediately to the Father, and the Father, on receiving 

R4585 : page 104 

us, immediately begets us of the holy Spirit. Our Lord's 
words are, "No man cometh unto the Father but by me" 
—the Advocate of the Church. 

As sinners we had no relationship to God. When we 
believed and turned from sin we had a justification by 
faith tentatively imputed to us, permitting us to draw 
nigh to God and to hear his message through Christ- 
speaking peace to us and informing us of the High 
Calling and assuring us that "Now is the acceptable 
time"; that during this Gospel Age he is willing to accept 
us as living sacrifices through the merit of Jesus and to 
beget us of the holy Spirit to the divine nature. The 
moment we accepted those terms our Redeemer became 
our Advocate and immediately the entire contract was 
closed and we were begotten of the holy Spirit. We were 
no longer in the flesh, but in the spirit— no longer in the 
Court, but in the Holy. 

The New Creature being without sin needed no Mediator 
to come between it and God. On the contrary, the 
New Creature sings:— 

"Sun of my soul, my Father dear, 
I know no night when thou art near. 
O! may no earth-born cloud arise 
To hide thee from thy servant's eyes." 

But the New Creature needs an Advocate. Even 
though it is in full relationship with the Father, and even 
though as a New Creature it has no sin— the sins cancelled 
at Calvary were those of the old creature only. Is 
it asked why the New Creature, begotten of God, sinless, 
needs an Advocate? We reply that it is because he has the 
treasure of the new mind in an earthen vessel that is very 
imperfect through the fall. The sins of his mortal body 
were all cancelled through the imputation of the Advocate's 
merit and at that moment the old nature died and 
ceased its responsibility. He that is dead "hath ceased 
from sin." (I Pet. 4:1.) The New Creature, which at that 
moment was begotten and as a new mind or new will 
took possession of the mortal body reckoned dead, is held 
responsible for its conduct in exactly the same manner that 
the owner of a dog is responsible for him. Whatever 
violence the dog may do, the owner is responsible, because 
he should have chained him up. So we, as New 
Creatures, are responsible for our hands, our feet, our 
eyes, our tongues, in what they may do. If the tongue 
slander another through weakness, force of habit, etc., the 
New Creature is responsible and must give an account. 
If other wrongdoings be committed, there is a similar 
responsibility in every case. 

The New Creature cannot claim that the merit of 
Christ has cancelled these imperfections of his flesh in advance. 
He can merely claim in the Apostle's words, "The 



forgiveness of sins which are past, through the forbearance 
of God." (Rom. 3:25.) What, then, must he do in 
respect to these daily deflections— trespasses of omission 
and commission due to the imperfections of his flesh? The 
Apostle's answer is, "If any man (in the Church) sin, we 
have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the 
Righteous." (I John 2:1.) "Having such an high priest 

R4585 : page 105 

over the house of God (the antitypical priests and Levites) 
let us draw nigh to God in full assurance of faith, 
that we may obtain mercy and find help in time of need." 
We thus pray, "Our father which art in heaven. ..forgive 
us our trespasses as we forgive those who trespass 
against us." If as New Creatures our Lord and Advocate 
sees that we are cultivating his Spirit of mercy towards 
others, he will at once advocate our plea and secure for 
us Divine cancellation of the errors of our flesh, to which 
we, as New Creatures, were not a party and did not consent. 
If as New Creatures we gave partial consent to the 
wrong course, we would be liable in that proportion to 
some kind of stripes or punishment. And if any sin wilfully 
—heartily assented to sin knowingly and intentionally 
and without protest— it would prove that such was 
no longer a New Creature, but "twice dead, plucked up by 
the roots." 

Our Lord will continue to be the Church's Advocate 
with the Father down to the moment when the last member 
of his Body and of the Great Company shall have 
finished his course and passed beyond the veil to be a 
member of the "Church of the First-born, whose names 
are enrolled in heaven." Then they will no longer need an 
Advocate, because their resurrection change will make 
them perfect and the good intentions of their wills as 
New Creatures will find no impediment in their new 
bodies. They will be like their Lord, partakers of the 
divine nature and sharers of his glory and of his work. 
Then, as members of the great Prophet, Priest, Mediator, 
Judge and King, they will assist in dispensing the Divine 
blessings to the world of mankind for a thousand years. 
Then our Lord's office of Advocate will terminate with the 
glorification of the Church, and his office of Mediator 
between God and the world will be ready to begin. 

WHEN GOD COVENANTED WITH ABRAHAM 

Gradually those who went out from us because they 
were "not of us" are going into darkness on all subjects. 
This was to be expected. A root of bitterness developing 
in the heart affects the sight. Light becomes darkness; 
darkness becomes light. New things pass away. All 
things become old again in the wrong sense. 

These friends, not content with urging unscripturally 
that they need a Mediator between them and God, become 
very angry with us because we point out to them the 



truth on the subject— that the Mediator is between God 
and men and not between God and the New Creature. They 
seem to want to have a different view, and, of course, find 
plenty of opportunity for it. People usually find what 
they look for. Infidels who are in a wrong attitude of 
mind and desirous of finding fault with the Bible 
succeed in convincing themselves of its inconsistencies, 
contradictions, etc. Sometimes they succeed in deceiving 
others whose intentions are good, but who are lacking 
in spiritual discernment. We suggest that our proper attitude 
towards these erstwhile friends is to let them alone 
—to allow God to deal with them. Such of them as he sees 
to be honest-hearted and of right spirit he will guide in 
judgment and lead back again into the Truth; such as he 
cannot approve for any part of his work, he has a perfect 
right to cast aside. We may not murmur, but rather be 
glad that our eyes are open to see the wisdom and the 
justice of the Divine decree, "The wages of sin is death." 
If, then, those who were once with us and "of us" have not 
been influenced by all the Lord's leadings in the past and 
the presentations of the present, what more can we do 
for them but leave them in the hand of him who is too 
wise to err and too just to be unkind? 

These erstwhile friends, busy seeing what they can 
object to, are step by step walking into darkness. One of 
their recent claims of finding new light and proof that 
THE WATCH TOWER teachings are erroneous is that there 
was no Abrahamic Covenant at all; that what God said to 
Abraham was merely a proposition to make a Covenant 
and that the New Covenant is the promised one. They 
think that it began somewhere about the time of our 
Lord's First Advent, but they do not know when and can 
find no Scripture on the subject, and are afraid to make a 
guess, lest it be shown to be fallacious. The reason back 
of this endeavor to cast out the original Covenant with 
Abraham, and to declare that it was merely a promise that 
the New Covenant would be made in due time, is evident. 
They perceive that the Church cannot properly be under 
two Covenants, or two "mothers," and are determined 
that they are the children of the New Covenant; hence 
they strive to show that there was no Covenant, except 
the Law Covenant, until Christ came. They are put to 
great perplexity when some one quotes the Apostle's 
words that the "Law was added because of transgressions 
(added, of course, to the Abrahamic Covenant) until 
the Seed (specified by the Abrahamic Covenant) should 
come." (Gal. 3:19.) Another Scripture which gives them 
trouble is St. Paul's statement that the Law Covenant was 
430 years after the Abrahamic Covenant. They know not 
how to explain this in harmony with their theory that the 
Law Covenant was made 1600 years before the time they 
claim the New Covenant began. 

After worrying themselves as above, some of them 
have taken up a new line— anything to be different— anything 
to prove that the DAWN-STUDIES are incorrect, 
blind guides. The later claim is, "Yes, there must have 



been some kind of Covenant made with Abraham, but it was 
made fifty years later than the DAWN-STUDIES say. It 
was made after Abraham had typically offered Isaac in 
sacrifice." There, they tell us, God said to Abraham, "By 
myself have I sworn, saith the Lord; because thou hast 
done this thing and hast not withheld thy son, thine only 
son; that in blessing, I will bless thee, and in multiplying, 
I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven, and as the 
sand which is upon the seashore; and thy seed shall possess 
the gate of his enemies; and in thy seed shall all the nations 
of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed 
my voice."— Gen. 22:16-18. 

See, they say, THE WATCH TOWER and DAWN-STUDIES 
have erred in saying that God made the Covenant with 
Abraham when first he came into the land of Canaan; 
whereas he merely promised it then but did not actually 
make the Covenant until fifty years afterward— when 
Isaac was twenty-five years old, and after Abraham had 
offered him as a sacrifice in a figure. 

We reply that our critics are in error. God called 
Abraham while he was yet in Haran, to come out into the 
Land of Canaan and that he would there make a Covenant 
with him. Abraham believed and, at the death of 
his father Terah, removed to Canaan. Thereupon the 

R4586 : page 105 

Lord blessed him and consummated the Covenant with 
him. That Covenant was repeated in different forms from 
time to time and confirmed to Isaac and to Jacob long 
afterward. Even if the time of making oath to the Covenant 
were a matter of dispute it would not alter the fact 
that the Covenant itself was made directly after Abraham 
obeyed and removed to Canaan. The various statements 
respecting the matter are, "I have made a Covenant with 
thee," "I have sworn," etc. To suppose that these restatements 
of the Divine Purpose are either New Covenants 
or intimations that the Covenant had not been 
made is to suppose erroneously. 

See where the argument of our friends would lead 
them chronologically. If the Abrahamic Covenant was not 

R4586 : page 106 

made until after the figurative offering of Isaac it would 
add fifty years to the chronology at that point. We base 
our reckoning on St. Paul's words, "The Covenant, which 
was confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law, which 
was 430 years afterward, cannot disannul." (Gal. 3:17.) 
If, therefore, instead of counting the 430 years from the 
time Abraham entered Canaan we count it from a date 
fifty years later when he offered Isaac, we would be adding 
fifty years to our chronology. What would that mean? 
It would throw everything out of gear— the chronology itself 
and the harmony based upon it. For instance, add 
that fifty years and it would make the six thousand years 



end fifty years sooner than 1872, namely, in 1822, which 

would mean that the Millennium, the seventh-thousand 

year period, would begin in 1823. The absurdity of this 

need not be discussed. Another beautiful time feature 

would thus be spoiled— the one suggested by Brother 

Edgar— that the giving of the Covenant is exactly midway 

chronologically between the time of the fall and the 

sending of the Gospel to the Gentiles, Cornelius being the 

first one to receive it. However, as before intimated, we 

can expect anything, everything, in the way of misunderstanding 

and misrepresentation, bitterness and personalities 

from these erstwhile friends. "If the light that is 

in thee become darkness, how great is that darkness!" 

The darkness seems to affect people, not merely intellectually, 

but morally, blunting their sense of right and 

wrong, truth and falsehood, decency and honor. Let us 

beware of rendering evil for evil, slander for slander, 

or the cultivation in the slightest sense of roots of bitterness, 

hatred, envy, strife— works of the flesh and of the 

Adversary. 



R4586 : page 106 

"HE IS NOT A JEW-OUTWARDLY" 

"He is not a Jew who is one outwardly,. ..but he is a Jew 
who is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart." 
Romans 2:28,29. 

THOSE who argue that the Church is under 

the New Covenant, instead of under the 

Abrahamic Covenant, symbolized by Sarah, 

as the Apostle says, are perplexed with the 

plain prophecy of Jeremiah 31:31-33. It 

distinctly declares that New Covenant provision 

to be for the house of Israel and the 

house of Judah— the ten tribes and the two 

tribes of the Jewish nation. Perplexed, 

they answer that they are Jews; that all 

Christians are Jews, and that the New Covenant prophecy, 

therefore, applies to them and proves that it has 

already been established and that they are enjoying its 

provisions. 

In reply, we ask them first of all to read the context 
from verse 27 to the close of the chapter. It seems difficult 
to imagine a mind so twisted and blinded that it 
would be unable to see that the entire passage is for the 
Jew— natural Israel. There is not the slightest reference 
to Spiritual Israel or any spiritual experiences. 

In desperation they quote the text at the head of this 
article in proof that they are Jews and therefore in New 
Covenant relationship with God. But, alas for them, they 
thus go from one misinterpretation to another! If they 
will look up the context of the above text they will find 



that it applies not to spiritual but to natural Israel. It is 
a portion of St. Paul's argument showing that the Jew 
was not justified by being under the Law Covenant; and 
that he could be justified only by accepting Christ as his 
Redeemer from the sentence of the Law Covenant incurred 
by his inherited imperfection. Note the argument 
—verses 17-24. 

The culmination of the Apostle's argument is found in 
the next chapter (3:9,10) in the words: "What then? 
are we [Jews] better than they [Gentiles]? In no wise; 
for we have before proved both Jews and Gentiles, that 
they are all under sin [condemnation]. As it is written, 
There is none righteous, no, not one." See the further 
argument of verses 19-29. 

St. Paul's constant argument was that it was not 
necessary for Gentiles to become Jews in order to become 
Christians, but that the Jew must become dead to the Law 
and the Gentile become dead to sin in order that both 
might become one in Christ Jesus— Christians. 

NOTE FURTHER MISINTERPRETATION 

Let us ask these bewildered brethren a few simple 
questions, that they and we may know just where they do 
stand on the question of their being Spiritual Jews. 

Is it as "new creatures in Christ" that this claim to being 
Jews is put forth? Yes, they answer. We reply with 
the Apostle's words, "There is neither Jew nor Greek" 
in Christ. Besides, the New Covenant proposes restitution 
and applies to those whose stony hearts are to be 
changed to hearts of flesh. Where is there a spiritual 
promise to the Jew? And the New [Law] Covenant would 
condemn every imperfect person, as did the Old one. "Ye 
are not under the Law [Covenant], but under Grace."— 
Rom. 6:14. 

"Ah, yes," they answer, "We erred in stating that we 
are Jews and under the New Covenant as 'new creatures.' 
We will change that answer and say rather, that as Jews 
we were justified under the New Covenant and then became 
'new creatures' and members of Christ under the 
Abrahamic Covenant." 

You are making a bad argument worse, by a further 
confusing of the Scriptures. The natural Jew could get 
free from the condemnation of the Old Law Covenant 
only by renouncing it— dying to it and becoming alive 
toward God as a member of The Christ. What advantage 
would accrue to a Gentile, to get under another Law Covenant, 
new or old? None, surely! 

Christ is the Mediator of the New [Law] Covenant to 
bring as many as possible of Adam's race back into full 
harmony with God. During the Gospel Age he is laying 
the foundation for his great work by first making satisfaction 
for their sins. Soon the antitypical Atonement 
Day will end and satisfaction for the sins of the world 
will be made. Forthwith the world will be turned over 
to him, and his mediatorial reign will begin. 



His mediation will not be for each person individually, 
but for the world collectively. He will reign or mediate 
for a thousand years, and not until its close will he deliver 
over to the Father— Justice— those whom he will succeed 
in uplifting out of sin and death conditions. During all 
the time he mediates the world will have no direct dealing 
with the Father, but only with the Mediator of the New 
Covenant. 

On the contrary, the Church of this age is justified 
and accepted by faith, as was Abraham, and is backed by 
"the blood of Christ." Then, upon consecration to be 
"dead with him," they at once come into relationship with 
God as "members of the Body of Christ." Thank God for 
our portion of blessing under the Abrahamic Covenant 
and our glorious Redeemer- Advocate! And praise God 
for the world's coming blessing under a 
Redeemer-Mediator ! 



R4587 : page 107 

SIN AND SICKNESS RELATED 

-MATTHEW 9:1-13. -MARCH 20.- 

Golden Text:— "The Son of Man hath power 
on earth to forgive sins."— V. 6. 

JESUS left the country of the Gergesenes at 

their request, because they feared that other 

healings of obsessed people might destroy 

other herds of swine, the chief industry of 

that place. He came by boat to his own city 

of Capernaum, where most of his mighty 

works were done. The people thronged 

about him and soon he was busy preaching 

to a houseful about the love and mercy of 

God and the duty and responsibility of man. 

The house was of the ordinary type of one story, with 

large tiles constituting the roof and with outside stairs 

leading thereto. Presently a paralytic borne upon a 

stretcher was brought by his friends that the Lord might 

heal him. They could not enter because of the multitude 

which filled the room and extended into the court. In 

their earnestness they climbed the stairs, removed the 

large stone tiling near the center of the house and let the 

man on the stretcher down in front of the Savior. It 

was not necessary to explain or to entreat. The Great 

Physician's heart went out in loving sympathy. He recognized 

the prayer of faith and answered it at once, but 

not as might have been expected. 

To teach a great lesson respecting the relationship between 
sin and sickness, and to show himself powerful to 
deliver them both, he said to the sick man, "Son, be of 
good cheer. Thy sins be forgiven thee"! Possibly the 



palsied man and his friends may have felt disappointed. 
Like many of our day they may have appreciated the 
loaves and fishes and healings accomplished by our Lord 
more than they were able to appreciate his work as a 
Redeemer, the Sin-Bearer, the one through whom comes 
forgiveness of sins. 

But there were present some very religious people 
learned in the Law, who understood that transgression of 
the Divine Law could not be forgiven, except by the satisfaction 
of that Law. When these in their hearts began to 
murmur, Jesus knew it and said aloud, "Which is easier— 
to say, Thy sins be forgiven thee, or to say, Arise and 
walk?" The Master would have his critics see that even 
they without authority could say, Thy sins be forgiven 
thee, and none have power to know on the subject. But 
they could not heal the man and dare not say to him, 
Arise and walk. He thus convinced them that what 
they had thought the more difficult was really the easier, 
and that the one who could say the latter could doubtless 
truthfully say the former. Then, turning to the sick man, 
Jesus said, "Arise, take up thy bed and go unto thine 
house"— and he did so. 

On a very similar occasion the Scriptures tell us 
that our Lord said to the healed one, "Go thy way and sin 
no more, lest a worse thing fall upon thee." In these words 
our Lord indicated a relationship existing between sin 
and sickness. The more we consider the subject the more 
we are assured of this. Sickness is so much of death 
working in us toward completion. Before the death 
sentence came there was no sickness. After the Redeemer 
shall, during the Millennium, have put away sin, 
the time will come, we are sure, when "there shall 
be no more sighing, no more crying, no more dying." Not 
only so, but do we not all recognize that the dying we 
have inherited from father Adam has come to us down 
through the ages along the lines of mental, moral and 
physical sickness, impairment of function? And do not 
all recognize that to whatever extent sin is indulged in 
willingly, the effect is not only moral abasement, but 
an increase of disease, sickness— death working in us? 

The Jews were under the Law Covenant of DO AND 
LIVE and hence the forgiveness of sins with them would 
imply proportionate release from sin's infirmities, under 
the New Covenant during the Millennium. (Jer. 31:31.) 
When the glorified Christ shall in the end of this age 
antitypically sprinkle the mercy-seat with the virtue of 
his secondary sacrifice it will not be for the Church, as at 
first, but for the world, "for all the people." (Lev. 16:33.) 
With the Church of this Gospel Age the Divine programme 
is different. Received under the Abrahamic Covenant 
the forgiveness of their sins is associated with their 
Consecration Vow to sacrifice the earthly life and all its 
interests for the attainment of the heavenly life and 
joint-heirship with the Redeemer in his Kingdom. Hence 
the forgiveness of sins does not mean to the Church release 
from physical ailments. 



It was shortly after this that Matthew, elsewhere 
styled Levi, was called to be one of the twelve Apostles. 
He was a publican— that is to say, a collector of taxes 
for the Roman government. Publicans were despised for 
two reasons:— 

(1) It was considered very disreputable to assist a 
foreign government to collect taxes from one's friends 
—kin. 

(2) Many of these publicans were rascally and took 
advantage of their position to make themselves wealthy 
through bribes, over-collections, etc. We may be sure 
that Matthew-Levi was not of the dishonest type, else 
he never would have been called to association with 
Messiah as one of his Apostles and prospective joint-heirs 
with him in his Kingdom. For such position the 
highest degree of honesty is requisite. And if Jesus 
would never call a dishonest man, neither would a dishonest 
man have accepted his call, because there was 

nothing to be gained— neither reputation, wages nor 
fraud. Similarly Zaccheus was an honest publican who 
proffered to restore fourfold to anyone he had wronged, 
thus emphasizing the fact that he would not want to be 
dishonest. 

Other Scriptures intimate that Matthew at once made 
a supper for his friends and acquaintances, that these 
might thus have the better opportunity for acquaintance 
with the Lord, who also was a guest. But the Pharisees, 
cynical and critical and fault-finding, objected that if 
Jesus were righteous he would not be found in such company. 
Our Lord, however, sent them word that not the 
healthy, but the sick need a physician, intimating that for 
this reason he was fellowshiping sinners, that he might 
do them good. He was not descending to sin in any 
form, but seeking to lift up sinners. Then he quoted to 
them from his wonderful memory the words from Hosea 
the Prophet, "I desired mercy and not sacrifice." (Hosea 6:6.) 
He tells them that he came not to call the righteous, 
but sinners. 

Note a lesson for ourselves and for all: "There 
is none righteous, no, not one." (Romans 3:10.) 
All are sinners. All have come short of the Divine 
standard of perfection. Whoever, therefore, claims that 
he is righteous and on that score rejects the Redeemer is 
a hypocrite— in a wrong condition of mind, not ready 
for any of the blessings God now has to bestow. 

God is calling none to discipleship with Jesus, except 
such as acknowledge that by nature they were children of 
wrath and who first accept forgiveness of sins through the 
precious blood. 



R4587 : page 108 

OUR EASTER LESSON 



--MARCH 27.- 

Golden Text:— "I am he that liveth and was dead; 
and, behold, I am alive forevermore."— Rev. 1:18. 

WITHOUT quitting our study of the teachings 

of the great Prophet of Galilee we must not 

allow Easter Sunday to pass without noting 

its peculiar lesson— the resurrection of the 

Savior from the dead. Our text comes to 

us as fresh as though delivered yesterday 

from the lips of the risen Redeemer— his 

special message to his people. How much 

there is in these few words! They affirm 

with positiveness that Jesus really died, the 

Just for the unjust, that he might bring mankind back 

from sin and condemnation to harmony with God. With 

equal force they tell us that he is dead no longer, that 

although unseen to our natural eyes, our faith may recognize 

the fact that he arose from the dead and ascended 

up on high, there "to appear in the presence of God for 

us."-Heb. 9:24. 

What was effected by his death and what is the 
value of his life to mankind? 

His death was necessary because death was the 
sentence against Adam and all his race, because of original 
sin— disobedience. St. Paul says, "By one man's 
disobedience sin entered the world, and death as a result 
of sin, and thus death passed upon all, for all are sinners." 
It was not an angel that had sinned and hence 
an angel could not be the Redeemer. The Divine Law 
was an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, an ox for an 
ox, a man for a man. Hence nothing but the sacrificial 
death of a perfect man could redeem the race from their 
death sentence. Any perfect man could have thus been 
substituted, but there was none in the whole world; hence 
the necessity that our Lord should be "made flesh" that 
he might redeem us. (John 1:14.) Hence, as the Scriptures 
explain, "he who was rich, for our sakes became 
poor"— leaving the perfection of the heavenly nature and 
coming down to perfect human nature; he was "holy, 
harmless and undefiled, separate from sinners."— 
Heb. 7:26. 

The death of Jesus did not redeem the world, but it 
constituted a ransom price for the world whenever it 

R4588 : page 108 

might be applied. Our Savior laid down his life, surrendered 
it to the Father, in obedience to the Divine 
suggestion. As a reward he was highly exalted, given a 
name above every name on the spirit plane. Not having 
forfeited his human rights by sin, but merely having laid 
them down, in obedience to the Father's wish, he has 
these to dispose of, to give as a bequest or testament 
to humanity. 



But if we may thus see clearly an inestimable value 
in our Redeemer's sacrifice of himself, a glance will show 
us that his resurrection was of equal importance. Had the 
Father not raised him from the dead, it would have implied 
some unfaithfulness, some failure on our Lord's 
part. And if he had not arisen, how could he have made 
application of his human rights on our behalf? No 
wonder St. Paul forcefully declares, "If Christ be not 
risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith is 
also vain... .Ye are yet in your sins. And they also 
which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished.. ..But 
now is Christ risen from the dead and become the first-fruits 
of them that slept. "--I Cor. 15:14-20. 

So, then, upon the death of Jesus and his resurrection 
hang the resurrection hope of the Church and of the 
world. We must differentiate these as the Scriptures do. 
The Church is to have share in the "first" or "chief resurrection," 
called also "Christ's Resurrection," "his resurrection." 
(Phil. 3:10.) The resurrection of Christ and 
his Church is to the spirit nature of glory and perfection. 
On that glorious plane the Heavenly Bridegroom will 
soon claim his espoused Church as his Bride and joint-heir 
in his Kingdom. 

Then the world's resurrection will be due to begin- 
not a resurrection "change" to spirit nature, etc., nor an 
instantaneous work at all. Theirs will be a resurrection 
to human nature, human perfection, but of gradual development 
—first the awakening, "every man in his own 
order," and subsequently the gradual raising of them up 
out of sin and death conditions to perfection of life— as 
many as will obey the great King of the Millennial Kingdom. 
And such as will refuse obedience will be cut off- 
destroyed in the Second Death. 

It is greatly to be regretted that very many Christian 
people, including many of the clergy, have failed to 
discern the great importance of the resurrection, in connection 
with the teachings of God's Word. This serious 
omission has aided greatly in the confusion which has 
led many to a rejection of the Word of God under the 
teachings of Higher Criticism and Evolution. Let us 
honor the Heavenly Father and the Redeemer by heeding 
the testimony of the Bible respecting the importance of 
the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead. In proportion 
as we do this we will be surely following the example 
of the Great Teacher and of all the Apostles. And are we 
wiser than they that we should leave their teachings or 
neglect them? Nay, we will "take the more earnest heed, 
lest we should let these things slip" and become bound, 
as many have been, through the neglect of the teachings 
of this doctrine. 



R4588 : page 108 

FAITH, THE CHANNEL OF BLESSING 



--MATTHEW 9:18-34.-APRIL 3.- 

Golden Text:— "All things are possible 
to him that believeth. "-Mark 9:23. 

FAITH in God consists in taking him at his 

word— accepting and believing his Revelation 

of his Character and his Plan in respect 

to ourselves and others. We should 

clearly distinguish between faith and 

credulity. Some very good people make 

the mistake of supposing that the more 

absurd the thing which they believe, the 

greater is the faith. Faith does not spurn 

reason, but uses it within certain prescribed 

and rational lines. In order to have faith in God, we 

must first satisfy our reasoning faculties:— 

(a) That there is a God; 

(b) That he has a dependable character— is Just; is 
Wise; is Powerful; is Gracious; 

(c) We must reasonably assure ourselves that what 
we accept as his message is worthy of acceptance— bears 
marks of truthfulness and harmony with the Divine 
Character. He who does not seek such evidences as a 
foundation for faith is merely credulous— not faith-full. 

Because so many Christian people ignore the proper 
definition of faith many candid minds are repelled from 
Christianity, refusing, they tell us, to believe absurdities. 
We urge Christian people to a more rigid examination 

R4588 : page 109 

of their faith in God and in the Bible, that, as the 
Apostle says, We may be able to "give a reason for the 
hope [the faith], that is within us." (I Pet. 3:15.) We owe 
this to ourselves, as well as to those whom we would 
endeavor to interest in God's Word. In the light now 
shining upon God's Word it is possible, as it was in the 
days of the Apostles, for the man of God to be "thoroughly 
furnished" and able "to rightly divide the Word of Truth" 
and to show to his friends and neighbors solid, logical 
grounds for each item of his faith. We admit that this 
was not, apparently, possible during the dark period 
which intervened between the first century and now. 
Knowing how to sympathize with the many who have 
perplexities respecting the reliability of the Bible as the 
inspired Word of God, we invite correspondence from 
such, feeling sure that we can assist them. 

Our present study illustrates faith from four different 
standpoints:— 

(1) The faith of Jairus— the father, on behalf of his 
daughter; 

(2) The faith of the woman who, on her own account, 
touched the hem of the Lord's garment; 

(3) The faith of the two blind men who encouraged 



one another; 

(4) The faith of those who brought to the Lord a 
deaf and dumb man possessed of a demon. 

Jairus, the ruler of the synagogue in Capernaum, our 
Lord's home city, knew Jesus well. He sometimes called 
upon him to read the Sabbath lesson. (Luke 4:16.) On 
a previous occasion with others he entreated the Lord on 
behalf of the centurion's servant. (Luke 7:4.) Now 
affliction had invaded Jairus' home. His only daughter, 
twelve years old, was dying. The Master had been absent 
across the sea. Amongst the throng awaiting him 
was Jairus, who, because of his prominence as a representative 
man, was properly given first audience. He 
manifested his faith not merely by his request that the 
Lord would come and heal his daughter, but also by his 
conduct in prostrating himself, figuratively expressing 
his homage, obedience and faith. He had left the daughter 
in a dying condition. She was dead at the time that he 
was talking to Jesus and urging haste. Before they 
reached the house messengers came, saying that it was 
too late, that she was dead. When Jesus arrived, neighbors 
had gathered, in harmony with the Jewish custom. 
Some were playing doleful tunes on flutes; others were 
groaning and lamenting. It was the custom for the females 
of a family and neighborhood, when they heard of a 
death, to give a shriek and then to continue murmuring, 
mourning as they entered into the death chamber a while 
later. The Master bade all these to depart, lightly saying, 
"The maid is not dead, but sleepeth." The language 
is similar to that used respecting Lazarus. She was dead, 
according to the usual human expression. But she was 
not dead from the Divine standpoint— not extinct as is a 
brute in death. God's provision from the first was that 
the death sentence upon humanity would be cancelled by 
the Redeemer's sacrifice and that as a result there will be 
a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and of the unjust. 
From this standpoint the Scriptures speak of death 
as a sleep, from which there will be a glorious awakening 
in the resurrection morning— in the dawning of the 
Millennial Age. Thus Abraham and others of the past, 
both good and bad, are referred to as falling asleep, 
sleeping with their fathers, etc. Thus Stephen, the first 
Christian martyr, fell asleep. (Acts 7:60.) Evidently this 
does not mean that the dead go to sleep in either heaven, 
purgatory or hell. The Bible explains the matter, saying 
that many that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake. 
(Dan. 12:2.) As all in Adam die, even so all in Christ 
shall be made alive. (I Cor. 15:22.) What would have 
been death to them and eternal cessation of being has been 
changed by virtue of the Redeemer's sacrifice and is a 
sleep of unconsciousness, until the morning when the 
great Redeemer will say to all, as he did to Lazarus, 
"Come forth," or as he did in this case, to Jairus' daughter, 
"Talitha Cumi"— "Come, my child." So, we are assured 
that eventually all that are in their graves shall hear the 
voice of the Son of Man and come forth. (John 5:28.) 



On the way to Jairus' home a woman in the crowd surrounding 

the Lord touched the hem of his garment, believing 

in his greatness and power and that thus she would 

get a blessing. The thrill of life and strength immediately 

came into her body, just as the touching of the storage 

battery with a wire would draw the electric current. 

Our Lord was full of vital energy. He was perfect, not 

only free from sin, but free from sickness and death conditions. 

He noticed the loss of vitality and, turning, inquired, 

"Who touched me?" The poor woman was fearful 

that she had stolen a blessing, of which she felt herself 

unworthy. But soon she was assured by the kindly 

words and look of the Master. This incident teaches us 

clearly that our Lord's miracles drained upon his vitality. 

R4589 : page 109 

Thus from Jordan to Calvary he willingly, gladly, responded 
to the needs of those about him— laying down 
his life. 

The two blind men who met Jesus, hailing him as 
Messiah, the promised King of David's line, encouraged 
one another and both got the desired blessings, according 
to their faith. Here we have illustrated the advantages 
of Church fellowship in respect to faith stimulation. Let 
us assist one another in the most holy faith. Let us be 
helpers and not hinderers to fellow-pilgrims. The Master 
did not attempt the healing of all the people. For instance, 
there was but one healed at the Pool of Siloam, though 
many were there. So here Jesus admonished those whose 
eyes were opened to keep the matter quiet. But they could 
not. Their joy was so great and the Lord's humility in 
the matter served to draw forth their praise the louder. 
So with us— quickened from the dead, spirit-healed, and 
with the eyes of our understanding opened— we cannot 
refrain from telling the good tidings and praising the 
Lord. -Romans 1:12; Acts 4:20. 

The man possessed of a demon and made both deaf 
and dumb was in such a deplorable condition that he 
could not help himself, neither could he ask the Master's 
aid; neither could he hear, if anyone should exorcise the 
demon. His friends, however, exercised faith in his behalf. 
Jesus responded and cast out the demon. The man 
was healed. The multitude marveled. But the Pharisees 
were envious. They wished to pose as the chief religionists 
and to have and to hold the popular respect, which was 
rapidly passing to Jesus. The poison of envy in their 
minds so perverted them that they declared that Jesus 
himself was Satan, Beelzebub, the Prince of devils. Let 
us learn the lesson and avoid envy, malice, hatred, and 
fill our hearts instead with the spirit of meekness, gentleness, 
patience, love, and thus become more and more 
like our Master, increasing our faith. 

O for a faith that will not shrink, 
Though pressed by every foe; 



That will not tremble on the brink 

Of any earthly woe; 
That will not murmur nor complain 

Beneath the chastening rod, 
But in the hour of grief or pain, 

Will lean upon its God. 



R4589 :page 110 

RE BEREAN STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Brother Bohnet's interesting 
letter in February 1 TOWER, re Berean Studies, suggests 
to my mind that you might be pleased to have me recount 
our experience in the Church at Los Angeles, where I 
believe the Berean Bible Studies originated, in the form 
of "Outlines," as we then called them. We had had some 
very unsatisfactory experiences in the Bible Study by 
book, chapter and verse, which we tried for about one 
year, if I remember correctly. But we were continually 
"running up against" verses which had not been explained 
in DAWNS or TOWERS, and whose proper interpretation 
we could only "guess at," and the result was that 
some combative spirits in the meeting would insist upon 
their private and personal expositions being accepted by 
the congregation, to the ultimate disruption of the meeting. 
This we found so unedifying, so unprofitable, that 
we were led, I believe by the Lord, to the arranging of 
Topical Bible Studies on various subjects, with questions 
and references to be examined by the members of the 
class before coming to meeting. 

I do not believe any other Church has received the 
benefit enjoyed by the Los Angeles congregation in these 
studies. And I can account for it only in this manner:— 

First— the class studied the questions at home, studied 
as though each one was to lead the meeting, studied as 
though upon each member rested the responsibility of seeing 
that the Truth, and that only, was clearly set forth in 
every statement made in the class. (You see we were 
so far away from headquarters that we were not favored 
with Pilgrim visits more frequently, during that period, 
than about once in three or four years, and we had no 
brethren among us who were gifted with the talent of public 
speaking, and thus we were thrown upon our own resources, 
and compelled to depend upon the Lord and each 
other for our "edification in the most holy faith"!) 

Secondly, the leader called upon individuals by name, 
to answer the questions. As we are only "children of a 
larger growth," I believe the feeling that we would 
probably be called upon personally to answer a question 
incited us to study more than if we thought, "Oh, I won't 
be called on; it does not matter whether I study or not." 
There is in all of us a little pride, which must be appealed 
to sometimes. 



Again, our aim was not to leave a single question until 
every member in the class had a perfectly clear understanding 
of the matter, even though we were often obliged 
to spend two, three or four meetings on one question 
alone. Every member was encouraged to ask questions, 
not to be ashamed of his ignorance, but to realize we 
were all students in the School of Christ, all learners at 
the feet of the Great Teacher! 

Again, we studied to bring up Scriptural quotations 
which would corroborate, or seem to contradict, our accepted 
position on any doctrine, and thus we were enabled 
to "put on the whole armor of God" to such an extent 
that the various Pilgrim brethren who visited us afterwards 
mentioned especially the knowledge manifested in 
the Los Angeles Church, as well as their growth in the 
fruits of the Spirit, due to the application of this knowledge. 
(Pardon what might seem to be undue laudation; I 
refer to it only as a proof of the good received by us in 
the Berean method of Bible Study.) 

As some of the friends seem to think you, dear 
Brother, "got up" this method and are "forcing it upon 
the Church," perhaps the above may assist them to a 
better understanding of the matter. You are at liberty to 
use this letter as may seem to you best. Praying his 
continued blessing upon you, 

Yours in the service of our blessed Lord and Redeemer, 
G. W. SEIBERT. 



R4589 :page 110 

RE FIFTH-SUNDAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I heartily enjoyed my visit yesterday and Saturday 
with the dear ones at Canton in their "Fifth-Sunday 
local convention," and thank you for affording me the 
blessed privilege to meet with them. Enclosed find program. 
It was my privilege to address the local class twice 
on Saturday and the general assembly twice on Sunday, 
besides the Berean lesson after-talk. 

Brother, you should have been present at the morning 
testimony meeting and heard the splendid testimonies of 
the dear friends. It would have comforted your heart 
to hear yourself so frequently referred to as the faithful 
servant of the Lord, and the assurance of loyalty to your 
teachings, and the confidence in you as a loving brother, a 
noble-minded man, whose every word and act bespeaks 
the thorough Christian. I fear, however, your modesty 
would have prompted you to leave the hall before half a 
dozen testimonies had been given, for every one of them 
had some favorable allusion to yourself and your service. 
Truly it was good to be there, and when finally the Vow 
song was sung by the entire congregation tears of joy 
came to more eyes than mine. It sent thrill after thrill 



through my being until I could hardly refrain from shouting, 
and you know I am not easily swayed by emotion. 

I have perhaps been to twenty conventions, large and 
small, since coming into the Truth in 1892, and write truly 
when I assure you that this little convention of about 200 
Truth friends afforded me greater pleasure than any of 
the others. Possibly, as we come nearer the goal of our 
hopes, we more and more appreciate the sweet fellowship 
of the saintly ones of like precious faith, and possibly the 
attitude of the opposing ones draws us closer and closer 
together. Often, on the farm in my earlier days, 
when some strange dog or other animal would come near 
the sheep, I noticed how they would huddle together as 
though for mutual protection. Just so when we see 
enemies near, we, like sheep, instead of scattering, draw 
closer together. The dear sheep about Canton are drawn 
very, very close to you, dear Brother. Not only would 
the sheep in threatened danger bunch together, but they 
kept close to the one who fed and cared for them. The 
sheep of the Lord well know who it is that is supplying 
them the wholesome spiritual food today. The goats are 
ever on the alert for brush and leaves, which they prefer. 
Peter was admonished of the Lord to feed the lambs 
and sheep, but he could not hope to satisfy goats with 
sheep provender. Neither can you or any of us. 

Some of the friends at Canton told me of the effort 
of a certain brother who came amongst them to turn 
them out of the way by what they considered were exaggerated 
or wrong assertions. They took note of his 
changed deportment from what he had been on former 
visits when he came to them in like faith. He preferred 
to talk mostly on matters of no interest to them. 
He mentioned religious matters only in connection with 
evil speaking, slander and backbiting until he fairly disgusted 
his hearers. But not so the certain class who 
seemed to enjoy his unchristian attacks on the life and 
character of another. The friends called to mind the text, 
"Speak evil of no man," and especially Paul's admonition 
prohibitive of the speaking aught against an Elder, and 
thus he was unconsciously "driving nails into his own 

R4590 : page 1 1 1 

coffin," as the Germans say. I cautioned the friends to 
ever beware of anyone who allows himself to speak evil 
of others, assuring them that even were the statement 
entirely true the one who so speaks is manifestly more 
guilty in God's sight than is the one he is endeavoring to 
malign and injure. 

In giving my own testimony in the general assembly, 
prompted by the other testimonies of the friends present, 
I told the dear ones of how I had for many years been a 
member of the Bible House family, had eaten and 
lived there, and even enjoyed your uncomfortable 
bed-lounge with you on various occasions since 
the year 1895, and that never once in all that 



time had I heard a cross or angry word from 
your lips, and that never had I known you to do or 
say aught unbecoming a Christian and a gentleman. 
Brother, I may have been somewhat personal, but in view 
of some malicious attacks that had been made on you 
behind your back I could not refrain from uttering the 
truth in your defense, although I am well aware of your 
practice to make little or no defense of yourself, but to 
vigorously defend others, or the Truth, or a matter involving 
a principle or doctrine. While I can say, All 
honor to the man who can adhere to such a policy persistently, 
yet sometimes I feel that you really ought to defend 
yourself, if not for your own sake, for the sake of 
many dear ones on whose shoulders part of the burden 
falls. You always say in substance, "The Lord knows all 
about it," and with him you let it rest. The letter enclosed 
contains a sentence right along this line. You will 
not need to return it. 

I think these Fifth-Sunday conventions are a means 
of great blessing to our people, stimulating and refreshing. 
I would like to hear from the friends elsewhere as 
to their experience re these little gatherings. I feel like 
encouraging all the Truth friends to institute these occasions 
of spiritual uplift. I will do all in my power 
to assist. Both at Detroit and Canton they worked me 
pretty hard, yet it was joy to serve the friends. I regret 
my inability to serve as I should like. The Lord, however, 
knows I am willing to do the best I can. The bond 
of Christian love was strengthened in the heart of 
everyone who attended yesterday's convention, I am sure, 
and you are more dearly than ever entrenched in the 
hearts of all who were there. God bless you and keep you 
in his tender care. 

Thanking you once more for making it possible for me 
to be there, I remain in loving sympathy, 

Your Brother in Christ, our Advocate and Lord, 
J. A. BOHNET. 



R4590 : page 1 1 1 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I desire to let you know of an incident that is an occasion 
of joy to our little class, and I believe it is an act of 
justice to a Brother to hasten to tell the good report we 
can now give, inasmuch as you were acquainted at the 
Jacksonville Convention, February, 1909, with the 
estrangement that existed. 

We are so glad to announce that Brother , once 

our Elder, has won a great victory over the "old man," 
pride, self, and the Adversary. He, by the grace of God, 
at a testimony meeting, arose and confessed his faults, saying 
that pride and the Adversary combined had deceived 



and cheated him of the blessed fellowship of this class, 
that he had been to the throne of grace with the matter and 
desired to do nothing but the Lord's will in all matters and 
desired to again meet regularly with "those of like precious 
faith." 

Each one present at the end of our Brother's testimony 
came forward and extended the hand of fellowship and 
love. Stimulated by the example, another one of our 
class who had been unstable, arose and testified in like 
manner, to whom also we demonstrated our love and 
good will by shaking hands. We felt that the power of 
God's holy Spirit had worked mightily in our midst and 
rejoiced greatly. These two Brothers are demonstrating 
the sincerity of their testimony by attending all the meetings 
regularly, which is our Lord's appointed way of 
blessing his Church, those who "forsake not the assembling 
of themselves together as is the manner of 
some." 

Yours faithfully in our Redeemer and King, 
M. L. MCILVAINE. 



MY DEAR PASTOR:- 

For months the publications of those poor "dreamers," 
so graphically described by the Apostle Jude, have been 
coming through the mail into our home. 

Dear Pastor, what a fearful thing to be "spots on the 
feasts of love" of God's dear people as they meet to worship 
and learn of him. To be "trees whose fruit 
withereth— twice dead, plucked up by the roots"! The 
empty clouds ("without water"), carried about by winds, 
"every wind of doctrine." 

Will you offer a special prayer for me and mine that 
we may "keep ourselves in the love of God, looking for 
the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life"? 

And for the foolish ones, deluded for a time by these 
"wandering stars," who have gone in the way "of Cain, 
Balaam and Core," pray that we may have all proper 
"compassion, making a difference," "pulling them out of 
the fire," by continually feasting our minds on the Truth, 
and keeping on the "whole armor of God," thus being 
equipped for any service or any trial. Surely, we never 
could help any one by imbibing error, even with the 
thought of being better able to contrast it with the Truth. 

A number of times I have thought of writing letters to 
some, trying to help them; but if all the clear, beautiful 
expositions of Scripture we have been given through the 
TOWERS cannot dispel their mental and spiritual clouds, 
I thought anything I might say surely would do no good. 

May the God of all grace keep you continually; give 
you wisdom, grace and strength to meet every need. 

Yours in our blessed Redeemer and Advocate, 
MRS. C. A. WISE. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Since the opponents of the Vow called attention to the 
small number of names registered, the Birmingham 
Church has decided to send a full list of her members that 
have taken the Vow, as a means of expressing to you our 
hearty approval and appreciation of it. 

While the majority took it some time ago and so notified 
you, yet others have been dilatory about sending in 
their names. Only a few have not yet seen the necessity 
for taking it, and we trust, in God's providence, they may 
soon see "eye to eye" with us, as no antagonism has been 
shown. 

We would like to say, also, that we feel most grateful 
for the season of refreshing that we have recently enjoyed, 
and are confident that much permanent good will 
result therefrom. 

Yours in him, 

B. T. M., --Secretary. 



page 1 13 



SEMI-MONTHLY 