R163 : page 1 

VOL. II. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., DECEMBER, 1880. 

NO. 6. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 
L. A. ALLEN, .... HONEOYE, N.Y. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance-includes 
postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R163 : page 1 



THE RESTORED DOMINION. 

When God created man, he endowed him with qualities of 
being like his own. Qualities of justice and judgment fitted him 
to be a ruler; qualities of mercy and love prepared him to be a 
reasonable, kind and wise ruler. Such is a brief description of 
earth's first king- Adam. An image of his creator, (not 
physically, but mentally and morally,) he is to be invested with 
authority over earth and its affairs, like as God is ruler over all, 
as we read: "In our likeness let him have dominion over the 
beast of the field, the fowl of heaven and the fish of the sea." 
[Gen. 1:26]. Thus was he installed lord of earth. He was but 
another form of creation, a step lower than angels, as lower and 
under him, came the brute creation; accordingly we read: "Thou 
hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned 
him with glory and honor. Thou madest him to have dominion 
over the works of Thy hands. Thou hast put all things under his 
feet." [Psa. 8:5-6.] 

All of this glory, honor, and rulership was invested in him, to be 
used in harmony with his nature, which being perfect, was at 
perfect harmony with the will of God. 

As God had foreseen, and arranged for, man disobeys his 
superior ruler the King of Kings and Lord of Lords. This cannot 
be allowed to go unpunished. He had been informed from the 
first that disobedience to God would be sin, and that its 
legitimate punishment and effect is death. While man always 
was mortal, and therefore liable to disease and death, yet the 
loving Creator had made every provision necessary to his 
welfare, in the garden prepared for his trial. And not only had 
He arranged that the soul (person) that sinned should die, but 
also that if obedient the person should continue to live. The 
means for life's continuance was in "every tree of the garden," 
i.e., the food provided for man's sustenance was amply sufficient 
to meet all the wastes of his system, and would have preserved 
the freshness and vigor of his perfect being forever. This would 
be everlasting life. 

When man became a sinner the penalty "death" must be 
executed. It mattered not so far as the penalty was concerned, 
whether Adam should die the same moment that he disobeyed, 
or the same year, or a thousand years after. He must die. The 
word "day" used in connection with the penalty, is the general 
term used now as well as in past times, for a period or epoch of 
time, as "The day of temptation in the wilderness -forty years;" 
the days of creation, etc. The marginal reading clears up the 
meaning: "In the day that thou eatest thereof, dying, thou shalt 
die." [Gen. 2:17] This was fulfilled not by God's striking Adam 
dead with a thunderbolt but simply by cutting off his access to 
the life-giving food supplied by the trees of the prepared garden. 
Accordingly an angel drove Adam from the garden and 



prevented with flaming sword, his access thereafter to the tree 
(trees or woods) of life. (Gen. 3:24). 

Thus was the lord of creation driven out into the world which 
God, foreknowing his fall, had left in an unprepared or "cursed" 
condition. The garden which we are told was "prepared" was 
doubtless an illustration of what the whole earth will be when 
man and his perfect conditions are restored- in "The times of 
restitution of all things which God hath spoken by the mouth of 
all his holy prophets. " 

Thus thrown upon his own resources for obtaining by sweat of 
face, elements to sustain life, Adam found it a hard lot, and by 
its effects was enabled to know what evil is, and the exceeding 
bitterness of sin. And oft, no doubt, he desired, perhaps prayed, 
that he might be permitted again to dwell in Eden, and promised 
that with his present knowledge of sin and evil he would more 
highly prize the good things there enjoyed and more fervently 
love and obey Him "from whom cometh every good and perfect 
gift." But though God's plan was no less loving than this, it was 
broader, wiser and more comprehensive. God's plan being to let, 
not only Adam, but also the entire race, learn just this same 
lesson of the bitterness of sin and disobedience which each must 
individually learn to fully appreciate. Then bringing all back to 
the Eden condition, sin might be forever banished, and the entire 
race live in harmony with God. 

Toil and care told in time upon even the perfect physical form of 
a perfect man, resulting finally in his complete overthrow and 
wresting from his grasp the last shred or spark of life. He is 
dead. After nine hundred and thirty years of struggle with his 
foe-death-he is conquered. The penalty of sin was inflicted and 
continues, to this moment, since he still is one of the prisoners in 
the great charnel house of death, which has since swallowed up 
the race, and will hold them all until the second Adam, who 
ransomed the race, and who declares, "I have the keys of hell 
and death" [hades-the grave] (Rev. 1:18) shall take his great 
power and reign, releasing "the prisoners of the pit" [grave] "the 
captives" of sin and death. 

But not only did the casting out from the life-producing fruits of 
the garden tend to the impairing of Adam's physical powers, but 
of his mental qualities also. It was not possible that he should 
retain perfect mental vigor, when he became physically 
impaired, thought being the product of the mental organism 
made active by the physical vitality. An injury to either one or 
both of these producing qualities would of necessity impair their 
product. 

We see then that Adam's mental powers decreased with his 
physical deterioration and we claim that the moral qualities of 
his mind suffered the most. While the energy of body and mind 
were taxed to their utmost to take care of self, it is but 



reasonable to suppose that the quality of benevolence (love) 
which, being in God's image, must have been one of the ruling 
characteristics of his being, would be crowded out, and the 
quality of acquisitiveness 

R164 : page 1 

(selfishness) and combativeness developed instead. This same 
idea followed out would show us that all the higher, grander, 
nobler qualities were suffered measurably to decline, while all 
of the lower ones (common to the lower animals) were the more 
developed. 

As man lost the grandeur of his being, and its powers decreased, 
his rulership over the lower creation, as well as over self gave 
way, until today we find him afraid of all wild beasts, and that 
they no longer recognize the rulership of their fallen lord. And 
the influence once exercised by our father Adam is barely 
discernible in the occasional man who can master and tame 
(partially) the ferocious beasts. Here we have a brief glance at 
the first dynasty of earth and its overthrow. Now we pass 
onward to the second ruler. That we may more clearly recognize 
who this is, let us notice what power conquered the first ruler. 
Surely it was DEATH. "By sin came death. " In the expressive 
language of Paul, 

"DEATH REIGNED" 

King of Terrors under "him that has the power of death, that is, 
the devil"- "the prince of this world." All bow before him; all 
are under his control. From the cradle to the tomb, every ache 
and pain attests his power over us, and the same agency which 
first placed us under his rule (sin) conspires yet, to more quickly 
destroy the race. His rule or reign must continue so long as there 
is sin to be punished, or until the entire race is reduced to the 
condition of lifelessness, unless some power arise and redeem 
the race from his control. 

Such a ransom and deliverance was a part of God's plan from 
the first; and we read "for this purpose Christ was manifested, 
that He might destroy the works of the devil"— sin and death. 1 
John 3:8. And not only so, but also "him that hath the power of 
death, that is, the devil" (Heb. 2:14), and thus release from his 
grasp all of the race. But as Satan and death are acting in 
harmony with a law of the universe, viz. : that no sinner shall be 
permitted to live, and that every creature shall be perfect in its 
own plane of existence, the one who would deliver the race from 
his authority must satisfy these claims of the law of the universe. 
This the fallen race could not do for themselves, as God had 
from the first foreknown and arranged for in His plan. Carrying 
out this plan he had already condemned the entire race on 
account of one man's disobedience, His purpose from the first 
being that He would provide another man, who, being without 



sin, should give himself "a ransom for all" the race. That "as by 
one man's disobedience [the] many [all] were made sinners, so 
by the obedience of one shall [the] many [all] be made 
righteous" (justified from sin and death). Rom. 5:19. 

But who is the one righteous, pure, holy, sinless, one? How 
could there be such an one among a race all of whom were 
condemned. "There is none righteous, no not one," the scriptures 
answer. But when mankind had learned effectually his own 
weakness and inability to deliver himself from death, his 
extremity became God's opportunity, and "God's eye pitied, and 
His arm brought salvation. " The very chief of God's creation 
higher than angels and archangels [Heb. 1:5-8], 

R164 : page 2 

He who is called "the beginning of the creation of God" [Rev. 
3:14] is selected as the one who shall undergo the labors of 
redeeming humanity. We are not to suppose this was an irksome 
or unwilling work, for we cannot suppose a being in perfect 
harmony with Jehovah who would not take delight in doing His 
will. Nor would obedience be the only motive which would 
actuate, partaking as all perfect beings on whatever plane they 
exist must, of the divine quality— love— he would love to do the 
work for the sake of its benefits to mankind, releasing them 
from death. This no doubt was a part of "the joy set before him," 
for which he, "endured the cross despising the shame." Heb. 
12:2. 

Aside from this joy at the opportunity to release the human race 
from death, was that of "bringing many sons to glory," i.e., a 
part of the race "a little flock." "To these gave he power to 
become sons of God. " "For, as many as are led by the spirit of 
God, are the sons of God. " These, according to God's plan, may, 
by intimate association with him be reckoned as the bride of 
Christ and as such enter the heavenly family. To these sons this 
mighty one would be a leader or "captain of their salvation. " 
And yet another (though perhaps in his estimation less 
important) part of this 

"JOY SET BEFORE HIM, " 

was that He himself should, because of his obedience, labor, 
sacrifice, etc., be accounted worthy of still higher honor than he 
had ever yet possessed, as we read: "He became obedient unto 
death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore, God also hath 
highly exalted him and given him a name which is above every 
name." (Phil. 2:8-9.) "That all men should honor the Son even as 
they honor the Father. (John 5:23.) 

But how shall this redemptive work be accomplished? We have 
seen that God's plan was that, since by man came death, by man 
should also come the resurrection of the dead. (1 Cor. 15:21). 
Then to redeem man, this mighty one must become a man in 



every particular. He must partake of "flesh and blood," (Heb. 
2:14), and consequently must have all the qualities of the fleshly 
race, not the sinful and depraved qualities with which we now 
are burdened, but he must be a perfect man standing exactly 
where Adam stood, except that he would know that sin had 
brought the wretchedness and death which he saw everywhere 
about him, and also for what purpose he had come. He took not 
the nature and form of angels, for that would not have answered, 
but he took the nature and form of man. 

All things are now ready. "In the fullness of time, God sent forth 
his Son, born of a virgin. " "born not of the will of the flesh but 
of the will of God"— in a word as much of a specially creative 
act on God's part as was the creation of Adam; the difference 
being that the one could say, "The earth is my mother," the other 
was "born of a woman. " Had he in any way been a descendant 
of Adam he would have been under the curse of death, as are all 
other members of that race. He would have been as unable to 
keep the law as other men in whom sinful dispositions and 
depraved human nature are born. But while of the same (human) 
nature he is a new being, distinct from the race. He is born, 
grows in wisdom and in stature but manifests powers beyond 
others because he is perfect, they imperfect. Now he has reached 
maturity (according to the law) at thirty years of age. He knows 
as no one else does the great work for which during those thirty 
years he has been coming-a body preparing-it was "for the 
suffering of death'-fhat he "should taste death for every man"- 
"that through death he might destroy death," and liberate a dead 
race— "in due time. " Now he is come the second perfect sinless 
man, and offers this perfect life as a ransom for the race. "Lo, I 
come, (as) in the volume of the book it is written of me, to do 
thy will, O God." (Heb. 10:7). This was his covenant, to die, as 
he afterward expressed it, saying: "For this cause came I into the 
world. " And here in type he was buried in the water and rose 
again, thus making the picture of that which he covenanted to 
do. 

Now as the perfect one he has done all that he can do, given 
himself up to die as the Father may will, but though the death 
has not actually occurred (at baptism) it is so reckoned, (as with 
us when we covenant,) and the new nature's powers and will, 
which belong to the spiritual body, which he is to be when the 
work of death is complete; ("raised a spiritual body,") these 
powers and qualities were given him as soon as the human- 
earthly— body was consecrated. This was at his baptism when 
the spirit descended and a voice from heaven acknowledged His 
begetting again to the spiritual plane and to the Divine nature. 
"This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased." [Matt. 
3:17.] Henceforth the life of Jesus is that of a dual being, the 
outward form being the man Christ Jesus, whose life and being 
were daily spent for the good of others— a body already given 
up to death. 



The new being within-the Divine nature- was the spirit power 
of God. And in this he is the pattern and leader of "all who come 
unto God by Him," "who become partakers of the Divine 
nature"— the "little flock" called His bride-His body. We must 
surrender ourselves to God— be baptized into His death- in order 
to be begotten of the spirit and receive the earnest of our new 
spiritual being, the fullness of which will be received when we 
are completely delivered from this fleshly condition to our 
spiritual bodies. 

Thenceforth he "did not his own human will" but was "led of the 
Spirit," and the actions now were of God, as Jesus testified: 
"The word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's, which 
sent me." [John 14:24 and 17:8.] Of mine own self I can do 
nothing, the Father that dwelleth in me, He doeth the works. 
[John 14:10.] If we as our head "are led by the spirit of God"- 
evenunto death— we also become "the sons of God," [Rom. 
8:14,] who will also "work in us to will and to do of His good 
pleasure." Phil. 2:13. 

And we who are now "new creatures (in Christ Jesus") should 
take courage from the life of our beloved master; as Paul says: 

"CONSIDER HIM 

who endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest 
ye be weary and faint in your minds. " If you sometimes find it 
hard to endure the frowns of the world and to be thought of and 
treated as a deceiver by your friends, think of Him weeping in 
Gethsemane, condemned before Pilate, crucified as a 
malefactor, forsaken and denied by His loved ones, "yet He 
opened not His mouth. " And if your human nature sometimes 
shrinks, although reckoned dead, think again of Him. Remember 

R165 : page 2 

that He was tempted in all points like as we are, (yet without 
sin,) and can and does sympathize with us, and though you may 
sometimes cry out, as he did, "Father, if it be possible, let this 
cup [the ignominy] pass from me, " forget not to add, as he did, 
"yet not my will but thine be done." The human will of Jesus 
though given up at consecration— baptism— sometimes rose up 
so that He needed the heavenly "grace to help in time of need" 
to keep the human will perfectly obedient to the will of the new 
being-the divine. 

This dying process continued during the three and one-half years 
of His ministry, from the moment of His consecration and 
acceptance at baptism, until on the cross He cried: "It is 
finished. " But what was finished there-the work of atonement? 
No, the work of atonement signifies the making at one of two 
parties. In this case God was one and humanity the other party. 
Man's sin had brought upon him God's curse, death, instead of 
His blessing; and by its degrading influence (as we have seen) it 



had so marred the mental and moral likeness of man to his 
maker, that he no longer took "delight in the law of God," but in 
sin, and it will be readily seen by all that there was much work 
necessary to bring about full reconciliation between God and 
man. First— Justice must be met, a ransom must be given for the 
sinner, else God could never, to all eternity, recognize him as 
having a right to live. Secondly-Man must be brought to his 
original condition of perfection-in God's image— before he can 
be of himself perfectly in harmony with God's perfect will and 
law. Now, while this work, as a whole, was Jehovah's plan from 
"before the creation of the world," its accomplishment only 
began with Jesus, and will not be completed until the end of the 
millennial reign, when Jesus shall deliver up all things to the 
Father, having put down [destroyed] all opposition to God's laws 
[sin.] 1 Cor. 15. 

When Jesus cried "It is finished," he referred only to the first 
mentioned part of this work of atonement, viz: The giving of the 
ransom; this was now complete; the penalty of Adam's sin was 
now met for "Christ died for our sins according to the scripture"- 
-"gave himself a ransom for all to be testified in due time." 
"Who is a propitiation [satisfaction] for our sins, and not for 
ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world." 1 John 2:2. 

Having thus "purchased us from death with his own precious 
blood, " all the race belong to him. A race of sinners they were 
having no right to life; a race of ransomed beings they are 
against whom justice has no claim, and who may be restored to 
perfect life at the pleasure or will of Jesus their redeemer, who 
proclaimed, that in due time "all that are in their graves shall 
hear the voice of the Son of Man and come forth. " And again: "I 
am he that liveth and was dead and behold I am alive 
forevermore, and have the keys of hell [hades— the grave] and of 
death." (Rev. 1:18.) Yes, says Paul: "For this purpose Christ was 
manifested, [in the flesh] that he might destroy death, and him 
that has the power of death, that is the devil. " 

But while we are thus informed of the plan of God to destroy 
"death" yet, nearly two thousand years have passed since the 
ransom was paid and still death reigns. Why does not the 
purchaser take possession of "the purchased possession?" Ah, he 
has a grand plan with regard to some of the race he has 
purchased-He will by trial of faith and patience develop and 
separate from the world "a little flock" whom he will associate 
with Himself as His bride. They will be a peculiar people, 
zealous of good works, and full of faith, who walk in his 
footsteps of self-sacrifice and entire giving up of their human 
nature -will and body-receiving instead the Divine nature-will 
and body. 

When the church— body— of Christ is made perfect through 
sufferings and trials, and united with Him [which event we 
believe to be so close at hand,] then the great work and reign of 



earth's new monarch- the second Adam-begins. Though 
possessing the power over evil ever since He rose from the 
grave its victor, yet he has not exercised that power up to the 
present time because evil is necessary to the development of his 
body. But when we are complete he shall take to himself his 
great power and reign. (Rev. 11:17.) This statement is applied as 
having its fulfillment at the end of the gospel age during the 
sounding of the seventh (symbolic) trumpet. 

Now let us inquire, how long will Christ reign-or exercise 
authority and rule? Answer. "He shall reign forever and ever," 
(Rev. 11:15,) that is, being associated with the Father, Christ 
(and we in him) shall always belong to the reigning and ruling 
power-Jesus at the Father's right hand (next in authority) and 
we at his right hand, consequently "above all principalities and 
powers." But in the especial sense of ruling over and subduing 
earth, the reign is limited to the period of time necessary to the 
restoring of all earth's people and affairs to a condition of at- 
one-ment or harmony with God, the Father, as Paul expresses it: 
"He must reign till he hath put all enemies under his feet. The 
last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. " For "He (the Father) 
hath put all things under his (Christ's) feet," but it is evident that 
the Father did not put himself under the control of Christ. "And 
when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son 
also, himself, be subject unto Him [the Father] that put all things 
under him, that God may be all in all." [or above all.] 1 Cor. 
15:25-28. 

Man having been restored to his original dominion every brute 
creature will recognize him as its Lord, and every human being 
will recognize "Christ as Lord to the glory of God the Father," 
(Phil. 2:1 1,) And thus will be completed the great work planned 
before our creation, commenced at the baptism of Jesus and 
ending with the close of the millennial reign, (Rev. 20:6,) viz: 
At-one-ment. 

Then "the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth," and 
His "will be done on earth as in heaven." 

That this is God's plan, is implied in the term "Restitution, " and 
is the 



(Continued on Seventh Page.) 

R165 : page 7 

(Continued from Second Page.) 



legitimate conclusion to be drawn from Paul's argument, 
Hebrews 2:6-9. He starts out with the original plan of God in 
creating man perfect -"Thou madest him a little lower than the 
angels; thou crownedst him with glory and honor and didst set 



him over the works of Thy hands. Thou hast put all [earthly] 
things in subjection under his feet. " But as we have seen, sin has 
marred all this glory and honor, and has degraded us far below 
angels; taking the dominion out of our hand and permitting 
"Death to reign," and if we look about us we will say with Paul 
that it seems as though God's plan was a failure, for though six 
thousand years have passed, "We see not yet all things put under 
him" [man]. But is there any hopeful sign to indicate that man 
may yet be restored to this honor and glory, and set over the 
earthly works of God's hand? Yes, we have the assurance that all 
God's purposes shall be accomplished, [Isa. 14:24,] and that a 
"seed of the woman" should yet destroy the serpent— evil-and 
"bless all the families of the earth. " And though this work is not 
yet accomplished yet we see a beginning of it. As Paul says, "we 
see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels," [the 
condition of a perfect man,] for the suffering of death... that "He, 
by the grace of God, should taste death for every man." Thus far 
had the plan progressed in Paul's day, and if he were living now, 
he would doubtless add, as we can, that the church, as his body, 
is about complete; that the gospel age of suffering with Him and 
"filling up the measure of the afflictions of Christ, which are 
behind" is ending and the millennial age in which we shall "live 
and reign with Christ a thousand years" is dawning. 

As those who expect to be of the bride— the body-of Christ and 
be glorified together with Him, we rejoice to think that the time 
is so near at hand when we shall be changed, leaving forever the 
human form and nature, and being made "like unto Christ's 
glorious body. " But one thing which adds much to our interest 
and rejoicing is the thought of the necessity of our development 
and change, as the body of the great deliverer, before the present 
ruler of earth-death-can be destroyed and the race liberated and 
brought to the liberty of the sons of God, as Adam and angels- 
free from the bondage of corruption -death. For we know that 
"they without us shall not be made perfect. " We must be 
perfected on the spiritual plane as divine beings before they can 
be perfected on the earthly plane as human beings. 

Seeing then what high honors and glory await us, and the 
blessings awaiting the world through us can any one wonder that 
we long for the happy moment of change? Surely not, and not 
only we, but the world, also, are waiting and hoping [though 
ignorantly] for a good time coming, for "The whole creation 
groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now waiting for the 
manifestation of [the Church] the sons of God. " (Rom. 
8:22,19.)- the sun of righteousness which "arises with healing 
in his wings" to heal, and perfect, and restore all things to the 
perfect will of God. 

Thus earth will have had, when man is restored, the following 
great 



OVERRULING POWERS: 

First-Man under God. Second -Death and evil under Satan. 
Third-Righteousness under Christ. Fourth-The first restored, 
i.e., man under God. 

In the second and third of these dynasties, viz.: The reigns of 
Satan and of Christ, the active rulers are invisible to humanity 
and their powers only recognizable by the effects and results. 
The devil is called "the prince [ruler] of this 

R166 : page 7 

world,"— "him that has the power of death, that is, the devil." 
The effects of His reign and rule have been, as we have seen, to 
degrade man in every way. How wonderfully successful he has 
been is evident as we look about us. Sin, misery and death are 
on every hand, and yet Satan, the ruler, is invisible, seen only 
through his agents, and he has plenty of them, for "his servants 
ye are to whom you render service. " We claim, then, that all 
persons or institutions or governments who aid in the work of 
death and degradation and oppression of right and truth, are 
Satan's agents. 

God classes all present governments of earth as Satan's. "The 
prince-ruler-of this world" would not permit any government 
which would not act in harmony with him, as long as he has the 
control, which will be until the end of this age, when the 
Redeemer takes his great power and reigns. Satan has ruled 
among the nations for ages, except the one nation, Israel, of 
which God says, "You only have I known of all the [nations] 
families of the earth. " (We have seen that they were used thus as 
a type of the higher spiritual Israel, the church, which was to be 
in the world, but not of it.) The time came, however, that God 
gave over even this nation as the others when they went into 
captivity to Babylon, and God's prophet said of the last reigning 
prince, "Take off the diadem, remove the crown; this shall not 
[continue to] be the same, I will overturn, overturn, overturn it 
[the kingdom] until He come whose right it is, and I will give it 
unto Him" [The Christ]. Ezek. 21:27. 

At the same time, God indicated that the government of earth 
was given over to depravity's rule, and pictures it to 
Nebuchadnezzar as 

A GREAT IMAGE 

illustrative of human power, divided into four parts, 
Nebuchadnezzar's government representing the head; the 
succeeding, Medo-Persian government represented by the breast 
and arms; and the belly and thighs representing the third or 
Grecian government; while the fourth and last part, the legs and 
feet represent the last phase of earthly government, the Roman 
Empire, which, in a divided form, still continues, and is to be 



followed by Messiah's Kingdom— the kingdom of heaven, 
"which shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms 
[not people], and it shall stand forever." Danl. 2:44. 

Thus, as a glorious image, did these earthly kingdoms appear to 
the natural man; and as glorious they still are regarded by the 
world. Extolled in prose and verse, through all generations, are 
their deeds of blood and violence, which shock the feelings of 
all possessed of the spirit of love. Their history is one successive 
record of crime and death, each of their heroes claiming higher 
honor than his predecessor because he had butchered greater 
numbers of his fellow-beings, and made more widows and 
orphans and more misery. No wonder that when God pictured 
the same four earthly governments to the holy prophet Daniel, 
he gave it as a beastly picture. (Dan. 7.) They are indeed beastly 
governments. How perfectly they represent, in their evil and 
death-dealing power, their master, the devil. The picture, or 
likeness of the fourth (Roman power) to Satan is so strong that 
Jesus, when presenting it in symbol in Revelation, almost 
invariably calls it "the dragon," "that old serpent, which is the 
devil and Satan," &c, thus using the names of its prince as a 
name for the kingdom. 

While God thus permits evil to triumph now, seemingly without 
restraint, and uses it as an agency for punishing sin, yet it is 
under an over-ruling guidance by which God "causes the wrath 
of man to praise Him, and the remainder He will restrain. " 

The inventions and arts of the last three centuries (machinery, 
printing, application of steam, electricity, &c.) have come about 
gradually, but we believe are none the less of God, and agencies 
now in preparation for the blessing of humanity during the 
coming reign of righteousness. These scientific attainments, 
which will so fully bless in the future, are even now exercising a 
powerful effect upon humanity, enlightening the understanding, 
and, by increasing the dependency of one upon another, it 
naturally tends to promote sympathy, affection and fraternity 
between the various members of the human family. 

But all of these blessings, while they serve to lift mankind in a 
measure out of evil, are only temporary helps. Satan is still equal 
to the occasion, and though he could not now induce millions of 
men to follow for years a leader for his glory's sake, he can 
foment angry strife between nations upon pretexts of honor, etc., 
and though men do not now fight as incessantly as of old, yet 
the "arts of war" more than keep pace with those of peace, so 
that to-day the standing armies of earth are far larger and far 
better prepared for mutual destruction than ever before. 

The progress of science and art fails to bring now the blessings 
which will result in the future, because avarice (selfishness) has 
crowded out love and benevolence. Capital and power combine 
to oppress the poor, and they in turn despise and envy the rich. 



Nor can we wonder if the masses of mankind notice this 
condition of affairs; and that as knowledge increases among 
them they should seek to band themselves together for self- 
protection, especially if they see, as in Europe, kings, emperors, 
nobles and landlords rolling in wealth and luxury, while some of 
them barely eke out an existence on the commonest necessaries 
of life, without luxury or comfort. All that they can earn more 
than will purchase meal, potatoes and salt, with coarse fabric for 
clothing, is required as tax to support these corrupt governments, 
which, like great boils, absorb the strength and vitality of 
humanity. So we see that Satan is still ruling over earth. Evil 
may change tactics according to the necessities of the hour, but 
it is evil still. 

God's word informs us that, by the general uprising of humanity 
and overthrow of governments, the new age will be introduced. 
In the coming struggle the two spiritual powers, Christ and his 
saints, and Satan and his angels, will each have earthly armies 
whose causes they will support and advance. Satan's will be the 
kings, chief captains, rich men and mighty men, [Rev. 19:19,] 
while Christ will espouse and bring to victory the cause of the 
oppressed, who, inspired by justice and right, will be used to 
some extent as agents to their own liberation from the thraldom 
of evil and oppression. 

How we see the preparation for this time of trouble in the world, 
going on all around us, and how unconsciously each one takes 
his place to play his part in the closing act of the reign of sin and 
death. In this country less oppressed and in every way more 
blessed than others, 

CAPITAL AND LABOR 

are arraying themselves against each other as if against enemies. 
Labor fearing that capital will grind the life out of it unless it 
organizes and protects itself; capital fearful of losing the upper 
hand of labor. Look abroad and see the Nihilists of Russia, the 
Land Leaguers and Liberals of Great Britain and Ireland, and the 
Socialists and Communists of Austria, Germany and France, and 
tell me do not all of these things, visible to our natural eye, 
corroborate what our spiritual eye of faith has seen by the light 
of the prophetic page, viz. : That "the day of the Lord is a day of 
trouble," and that we are now in the "harvest" of the gospel age, 
the chief reaper present, and the work of separation going on [in 
the church] between wheat and tares. Soon, probably by, 
possibly before, the fall of 1881, we shall be changed- born of 
the spirit [of which we are now begotten] into the glorious 
likeness of our Head. 

The third dynasty of earth, like the second, will be the ruling of 
an invisible power through seen agencies of earth. As now Satan 
reigns unseen, then "The Christ of God" will reign and rule 
unseen. As now sin abounds, so then the opposite, 



righteousness, will rule. As Satan now has agents in men and 
governments, so with Christ's reign, every man coming into 
harmony with truth and righteousness will be reckoned a servant 
of God. The kingdoms of this world being all overthrown, [Dan. 
2:44,] will be re-established on principles of justice and equity 
based upon the golden law of love to God and men. 

The chief nation of earth during that age, the word informs us, 
will be fleshly Israel, in glory and prominence exalted above all 
other nations -"The joy of the whole earth." And next in 
positions of favor and blessing will come other nations in 
proportion as they conform to the law of the Kingdom of God. 
Thus will the light of knowledge and truth emanating from the 
spiritual city-the church— the New Jerusalem, [Rev. 21.,] bless 
all nations and result in healing and blessing all mankind, until 
ultimately, having put down all opposition and brought all men 
to the condition of perfection and righteousness, the third empire 
will give place to the fourth, which is the first restored, viz: man 
over earth its lord and himself in perfect obedience to the King 
of Kings and Lord of Lords. Thus, "God [will be] all in all." 
Amen. "Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done, on earth as it is 
in heaven. " 



page 3 

TAKE HEART. 

Let me take heart! the present scene shall soon be o'er; 
The clustering clouds shall hide the sun at noon no more. 
The tears now dropping from my eyes shall be forgot; 
The joys undimmed by sin and misery, my lot. 

The storm now sweeping through the troubled sky be past; 
The longed-for morning without clouds arise at last. 
The hindmost shadow soon shall utterly depart; 
Then let me watch and wait, and hopefully take heart. 

-H. Grattan Guinness. 



R167 : page 3 



PLACE OF MEETING. 



To be "forever with the Lord" has ever been an important 
element of the Christian's hope. This hope has cheered and 
strengthened the true pilgrims in all generations. This has been 
the case even where a very imperfect understanding has 
obtained. Whatever has been believed among Christians as to 
how, when, or where they should meet the Lord, as to the fact of 
being with Him, they have often said, "That will be Heaven for 
me." 



We cannot think that only those who fully understand the 
subject beforehand will be accepted in His presence. In such a 
case, perhaps none would be accepted. But we believe it is both 
duty and privilege to search and learn more and more of this and 
all other Bible subjects. The beauty and harmony of the various 
parts of the word and plan is seen when each part receives due 
attention. 

Those who have believed that the spirits of just men could be 
made perfect and enter into the immediate presence of God, and 
there meet and dwell forever with the Lord, have in consequence 
regarded the coming of the Lord with indifference, so far at least 
as their own hope is concerned. On the other hand, those who 
have seen the import of Jesus' word, "If I go and prepare a place 
for you, I will come again and receive you to myself, that where 
I am there ye may be also," have necessarily made much of the 
return of Christ. 

While the latter class are doubtless correct as to the time of 
meeting the Lord, we think both may be holding extreme views 
as to the place of meeting. One class expects to meet Him in 
Heaven itself, the immediate presence of God, and the other 
class associate the meeting with earthly conditions, while we 
believe the meeting will be in a condition midway between the 
other two. The Lord shall descend, and we shall be caught up to 
meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord. 
Comforting words! 1 Thess. 4:16-18. 

It may seem strange to some, in view of the simplicity of Paul's 
statement, that we should raise the question, "Where shall we 
meet the Lord?" Is it not plainly said we shall meet Him in the 
air, and is not this easily understood? But Peter says that he 
himself and "beloved brother Paul also," when speaking of these 
things, said things "hard to be understood." 2 Pet. 3:15,16. And 
we have seen that the truth concerning the trumpet's voices and 
fire associated with His coming does not lie on the surface. We 
need not be surprised, then, if the same be true of all the 
circumstances attending. 

By the study of the Bible we have been led to believe that as we 
advance from natural to spiritual things there is a corresponding 
advancement in the signification of words. Many examples of 
this are familiar to all careful readers. Take for example the 
terms bread, water, garment, light, heat, cold, hunger, thirst, 
nakedness, darkness. No one would think of giving these words 
the same signification, when applied to spiritual things, as when 
applied to natural things. A man might walk in the light of the 
brightest sun that ever shone, and yet be in the grossest spiritual 
darkness. All can apply this to the other terms. 

Air and spirit are primarily the same, yet who would think of 
reading "air" instead of "spirit" in the sublime statement of the 
word, "There is a spirit in man, and the inspiration [or in- 



breathing] of the Almighty giveth him understanding?" Or when 
it is declared "God is Spirit," who but the grossest materialist 
would read it, "God is air?" When Jesus breathed on His 
disciples, and said, "Receive ye the Holy Spirit," all Christians 
recognize the advancement in the use of words according to the 
relation between natural and spiritual things. 

A further application of the same principle is seen in the fact 
that Satan is called "the prince of the power of the air," and 
when his spiritual kingdom is overwhelmed by the incoming 
kingdom of Christ, it is said, "The powers of heaven shall be 
shaken. " In contrast with this shaking, Paul says we are to 
receive a kingdom which cannot be shaken or removed. Heb. 
12:27,28. 

Let this same principle be kept in mind, and our being caught up 
to meet the Lord in the air will have the deep significance of our 
being exalted to power with Christ in the Kingdom of Heaven. 
The kingdom of the air [firmament] and "the Kingdom of 
Heaven" are primarily the same. 

Place and distance in natural things are used to represent 
condition in the spiritual. No one would think of applying the 
expressions "coming to God," or "coming to Jesus," literally. 
When we sing "Nearer, my God, to Thee, " or when Paul says, 
"Let us draw near with a true heart," literal place or distance is 
not thought of, but to be more and more like our great Example 
is the burden of the heart of the true worshiper. "He that cometh 
to God must believe that He is, and that He is the re warder of 
them that diligently seek Him. " Heb. 1 1 :6. 

Translation (or change) is a term which we believe is subject to 
the same law of interpretation. As words are translated or 
changed from one language to another, and so changed in form, 
and as men or things may be translated or changed from one 
place to another, so spiritually men may be translated or 
changed from one condition to another. Thus, when men come 
over from the devil to the Lord's side, they are said to be 
delivered from the power of darkness and translated into the 
kingdom of God's dear Son. Col. 1:13. All will agree that this 
translation is a change not of place, but of condition. If this 
principle holds good as to the begetting of the Spirit, may it not 
also hold good as to the birth of the Spirit. 

In view of this so common principle of the word, we cannot 
regard with favor the idea that the saints are to be caught away 
in the flesh (however perfect that flesh may be) to meet Christ in 
any locality. The translation, in our mind, can mean no less than 
a change from the natural condition to the spiritual condition. 
The ascent of Aaron, the saint, to meet Moses in the Mount of 
God, is clearly a type of the saints going up to meet Christ. The 
mountain is a type of the mountain or Kingdom of God, in 
which we shall meet Christ. From that time forward, Moses and 



Aaron were manifested in power and great glory. So from the 
time the saints are exalted, they will be manifested or made to 
appear in power and great glory. 

That the saints are not to be in an earthly condition at that time 
seems clear from Paul's statement that we are not come (or 
coming) to Mount Sinai, a mount that could be touched, that 
burned with fire, &c, "but ye are come [or coming] to Mount 
Zion, the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem," &c. 
Heb. 12:18-22. 

If it were an earthly mountain, it could be touched. Paul says 
this one can not be touched; hence it is a heavenly or spiritual 
mountain— a very high spiritual condition. When the Deliverer 
comes out of Zion, we may safely conclude that it is not an 
earthly army with guns and broadswords, but a heavenly army, 
wielding the sword of the Spirit, which sword proceeds out of 
His mouth, i.e., "The Word of God." The victory of that army 
will surely be a blessing to the nations. Oh, that we may be 
prepared to meet Christ in His Kingdom! 

J. H. P. 



R167 : page 3 

AFTER CHANGE-BEFORE GLORY. 

"I tell you, in that night there shall be two men in one bed. The 
one shall be taken, and the other shall be left. Two women shall 
be grinding together. The one shall be taken, and the other left. 
And they (the disciples) answered and said unto Him, "When, 
Lord?" (that is, when will they be taken). And He said unto 
them, "Wheresoever the body is, thither will the eagles be 
gathered together." Luke 17:34-37. 

The above verses, in connection with others of a similar nature, 
have received special attention for several months. Believing, as 
we do, that we are drawing very near the time when this will be 
fulfilled, it is important that we try to arrive at a correct solution 
of the matter. Further, as the light shines more and more, we 
also believe that when due, this, like other things, will be 
understood by those in the shining way; hence, if we can now 
understand how or in what manner this will be fulfilled, it is 
evidence that we are near the event spoken of. Like other 
portions of God's word, this has to be taken in connection with 
other scriptures in order to arrive at the whole truth. So now, by 
comparing scripture with scripture, we shall endeavor to set 
forth the manner in which this will be fulfilled. First; we do not 
think that the scriptures teach that those who are taken will be 
taken to any locality (not Mt. Zion, or any definite point), 
neither do we think that those when taken, and for some time 
afterward, will be invisible to those around them. No, we 



believe, after they are taken, they will be visible and to all 
appearances just the same, but in reality, they will not be the 
same as before taken, for if they were, then to be taken would 
not mean anything. Some may ask, how can they appear the 
same, and yet not be. 

We find angels have appeared as men, yet they are not men, but 
are spiritual bodies. When Jesus was raised from the dead, He 
was born of the spirit, and hence a spiritual body, for that which 
is born of the spirit is spirit, and hence is not flesh. John 3:6. 
Though he was a spiritual body, yet he appeared (only appeared) 

R168 : page 3 

as a man. Now, could He not have remained under the vail of 
flesh all of those forty days after the time He rose? We think so, 
for if He could appear as a man (because of the vail) for a short 
time, He could have remained so all the time He was on earth 
after His resurrection. This being true then, one can be a 
spiritual body and yet appear as a natural fleshly body. Again, if 
Jesus did so, and we are to be made like Him, then we could be 
taken or changed to spiritual bodies, and yet remain under the 
vail and to all appearances the same, and yet not be the same in 
reality. The fact that when we are changed we will be seen, is 
proven by the taking of Elijah. 

If you will read (2 Kings 2:10), you will notice a conditional 
promise to Elisha. He had asked for a double portion of Elijah's 
spirit, and Elijah says, "Thou hast asked a hard thing, but if thou 
see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so unto thee, but if 
not [that is, if you do not see me], it shall not be so. " Verse 15 
informs us that the spirit of Elijah did rest on Elisha. Then we 
know he must have seen Elijah when taken, for this was the 
condition on which he would receive the spirit. In Verse 1 1 
there are two statements, viz.: Elijah and Elisha were parted 
asunder by a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and Elijah went 
up by a whirlwind into heaven. This last event was after they 
were parted, but how long after we are not informed. Elisha saw 
the first act, but not the latter. Now, what we want to consider, is 
the separation, or first act, for this, I believe, shows the change 
or taking of the saints, and what I now want to prove is that we 
will be taken (changed to spiritual bodies) and yet be seen, just 
as Elijah was seen, when he was taken from Elisha. Elijah has 
been a perfect type of the church, as all our readers know, from 
Pentecost down; hence, when he was taken, it must have been a 
type of our change, for the church is not complete until we, the 
living, are taken. Then the manner of Elijah's change, is 
important, if we would understand how we shall be changed. 
We now leave this type and look at another, which, seems to 
teach the same thing. I refer to Moses and Aaron. We 
understand Moses to be a type of Christ, and Aaron a type of the 
overcomers. Aaron is mentioned as going forth to meet Moses 
as we go forth to meet Jesus; "And when he (Aaron) seeth thee 



(Moses), he will be glad in his heart." So will we be glad when 
we "see (Jesus) as he is." Verse 27 informs us that Aaron met 
Moses in the Mount of God, and kissed him. This meeting of 
Moses and Aaron, as also the parting of Elijah and Elisha, we 
understand to typify our change. We think so, for this reason, 
viz. : It was after they (Moses and Aaron) met in the mount that 
Moses told Aaron all the words of the Lord, who had sent him, 
and all the signs which he had commanded him. Verse 28. This 
instruction, seems to show the increase of knowledge 

R168:page4 

that will be acquired by the change to the spiritual condition and 
yet that they will be seen afterward and remain, to all 
appearances, the same, is proven by the work of Aaron after he 
met Moses. Verse 16 reads, "He (Aaron) shall be thy spokesman 
unto the people,... and he shall be to thee (Moses) instead of a 
mouth, and thou shalt be to him instead of God. " This proves 
clearly that there is a difference between the condition of Moses 
and Aaron, at least so far as teaching the people is concerned, 
and if Aaron represents the church, and we were (when changed, 
or when meeting Jesus) to go into the invisible condition as He 
is, how then could we be the spokesman unto the people? Here 
is a point worthy of notice. The main difference between Moses 
and Aaron after they met seems to have been that Aaron was the 
active agent in communicating to Pharaoh (the world), so the 
only difference between us (when changed) and Jesus will be 
that we will be under the vail, and hence visible- the active 
agents or representatives of the unseen kingdom of God. "The 
Kingdom of God cometh not with observation" (outward show). 
Luke 17:20. 

After the meeting of Moses and Aaron in the Mount, they went 
and gathered together the elders of Israel, and Aaron spake all 
the words... and did the signs, and the people believed. Verses 
29-31. This would represent that Jesus and the saints were in a 
sense together, and yet the saints only would be seen by the 
world, for Aaron spake the words, did the signs, and the people 
believed. 

After the meeting of Moses and Aaron, there were ten plagues. 
During the first three, Moses does the work through Aaron. We 
read: "Moses and Aaron went in unto Pharaoh,... and Aaron cast 
down his rod." Ex. 7:10. Again, "The Lord spake unto Moses, 
say unto Aaron, take they rod,... and Moses and Aaron did so, 
and he (that is, Aaron) lifted up the rod and smote the waters... in 
the sight of Pharaoh. "...Verses 19,20. Again, "The Lord spake 
unto Moses, say unto Aaron, stretch forth thine hand, and Aaron 
did so,... and the frogs came." Ex. 8:5,6. Verse 16 informs us 
that Aaron acted as prophet, and did the work connected with 
the third plague. We believe that those whom Aaron represents 
(the little flock) will be really spiritual bodies, but during the 
three first plagues will be under the vail, and hence appear as 



prophets (teachers) unto the people, and in this condition will be 
the prophet or mouth-piece of the Christ, as Aaron was of Moses 
after meeting him. 

This company of changed saints it appears are those brought to 
view in Rev. 15:1-4, standing on, as it were, a sea of glass; the 
sea mingled with fire (people in the midst of judgments); these 
have the harps of God; these are they who had gotten the victory 
over the beast, and over his image, and over his mark, and over 
the number of his name the overcomers. These sing the song of 
Moses, the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb. Not the 
song sung by Moses and the Children of Israel after the 
overthrow of the Egyptians, but the song of Moses, when the 
elders of the tribes were gathered together. See Deut. 31:28- 
32;l-4. Moses sang: Ascribe ye greatness unto our God,. ..for all 
His ways are judgment.... A God of truth,... just and right is He." 
The company on the sea of glass sing: "Great and marvelous are 
thy works,. ..just and true are thy ways, ...for all nations shall 
come and worship before thee, for thy judgments are made 
manifest. " We find the words are nearly identical, and hence the 
same song. This company on the sea of glass are before the 
throne (not on the throne). Rev. 4:6. 

This picture is given, however, after the throne was set, and one 
sat on the throne (verse 2), and out of the throne proceed 
lightnings and thunderings (judgments). So in Rev. 15 we have 
those on a sea of glass making a proclamation during troublous 
times, mingled with fire. It would also appear that this same 
company of changed ones are among the number mentioned in 
Rev. 14:1-5, viz.: "A Lamb stood on the Mount Zion, and with 
him are one hundred and forty- four thousand. These are in the 
Mount, as Moses and Aaron met in the Mount. These harp with 
their harps (like those on the sea of glass). These sing a new 
song "before the throne;" these are virgins; these follow the 
Lamb, and in their mouth was found no guile; "for they are 
without fault before the throne of God. Notice, these are before 
the throne-not on it. This is likely the position referred to in 
Luke 21:36, viz.: "that ye may be accounted worthy to escape,... 
and stand before the Son of Man. " But some one says, "When 
changed are we not exalted to the throne?" Not necessarily so. 
Jesus was a spiritual body, and at times appeared under the vail 
before He ascended to the Father's throne. (See Acts 2:22-36.) 

Then we might be changed to spiritual bodies, and remain under 
the vail of flesh for a time, before we are exalted to our Lord's 
throne. But some one says, "Is not a spiritual body a glorified 
body?" No. Jesus was a spiritual body before He was glorified 
(exalted to power). John 7:39. Then we might be spiritual bodies 
before we are glorified. We, the living ones, when changed to 
spiritual bodies, and while yet under the vail of flesh and before 
we are glorified, are probably those who are spoken of in Isa. 
52:7-8, viz.: "How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of 



Him (The feet represent the taken ones under the vail and are 
said to be of Him because in the spiritual condition as He is) that 
bringeth good tidings, ...that publisheth salvation; that sayeth 
unto Zion, thy God reigneth; thy watchmen shall lift up the 
voice; with the voice together shall they sing, for they shall see 
eye to eye (Now they do not) when the Lord shall bring again 
Zion. The above description would seem to indicate a different 
condition of the watchmen than that now held; also the work 
here is for Israel, just as the first work of Aaron, after meeting 
Moses, was among the elders of Israel. Israel, or my people, in 
the type (Ex. 8:23), primarily refers to the servant company 
down here and are spoken of as my people in Rev. 18:4. The 
servant company here will be separated from Babylon by the 
three first plagues, or during the time that the proclamation of 
Rev. 14:6-10 is being made by the taken but vailed saints, just as 
Aaron was spokesman to the people during the three plagues 
that caused the division between Pharaoh's people and the 
people of God. 

We suppose that any who have a mind to apprehend spiritual 
things can see how, by the evidence already given, we could be 
changed to spiritual bodies, and yet remain under the vail of 
flesh and at the same time see Jesus without His coming in the 
flesh or appearing under that vail to us. Any one who will use 
Moses and Aaron as a type must give up the idea of Jesus 
appearing to us in the flesh. Notice, Aaron went up to meet 
Moses in the mount. Yes, the church goes up toward the 
condition of Jesus, but Jesus does not come 

R169:page4 

down to the condition of the church. If Jesus were to come in the 
flesh, as some teach, then He could be the prophet Himself, and 
the very fact that Aaron was still prophet after they met proves 
that we will be under the vail, and hence in a condition to speak 
to the people, while Jesus will not so appear, and hence could 
not be prophet (teacher) even as Moses was not. We being in the 
spiritual condition Jesus will be our God as Moses was to 
Aaron. The fact that Aaron met and saw Moses in the mount, 
indicates that we must go up, or into the spiritual condition 
before we can meet and see Jesus. When He shall appear we 
shall be like Him and see Him as He is?" [1 John 3:2.] The 
change comes to us not to Him, "we shall be like Him." "We 
shall see Him as He is," a spiritual body; not as he was, in flesh. 

The fact that we will see Jesus after our change, though still 
under the vail, is proven by another type, viz. : that of Isaac and 
Rebecca: "And Rebecca lifted up her eyes, and when she saw 
Isaac she lighted off the camel, therefore she took a vail and 
covered herself." (Gen. 24:64-65.) When she saw Isaac 
represents one change. Then the putting on of the vail would 
show that we will remain vailed for a time after our change. The 
reason she is said to put on the vail is because when she saw 



Isaac she was changed, and hence the vail is no longer her real 
condition, but the assumed. Just so when we see Jesus we will 
have been changed and though under the vail it will only be put 
on, so to speak, and only because of this vail (the flesh) will we 
appear the same to the world. We will have additional power of 
utterance and knowledge, and perhaps certain miraculous 
powers which will be demonstrated, as was the case with Aaron 
after meeting Moses. We believe that the change we have been 
considering is near, much nearer, perhaps, than many are aware 
of. Let us be careful for nothing. Let us be Holy, for without 
Holiness shall no man see the Lord. Let all strive to enter in, ere 
the Master shuts too the door, for then there will be no more 
admission to the little flock, who shall finally sit with Jesus on 
the throne. Yes we shall soon be in the Kingdom. 

Not many monfhs- 

Their course shall run, 

Not many mornings rise, 

Ere all its glories stand revealed 

To our transported eyes. 



A. D. J. 



R170:page4 

BEFORE THE THRONE. 

"For since we believe that Jesus died and rose, so also, we 
believe that God, through Jesus, will lead forth with him those 
who fell asleep. For this we affirm to you by the Lord's word, 
that we, the living, who are left over to the coming of the Lord, 
will by no means precede those who fell asleep." (1 Thess. 4:14- 
15. Diaglott.) In the article in 

page 4 

which we considered how we, the living would be changed to 
spiritual bodies and yet remain for a time under the vail, it will 
be noticed that there is no mention made of the dead in Christ. 
From the above text we find that our changes cannot come until 
the dead are raised, "for we shall not precede them. " In order to 
understand this, we must look at several scriptures. 

1st. We will notice our pattern, Jesus. We find that after He was 
raised from the dead, (a spiritual body, born of the spirit) He 
was not seen by any one except when He showed Himself. This 
being true then, He could have been present [as He was 40 days. 
Acts 1 :3], and not have been seen at all; just so we now think He 
is actually present, 

R170:page4 

but not seen. And if Jesus can be present, and not seen, the dead 
in Christ could be raised and not seen, because when raised they 



will be like Jesus. Our understanding of the matter is this, viz: 
that the dead in Christ, will be raised spiritual bodies; then we, 
the living, changed to spiritual bodies, the only difference being, 
that they will not be seen; that is, will not appear under the vail, 
[the flesh] while we remain for a time vailed, yet our real 
condition will be the same. The type of Moses and Aaron 
teaches the resurrection of the dead before we meet Jesus. 
Before they met [Ex. 4:27,] you will notice that the angel of the 
Lord appeared unto him [Moses] in a flame of fire out of the 
midst of a bush [Ex. 3:2-6]; here God seems to introduce the 
idea of the resurrection. We find that Jesus gives the key in Luke 
20:29-38. We know that it is the resurrection of the dead in 
Christ He is talking about, for He says: they which shall be 
accounted worthy to obtain that world and the resurrection from 
the dead... these cannot die any more... [because the first 
resurrection, the second death hath no power over them, they 
cannot die again. [Rev. 20:6.] Now that the dead [viz: this class 
of the dead] are raised, even Moses showed at the bush... that is, 
the dead in Christ are raised at this point of time, which we find 
is before Aaron went to meet Moses and hence, before any one 
of the ten plagues were poured out. Then if [as has been shown] 
the meeting of Aaron and Moses represents our change and the 
dead must first be raised, this transaction at the bush is in the 
right place and harmonizes with the statement by Paul. "The 
dead in Christ rise first." 

In Rev. 15 we find a company on the sea of glass, making a 
proclamation. This sea of glass condition is before the throne, 
[Rev. 4:6.] we notice in verse 5, that there are seven lamps of 
fire burning before the throne, (which are the seven 
congregations, Rev. 1:20, E.D.) these seven lamps bring to mind 
the complete gospel church. And as they are before the throne, 
and the sea of glass, is also before the throne and there is a 
company on the sea of glass, we conclude it must be the 
overcomers in that position. We then conclude as follows, viz: 
"that this scene is, after the dead in Christ are raised and we the 
living changed and though all can sing the same song, they 
could remain invisible and yet we under the vail, might be 
visible. The seven lamps of fire might be burning [the church 
complete] because we are all in the spiritual condition, they 
would be visible to us and we to them. They 

R170 : page 5 

will not be visible to the world, neither would we, were it not for 
the vail. With this understanding of the matter we will now look 
at another point, viz: (Rev. 14:1-5.) ...A lamb stood on the 
Mount Zion, and with Him are 144,000; this company represents 
to our mind the complete church, and hence, the resurrected 
saints as well as the changed living saints; these harp with their 
harps. ..[like those on the sea of glass] these sing as it were a new 
song... these are the first fruits [overcomers] unto God and the 



Lamb and these are without fault before the throne of God... just 
as the company on the sea of glass are before the throne. Now 
we think the evidence is conclusive, that these are the 
overcomers, for the following reasons: 1st. We know of no more 
exalted position before the throne than the sea of glass. 2d. We 
know not who else should be the first fruits unto God and stand 
on the Mount Zion with the Lamb [Moses and Aaron met in the 
Mount.] 3d. We know not who the seven burning lamps could 
represent, if not the little flock. 4th. Neither do we know who 
the 144,000 could be if not those. 

Both "the one hundred and forty-four thousand," and the ones 
"as it were, on the sea of glass," are said to be "before the 
throne," which is the location of the sea of glass. Should we not 
conclude, therefore, that they are the same— the bride— "before 
the throne" signifying before the exaltation to the glory of 
power? The song sung is after they are seen on the Mount Zion 
with the Lamb, and this is in harmony with the type. After 
Moses and Aaron met in the Mount, Aaron did his work. So 
these are represented making a proclamation after the meeting 
with the Lamb. Our position then would be this, viz.: All the 
dead in Christ raised; we, the living, changed. All these would 
be in the spiritual condition. All remain before the throne until 
the proclamation to be made is completed by us who remain 
under the vail. The fact that they are raised but not seen, while 
we are changed but seen, seems to be shown by Isa. 52:7-8, viz.: 
"How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of Him?" The 
thought is this: Jesus, the Head (of the body), is beyond the vail 
and is not seen; the dead in Christ are raised, and they are 
beyond the vail-not seen. We, the living (the feet), are changed, 
but we are seen for a time, while a work is being done. The feet 
(so to speak) walk the earth, and they publish peace,... bring 
good tidings, ...that saith unto Zion, "Thy God reigneth, and we 
shall see eye to eye (because we are changed), when the Lord 
shall bring again Zion. The types of Elijah and Rebecca, we 
know, have represented the living phase of the gospel church 
from Pentecost down, but when we come to the closing work, 
viz.: when Elijah was taken, and when Rebecca saw Isaac, it 
proves the previous resurrection of the dead in Christ, for in this 
matter we cannot precede those who sleep; hence, when we see 
Him, the dead must have been previously raised, and so those 
two are in harmony with that of Moses and Aaron and Paul's 
statement. While they meet Jesus beyond the vail, we can be 
changed and meet both them and Jesus and yet remain under the 
vail, and we can all [resurrected and changed] remain on the sea 
of glass position for a time before the throne and not interfere 
with our being finally exalted to the throne. We shall consider 
this again. The spiritual body condition of both dead and living 
will obtain before any are glorified [or sit on the throne]. Let us 
lay aside every weight that we, being in Him, may be accounted 



worthy to escape— be changed— and the glory will follow in 
God's due season. 



A. D. J. 



R169 : page 5 

THE MARRIAGE--IN GLORY. 

And the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God 
and from His power, and no man was able to enter into the 
temple till the seven plagues of the seven angels were fulfilled. 
[Rev. 15:8.] In two articles preceding we have endeavored to set 
forth the manner in which we will be taken, or changed to 
spiritual bodies, and yet for a time remain under the vail, while 
the dead in Christ will at some time be spiritual bodies, and not 
under the vail. In this position we understand they are before the 
throne, but believing that we shall finally sit with Jesus on the 
throne, let us see if there is anything to throw light on this point, 
though the saints, after they are taken, will be seen for a time. It 
is also clear that we will finally pass beyond the vail and be seen 
no more. 

We found in looking at the taking of Elijah, who is one type, 
that there were two events. He was first parted from Elisha by a 
chariot of fire and horses of fire, but he went up into heaven by a 
whirlwind. The first we expressed as showing our change, and 
that we would then be seen as was Elijah, but the latter we 
understand to show, when we will leave the vail and be seen no 
more, and this is in harmony with the statement in 2 Kings 2:12. 
I also find there were two changes in the movements of Aaron, 
who is also a type. You will remember that during the three first 
plagues he was represented as the prophet of Moses and as 
spokesman unto the people. We explained this as teaching that 
we, after our change, would under the vail of flesh be as 
prophets (teachers) to the people here, but we find that after the 
third plague Aaron is never spoken of as the prophet of Moses 
or as spokesman unto the people. Notice Ex. 9:8. The Lord said 
unto Moses and unto Aaron, (Previous to this the Lord said unto 
Moses; Say unto Aaron), take to you handfuls of ashes of the 
furnace, and let Moses sprinkle it toward the heaven in the sight 
of Pharaoh, and they (Moses and Aaron) did so. At this point 
there seems to be some difference in Aaron. The Lord now 
speaks to him direct, as He had done to Moses. At this point, 
when Aaron is no longer the mouthpiece, his leaving the vailed 
condition seems to be typified. Now, at the same point, when 
Elijah went up into heaven and the Lord speaks face to face with 
him he is no longer seen. 

When we cease to appear under the vail is when the glorification 
of all takes place, and this is in harmony with Jesus, our 



forerunner. He was a spiritual body, and for forty days appeared 
at times under the vail, but when He ascended into heaven, (Acts 
1:11), and was seen no more, then He was glorified. In our text 
we come to a time when the temple is to be filled with smoke 
from the glory of God. We find this takes place just before the 
pouring out of the seven plagues, and is a parallel to the time 
when Aaron changes his position. After that he was no longer 
prophet. Neither will we be after our glorification. This 
glorification of all, I understand to be, the marriage of the Lamb. 
We are to be changed, that we may be fashioned like unto His 
glorious body, (Phil. 3:21), and if so be that we suffer with Him, 
then we may also be glorified together with Him. (Rom. 8:17.) 

This glorifying together we believe is the making one with Him 
in the fullest sense, and this follows the spiritual body condition. 
This will be when we shall be exalted to His throne and sit with 
Him. Jesus cannot appear with us in glory until we are glorified 
with Him. We find in Matt. 25:31-40 that when the Son of Man 
shall come in His glory, and all the holy angels with Him, then 
shall He sit upon the throne of His glory. We are with Him on 
the throne, hence the glory and our being on the throne are 
associated, but we can be spiritual bodies without the glory, and 
be before the throne. This same thought, viz. : first the change 
and then the glorification, or marriage, is also shown in the type 
of Isaac and Rebecca. When she lifted up her eyes and saw Isaac 
seems to show our change. We see Him when like him, but 
when he took her into his mother Sarah's tent, and she became 
his wife, [Gen. 24:67], which was after they met, seems to bring 
us to the point when the temple would be glorified and we 
become His wife. 

The thought that the glorification is the marriage and not the 
change to spiritual bodies is further proven by the following: 
Jesus ascended unglorified. [John 7:39]. He was to come in like 
manner, [Acts 1:11], then when we see Him it will be when He 
is unglorified, represented by Rebecca's seeing Isaac, but when 
we are glorified together with Him, would be shown by Isaac's 
taking Rebecca and making her his wife. Hence we go in with 
Him to the marriage. This is progressive: first, into a condition 
for the change; second, from that into glory with Him. 

We find in our text that just when the temple is filled with glory, 
is just before the pouring out of the seven plagues, and that is 
when the church is called the bride, viz. : when glorified. [See 
Rev. 21:9-1 1]. Then came unto me one of the seven angels 
which had the seven vials full of the seven last plagues, [Full? 
yes,] saying, come hither, I will show thee the bride, the Lamb's 
wife. He showed me the Holy Jerusalem. Having the glory of 
God, etc., here when glorified the church is called the bride. 
Hence this must be at or after the temple is filled with glory. The 
glorification and exaltation of the bride to the throne seems to be 
the main difference between the little flock and the great 



multitude, [the servants]. They certainly get spiritual life but 
apparently do not have the glory of the bride. The city was 
lighted by the temple for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb 
are the temple of it, and the glory of those [the temple] did 
lighten it [the city]. [Rev. 21:22-23]. Then the city is the light of 
the nation. [Verse 24]. In order to fully understand this matter 
and harmonize the various scriptures, it seems necessary to 
recognize the difference between one change [when we are 
made spiritual bodies] and the glorification of those spiritual 
bodies. This thought seems suggested by the building of the 
temple by Solomon. The getting out of the stones and timbers 
seems to be the work done during the gospel age, from 
Pentecost down. [1 Kings 3:18]. The building of the temple we 
apprehend is something different. It was built of stone made 
ready before brought thither to place of building, so that there 
was neither hammer, nor axe, nor any tool of iron heard in the 
house while it was in building. [1 Kings 6:7]. This shows the 
noiseless resurrection of the dead in Christ and change of the 
living, both classes changed to spiritual bodies. It was, however, 
after the temple was built that the glory of the Lord filled the 
House of the Lord. [1 Kings, 8:11]. Hence, if the building shows 
the change of dead and living to spiritual bodies, then the 
glorification must be something different from the change. 
Again, the fact that the temple was built and then glorified rather 
proves that all, dead and 

R170 : page 5 

living, will be made spiritual bodies before any are glorified. 
This would be in harmony with [Rev. 15:1-8]. The seven angels, 
clothed in pure and white linen [righteousness of the saints, Rev. 
19:8] and having their breasts girded with golden girdles, [verse 
6], seem to represent the overcoming church complete, dead 
raised, and living changed. If so, we find these on the sea of 
glass condition, [before the throne], singing a song [making a 
proclamation] before they are glorified-exalted to the throne. 
When on the sea of glass they are spiritual bodies, hence the 
temple is built before it is filled with glory. This sea of glass or 
spiritual body condition, we believe, will obtain before long, 
while the glorification or final exaltation of the saints will not 
take place for some time afterwards. Let us watch and be sober. 
Let us assemble ourselves together, and so much the more, as 
we see the day [time] approaching. The time seems short. 

A. D. J. 



R170 : page 5 



"FALSE CHRISTS." 

"Then if any man shall say unto you; lo, here is Christ, or there; 
believe it not. For there shall arise false Christs and false 
prophets and shall show great signs and wonders; insomuch that 
if it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect. Behold I 
have told you before. Wherefore, if they shall say unto you; 
behold He is in the desert; go not forth: behold He is in the 
secret chambers; believe it not." Matt. 24:23-26. 

We have reason for believing that after 1881, there will be 
wonderful spiritual manifestations. The prince of the power of 
the air... [Devil and his angels, Eph 2:2.]-The rulers of the 
darkness of this world [wicked spirits-6:12 margin] will now 
make a last great effort previous to their binding, at which time 
these powers will be subdued. [Rev. 20:2.] Those angels which 
kept not their first estate God hath reserved in everlasting [age- 
lasting] chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great 
day. Jude 6. They were cast down to hell. ("Tartarus" lower 
atmosphere— our air.) 2 Pet. 2:4. For 6000 years these spiritual 
powers have been deceiving and misleading 

R170 : page 6 

mankind. These like the good angels, have also had power to 
appear as men, but they must always appear in the dark, for God 
had placed them under darkness. This fact recognized would 
explain many of the spiritualistic manifestations of to-day, 
which otherwise cannot be accounted for. Of late years many 
have been deceived into believing that they saw some of their 
dead friends. 

Which will you believe, God or the Devil? Notice: "Ye shall not 

R171 : page 6 

surely die." Gen. 3:4. Now in his various manifestations and in 
personating dead people and appearing to their friends, is not the 
Devil carrying out and trying to corroborate the lie he started in 
Eden? Surely he is. Jesus well said of him: He is a liar and the 
father of it. John 8:44. If the Devil has succeeded in keeping up 
this lie for so long a time, and to-day has nearly all the world 
believing what he said; if he has done so much, and by 
manifestations in darkness has caused many to fall, what will be 
the result when he thus carries on in the light? For remember, 
that he was only to be confined in darkness unto the judgment of 
the great day, and as we have now entered upon that time or day, 
we expect much of his work to be carried on in the light. And 
spiritualists now claim that they can materialize in broad 
daylight. We would advise that all believe what God said, viz.: 
"Ye shall die, hence, ye can not see dead friends until raised 
from the dead. " And the Devil does not do that work. 

Paul says: "Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light." 
2 Cor. 1 1 : 14. If so, and if he has the power to appear as an angel 



of light is he not liable to deceive? How significant then is our 
text, viz. : "There shall arise false Christs and shall show signs 
and wonders. ..and if any shall say to you.. .he (Jesus) is in the 
desert or secret chambers... believe it not." Notice that this takes 
place during the presence of Jesus. Vs. 27, E.D. It would seem 
then from our text that there will false Christs arise and show 
themselves as Jesus did after his resurrection, and many will be 
saying, lo, here or there. If Satan is transformed into an angel of 
light and is to appear thus, and if we look for Jesus to appear to 
us or come to us in the flesh, would it not be an easy matter for 
us to be deceived? We think so. We think that this warning of 
our Savior is absolute proof that neither he nor any of the 
resurrected saints will so appear; hence, of any manifestations 
there may be, we will conclude that it is neither Jesus nor 
resurrected saints. Let no man deceive you; remember Jesus has 
foretold you, that it will not be so. The Devil will certainly try to 
take advantage of those who are so looking for Jesus, for he 
could not deceive those who believe in his presence as the 
lightning-invisible, who do not believe that He will appear in 
the flesh. The danger lies in our being led away from the truth so 
as to look for Jesus in that way, for we feel sure that those who 
still retain the truth, will, at the time the appearances take place, 
be in a safe condition. Our text says: "that if possible they shall 
deceive the very elect. Notice, it is not possible. We understand 
that the elect are at the time referred to in the spiritual body 
condition, though under the vail. 

For this there is proof. We find Paul speaking in this way (1 
Tim. 4:1): "Now the spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter 
times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing 
spirits and doctrines [teachings] of devils. Also (2 Tim. 3:1-9), 
"This know also, that in the last days, perilous times shall 
come.... Men shall be lovers of pleasure more than lovers of 
God; having a form of godliness ...[must be professed 
Christians] ever learning, and never able to come to the 
knowledge of the truth. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood 
Moses, so also do these resist the truth." Here is the key. If we 
will now go back and look at the time referred to, we will get 
some light. (See Ex. 7:10-12). Aaron cast down his rod before 
Pharaoh and his servants and it [the rod] became a 
serpent.... Now the magicians of Egypt,... they did in like manner 
with their enchantments, ...and their rods became serpents, ...but 
Aaron's rod swallowed up their rods. When Aaron smote the 
waters of the river with his rod, they became blood [verse 20], 
but also did the magicians of Egypt [verse 22]. Also, when 
Aaron stretched forth his rod, frogs came upon the land of 
Egypt, and likewise did the magicians. Ex. 8:5-7. Now you will 
notice that all this opposition took place after Moses and Aaron 
met in the Mount (Ex. 4:27), and yet it was while Aaron was 
spokesman unto the people and acted as prophet of Moses to 
Pharaoh. Verse 16. 



As the meeting of Moses and Aaron represents the change of the 
saints, then we know that the resistance spoken of by Paul (2 
Tim. 3:8) is due after our change, and while we are yet here 
under the vail. These did deceive Pharaoh, but not Aaron, for 
Aaron had greater power than they. So, now, these false Christs 
(magicians of Egypt— the world) will deceive many, but they 
cannot possibly deceive us, for we (as represented by Aaron) 
will have been previously changed. The next plague following 
that of the frogs, was Aaron's bringing up lice on the land of 
Egypt. Ex. 8:16. But when the magicians tried, they could not do 
this,. ..and they say to Pharaoh, this is the finger of God. Verses 
18-19. Yes, there will be a time, and not far distant, when the 
world shall realize that there is a higher power, and though 
Satan and his angels will in the next few years do wonders, yet 
they shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be made 
manifest to all as was the folly of Jannes and Jambres. It will be 
noticed that it was only during two plagues that the magicians 
could stand before and do as Aaron did. They were not able to 
stand quite all the time that Aaron was spokesman unto the 
people. God says unto Moses and unto Aaron, take to you 
handfuls of ashes, ...and they did so, and it became a boil upon 
the Egyptians and magicians. Ex. 9:8-10. This we understand to 
be where Aaron enters into the glory of Moses, and God says 
unto Aaron as unto Moses. This apparent change in the 
condition of Aaron is just the time that the seven plagues 
commenced, and there we believe the power of Satan will begin 
to be curtailed. We believe the same order will obtain here, viz.: 
while the saints are under the vail and acting as teachers unto the 
people, and during the three plagues, Satan will manifest great 
power, but when the church is glorified (Rev. 15:8,) which is 
just before the seven plagues, Satan cannot longer stand, and by 
the time all the plagues are poured out He will be completely 
bound and deceive the nations no more for a thousand years. 
Rev. 20:2,3. We find this event takes place when the saints are 
represented as seated on thrones. Verse 4. We found that the 
position on the throne and the glory were associated (Matt. 
25:31-40), hence this takes place when the temple is glorified. 
Rev. 15:8. This harmonizes with the point where Aaron changes 
his position in the type. 

But before this, we believe, the saints will have been changed, 
and though here under the vail, while there are great signs and 
wonders wrought by these false Christs, it will not be possible to 
deceive us. We, in this condition, will be in the secret place of 
the Most High and shall abide under the shadow of the 
Almighty. [Psalm 91:1]. This is the position before the throne. 
But while we are safe, as was Aaron, there will be those who are 
mentioned in the type as "my people." [Ex. 8:23], and who 
evidently represent the "great company" upon whom the first 
three plagues come, effecting their deliverance from Babylon. 
[Rev. 18:4.] As the people of Israel were separated from the 



people of Pharaoh by the three first plagues, while Aaron was 
prophet, and they believed his words and signs, so here God's 
people will come out of Babylon [a worldly church] by the 
proclamation- "Fear God and give glory to Him, the hour of His 
judgment is come," [Rev. 14:6-9], made manifest by the vailed 
saints. And because they heed and believe the truth, they will be 
protected during the seven last plagues. God says to them; come 
my people, enter thou into thy chambers and shut thy doors. 
Hide thyself, as it were, for a little moment, until the indignation 
be over-past, for behold the Lord cometh out of his place to 
punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity. [Isa. 26:20- 
21]. These [the great company] will doubtless be severely tried 
during the first three plagues. "Delivered over to Satan 
[opponents] for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may 
be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus." They evidently get free 
from Babylon because of the judgments which cause her fall, 
and therefore escape the seven last plagues and cease to partake 
of her sins and receive not further of her plagues, [Rev. 18:4], 
for "my people shall be willing in the day of my power." The 
above language seems due just prior to the pouring out of the 
seven plagues; and here commences the binding of Satan. So we 
read, [Isa. 27:1], "In that day the Lord with his sore and great 
and strong sword shall punish Leviathan, the piercing serpent, 
even Leviathan, that crooked serpent, and he shall slay the 
dragon, [that old serpent, the Devil and Satan, Rev. 12:9], that is 
in the midst of the sea [people]." 

We have reasons for believing that those who are represented by 
Aaron will soon be changed, and soon now, we say, "Come out 
of Babylon, my people." Fear God and give glory to Him, for 
the hour of his judgment is come. [Rev. 14:7.] We trust that all 
who have ears to hear will obey the call. Those who will still 
continue to worship the beast and his image and will still 
support a worldly church [Babylon], [now being spewed out of 
God's mouth, Rev. 3:16], upon these shall not only come the 
first three plagues but also the seven— hence separate 
yourselves, for if any man worship the beast and his image, the 
same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is 
poured out without mixture, into the cup of his indignation. 
[Rev. 14:9-10.] Let us who are already separated quietly wait for 
our change and gathering together unto Jesus. Be holy, for 
without holiness none shall see the Lord. 

A. D. J. 



R174 : page 6 



"BABYLON THE GREAT." 

D. W. McLaughlin in "Free Methodist" says: "The Babylonish 
church has the outward body, or form of religion, but not the 



inward spirit of vital piety; consequently the Babylonish church 
is spiritually dead. 

All fallen sects, from which the inward spirit of vital religion 
has departed (or is departing), bear upon their foreheads the 
likeness or semblance of the "mother of harlots," and of all 
abominations. It is admitted that the Papal church is the first in 
the transgression, consequently the designation, "mother of 
harlots," applies only to her. Hence, the symbolic description of 
the great harlot will apply to every apostate sect that bears her 
likeness, or semblance. Let us note carefully the marks of 
apostasy in the Babylonish church. She is proud, haughty, high- 
minded, seeks worldly power and greatness; says in her heart, I 
sit a queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow. She is 
artificially and gaudily attired, arrayed in gold and pearls. She is 
rich, lives deliciously, and makes rich the merchants because of 
her costliness. She despises and persecutes the true saints of 
God. She seeks the friendship of the world, and is guilty of 
spiritual fornication. She fellowships the world, provides carnal 
entertainments for them, invites them to God's holy temple to 
engage in festivals, lotteries, fairs, and carnal devices, thus 
making of God's house a den of thieves. These are the marks of 
apostasy, and wherever they bear away and predominate, be it in 
Roman or Protestant countries, there is the mark of the "beast," 
and the spirit of mystic Babylon; and the command of God is, 
"Come out of her my people, &c." Rev. 18:4. 



R173 : page 6 

SOME one has beautifully said: "You have noticed that all 
evening shadows point to the East, where the dawn will appear. 
So every shadow made by the descending sun of earthly 
prosperity, points with sure prophecy to the better hopes which 
are kindled by the glowing promises of God." 

ACCUSTOM yourself to think vigorously. Mental capital, like 
pecuniary, to be worth anything, must be well invested— must be 
rightly adjusted and applied, and to this end, careful, deep and 
intense thought is necessary if great results are looked for. 

R285 : page 6 

THE moment we try to peep beyond revelation, and to fathom 
the mysteries of nature, we lose our real enjoyment of both. 



R172 : page 8 



THE TEMPLE-BUILDING TYPE. 

As the Tabernacle of the wilderness, a moveable tent, 
represented God's dwelling -place-the church— in its present 
imperfect state, the fleshly condition, so the Temple built by 



Solomon is, we believe, also a type of the dwelling-place of 
God. A permanent structure, it is a fit illustration of the church 
when it shall reach the perfect spiritual condition. 

The tabernacle was pitched hither and thither in the "wilderness 
of sin" (Ex. 16.) and had no continuing place, while the temple 
was permanently established not only in Canaan, the land of 
promise, in Jerusalem, the holy city, but in the top of the 
mountain. So Paul says of us, "Here we have no continuing city 
[we journey through the wilderness of sin], but we seek one to 
come" (Heb. 13:14)-the New Jerusalem —and "the Lord God 
and the Lamb are the Temple of it" (Rev. 21:22), and it shall be 
established in the tops of the mountains also. Isa. 2:2. 

In a certain sense, we may be spoken of even now as God's 
temple. "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the 
spirit of God dwelleth in you?" 1 Cor. 3:16. But this is only in a 
limited sense that we are now said to be the temple. In the spirit 
of our minds we are "risen with Christ and seated with him in 
heavenly places," speaking of things future as though they now 
existed, because now commenced. 

Really, we, as living stones, are now being taken out of the 
quarry of humanity, fitted, shaped, trimmed and polished for our 
positions in the glorious temple of God, and this is the work of 
this gospel age. Ye are "built upon the foundations of the 
apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief 
corner stone, in whom all the building fitly framed together 
groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord: in whom ye also are 
builded together for an habitation of God through the spirit. " 
Eph. 2:20-22. Solomon, the peaceful and wise king, built the 
pattern, so a wiser and "a greater than Solomon," called "the 
Prince of Peace," is to build the antitypical temple. As the 
building of the temple required seven years (1 Kings 6:38), and 
much or nearly all of the materials used were made ready before 
the work of construction began, so with the building of this 
antitypical temple. We believe that the seven years ("harvest") 
from the autumn of 1874 to 1881, is the time for the 
construction of this temple, i.e., the bringing of all the members- 
-fruit-bearing branches of the Vine-into the perfect spiritual 
condition. And the living stones for this temple selected and 
prepared during this gospel age, were nearly all ready before the 
construction commenced (1874), and must all be ready before 
the temple is completed, and it must be completed before "the 
glory of the Lord" fills it. 2 Chron. 5:1-13, and Rev. 15:8. 

The ending of the 1 ,335 symbolic days of Daniel, just at the 
beginning of this seven years (1874), seems to corroborate this, 
since Daniel was to stand in his lot at the end of the days. (He 
belongs to the order of prophets who are first mentioned in the 
order of giving rewards. Rev. 11:18.) And we believe that this 
constructing of the temple began by bringing into the spiritual 
condition (like unto Christ's glorious body) the prophets. If we 



are correct in this matter, it proves, in harmony with the 
parallelism of the Jewish and Gospel ages, not only that the door 
of favor to the "high calling" -to be the bride-the temple, will 
end in the autumn of 1881, but it also proves, as that parallelism 
does, the presence of Christ. The first proves his presence as the 
reaper in this harvest, gathering dead and living "into his barn," 
away from the tares, &c, and this last proves his presence as the 
constructor of the temple, typified by Solomon. Jesus indicates 
that he is not only the overseer and director in our quarrying and 
preparation, but also that He will be the "master builder" in 
constructing the temple. He has promised "him that overcometh 
will I make a pillar in the temple of my God." Rev. 3:12. 

Our change from natural to spiritual bodies we at one time 
supposed to be the marriage, but we now see that the change 
precedes, as making us ready for the marriage. We still believe 
that the change is our full deliverance from fleshly conditions 
and frailties into the perfections of our new being, from 
weakness to power; from corruption to incorruption; from 
dishonor to glory; from a natural to a spiritual body; from the 
image of the earthly to the image of the heavenly (1 Cor. 15:42- 
48); "made like unto Christ's glorious body." But we are thus 
changed to His glorious likeness in order that our installment in 
official power with Him may follow (symbolically called 
marriage). This was true of Jesus, our pattern and forerunner: He 
was quickened of the Spirit- "raised a spiritual body"-("that 
which is born [quickened] of the Spirit is Spirit." John 3:6), 
though like all spiritual bodies, He must have been "a glorious 
body" (vailed under flesh forty days), yet the glorifying, in the 
sense of exalting to official dignity, did not occur until He had 
ascended up on high and become associated with the Father — 
"set down with [His] Father in His throne." So we must be 
changed before we sit with Christ "on His throne, " or are united 
(married) with Him in the glory of power. 

When "the body," "the bride," "the temple," is completed, all 
will have been thus changed, yet there are scriptures which seem 
to teach that we that are alive (the feet of the body), will, for a 
time after our change, appear under the vail of flesh [as Jesus 
did after his change] before the temple is glorified, and that the 
work to be done then is much the same as that we are now 
doing, though doubtless more ably done and more successful in 
results, viz.: Proclaiming to all Christians- the second "great 
company" (Rev. 7:9-15) -and to the world, during the three 
plagues which precede the "seven last:" "Fear God and give 
glory to Him, for the hour of His judgment is come. " Rev. 14:7. 
"Babylon is fallen; come out of her my people, that ye be not 
partakers of her sins and receive not of her plagues" [the seven 
last]. Rev. 18:1-4. 

Though now we "sing the song of Moses and the Lamb," 
proclaiming restitution-using "the harps [the word] of God. " 



[See article "Having the Harps of God," in August number], yet 
doubtless all of these proclamations will be emphasized under 
our new conditions. Then many-"a great company"-will hear 
and heed— come into harmony with our proclamation. 

This work of proclaiming, &c, is shown in the type when the 
priests took their trumpets and sounded the notes, the Levites 
took their position as singers to sing in harmony with the 
trumpets of the priests. We have already seen that the priests 
represent the "little flock" and the Levites the "great company." 
The practicing continued, doubtless, for some time before 
perfect harmony was obtained. So in the future, when these 
proclamations are made, it will be some time before the second 
company— Elisha class— come into full harmony —apparently 
not until the end of the first three plagues. We read, "It came to 
pass, when the trumpeters and singers were as one to make one 
sound to be heard in praising and thanking the Lord,... For He is 
good, for his mercy endureth forever, that then the house 
(temple) was filled with a cloud,... for the glory of the Lord had 
filled the house." 2 Chron. 5:13. This glorifying shows the 
marriage; after which fleshly priests could no longer remain in 
the temple— representing the fact that we will no longer be even 
under the vail of flesh. 

That the "great company" learn the song, is shown also by Rev. 
19, when they say, verses 1 and 2, "True and righteous are His 
judgments, &c." Then the enthroned company say: "Praise our 
God, all ye his servants, and ye that fear Him, both small and 
great. " The answer shows that they have reached the condition 
of complete harmony with God-they can sing in harmony in 
every note— "I heard, as it were, the voice of a great multitude... 
saying, 'Alleluia, for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth, let us 
be glad and rejoice and give honor to Him, for the marriage of 
the Lamb is come." (Verse 5-7.) They will realize that the 
"body" or "bride" is complete, and that they can have no share in 
that high calling, as the door to that position will then be closed; 
yet they rejoice to see [as we do] God's great loving plan as it 
embraces the sin destroyed race, and they are filled with God's 
praise. Verse 9 contains a promise written specially for this 
"great multitude," viz.: "Write, 'Blessed are they which are 
called to the marriage supper of the Lamb.'" It is then too late for 
them to share the honors of the bride— the marriage being over, 
but the supper, or feast of rejoicings is postponed until this 
"great company" shall have "washed their robes and made them 
white"-coming through great tribulation." Rev. 7:14. 

Dearly beloved, if we believe these things, our works will attest 
our faith. If you and I believe that the door to the "high calling" 
closes in less than a year, should we not increase our efforts to 
bring all Christians into the light of present truth-the knowledge 
of the bridegroom's presence— that they and we may be more 
fully separated from the world. 



Does some one say: Ah, you make a test then of knowing of the 
bridegroom's presence! We reply, that we understand the 
necessary conditions upon which any one may become a part of 
the bride of Christ are first that they accept of forgiveness of 
their sins and justification in God's sight as accomplished not by 
any works of their own but by the death of Christ Jesus our Lord 
—our ransom. Second, that they become his followers— walking 
"in his footsteps" to the crucifying of the fleshly will. These are 
the only conditions. But we might not be able to discern who are 
of this company as we know not men's hearts, but are especially 
instructed of the spirit through the word that He will lead all 
who will follow, into any and all needed light on the way. And 
we are further told that in this time of His presence, all whose 
hearts the Lord sees to be in a right condition will come to a 
knowledge of His presence. Some of the virgins [Christians] 
will be away seeking oil [light] in other directions when He is 
present, and the wise are going "in with Him," (Matt. 25,) 
others, whom the Lord calls servants, (but unfaithful, hence 
evil,) will in the days of His presence smite their fellow servants 
who are proclaiming the presence as "meat in due season to the 
household" of faith. (Matt. 24:45-51) "Saying, my Lord delayeth 
his coming"— these servants shall have their portion in the time 
of trouble with the hypocrites and doubtless constitute a part of 
the great multitude referred to above. 

But of those who will constitute part of the bride it is said: "Ye 
brethren are not in darkness that that day (the day of the Lord) 
should come upon you as a thief. Ye are all children of the 
light;.... Therefore let us not sleep as do others." (1 Thes. 5:4-6.) 
We cannot be too much awake on this subject, and if we see 
fellow Christians whose lives seem to mark them as ones who 
have taken Christ for their leader and example, let us spare 
ourselves neither pain nor trouble in calling to their attention 
these wonderful things which have so refreshed and 
strengthened our hearts -the center of all which is that the 
Bridegroom has come, and they that are ready are going in to the 
marriage. (Matt. 25:10.) If you cannot tell the story well tell it 
the best you can. To him that made use of his talents more were 
given. You can at least interest some and lend them reading 
matter. Be awake, and keep active, lest you become drowsy with 
the lethargy which pervades all around you. 



page 8 



NOTICE, FRIENDS EAST. 



Bro. A. D. Jones purposes another eastern trip to New York 
city. Any friends en route who would like to have him stop and 
meet with them should address him at once. He will be glad to 
meet with either the few or many, and hold either public or 



private meetings, as you may deem advisable. Those within 
seventy-five miles of the main line may address him— Pittsburgh, 
Pa. 



R173 : page 8 



THE NEW TRACTS. 



We have been somewhat disappointed with regard to the tracts 
but hope to be able to send you samples of several within a 
month. They will be free to all who agree to use them wisely. 
We advise that you make a list of all Christian people whom you 
may have any hope of interesting, and send them the tracts in 
rotation, as numbered, so that they will get hold of the subjects 
in a connected manner. Make out your lists at once. 



R166 : page 8 

OUR trip northward was a very pleasant one. In four places we 
held meetings, and stopped to visit a few here and there en 
route. The dear ones expressed themselves as strengthened and 
encouraged. -EDITOR. 


