“We Must Obey God as Ruler Rather Than Men”
Delivered by “Precious Blood”
JEHOVAH’S greatest act of love was that of sending his only-begotten Son to offer his perfect human life as a ransom. As sinful humans, we sorely need such deliverance, since no imperfect man “can by any means redeem even a brother, nor give to God a ransom for him . . . that he should still live forever.” (Psalm 49:6-9) How grateful we are that God “gave his only-begotten Son, in order that everyone exercising faith in him might not be destroyed but have everlasting life”!​—John 3:16.
How does the ransom provide deliverance? Let us consider four ways in which we gain freedom as a result of this monumental act of love on the part of Jehovah God.
Release by Ransom
First, Jesus’ sacrifice can deliver us from inherited sin. All of us are born in sin. Yes, we are sinful even before we are able to violate Jehovah’s law. How so? Romans 5:12 says: “Through one man [Adam] sin entered into the world and death through sin.” As children of sinful Adam, we have inherited his imperfect condition. However, the payment of the ransom makes it possible for us to be freed from the grip of inherited sin. (Romans 5:16) Jesus ‘tasted death for every man,’ bearing the consequences of sin for Adam’s offspring.​—Hebrews 2:9; 2 Corinthians 5:21; 1 Peter 2:24.
Second, the ransom can liberate us from the fatal effects of sin. “The wages sin pays is death.” (Romans 6:23) The penalty for sin is death. By means of his sacrificial death, the Son of God made eternal life possible for obedient mankind. Indeed, “he that exercises faith in the Son has everlasting life; he that disobeys the Son will not see life.”​—John 3:36.
Notice that we can be delivered from the effects of sin only if we exercise faith in God’s Son. This involves making changes in our life and bringing it into harmony with God’s will. We must reject any wrong course that we may have been pursuing and must take action to do what is pleasing to God. The apostle Peter said that we need to ‘repent and turn around so as to get our sins blotted out.’​—Acts 3:19.
Third, the sacrifice Jesus offered frees us from a guilty conscience. All who make a dedication to Jehovah and become baptized disciples of his Son experience comfort. (Matthew 11:28-30) In spite of our imperfection, we find deep joy in serving God with a clean conscience. (1 Timothy 3:9; 1 Peter 3:21) By confessing our sins and leaving them, we are shown mercy and gain relief from a troubled conscience.​—Proverbs 28:13.
Providing Help and Hope
Finally, by exercising faith in the ransom, we are delivered from fear regarding our standing before God. The apostle John wrote: “If anyone does commit a sin, we have a helper with the Father, Jesus Christ.” (1 John 2:1) Regarding Jesus’ role as a helper, the apostle Paul wrote: “He is able also to save completely those who are approaching God through him, because he is always alive to plead for them.” (Hebrews 7:25) As long as we have any taint of sin, we will need the services of the High Priest Jesus Christ to help us have a right standing with God. How did Jesus act as a high priest in our behalf?
Forty days after his resurrection in 33 C.E., Jesus ascended to heaven, where he presented the value of his “precious blood” to God. As a result, Jesus will soon free obedient mankind from sin and death.a (1 Peter 1:18, 19) Therefore, do you not agree that Jesus Christ deserves our love and obedience?
Additionally, Jehovah God deserves our love and obedience. He lovingly made possible our “release by ransom.” (1 Corinthians 1:30) We owe him not only the life we have now but also any prospect we have of enjoying everlasting life. Therefore, we have every reason to “obey God as ruler rather than men.”​—Acts 5:29.
[Footnote]
See the 2006 Calendar of Jehovah’s Witnesses, March/​April.
[Box/​Pictures on page 9]
DID YOU KNOW?
• Jesus ascended to heaven from the Mount of Olives.​—Acts 1:9, 12.
• Only Jesus’ faithful apostles witnessed his ascension.​—Acts 1:2, 11-13.

