R1265 :page 1 

VOL. XL ALLEGHENY, PA., DECEMBER, 1890. NO. 12. EXTRA. 



R1274 : page 1 
TAKE NOTICE. 



This issue is made an Extra, so that 
Vol. XII. can begin with the new year. 
As we intend using printed address slips 
hereafter, and now are revising our lists, 
we desire to hear at once from all whose 
subscriptions expire with this volume or 
year— whether they desire to renew or to 
have their paper stopped. The same notice 
applies to all who, because of infirmities, 
etc., are in the habit of receiving the 
TOWER free as the Lord's poor. ALL 
such are expected to notify us now if they 
desire our visits for the coming year. 
See terms above and remember that 
the interested ones, too poor to pay, are 
supplied as willingly as any. Attend to 
this at once, please. 



page 1 

PLEASE DO NOT ask us for credit on 
Bibles and other books. We have not 
the means to grant such requests, much as 
we love and would like to accommodate 
you all. The small credit allowed to 
MILLENNIAL DAWN colporteurs is an 
exception to this rule. 



R1265 : page 1 

WHAT IS MAN? 

"What is man, that thou art mindful of him? 
or the son of man, that thou visitest him?"— 
Psa. 8:4 . 

What is man? is an important question 
in view of his possible destiny; and the 
question in its widest scope refers to his 
past, his present and his possible future 
state. What, then, we may inquire, was 
he? what is he? and what is he to be in 



the future? 

As to what he was originally we have 
no knowledge whatever, and can gain no 
information, save from the sacred writings 
of God's inspired prophets and witnesses. 
Some would-be philosophers, who have 
more faith in their own surmises than in 
the inspired records, tell us that originally 
man was much inferior to his present state, 
and that from a very low beginning he has 
been gradually progressing toward a state 
of perfection. Progression, or evolution, 
is the term which describes the theory, 
though none of its advocates will attempt 
to define either the beginning or the ultimate 
terminus of such progression. 

But, discarding the vain philosophies of 
mere human reasoning, let us inquire of 
the divine oracles, the only reliable testimony. 

R1266 : page 1 

The Bible tells us that man is of 
the earth, earthy; that out of the ground he 
was taken; that God formed him of the 
dust of the ground and then breathed or 
infused into him the breath of life— i.e., 
instituted the breathing process— and that 
thus man became a living soul or being. 
And not only so, but unlike all the other 
living souls of the earth which God had 
created, this soul was in the image of his 
Maker. Now an image of any thing is a 
representation or copy of it, though of inferior 
substance. So man was an earthy 
or clay copy of his heavenly, spiritual 
Maker— a copy of God! yes, a manifestation 
of God in flesh. Truly, then, he must 
have been a noble creature. And what shall 
we say of the implied reflection against the 
Creator in the claim of some, that man was 
originally far inferior even to his present 
state of degradation? for however high 
or low was his condition, the fact clearly 
stated is that he was an "image," a copy, 
of God. "O," say they, "but the statement 
reads, 'Let us make man in our 
image, after our likeness' ( Gen. 1:26 ), 
and the process of making him was 
only begun in Eden and it still continues, 
and must, until he has reached the 
image of God. Thus far he is "a cake 
only half baked." 
But let such observe the reading of the 
following verse , also verse 3 1 , which show 
that God not only purposed the work and 



proposed it to his Son, his agent in the 
creation of all things ( John 1:3 ; Col. 1:16 ), 
and that he not only began the work, 
but that he also completed it:— "So God 
created man [past tense] in his own image; 
in the image of God created he him; 
male and female created he them." "And 
God saw every thing that he had made, 
and, behold, it was very good." (Compare 
Gen. 1:27,31 ; 5:1 ; 9:6 ; Eccl. 7:29 ; 

1 Cor. 11:7 ; Jas. 3:9 .) And this 
creature which God "had made," completed, 
and declared to be a copy, an image of 
himself, a manifestation of himself in flesh, 
he was also pleased to own as his son 
( Luke 3:38 ), and as Paul says— "If a 
son, then an heir;" for God brings no 
son into existence for whom he has not 
made ample provision. And as a son he 
had the rich token of his Father's loving 
providence in the vast domain of earth 
which he was to subdue and take possession 
of as his posterity would increase and 
require it; and all its products— animal, 
vegetable and mineral— were subject to 
his control and use:— "And God blessed 
them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, 
and multiply, and fill the earth, and 
subdue it; and have dominion over the 
fish of the sea, and over the fowl 
of the air, and over every living thing 
that moveth upon the earth. And God 
said, Behold, I have given you every herb 
bearing seed which is upon the face of all 
the earth, and every tree in the which is 
the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you 
it shall be for meat."— Gen. 1:28,29 . 

And not only did God thus give to 
Adam the whole earth as an inheritance 
for himself and his posterity, telling them 
to appropriate it and cultivate it as their 
increasing necessities should require, but 
he had already prepared a choice portion 
of it as a fit home for the perfect pair, 
and a sample of what the whole domain 
of earth would become under the process 
of industrious cultivation with his added 
blessing.— "And the Lord God planted 
a garden eastward in Eden; and there he 
put the man whom he had formed.... 
And the Lord God took the man and put 
him into the garden of Eden to dress it 
and to keep it."— Gen. 2:8,15 . 

How like a wise and loving father! 
How bountiful the provision, yet how wisely 
bestowed!— not in a way to cultivate 



indolence and undue dependence upon 
paternal care, but in a way to stimulate 
industry and thrift and to cultivate a spirit 
of appreciation and thankfulness for the 
blessings and advantages received. When 
we thus view the newly created man in 
the light in which the Bible presents him, 
as a son and an heir of God, beloved 
and owned of God and so richly blessed 
with such lavish tokens of the divine favor, 
we must conclude that he was indeed 
a creditable "image" of God, and one 
that God was not ashamed to own— a 
perfect creature, therefore, filled with grace 
and crowned with glory, as the Scriptures 
declare.- Psa. 8:5-8 . 

Would a man take pleasure in sending 
out a blurred and defaced painting, and 
widely announce it as an image of himself? 
or would he take delight in owning 
and blessing a simple or an idiotic son? 
No; such a painting would be a disgrace 
to the original, and such a son a reproach 
to a parent. 

But let us consider further this copy of 
God; for even defaced as it now is, and 
therefore no longer owned of God, 
some traces of the original likeness still 
remain, and to view the original, we have 
only to supply in imagination the shortcomings 
of our various powers from the 
standard of an ideal perfection suggested 
in the Scriptures. The physical nature of 
man may, or may not, constitute a part 
of the likeness of God. Of this we cannot 
judge, since "it does not yet appear" what 
a spirit body is, excepting negatively, 
that it is not flesh and blood, though it is 
a reality, a glorious body— "There is a 
natural body and there is a spiritual body." 
( 1 Cor. 15:44 .) But the intellectual and 
moral qualities in man are the exact 
counterparts of God's own intellectual and 
moral qualities. Man has perception, imagination, 
the power of original suggestion, 
memory, reason, judgment and will, 
corresponding to these various intellectual 
qualities in God. He has also the Godlike 
moral quality of conscience, which 
enables him to discern the right and the 
wrong, to distinguish one from the other 
and to estimate them properly. As originally 
created, all of these powers worked 
together perfectly and harmoniously, all 
being subject to that supreme mental faculty, 
the will, which, being free to act independently, 



though aided by the suggestions 

of all the other mental and moral 

faculties, determines the course and constitutes 

the character of the man. 

This Godlike endowment of a free will 
constituted the crowning glory of God's 
human creature. Had he been left without 
this one, though possessed of all the 
other noble faculties, he would have been 
a mere machine, without character, either 
meritorious or blameworthy. So, then, 
the perfect man was this free moral and 
intellectual creature, with a perfect physical 
organism, giving full and free exercise 
to, and in no way interfering with, his noble 
powers; with surroundings which continually 
stimulated and rewarded their cultivation 
and use; and with the promise of 
lasting continuance of these favors on condition 
of the right course of his will— his 
choice of righteousness as manifested in 
the expressed will of God. To prove his 
worthiness of lasting life, a test of character 
must of necessity be applied. The 
first test was a very simple one, merely 
the prohibition of the fruit of a single tree 
in the midst of the garden of Eden. 
But under this first simple test, though 
knowing the Creator's will and perfectly 
able to obey it, he willed to do wrong, to 
disobey God, and hence brought upon 
himself the just penalty, death. 

But, says the objector, does not the 
fact that Adam fell under the very first 
test prove that he was not perfect, and, 
therefore, could not stand? By no means; 
it simply proves that his will was not fixed, 
was not settled in its determination to do 
right, to do the will of God, as it might 
and should have been. Being perfect, in 
the image of God, and free to act out his 
own will, he had power to obey or disobey, 
and in his choice of the course of 
disobedience he was therefore culpable. He 
alone was responsible, and God was in no 
sense responsible. God had richly endowed 
him with every blessing, both personal 
and in his surroundings, had forewarned 
him of the sure rewards of righteousness 
and sin, and in his command of 
obedience to him as to a wise and loving 
Father, he had provided his wisdom and 
care as their protection and safeguard in 
lieu of their inexperience. And the testing 
of their obedience was his righteous 
act to prove their worthiness or unworthiness 



of eternal life. Consequently, the 
responsibility was all on man's part, and 
when he sinned God was just in condemning 
him to death. 

It is plain, therefore, that the salvation 
which God has provided is purely an act 
of his free grace— an act to which he was 
in no sense obligated, and to which he was 
impelled only by his abounding love: 
"For God so loved the world [even while 

R1266 : page 2 

we were yet sinners] that he gave his only 
begotten Son, that whosoever believeth 
in him should not perish, but have everlasting 
life."- John 3:16 ; Rom. 5:8 . 

Thus we see from the Bible testimony 
that man was originally perfect, an image 
or copy of God in flesh. Of the fall from 
that original perfection and the results to 
the entire race of Adam, we also have the 
clear testimony of the Scriptures, showing 
just how it came about— that it was a 
wilful transgression of known righteous law, 
in the face of a distinct warning of the 
penalty of such a course. It was a sin on 
man's part only, and from which God is 
fully exonerated in that man was left under 
no necessity of want and with full instruction 
as to the right course and as to the 
results of a wrong course of action. The 
only cause of man's fall, then, which is 
traceable to the Creator, lies in the fact 
that he created him in his own image— 
with a free will of his own. But this endowment, 
we see, was the crowning act of 
God's favor to man, and man's choicest 
blessing. And so it was the lack of appreciation, 
and an abuse of God's abounding 
favor and goodness, and not any lack 
on God's part, which led to the fall. 

As a consequence of that fall from 
original perfection and favor on the part 

R1267 : page 2 

of the head and representative of the race, 
another law of our being, designed for 
our highest good— the law of heredity- 
has brought upon all Adam's posterity its 
entailment of imperfection and proneness 
to evil. And thus all the race is in the 
same wretched plight. An evil tree cannot 
bring forth good fruit, nor a bitter 
fountain send forth sweet waters. The 



present state, therefore, of the entire race 
is a degenerating and dying one. 

But what of the future condition of 
man? The future condition, as implied 
in the penalty, would have been everlasting 
extinction of being, had not the 
mercy, wisdom and love of God provided 
another opportunity for the race, in which 
the bitter experience gained during the 
six thousand years of the reign of sin and 
death will furnish a valuable lesson, which 
experience will prove that obedience to 
God is the only right and safe course for 
any of his creatures. This second trial of 
the race, under conditions which were impossible 
in the first trial, we thus see is 
another favor of God, and a favor, too, 
which could never be claimed on the score 
of justice. Though man was justly condemned 
as unworthy of life, God saw in 
his inexperience and youth an extenuating 
circumstance, though not a release from 
moral obligation; and, therefore, coupled 
with the enunciation of the penalty, came 
the merciful promise of final deliverance 
from it. The sacrifice of our Lord, 
the man Christ Jesus, as the ransom for all, 
to satisfy the claims of justice against all, 
makes manifest both to angels and to men 
that this salvation, this recovery out of sin 
and its penalty, death, could not be hoped 
for on the score of justice, but only on the 
score of pity and love. The atoning sacrifice 
for sins was demanded by justice 
and was furnished by Jehovah, that he 
might be just, and yet the justifier of men 
already justly condemned to death.— 
Rom. 3:26 . 

This favor of a new trial for the condemned 
race was provided by God in the 
gift of his Son, our Lord Jesus, who left 
his former glory and took our human nature, 
and then, as a man, freely gave 
himself as our ransom or corresponding 
price. Wherefore, says the Apostle, God 
has now highly exalted him, even to the 
divine nature, that he might have power 
to justify or restore the redeemed race to 
the perfection and glory and dominion of 
earth lost in Eden; for the Son of man 
came to seek and to recover that which 
was lost.— Luke 19:10 . 

In looking back, therefore, to the original 
condition of man and the dominion 
given him in Eden, we see to what the 
human race is to be restored in the 



times of restitution promised by the mouth 
of all the holy prophets since the world 
began. ( Acts 3:19-21 . See also Gen. 1:26-28 ; 

Psa. 8:4-8 .) He is to be 
restored to his original perfection and to 
the lordship of the whole earth. (See 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. I., Chap. XIV.) 

Ah, says one, "I do not see much glory 
or honor in being made lords over sheep 
and oxen and fishes and creeping things." 
Well, my friend, that is only because your 
ideas of honor and dominion are borrowed 
from the selfish emulations that prevail 
among the ruling classes of the present 
time. See how the kings and lords of 
the past have loved to flaunt their authority 
and presumed superiority before 
the world; how they loved to live in palaces, 
to array themselves in the finest 
fabrics and to glut their appetites with 
the choicest viands of earth's good things, 
selfishly disregarding the woes of the masses, 
whose want of the common necessities 
of life supplied that abundant fulness and 
whose ignorance crouched in humility before 
their assumed greatness. If such gratification 
of the lusts of the flesh and the 
pride of life and the meanness of selfish 
love of display be your ideas of glory and 
honor (and such are the ideas of the sinful 
world), then no wonder if you see no 
special honor and glory in man's future 
dominion over the cattle and beasts and 
fish and fowl. 

But take the standpoint of truth and 
soberness and of a sound mind, and the 
glory and dignity of the future lord of 
earth will be very apparent. He will not 
need to tax his fellow men to gain for 
himself the luxuries of ease and elegance, 
and then seek selfishly to enjoy them in 
the midst of the poverty and distress of his 
impoverished fellow men; for all men 
will be lords and kings, enjoying the same 
wealth and ease and elegance. His glory 
of person will not, as now, be dependent 
on gold and gems and costly array, but 
will have for its foundation the dignity 
and true beauty of character. Gems of 
intellectual beauty will sparkle in the eyes; 
the chisel of thought and the mallet of 
experience will fashion the features to 
forms of beauty such as art has never yet 
dreamed of; and the mantle of an established 
character of purity and righteousness 
and true holiness will clothe it more 



gloriously and royally than purple and 
scarlet and fine linen. One will have nothing 
to boast of over his fellow-men, for 
all will be alike glorious when all have 
been restored. 

Nor will he need to set up a puppet 
show of his greatness before the lower 
creatures, to awe his subjects into submission 
to his authority; for naturally and 
without compulsion the beasts and cattle 
and fish and fowl will be his willing servants, 
and all the stores and forces of nature— 
the winds and waves, the light and heat, 
the electric currents, the minerals and 
gases and liquids, and vegetation in all its 
varied forms— will freely minister to his 
comfort and blessing. With what easy 
grace may the commands of such a lord 
be expressed, and with what delight will 
his blessings be enjoyed; and how far 
superior will they be to the plumed and 
titled mimic lords of to-day, who tremble 
on their thrones and whose very existence 
is continually haunted by visions of angry 
mobs, court intrigues and assassination 
plots. 

Thus we see the grandeur of man as 
originally created in God's image and can 
appreciate the significance of God's statement, 
that he was crowned with dignity 
and honor as the lord and master of earth, 
with dominion over the beasts of the 
field, the fowl of the heavens and the 
fishes of the sea, in likeness of his Creator, 
the Lord and Ruler over all things. 
We have seen, too, how all this arrangement 
was interrupted by sin. But while 
God permitted this interruption, he has 
not permitted, nor does he purpose to permit, 
a failure of his plans. All his purposes 
shall be accomplished ( Isa. 55:11 ), 
because they were all devised in full view 
of all the circumstances which would attend 
them— in view of man's free agency, 
in view of his temptation and fall into sin 
and of its death penalty, and in view, 
also, of the possibility of his recovery 
from that condition through the sacrifice 
and mediation of the Lamb slain from the 
foundation of the world. "Known unto 
God are all his works from the beginning 
of the world;" and therefore he says, 
"I change not." ( Acts 15:18 ; Mai. 3:6 .) 

God's original purpose, therefore, has 
not been changed by reason of Adam's 
failure, and even its interruption by his 



non-appreciation and abuse of his free 
agency, in full view of which the plan was 
formed, shall in the end be overruled for 
good, the painful experience under the 
reign of sin and death acquainting him 
more thoroughly with the wisdom and 
righteousness of God, and at the same 
time exhibiting the exceeding sinfulness 
of sin to the other intelligent creatures. 
But after the long interruption of seven 
thousand years the regeneration of the race 
and their dominion of the whole earth will 
be an accomplished fact. 

But six thousand years have passed already; 
and is there any indication that 
the dominion is soon to be restored? O 
yes: the same inquiry was raised eighteen 
hundred years ago, and Paul showed that 
even then there was a sure indication of it. 
He said, quoting the Psalmist ( Psa. 8:4-8 ), 
"Thou madest man a little lower 
than the angels, thou crownedst him with 
glory and honor and didst set him over 
the works of thy hands. Thou has put 
all things in subjection under his feet. 
But now [since the fall and forfeiture of 
the estate, though God purposes to restore 
mankind to the lost estate] we do not yet 
see all things [restored again] subjected to 
him. But"— what do we see? Is there 
yet any evidence of the long promised 
restitution? O yes, says Paul— "we see 
Jesus, who was made a little lower than 
the angels [a man] for the suffering of 
death, crowned with glory and honor [the 
glory and honor of perfect humanity, in 
whom inhered all the rights and privileges 
of a perfect man, and therefore a fit sacrifice 
—a corresponding price for the man 
Adam], that he, by the grace of God, 
should taste death for every man. For it 
became him [Jehovah] for whom are all 
things and by whom are all things, in 
bringing many sons [the human race] unto 
glory [the glory of the restored perfection 
and dominion], to make the Captain 
of their salvation [the glorified divine 
Christ] perfect [as a divine being— the 
divine Prophet, Priest and King] through 
suffering" [through his suffering in the 
flesh, even unto death].— Heb. 2:6-10 . 

This indication of the promised and 
coming restitution, Paul pointed out to the 
Church in his day, but now in the close 
of the Gospel age we see still further indications. 
We not only recognize, as the 



early Church did, that the Redeemer has 
come and has paid our ransom price, and 
that he has been exalted to power for the 
accomplishment of the great restitution 
work, but we see further that the time is 
close at hand for the establishment of his 
Kingdom and the beginning of his glorious 
reign; that the body of Christ, which 
is to share that reign and work with him, 
is now almost complete; and that we are 
now living in the day of Jehovah's preparation 
for the Millennial reign of Christ, 

R1268 : page 2 

by means of which the restoration of all 
the willing and obedient sons of Adam 
shall be accomplished. 

Praise the Lord! we see the beginning 
of the consummation of the great divine 
plan of the ages. Lord, what is man that 
thou art mindful of him, or what are 
the sons of the fallen man that thou 
visitest them with thy salvation? Creatures 
of the dust, indeed, whose breath is 
in their nostrils! Aye! but more! they are 
creatures stamped with thine own glorious 
image, though sadly marred, and they ere 
long may reflect again thy perfect likeness. 
"O Lord, our Lord, how excellent 
is thy name in all the earth ! " 



R1275 : page 2 

EXTRACT FROM SEW ALL'S ANCIENT HISTORY, 
WRITTEN BY ARCHBISHOP 
USHER, PRIMATE OF IRELAND. 

"All you have yet seen hath been but 
the beginning of sorrows to what is yet to 
come upon the churches of Christ, who 
will ere long fall under a sharper persecution 
than ever yet has been upon them. 
And, therefore, look that you be not found 
in the outward court, but a worshiper in 
the temple before the altar; for Christ will 
measure all those that profess his name 
and call themselves his people; and the 
outward worshipers he will leave out, to 
be trodden down by the Gentiles. The 
outward court is the formal Christians, 
whose religion lies in performing the outward 
duties of Christianity, without having 
an inward life and power of faith and 



love, uniting them to Christ. And these 

God will leave to be trodden down and 

swept away by the Gentiles. But the 

worshipers in the temple and before the 

altar are those who indeed worship God 

in spirit and in truth, whose souls are 

made his temples, and he is honored and 

adored in the inmost thoughts of their 

hearts, and they sacrifice their own wills, 

also, to him; and these God will hide in 

the hollow of his hand, and under the 

shadow of his wings. And this shall be 

the great difference between this last and 

all the preceding persecutions; for, in the 

former, the most eminent and spiritual 

ministers and Christians did generally 

suffer the most, and were most violently 

fallen upon; but in this last persecution, 

these shall be preserved by God as a seed, 

to partake of that glory which shall come 

upon the Church, as soon as ever this 

storm shall be over. For as it shall be the 

sharpest, so it shall be the shortest persecution 

of them all, and shall only take 

away the gross hypocrites and formal professors, 

but the true spiritual believers 

shall be preserved till the calamity be 

'overpast.' See Isa. 26:20,21 : 'Come, 

my people, enter thou into thy chambers, 

and shut thy doors about thee: hide thyself 

as it were for a little moment, until 

the indignation be overpast. For, behold, 

the Lord cometh out of his place to punish 

the inhabitants of the earth for their 

iniquity: the earth also shall disclose her 

blood, and shall no more cover her slain." 

[Thus one long ago saw dimly the trouble 
now at hand, and the class of true ministers 
(servants) of God who would escape 
all these things and stand.] 



page 2 



ARP TRACTS— free— in any quantity you 
think you can use judiciously. We have 
these in both English and German. 



R1275 : page 3 

THE CHRISTIAN'S PATH. 

Brighter and brighter, every day! 



Better and better, each step of the way! 
Fairer and clearer, the sky above! 
Nearer and sweeter, the songs of love! 

Peace like a river flowing along, 

Hiding for ever ages of wrong, 

Burying deeply, beneath its calm breast, 

The warfare and strife that robbed us of rest. 

Oh! what a joy to be living to-day! 

Flowers of hope bestrewing our way! 

Roses, and lilies of promise, in bloom! 

Rainbows encircling the ages to come! 
Oh! blessed Lord, what a portion divine 
Art thou to the soul who can say Thou art mine; 
In utter surrender, and joyful repose, 
Thou o'ercomest in him the last of his foes. 

Only those who have known thee can guess at the bliss. 
Alas! that so many the happiness miss- 
Turn away from life's river, and City of Gold, 
For poor, broken cisterns, that nothing will hold. 
Yet nothing, dear Lord, can rob us of joy- 
It is far above anything earth can destroy; 
Our treasures all hidden and laid up above, 
Secure in our Lord, in his kingdom of love. 
— Selected. 



R1268 : page 3 

ALL THINGS ARE OF GOD. 



The adversary seems continually on the 
alert to invent some new error or else to 
revive and revamp some old one, to deceive 
God's children. And God permits 
all this, as he has told us, that those being 
gathered as wheat into his barn may 
thereby be thoroughly threshed and winnowed 
or separated from the chaff. God 
sends, or permits the ambitious ones to 
bring upon themselves, strong delusions 
that all who take pleasure in the error may 
have plenty of it to enjoy and to deceive 
themselves with, that all such may be condemned, 
separated from the simple, trusting, 
humble, non-ambitious, faithful ones 
whom he is about to glorify in his Millennial 
Kingdom. 

One of the latest phases of error is that 
which ascribes all sin and crime and 
wickedness to God; which declares that 
God inspires every wicked thought, word 
and deed, and that men in his hands are only 
tools; that absolutely all things are of God. 



But while God permits wilful men to fall 
into such erroneous views and to prosper 
in spreading them, he does, on the other 
hand, guide the meek in judgment and teach 
them his way, and he raises up a standard 
for them by which they are enabled to see 
the truth and to distinguish it from error. 
And though, in this "evil day," a thousand 
shall fall under those errors, they 
shall not overthrow the meek ones whom 
the Lord is pledged to guide and to keep 
from falling. He will give his messengers 
a charge concerning them, and in their 
hands shall they bear up the feet of the body 
of Christ, lest they should stumble over 
that stumbling-stone which stumbled all 
but a small remnant of the fleshly house 
of Israel, and which is now to stumble all 
but a small remnant of the nominal spiritual 
house. (Psa. 91:10-12 ; Isa. 8:14 .) 
He has given to us a charge or message for 
the feet upon this subject, a message of 
truth which will bear them up— the complete 
and glorious harmony of the divine 
plan of the ages. "They," the feet class, 
"shall never fall;" though they stumble, 
they shall not be utterly cast down.— 
Psa. 37:24 . 

Below we quote the pith of this error 
and will examine those scriptures which it 
claims as proof-texts. It reads as follows:— 

"'All things are of God.' ( 2 Cor. 5:18 .) 
When you think of it seriously it 
seems that Paul was rather unguarded and 
careless in his language; it would seem 
as though he ought to have modified and 
limited his statement somewhat; say, for 
instance, all good things are of God. But 
no, the apostle makes the sweeping, unqualified 
statement— 'All things are of 
(literally, out of) God;' and so important 
did he consider this truth that he 
repeats it no less than seven distinct times. 
See Rom. 11:36 ; 1 Cor. 8:6 ; 11:12; 

2 Cor. 5:18 ;Eph. 1:11 ; 4:6 ; Heb. 2:10 . 

Now was the apostle careless and a little 
too bold in these utterances, or did 
he mean just what he said, and are they 
true absolutely? I say unhesitatingly, Yes, 
to the latter questions. The more we 
learn of God's works and ways the more 
we shall understand that, in a sense, absolutely 
all things are of God, or, as some 
put it, God is in everything. This is the 
doctrine of God's universal, all-pervading, 
ever constant Providence. 'His tender 



mercies are over all his works.' 'He 
worketh all things after the counsel of his 
own will.' 

"This doctrine of God's Providence is 
a most positive and important one; there 
is no doctrine of Scripture that is more 
plainly supported, by the most emphatic 
statements, repeated over and over again, 
as referred to above; and no Christian 
would think of doubting it, were it not 
for the fact that its full acceptance leads 
to some very startling and, to some, even 
shocking conclusions. 'What!' they say, 
'all things are of God? absolutely all 
things? the bad things as well as the 
good? all the crime, and sin, and wickedness? 
surely it is blasphemous to say that 
such things are "of God." Paul never 
could have meant that we should take him 
absolutely; we must use our own judgment 
and reason in such matters, and correct 
these sweeping statements, for it cannot 
mean that absolutely all things are of 
God.' And yet that is the way the apostle 
puts it, over and over again. Was he 
ignorant and careless? NO, HE WAS NEITHER; 
he was right, and the Scriptures 
and experience and observation fully bear 
him out in his statements, as strange and 
startling as they may seem." 
"Startling!" "Shocking!" We should 
say it would be strange, shocking and startling 
to find out that God has been the 
real devil for the past six thousand years. 
What sane man would not be startled, 
could it be proved that God has been 
exerting his power in some men to inspire 
them to "sin, wickedness and crime"— to 
robbery, murder, arson, licentiousness, 
intemperance, profanity, devilishness— 
and at the same time inspiring other 
men to write and say that he hates 
such things, that he is holy and separate 
from sin and cannot look upon 
it with any degree of allowance. 
Meanwhile God has been blaming all 
the sin upon men and upon Satan, and 
not only threatening men with punishment, 
but actually inflicting pain, sickness 
and death upon them and telling 
them that they are blame-worthy sinners, 
when, if this theory be true, God is not 
merely the only sinner in the case, the cause 
of "all sin and wickedness and crime," 
but also a most consummate liar and hypocrite, 
and unjust to the last degree, in 



blaming his own work upon his helpless 
tools. 

"Blasphemous?" We should say so indeed! 
If those who said of our Lord 
Jesus that his works were done by the 
power of Beelzebub were blasphemers, as 
he declares, these who unblushingly ascribe 
to Jehovah himself all the "sin and crime 
and wickedness" of earth, it seems to us, 
are blasphemers a hundred-fold more. No 
wonder the writer of this bold blasphemy 
thought that some would be startled by 
such a charge. In our judgment, the 
man or woman who is not startled— 
nay, more, whose heart does not burn with 
righteous indignation at such a blasphemous 
suggestion— is seriously lacking in 
either mental or spiritual balance, or both. 
If, then, any saint feels startled by the 
bare suggestion of such a doctrine, let him 
glorify God on this behalf and rejoice that 
he has some spiritual instinct on the subject. 

BUT WHAT CAN BE THE OBJECT? 

What inspires such thoughts of God's 
character? What false theory is it that 
hesitates not, even to malign the character 
of the Almighty, and which assumes to 
prove its blasphemies by a distortion of 
the divine Word? What theory can require 
such support to make it appear 
reasonable? 

The object is manifestly two-fold: (1) 
To uphold the theory that man never was 
perfect, that he never fell from perfection 
and righteousness into sin, and hence 
did not need a ransom-price for his release 
from what he did not fall into; and 
also (2) to prove that all men will be everlastingly 
saved (not saved from a fall or 
from anything else that they had anything 
to do with, but saved in the sense of being 
evolved up to perfection) —a salvation, 
not from the wages of their sin, but a salvation 
in the sense of release from the 
wickedness, crime and sin of which God 
is the author and instigator, and under 
which he is now keeping and has for six 
thousand years kept them. This theory in 
substance implies that all men will be saved 
on the score of justice, when God shall 
cease from causing them to sin and shall 
favor righteousness. 

To sustain this false theory, which the 
Bible everywhere both directly and inferentially 



contradicts, is the object of the 
writer whose words we have quoted above: 
and because of lack of Scripture to support 
that which he and others have determined 
must be so, he is willing thus to 
malign and blaspheme the character of 
our God to accomplish it. He reasons it out 
about as follows: If I can prove that God 
admits to being the real instigator of all 
sin and wickedness and crime— that absolutely 
all things are of God, evil as well 
as good, wickedness as well as righteousness 
—then I have proved that man is not 
really the sinner; and if man is not really 
the sinner but merely the agent or tool of 
God, both in good and in evil, why should 
he need a ransom, or be charged with, or 
punished for, anything?— if all things are of 
God? The same line of reasoning, carried 
further, leads to the inference that 
when God tires of prompting to sin and 
wickedness and crime, he will stop it and 
begin to prompt only to righteousness; 
and when he does that all men will be 
righteous, as now, under his control, all are 
more or less disposed to sin and wickedness 

R1269 : page 3 

and crime. If thus all the crime and 

sin and wickedness be of God the problem 

of doing without a ransom is solved. 

GOD'S WORD REPUDIATES THE THEORY. 

But the Scriptures say, "Let no man 
say, when he is tempted, I am tempted of 
God; for God cannot be tempted with 
evil, neither tempteth he any man" ( James 1:13 ). 
"Woe unto them that call evil 
good [who say that the evil of man is 
obedience to God's working in him], and 
[call] good evil [imputing evil to God 
who is only good]; that put darkness for 
light and light for darkness; that put bitter 
for sweet and sweet for bitter! Woe 
unto them that are wise in their own eyes 
and prudent in their own sight."— 
Isa. 5:20,21 . 

Let us now examine the scriptures which 
are claimed to support the above theory. 
Does the expression all things mean absolutely 
all things, as the above writer 
assumes and insists, or was the Apostle 
doing what is common to all writers and 
speakers, leaving something to the general 



intelligence of his readers in relation 

to God's character, and also leaving something 

to be understood from the context 

as to what is meant by the expression, all 

things? Paul wrote only to those "that 
do know their God," who know that "every 

good and perfect gift cometh down from 
our Father, with whom there is no variableness 
[from this rule of sending only 
good and what will work for good— never 
sending or causing wickedness, etc.], neither 
shadow of turning" from that course. 
And besides, we shall see that every one 
of these texts quoted had particular things 
in view, when they stated that all things 
are of God; and that those particular 
things were good things, and not sinful 
things. 

First let us show, by quoting from the 
same Apostle, that, not using words carelessly 
or unguardedly, but in the usual 
manner, common to himself and to all 
writers, he used the same words all things 
in a way that the most stupid and the 
most obstinate must acknowledge was not 
an absolute sense. The following instances 
are only a few of the many which we 
might quote, but they will be sufficient to 
keep the "feet" from stumbling into the 
idea that Paul's expression, "All things are 
of God," must be understood as giving 
sanction to this blasphemy, which charges 
God with all the wickedness, crime and 
sin in the world. 

"All things are lawful unto me." ( 1 Cor. 6:12 .) 
Shall we here say absolutely all 
things were lawful to Paul? Does he mean 
that it would have been lawful for him 
to murder, to commit perjury, to lie, 
to steal and to blaspheme? Does he 
mean that absolutely all things were 
lawful to him? Assuredly not: this would 
be the doctrine of the Jesuits, which led 
them, in the dark ages, into every conceivable 
form of evil, under the plea 
that the end in view would justify the 
means used— any means that would bring 
it to pass. Some so misconstrued the 
Apostle's words at the time, declaring 
that evil might be done if good would 
follow. The Apostle resented such a false 
application of his words, and charges those 
who said so with slandering or blaspheming 
him. Very vehemently he protests 
that their condemnation was just who 
slanderously reported that he taught, 



"Let us do evil that good may result."— 
Rom. 3:8 . 

Who shall suppose that this Apostle, who 
so strenuously resented the thought that 
he would do evil that good might result, 
would himself blaspheme the Creator by 
teaching that he was the direct and inspiring 
cause of all evil— of all sin, crime 
and wickedness? If their condemnation 
would be just for thus blasphemously assailing 
Paul's character, how just would 
be the condemnation of those who so 
charge Jehovah our God, we leave for God 
to determine. We are not incapable of 
deciding that this is a heinous crime and 
blasphemy, but we are incapable of judging 
what weakness of reasoning powers 
lies behind such blasphemies, and hence 
what degree of punishment our all-wise 
and just Creator will pay in due time. 

Take another illustration of the Apostle's 
use of the expression "all things:" 
"He [Jehovah] hath put all things under 
his [Christ's] feet." ( 1 Cor. 15:27 .) It 
does not mean that our Lord Jesus stands 
with his feet upon all things —earth, sea, 
angels and men. It does mean that all 
things are made subject to him, or put under 
his control, under his power or authority. 
Yet even in this sense absolutely 
all things are not understood, for, as 
the Apostle suggests, an exception to the 
all things is left for inference to the intelligent 
mind, and not stated. He says, 
"It is manifest that He [Jehovah] is excepted, 
who did put all things under him" 
[Christ]. And to the same class of minds 
that could appreciate such an exception to 
the expression "all things," it is also 
manifest that in the statement "All things 
are of God," an exception of sin, crime 
and wickedness is to be understood, as being 

R1269 : page 4 

the very opposite of God's character. 
If it is impossible for God to lie, shall we 
say that if he compels men to lie for him, 
he is yet clear from the guilt? 
Take two other illustrations together: 
"All things are for your sakes," and "All 
things are by Jesus Christ." ( 2 Cor. 4:15 ; 
1 Cor. 8:6 .) Shall we say that the Apostle 
meant that all murders and robberies 
and storms, all perjury and lying and every 
form and act of sin, are for our sakes? and 



that they all come by or through the Lord 
Jesus? What nonsense! 

Take another illustration: Charity hopeth 
all things, believeth all things, etc. 
( 1 Cor. 13:7 .) Shall we say absolutely all 
things? Does Love hope and believe that 
your neighbor or yourself will be drowned 
or burned or mangled or murdered, or does 
it believe all the nonsense that somebody 
says? Surely again the connections show 
what the expression signifies. We are to 
believe charitably all that we can believe 
relative to the honesty of our fellow-creatures, 
and charitably to hope all that 
we can in their favor so far as we are ignorant 
of the matter in question. 

Take another illustration: "One believeth 
that he may eat all things." ( Rom. 14:2 .) 
Shall we suppose that some in the 
Apostle's day believed in eating absolutely 
all things?— all the cattle and horses 
and men and houses and trees and mountains? 
— absolutely all things? Or shall 
we use a grain of sense and read the connection 
and find out that the Apostle was 
speaking by way of contrast of some whom 
he calls weak brethren, who would eat nothing 
but vegetables ["herbs"], while others 
had no such conscientious scruples and, as 
we would say, "ate any thing and every 
thing." 

With these illustrations of Paul's general 
use of the expression, "all things" 
(occurring over eighty times in his 
epistles), which show that it is not used 
in the absolute sense, let us proceed to 
examine the texts to which we are cited 
as proofs that God is the author and inspirer 
of all wickedness, sin, crime, etc., 
remembering this fact and expecting to 
find in the context that which will indicate 
which things are all of God, and 
never forgetting that it is manifest that 
sin, wickedness and crime are never to be 
understood as included among the all 
things that are of God. 

THE PROOF-TEXTS EXAMINED. 

Let us now examine the texts which 
are offered as proofs of this theory. 

"All things are of God, who hath reconciled 
us to himself by Jesus Christ."— 

2 Cor. 5:18 . 

Surely nothing in the context affords 
ground for the supposition that the Apostle 



would charge God with all the wickedness 
and sin of the world. On the contrary, 
he is showing our new standing in 
Christ, who "died for all" ( verse 14 ), 
but would have us note that while the 
work of redemption was done by our 
Lord Jesus, it was all planned by the 
Father himself. All the features of our 
redemption are of God who himself reconciled 
us to himself by Christ Jesus. 

"To us there is but one God, the Father, 
OF WHOM are all things, and we in 
him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, BY 
WHOM are all things, and we by him." 
( 1 Cor. 8:6 .) This is a repetition of the 
same thought as that foregoing. 

"For as the woman is [ek, out] of the 
man, even so is the man also by [through] 
the woman; but all things [ek, out] of 
God."- ICor. 11:12. 

This is a further showing (see verse 3 ) 
of the relationship existing between the 
church and Christ Jesus, her Lord, and the 
Heavenly Father, from whom proceedeth 
every good and perfect gift. — James 1:17 . 

"In regard to an administration of the 
fulness of the appointed times, to re-unite 
all things under one head, even under the 
Anointed One;— the things in the heavens 
and the things in the earth— under him." 
— Eph. 1:10 .— Diaglott translation. 

This verse points out that though sin 
has been a rebellion against God, the great 
Emperor, in which some of his creatures 
voluntarily and others involuntarily came 
under the dominion and bondage of sin 
and death, it is not God's purpose to 
allow his empire to remain thus shattered 
forever. On the contrary, he is providing 
for the recovery to full harmony of whosoever 
will, and for the destruction of whosoever 
will not obey his representative— the 
Anointed— unto whom already, since his 
resurrection and high exaltation to the 
divine nature, all power in heaven and on 
earth is given ( Matt. 28: 18 ; Phil. 2:9 ), 
and under whom eventually all things 
shall be subdued, that a state of peace, harmony 
and bliss may everlastingly prevail. 

"By whom also we obtained an inheritance, 
having been previously marked out 
according to a design of him who is operating 
all things agreeably to the counsel 
of his own will."— Eph. 1:11 .— Diaglott 
translation. 



R1270 : page 4 

This verse shows that the Church is not 
included among the all things of the preceding 
verse; for it declares that "also 
we" are already re-united to God, in 
Christ, in advance of the general re-uniting 
and subduing of the Millennium. 
And this plan of first selecting us, the 
Church, is only a part of the one great 
plan which he is working out, which he 
assures us will finally bring order and harmony. 
All these good things are of God 
and work out his will. The wrath of man 
he will not permit to interfere with his 
plan.- Psa. 76:10 . 

"For it was becoming in him for the 
sake of whom [are] the all things, and 
through means of whom [are] the all 
things, when many sons to glory he would 
lead, that the Princely Leader of their 
salvation he should through suffering make 
complete."— Heb. 2:10 .— Rotherham's 
translation. 

Nothing could be farther from the sense 
of this passage than to suppose that the 
Apostle meant "all the sin and crime and 
wickedness" of the world are for the sake 
of God and through the means of God. 
The thought, on the contrary, is that all 
things as they shall ultimately be re-united 
under Christ in God are to be so for God's 
sake, because such has been his purpose, his 
pleasure; and that all will be thus brought 
to perfection and harmony by his means— 
his plan and his power carrying that plan 
to completeness through Christ Jesus, our 
Lord. Having such a plan, a part of which 
was the high exaltation of the Church to 
the divine nature, it was proper that he 
should thoroughly test the obedience of 
all so exalted. Even our Lord Jesus, always 
loyal and faithful, should be no less an 
overcomer and no less proved than the sons 
of glory of whom he is the Princely Leader. 
Wherefore God's arrangement included 
him also (as well as the many 
being brought to glory under his leadership), 
that all who would attain to the 
grand perfection of the divine nature 
must be proved worthy through their endurance 
of suffering and resistance of sin. 

"For of him, and through him, and 
unto him, are all things." — Rom. 11:36 . 

A glance at the preceding verses will 
show that the Apostle is not teaching that 



all sin, wickedness and crime are of and 
through and unto the Lord; but, on the 
contrary, he refers to certain blessings and 
favors which are yet to come upon Israel. 
( Verses 25-27 .) Though they sinned 
and with wicked hands slew the Lord of 
life and glory, and brought upon themselves 
God's "wrath" and "indignation," 
which were manifest in their national 
rejection, trouble and overthrow, yet, 
after all, God has a way for bringing a 
blessing upon them as well as upon all 
others of mankind through Christ and his 
glorified Church ( verses 30,31 ), who, during 
the Millennium, will extend mercy 
and full salvation to all, opening the blind 
eyes and unstopping the deaf ears. Such 
a view of God's wisdom and goodness 
leads the Apostle to the exclamation of 
verses 33 to 36 , which concludes with the 
assertion that this plan is not of human 
device, nor even by human assistance; 
for no man would have dreamed of such 
a wonderful blending of justice and mercy. 
But all was planned of God and is by 
him being carried out through Christ, and 
shall, when completed, be to his praise, to 
whom belongs the glory. 

If, then, we see that the above passages 
do not teach what the writings we criticize 
would misrepresent them as teaching, 
we are bound to conclude that such teaching 
is by no means the spirit of God's 
Word; but on the contrary that it is of 
some other spirit. Whatever the motive 
and aim of the human instrument, it is 
evident that only the spirit of gross error 
could instigate so blasphemous a misrepresentation 
of God's character and of 
his Word. 

GOD'S SUPERVISION OF ALL THINGS. 

That the eyes of the Lord are in every 
place beholding the evil and the good, is 
unquestionable. "The word of God is a discerner 
of [even] the thoughts and intents of 
the heart: neither is there any creature that 
is not manifest in his sight, but all things 
are naked and opened unto the eyes of 
him with whom we have to do." ( Prov. 15:3 ; 
Heb. 4:12,13 .) That God could interfere 
with and stop all forms of evil is a 
manifest truth. That he has not yet 
interfered to stop evil is a clearly recognized 
fact. That the time will come 



when all evil shall be fully restrained is 

his distinct promise. Hence it is as 

proper to say that God permits sin, wickedness 

and crime as it would be false and 

slanderous to say that he causes or instigates 

such things. 

"Let no man say, when he is tempted, 
I am tempted of the Lord; for God 
tempteth no man. ...Every man is 
tempted when he is led astray of his own 
desires [for wealth, power, revenge, etc.] 
and enticed.... Do not err, my beloved 
brethren. Every good and every perfect 
gift is from above, and cometh down from 
the Father of lights, with whom there is 
no change or the least variation. ...For 
the wrath of man worketh not the righteousness 
[right will or mind] of God."— 
James 1:13-20 . 

Nevertheless, God has repeatedly shown 
us how even the wrath of man has been 
made use of by him to accomplish his 
good purposes. The declaration of the 
prophet ( Psa. 76:9,10 ), which assures us 
that in the great time of trouble, when 
the Lord shall arise to judgment and to 
save all the meek of the earth, he will 
cause the wrath of man to praise him and 
the remainder which would not praise him 
shall be restrained, is only the expression, 
we may believe, of what has been the 
principle of God's dealing throughout all 
the past, since sin, wickedness and crime 
began. The truth is, that so far from 
creating sin or inciting to wickedness and 
crimes, God's actions, where he has interfered 
at all, have been toward the restraint 
of sin. The deluge was for the 
restraint of sin; the destruction of Sodom 
was for the same purpose; the destruction 
of Korah and his band was to the same 
end; the destruction of the Canaanites 
was for the same purpose; the captivities, 
famines, etc., permitted to come upon 
Israel were designed to have the same effect. 

And in almost every instance the cause 
is stated. At the time of the deluge the 
whole world, except Noah and his family, 
had become corrupt, and their thoughts 
were evil continually. Of Sodom it is 
declared that the sin thereof was great, 
and God "took them away as he saw 
good." ( Ezek. 16:50 .) His way was good 
for two reasons: first, in that it made an 
example of them for the restraint of those 
who should afterward live ungodly (contrary 



to God's will— in sin— Jude 7 ; 2 Pet. 2:6 ); 
and secondly, because God's "due 
time" for bringing them to a knowledge 
of his gracious provision for them and for 
all under the New Covenant (sealed, or 
made of force, by the precious blood of 
Christ) had not yet come. Besides, in 
his due time, during the Millennium, they 
shall be awakened, when they and all 
shall be under the restraints of Christ's 
Kingdom, and have a full opportunity for 
attaining life everlasting. See 
Ezek. 16:48-50,53-55,60-63 . 

THE DESTRUCTION OF THE CANAANITES. 

In connection with the destruction of 
the Canaanitish nations (the Amorites, 
Hittites, Jebusites, etc.), we are told that 
the Lord would not bring Israel into their 
land, but left his people in Egypt (where 
they got valuable lessons in humility), because 
the iniquity of the Canaanites was 
not yet come to the full. ( Gen. 15:16 .) 
Each nation, seemingly, was permitted to 
go only so far in sin and there was stopped. 
And the stopping of sin furnished repeated 
illustrations, types, suggestions, 
outline hints, of God's general plan for 
the final destruction of evil and the permanent 
establishment of righteousness in 
the world. Thus the due time for Israel's 
release from the bondage of Egypt (which 
fitly typified the bondage of Sin) was also 
the due time for a chastisement of Egypt, 
and the Lord made use of the opportunity 
to show his power both for the deliverance 
of his covenant people and for the overcoming 
of all opposition. Hence he 

"raised up" to the throne of Egypt that 
member of the royal family who was most 
bold and defiant, and who would resist 
God's plan the most and the longest, in 
order to make of him and his army a type 
of Satan and his evil servants ever seeking 
to enslave and hold in bondage God's 
covenant people. The deliverance of the 
one class by God's power and the overthrow 
of the other class were not only in 
harmony with principles of righteousness 
then, but they were also exemplifications 
of a fuller work of division and separation 
to be made in God's due time between 
him that serveth God and him that serveth 
him not.- Mai. 3:18 . 

So, too, the entrance of Canaan by Israel 



and the overthrow of the Canaanites, 
whose iniquity was come to the full, was 
not only a righteous act, but it was also a 
type of how, when the real land of promise 
(the Millennial age) is reached, all the 
old sinful ways and institutions must be 
eradicated; and it is also a type of the 
Christian of to-day, of how when he by 
faith leaves the world, Egypt, and by faith 
enters into the possession of God's promises, 
he must wage a war of extermination 
against the sinful propensities of the old 
disposition, which have entrenched themselves 
in the recesses and fastnesses of his 
fallen nature. 

When thinking of God's relationship 
to sin, in permitting it for a time, we 

R1270 : page 5 

should remember that the heart of fallen 
man is prone to sin— malice, envy, pride, 
strife, hatred, lasciviousness— and that 
these are ever ready to take advantage of 
any opportunity. That God has permitted 
opportunities for evil would, therefore, 
be all that could be truthfully said of 
God's dealings— not that he inspires sinful 
thoughts and desires and deeds. Let 
us glance at some illustrations cited as 
proof that God inspires sin, wickedness 
and crime. 

R1271 : page 5 

JOSEPH'S EXPERIENCES. 

Joseph's brethren sold him into slavery, 
and when they afterward found him the 
lord of all Egypt they feared greatly 
the punishment of their crime. But to 
quiet their fears Joseph said, "Be not 
grieved nor angry with yourselves, that ye 
sold me hither: for God did send me before 
you to preserve life." ( Gen. 45:5 .) 
But, we answer, no ground is found here for 
charging the crime of Joseph's brethren 
upon the Almighty. Stephen, filled with 
the holy spirit, declared ( Acts 7:9 ) that 
their course was not inspired by God, but 
by their own envy; which fully agrees with 
James 1:13,16 . Shall we then say that 
Joseph made a mistake in the statement 
he made? No; both Joseph's and Stephen's 
statements are correct. Joseph's 
brethren were full of envy and they premeditated 



his murder, but God caused 
fear to operate upon the mind of one of 
them, through whose suggestion the envious 
brethren took a different course of 
action and sold Joseph for a slave. Thus 
God's part in no sense altered the moral 
responsibilities of Joseph's brethren; nor 
did it inspire an evil thought. It merely 
turned the evil thought into another channel 
(to sell instead of to murder him), which 
would not conflict with God's plan in 
reference to Joseph, his servant. It is 
merely an illustration of God's power to 
overrule without interfering with the 
moral character of man. So, too, with 
all the other affairs of Joseph. Because 
Joseph was taken from prison to Pharaoh's 
throne, it is not to be argued that God 
was the inspiring cause of the crime of Potiphar's 
wife, on account of which Joseph was 
sent to prison. On the contrary, God 
could have brought Joseph to the throne of 
Egypt in a hundred different ways wholly 
aside from Potiphar's wife and Joseph's 
envious brethren. The way adopted was 
the natural course of events which God 
overruled and turned; so that without interfering 
with the wills of any, his will for 
good was carried out. 
Thus it is that God causes the wrath of 
man (the dispositions of the sinful fallen 
race, not dispositions which he inspires 
and forces upon men) to praise him, while 
the remainder which would interfere with 
his plans he will restrain. When, in the 
future, it shall be made clearly manifest 
to all that the efforts of evil men against 
God and against his children were all 
overruled and used of God for some 
testing or other expedient blessing toward 
those who love and serve him, then the 
present wrath of men will begin to praise 
the Lord by showing his wisdom and 
goodness. 

JOB'S TRIAL AND INTEGRITY. 

It is claimed, too, that Job's case is another 
proof that God is the author of 
sin, wickedness and crime. We fail to 
see any foundation for the slander there, 
either. The account given in the 
first and second chapters of the book of Job , 
which represents Jehovah and Satan communing 
together, relative to Job, we regard 
as a dressing of facts in figurative 



language for the purpose of giving certain 
lessons with clearness. God would teach 
us that we are not to attribute our calamities 
to him, to evil or viciousness on his part; 
that they are merely permitted to come 
upon us for our testing, and ultimately for 
the good of all whose faithfulness and integrity 
toward him are proved thereby. 
How much Satan has to do with calamities 
of the present time (the storms, 
earthquakes, etc.), aside from his general 
precipitation of all these upon man through 
his leading of mother Eve into sin, is not 
clearly shown in the Scriptures.* But 
though it is intimated that he has much 
to do with all of man's calamities, both 
indirectly and directly, this lesson furnished 
in Job's case shows that in the case 
of God's people at least Satan's power is 
limited. He cannot destroy them at his 
will; he cannot touch them with adversity 
except as their God will permit. And 
we have the blessed assurance that he will 
permit only such calamities as will serve 
to develop us, and to test our trust and 
obedience. 

As Job said ( Job 2:10 ), so may all of 
God's people say under affliction: Shall 
we receive blessings of the Lord's hand 
and by his providence and refuse chastisements 
and painful experiences if he sees 
best to permit them? Shall we not rather 
trust the Lord and patiently accept whatever 
experiences may come to us, knowing 
that he could interfere and protect us, and 
that whatever he permits must be intended 
for our good if we are exercised rightly 
under it? 

Another text misused to prove that God 
is the instigator of all things, good and 
bad, including sin, crime and wickedness, 
is found in Amos 3:6 , which reads:— 

"SHALL THERE BE EVIL IN A CITY AND 
GOD HATH NOT DONE IT?" 

(Literally— Shall there be calamity in 
a city and the Lord have naught to do 
with it?) Another similar text quoted in 
evidence is Isa. 45:7 . "I make peace and 
create evil: I the Lord do all these things." 

To comprehend these two texts, two 
things must be borne in mind, (1) the proper 
significance of the word "evil," and (2) 
the special covenant relationship between 
God and Israel. 



First, the primary signification of the 
word "evil" is, "Anything that directly or 
remotely causes suffering." Its synonyms 
are injury, mischief, harm, calamity.— 
Webster. "Moral badness" is a secondary 
definition of the word "evil," by the 
same authority on language. 

This secondary meaning grows out of 
the first as a matter of course: all badness 
is evil, whether it implies moral perception 
and accountability or not. The decay or 
badness at the heart of an apple is evil, 
just as truly as the decay of morals at 
the heart of a man. The one is a physical 
evil implying no moral quality or responsibility; 
the other is a moral evil and implies 
moral responsibility. 

Why any one from a good motive should 
pass by the evident sense of the word 
"evil" in these texts of Scripture, and attempt 
to prove that the Almighty inspires 
all the sin, crime and wickedness of every 
city and time, is difficult to conjecture. 
In this text the word "evil" stands in opposition 
to the word "peace," and hence carries 
the thought of trouble, war or some 
similar evil opposed to peace. If moral badness 
were meant, the contrasting word 
would be righteousness or goodness. 

Second, in considering that these words 
of the Lord relate specially to Israel, his 
typical and covenant people, we have a 
clear light thrown upon them. As God 
now has a special interest in and care 
over all his people, Spiritual Israel, bound 
to him by the ties of the New Covenant, 
so he had a special care over Israel as a 
nation under the conditions of their Law 
Covenant. Under the New Covenant 
each individual son of God is a subject of 
special supervision and chastisement and 
correction, while under their Law Covenant 
Israel as a nation was corrected and 
chastised. 

A reference to the terms of the covenant 
between God and the nation of Israel 
will show this. The Lord's declaration or 
promise to them was that, if they as a 
nation would observe the laws which he 
gave them, he would bless them with peace, 
prosperity and plenty, and would be with 
them, their God, a shield and defender 
from all evils, wars, pestilences, famines, 
etc. But if they should neglect God's 
statutes, and should become idolaters and 
promoters of evil like the nations about 



them, God declared, as a part of his covenant 

with them, that they should be afflicted 

with sicknesses, famines and pestilences, 

and be delivered into the hand of 

their enemies. See the particular description 

of the blessings promised and the 

evils threatened in Lev. 26:3-25 ; Deut. 1 1:13-28 

28:1-8,15-23,36-49,58-61 . 

Although the Lord had so particularly 
warned Israel what to expect, they seem 
to have gotten the idea that their blessings 
and calamities were matters of chance and 
circumstance, as with the godless nations 
about them; and in the above text ( Amos 3:6 ) 
God points out to them that their 
calamities could not come without his 
knowledge, nor without his permission, 
according to his covenant with them. 
This is clear also from the context ( verses 1-3 ): 
"Hear this word that the Lord 
hath spoken against you, O children of 
Israel— against the whole family which I 
brought up from the land of Egypt, saying, 
You only have I known [recognized, 
covenanted with] of all the families of the 
earth: therefore I will punish you for all 
your iniquities." 

Instead, therefore, of this passage teaching 
that Jehovah is the great sinner, the inspirer 
of "all wickedness, crime and sin" 
in every city, it teaches the very reverse of 
this— that the evils mentioned were calamities 
which God would bring or permit 
to come upon Israel because of their 
iniquities. 

The lesson of Isa. 45:7 is similar. The 
Lord, having chastened Israel by seventy 
years captivity in Babylon, points out that 
the circumstances leading to their return 
to their own land are no less remarkable, 
none the less of him and by him, because 
accomplished through Cyrus, the heathen 
warrior. The spirit of war, the lust for 
power and gold which holds sway among 
men and nations, are not inspired of God; 
but when the time for Israel's deliverance 
came, God permitted the hosts of the Medes 
and Persians to come against Babylon and 
prospered the way of the noble, benevolent 



*For this reason we cannot give to Heb. 2:14 
the full force implied in our common version. Had 
Satan the power of death fully in his control, we 
may be sure that the saints of God would have 



perished from the earth long ago. However great 
a power he may exercise over the world, we know 
that his power does not extend to the Church. 
(John 7:30; 13:1 ; Phil. 1:25 ; Matt. 10:27-31 .) 
In this instance it seems evident that the word 
translated power would have been better translated 
dominion. Satan's dominion is the dominion of 
death— i.e., death is the sure result to all who serve 
and obey him. 

R1272 : page 5 

Cyrus to the seat of power at the 
proper time to permit him to decree the 
restoration of Israel to their own land at 
the termination of the predicted seventy 
years of its desolation. 

In this case as in the others no room is 
found for charging the Almighty with sin, 
crime and wickedness. He in no degree 
interfered with the moral sense of Cyrus 
or of Israel, but, as always, merely took 
advantage of the aims and desires of carnal 
men and overruled their courses (not 
their motives) to the accomplishment of 
his plans to bless and heal his people, 
whom he had previously, according to his 
covenant, permitted Babylon to conquer 
and captivate. 

In conclusion, we assert on the foregoing 
evidence that God's Word conscientiously 
interpreted is a full vindication of 
the divine character; that even the texts 
cited to sustain the blasphemy clearly 
and emphatically contradict it. And we 
warn all to beware of theories— their own 
or other men's— which make necessary a 
defamation of the divine character for 
their support; that charge God with being 
the instigator and author of "all the sin 
and wickedness and crime" of the world, in 
order to prove that he must by and by retract 
and work righteousness in all, and 
preserve all everlastingly. Let God be 
true though it make every man a liar. 

R1272 : page 5 

GOD THE OMNIPOTENT. 

A certain class of thinkers, neglecting 
to use reason within the bounds of God's 
revelation, entangle themselves in their 
own unsound reasonings. 

They ask: (1) Is not God all-wise? 
Certainly, we answer. (2) Is he not all-powerful? 



Assuredly, we reply. Well, then, 
say they, if he be all-wise and all-powerful, 
can any thing occur in the world contrary 
to his will or contrary to his power? 
Must we not settle down to the conviction, 
held these long centuries back by people 
called Fatalists, that whatever happens, 
from a mosquito bite to an epidemic 
plague of death, or from a snowflake's fall 
to an earthquake or a tornado, is of God, 
and that all nature is fulfilling his will? 
Must we not surmise, too, that all the 
thoughts and deeds of men, both good 
and bad, are inspired of God? And if 
these arguments be admitted, are not all 
mankind like so much clay in God's 
hands, which he can and does fashion one 
way for good or the other way for evil? 
And if so, are not all our efforts for good 
or for evil futile? Since God is all 
powerful, who can resist his will for good 
or for ill? Is it not, therefore, the only 
wise course to stop all effort for good or 
evil, and merely follow the good or bad 
impulses which arise within us? 

We answer that all such reasoning is 
nonsensical— the vain imaginations of a 
foolish head and heart. It is simply reasoning 
around in a circle, without God 
and his revelation of his will and plan. 
Such reasoning merely lands where it 
started— with the proposition, Whatever 
is, is, because it is and must be so. 

While it is true that God has all power, 
and that none can resist his will or 
battle with the Almighty, yet it is also 
true that he is not now exercising this 
power in every matter, nor compelling 
his will to be done in all things. To take 
such a view as the one we are criticizing 
was bad enough in the darkness of the 
remote past for those to whom God had 
offered no revelation concerning his will 
and plan, and his attitude toward sin and 
righteousness; but such a leaning to 
pure conjecture, and totally ignoring God's 
own statement of his exercise of his 
power, is inexcusable among Christians of 
to-day. 

God assures us that sin is a rebellion 
against him and his just provisions for 
our good; that though he has the power 
to destroy the sinners, he has a more gracious 
plan with reference to them through 
Christ; that though he could have made 
them otherwise, he preferred to make all 



animals, from the worm, the ant and the 
gnat, up to man, the highest of the animal 
creation, of such organisms that each 

R1272 : page 6 

should have a will of his own— the power 
of mind to hope and to fear, to love and 
to hate, to obey and to disobey. He tells 
us his plans as they relate to man made in 
his own image. He shows us that he purposed 
a test for man in Eden, that even 
though from the first he knew what the 
result would be, yet he wished man to 
learn the lesson, that the only path to 
happiness is the one of obedience to God 
and righteousness and love. In permitting 
sin and its consequences, pain and 
death, for a time, God is subordinating his 
love of righteousness, his good pleasure, for 
our experience and instruction in the principles 
of righteousness which underlie his 
government. 

During the present time, that we may 
see how the course of sin would result, 
the Lord ignores very much that is unholy, 
hateful and abominable in his sight and 
does not swiftly mete out the deserved 
punishments. But he declares that "He 
will not always chide [reprove], neither 
will he keep [back, restrain] his anger 
forever." ( Psa. 103:9 .) Though it may 
at present appear as though the Lord is 
slack in the fulfilment of his promises, 
both in regard to well-doers and to evil-doers, 
it would be a mistake to suppose 
thus. The Lord is not slack, as men count 
slackness, says the Apostle ( 2 Pet. 3:9 ), 
but is plenteous in mercy, not desiring 
that any should perish, but that all should 
turn unto him and live. Nevertheless, 
every good deed shall in due time be remembered 
and rewarded, and every malicious 
deed likewise: "Vengeance is mine, 
I will repay, saith the Lord." God is 
merely biding his time, letting his will 
and word and character be misunderstood 
by some and misrepresented by others, 
letting men have an experience with doing 
their own wills and trying their own plans 
and theories, that thus the lesson of sin and 
its tendencies and results may be clearly 
seen and appreciated by both angels and 
men. Then the Lord will arise and through 
his Anointed Son will display his power 
and make known his will. He will proceed 



to lay righteousness to the line and 
justice to the plummet and will sweep 
away every refuge of lies. ( Isa. 28:17 .) 
His will then shall be done on earth as it 
is done in heaven. ( Matt. 6: 10 .) A knowledge 
of righteousness and an experience 
with righteousness shall be forced upon 
men through Christ's Millennial reign; 
all shall come to a knowledge of the truth; 
all shall see the effects of righteousness and 
love and peace, and the will and law of 
God, clearly contrasted with their own former 
experiences under sin and selfishness. 

God's object in all this— in thus permitting 
man now to try rebellion and selfishness, 
and under the Millennial reign of 
Christ forcing all to have an experience 
with the different results when his will is 
done— is to select from among his creatures 
such as, after full knowledge of evil and of 
good, love the good, the right, the pure, 
the holy, and abhor the evil. 

He seeketh such to worship him; for 
they can and will worship him in spirit 
and in truth. After they are fully proved 
to be such, it is his good pleasure that they 
shall live forever, and he promises them 
everlasting life and communion with himself. 
All others he will cut off from life 
in the second death, because he has no 
pleasure in them that love evil: "Evil 
doers shall be cut off, but those that wait 
upon the Lord, they shall inherit the earth; 
for yet a little while, and the wicked shall 
not be; yea, thou shalt diligently consider 
his place and it shall not be: But the meek 
shall inherit the earth, and shall delight 
themselves in the abundance of peace."— 
Psa. 37:9-11 . 

Thus we see the fallacy of the circle-reasoning 
of those who would judge of the 
Lord merely by their own weaknesses and 
not by his Word. How grand the view which 
the Scriptures present— that God and his 
will and all his works are wholly on the 
side of purity and justice and truth, and 
that he is in no sense practicing or endorsing 
sin, or causing others to practice 
it, or in the slightest degree favoring it; 
but on the contrary, while reproving it 
and explaining its tendency and results, 
he merely restrains his indignation and 
justice and permits man to work out his 
wilful, sinful plans, and to learn from experience 
the lesson that sin is ever an evil 
and is to be shunned. 



GOD'S STATEMENT OF HIS WILL AND 
GOOD PLEASURE. 

As in the October TOWER we noted the 
Lord's own testimony concerning the class 
whom he specially loves, so let us now 
permit his Word to tell us what things he 
takes pleasure in and brings to pass. 

God has pleasure in uprightness.— 

IChron. 29:17. 

He has pleasure in the prosperity of his 
servants.— Psa. 35:27 . 

He taketh pleasure in his people who 
reverence him.— Psa. 147:11 ; 149:4 . 

It is his good pleasure to give the kingdom 
to his little flock.- Luke 12:32 . 

He called them to this kingdom honor 
according to the good pleasure of his will.— 
Eph. 1:5 . 

It is his good pleasure to work in those 
who are fully consecrated to him, to guide 
them both in willing and in doing his 
will- Phil. 2:13 . 

R1273 : page 6 

In such as he counts worthy he will 
fulfil all the good pleasure of his goodness. 
-2Thes. 1:11. 

The words, deeds and character of our 
Lord Jesus illustrated to us what pleases 
God. In him he was well pleased. — 
Matt. 3:17 . 

He was an example for all who would 
please God.— 1 Thes. 4:1 . 

The testimony to those who have loved 
and served him in righteousness and truth 
is, that they pleased God.— Heb. 11:5 . 

God is pleased with all the painful though 
joyous sacrifices which his "little flock" 
makes in his service, following in the footsteps 
of their Redeemer and Lord. With 
such sacrifices God is well pleased. — 
Heb. 13:12-16 . 

Of his own will begat he us by the Word 
of truth.— James 1:18 . 

Our Master declares that whosoever shall 
do the will of the Father is his brother.— 
Mark 3:35 . 

And this is the will of God, even our 
sanctification.— 1 Thes. 5:14-23 . 

Through the fall, we have lost our keen 
appreciation of God's will, and hence are 
exhorted to study to prove what is that 
good, acceptable, perfect will of God. — 



Rom. 12:2 . 

This is needful if we would stand complete 
in the will of God. - Col. 4:12 . 

That we might be willing, if the will 
of God be so, to suffer for righteousness 
sake.-- 1 Pet. 3:17 . 

It is also the will of God that by well-doing 
ye should put to silence the ignorance 
of foolish men.— 1 Pet. 2:15 . 

This to the intent that we should not 
live henceforth according to the desires of 
men, but to the will of God. - 1 Pet. 4:2 . 

Because he (and only he) that doeth 
the will of God abideth forever.— 

1 John 2:17 . 

Wherefore let them that suffer according 
to the will of God [for righteousness 
sake] commit the keeping of their souls in 
well-doing unto him, as unto a faithful 
Creator.- 1 Pet. 4:19 . 

And ye have need of patience [during 
this period in which God permits sin and 
opposition to his will to flourish], that after 
ye have done the will of God, ye might 
receive the promise.— Heb. 10:36 . 

That we may have confidence in him, 
and respect and trust him, he hath made 
known to us the mystery of his will [plan] 
concerning his good pleasure which he 
purposed in himself— that in his due, full 
time he will subdue all things by and under 
Christ; that evil and sin are permitted 
to oppose his will only for a little season; 
that shortly the lessons because of which 
evil is now permitted to triumph will be 
finished; and that throughout all the ages 
to come, righteousness, his will, shall be 
done.-Eph. 1:9,10 ; 2:7 . 

This mystery of God's will, though still 
hidden from the world, was to be fully appreciated 
by his saints during this evil day 
and was to be the ground for their faith and 
patience and endurance. They were to wait 
for the Lord from heaven and to expect 
deliverance from evil both for themselves 
and the world through him who gave 
himself for our sins, that he might deliver 
us from the evil of this present period, according 
to the will of God our Father.— 
Gal. 1:4. 

Not only were the saints to have this 
knowledge of the coming triumph of God 
and righteousness, but they were to confess 
to the Lord in prayer their appreciation 
of the fact that present evil is not of his 
will, nor of his government, and their 



faith to the contrary that all holy desires 
will be fulfilled when his kingdom has come 
and when his will is done on earth as it 
is now done in heaven.— Matt. 6:10 . 

GOD'S PLEASURE TOWARD THE WORLD. 

God, our Savior, desires all men to be 
saved and to come to an accurate knowledge 
of the [this] truth.- 1 Tim. 2:4 .-- 
Diaglott. 

His good desires and plan, however, are 
all centred in Christ; hence he has appointed 
no other name by which we must 
be saved, and no other condition than 
faith in his blood (in his ransom-sacrifice) 
and obedience to his precepts of righteousness 
—love. No man can come unto the 
Father except by him. He that hath the 
Son hath life, and he that not the Son of 
God hath not life.- John 14:6 ; 1 John 5:12 ; 
John 3:36 ; 5:24 . 

To this end, the sympathetic love of 
God toward all his fallen, disobedient creatures 
was manifested in the gift of his Son 
to be our redemption price— even while 
we were yet sinners. 

For the same reason, as a part of the 
same will of God concerning men, he hath 
appointed to establish his kingdom on 
earth, and that his King and representative 
shall reign to bless men, to bring them 
to a knowledge of his goodness, his perfection, 
his hatred of sin and his desire 
toward all that they might be saved from 
death and come fully back into harmony 
with him, and of his provision through 
Christ for them all to do so.— 1 Tim. 2:3-6 . 

Yet God is not pleased to accept men 
without testing and proving them as to 
whether, after full knowledge, ability and 
choice, they will sincerely love the right and 
hate the wrong. Therefore he has been 
pleased to appoint a day [the Millennial 
Day] in the which he will judge the world 
in [try and prove men with reference to] 
righteousness. The Judge of all is to be 
Christ— Jesus and his Church; and the 
work shall be so thoroughly done that no 
lover of righteousness shall be sentenced 
to the second death, and no lover of evil 
shall escape that sentence.— Acts 3:23 . 

This trial-test of all, after full knowledge 
of good and evil, is because our God 
hates sin and every evil way. He is not 
a God that has pleasure in wickedness.— 



Psa. 5:4 . 

"Have I any pleasure at all that the 
wicked should die? saith the Lord God: 
and not that he should turn from his ways 
and live?" "I have no pleasure in the 
death of him that dieth, saith the Lord 
God: wherefore turn and live ye." "As 
I live, saith the Lord God, I have no 
pleasure in the death of the wicked; but 
that the wicked turn from his way and 
live."-Ezek. 18:23,32 ; 33:11 . 



R1273 : page 6 

CHRIST IN YOU, THE HOPE OF GLORY. 

"My little children, of whom I travail in birth 
again until Christ be formed in you, I desire to be 
present with you now and to change my tone; for 
I stand in doubt of you."-- Gal. 4:19,20 . 

The wealth of God's wonderful favor to 
the church of Christ is briefly comprehended 
in that one expression of the 
Apostle Paul, "Christ in you, the hope of 
glory." ( Col. 1:27 .) Christ in you, dear 
ones, is the only Scriptural foundation for 
that good hope of the prize of our high 
calling of God in Christ Jesus. If Christ 
be not formed in you, then indeed is your 
hope vain, no matter how much truth 
or how many advantages you may possess. 
The object of giving the truth is not to 
satisfy mere idle curiosity, but to sanctify 
us wholly; and if it does not accomplish 
this result, the knowledge of it is only the 
stronger condemnation against us. 

In writing to the congregation of believers 
at Colosse who had received the 
truth from Paul with gladness and all 
readiness of mind, the Apostle, as the 
above text indicates, was obliged to change 
his tone or manner of expression toward 
them, because their vacillating course 
since receiving the truth proved to him 
that the spirit of Christ, the spirit of the 
truth, was not yet formed in them. 
And therefore he here represents his work 
among and for them as that of a mother 
in the first stages of gestation, travailing 
in painful and laborious effort until the 
new being is formed. When the "new 
creature" is once definitely formed, the 
process of development, as illustrated in 



the development of the natural fetus, is 

less laborious and distressing; yet there is 

labor and anxiety all the way to those 

whose care over the church, like Paul's, 

is akin to that of motherhood, until the 

new creature is actually born at the resurrection. 

After the new creature is formed, 

if there be no mishap, no miscarriage, 

there will in due time be the birth of a 

glorious being, of the divine nature, in 

the likeness of our glorious Head; and 

great will be the joy then of all such as 

have taken the motherly interest in the 

formation and development of the Christian 

character of these called and faithful 

and chosen. 

There comes a time during the period 
of natural gestation, shortly after the formation 
of the new creature, when life begins 
to manifest itself in activity. This manifestation 
of activity is called the quickening. 
If this quickening never takes place, 
the sure indication is that whatever of dormant 
life there may have been is becoming 
or has already become extinct, and 
the birth of the new living creature will 
therefore never take place unless the dying 
embryo can in some way be resuscitated 
and brought to the quickening stage. 

This is precisely what Paul was endeavoring 
with much carefulness and painstaking 
to do for the church at Colosse. 
They had received the truth with gladness, 
and Paul was for a time greatly beloved 
among them as a messenger of the 
truth. But very soon after they lost confidence 
in the truth and were speedily 

R1274 : page 7 

drifting into error— the error of trusting 
to the law Covenant of God for salvation 
instead of humbly depending on Christ 
alone, who is "the end of the law for 
righteousness to every one that believeth" 
—that trusteth in him. 

The cause of this instability and sudden 
turning away from the truth on the 
part of the Colossian church is clearly intimated 
in the above text. It was because 
Christ was not formed in them. Although 
they had been begotten by the word of 
truth, the new germ of spiritual being had 
not yet progressed even to the definite 
formation of Christian character which 
manifests its existence and life in activity; 



they had not reached the quickening 
stage, although it was high time that such 
indications of life should appear in them. 
Therefore said the Apostle, "I desire to 
be present with you now, and to change 
my tone; for I stand in doubt of you." 
Ah! instead of the joyful tone, proclaiming 
the good tidings of the grace of God 
to them, as formerly, it must now be the 
tone of reproof, of warning and of 
exhortation. 

But let us inquire more particularly 
what it is to have Christ formed in us. It 
is not merely to have a knowledge of 
Christ and of the divine plan which God 
is working out through him; it is not 
merely to have an admiration for his character 
and glory, or a desire to share 
his glory in the day of his manifestation; 
it is not merely to talk loudly of the truth, 
nor to make long prayers, nor to wear 
solemn faces and make loud professions 
of holiness. This is the negative 
answer to the question, but what is the 
affirmative? We answer, It is to have a 
Christ-like character distinctly formed in 
us as a result of the begetting power of the 
truth and of the exceeding great and 
precious promises, inspiring in us love to 
God and to all his creatures; faith in his 
sure Word of promise and in his ability 
and willingness to accomplish all his purposes; 
obedience, or full consecration to 
the will of God at any cost to self, and a 
fixed determination ever to abide by his 
expressed will; and zeal, which makes 
manifest this disposition of heart in activity 
for the accomplishment of the purposes 
of God, in so far as the Scriptures 
inform us that human agency can affect 
them. These fundamental principles of 
Christian character— love, faith, obedience 
and zeal— must be established before 
the new creature can be said to exist at 
all. And if they are thus established, 
God has provided the conditions necessary 
to their gradual growth and development 
until, in due time, the new creature 
is born into the full perfection and glory 
of the divine nature. 

If these principles of the Christian character 
are not definitely formed, or fixed 
in us, we will always be vacillating in our 
faith and obedience, and lacking in love 
and devotedness to God; and we can 
therefore have no good hope of the reward 



of the faithful. If we have merely 
a little love for God which appreciates 
but slightly his blessings and promises, 
and a little faith which indolently says— 
This good news seems to be true, but I do 
not exactly know; many smart men read 
the Bible quite differently and arrive at 
opposite conclusions; it is difficult to discover 
which is right and I shall not trouble 
myself trying to find out, so I have a general 
charity for all and am no bigot; —and 
if we are willing to obey God only so far as it 
suits our convenience, to trust him as far 
as we can trace him, and to advance his 
truth only so far as our indolence will permit 
us to discover it, and as our temporal 
interests may be served by it— if such be 
our condition of heart, then the Christ 

character is not formed in us. And though 
we may have been begotten by the exceeding 
great and precious promises to a 
good hope of life in Christ, the germ of 
the new life is in a dying condition and 
will never come to the birth unless it can 
be resuscitated and developed to the actual 
formation of the Christ character, 
which always manifests itself in loving 
zeal for the Lord's cause— for the advancement 
of his truth and the upbuilding 
of his consecrated ones. 

How important, then, that each of those 
who hope to have a share with Christ in 
his kingdom sees to it that his hope is 
founded upon the fact that Christ is now 
actually formed in him, and that as evidence 
of this he has manifestly reached 
the quickening stage in the process of development, 
when love, faith and obedience 
are all full of activity and zealous in 
seeking and improving every opportunity 
for the service of God. If we hear the 
truth and merely say that we consecrate 
ourselves to God, and then go on living 
just like the rest of the world, spending all 
or nearly all of our time and our means 
merely for our stomachs, our backs and 
the temporal interests of our families and 
the business pursuits of the present life, 
what evidence have we that we are quickened, 
that the Christ character is formed 
in us, or that the hope of glory is ours? 
Many seem to make this mistake, and 
the evidences of the shipwrecked faith of 
many such lie all about us; but, thank 
God! the evidence of faithfulness— of the 
actual formation and development of 



Christian character— is also apparent in 
the quickened zeal of many. And it is a 
noteworthy fact that those whose mortal 
bodies are thus quickened in the service 
of the truth have the clearest perception 
and discernment of truth, and the evil 
one is unable to touch them with the 
shafts of error. 

Let all who aspire to the inheritance of the 
saints make sure that they have the Christ 
character formed in them, that the principles 
so notable in Christ's character are 
established in them. Let us each see that 
we do not hinder the development of this 
character by giving our time, our vitality, 
our means, etc., to the pursuit of the things 
of this world. Have you love? Is it manifested 
in fervent zeal for the honor of 
God, the spread of his truth and the 
blessing of his children? Are you seeking 
and finding opportunities for thus showing 
the Lord how much you love? Have 
you faith? Is it unmistakably manifested, 
not merely in profession, but in bold and 
definite acts of faith? If a million dollars 
were promised to any man who would 
walk from Pittsburgh to Buffalo, and a 
dozen men professed faith in the promise, 
and yet only one actually started out and 
walked, the natural and correct inference 
would be that the other eleven did not 
have the faith. If they had the faith in 
such a promise it would rouse them to activity. 
And just so, any man who appreciates 
fully and believes the exceeding 
great and precious promises of God to the 
church, will make haste and run for them; 
and he will closely observe the directions, 
too, that he may not run in vain. 

And if Christ be formed in him, those 
established principles of Christian character 
will hold him firm and steady in 
the midst of temptations and error, and 
he will not be easily moved either from 
the practice of righteousness or from sound 
Scriptural doctrine. He will demand a 
"Thus saith the Lord" for every doctrine, 
and on that sure word he will dare depend. 
And the language of his heart as 
expressed in his daily life will be, "My 
heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed. 
I will praise thee, O Lord, among the 
people." "Thy testimonies have I taken 
as an heritage forever; for they are the 
rejoicing of my heart." "Thy words 
were found and I did eat them; and thy 



word was unto me the joy and rejoicing 
of mine heart; for I am called by thy 
name, O Lord God of hosts."— Psa. 57:7,9 ; 

119:111 ;Jer. 15:16. 

While such must be the personal condition 
of every heir of the Kingdom, the 
special work of every such one should be 
to help those begotten by the Word of 
truth to arrive at this condition of fixed 
and quickened Christian character. Be 
not satisfied, beloved fellow laborers, when 
those within the range of your influence 
are merely begotten by the Word of truth, 
but, by instruction, example and assistance, 
labor diligently to have Christ formed in 
them, the hope of glory; and then, so far 
as possible, minister also to their further 
development, that they may eventually be 
born in the glorious, divine nature. 



R1275 : page 7 

THE RELATIVE CLAIMS OF LOVE AND 
JUSTICE. 

Though love and justice stand very 
closely related to each other, they are 
nevertheless distinct and separate elements 
of moral character. Justice is the exact 
weight and measure of righteousness, but 
love is the overwhelming measure of benevolence, 
pressed down, shaken together, 
heaped up and running over. 

Justice may be dealt out without love's 
overwhelming measure, but love cannot 
be dealt out without justice. The measure 
cannot overflow until it is first filled. 
Justice, therefore, is the foundation on 
which love is established. If we make 
professions of love which are not backed 
by justice, our conduct is open to either 
one of two adverse criticisms, either that 
we are ignorant of the operations of justice 
in certain particulars, or else that we 
are unfaithful in our professions. The 
former probably is most generally the case 
where the profession lacks the substantial 
foundation. 

This principle of justice, the Scriptures 
declare, is the very foundation of God's 
throne— "Justice and judgment are the 
prop of thy throne." ( Psa. 89:14 .) And 
the great value which God placed upon 
this principle was manifested in the great 



expense at which he maintained it inviolate, 
notwithstanding his overwhelming 
love for the race which it condemned to 
death and which he planned to redeem. 
Though it cost the sacrifice of his only 
begotten Son, he freely gave him up for 
us all— as a satisfaction to the claims of 
justice against his human children. If 
God is so scrupulously careful to maintain 
justice, how careful we should be to study 
and apply the same principle in all our 
dealings. As justice is the very foundation 
of all God's dealings with his creatures, 
so it should be the foundation of 
all our dealings— in our business relations, 
in the family and in society. 

In the life of every Christian strict justice 
should be manifest. He should be 
fair in his judgment of values, willing to 
pay the just equivalent for that which he 
receives if he is making a purchase, willing 
also to give to his employer a just 
equivalent in labor for wages received. 
If a competitor in business with others, 
he should not seek to undersell his fellow 
tradesman below a living price for his 
commodities. If a parent, he should recognize 
the individual rights of his children, 
male and female, when they come to 
maturity. Parental control is a necessity 
until that time, but is an injustice when 
insisted upon beyond it; and if yielded 
to, becomes a fetter to future usefulness and 
interferes with their individual relationship 
and responsibility to God. 

Justice in parents recognizes the right 
of a matured son to leave the home nest 
and carve out his future course for himself; 
and likewise of the daughter. Justice 
on the children's part also recognizes 
the claims of filial obligation— of reverence, 
love, the grateful consideration of the maturer 
wisdom of parents, and the tender care 
for their age and infirmities and declining 
years. 

When justice is thus established in these 
various relations of life, there is little 
room left for the weeds of hatred, malice, 
envy, evil-speaking, etc., to spring up. On 
the contrary, the conditions are ripe for 
the development of every virtue and every 
grace, especially if love's overflowing 
measure of benevolence overleaps the 
bounds of simple justice in its desires and 
efforts to bless. 

Let us then see to it that we are always 



just before we attempt to be generous, and 
when sure that all our actions are squared 
by justice, then let us manifest the love 
unfeigned, not necessarily by showers of 
professions, but rather by the loving ministry 
of kindly deeds, deeds of self-sacrifice 
and self-forgetfulness. Such love 
should be markedly manifest among the 
consecrated sons of God— not a love which 
merely worketh no ill to his neighbor, but 
a love which worketh good. And let no 
one deceive himself into the idea that his 
heart is filled with the love of God while 
he is unjustly depriving another of his 
rights, either of property, or reputation, 
or aught else. 

But love will go still further: it will not 
only spare a neighbor's property or reputation, 
but it will seek to protect them. 
Love will cover a multitude of sins, even, 
from the eyes of others, though it will endeavor 
to show them up to the offender. 
Let justice with love's overflowing measure 
abound in all the saints. 

MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R1276 : page 7 
THE BLOOD. 

Christian people talk a good deal about 
blood. What do they mean? Why is it 
they take such delight in singing and 
speaking about blood? 

Go into some religious meetings, and 
presently you hear some one get up and 
tell that he is saved by the blood; and then 
another one says that he rejoices to know 
he is living under the blood, and another 
says that the blood cleanses him from all 
sin; and so they continue all through the 
meeting; and they really seem to enjoy 
it. Whenever any one mentions the blood, 
you see the faces of the others light up 
with joyful emotion, and hear words of 
gladness come from their lips. What is it 
all about? Are they lunatics? No; on 
the contrary, they are the most sensible 
and moral people in the community, whose 
testimony would be received as good in 
any court of justice. Then surely they must 
have some reason for their language about 
the blood. Let us ask one of them about it. 

Friend, will you explain why you people 



are always talking about blood and seem 
to find so much comfort in doing so? 
Yes, gladly; it is the precious blood of 
Christ, the Son of God, who is called the 
Lamb of God, about which we talk and 
sing. But why is that blood so precious 
to you? Because it continually reminds 
us that our sins are all forgiven and put 
away, in perfect accordance with God's 
infinite justice and righteousness, as well 
as mercy; so that trusting in the blood we 
have actually no more consciousness of sins. 

R1276 : page 8 

But how does Christ's blood do away 
with your sinfulness? I can best answer 
you by pointing you to the record of 
Scripture concerning the penalty of sin, 
which is everywhere declared to be death. 
Under the Mosaic and Patriarchal dispensations 
this was also taught by a series of 
object lessons. Animals were killed, and 
their blood was carried in by the priest 
and presented before God as the evidence 
that death had really taken place, as the 
broken law required. In accordance with 
this God told the Israelites, "The blood 
is the life. ..and I have given it to you 
upon the altar to make an atonement for 
your souls, for it is the blood which maketh 
an atonement for the soul." The 
blood, being no longer in the victim's 
veins, was the positive evidence that the 
life was taken. 

But could the life blood of animals satisfy 
divine justice on behalf of sinful man? 
No; "the blood of bulls and goats could 
never take away sins," but it could shadow 
forth the truth that if human guilt was 
ever removed, some way must be found 
by which divine justice as well as mercy 
could be magnified, and sin be seen in all 
its awfulness through the terrible consequences 
it entailed. The doctrine of 
Scripture is, that Christ, by offering up 
himself, or shedding his life's blood, or 
pouring out his soul unto death, put away 
our sins. We read that "he died for our 
sins"— "put away sin by the sacrifice of 
himself"— "offered one sacrifice for sins 
forever:" in fact, did what the Levitical 
sacrifices had pointed to but never accomplished. 
But how could Christ become 
legally responsible for the guilt of others, 
so that his death would meet the requirements 



of justice on their behalf? By 

identifying himself with them, and offering 

himself as a sacrifice for their redemption, 

he became a new federal head 

to the human race, with power and authority 

to bestow upon those previously 

under sentence of death a new life from 

himself, over which death should have 

no power. Making himself thus a shelter 

for sinners, he became responsible for 

their sins. Justice, being unable to reach 

the sinner, demanded and received satisfaction 

at the place where the sinner thus 

legally escaped it. 

Adam, the old life-giving head, entailed 
death on his seed. Christ, the new life-giving 
head, undertook to carry the race 
safely through the death which otherwise 
would have completely and eternally overwhelmed 
it. So in order to make a way 
out of death, he was obliged to go down 
into death, bearing in his own person the 
legal responsibility for the sins of the 
world; and so the shedding of his blood 
became the evidence that he really and 
truly died. By offering new life to man 
he burdened himself with the debt which 
attached to the old life, and therefore he 
laid down forever the natural or creature 
life, that he might rise again in the divine, 
spiritual life, and become the source of 
life to all who would come into union 
with himself. Thus, the blood of Christ, 
his death, stands as an evidence before 
God and before the conscience of believers 
that the law's demands have been met 
and fully satisfied by our great federal 
Head. Do you wonder that we make 
much of the precious blood of Christ; 
and that we feel and know that it cleanseth 
us from all sin? — Selected. 



page 8 



MISSIONARY ENVELOPES.-The price of 
these is reduced to 25 cents per hundred, 
or $2.00 per thousand. (This includes 
expressage or mail charges of delivering 
them to you.) We want these messengers 
to go everywhere, bearing testimony to 
the Truth, and calling attention to God's 
gracious Plan of the Ages. 



R1276 : page 8 

THE EASY YOKE. 

"Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy 
laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon 
you and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in 
heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For 
my yoke is easy, and my burden is light." — 
Matt. 11:28-30 . 

To take Christ's yoke upon us is to become 
a yoke-fellow with him, and to patiently 
walk with him. The yoke is a 
symbol of servitude, and he who submits 
to the yoke thereby submits to the will 
and directing of another and quietly plods 
on for the accomplishment of an appointed 
task. This our Lord Jesus did in willingly 
submitting his will to the will of the 
Heavenly Father. God did not impose 
the yoke upon him, nor does he upon any; 
but he cheerfully took it and patiently 
bore it, not esteeming it a menial service, 
though it cost him the deepest humiliation, 
but delighting to do God's will. 

The invitation to us, then, is to be 
yoked in together with Christ in the same 
service and under the same Master. The 
yoke, he says, is an easy one, and the 
burden light. But we cannot be yoked 
in with Christ unless we have his spirit. 
Two that are yoked together must of necessity 
be of one mind; and that which 
makes the yoke set lightly upon us is the 
fixedness of purpose which does not chafe 
under it or try to get away from it, but 
which delights to bear it in view of the 
end to be gained, as well as in the communion 
and fellowship of a kindred mind, 
a true yoke-fellow. 

What a blessed invitation, to come under 
the same yoke with Christ! and what 
an excellent opportunity to learn the way 
in which our Heavenly Father would have 
us walk! How, indeed, could we miss 
the way when yoked in with such a leader? 
From him we learn the way; in company 
with him we catch his blessed spirit; 
we learn of that meekness which despises 
no humiliation, however great; which is 
not only contented and happy in any situation, 
but which is always rejoicing in the 
privilege of treading the way, as well as 
in hope of the glorious end to which it 



tends. And thus we find rest unto our 

souls— rest from the vain ambitions and 

fruitless works and plans which other task-masters 

would force upon us. O! that all 

who labor under other yokes and are heavily 

burdened would cast them off and learn 

with what ease and delight they can wear 

the yoke of Christ. 

All of the greatest toilers in God's service 
gave the same testimony. Jesus said, 
It is easy and light; Paul said, "These 
light afflictions, which are but for a moment, 
work out for us a far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory." James 
said, "Brethren, count it all joy, for the 
trying of your faith [under this yoke] 
worketh patience," etc.; Peter said, "We 
rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of 
glory." And all the true yoke-fellows of 
the Lord in the present day also bear the 
same testimony. They can rejoice in all 
circumstances, and in everything give 
thanks. MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R1248 : page 8 

ANGER. 

Anger is wrong when it is fired by the 
lower passions. Most men are angry when 
their own interests are assailed, but bear 
with great patience wrongs inflicted upon 
others. Anger fired by self-love, or self-conceit, 
or self-will, is always despicable. 
But anger fired by the higher impulses is 
noble, manly, divine. The ancient prophets 
were angered when they heard the 
name of God blasphemed. "I count the 
enemies of God my enemies," said David; 
"I hate them with a perfect hatred." 
The spirit which flushes with resentment 
at an oath is better by far than the spirit 
which listens with indifference, or which 
laughs with pleasure. "Abhor that which 
is evil" says the divine command; and no 
man is safe unless he does. Every child 
should have such a chivalric sense of the 
purity of true womanhood that the salacious 
story, the illicit jest, the noisome 
scandal, should arouse his wrath against 
the teller of it. A moral discord should 
awaken resentment in a well-educated conscience, 
as a musical discord awakens resentment 
in a well educated ear. The 



wrath of self-esteem, of approbativeness, 
of acquisitiveness, is dangerous and degrading. 
But it is both dangerous and degrading 
to be without a wrath of conscience, 
of reverence, of faith and of love. 
The wrath of love? Aye! the wrath of 
love. This is the divinest and hottest 
wrath of all. This is the wrath of the 
Lamb which will consume the world's 
dross in the day when it is purified so as 
by fire. Do not teach your children never 
to be angry; but teach them how to "be 
angry and sin not."— Eph. 4:26 . 
Selected. 



page 8 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Liberia, W.C. Africa. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-It is now 

nearly ten months since you heard from 
me last. The reason for this long delay 
has been my recent sickness for nearly 
three months, and I have been still disabled 
to write even after my partial recovery. 
The books, papers, tracts, etc., you 
sent me came to hand and are doing their 
intended work. Enclosed please find another 
order for more books. I am heartily 
gratified to hear of the book of "POEMS 
AND HYMNS OF DAWN." You may 
recollect that I called your attention, some 
two years ago, to the necessity of having 
such hymns, so we might "sing with the 
spirit and with the understanding;" hence 
I am greatly rejoiced to know that you 
have felt the same need and have prepared 
such a book for our use. 

I am also glad to advise you that the 
harvest work here is still going on with 
unabated zeal and perseverance amidst opposition 
and persecution from the nominal 
church and the world. We feel assured 
that the presence of the Lord is with us, 
which in great measure stimulates and 
cheers our otherwise drooping hearts. 
The circle of interested ones is gradually 
becoming wider in Africa. A recent letter 
from Bro. C. J. George to me, in reference 
to the Church of Christ, as a proof 
of this fact, says: "When you communicate 
to America you will not fail to remind 
Bro. Russell of the interest that is 



being awakened at L , and also to send 

me a few more of his tracts (assorted), 
missionary envelopes, and a copy of the 

Emphatic Diaglott." 

Thus you see how the truth is gaining 
ground, and must eventually prevail over 
errors and sophistries of the devil, and 
traditions of long standing. May the 
good Lord still bless your labor for his 
own glory! With best regards, very truly 
your brother in the harvest work. 
S. W. SETON. 

California. 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO. GENTLEMEN:- 
Enclosed find $1.50, and send MILLENNIAL 
DAWNS to addresses given. We have 
just read this most remarkable book with 
great interest. Should it strike others as 
it has me, it will certainly meet a long felt 
want, and prove to be a wonderful power 
for good. I always felt restrained in my 
allegiance to a God with no moral attributes 
above man. 

This book brushes away all the narrow 
views of a half century's gathering, and sets 
forth the wisdom, justice, and mercy of 
God in a far more exalted light. The 
Bible is all a new revelation to me now, 
and is wonderfully interesting. 

I send for these volumes to pass around, 
and should they give others the pleasure 
they have brought to me and mine, I will 
further continue the orders. Personally 
thanking the author of the book for the 
blessing and comfort it has brought to me 
through its vindication of the character of 
our God, I am sincerely and truly yours, 
A. MARTIN. 

England. 
MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Very 

many thanks for your gracious letters and 
postal card. I rejoice that you give me 
permission to translate the beautiful DAWN 
into French, and I note very carefully the 
instructions you give, which I wish to 
comply with to the letter. I find I must 
be in Paris to carry them out as you desire. 
I intend to win, with the Lord's 
help, many Frenchmen to the cause of 
this truth. I have been particularly blessed 
by reading recent numbers of the WATCH 
TOWER. 

Brother Cooper, who but recently came 
to see the light through the first volume, 



which I loaned to him, is in quite a glory 
season. He has been forbidden to preach 
any more among the Wesleyans so long as 
he spreads this light. With respect and 
love to Sister Russell, ever yours in heavenly 
love. E. H. CAREY. 

Florida. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Yours received, 
and as usual read with pleasure and 
profit. I thank you sincerely for your kind 
reply and advice. God bless you, and 
the saints at Allegheny. I felt that I had 
the assistance of your prayers last Sunday. 
I had the pleasure of meeting the pastor 
of my old congregation. He undertook 
a very unfair arrangement, all in his favor, 
but was met and completely routed, and 
actually fled the field. The Lord be 
praised! He compared me to "Judas Iscariot," 
and "Benedict Arnold." When 
I got up to reply, he tried to dismiss the 
congregation, failing in which, he left with 
precipitation, although I gave him a kind 
invitation to remain. 

A small number of his friends undertook 
to create some confusion by laughing 
and talking, even after I had kneeled down 
in prayer. I prayed the Lord to forgive 
them, for it was evident they were ignorant 
and knew not what they did. They 
finally subsided and fled with their leader, 
leaving me a large, orderly and interested 
company. It seemed to me that my understanding 
and lips were opened. I felt 
liberated and inspired, and like a flash the 
thought occurred to me, "The brethren and 
sisters of Allegheny are praying for me." 

I can't help thinking, good was done 
that day. I preached at 1 1 o'clock, A.M., 
also, and distributed a lot of tracts, and 
all the Z.W.T.'s you sent me, and then 
all that wanted could not be supplied. I 
am to preach there again soon. Dear 
friends, pray for us. And oh! pray the 
Lord to bless me with a meek and quiet 
spirit. I expect to be attacked furiously 
in all kinds of ways. 

God bless you and sister R. Long may 
you be spared to instruct and encourage 
the Church. Yours in the one faith, 
W. D. WILLIAMS. 


