All Can Have a Share in Making New Disciples
1 A new disciple does not result from the efforts of just one person. Jehovah can use all his “fellow workers” to help Bible students grow spiritually. (1 Cor. 3:6-9) We individually help new ones not only by our heartfelt comments at Christian meetings but also by our good conduct, which gives striking evidence of God’s spirit at work in our lives. (John 13:35; Gal. 5:22, 23; Eph. 4:22, 23) What more can be done to help new ones?
2 As a Congregation: All of us can demonstrate interest in those who begin to attend meetings by taking the initiative to greet them warmly and to converse with them before and after the meeting. Reflecting on his first contact with the congregation, one man said: “I met more genuinely loving people, total strangers, in one day than I had ever met in the church in which I was raised. It was apparent that I had found the truth.” He was baptized seven months after attending his first meeting.
3 Give sincere commendation as a Bible student makes spiritual progress. Has he been enduring opposition? Is he attending meetings regularly? Did he muster up the courage to comment? Has he enrolled in the Theocratic Ministry School or started sharing in the ministry? Commend him for the progress he has made. This will refresh and reassure him.​—Prov. 25:11.
4 As a Bible Study Conductor: Some publishers have been able to help their Bible students get acquainted with individual members of the congregation by asking other publishers to accompany them on the study. Invite the student to congregation meetings as soon as possible. When he begins attending meetings, make a point of introducing him to others. Is he struggling to overcome a bad habit, such as smoking? Does someone in his household object to his studying? He may benefit by talking to a publisher who has faced and overcome a similar challenge.​—1 Pet. 5:9.
5 New ones need spiritual support from the congregation. All can assist them in making progress by demonstrating sincere personal interest.

