Concerted Global Effort to Advertise the “Follow the Christ!” District Convention
Publishers Will Again Distribute a Special Handbill
1 Last year the worldwide campaign to advertise the “Deliverance at Hand!” District Convention had a powerful effect on interested ones. Those who accepted the special invitation and came experienced for the first time what a sumptuous spiritual feast among Jehovah’s Witnesses is like. (Isa. 65:13) They enjoyed association with our warm, united Christian brotherhood. (Ps. 133:1) In order to help as many as possible to attend the “Follow the Christ!” District Convention, we will once again engage in distributing worldwide a special handbill.
2 Results Last Year: Based on reports that were received from all parts of the world, excellent results were achieved by advertising the “Deliverance at Hand!” District Convention. In many places we received favorable publicity. For example, in one city, a newspaper published a six-column article about the campaign, stating: “To reach everyone in time Witnesses have been making an extra push in the neighborhood​—working longer hours, walking longer distances, and talking faster.” The coordinated handbill distribution aroused the interest of the local media in another city, prompting in-depth news coverage. At least three newspapers favorably reported on our activity before the convention. A reporter wrote several extensive articles that covered more than two pages in the Sunday edition of one newspaper. It detailed our beliefs, our brotherhood, the handbill distribution, and the convention. When one publisher presented the invitation at a door, the householder interrupted, saying: “Yes. I was just reading about that in the paper!” Another householder exclaimed: “I’ve just been reading about you, and now you’re here! Is that my invitation?” She then added, “This is a very nice thing for Jehovah’s Witnesses to be doing.”
3 Many interested individuals were seen approaching the convention sites with their invitation in hand. Some interested ones drove from distant cities in order to attend sessions. Our diligent efforts to invite others contributed to an increase in attendance, with one country having 27 percent more people present for the convention than the previous year.
4 Territory Coverage: You may begin distributing the handbill three weeks before the start of your convention. Every effort should be made to cover the entire congregation territory. In congregations that have a large amount of territory, publishers may leave the handbill discreetly at not-at-homes during the final week before the convention. Congregations should endeavor to distribute the entire allotment of handbills and to cover as much territory as possible. Any surplus can be utilized by the pioneers in the congregation.
5 What to Say: You might say something like this: “We are sharing in a global effort to distribute this invitation to an important upcoming event. This is your copy. You will find other details set out in the invitation.” Keeping the presentation brief will allow for a wide distribution. Of course, if the householder has questions, take the time to answer them. Where interest is shown, make a record and call back on the individual as soon as possible.
6 How vital it is that we strive to follow the Christ! (John 3:36) Our upcoming district convention will help all who attend to do just that. Surely we can anticipate that a tremendous witness will again be given as a result of this concerted effort to advertise the “Follow the Christ!” District Convention. Therefore, be zealous in inviting as many as possible to attend. May Jehovah’s rich blessing be upon your personal efforts as you share in this united global campaign.

