Service Meeting Schedule
Note: A Service Meeting will be scheduled in Our Kingdom Ministry for each week during the summer months. Congregations may make adjustments as needed to allow for attending the “Follow the Christ!” District Convention. Where appropriate, use 15 minutes on the last Service Meeting before attending the convention to repeat counsel and reminders from this month’s insert that apply locally. A month or two following your convention, set aside 15 to 20 minutes on a Service Meeting (perhaps using a local needs portion) for a review of points from the convention that the publishers have found to be helpful in the ministry. The review should be handled by the service overseer. Invite the audience to comment on how they are applying or plan to apply that information in their ministry.
Week Starting April 9
Song 201
10 min: Local announcements. Encourage everyone to view the drama on the DVD entitled Young People Ask​—What Will I Do With My Life? in preparation for the discussion that will be held next week at the Service Meeting. Point out the box “Main Menu,” and explain how to navigate around the DVD. Using the suggestions on page 8 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the April 15 Watchtower and the April Awake! In one demonstration, have the publisher raise a question that he will answer on the return visit.
15 min: “All Can Have a Share in Making New Disciples.”a When considering paragraph 4, invite the audience to comment on how members of the congregation encouraged them before baptism. One or two comments may be arranged in advance.
20 min: “Concerted Global Effort to Advertise the ‘Follow the Christ!’ District Convention.”b When considering paragraph 3, invite audience to relate outstanding local experiences in connection with distributing invitations to the district convention last year or include comments on the 2007 Yearbook, from page 7 to the subheading on page 10.
Song 43 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 16
Song 161
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: “Speak the Word of God Fearlessly.”c As time permits, invite audience to comment on the cited scriptures.
20 min: “What Will You Do With Your Life?”​—Part 1.d Following brief comments on paragraphs 1-2, get right into a discussion of each question presented in paragraphs 3-4. When discussing question 4 in paragraph 3, have both scriptures read. In conclusion, review the box “Main Menu.” Encourage everyone to watch the “Interviews” and “Supplementary Material” on the DVD in preparation for next week’s Service Meeting discussion.
Song 207 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 23
Song 215
10 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Using the suggestions on page 8 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the May 1 Watchtower and the May Awake!
10 min: Look! The Light Is Wonderful! Talk based on the March 15, 2007, Watchtower, pages 12-14.
25 min: “What Will You Do With Your Life?”​—Part 2.e Get right into a discussion of each question presented in paragraphs 5-7. Conclude with the warm appeal in paragraph 8.
Song 172 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 30
Song 186
 5 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for April.
10 min: Local needs.
30 min: “Follow the Christ by Manifesting Dignity.”f To be handled by the congregation secretary. Mention the convention to which the congregation is assigned. Review the box “District Convention Reminders.”
Song 44 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 7
Song 164
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Arrangements for Places of Worship. Talk and audience discussion based on chapter 11 of Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will.
20 min: “When People Are Not at Home.”g To be handled by the service overseer.
Song 178 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

