What Will You Do With Your Life?
1 Children are sometimes asked, “What do you want to be when you grow up?” When you were a small boy, would you have said that you wanted to be a cowboy? a fireman? a circuit overseer? Or as a little girl, would you have said that you wanted to be a ballerina? a nurse? a missionary? Now that you are older, you must ask yourself another question, ‘What will I do with my life?’ Are you ready to decide?
2 To help you make the best possible decision, Jehovah’s organization produced the DVD Young People Ask​—What Will I Do With My Life? Please watch it, and give serious thought to all that it contains, including the drama, interviews, and supplementary material. The contents are outlined in the box “Main Menu.”
3 The Drama: As you watch the drama, consider these questions: (1) What similarities are there between Timothy, who is spoken of in the Christian Greek Scriptures, and Andre? (Acts 16:1; 1 Tim. 4:8; 2 Tim. 1:5) (2) How was Andre being pressured to excel in athletics, and by whom? (3) Who proved to be positive influences on Timothy and on Andre, and in what ways? (2 Tim. 1:1-4; 3:14, 15) (4) How did the admonition at Matthew 6:24 and Philippians 3:8 affect Andre, and how does it affect you?
4 Selected Scenes: After watching the entire drama, replay the following scenes, and answer these questions. “Paul and Timothy”: What was Paul’s final admonition to Timothy? (2 Tim. 4:5) “Giving Jehovah Your Best”: What sort of spiritual goals do you have? “Taking a Stand for Jehovah”: From where does real happiness come? “Grandmother’s Advice”: What is wrong with wanting to be a star in Satan’s world? (Matt. 4:9) “No Regrets”: What discovery can help you find fulfillment in life?​—Prov. 10:22.
5 Interviews: As you watch each of the following sections, what do you see that you can do to give your best to Jehovah? (1) “Dedication to Vain Pursuits or to God?” (1 John 2:17); (2) “Learning to Enjoy Your Ministry” (Ps. 27:14); and (3) “An Open Door to Service.”​—Matt. 6:33.
6 Looking Back: Can you answer? (1) What careers were the brother and the sister pursuing, and why? (2) How successful had they become? (3) What was the turning point in each one’s life? (2 Cor. 5:15) (4) What theocratic careers replaced their former ones, and why did they feel that they could not pursue both? (5) Do they have any regrets for having changed their focus in life? (6) What did they say that has especially made you think about what you should do with your life?
7 Supplementary Interviews: In these interviews, what have you learned that you can do to apply yourself more fully in Jehovah’s service? (1) “The Value of Personal Study,” (2) “Alternative Witnessing,” (3) “Bethel Service,” (4) “Gilead Missionary Training,” and (5) “Ministerial Training School.” Review the “Index to Published Information on Related Subjects,” and read more about what interests you most.
8 So have you decided what you will do with your life? Paul urged Timothy: “Ponder over these things; be absorbed in them, that your advancement may be manifest to all persons.” (1 Tim. 4:15) We urge you to do the same with what you have seen and heard on this DVD. Ask Jehovah to help you make a wise choice that will truly give you joy and fulfillment in life now as well as a rewarding and happy future.
[Box on page 6]
MAIN MENU
Play Drama
Scenes (11 selections)
Interviews
Play All
Sections (3 selections)
Looking Back
Supplementary Material
Supplementary Interviews
Index to Published Information on Related Subjects
Subtitles
Hearing Impaired
None
To navigate around the menus, use the Next ▶, ◀ Back, and Main Menu buttons.

