When People Are Not at Home
 1. What is a common challenge when engaging in the door-to-door ministry?
1 In many areas it is becoming increasingly difficult to find people at home. In these “critical times,” many are forced to work long hours just to make ends meet. (2 Tim. 3:1) Some may be away from home spending money or engaging in recreation. How can we reach such ones with the good news?
 2. How can we make sure that not-at-homes will be cared for?
2 Keep Good Records: The first step is to make note of those who are not at home. This is especially important if you work your territory frequently. Do you make note of the name of the street, the territory number, your name, and the date? You may leave room for making additional notes when you or another publisher returns to work the not-at-homes. At the end of the witnessing period, remember to give the record or notes to the person who has the territory, unless he agrees for you to work the not-at-homes. Use a separate sheet to record any interest found that you will care for.
 3. What are some suggestions for reaching those who are not at home?
3 Try at a Different Time: Perhaps some who were not at home during the workday may be home in the evening or on weekends. Could you arrange your schedule to go back at a more opportune time? (1 Cor. 10:24) If not, you may be able to give the not-at-homes to a publisher who can go back at a different time. Otherwise, you might write to those who were not at home or try to reach them by telephone. Publishers whose health problems limit their share in the door-to-door work may be happy to assist you with this.
 4. What illustrates the importance of calling back on not-at-homes?
4 One case illustrates the importance of trying to contact those who are not at home. After publishers repeatedly called at one home for three years, the householder was eventually contacted. It turned out that she had been waiting all that time for a Witness to come by in order to resume the Bible study that she had before moving to that area.
 5. When is a territory considered completed?
5 Complete the Territory: When is a territory considered completed? Generally, this is when reasonable efforts have been made to contact someone at each home. It may be appropriate to leave a tract or an older magazine discreetly at the not-at-homes, especially in territories that are worked infrequently. The territory should be completed within four months. Then it should be checked in so that the territory servant can update his records.
 6. Why should we try to reach everyone in our territory with the good news?
6 We want as many people as possible to have an opportunity to learn to call on the name of Jehovah and be saved. (Rom. 10:13, 14) This includes those who happen to be away from their home when we call from house to house. Like the apostle Paul, make it your desire “to bear thorough witness to the good news of the undeserved kindness of God.”​—Acts 20:24.

