



Top left: Marek M. Berezowski/​Anadolu Agency via Getty Images; bottom left: Halfpoint Images/​Moment via Getty Images; center: Zhai Yujia/​China News Service/​VCG via Getty Images; top right: Ismail Sen/​Anadolu Agency via Getty Images; bottom right: E+/​taseffski/​via Getty Images


KEEP ON THE WATCH!
2023: A Year of Anxiety​—⁠What Does the Bible Say?


During 2023, global events provided undeniable evidence that we are living in what the Bible refers to as “the last days.” (2 Timothy 3:1) Note how current events match what the Bible predicted would happen during our time.
The Bible and global events 
“Wars and reports of wars.”​—Matthew 24:6.
             “Violent conflict is increasing in multiple parts of the world.”a



See the articles “Who Will Save the Civilians?” and “World Military Spending Surpasses $2 Trillion.”

“Earthquakes in one place after another.”​—Mark 13:8.
                “Since the beginning of 2023, there have now been 13 earthquakes above magnitude 7 worldwide, one of the highest values since records began.”b



See the article “Devastating Earthquakes Strike Turkey and Syria.”

“Fearful sights.”​—Luke 21:11.
                “The era of global warming has ended; the era of global boiling has arrived.”​—António Guterres, UN secretary-general.c



See the article “Summer 2023 Global Heat Wave.”

“Food shortages.”​—Matthew 24:7.
                “2023: Another year of extreme jeopardy for those struggling to feed their families.”d



See the article “Global Food Crisis Fueled by War and Climate Change.”

“Critical times hard to deal with.”​—2 Timothy 3:1.
                 “One in eight people globally are living with mental health conditions.”e



See the article “Disturbing Decline in Teen Mental Health.”

What can we expect in 2024?
No one can say for sure what 2024 will bring. But world events indicate that soon God’s Kingdom, or heavenly government, will replace human governments and bring an end to all causes of suffering and anxiety.​—Daniel 2:44; Revelation 21:4.
In the meantime, when we feel anxious, we can look to God for help. The Bible states:
“When I am afraid, I put my trust in you.”​—Psalm 56:3.
How can we demonstrate trust in God? We invite you to learn more about the Bible’s promise regarding a future free of suffering. Try our free interactive Bible course to see how you and your family can benefit from the Bible’s promises.

a Foreign Affairs, “A World at War: What Is Behind the Global Explosion of Violent Conflict?” by Emma Beals and Peter Salisbury, October 30, 2023.
b Earthquake News, “Year 2023: Number of Major Earthquakes on Course for Record,” May, 2023.
c United Nations, “Secretary-General’s Opening Remarks at Press Conference on Climate,” July 27, 2023.
d World Food Programme, “A Global Food Crisis.”
e World Health Organization, “World Mental Health Day 2023,” October 10, 2023.

