



fcafotodigital/E+ via Getty Images


A Vegan Lifestyle—What Does the Bible Say?


Around the world, there is significant interest in veganism.
             “Veganism is a philosophy and way of living which seeks to exclude—as far as is possible and practicable—all forms of exploitation of, and cruelty to, animals for food, clothing or any other purpose.”—The Vegan Society.


In addition to their concern for animals, some people adopt a vegan lifestyle for environmental, health, or religious reasons.
             “Unlike most dietary choices, veganism is more often seen as a philosophical proposition, an ethical choice, and a form of individual activism that aims to have a global impact.”—Britannica Academic.


Is veganism the way to a better future for the planet? What does the Bible say?
Our Creator’s view of humans and of animals
The Bible indicates that our Creator, Jehovah God,a views humans as superior to animals and that he has given people authority over them. (Genesis 1:27, 28) Eventually, God permitted humans to use animals for food. (Genesis 9:3) However, he does not condone the mistreatment of animals.—Proverbs 12:10.
According to the Bible, whether we eat meat is a personal decision.b Our choice does not make us better people in God’s eyes. (1 Corinthians 8:8) No one should criticize the choice that another person makes about what he chooses to eat.—Romans 14:3.
The way to a better future
The Bible reveals that our lifestyle choices will not correct the problems in the world. Many problems are rooted in the political, social, and economic systems of this world, which are beyond reform. The Bible says:
              “What is crooked cannot be made straight.”—Ecclesiastes 1:15.


Our Creator will solve the problems we face. The Bible uses figurative language to describe what he will do.
                 “And I saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the former heaven and the former earth had passed away, and the sea is no more.”—Revelation 21:1.


God will replace human governments, or “the former heaven,” with “a new heaven,” his heavenly Kingdom government. His Kingdom will remove “the former earth,” those who are wicked, and it will rule over “a new earth,” or those who willingly submit to its authority.
Only under the rulership of God’s Kingdom will humans learn how to live in perfect harmony with the animals and the environment.—Isaiah 11:6-9.

“I’ve gained peace of mind”
Jukka fought for animal rights, but he felt powerless when he saw that his efforts accomplished little. Then he found the best solution to stop the mistreatment of animals. Read his story.


a Jehovah is the personal name of God.—Psalm 83:18.
b The Bible does command us “to keep abstaining . . . from blood.” (Acts 15:28, 29) This means that we should not drink blood or eat meat that has not been bled; nor should we eat any food to which blood has been added.

