





Benefit From Jesus’ Sacrifice


Once each year, Jehovah’s Witnesses and millions of their guests around the world gather to observe the Memorial of Jesus’ death, just as he commanded. (Luke 22:19) This event helps us to appreciate the significance of what Jesus did when he gave his life for humankind. It also shows what his sacrifice can mean for us—both now and in the future.—John 3:16.
Whether you attended the Memorial this year or not, how can you benefit from Jesus’ sacrificial death? Jesus taught that we should do two important things:
1. Learn about God and Jesus. In prayer to his heavenly Father, Jesus said: “This means everlasting life, their coming to know you, the only true God, and the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ.”—John 17:3.

2. Act on what you learn. Jesus emphasized that we need to apply his teachings in our life. For example, he concluded his famous Sermon on the Mount by commending anyone who “hears [his] words and does them.” (Luke 6:46-48) Likewise, on another occasion, he said: “If you know these things, happy you are if you do them.”—John 13:17.


Would you like to learn more about God and Jesus? Do you want practical advice on how to act on what you learn? Here are some resources that can help you.
Bible course
Our free interactive Bible course has helped many people to examine the Bible and put it to work in their life.
  Visit the Guided Bible Study Course page to learn more about this program.

  Watch the video Welcome to Your Bible Study to see what a Bible study with Jehovah’s Witnesses is like.



Meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses
Jehovah’s Witnesses meet together twice each week at their place of worship known as a Kingdom Hall. At these meetings, we discuss the Bible and how to apply its teachings in our life.
These meetings are open to the public; you do not have to be a Witness to attend. Depending on local circumstances, you may have the option of attending in person or via videoconference.
  Watch the video What Happens at a Kingdom Hall? to get a preview of what you can expect at these meetings.



  Find a meeting near you by visiting the page Congregation Meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses.


Online articles and videos
Many articles and videos on this website can help you to learn more about Jesus’ teachings and the value of his sacrificial death.
For example, to learn how it is possible for one man’s death to benefit millions of people, read the articles “Jesus Saves—How?” and “Why Did Jesus Suffer and Die?” or watch the video Why Did Jesus Die?

