



Ahmad Gharabli/AFP via Getty Images


KEEP ON THE WATCH!
Can the Nations Unite to Avoid Climate Catastrophe?—What Does the Bible Say?


On Sunday, November 20, 2022, the COP27 United Nations Climate Change Conference ended. Although a landmark agreement was reached that would financially assist vulnerable countries to cope with climate disasters, many recognize that this will not solve the root problem.
               “I welcome the decision to establish a loss and damage fund,” said António Guterres, secretary-general of the United Nations, on November 19, 2022. “Clearly this will not be enough . . . Our planet is still in the emergency room.”

             “The world remains on the brink of climate catastrophe.”—Mary Robinson, former president of Ireland and former UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, November 20, 2022.


Young people are especially worried about the future of our planet. However, can the nations work together and fulfill their promise to address climate change? What does the Bible say?
Will the nations unite and succeed?
The Bible reveals that despite the hard work and sincere efforts of those involved, any progress that the nations make in solving the climate crisis will be limited. Note two reasons why:
              “What is crooked cannot be made straight.”—Ecclesiastes 1:15.
Meaning: Governments are flawed because humans were not meant to rule themselves. (Jeremiah 10:23) Even if the nations could unite, they would still be incapable of solving the world’s problems, no matter how hard they may try.

              “For men will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, . . . not open to any agreement.”—2 Timothy 3:2, 3.
Meaning: The Bible accurately predicted that many people in our day would be selfish and unwilling to work together for the greater good.


A reason for hope
However, the future of our planet does not depend on the promises of human governments. God has provided a capable world Ruler, Jesus Christ. Of him the Bible states:
               “The government will rest on his shoulder. His name will be called Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God, Eternal Father, Prince of Peace.”—Isaiah 9:6, footnote.


Jesus is the King of God’s Kingdom, or heavenly government. (Matthew 6:10) He has the power, the wisdom, and the desire to care for our planet and its inhabitants. (Psalm 72:12, 16) Under his leadership, this heavenly government will stop those who are “destroying the earth” and will heal the planet’s environment.—Revelation 11:18, footnote; Isaiah 35:1, 7.
To learn more about the ultimate solution for destructive climate change, read the article “Climate Change and Our Future—What the Bible Says.”

