





Can Peacekeeping Efforts Create a Peaceful World?


Wars and armed conflicts are constantly raging in our world. As a result, the United Nations and other organizations engage in peacekeepinga operations that include maintaining a presence in trouble spots. Their hope is to become a stabilizing force in these violent areas. “United Nations peacekeepers,” says UN Secretary-General António Guterres, “are the beating heart of our commitment to a more peaceful world.”
Over the years, peacekeeping operations have had some successes. For example, they have protected civilians, returned refugees to their home countries, delivered humanitarian aid, and rebuilt damaged infrastructure. But peacekeeping efforts face serious challenges that limit their success. Will there ever be lasting solutions that lead to a truly peaceful world? What answers does the Bible contain?
Peacekeeping challenges and the Bible’s solutions





The challenge: lack of cooperation. It is not always easy to get multiple military and civilian agencies, usually from different countries, to cooperate. At times, such agencies have struggled to work together efficiently because of misunderstandings and conflicting interests.
The Bible’s solution: “The God of heaven will set up a kingdom . . . and put an end to all these kingdoms [human governments], and it alone will stand forever.”—Daniel 2:44.

In the near future, God will end all war and establish global peace. (Psalm 46:8, 9) He will replace all governments on earth with one single government: God’s Kingdom. With one perfect government in heaven ruling over a planet free of conflict, there will no longer be a need for human peacekeeping agencies.







The challenge: limited resources and capabilities. Peacekeeping operations do not always have enough people, financial support, or other resources, thus hampering progress. Peacekeeping personnel also have to operate in environments that are becoming increasingly complex and dangerous.
The Bible’s solution: “The God of our Lord Jesus Christ . . . seated [Jesus] at his right hand in the heavenly places, far above every government and authority and power.”—Ephesians 1:17, 20, 21.
The almighty God, Jehovah,b has granted unrivaled resources to Jesus, the appointed King of God’s Kingdom. (Daniel 7:13, 14c) God has given Jesus great power, knowledge, wisdom, and discernment—far greater than that of any human government or agency. (Isaiah 11:2) Jesus also has an army of powerful angels at his disposal. (Revelation 19:14) No situation is too complex or too difficult for him.

Jesus will use the resources and capabilities that God has given him to do more than simply remove conflict. He will establish genuine tranquility, security, and peace for everyone living under God’s Kingdom.—Isaiah 32:17, 18.







The challenge: legal restrictions. Peacekeeping personnel are sometimes hindered by mandates that are unclear or that restrict their movements and actions. Such mandates may prevent them from effectively protecting others or from fully accomplishing their objective.
The Bible’s solution: “All authority has been given [Jesus] in heaven and on the earth.”—Matthew 28:18.
God has given Jesus a clear mandate to establish world peace and full authority to make it happen. (John 5:22) Jesus will never act unfairly or become corrupt. (Isaiah 11:3-5) With good reason, the Bible calls Jesus the “Prince of Peace,” whose Kingdom is established on “justice and righteousness.”—Isaiah 9:6, 7.
God’s Kingdom—a genuine peacebuilding force
Human peacekeeping forces can at best bring a measure of stability and perhaps end an armed conflict in a region. But they cannot remove the root cause of violence—the hatred simmering in many people’s hearts.
“The fundamental problem is that there is no peace to keep.”—Dennis Jett, former U.S. ambassador.

On the other hand, God’s Kingdom is a true peacebuilding force because it helps individuals eradicate hatred from their hearts. For instance, note that when Jesus was on earth, he taught his followers by word and by example how to make peace and to show love to others:

“Happy are the peacemakers.”—Matthew 5:9.


“You must love your neighbor as yourself.”—Mark 12:29-31.


“Return your sword to its place, for all those who take up the sword will perish by the sword.”—Matthew 26:52.


“When [Jesus] was being insulted, he did not insult in return. When he was suffering, he did not threaten.”—1 Peter 2:23.

Jesus also said that subjects of God’s Kingdom would be defined by their love for others. The Bible makes it clear that God’s Kingdom will not tolerate those who hate fellow humans:

“By this all will know that you are my disciples—if you have love among yourselves.”—John 13:34, 35.


“Everyone who hates his brother is a murderer.”—1 John 3:15.


“Whoever loves God must also love his brother.”—1 John 4:20, 21.

Jehovah God, who created the human race, knows the best way—the only way—to establish world peace. His Kingdom will succeed where human efforts, including peacekeeping efforts, have failed.

a The United Nations and other organizations also use such related terms as “peacebuilding,” “peacemaking,” “peace support,” and “peace operations.”
b Jehovah is the personal name of God. (Psalm 83:18) See the article “Who Is Jehovah?”
c At Daniel 7:13, 14, the term “son of man” refers to Jesus Christ.—Matthew 25:31; 26:63, 64.

Even now, God’s Kingdom builds peace and unity

In the future, when God’s Kingdom rules over the entire earth, it will unite all humankind under God’s teachings of peace. (Isaiah 2:4; 11:9) But God’s Kingdom has already been established in heaven, and even now it is building peace and unity by educating millions of people on earth.
  Watch the video Can Love Conquer Hatred? to see how the Bible helped two men root out prejudice from their hearts despite the long history of hatred between Jews and Arabs.




  Watch the video Former Enemies Who Became Friends to see how Bible teachings helped a ruthless criminal gang leader and a hardened police officer to overcome their hatred for each other and become best friends.





