



Manuel Reino Berengui/DeFodi Images via Getty Images


KEEP ON THE WATCH!
Can the World Cup Really Unite People?—What Does the Bible Say?


An estimated five billion people are expected to watch the FIFA World Cup being held from November 20 through December 18, 2022. Many feel that such sporting events have the potential to accomplish much more than just unite people as spectators.
             “Sport has the power to change the world. It has the power to inspire. It has the power to unite people in a way that little else does.”—Nelson Mandela, former president of South Africa.

             “Football . . . unites in hope, it unites in joy, it unites in passion, it unites in love, as well [as] in diversity.”—Gianni Infantino, president of FIFA.a


Can the World Cup or any sporting event achieve such lofty goals?  Is there any hope for peace and unity?
A source of unity?
This year’s World Cup has been about more than just football. The games have sparked debate on social and political issues involving human rights, racism, and economic inequality.
Even so, many find that international sporting events like the World Cup provide enjoyable entertainment. However, as much as people want them to, these events cannot provide lasting unity. Instead, they often showcase the divisive attitudes and actions that the Bible said would mark the time period called “the last days.”—2 Timothy 3:1-5.
To learn more about this Bible prophecy, read the article “Did the Bible Predict the Way People Think and Act Today?“


Real hope for world unity
The Bible contains a real hope for global unity. It promises that all people on earth will be united under a heavenly government called “the Kingdom of God.”—Luke 4:43; Matthew 6:10.
The King of that Kingdom, Jesus Christ, will ensure that there will be peace worldwide. The Bible states:
               “The righteous will flourish, and peace will abound.”—Psalm 72:7.

               “He will rescue the poor who cry for help . . . From oppression and from violence he will rescue them.”—Psalm 72:12, 14.


Even today, Jesus’ teachings have already united millions of people in 239 lands. They have learned to let go of hatred. To find out more, read the series of articles with the title “Breaking the Cycle of Hatred.”

a Fédération Internationale de Football Association, the international governing body for association football (soccer). 

