





Can the Bible Help You Overcome Drug Addiction?


Each year, millions die from the direct or indirect effects of substance use, including drug abuse. During the COVID-19 pandemic, the scope of this problem only increased. The Bible’s wisdom has helped many to overcome drug addiction. If you are struggling with this problem, this wisdom can help you too.a
In this article
Why look to the Bible for help in overcoming addiction?

Four Bible-based steps to break free from addiction

Bible verses that can help you overcome addiction

More real-life experiences: Conquering addiction with the Bible’s help

Does the Bible forbid medical treatment for addiction?

Does the Bible forbid the medicinal use of drugs?


Why look to the Bible for help in overcoming addiction?
Researchers have found that addiction is often associated with such deep-seated issues as loneliness, stress, anxiety, and depression. The Bible can help you to build the faith needed to cope successfully with the challenges that may contribute to addiction. It shows how you can have a close friendship with God. (Psalm 25:14) With his help, you can overcome problems that might seem impossible to solve on your own.—Mark 11:22-24.
Four Bible-based steps to break free from addiction
1. Get to know Jehovah God.b (John 17:3) He is the Creator and the Source of unlimited power. More than that, he is your loving heavenly Father. He wants to have a close relationship with you and to use his power in your behalf. (Isaiah 40:29-31; James 4:8) He has a wonderful future in store for you if you choose to benefit from his love.—Jeremiah 29:11; John 3:16.

2. Ask Jehovah for help. Pray to God and ask him to help you overcome your addiction so that you can be “holy [or, clean] and acceptable to [him].” (Romans 12:1) By means of his holy spirit, or active force, he will give you “power beyond what is normal.” (2 Corinthians 4:7; Luke 11:13) This power will help you to stop abusing drugs and to develop a “new personality” that is in harmony with his will.—Colossians 3:9, 10.

3. Fill your mind with God’s thoughts. (Isaiah 55:9) He will help you “to be made new in your dominant mental attitude,” or to change your thinking patterns, which will help you to break free from addiction. (Ephesians 4:23) God’s thoughts are found in the Bible, so it is vital that you read it regularly. (Psalm 1:1-3) Many have benefited by getting help to understand what the Bible teaches. (Acts 8:30, 31) Jehovah’s Witnesses offer a free interactive Bible course. We also invite you to attend our meetings, where we examine what the Bible says and how we can apply its teachings in our life.

4. Choose good association. Your friends can exert a strong influence on you, for good or for bad, in your fight against addiction. (Proverbs 13:20) God provides good associates among those who worship him, and he wants you to benefit from their friendship. (Psalm 119:63; Romans 1:12) Be selective in your entertainment as well, since you essentially associate with the characters you watch, listen to, or read about. Avoid anything that will weaken your resolve to do what is right.—Psalm 101:3; Amos 5:14.


Bible verses that can help you overcome addiction
Psalm 27:10: “Even if my own father and mother abandon me, Jehovah himself will take me in.”
“I never knew my biological father, and this left me feeling empty inside. Once I came to know Jehovah God as a real Person who truly loved me, I found meaning in life and was able to conquer my addiction.”—Wilby, from Haiti.

Psalm 50:15: “Call on me in the time of distress. I will rescue you.”
“Time and again, this verse gave me the strength to keep going, even after I had setbacks. Jehovah kept his promise.”—Serhiy, from Ukraine.

Proverbs 3:5, 6: “Trust in Jehovah with all your heart, and do not rely on your own understanding. In all your ways take notice of him, and he will make your paths straight.”
“These verses helped me to trust, not in myself, but in Jehovah. With his strength, I was able to change my life completely.”—Michele, from Italy.

Isaiah 41:10: “Do not be afraid, for I am with you. Do not be anxious, for I am your God. I will fortify you, yes, I will help you, I will really hold on to you with my right hand of righteousness.”
“I suffered from terrible anxiety when I didn’t have access to drugs. This scripture convinced me that God would help me overcome my anxiety, and he did.”—Andy, from South Africa.

1 Corinthians 15:33, footnote: “Do not be misled. Bad associations corrupt good morals.”
“Bad associates introduced me to drugs and led me into addiction. I was able to break free only after I cut off my association with them and made friends with clean people whose lifestyle I admired.”—Isaac, from Kenya.

2 Corinthians 7:1: “Let us cleanse ourselves of every defilement of flesh and spirit.”
“Those words inspired me to continue in the struggle to cleanse my body and leave behind a past of addictions and self-destruction.”—Rosa, from Colombia.

Philippians 4:13: “For all things I have the strength through the one who gives me power.”
“I knew that I wasn’t strong enough on my own to stop taking drugs, so I prayed that God help me. He gave me the strength I needed.”—Patrizia, from Italy.

More real-life experiences: Conquering addiction with the Bible’s help





Joseph Ehrenbogen was raised around violence and became addicted to alcohol, tobacco, marijuana, and heroin. Several times, he nearly died from overdoses. One Bible passage in particular convinced him that he could change. Read his story in the article “I Learned to Respect Women and Myself.”
Dmitry Korshunov suffered many relapses in his struggle to break free from alcohol addiction. Watch the video ‘I Got Fed Up With My Lifestyle’ to see what helped him to succeed.

Does the Bible forbid medical treatment for addiction?
No. The Bible acknowledges: “Healthy people do not need a physician, but those who are ill do.” (Matthew 9:12) Likewise, the U.S. National Institute on Drug Abuse says: “Drug addiction is a complex disease, and quitting usually takes more than good intentions or a strong will.” Of course, the help that God provides is far stronger than anyone’s willpower. Still, many who have broken free from substance addiction by following the Bible’s counsel also needed the help of medical treatment.c For instance, a man named Allen recalls: “When I was giving up alcohol, the physical pain of withdrawal was tremendous. That’s when I realized that I needed medical treatment in addition to the spiritual help I was getting.”
Does the Bible forbid the medicinal use of drugs?
No. In fact, the Bible describes the use of alcohol to treat illness or to dull the pain of someone who is about to die. (Proverbs 31:6; 1 Timothy 5:23) However, just as is true of alcohol, drugs that are used to manage pain can be highly addictive. Thus, it is wise to see the potential danger and exercise caution in the use of prescription painkillers.—Proverbs 22:3.

a Although this article focuses on overcoming drug addiction, the Bible principles considered can also help those who are fighting other problems, including issues involving alcohol, tobacco, food, gambling, pornography, or social media.
b Jehovah is the personal name of God. (Psalm 83:18) See the article “Who Is Jehovah?”
c Many treatment centers, hospitals, and recovery programs can provide help. Each person should carefully evaluate the options and then decide what type of treatment is best.—Proverbs 14:15.

