



Ismail Sen/Anadolu Agency via Getty Images


KEEP ON THE WATCH!
Devasting Earthquakes Strike Turkey and Syria—What Does the Bible Say?

UPDATED: February 10, 2023
As of Thursday, February 9, 2023, the death toll from Monday’s earthquakes that struck Turkey and Syria surpassed 20,000. Tens of thousands have been injured and hundreds of thousands have been left homeless.
The two Disaster Relief Committees set up by Jehovah’s Witnesses continue to provide practical help and to assist with search and rescue efforts. (Galatians 6:10) Representatives from the local branch office arrived within 24 hours of the earthquake, despite harsh weather and travel conditions, and have been able to provide emotional and spiritual support to the victims. (1 Peter 5:2) Updates on our relief efforts will be posted in the Newsroom.
The Scriptures assure us that “Jehovaha is close to the brokenhearted; he saves those who are crushed in spirit.” (Psalm 34:18) You may find the following Bible-based resources helpful during this stressful time.
  The video Comfort for Those Who Mourn offers practical suggestions to those who have lost loved ones in death.

  The article “Help Your Children Deal With Disturbing News Reports” provides Bible principles that can help your children from being overwhelmed by negative news.





On Monday, February 6, 2023, devastating earthquakes struck Turkey and Syria.
             “A huge earthquake killed more than 3,700 people across a swathe of Turkey and northwest Syria on Monday, with freezing winter weather adding to the plight of the thousands left injured or homeless and hampering efforts to find survivors.”—Reuters, February 6, 2023.


Our hearts ache when we read of such tragedies. At times like this, we can look to Jehovah who is “the God of all comfort.” (2 Corinthians 1:3) He provides “comfort from the Scriptures [that] we might have hope.”—Romans 15:4.
In the Bible, we learn:
             What was foretold about earthquakes.

              Where we can find comfort and hope.

              How God will eliminate all suffering.


To find out what the Bible says about these topics, read the articles:
              “Great Earthquakes—What Did the Bible Prophesy?”

               “Where Can I Find Hope?”

               “God Will Soon End All Suffering”



a Jehovah is the personal name of God.—Psalm 83:18.

