



E+/taseffski/via Getty Images (Stock photo. Posed by model.)


KEEP ON THE WATCH!
Disturbing Decline in Teen Mental Health—What Does the Bible Say?


On Monday, February 13, 2023, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in the United States released a report on the mental health of U.S. teens. It noted that over 40 percent of high school students experienced persistent sadness and hopelessness.
“Although we have seen worsening trends in mental health for young people over the last 10 years,” stated Dr. Kathleen Ethier, director of CDC’s Division of Adolescent and School Health (DASH), “the levels of poor mental health and suicidal thoughts and behaviors reported by teenage girls are now higher than we have ever seen.”
The report noted:
             More than 1 in 10 teen girls (14 percent) have been forced to have sex when they did not want to. “This is truly alarming” stated Dr. Ethier. “For every 10 teenage girls you know, at least one of them, and probably more, has been raped.”

             Nearly 1 in 3 teen girls (30 percent) seriously considered attempting suicide.

               Nearly 3 in 5 teen girls (57 percent) felt persistently sad or hopeless.


These statistics are truly heartbreaking. Youth should be a time of joy and happiness. What can help teens cope with the stress that they face today? What does the Bible say?
The Bible offers teens practical help
The Bible realistically describes the stressful times we are living in today. It calls them “critical times hard to deal with.” (2 Timothy 3:1-5) However, the Bible offers timeless advice that is helping millions of teens worldwide to successfully cope despite the challenges they face. Consider the following Bible-based articles.

Help for teens dealing with suicidal feelings

               What if I Don’t Want to Live Anymore? 

               I Want to Die—Can the Bible Help Me When I Have Suicidal Thoughts?

               Why Go On?



Help for teens dealing with depression, sadness, or negative emotions

               How Can I Deal With Depression?

               How Can I Avoid Negative Thinking?

               How Can I Deal With Anxiety?

               How Can I Control My Emotions? 

               From Sad to Glad (whiteboard animation)



Help for teens dealing with bullying or cyberbullying

               What if I’m Being Bullied? 

               What if I’m Being Cyberbullied? 

               Beat a Bully Without Using Your Fists (whiteboard animation)



Help for teens dealing with sexual harassment and assault

               How Can I Deal With Sexual Harassment?

               What Should I Know About Sexual Assault?—Part 1: Precautions 

               What Should I Know About Sexual Assault?—Part 2: Recovery 


The Bible offers practical advice for parents
The Bible also offers practical advice to assist parents so that they can help their teens cope with life’s challenges. Consider the following Bible-based articles.
               Teen Depression—Why? What Can Help?

               When Your Teenage Daughter Is Stressed Out 

               What if My Child Is Being Bullied? 

               When Your Teenager Self-Injures 

               Children and Social Media—Part 1: Should My Child Use Social Media? 

               Children and Social Media—Part 2: Teaching Your Teenager Social Media Safety 

               Children and Smartphones—Part 1: Should My Child Have a Smartphone?

               Children and Smartphones—Part 2: Teaching Children Smartphone Sense

               How to Talk to Your Teen About Sexting 



