



hadynyah/E+ via Getty Images


KEEP ON THE WATCH!
Global Food Crisis Fueled by War and Climate Change—What Does the Bible Say?


The war in Ukraine, coupled with the effects of climate change, continues to wreak havoc on global food supplies. This is especially the case in developing lands where many struggle to get enough food.
                 “The production and availability of food is being disrupted by conflict, climate change, energy prices and more.”—António Guterres, UN secretary-general, July 17, 2023.

             “Experts predict that Russia’s withdrawal from the grain export agreement will aggravate the global food security crisis and lead to higher food inflation in low-income countries, especially in North Africa and the Middle East.”—Atalayar.com, July 23, 2023.


Consider what the Bible says about food crises and the future.
The Bible foretold food crises
              Jesus prophesied: “Nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be food shortages.”—Matthew 24:7.

                The Bible book of Revelation describes four symbolic horsemen. One of those horsemen represents warfare. He is followed by another who represents famine, a time when food would be rationed and sold at exorbitant prices. “I saw a black horse, and its rider had a balance scale in one hand. I heard what sounded like a voice . . . It said, ‘A quart of wheat will cost you a whole day’s wages! Three quarts of barley will cost you a day’s wages too.’”—Revelation 6:5, 6, Contemporary English Version.


These Bible prophecies about food crises are being fulfilled now in the time that the Bible calls “the last days.” (2 Timothy 3:1) To learn more about “the last days” and the ride of the four horsemen of Revelation, watch the video The World Has Changed Since 1914 and read the article “The Four Horsemen—Who Are They?”
How the Bible can help
              The Bible contains practical advice that can help us cope with challenging circumstances, including rising food prices or even food shortages. See some examples in the article “How to Live on Less.”

              The Bible also gives us hope that things will get better. It promises a time when “there will be an abundance of grain on the earth” and everyone will have plenty to eat. (Psalm 72:16) To learn more about this hope for the future and why you can trust it, read the article “A Real Hope for a Better Tomorrow.”



