



NASA Photo


KEEP ON THE WATCH!
Is There a Stable Government That Can Rule Our Planet?—⁠What Does the Bible Say?


Governments around the world are in turmoil. Even in seemingly stable countries, governments have been shaken by scandal, close elections, political divisions, and civil unrest.
The Bible reveals that there is one government that is stable. You have likely heard about that government already. It is the one that Jesus Christ mentioned in the model prayer.
             “You must pray, then, this way: ‘Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sanctified. Let your Kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also on earth.’”—Matthew 6:9, 10.


What does the Bible say about that Kingdom?
The Kingdom—⁠a stable government
The Kingdom rules from heaven.
              Jesus called that government “the Kingdom of the heavens.” (Matthew 4:17; 5:3, 10, 19, 20) For this reason, he said: “My Kingdom is no part of this world.”—John 18:36.


The Kingdom will replace human governments.
              The Bible says: “This kingdom . . . will crush and put an end to all these [human] kingdoms, and it alone will stand forever.”—Daniel 2:44.


The Kingdom, with Jesus Christ as King, will never be destroyed.
               The Bible says: “His rulership is an everlasting rulership that will not pass away, and his kingdom will not be destroyed.”—Daniel 7:13, 14.


The Kingdom will bring peace and security to the earth.
               The Bible says: “Everyone will live in peace among their own vineyards and fig trees, and no one will make them afraid.”—Micah 4:4, Good News Translation.


Learn more about the Kingdom
When Jesus was on earth, he devoted his time to “preaching the good news of the Kingdom.” (Matthew 9:35) He also foretold:
               “This good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come.”—Matthew 24:14.


Today, the good news of the Kingdom is being declared in over 240 lands. We invite you to learn more about this government and how you can benefit from its rulership.
Please watch the video What Is God’s Kingdom?

