



Anton Petrus/Moment via Getty Images


KEEP ON THE WATCH!
Is World War Inevitable?—⁠What Does the Bible Say?


During the past 30 years, many people have felt that the international order was stable and even improving. However, that view is being challenged by recent events.
             “Israel, Hezbollah trade fire across Lebanon border amid alarm over Gaza war spillover.”—Reuters, January 6, 2024.

             “With its proxies attacking from many vantage points and its nuclear program suddenly revived, Iran is posing a new challenge to the West—this time with Russia and China on its side.”—The New York Times, January 7, 2024.

              “Russian strikes continue to wreak havoc across Ukraine.”—UN News, January 11, 2024.

              “China’s rising economic and military heft, Taiwan’s burgeoning sense of national identity, and fractious relations between Beijing and Washington mean the conditions for a crisis are in place.”—The Japan Times, January 9, 2024.


Does the Bible say anything about the international instability that we are seeing today? Will it lead to world war?
The Bible foretold current events
The Bible did not foretell any specific war that we are seeing today. However, it did foretell the rampant warfare that is marking our time and is taking “peace away from the earth.”—Revelation 6:4.
The book of Daniel foretold that “in the time of the end,” competing world powers would engage in a “pushing,” or struggle for dominance. That struggle would involve projecting great military power and spending vast “treasures,” or financial resources.—Daniel 11:40, 42, 43.
A war that is coming
The Bible indicates that the world situation will get worse before it gets better. Jesus foretold that “there [would] be great tribulation such as has not occurred since the world’s beginning.” (Matthew 24:21) That “great tribulation” will culminate in a war called Armageddon, which is described as “the war of the great day of God the Almighty.”—Revelation 16:14, 16.
However, Armageddon will save mankind, not destroy it. By means of that war, God will bring an end to human rulership, which has caused so many destructive wars. To find out how Armageddon will result in lasting peace, read the following articles:
               “What Is the Battle of Armageddon?”

               “Armageddon Is Good News!”



