



FPG/The Image Bank via Getty Images


KEEP ON THE WATCH!
Politicians Warn of Armageddon—What Does the Bible Say?


On the morning of Monday, October 10, 2022, Russian missiles hit cities across Ukraine in response to a massive explosion two days earlier that damaged a key bridge linking Crimea and Russia. These events come on the heels of warnings by politicians that we may be facing Armageddon.
               “We have not faced the prospect of Armageddon since [U.S. President John F.] Kennedy and the Cuban Missile Crisis. . . . I don’t think there’s any such thing as an ability to easily [use] a tactical nuclear weapon and not end up with Armageddon.”—U.S. President Joe Biden, October 6, 2022.


               “I agree that this is Armageddon, it’s a risk for the whole planet.”—Ukraine President Volodymyr Zelensky, when asked about the consequences of using nuclear weapons, BBC News, October 8, 2022.



Will the possible use of nuclear weapons lead to Armageddon? What does the Bible say?
Will nuclear weapons trigger Armageddon?
No. The word “Armageddon” is found only once in the Bible at Revelation 16:16. It does not refer to a war between nations but to a war between God and “the kings of the entire inhabited earth.” (Revelation 16:14) God will use the battle of Armageddon to end human rulership.—Daniel 2:44.
To learn more about what Armageddon will mean for the earth, read the article What Is the Battle of Armageddon?
Will the earth and its inhabitants be destroyed by nuclear war?
No. Although human rulers may use nuclear weapons in the future, God will not allow the earth to be destroyed. The Bible states:
              “The earth remains forever.”—Ecclesiastes 1:4.

              “The righteous will possess the earth, and they will live forever on it.”—Psalm 37:29.


However, Bible prophecy and current events do indicate that we are approaching a turning point in human history. (Matthew 24:3-7; 2 Timothy 3:1-5) Find out what the Bible says about the future by means of our free interactive Bible course.

