





KEEP ON THE WATCH!
Russia Invades Ukraine


In the early morning hours of February 24, 2022, Russia began a military invasion of Ukraine, despite the efforts of world leaders to avoid war. How might this military conflict affect the world? The secretary-general of the United Nations, António Guterres, said a few days ago: “The price in human suffering, destruction and damage to European and global security is too high to contemplate.”
What significance do events like this have according to the Bible?
  Jesus Christ foretold a time when “nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom.” (Matthew 24:7) Read the article “What Is the Sign of ‘the Last Days,’ or ‘End Times’?” to see how the Bible shows that wars today fulfill Jesus’ prophecy.

  The Bible book of Revelation depicts warfare as a rider who is seated on “a fiery-colored horse” and who takes “peace away from the earth.” (Revelation 6:4) Read the article “The Four Horsemen—Who Are They?” to find out how this prophecy applies to warfare today.

  The book of Daniel foretold a rivalry between “the king of the north” and “the king of the south.” (Daniel 11:25-45) Watch the video Fulfilled Prophecy—Daniel Chapter 11 to learn why Russia and its allies can be identified as the king of the north.a

  Revelation also describes “the war of the great day of God the Almighty.” (Revelation 16:14, 16) However, this is not a war between nations such as we now observe. Read the article “What Is the Battle of Armageddon?” to find more information about that future event.


Why can you be hopeful about the future?
  The Bible says that God will bring “an end to wars throughout the earth.” (Psalm 46:9) Read the article “A Real Hope for a Better Tomorrow” to learn more about the future that God promises.

  Jesus taught his followers to pray for God’s Kingdom to come. (Matthew 6:9, 10) That Kingdom is the heavenly government that will accomplish God’s will for the earth, and God’s will includes world peace. To learn how the Kingdom can benefit you, watch the video What Is God’s Kingdom?


There are more than 129,000 of Jehovah’s Witnesses living in Ukraine. Like the Witnesses in every other country, they imitate Jesus by remaining politically neutral and refusing to take part in war. (John 18:36) Worldwide, Jehovah’s Witnesses continue to declare the “good news of the Kingdom” as the solution to mankind’s problems, including war. (Matthew 24:14) We invite you to contact us to learn more about the Bible’s message of hope.

a For a complete discussion of this prophecy, see the articles “‘The King of the North’ in the Time of the End” and “Who Is ‘the King of the North’ Today?”

