



Anna Moneymaker/Getty Images


KEEP ON THE WATCH!
Scientists Move the Doomsday Clock Forward—What Does the Bible Say?


On January 24, 2023, scientists set the Doomsday Clocka closer to midnight, which stands for the end of the world.
             “The ‘Doomsday Clock’ symbolizing the perils to humanity moved its closest ever to midnight on Tuesday amid the Ukraine war, nuclear tensions and the climate crisis.”—AFP International Text Wire.

             “Scientists revealed on Tuesday that the ‘Doomsday Clock’ has been moved up to 90 seconds before midnight—the closest humanity has ever been to armageddon.”—ABC News.

              “A panel of international scientists has warned that humanity’s continued existence is at greater risk than ever before.”—The Guardian.


Is the end of humanity and our planet approaching? Do we need to fear what the future holds? What does the Bible say?
What the future holds
According to the Bible, “the earth remains forever” and there will be people who “will live forever on it.” (Ecclesiastes 1:4; Psalm 37:29) So humans will not destroy the earth or make our entire planet unlivable.
However, the Bible does mention an end. For example, it says that “the world is passing away.”—1 John 2:17.
              To find out what the Bible means when it talks about the end of the world, read the article “Is the World Coming to an End? What Is the Apocalypse?”

              To learn what the Bible says about the timing of coming world events, read the article “When Will the World End?”


Remaining positive
The Bible can help us to remain positive despite current problems in the world. How?
               The Bible gives us practical advice. (2 Timothy 3:16, 17) For example, read the article “How to Control Worry” to see how the Bible can help you to remain positive despite life’s challenges.

               The Bible provides a reliable hope for the future. (Romans 15:4) It explains exactly what we can expect now and in the future, which helps us to remain confident in the face of world events.


For you to get the most from the Bible, we warmly invite you to try our free guided Bible study course today.

a “The Doomsday Clock is a design that warns the public about how close we are to destroying our world with dangerous technologies of our own making. It is a metaphor, a reminder of the perils we must address if we are to survive on the planet.”—Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists.

