



Brais Seara/Moment via Getty Images


KEEP ON THE WATCH!
Severe Droughts—What Does the Bible Say?


             “China reports ‘most severe’ heatwave and third driest summer on record.”—The Guardian, September 7, 2022.


             “Greater Horn of Africa drought forecast to continue for fifth year.”—UN News, August 26, 2022.


              “Two-thirds of Europe is under some sort of drought warning, in what is likely the worst such event in 500 years.”—BBC News, August 23, 2022.



Many experts predict that such droughts will continue and even get worse. Is there any hope for a better future? What does the Bible say?
Droughts and Bible prophecy
The Bible foretold for our day:
              “There will be . . . in one place after another food shortages.”—Luke 21:11.


Droughts often lead to food shortages. Such food shortages, and the suffering and death that they cause, fulfill Bible prophecy.—Revelation 6:6, 8.
Why droughts are getting worse
The Bible reveals a fundamental reason why droughts are getting worse. It states:
              “It does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step.”—Jeremiah 10:23.


This means that humans cannot successfully “direct [their] step,” or govern themselves. Their mismanagement often causes droughts and water shortages.
               Most scientists agree that human activity has caused global warming, resulting in increased droughts worldwide.

               Greed and shortsighted policies lead to deforestation, pollution, and the misuse of natural resources, putting precious water supplies at risk.


The Bible, however, offers hope.
Is there any hope for the future?
The Bible promises that God will resolve the current water crisis. How?
1. God will “bring to ruin those ruining the earth.” (Revelation 11:18) He will remove one cause of water shortages—wicked, greedy people whose actions harm the environment.—2 Timothy 3:1, 2.

2. “The heat-parched ground will become a reedy pool.” (Isaiah 35:1, 6, 7) God will reverse the damage caused by droughts and turn this planet into a well-watered paradise.

3. “You care for the earth, making it abundantly fruitful and very rich.” (Psalm 65:9) With God’s blessing, the earth will abound with good food and clean water for all.


To learn about how climate change fulfills Bible prophecy, read the article “Climate Change and Our Future—What the Bible Says.”
To find out more about the Bible’s hope for the future, read the article “Who Will Save the Earth?”
To see how the Bible can help you cope with the challenges caused by extreme weather, read the article “Extreme Weather—Can the Bible Help You to Cope?”



