



Surasak Suwanmake/Moment via Getty Images


KEEP ON THE WATCH!
Summer 2023 Global Heat Wave—What Does the Bible Say?


People around the world are enduring a record-breaking heat wave and related extreme weather events. Note the following reports:
             “The world just sweltered through its hottest June in the 174-year global climate record.”—National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce, July 13, 2023.

             “Italy, Spain, France, Germany and Poland are all facing a major heatwave with air temperatures expected to climb to 48°C [118°F] on the islands of Sicily and Sardinia – potentially the hottest temperatures ever recorded in Europe.”—European Space Agency, July 13, 2023.

              “As the planet warms, the expectation is that we will see more and more intense, more frequent, more severe rainfall events, leading also to more severe flooding.”—Stefan Uhlenbrook, director of hydrology, water and cryosphere at the World Meteorological Organization, July 17, 2023.


Does the increase in reports of such extreme weather concern you? Consider what the Bible says about this pressing topic.
Does extreme weather fulfill Bible prophecy?
Yes. Global heat waves and other forms of extreme weather fit events that the Bible foretold for our time. For example, Jesus prophesied that we would see “fearful sights,” or “strange and terrifying things.” (Luke 21:11; Good News Translation) Rising global temperatures have led many to fear that humankind will ruin the earth.
Will the earth become unlivable?
No. God created the earth to be our permanent home; he will not allow humans to destroy it. (Psalm 115:16; Ecclesiastes 1:4) In fact, he has promised to “bring to ruin those ruining the earth.”—Revelation 11:18.
The Bible shows that God can and will protect the earth from environmental disaster.
              “[God] calms the windstorm; the waves of the sea grow quiet.” (Psalm 107:29) God has the power to control the natural elements. He is capable of fixing the environmental problems that currently cause people to suffer from extreme weather.

               “You care for the earth, making it abundantly fruitful and very rich.” (Psalm 65:9) With God’s blessing, the earth will become a paradise.


To learn more about the Bible’s promise of a restored environment, see the article “Who Will Save the Earth?”
Did you know?
The Bible offers not only the promise of a bright future but also practical advice that can help you to cope with extreme weather now. To find out how, read the article “Extreme Weather—Can the Bible Help You to Cope?”



