



Francesco Carta fotografo/Moment via Getty Images


The Growing Affliction of Loneliness—⁠What the Bible Says


According to a recent global report,a about one person in four feels lonely.
             “Social isolation can affect anyone, of any age, anywhere.”​—Chido Mpemba, cochair of the World Health Organization’s Commission on Social Connection.


Contrary to what many might think, loneliness afflicts not just older or isolated people but also those who are young, healthy, successful, and married. Social isolation and loneliness can seriously affect a person’s physical and emotional health.
             “Loneliness is far more than just a bad feeling,” states Dr. Vivek Murthy, U.S. surgeon general. He adds: “The mortality impact of being socially disconnected is similar to that caused by smoking up to 15 cigarettes a day.”


What the Bible says
Our Creator does not want us to be socially isolated. God’s purpose has always been for humans to enjoy good, satisfying companionship.
              Bible principle: “God said: ‘It is not good for the man to continue to be alone.’”​—Genesis 2:18.


God wants us to develop a relationship with him. He promises to draw close to us when we make efforts to draw close to him.​—James 4:8.
               Bible principle: “Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need, since the Kingdom of the heavens belongs to them.”​—Matthew 5:3.


God wants us to worship him together with others. When we do so, we are helped emotionally.
                Bible principle: “Let us consider one another so as to incite to love and fine works, not forsaking our meeting together, . . . but encouraging one another.”​—Hebrews 10:24, 25.


For more information on why it is important to combat loneliness, read the article “Loneliness in a World of Mass Connection.”

You are invited
Jehovah’s Witnesses meet together twice each week to build strong relationships with our Creator and with those in our communities. We warmly invite you to join us.
            Find a meeting near you.

            Request a visit.




a The Global State of Social Connections, by Meta and Gallup, 2023.

