



Halfpoint Images/Moment via Getty Images


KEEP ON THE WATCH!
Top Health Official Warns of Social Media’s Effect on Young People—What Does the Bible Say?


On May 23, 2023, a top health official in the United States warned the public that social media is negatively affecting many young people.
             “While social media may have benefits for some children and adolescents, there are ample indicators that social media can also have a profound risk of harm to the mental health and well-being of children and adolescents.”—Social Media and Youth Mental Health: The U.S. Surgeon General’s Advisory, 2023.


The advisory cited studies that give reasons for concern.
             Adolescents aged 12 to 15 “who spent more than 3 hours per day on social media faced double the risk of experiencing poor mental health outcomes including symptoms of depression and anxiety.”

              Among 14-year-olds, “greater social media use predicted poor sleep, online harassment, poor body image, low self-esteem, and higher depressive symptom scores with a larger association for girls than boys.”


How can parents protect their children from these dangers? The Bible offers practical advice.
What parents can do
Get involved. As parents, consider the risks and decide if your child should use social media or not.
              Bible principle: “Train a child in the way he should go.”—Proverbs 22:6, footnote.

              To learn more, read the article “Should My Child Use Social Media?”


If you do allow your child to use social media, be alert to the potential dangers and stay involved in your child’s online activities. How?
Protect your child from harmful content. Train your child to identify and avoid harmful content.
               Bible principle: “Let sexual immorality and every sort of uncleanness or greediness not even be mentioned among you, . . . neither shameful conduct nor foolish talking nor obscene jesting.”—Ephesians 5:3, 4.

               For practical tips, read the article “Teaching Your Teenager Social Media Safety.”


Set limits. For example, establish rules on when and for how long your child may use social media.
               Bible principle: “Keep strict watch that how you walk is . . . as wise persons, making the best use of your time.”—Ephesians 5:15, 16.

               Use the whiteboard animation Be Social-Network Smart to help your child understand why limits are necessary.



