





KEEP ON THE WATCH!
Ukraine War Fuels Global Food Crisis


On May 19, 2022, the United Nations Security Council heard from more than 75 high-level officials that “a global food crisis, already impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and climate change, is being driven to famine levels worldwide by the war in Ukraine.” Soon after, The Economist declared that the “war is tipping a fragile world towards mass hunger.” The Bible predicted that such food crises would happen in our time, yet it also provides help for us to cope with them.
The Bible foretold food crises
  Jesus prophesied: “Nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be food shortages.”—Matthew 24:7.

  The Bible book of Revelation describes four symbolic horsemen. One of those horsemen represents warfare. He is followed by another who represents famine, a time when food would be rationed and sold at exorbitant prices. “I saw a black horse, and its rider had a balance scale in one hand. I heard what sounded like a voice . . . It said, ‘A quart of wheat will cost you a whole day’s wages! Three quarts of barley will cost you a day’s wages too.’”—Revelation 6:5, 6, Contemporary English Version.


These Bible prophecies about food crises are being fulfilled now in the time that the Bible calls “the last days.” (2 Timothy 3:1) To learn more about “the last days” and the ride of the four horsemen of Revelation, watch the video The World Has Changed Since 1914 and read the article “The Four Horsemen—Who Are They?”
How the Bible can help
  The Bible contains practical advice that can help us cope with challenging circumstances, including rising food prices or even food shortages. See some examples in the article “How to Live on Less.”

  The Bible also gives us hope that things will get better. It promises a time when “there will be an abundance of grain on the earth” and everyone will have plenty to eat. (Psalm 72:16) To learn more about the Bible’s hope for the future and why you can trust it, read the article “A Real Hope for a Better Tomorrow.”



