



Photo by Stringer/Getty Images


KEEP ON THE WATCH!
War in the Middle East​—⁠What Does the Bible Say?


The world is anxiously watching the conflict involving the United States, Israel, and Iran. Will the situation escalate into a wider war? Can governments avert disaster and achieve lasting peace?
Those familiar with Bible prophecy may wonder whether this Middle East conflict could be the start of the battle of Armageddon mentioned in the book of Revelation.
What does the Bible say?
Will governments end war in the Middle East?
The Bible says: “Do not put your trust in princes nor in a son of man, who cannot bring salvation.”—Psalm 146:3.
Time will tell whether governments will be able to achieve a measure of peace in the Middle East. However, the Bible makes clear that no political leader, human government, or group of people can end war and bring lasting peace. Only God is able to bring “an end to wars throughout the earth.”—Psalm 46:9.
             To learn more, read the Watchtower magazine entitled “An End to War​—How?”


Does the war in the Middle East fulfill prophecy?
The Bible says: “You are going to hear of wars and reports of wars. . . . Nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom.”—Matthew 24:6, 7.
The current conflict in the Middle East is another event that marks “the conclusion of the system of things” and adds to the evidence that we are living in “the last days.” (Matthew 24:3; 2 Timothy 3:1) The wars we see today indicate that God will soon act to end war and the other problems that plague mankind.
              To learn more, read the article “What Is the Sign of ‘the Last Days,’ or ‘End Times’?”


Will Armageddon begin in the Middle East?
The Bible says: “They gathered them together to the place that is called in Hebrew Armageddon.”—Revelation 16:16.
The war of Armageddon is not a war between human governments that begins in the Middle East. It is a global war between all human governments and God.
               To learn more, read the article “What Is the Battle of Armageddon?”


What can help us to cope in anxious times?
The Bible says: “Do not be anxious over anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication along with thanksgiving, let your petitions be made known to God.”—Philippians 4:6.
Jehovaha God invites us to pray to him. Because God cares for us, he will hear our prayers and help us cope with our anxieties. (1 Peter 5:7) One way he does that is by helping us to understand not only why wars persist but also how they will end and what he will do to reverse our pain and suffering.—Revelation 21:3, 4.
               To learn more about how God provides us help, read the article “You Can Find Words of Comfort in the Bible.”



a Jehovah is God’s personal name.—Psalm 83:18.

