





What Does the Bible Say About Nuclear War?


Our world continues to face the threat of nuclear war as world powers maintain and expand their nuclear arsenals. People are naturally concerned that the greater the number of nuclear weapons that exist, the greater the danger that a nuclear war will start. There is even the fear that the use of just one small-scale nuclear weapon will ignite a full-scale nuclear war that will devastate our world. We are living with, as the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists observes, “the ever-present danger of nuclear war.”
Could nuclear war possibly occur? If so, will our planet survive? And how can we cope with our anxiety about a potential nuclear war? What does the Bible say?
In this article
Does the Bible predict nuclear war?

Would God permit nuclear war?

Will planet Earth survive?

How can you cope with “nuclear anxiety”?

Does the Bible prophesy a nuclear Armageddon?

What is the Bible’s solution to war?

Does the Bible book of Revelation refer to nuclear war?


Does the Bible predict nuclear war?
The Bible does not specifically mention nuclear war. However, the threat of nuclear war is a result of attitudes and events that the Bible foretold.
Consider the following Bible verses in the context of current world events:
Bible verses: Jesus’ disciples asked: “What will be the sign of your presence and of the conclusion of the system of things?” Jesus replied: “Nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom.”—Matthew 24:3, 7.
World events: Countries, including those with nuclear capabilities, increasingly resort to armed conflict.
“The world is getting far more violent in recent years: conflict event rates have increased.”—The Armed Conflict Location & Event Data Project.

Bible verse: “In the time of the end the king of the south will engage with [the king of the north] in a pushing.”—Daniel 11:40.
World events: Rival nations and their allies are pushing, or competing, for supremacy, as the Bible predicted. Today’s biggest nuclear powers might avoid direct confrontation, but they are expanding the capabilities of their nuclear weapons.
“We have witnessed an emerging trend of increased conflict between states in the last decade, including cases where major powers support opposite sides.”—The Uppsala Conflict Data Program.

Bible verses: “In the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here. For men will be . . . not open to any agreement, slanderers, without self-control, fierce.”—2 Timothy 3:1-3.
World events: Like many people today, world leaders are prone to disagree. And rather than use peaceful means to settle their differences, they may try to resolve their conflicts by using threats or force. Such actions stoke the threat of nuclear war.
“Without a practical approach to strengthening cooperation, conflicts will grow deadlier.”—S. Saran and J. Harman, World Economic Forum.

Would God permit nuclear war?
The Bible does not say. It does say that “fearful sights,” or terrifying events, would occur in our day. (Luke 21:11) An example of such events includes atomic bombs being dropped during the Second World War. The Bible explains why God has permitted wars. To learn more, watch the video Why Does God Allow Suffering?
Will planet Earth survive?
Yes. Even if man were to use nuclear weapons again, God would not allow the situation to escalate to the point of global annihilation. The Bible says that our planet will not only survive threats to its existence but will also host human life forever.

“The earth remains forever.”—Ecclesiastes 1:4.


“God, the One who formed the earth, . . . did not create it simply for nothing, but formed it to be inhabited.”—Isaiah 45:18.

Some people have imagined that, in the future, the earth will be inhabited by a handful of humans struggling to survive in a wasteland polluted by nuclear fallout. However, the Bible indicates that any damage to the earth caused by warfare will be fully undone.

“The wilderness and the parched land will exult, and the desert plain will be joyful and blossom as the saffron.”—Isaiah 35:1.





God wants us to live in happiness on a beautiful earth



Our Creator has designed the earth with an amazing ability to heal itself. Ultimately, though, God will use his power to restore the earth; it will forever serve as a magnificent home for humankind.—Psalm 37:11, 29; Revelation 21:5.
How can you cope with “nuclear anxiety”?
Some may suffer from “nuclear anxiety,” which has been defined as “fear of a nuclear war and its consequences.” The Bible’s promises and advice can help those affected to cope and to lessen their fears. How?
The Bible describes a bright future for the earth and for those living on it. Learning about this hope can act as “an anchor for our lives,” reducing anxiety. (Hebrews 6:19, footnote) We can also minimize anxiety by taking one day at a time, not being consumed by thoughts of what might happen in the future. As Jesus said, “each day has enough of its own troubles.”—Matthew 6:34.
In fact, we all do well to take care of our mental and emotional health. We can do that by avoiding unnecessary exposure to information that generates anxiety, such as discussions, predictions, and opinions about the latest nuclear developments. This does not mean that we choose to live in denial. Rather, we are taking steps to free our mind from dwelling on events over which we have no control and which may never happen.

“Anxiety in a man’s heart weighs it down, but a good word cheers it up.”—Proverbs 12:25.

Give yourself a break from bad news by focusing on the positive things in your life.

“May the God who gives hope fill you with all joy and peace by your trusting in him.”—Romans 15:13.





The Bible provides a sure hope of a better future



Learning more about God’s promises can give you hope, joy, and inner peace.
Does the Bible prophesy a nuclear Armageddon?
Some connect Armageddon to a global nuclear war. No doubt they imagine the catastrophic consequences of such an event.
The Bible, however, uses the word “Armageddon” to refer to a war between “the kings of the entire inhabited earth,” or human governments, and God.a (Revelation 16:14, 16) Armageddon will not involve random destruction, leaving behind the devastation of a man-made nuclear holocaust. Rather, at Armageddon, God will destroy only the wicked, which will make true peace and security possible.—Psalm 37:9, 10; Isaiah 32:17, 18; Matthew 6:10.
What is the Bible’s solution to war?

“He is bringing an end to wars throughout the earth. He breaks the bow and shatters the spear; he burns the military wagons with fire.”—Psalm 46:9.

Jehovahb God will exercise his authority over warring nations by putting a stop to their conflicts and destroying their weapons of war. He will do this by means of his Kingdom, a heavenly government that will take over the administration of all earth’s affairs.—Daniel 2:44.
God’s Kingdom will teach people how to live in peace and harmony. Because only one government will rule over the entire earth, international disagreements will disappear; people will not even learn how to fight wars anymore! (Micah 4:1-3) The result? “Everyone will live in peace among his own vineyards and fig-trees, and no one will make him afraid.”—Micah 4:4, Today’s English Version.

a See the article “What Is the Battle of Armageddon?”
b Jehovah is the personal name of God. (Psalm 83:18) See the article “Who Is Jehovah?”

Does the Bible book of Revelation refer to nuclear war?
Some feel that the book of Revelation alludes to the devastation caused by a nuclear holocaust. (Revelation 6:14; 8:7-12; 16:1-21) For example, it describes “making fire come down out of heaven to the earth.” (Revelation 13:11-13) Jehovah’s Witnesses understand that this refers, not to full-scale nuclear war, but to the use of atomic bombs during the Second World War.
Although the book of Revelation does refer to those nuclear events, its purpose is not to describe the horrors in detail. When reading the book of Revelation, remember:
            The book uses many signs, or symbols, that are not to be understood literally.—Revelation 1:1.

            The book is not intended to terrify its readers. Rather, its message brings happiness to those who understand and apply it.—Revelation 1:3.


For further information, see the article “The Book of Revelation—What Does It Mean?”


