





KEEP ON THE WATCH!
What Has Happened to Decency?—⁠What Does the Bible Say?


Decency is in decline. Rude patients yell at doctors; disrespectful restaurant patrons berate servers; unruly passengers assault flight attendants; delinquent children mock, threaten, and attack teachers; and some politicians get involved in scandalous conduct while other politicians try to stress their own decency.
The Bible is a reliable guide for what constitutes decent behavior. It also explains why there is a lack of decency today.
What has happened to decency?
The decline in decency—behavior that is good, moral, and acceptable—is being seen around the world.
             According to a recent Gallup poll, Americans rated the state of moral values in the United States to be lower now than at any other time in the past 22 years.

             In another survey of more than 32,000 respondents in 28 countries, 65 percent said that the lack of basic human decency today is the worst they have ever seen.


The Bible predicted the behavior that we see today.
               “There will be difficult times in the last days. People will be selfish, greedy, boastful, and conceited; they will be insulting, disobedient to their parents, ungrateful, . . . unkind, [and] violent.”—2 Timothy 3:1-3, Good News Translation.


For more information on how this prophecy is being fulfilled, read the article “Did the Bible Predict the Way People Think and Act Today?”
A reliable guide to decent behavior
In a world where decency is in decline, millions have found the Bible to be an excellent guide to good behavior. Its moral advice is “always reliable, now and forever.” (Psalm 111:8) Consider a few examples:
               What the Bible says: “All things . . . that you want men to do to you, you also must do to them.”—Matthew 7:12.
Meaning: We should treat others kindly and respectfully, just as we want to be treated.


               What the Bible says: “Now that you have put away deceit, each one of you speak truth with his neighbor.”—Ephesians 4:25.
Meaning: We should be honest in all that we say and do.


For more information on this topic, please read:
               The Watchtower issue entitled “Right and Wrong—A Guide You Can Trust.”

               The article “Tolerance—How the Bible Can Help.”



