





KEEP ON THE WATCH!
What Does It Mean to Be a Christian?​—⁠What Does the Bible Say?


Today many people around the world proudly identify themselves as Christians; yet, they act in ways that are hurtful to others. Some are selfish, dishonest, or unkind. Others may be unfaithful to their marriage partner. Their behavior causes some people to wonder: ‘What does it really mean to be a Christian?’
What being a Christian really means
It is easy for a person to say that he is a Christian. But more is involved. According to the Bible, a Christian is someone who is a disciple of Jesus Christ. (Acts 11:26) Jesus himself said: “If you remain in my word, you are really my disciples.” (John 8:31) Of course, no one can obey Jesus’ words perfectly. But a Christian strives to follow Jesus’ teachings and to live each day in a way that reflects his values. Consider some examples.
Christians show unselfish love
What Jesus said: “I am giving you a new commandment, that you love one another; just as I have loved you, you also love one another. By this all will know that you are my disciples—if you have love among yourselves.”—John 13:34, 35.
What Jesus did: Jesus showed unselfish love to all, regardless of their social status or background. He healed the sick, fed the hungry, and even gave his life for others.—Matthew 14:14-21; 20:28.
How Christians act: Christians show unselfish love by being generous, impartial, and forgiving. They help people who are in need, and they are willing to make sacrifices for others.—1 John 3:16.
Christians are honest
What Jesus said: “I am the . . . truth.”—John 14:6.
What Jesus did: Jesus was truthful in all that he said and did. He never manipulated others or used misleading speech. He was known for his honesty, even when it brought opposition.—Matthew 22:16; 26:63-67.
How Christians act: Christians do not lie. They pay their taxes, they do not steal, and they give their employers an honest day’s work. (Romans 13:5-7; Ephesians 4:28) They do not defraud others, cheat on exams, or falsify information on résumés or similar documents.—Hebrews 13:18.
Christians act with kindness
What Jesus said: “Come to me, all you who are toiling and loaded down, and I will refresh you. Take my yoke upon you and learn from me, for I am mild-tempered and lowly in heart, and you will find refreshment for yourselves. For my yoke is kindly, and my load is light.”—Matthew 11:28-30.
What Jesus did: Jesus was approachable and gentle. He welcomed children, comforted the distressed, and treated others with dignity.—Mark 10:13-15; Luke 9:11.
How Christians act: Christians speak kindly to others; they are not rude or abusive. (Ephesians 4:29, 31, 32) They take an interest in others and look for opportunities to be helpful.—Galatians 6:10.
Christians remain faithful to their marriage partner
What Jesus said: “What God has yoked together, let no man put apart.”—Mark 10:9.
What Jesus did: Although Jesus never married, he encouraged marriage partners to be faithful to each other. (Matthew 19:9) He warned about actions that could break up a marriage.—Matthew 5:28.
How Christians act: Christians avoid conduct that dishonors marriage. (Hebrews 13:4) Marriage partners treat each other with love and respect.—Ephesians 5:28, 33.

