





What Does the Bible Say About Today’s Food Shortages?


“Zero hunger.” Those words state the goal of world leaders regarding one of mankind’s biggest problems—providing food for everyone on the planet.a But will the world ever be free of hunger? What does the Bible say?
The Bible foretold today’s food shortages
The Bible predicted that food shortages would occur in our time, a period it calls “the last days.” (2 Timothy 3:1) God is not responsible for these food shortages, but he has warned us about them. (James 1:13) Note two Bible prophecies.
“There will be food shortages . . . in one place after another.” (Matthew 24:7) This Bible prophecy foretold widespread famine. Significantly, a recent report from food-supply monitors states: “The world is moving backwards in its efforts to end hunger, food insecurity and malnutrition.”b Hundreds of millions of people in dozens of countries cannot get the food they need. Sadly, as a result, many of them do not survive.





“Look! a black horse, and the one seated on it had a pair of scales in his hand.” (Revelation 6:5) In this prophecy, the symbolic horse and its rider represent famine in the last days.c The scales in the rider’s hand are for weighing out food rations. As this horseman rides, a voice announces that food prices would be very high and warns people to conserve basic food items. (Revelation 6:6) This accurately depicts the global food crisis today, when billions of people cannot find or afford healthful food.
How food shortages will end
Experts say that our planet produces more than enough food to feed everyone living on it. So, then, what problems contribute to food shortages? And what does the Bible say that our Creator, Jehovah,d will do to solve these problems?






Problem: Governments cannot eliminate the poverty and economic inequality that keep people hungry.
Solution: Imperfect human governments will be replaced with a perfect government—God’s Kingdom. (Daniel 2:44; Matthew 6:10) Today, many poor people struggle to afford food, but under God’s Kingdom this will change. The Bible says about Jesus Christ, the King of God’s Kingdom: “He will rescue the poor who cry for help, also the lowly one and whoever has no helper. . . . There will be an abundance of grain on the earth; on the top of the mountains it will overflow.”—Psalm 72:12, 16.







Problem: Wars cause destruction and economic instability, which limit or halt the distribution of food.
Solution: “[Jehovah] is bringing an end to wars throughout the earth. He breaks the bow and shatters the spear; he burns the military wagons with fire.” (Psalm 46:9) God will destroy weapons of war and instigators of war. As a result, everyone will be able to obtain food safely and readily. The Bible promises: “The righteous will flourish, and peace will abound.”—Psalm 72:7.







Problem: Extreme weather and natural disasters ruin crops and kill livestock.
Solution: God will control earth’s natural forces, creating conditions that are favorable for food production. The Bible says: “[Jehovah] calms the windstorm; the waves of the sea grow quiet. . . . He turns the desert into reedy pools of water, and dry land into springs of water. He causes the hungry to dwell there . . . They sow fields and plant vineyards that yield fruitful crops.”—Psalm 107:29, 35-37.







Problem: Greedy and corrupt individuals produce unsafe food or prevent food from reaching those who need it.
Solution: God’s Kingdom will remove all dishonest and corrupt people. (Psalm 37:10, 11; Isaiah 61:8) The Bible describes Jehovah God as “the One securing justice for those defrauded, the One giving bread to the hungry.”—Psalm 146:7.







Problem: One third of the world’s food supply is wasted or lost every year.
Solution: Under God’s Kingdom, food supplies will be properly managed. While on earth, Jesus carefully avoided wasting food. For example, on one occasion he miraculously fed a crowd of more than 5,000. Later, he instructed his disciples: “Gather together the fragments left over, so that nothing is wasted.”—John 6:5-13.

Because God’s Kingdom will eliminate the root causes of hunger, all humans will enjoy an abundance of good, healthful food. (Isaiah 25:6) To learn when God’s Kingdom will accomplish this, see the article “When Will God’s Kingdom Rule the Earth?”

a The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, adopted by all United Nations Member States in 2015.
b A joint report by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations World Food Programme, and the World Health Organization.
c To learn more about all four horsemen of Revelation, see the article “The Four Horsemen—Who Are They?”
d Jehovah is the personal name of God. (Psalm 83:18) See the article “Who Is Jehovah?”

