



id-work/DigitalVision Vectors via Getty Images


KEEP ON THE WATCH!
Why Is There So Much Hatred?​—⁠What Does the Bible Say?


Hate speech, hate crimes, ethnic violence, and war dominate the news.
             “Fueled by the conflict between Israel and Gaza and stoked by extremists, hate speech has spiked on social media platforms.”​—The New York Times, November 15, 2023.

             “Since the 7th of October, the world has seen a sharp and worrying increase in hate, hate speech and hate crimes.”​—Dennis Francis, president of the United Nations General Assembly, November 3, 2023.


Hateful speech, violence, and war are not new. In fact, the Bible describes those in the past who “[aimed] their cruel words like arrows” and who pursued war and violence. (Psalm 64:3; 120:7; 140:1) Yet the Bible explains that the hatred we see today is significant.
Hatred​—A mark of our times
The Bible reveals two reasons why hate is common today.
1. It foretold a time period when “the love of the greater number will grow cold.” (Matthew 24:12) Instead of love, people in general would display attitudes that foster hatred.​—2 Timothy 3:1-5.

2. The level of hatred today reflects the malicious and wicked influence of Satan the Devil. The Bible says that “the whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one.”​—1 John 5:19; Revelation 12:9, 12.


However, the Bible also reveals that God will soon eliminate the root causes of hatred. What is more, he will undo all the suffering that hate has caused. The Bible promises:
              God “will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”​—Revelation 21:4.


We invite you to read an issue of the Watchtower magazine entitled “Breaking the Cycle of Hatred.” You will find the Bible’s answers to these questions:
What is behind the cycle of hatred?
How can we overcome hatred in our life now?
What will God do to eliminate hatred completely?



