





Will the Cry for Justice Be Heard?


Injustice seems to permeate society. Consider just two examples from the criminal justice system:
  In January 2018, a judge in the United States ordered the release of a man who was imprisoned for nearly 38 years. He was exonerated by DNA evidence.

  In September 1994, three young men in an African land were imprisoned because of their conscientious objection to serving in the military. As of September 2020, they had served 26 years in prison without ever having been formally charged with a crime or appearing in court.


If you have suffered injustice, you might feel as did the man Job in Bible times, who said: “I keep crying for help, but there is no justice.” (Job 19:7) Yet, even though true justice may seem to be just a dream, the Bible promises a time when the cry for justice will be heard. Further, its wisdom can help you to deal with injustice now.
What causes injustice?
Injustice comes from those who reject God’s guidance. The Bible shows that true justice comes from God. (Isaiah 51:4) In the Bible, the words translated “justice” and “righteousness” are closely linked. (Psalm 33:5) Actions that are righteous, or right and proper according to God’s standards, produce justice. By contrast, injustice comes from sin, which is the breaking of God’s righteous standards. Consider the following examples:
  Selfishness. Selfish desire and sin are closely connected. (James 1:14, 15) In order to get what they want, many take advantage of others by treating them unfairly. In contrast, God wants us to put the advantage of others first.—1 Corinthians 10:24.

  Ignorance. Some may treat others unfairly without even realizing it, yet such acts are still sins in God’s view. (Romans 10:3) In fact, ignorance led to one of the greatest injustices of all—the execution of Jesus Christ.—Acts 3:15, 17.

  Failed human systems. In theory, the political, commercial, and religious systems of the world should promote fair treatment and social justice. In reality, though, these systems are often the source of mistakes, corruption, prejudice, greed, extreme financial inequality, and intolerance—all of which can lead to injustice. Some of these systems are promoted by individuals with good intentions. But ultimately, all human efforts that ignore God’s guidance are deeply flawed.—Ecclesiastes 8:9; Jeremiah 10:23.


Does God care about injustice?
Yes, he hates injustice and the attitudes and actions that create it. (Proverbs 6:16-18) He inspired the prophet Isaiah to write: “I, Jehovah,a love justice; I hate robbery and unrighteousness.”—Isaiah 61:8.
The Law that God gave to the ancient Israelites showed that he wanted the people to practice justice. He commanded their judges to reject bribes and other actions that could pervert justice. (Deuteronomy 16:18-20) He condemned the Israelites who disobeyed him by taking advantage of the poor and lowly, and he ultimately rejected them for failing to uphold his standards.—Isaiah 10:1-3.
Will God end injustice?
Yes. By means of Jesus Christ, God will remove sin, the root cause of injustice, and restore the human family to perfection. (John 1:29; Romans 6:23) He has also set up a Kingdom that will bring a righteous new world and provide justice for everyone. (Isaiah 32:1; 2 Peter 3:13) To learn more about this heavenly Kingdom, watch the video What Is God’s Kingdom?
What will life be like in the righteous new world?
When justice fills the earth, the result will be peace and security for everyone. (Isaiah 32:16-18) God values every human life equally, so all will be treated fairly. The sadness, outcry, and pain that come from injustice will be gone forever, and even the painful memory of injustice will gradually fade away. (Isaiah 65:17; Revelation 21:3, 4) For more details, see the article “What Will God’s Kingdom Accomplish?”
Can you really believe God’s promise of a world free of injustice?
Yes. The Bible has a proven record of reliable prophecy, historical and scientific accuracy, and internal harmony, and these show that you can trust its promises. The following articles provide further details:
  How Can We Be Sure the Bible Is True? (video)

  “Prophecies That Have Come True”

  “Prophecy—A Perfect Record”

  “Reasons to Trust the Bible”


What about fighting injustice now?
Good people in Bible times resisted unjust treatment. For example, the apostle Paul was threatened with an unfair trial that could have led to his death. Rather than passively accepting such an injustice, he used the legal means available to him and appealed to Caesar.—Acts 25:8-12.
Nevertheless, human efforts to correct all the injustice in this world are doomed to failure. (Ecclesiastes 1:15) Still, many have found that building their faith in God’s promise of a righteous new world has helped them overcome inner turmoil and gain peace of mind in the face of injustice.

a Jehovah is the personal name of God.—Psalm 83:18.

The Bible helped them to cope with injustice





Rafika joined a group that promised to fight injustice, but she left it when she learned about its aggressive tactics. Later, she came to trust the Bible’s promise of peace and justice under God’s Kingdom. Watch her story.






Antoine, who grew up in Lebanon during a time of civil war, had been fighting his own war against injustice. But two Bible verses helped him to gain inner peace. Learn how the Bible changed his life.






Jukka fought for social justice but felt powerless, as he saw his efforts accomplished little. Now he is content as he puts his energy into the only real hope for the world. Read his account.




Bible verses about justice
Ecclesiastes 3:16: “I have also seen this under the sun: In the place of justice there was wickedness.”
Meaning: The Bible realistically acknowledges the lack of justice in the world.
Job 34:12: “For a certainty, God does not act wickedly; the Almighty does not pervert justice.”
Meaning: God is never the source of injustice.
Deuteronomy 32:4, 5: “The Rock, perfect is his activity, for all his ways are justice. A God of faithfulness who is never unjust; righteous and upright is he. They are the ones who have acted corruptly. They are not his children, the defect is their own.”
Meaning: Injustice comes, not from God, but from people who sin and reject God’s guidance.
Isaiah 32:1: “A king will reign for righteousness, and princes will rule for justice.”
Meaning: God’s Kingdom will rule with righteousness and justice.


