





Will Government Corruption Ever End?


Corruption by government officials is a global problem with devastating consequences.a For example, during the COVID-19 pandemic, officials in one country after another were accused of enriching themselves with funds intended to fight the pandemic. Such corruption prevented people from getting the health care they needed, which contributed to untold suffering and death.
The effects of government corruption are far-reaching. David Cameron, a former prime minister of the United Kingdom, put it this way: “Corruption is one big, tangled web—and all countries are caught up in it.”
However, we can be certain that soon all government corruption will end. Why? Note what the Bible says God will do.
Why we know that God will act against corruption
The Bible records this statement by God: “I, Jehovah, love justice; I hate robbery and unrighteousness.”b (Isaiah 61:8) When people suffer from the corrupt acts of others, God is aware of it. (Proverbs 14:31) He promises: “Because the afflicted are oppressed, . . . I will rise up to act.”—Psalm 12:5.
What will God do? Rather than reform existing governments, he will replace them with his own heavenly government, called “the Kingdom of God.” (Mark 1:14, 15; Matthew 6:10) The Bible says: “The God of heaven will set up a kingdom that . . . will crush and put an end to all these [other] kingdoms, and it alone will stand forever.” (Daniel 2:44) God will thus end the corruption we see today.
A government free of corruption
How do we know that God’s Kingdom government will not become corrupt? Consider the following.
1. Power. The Kingdom receives its power from Almighty God.—Revelation 11:15.
Why this matters: In order to function, human governments rely on their citizens for money. Often this creates opportunities for bribery, theft, and manipulation. However, this Kingdom is supported by Almighty God, so it will always be able to provide for the needs of its subjects.—Psalm 145:16.

2. Ruler. God has appointed Jesus Christ as Ruler of the Kingdom.—Daniel 7:13, 14.
Why this matters: Even the best human rulers are vulnerable to improper influence. (Ecclesiastes 7:20) In contrast, Jesus has shown that he cannot be bribed. (Matthew 4:8-11) Further, he is always motivated by genuine love for his subjects and is truly interested in their welfare.—Psalm 72:12-14.

3. Laws. The laws of God’s Kingdom are perfect, even refreshing.—Psalm 19:7, 8.
Why this matters: Human laws are often complex, burdensome, or poorly enforced, creating opportunities for corruption. On the other hand, God’s laws are practical and beneficial. (Isaiah 48:17, 18) Further, these laws address not only actions but also motives. (Matthew 22:37, 39) Of course, God can read hearts and can ensure that such laws are enforced with compassion.—Jeremiah 17:10.


We invite you to learn more about the Bible’s promise regarding a future free of government corruption.
  Read the article “God’s Kingdom—A Government With No Corruption” to learn three more reasons why God’s Kingdom will never become corrupt.

  Watch the video What Is God’s Kingdom? to learn more about God’s government and what it will do for the earth.

  Try our free interactive Bible course to see how you can benefit from the Bible’s promises.



a According to one definition, “corruption” means the abuse of entrusted power for private gain.
b Jehovah is the personal name of God. (Psalm 83:18) See the article “Who Is Jehovah?”


Watch the video Why Does God Allow Suffering? to find out why God has allowed government corruption and other causes of suffering to exist.


