Do You Appreciate Your Possession?
1 Are you enjoying your possession now? Is it the same possession that brought delight to God’s faithful servant David? Regarding it, David wrote: “Jehovah is the portion of my allotted share and of my cup. . . . The measuring lines themselves have fallen for me in pleasant places. Really, my own possession has proved agreeable to me.”​—Ps. 16:5, 6.
2 Note that David found his “allotted share” in the Most High God. His treasured possession was having an approved relationship with Jehovah and being able to serve him. To him, that allotted portion was most pleasant. Unlike faithless “men of this system of things,” David did not center his life around material things. What really counted with him was being ever aware of Jehovah’s presence. On awakening in the morning, he would focus his thoughts on the Most High God. David was satisfied in knowing that Jehovah was always with him, ready to come to his aid.​—Ps. 17:14, 15.
DOES JEHOVAH’S SERVICE COME FIRST?
3 What about us today? Do we, like David, view our relationship to Jehovah and our service to him as one of our best possessions? Is this reflected in our being busy in fine works, including Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making? Or, are we being sidetracked by the daily cares of life, entertainment, some hobby or other interest? When there is a choice between pursuing either a personal desire or sharing in field service, helping with Kingdom Hall cleaning, visiting a sick member of the congregation, or the like, what do you do? Does personal desire often win out? Do you have time to watch your favorite television program or to read a novel, but just do not get around to reading the Bible or Bible-based publications? Do you spend hours in pursuing bodily training or recreation on a Saturday afternoon but find that there is no time for field service in the morning because other things have to be done? Or, do you willingly adjust your schedule of activities in such a way that after other essentials are cared for, the major part of the time remaining can be devoted to helping people inside and outside the congregation?
4 One vital way in which we can aid persons outside the congregation is by sharing in the work of Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making. Of course, no one can determine for us individually how much time we should be devoting to this activity. But would it be consistent for someone who really loves Jehovah to think that it does not matter as long as he at least does something, when he could have done much more? Could a person say that he appreciates being able to serve God and Christ when he spends more time in pursuing a hobby or some other pleasure than he does in spiritual activities? Is he really giving his best?​—Compare Malachi 1:8.
5 Recognizing that we will be called to account by God and Christ, we do well to examine how we are using our time. (Rom. 14:10; 2 Cor. 5:10; compare Luke 12:35-40, 47, 48.) We have chosen to serve them, and, therefore, have received priceless benefits, including the forgiveness of our sins, divine help and guidance, and the promise of eternal life. So, then, the way in which we are spending our time should harmonize with what we have agreed to do and should show appreciation for what Jehovah God and Jesus Christ have done for us. We can ask ourselves individually: Would I want to stand before God and have my record of fine works reviewed? Am I willing to pray as did David, “Examine me, O Jehovah”?​—Ps. 26:2.
6 Perhaps realizing that we may not have used our time well, we might be apprehensive about being examined now. If so, we should think seriously about making improvement in the future. Our love for Jehovah and Jesus Christ should move us to be whole-souled in serving them. If we do what we reasonably can, we will have no reason to fear a careful examination of our record as Christians. In fact, we will be happy to have our record of fine works reviewed, confident that Jehovah will reward us.​—Heb. 6:10.
7 Truly, we want to be like David, finding delight in our relationship with Jehovah and our service to him. If we continue to view this as a priceless possession, we can look forward to standing as approved before the judgment seat of our Master, Jesus Christ, and hence, also before Jehovah God.

