Presenting the Good News​—With Tract No. 25
1 How fine it will be for all of us to share in distributing Kingdom News No. 25 for the entire month of May! Along with the tract, we shall also be using the Life book or magazines. The subject matter of Kingdom News No. 25 should have wide appeal. As people face the daily anxieties of life and note the world’s mounting problems, they often wonder, “Why are we here?”
2 Again we encourage you to use the tract to start conversations. The scriptures that are quoted in this particular Kingdom News are ones that we commonly share with others in our witnessing. So you may wish to select a text that you could easily use to stimulate interest in the Bible’s message. It may be helpful to talk with other publishers to see what they have found helpful in getting conversations started. Especially if you recognize a need to become more skillful in witnessing with the Bible, you may wish to make definite arrangements to share in the tract work with another brother or sister. And, when unable to work with an experienced publisher, do not hesitate simply to present the tract and to offer the Life book. If your circumstances allow, why not enroll as an auxiliary pioneer? By spending more time in the field, you may be surprised to see how much easier it becomes to start conversations.
3 Whether we are experienced in declaring the “good news” or not, we do need to think about something definite to share with others. The subject we will be discussing is furnished by the tract​—“Why Are We Here?” How can we get into the subject? A person might say something like this: “I have stopped by to share with you the answer to a question that has puzzled many people. Have you ever wondered, Why are we here on earth?”
4 Possibly the individual will say that he has not thought about the matter at all. This may simply be his way of telling you that he is not interested. In that case, you may find it advantageous to mention briefly why many people are concerned about the reason for our existence and that many have been pleased to learn that a reasonable and satisfying answer is available. At this point you could direct attention to the tract.
5 On the other hand, the householder may be interested. Therefore, you may wish to use a scripture from the section, “Why, Then, Are We Here?” and read it, either from the tract or the Bible. If you ascertain that he has the time, introduce the Life book. You could open to chapter 3, “A Paradise Home Ahead,” and read the first three paragraphs. Then consider some of the questions on that material. Thereafter, offer the Life book and make definite arrangements to continue considering the chapter. Try to stimulate the householder’s interest in reading the material by calling attention to the subheadings in chapter 3.
6 Of course, we cannot expect to start a study with most of those on whom we call. In fact, some householders may not even want to converse. Nevertheless, we should try to leave a copy of Kingdom News No. 25 with as many as possible and encourage them to read it.

