Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING APRIL 30
25 min: Song 60. Announcements. Direct attention of publishers to announcement in Our Kingdom Service about not leaving tracts in mailboxes. Discussion on “Do You Appreciate Your Possession?” Have a brief introduction based on paragraphs 1 and 2 making clear the application of Psalms 16:5, 6 and Ps 17:14, 15. Then have paragraph 3 read, and ask: Why is it good to think about the questions raised here? (There is no need to discuss each question, and it should be kept in mind that, in their place, the activities mentioned are not wrong.) After reading paragraphs 4 and 5, ask: Why is it important to give personal attention to our field activity? Conclude by warmly encouraging brothers to take delight in Jehovah’s service.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With Tract No. 25.” Review with audience material in paragraphs 1 and 2. Then present a well-prepared demonstration covering circumstances outlined in paragraph 4, using the introduction mentioned in paragraph 3. Following this demonstration, have another presentation using material covered in paragraph 5, showing how a Bible study can be started by using chapter 3 in the Life book. (Also mention leaving tracts when someone is not at home. Encourage publishers to make sure that tracts are not readily visible to passersby. If congregation has territories that have not been worked recently, inform audience of arrangements made to cover them with Tract No. 25.)
15 min: Branch Letter. Use material to encourage as many as possible to auxiliary pioneer during May or in the coming summer months. Song 68 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 7
20 min: Song 31 and local announcements. Question-and-answer discussion on “Cultivate a Longing for Spiritual Food.” Review with audience the application of the scriptures quoted.
10 min: Talk on article, “Why Meditate?” in March 15, 1977, Watchtower, pp. 165, 166.
30 min: Getting the Most from Bible Reading. Briefly mention that Bible reading is a necessity for us and should benefit us personally. It is not a matter of reading for the sake of reading. When we read the Bible, we are reading God’s Word. Encourage audience to follow along as an elder or a ministerial servant reads Matthew 5:1-16. (Do not spend much time in the introduction, but start right away with Bible reading suggested. Make sure you give an equal amount of time to each question. You may find it helpful to assign certain publishers to prepare for this part by reviewing the Watchtower articles dealing with the Sermon on the Mount.) After reading the first five verses, ask the following: Why does happiness result from being conscious of our spiritual need? How are we comforted when we mourn? Why does this make us happy? Why will the mild-tempered ones inherit the earth? Read verses 6-8, and ask: What is involved in hungering and thirsting? How are we going to be filled and happy? How can we show that we are merciful? Why would our being shown mercy make us happy? How can we be pure in heart? In what sense can we see God? Read verses 9-12, and ask: How can we be peaceable? Why would being called ‘sons of God’ result in happiness? Why could we be happy when being persecuted? Conclude by reading verses 13-16, and ask: In what way are we the salt of the earth? In what way are we a light in the world? In what way might one’s light be hidden? Inform audience that further information on the above can be found in the February and March 1978 issues of The Watchtower. Encourage all to read the articles dealing with the Sermon on the Mount and to meditate on the information. We should be sure to take advantage of our opportunities to study and to read God’s Word with a view to knowing Jehovah better. Song 100 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 14
10 min: Song 8 and announcements.
15 min: Talk on “1978 Conventioners in Action!” insert, from “Christian Witnesses Live Up to Their Name” to “People Meet People.”
15 min: Question-and-answer discussion of insert, from subheading “Presentableness” to “Maintaining Good Order.” Please read the material under “Presentableness.” Then ask: What do we learn from Jesus and the angels as to their presentableness before Jehovah during their assemblies? How can we imitate their example? Read paragraphs under “Cleanliness and Uprightness,” and then ask: In harmony with 1 Peter 1:16, what responsibility does each one of us have at assemblies? Conclude this portion by reading paragraphs under “Maintaining Good Order.” Ask audience: What responsibility do children have at assemblies? In harmony with 1 Corinthians 10:31, how should we conduct ourselves where we are accommodated? Why is this important? Why should we exercise care in the use of alcoholic beverages? what should be done if there is improper conduct on the part of any of the brothers?
20 min: Field overseer outlines local arrangements for special witnessing at the assembly that most publishers will be attending. Where brothers are accommodated at the same place or nearby, car or bus groups may be organized in advance before leaving to attend the assembly. Small groups might arrange for a convenient meeting place and then quickly proceed into the field. A group of pioneers and publishers enthusiastically discuss material from “Will You Be One of the ‘Locust’ Band in Action?” and “Campaign Plans.” Song 89 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 21
“Look After Orphans and Widows.”
20 min: Song 108 and local announcements. Review concern of Jehovah and Jesus Christ for widows, as shown in Isaiah 1:17, 23; 10:1, 2; Jeremiah 22:3; Ezekiel 22:7; Zechariah 7:9, 10; Malachi 3:5; Luke 20:46, 47.
20 min: “Helping Widows and Orphans.” Question-and-answer discussion. Highlight what all in the congregation can do in this regard.
20 min: First interview one or two sisters who are widows, and then one or two young brothers or sisters without a father or a mother. Let them tell of the joys they have in working with others in the field service, and how helping others spiritually has made it easier for them to cope with their own problems. Conclude by having various ones in the audience relate what they have noted to be especially helpful in encouraging individuals in local territory and those who are unbelievers in their immediate family. Song 85 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 28
15 min: Song 103 and local announcements. If any tracts remain from May, publishers may continue to use them in June to start conversations with people. If many tracts are still available, it may be advisable simply to hand them out without attempting to start conversations. Comment on Acts 4:20, highlighting the fact that we share with people what we have heard and seen. No reason to hold back from preaching because we do not know much about the Bible. All of us know something, have heard Scriptural truths and have personally experienced Jehovah’s help and the benefits of applying his Word.
15 min: What Could We Say? Invite audience to cite scriptures that could be used in giving a witness in the following situations: (1) A loved one dies. (2) Neighbor complains about unruliness of children in the neighborhood. (3) A fellow worker comments about the high cost of living. (4) A neighbor mentions health problems and the expenses incurred. (If possible, texts could be written on a blackboard.) As scriptures are cited, could ask for gist of text and how the points made in the Bible could be used. Comment on many opportunities that we have for using these scriptures in the field service and at other times.
30 min: To be prepared locally. Include discussion of local plans and arrangements for all in the congregation to have some share in presenting the offer for June. Encourage schoolchildren who will be out for their summer vacation to participate. Song 77 and prayer.

