Applying Bible Counsel Promotes Family Unity
IS NOT a home where a peaceful atmosphere prevails something truly desirable? How fine it is when children freely communicate with their parents, sharing their joys as well as their problems and disappointments! And it is indeed refreshing when the dominant spirit in a home is one of love and affection instead of quarreling, nagging and strife.
But how can family life be changed for the better? Many families have found that their application of the things learned through a study of the Bible has been an invaluable aid.
● A family in Okinawa came into a desperate financial situation. To get something to eat for the family the wife collected empty bottles to sell. When the husband was at home, she would constantly pour out her complaints. So he stayed away as much as possible. Eventually one of Jehovah’s witnesses called at the home and, from the Bible, explained to the wife the cause of the trouble and suffering on earth. She agreed to have a home Bible study. After a few studies she realized that what she was learning was really the truth. Soon she started to attend the meetings held by Jehovah’s witnesses and began to share with others the good things she had learned. She also recognized her mistakes in dealing with her husband, recalling the Bible text that compares a contentious wife to “a leaking roof that drives one away.” (Prov. 27:15) Consequently, she changed her course of action. Instead of constantly complaining, she restrained her tongue and pursued peace.
As a result the husband no longer stayed away from the home, but began studying the Bible with a Witness. Today this family is rejoicing in a pleasant home atmosphere, for all are united in striving to apply Bible principles in their relationships with one another.
● Similarly, the application of Bible principles brought an end to constant quarreling for a married couple in Surinam. The wife began studying the Bible with Jehovah’s witnesses. But there were repeated quarrels in the home, especially when it was time for the Bible study or when the wife got ready to attend the meetings of Jehovah’s witnesses.
The climax came when the wife decided to attend the program every day at a circuit assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses. Her husband locked her out of the house, not opening the door until a long period had passed. Even when he finally let her in he spoke angrily. However, the wife wanted to put into practice the fine principles she had learned from her home Bible study. When she remained silent, her husband became even angrier. Then she said calmly: ‘Just listen a moment. You know how I acted formerly, don’t you? Whenever we had a quarrel, I always wanted to have the last word and do most of the talking. But now that I am studying the Bible and reading The Watchtower and Awake! regularly I do not want to quarrel with you anymore. If you want to quarrel with me, go ahead. But I will not reply to your quarreling any longer.’
Immediately the man calmed down. He could not believe his ears. If what his wife was learning produced such fine results, it was worth investigating. He then said: ‘I must also begin reading those magazines and books of yours, because they taught you something worth while.’
● A family in Jamaica was also drawn closer together through a study of the Bible. Although living in the same house, each family member went his own way. Then a young lady in this family began to study with Jehovah’s witnesses. Of particular interest to her was Jesus’ prophecy at Matthew 24 concerning the “conclusion of the system of things.” Eagerly she invited her mother to share in the study.
The mother consented, but mainly to see what her daughter was learning. Because of common interest developing through their study, both became aware that the “generation gap” was narrowing. The daughter also spoke to her sister. But later this sister was persuaded by a clergyman to stay away from the Witnesses because, he said, ‘their religion breaks up families.’ However, this sister saw that just the opposite was happening in her own family. Eventually she and three other members of the family began to study the Bible with Jehovah’s witnesses. Thus six persons who had lived independent of one another were united by means of the message of God’s Word.
Surely the application of Bible counsel can bring unity to families. Is that not reason enough to give serious consideration to the contents of God’s Word?

