From Our Readers
Pet Safety  In the article “Are Children Safe With Your Dog?” (July 8, 1997), you suggested putting the dog’s bed in the kitchen. In previous articles, however, you have stated that we should avoid having pets in food-preparation areas for hygienic reasons.
R. H., Spain
We appreciate this observation. Our article was focusing on the safety of children, and hygienic concerns were not addressed. We would therefore suggest that readers give consideration to the article “Make Your Eating Safe” (June 22, 1989), which stated: “Pets and other animals should be kept away from food-preparation areas.” Perhaps an outside kennel or a room outside the kitchen would be a more appropriate place for a dog to bed.—ED.
Life Down Under  I want to say a big thank-you for the warm, yet lively, article about Australia, called “Life Is Different Down Under.” (October 8, 1997) Although I have read a lot about this fascinating and colorful country, your article helped me to see how grateful we should be to Jehovah for his wonderful creation.
L. K., Germany
Trouble-Free Paradise  I am so grateful for the series “A Trouble-Free Paradise—When?” (October 8, 1997) My grandmother died before I was born. She died of cancer. But in the Paradise, there will be no more sickness. This article encouraged me to stay faithful so I can see her in Paradise.
M. J., Trinidad
Animal Slumber  I want to express my appreciation for the article “Secrets of Animal Slumber.” (October 8, 1997) It was funny—and I learned some marvelous things about creation.
J. G., Puerto Rico
I own a pet fish, and I have always wanted to know if fish sleep. So I was happy to discover that when I see it quite still, it is only resting up.
A. P. L. M., Brazil
Aching Feet  Your article “Help for Aching Feet” (October 8, 1997) seemed to be written primarily with women in mind. However, a few days after reading the article, my husband complained about his feet hurting—as he has for the past seven years. With the article in mind, we went to a shoe store. Would you believe it—he was wearing an 8 medium when he needed a 9 wide! He has already experienced relief, thanks to Awake!
S. J., United States
I am on my feet nearly all day at work, and I was beginning to have problems because of wearing high heels. This month I served as an auxiliary pioneer (part-time evangelizer), and thanks to the article, I obtained three pairs of comfortable shoes. Thanks for being interested in our health and for keeping us informed.
C. L., Germany
War and Children  Thank you ever so much for the series “What War Does to Children.” (October 22, 1997) It really helps us to see how much we need Jehovah’s Kingdom to put an end to the devastating effects of war. Truly an eye-opener, showing us the cruelty that many of us are not aware of in other lands.
Y. C., England
I do not like reading about the mistreatment of children. Right now I am on the verge of tears. It really sickens me to see the world developing into a mindless society of apathetic humans. I commend you for your candor in presenting this eye-opening article.
K. E., United States

