Is Perfect Health Just a Dream?
HAVE you ever been seriously ill or gone through a serious operation? If you have, likely you now appreciate life even more. But whatever your physical condition, do you believe it is possible to enjoy perfect health? This may seem unrealistic in view of the prevalence of such debilitating illnesses as cancer or heart disease. Indeed, most of us get sick from time to time. Yet, complete well-being is not merely a dream.
Man was created to enjoy excellent health, not to struggle with sickness and death. Hence, to counteract sickness and death, Jehovah provided the basis for perfect health and eternal life by means of the ransom sacrifice of Christ Jesus. “God loved the world so much that he gave his only-begotten Son, in order that everyone exercising faith in him might not be destroyed but have everlasting life.” (John 3:16) Those who live forever in God’s promised new world will not struggle with poor health or old age. That being so, what will happen to infirmities?
Relief From Sickness
The way in which Jesus Christ healed the infirm provides a pattern. About such cures it was said: “The blind are seeing again, and the lame are walking about, the lepers are being cleansed and the deaf are hearing, and the dead are being raised up, and the poor are having the good news declared to them.” (Matthew 11:3-5) Yes, all disabled ones who approached Jesus “were made completely well.” (Matthew 14:36) As a result, “the crowd felt amazement as they saw the dumb speaking and the lame walking and the blind seeing, and they glorified the God of Israel.”—Matthew 15:31.
Really, although no one today can perform cures like these, we can be confident that under God’s rule mankind will be elevated to perfection, healed of all mental and physical diseases. God’s promise is recorded at Revelation 21:3, 4: “Look! The tent of God is with mankind, and he will reside with them, and they will be his peoples. And God himself will be with them. And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”
Imagine a world where there is no need for any pharmaceutical industry or for hospitals, surgery, or therapy! Furthermore, in the restored Paradise, depression and mental illnesses will be things of the past. Life will be a real delight; and happiness, a permanent sentiment. Indeed, God’s infinite power will activate the body’s regenerative processes, and the benefits of the ransom will eliminate sin’s debilitating effect. “No resident will say: ‘I am sick.’”—Isaiah 33:24.
What a marvelous hope—to enjoy perfect physical and spiritual health under God’s Kingdom! As you maintain a balanced and healthy life-style now, look forward to the blessings of God’s new world. May Jehovah ‘satisfy your lifetime with what is good, and may your youth keep renewing itself just like that of an eagle’!—Psalm 103:5.

