When Sickness Is No More!
MANY people hope that they will find relief from pain and sickness in a heavenly afterlife. However, contrary to popular belief, the hope that the Bible really offers for mankind in general is life in an earthly paradise. (Psalm 37:11; 115:16) This promised future includes perfect health, happiness, and everlasting life.
Why do we get sick and die? And how will a world without sickness come about? The Bible answers those questions.
▪ The real cause of sickness Adam and Eve, our first human parents, were created with perfectly healthy bodies. (Genesis 1:31; Deuteronomy 32:4) They were designed to live on earth forever. It was not until they willfully rebelled against God that their bodies became susceptible to disease. (Genesis 3:17-19) By rejecting God’s authority, they severed their ties with the Creator, the Source of their perfect life. They became defective. As a result, they got sick and died, just as God had warned them they would.—Genesis 2:16, 17; 5:5.
After their rebellion Adam and Eve could only pass on imperfection to their children. (Romans 5:12) As mentioned in the preceding article, scientists today recognize that there are inherited malfunctions that contribute to sickness and death. After extensive research, a group of scientists recently concluded: “It is an inescapable biological reality that once the engine of life switches on, the body inevitably sows the seeds of its own destruction.”
▪ Not by human effort Science is achieving great things in the fight against sickness. But the cause of disease has proved too complex for science to resolve fully. This is no surprise to Bible students who are acquainted with God’s inspired words: “Do not put your trust in nobles, nor in the son of earthling man, to whom no salvation belongs.”—Psalm 146:3.
However, as the Bible declares, “the things impossible with men are possible with God.” (Luke 18:27) Jehovah God can undo the cause of sickness. He will heal all our maladies. (Psalm 103:3) His inspired Word promises: “Look! The tent of God is with mankind, and he will reside with them, and they will be his peoples. And God himself will be with them. And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”—Revelation 21:3, 4.
▪ What you need to do Jesus Christ pointedly explained what we must do in order to enjoy a future world without sickness. He said: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.”—John 17:3.
The knowledge of God and the teachings of his Son, Jesus, are found in the Bible. Such knowledge includes practical advice that can improve your life now. But even more, God promises a world without pain for his obedient worshippers. Yes, God offers you a future when “no resident will say: ‘I am sick’”!—Isaiah 33:24.
[Box/Pictures on page 11]
A Balanced View of Health
  The Bible promotes respect for life. Jehovah’s Witnesses display such respect by striving to take care of their health. They avoid harmful practices, such as drug abuse and the use of tobacco. God expects his worshippers to be moderate in their drinking and eating habits. (Proverbs 23:20; Titus 2:2, 3) Such practical steps along with sufficient rest and exercise can delay or prevent many physical maladies. Those suffering illness may need the help of trustworthy health specialists.
  The Bible promotes reasonableness and “soundness of mind.” (Titus 2:12; Philippians 4:5) Many today lack balance and become obsessed in their search for cures, even at the expense of their spirituality. Some resort to questionable therapies that can cause harm. Others waste money and time on treatments and remedies that are ineffective or even harmful.
  The reality is that perfect health is not yet attainable. While you await the future when sickness will be no more, the wisdom and reasonableness found in the Bible can help you to remain balanced in your pursuit of good health.

