VOL. XXIX. APRIL 15 No. 8 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

The Church of the Living God 115 

A Church "Trust" Undesirable 118 

Three Views of the Church 119 

The True Church 120 

The Church of the First-Born 121 

Christian Fellowship 122 

The True Church Not a Sect 123 

A Parable of False Sheep-Folds 124 

"Come Out of Her, My People" 125 

A Suggested Letter of Withdrawal 127 

page 114 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R4163 :page 114 

1908--VOLUNTEER MATTER--1908 



FOR TRACT DISTRIBUTION we always recommend the 
January issue of the "Old Theology Quarterly." Thus the 
same matter is being circulated everywhere. We still advise 
that the distribution be from house to house except where 
Catholics or Jews are predominant. The tracts are "nested" 
—four different kinds folded together— so that when they are 
unfolded in a home several persons may be served and exchange 
with each other; and one of the four tracts is pretty 
sure to interest some one. We have orders with the printers 
for over 4,000,000 of these quadruple tracts and some of them 
are already being shipped. Order all you can and will use 
wisely as free samples. We prepay freight charges. Remember 
to co-operate with other WATCH TOWER readers in regard 
to this work. Confer, lay out the territory and order together, 
stating population you can serve as well as quantity desired. 

page 114 

DISCIPLES AND BAPTISTS 



We desire the co-operation of such of the friends as live in 
cities and towns where "Baptists" and "Disciples" reside. If 
you are willing to assist address us so stating, and reporting 
how many of their churches are in your town and the attendance 
at each, as well as the number who would co-operate 
with you in the service. "He that reapeth receiveth wages." 

FRIENDS NEAR POLISH CHURCHES 



We have some Polish literature for those who desire to 
serve the Polish of their vicinity. Write us, saying how many 
of these churches you could serve and the attendance at each. 



R4163 :page 115 

"THE CHURCH OF THE LIVING GOD" 

-I TIMOTHY 3:15.- 

"As the body is one, and hath many members, and all the 

members of that one body, being many, are one body, so also is 

Christ; for by one spirit are we all baptized into one body." 

..."There is one body, and one spirit; even as ye 

are called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one 

Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all."... 

"After the way which they [many] call heresy, so 

worship I the God of my fathers. "..."Am 

I become your enemy, because I tell you the 

truth?" If so, then, "I have become a fool for 

Christ's sake."~I Cor. 12:12,13; Eph. 4:4-6; 

Acts 24:14; Gal. 4:16; I Cor. 4:10. 

THAT during the Gospel Age God has been 

selecting a Church is admitted by all Christians 

except Universalists; and that all thus 

selected constitute the one Church, and that a membership 

in that one Church can be secured only during 

the present life— during the Gospel Age— are also generally 

admitted to be the teachings of the Bible. 

And many will admit, also, that our present union 
with Christ's Body, the Church, though precious, is but 
a probationary membership, which will be confirmed 
and made everlasting only by introduction into full 
membership in the Church triumphant, at the close of 
this probationary period of the present life.— John 15:5,6; 
Phil. 3:12-16. 

But, while we and other Christians agree that the 
Church triumphant is to be one Church, and not many 
churches, there are parts and bearings of the subject 
regarding which we are not agreed. 

We hold that the conditions of the present trial, 
of all accepted as probationary members of the heavenly 
Church, are very severe and exacting, and that the 
selection is consequently much smaller than Christian 
people generally suppose; that only a "little flock" is 
now being selected. (Luke 12:32.) Many suppose that 
the object of our God in calling the Church and promising 
her high exaltation was merely to save them 
from everlasting torment. We claim, and find and 
produce abundant Scripture proof of it, that God's 
object in this selection, training, discipline and final 



exaltation of the Church, is for the ultimate purpose 
of blessing through them all his fallen, sin-stricken 
creatures (human and angelic), by granting to all a 
full, perfect judgment or trial under most favorable 
conditions, of which perfect knowledge and sufficient 
help will be the chief elements of favor. Thus seen, 
the Church is being selected for the great work to be 
accomplished during the Millennial Age, of restoring 
"whosoever will" of the fallen ones back to their former 
estate, and of consigning the wilfully unholy to 
the Second Death— everlasting punishment— everlasting 
destruction. 

Nor can it be denied that this Scriptural view is 
much more elevating than the common, selfish view 
which originated in the great Papal apostasy. Those 
called out by the hope of sharing in God's plan for 
doing good to others— blessing "all the families of the 
earth"— are sure to be few, and spiritually above the 
masses, who are moved only by a selfish hope of 
escaping torment. 

We also differ from most Christians in that we 
regard the Church in its present condition as merely 
in a probationary state. And we further claim that 
there is only one Church now, even as there will 
be but one Church in glory; that our Lord and the 
apostles never recognized any but one Church on 
earth; that so far from establishing many, or recognizing 
many, they denounced all efforts to separate 
into different parties and under different names, as 
schismatic, sectarian, and contrary to God's will; as 
injurious, and as an evidence of carnality in all who 
consented to or aided such divisions of the probationary 
Church. 

Paul's able and pointed reasoning upon this subject 
is partially obscured by the common translation, 
yet even there, when attention is called to it, the trend 
of the Apostle's reasoning is clearly discerned; much 
more so in that valuable and generally very faithful 
translation, the Emphatic Diaglott. He exhorts that 
those teachers who favor divisions in the flock of 
Christ be "watched," and turned away from; because 
they are not following the Lord's will, but their own. 
And he adds, by kind and complimentary words they 

R4163 :page 116 

mislead the unsuspicious. (Rom. 16:18.) He reproved 

the Corinthian Church because of a tendency 

toward sectarianism among them. (I Cor. 1:10-13; 3:3-6.) 

They were dividing into Paulites, Apollosites 

and Peterites, while a few rightly clung to the name 

Christian. 

Each of these teachers had his peculiarities of 
manner in teaching, which caused some to esteem one, 
and others another, most highly. But they all had the 
one Gospel— the one Lord, the one faith and the one 



baptism. The spirit of favoritism, which led to factions 
and divisions, and to the exaltation of sectarian 
or party names, or to the name of an individual teacher, 
to be the standard around which to rally, the Apostle 
declared was an evidence of carnality— proof of a 
worldly spirit. 

While the taking of different names was wrong, 
it was an evidence of a deeper wrong— of a selfish, 
party spirit. It was an evidence that those Corinthians 
who took the party names had never appreciated the 
oneness of the Body of Christ; that they did not really 
appreciate that Christ is the only Head, leader and 
standard; and that his is the only name by which his 
followers should recognize themselves and each other. 
Where scoffers apply a name in derision, it is not the 
fault of the faithful; but the true, loyal soldiers of the 
cross should never own or recognize such a name. Instances 
of names so originating are "Methodist" and 
"Baptist," both of which were given in derision, but 
were afterwards adopted as party names, representing 
sects, factions or divisions in the Body of Christ. All 
true teachers are not only sent by Christ, but receive 
their instructions from him; and any man who attempts 
to put his own or any other name upon all or 
any portion of the Church is an opponent, and adversary 
to the true and only Lord and Head of the 
Church. He is a mis-leader and an evildoer, no matter 
what his claims or motives may be. 

The Apostle, upbraiding the Corinthians and 
seeking to show them their error in owning any other 
teacher besides Christ to be their head and standard 
and leader, asks, "Has Christ been divided?" Are 
there several seeds of Abraham now, each an heir of 
a promise? Is this the reason you countenance divisions 
into different parties? Or, is it because one of 
these leaders— Paul, Apollos or Peter— has specially 
favored you and put you under obligation to him, that 
you requite him by calling yourselves his servants and 
followers, bearing his name? Was Paul crucified for 
you? or were you baptized in his name? 

Nay, nay, dearly beloved; one, and only one, deserves 
all the honor of the Church, both now and forever, 
and that one is her true Lord and Master; and 
his name only should she own in any manner. He 
leads, he teaches, he feeds; and the various human 
agents used by him, as channels for his blessings to 
his espoused, should neither take his place in her heart 
nor share his honor before the world. We may, however, 
and should, honor his servants "for their works 
sake," and count those who serve well as worthy of 
double honor; but we must always "hold the Head," 
and render him supreme reverence and obedience. (I Thess. 5:13; 
I Tim. 5:17; Col. 2:19.) Our esteem for 
others should be "in the Lord." 

For a long time, in fact until very recently, Christians 
recognized this true principle, that there is but 



one Body or Church on earth, even as there will be but 

one in glory. And, following this idea, each sect 

claimed to be that one, the only true Church, and persecuted 

others. But by and by each began to see in 

the other certain good features of doctrine and practice, 

and gradually their ideas changed, until today 

they claim boldly, and in opposition to the word of our 

Lord and of the apostles, that sects are a decided advantage; 

that the human mind is so constituted that a 

common faith, which Paul urges upon the Church, is 

an impossibility; and that the various sects of today 

with their contradictory diversities of faith are necessary 

accommodations to human prejudices and 

imbecility. 

Yet, still clinging to the idea that somehow there 
should be but one Church, they are anxious to reunite 
all the larger sects so as to make (nominally) one 
Church, while each sect therein may retain its own special 
features of faith or disbelief as at present. All in 
such a union (of which the Evangelical Alliance was a 
beginning— advanced a stage, now, in this country, by 
the organization of the "Federation Council of the 
Churches of Christ of America," representing thirty 
different denominations) merely agree to disagree, 
live and let live, and to recognize each other, in this 
general way, because of an increased influence, power 
and protection which the association will bring to each, 
and because it would detract from the influence of other 
sects not so associated, and thus hinder independence 
of thought. This would serve to fix and establish an 
"orthodox" boundary line, inside of which there would 
be bounds to individual liberty, and yet a measure of 
freedom— a permission to choose a preference among 
the forms and doctrines of these associated sects, and 
still permit them to be recognized as "orthodox." 

This is, in fact, the case now, among the so-called 
"liberal minds" of all denominations; and it is being 
urged that an organization of this sort, already founded 
in the Evangelical Alliance, be fully consummated, 
and that an attempt be made to have such a composite 
Church in some degree recognized by the government. 

But, even when fully consummated, this could be 
no more than a union in name, with the same divisions 
and differences in fact— one church nominally, but 
many sects really. 

The first danger against which the Apostle warned 
the Church was sectarianism; and he was evidently 
heeded at the time at least, for no great sects of Paulites 
or Apollosites developed. But, as usual, the great 
enemy, thwarted in one direction, moved to the opposite 
extreme, and attempted to insist upon a oneness 
very different from what our Lord or the apostles ever 
taught. This attempt was to have every recognized 
member of the Church think exactly alike, on every 
minutia of Christian doctrine. This attempt finally developed 
into Papacy, where every matter of doctrine 



was decided by the popes and councils; and every man 

who desired to be considered a church member was 

obliged to accept such decisions fully, and to profess 

that such decisions were his belief, his faith; whereas 

they were not his in any sense but that of adoption. 

They were generally either blindly received or hypocritically 

professed with mental reservations. 

This was not at all the oneness urged by Paul. 
He urged a oneness of heart and mind, and not a 
thoughtless, heartless or hypocritical profession. He 
urged a oneness such as naturally results from the 

R4163 :page 117 

proper exercise of the liberty which we have in Christ 
—to search and believe the Scriptures, and to grow in 
grace and in knowledge, every man being thus fully 
persuaded in his own mind, and firmly rooted and 
grounded in the one faith as set forth in the Scriptures. 
The oneness of faith which Paul urged was 
not that elaborate faith which touches and embraces 
all subjects, heavenly and earthly, divine and human, 
revealed and unrevealed. Quite the contrary: Paul's 
letters, weighty with logical reasoning, do not even 
mention the subjects upon which sectarians do most 
insist, and which are by them generally made tests of 
fellowship. 

Paul said nothing about an everlasting torture of 
sinners; he said nothing whatever about a mysterious 
trinity, in which three Gods are incomprehensibly one 
God and at the same time three Gods; he said not a 
word about man being of a nature such as could not 
die but must live everlastingly, in a place of either 
pleasure or woe; he said nothing, either, about the 
present life ending all trial for all classes; and he 
entered into no entangling discussion about the bread 
and wine used in commemoration of the Lord's death 
—as to transubstantiation or consubstantiation; yet it 
can easily be discerned that he was not in harmony 
with any of these errors. 

Notice particularly, however, that without so 
much as mentioning a single one of these sectarian 
tests of fellowship, Paul declares— "I have not shunned 
to declare unto you the whole counsel of God." 
(Acts 20:27.) From this it is very evident that none 
of these points, which are today regarded as the very 
essence and substance of Christian doctrine and as the 
proper tests of faith is the one faith, or in any sense 
or degree part of "the faith once delivered unto the 
saints."— Jude 3. 

The one faith, which all should hold, was a very 
simple one; one so simple that all, the learned and the 
unlearned alike, could grasp it and comprehend it, and 
be "fully persuaded in their own minds" concerning it. 
It was not a dose of incongruous mysteries, inconsistent 
with themselves and inharmonious with reason as 



well as with the Bible, to be swallowed by the ignorant 
with credulity, and by the learned with hypocritical 
mental reservations; but it was so simple, so clear, so 
reasonable, that any and every honest follower of 
Christ could be fully persuaded in his own mind regarding 
its truth. 

What is this one faith? The basis of it is stated 
by Paul, thus: "I delivered unto you first of all, that 
which I also received [first of all— as a foundation 
truth or doctrine, upon and in harmony with which 
all other doctrines must be built], how that Christ died 
for our sins, according to the Scriptures; and that he 
was buried; and that he rose again the third day, according 
to the Scriptures." (I Cor. 15:3,4.) "There 
is one God and one Mediator between God and men, 
the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for 
all, to be testified in due time."— I Tim. 2:5,6. 

This, in a word, confesses sin and utter helplessness; 
it acknowledges God's loving plan for our redemption; 
it owns that our Lord's death was our ransom 
price; and that forgiveness (justification), and 
reconciliation to God, and the restitution of believers, 
come as a result of faith in this Redeemer, when in 
due time that place is made known to each and all. 

These brief statements contain the whole Gospel, 
in the same sense that an acorn contains an oak tree. 
Without this Gospel kernel, the true Gospel can never 
be possessed; hence this must be insisted on as a test 
of Christian fellowship. This must be received, else 
the Gospel is not received. When it is received, the 
Gospel is received. Then a work of growth begins— a 
development of this Gospel. It may vary in rapidity 
of growth according to temperament and surroundings; 
it can develop into a sprout, a sapling, a sturdy 
oak successively, but the nature of the seed will appertain 
to it in every stage of its development. So is 
faith— the true faith; it must begin with the one kind 
of seed-faith in all, no matter what stage of development 
each may attain. This one gospel acknowledges 
man's fall and sinfulness, and God's mercy and love 
manifested through Christ's great work of redemption, 
forgiveness and final restoration of all the willing 
and obedient, but of no others. All theories, and they 
are many, which omit any of these items are spurious. 

Some deny God's love in the matter, and claim 
that all the love was Christ's and that he interposed 
and thwarted the Father's original plan; but those of 
the one faith are guided by our Lord's own testimony, 
that God so loved the world that he devised the plan 
as it is being carried forward, and sent his only begotten 
Son to do what he has done and is yet to do for 
the world. (John 3:16,17.) Others deny that any redemption 
was accomplished by the death of our Lord 
Jesus, deny that his life was substituted as a corresponding 
price or "ransom for all," and claim that the 
Father does all by simply pardoning the sinners. But 



again the one faith is clearly pointed out by the words 
of Paul— "There is one mediator between God and 
men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom 
[corresponding price] for all." 

When received into honest hearts, this simple Gospel, 
the true Gospel, will gradually open up and spread 
its roots of reason and its branches of hope in every 
direction, feeding upon the promises of God, building 
itself up as he designed, and grasping, as it progresses, 
the "one baptism" and every other feature of the Gospel 
in its fulness. 

Note the difference between this, God's test, on 
the simple first principles of the Gospel, and the wrong 
course of men who attempt to enforce upon all an entire 
system of faith (and that when they are the merest 
babes in Christ), so fettering them, then, that their 
growth is hindered. To ask babes in Christ to assent 
to thirty or forty articles of faith arranged by fellowmen, 
and to agree to take those as the infallible truth, 
and to promise never to believe either more or less 
than they contain, is like selecting in an orchard one 
gnarled and crooked tree, as a standard, and requiring 
all the other trees to be padded out to make them look 
as thick and as gnarled as the sample, and to be bound 
with iron bands that they might never grow larger or 
straighter. 

This true Gospel, this simple faith, easily understood 
and confessed by the weakest babe in Christ, 
must also be, and always, and equally, the faith of the 
most developed sons of God. This one faith (and not 
the endless ramifications and details of faith which lead 

R4163 :page 118 

out from it) Paul placed as a standard or test of all 
claiming the name Christian. All the consecrated who 
agreed on this one standard, or foundation truth, Paul 
counted as in and of the one Church. While each 
member was to grow in grace, knowledge and love, 
there would always be harmony and oneness in the 
faith and fellowship of the Church, if all growth were 
kept in line and harmony with this foundation truth. 

Here was a perfect basis of union, which allowed 
for all the various stages of individual development in 
the truth, and which most effectually guarded against 
errors. For if this simple creed were to-day made the 
standard by which all doctrines should be tested, it 
would speedily lead to the discarding of every error 
and to the true union of the Church in the "one Lord, 
one faith and one baptism." 

The endeavor to compel all men to think alike on 
all subjects, culminated in the great apostasy and the 
development of the great Papal system; and thereby 
the "gospel," the "one faith," which Paul and the other 
apostles set forth, was lost— buried under the mass of 
uninspired decrees of popes and councils. The union 



of the early Church, based upon the simple Gospel and 
bound only by love, gave place to the bondage of the 
Church of Rome— a slavery of God's children, from 
the degradation of which multitudes are still weak and 
suffering. 

The Reformation movement of the sixteenth century 
came as an effort to regain liberty of conscience; 
but, deluded by the idea of an elaborate creed, insisted 
upon for so many centuries, the reformers and their 
followers formed other systems of bondage very similar 
to that of Papacy, though slight modifications gave 
liberty to fuller ideas on some subjects. And so it has 
been ever since: each new reform movement has made 
the failure of attempting to make a creed just large 
enough for its prime movers. 

A "CHURCH TRUST" UNDESIRABLE 

But while divisions in the Church of Christ are 
very wrong, and very contrary to the will and Word of 
our Lord, they are better far than a union in bondage 
under Papacy's system, creed, etc. Instead, therefore, 
of attempting to get all the sects to combine in a sort 
of "Church Trust," an image or likeness of the Papal 
system of oneness (though on a higher plane), to regulate 
and restrict further investigation and further 
growth, we need to do the very opposite— to abolish 
all sects and all elaborate creeds and confessions of 
faith. Instead of being further bound (by such a 
Church Trust Union— or wheel within a wheel, double 
imprisonment), all bondage should be set aside, except 
the simple tests first imposed in the one faith once delivered 
to the saints; and all party sectarian names 
should be repudiated, and the name of Christ should 
be the only name borne by his Church. 

Such a breaking down of sectarian fences would 
leave the true children of God willing to accept the 
original and simple test— "all one in Christ Jesus"; 
and this is what is needed. It would destroy sectarian 
pride, which so often counterfeits true Christian zeal 
and love, but it would tend to develop the truth, and 
thereby to develop the real zeal for the truth which our 
Lord desires in his followers. The term Church of 
Christ would no longer mean to any "our denomination," 
but, when they would sing, 

"I love thy Church, O God, 

Her walls before thee stand, 
Dear as the apple of thine eye, 

And graven on thy hand," 

they would think, instead, of the one, true and only 
Church. 

Under such conditions, recognizing the true and 
only test, as above quoted from Paul, those who formerly 
championed opposite sides of the various questions 



of doctrine would join heads and hearts in carefully 
weighing the various statements of the Scriptures; 
and, truly seeking the divine plan, they would 
ere long, as promised, be guided into all truth. 

They would join hearts and hands as Christians, 
and while their heads might not at once agree on certain 
points, it would be a question of only a short time; 
for the unbiased study of God's plan, with no sectarian 
theory and organization to uphold, would bring the 
heads of all into union and general harmony, even 
though, as at first, the growth of faith-roots and faith-branches 
might vary. All would believe the "same 
things," even if some could see and believe more elaborately 
than others. -Phil. 3:15,16. 

This freedom, and yet harmony and union, which 
is the result of a full acceptance of God's will and 
Word, will not be attained in the present age except 
by the few, the "overcomers." Others, the Scriptures 
show, will continue in sectarian bondage, and even increase 
their bondage-union by a Church Trust or "confederacy" 
(Isa. 8:12), until, in the close of this time 
of trouble, all this is corrected by the fall of sectarian 
systems as well as of present political governments.— 
Dan. 12:1; Rev. 18:2-5. 

In the next age, during the world's trial, such 
great deceiving systems will not be permitted; but now 
they are permitted in order to accomplish the testing 
and manifesting of the "overcomers." 

Let the dear saints who now walk the narrow 
way, and whose names are "written in heaven" as probationary 
members of the one, true Church of Christ, 
patiently persevere in worshiping God after the manner 
which others term "heresy"— closely studying and 
believing all that is written in the inspired Word, however 
it may conflict with human creeds and the opinions 
of so-called great theologians. Be simple enough 
to take God at his Word, however church monopolies 
or trusts may seek, either willingly or unintentionally, 
to wrest it to their own advantage. Flee all so-called 
unions, which are merely bondages. What is needed 
is fewer of such unions, not more. Each individual 
needs to feel and exercise the same liberty on doctrine 
that each sect now claims. From this standpoint the 
bondage-union of the Church under Papacy was the 
worst and most complete enslavement of the individual 
Christian; and the full breaking up of all sectarianism, 
so that no two persons will be bound to hold one 
faith (except on first-principles) is the most desirable 
condition. The breaking of Papacy into a hundred 
sects, each free from the other, was a good work, 
tending to the realization of the liberty wherewith 
Christ makes free. Though at first regarded as a calamity, 
it soon came to be known as the Reformation. 

R4163 :page 119 



And now the breaking up of these numerous sects, so 
that each individual will be free, is essential to a fuller 
growth in grace, knowledge and love than is at present 
possible. This breaking up of sectarianism, now regarded 
as a calamity, will by and by be recognized as 
truly the greatest of all religious reformations. The 
signs of the times indicate that such a reformation is 
impending, and the Scriptures declare it. A little more 
light, a little more knowledge, and these sectarian 
shackles upon the individual conscience will fall. Then 
whatever union shall exist will be upon right principles 
—a union of hearts and principles and not merely a 
heterogeneous confederacy. Recognizing each other's 
personal liberties, each disciple of Christ will be bound 
to the other by his love of the Lord and of his Word 
alone; and others will be separated. 

Sectarianism has woefully distorted that beautiful 
figure of Christian union given by our Lord, recorded 
in John 15:1-6. To fit it to sectarianism, and to make 
their error in this appear to be supported by God's 
Word, it is claimed that the "vine" is the whole Church, 
and that the various denominations of "Christendom" 
are the branches. But that the Lord's words will bear 
no such construction must be evident to any one who 
will give the passage candid consideration. The 
branches are the individuals, and "any branch" is defined 
by our Lord's own words to be "any man." Let 
this, our Lord's illustration of the proper union of all 
the branches in One Vine, connected and nourished by 
the same sap, from the same roots, teach us of true 
union and personal freedom in the Body of Christ. 



Suppose that the salaries and "livings" of all ministers, 
bishops, priests, etc., were cut off, all churches, 
chapels and cathedrals destroyed, all theological seminaries 
broken up, and their professors turned to other 
pursuits, all religious guilds and societies disbanded, 
including all sectarian organizations— what would be 
the effect? 

Who can doubt that it would be a real blessing 
under the disguise of a great and terrible catastrophe? 
The effect would be to bring true Christians together 
as the family of God, and not as sectarian bands; to 
study God's Word, and not human traditions and 
creeds formulated in the dark ages. Very soon, unhindered, 
God's Word would be heard by all truly his; 
and one Lord, one faith and one baptism would soon 
be the result, while the worldly mass would speedily 
drift apart, and the true distinction between the Church 
and the world would be discernible. The Scriptures 
seem to indicate that very much of this sort of destruction 
of present systems must take place before all the 
"wheat," the true Church, will be separated from the 
"tares," the mere professors. Party spirit and love 



of sect are so strong that, apparently, nothing short of 
a complete wreck of all the sects will suffice to set free 
all of God's children now bound and blindfolded in 
and by them. 

This catastrophe— sectarian destruction, the fall 
of Babylon— is what is referred to in the Book of 
Revelation under the symbol of the seven last plagues. 
(Rev. 15-18.) The pain from these will consist largely 
of mental chagrin, the disappointment of sectarian 
hopes and plans, and the wounding of sectarian pride. 
When the Master said, "Watch ye, that ye may be accounted 
worthy to escape all these things coming upon 
the world," he included the pain of these plagues, as 
well as other annoyances to which the world will be 
subject because of ignorance of the real plan of God. 
It is of escape from these plagues that the Revelator 
(our Lord— Rev. 1:1) speaks to us, saying, "Come out 
of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, 
and that ye receive not of her plagues."— Rev. 18:4. 

THREE VIEWS OF THE CHURCH 

A dear brother sent us the following clipping, 
with the remark, "Two views well stated. Please give 
us the third and true one, Brother Russell." 

"There are two conceptions of the Church, which, for convenience, 
I shall designate as the Protestant and Catholic conceptions. 
The Protestant idea of the Church is that it is a 
voluntary association of believers in Christ; that those who 
think alike upon religious subjects join together in a society 
and choose their pastor, who derives his commission and his 
authority from them. Consequently they are at liberty to prescribe 
what he shall and shall not teach, or to unmake their 
church and make another, precisely as the members of a club, 
or of a political party, have a right to withdraw and form a 
new organization. The Protestant theory of the Church is 
that of an aggregation of individuals, 'who can rearrange 
themselves at will, and thus create new churches at every rearrangement.' 
(Ewer.) The Catholic theory, on the other 
hand, is that it is an organization which God Almighty has 
founded once for all, to last to the end of time, and into 
which he invites men; it is his family, his household, his kingdom, 
his city. Its officers are commissioned by him and hold 
their authority as teachers only from him. In a word, the 
Catholic Church is not a democracy but an empire, not a republic 
but a kingdom. As such, it comes to man with divine 
authority; its officers are under oath to the Eternal King, and 
they are to minister to man in his name, and for him."— The 
Living Church. 

In presenting the true view of the Church, we 
labor under the disadvantage that for fifteen hundred 
years people have been taught one or the other of the 
above views, or combinations of both, while the true 
idea has been generally lost sight of since the second 
century. The true view, as we conceive it, is as 
follows:— 



God's Church, when completed and organized, 
will be all that is given above as the Catholic or Episcopal 
view. But it is not yet completed, and hence not 
yet organized. When organized, it will be clothed with 
power, and will be, "not a democracy, but an empire; 
not a republic, but a kingdom. As such it [will] come 
to man [the world— during the Millennium] with divine 
authority [and with power to back up that authority]. 
Its officers are [then to be] under oath to 
the Eternal King, and they are to minister to man in 
his name, and for him." All this, it is to be noted, fits 
exactly to the coming reign of the Church, when it 
shall "bless all the families of the earth"; but it does 
not fit at all to the present state or condition. There 
is no organization today clothed with such divine authority 
imperiously to command mankind. There is no 
organization doing this today; though we are well 
aware that many of them in theory claim that they 
ought to be permitted to do so; and many more would 
like to do so. 

This was the fatal mistake into which the Church 
began to fall in the second century; and the effort to 

R4163 : page 120 

realize this false conception culminated in the boastful, 
imperious counterfeiting of the coming Kingdom 
in Papacy, which for centuries sought to dominate the 
world, by claimed "divine authority." This idea has 
more or less pervaded and poisoned the ideas of all 
the Protestant "clergy" as well; who, copying Papacy's 
false ideas of the Church, claim also that the Church 
of Christ is now organized, though they make less 
boastful claims to "divine authority," to teach and rule 
mankind in general, than Papacy does. 

God's Church is not yet organized. On the contrary, 
the Gospel Age has been the time for calling out 
and testing the volunteers willing to sacrifice and suffer 
with their Lord now, and thus prove themselves 
worthy (Rev. 3:4,5,21; 2 Tim. 2:11,12; Rom. 8:17) 
to be organized as joint-heirs in his Kingdom at the 
close of the Gospel Age, when he shall "set up" or 
organize his Kingdom in power and great glory, to 
bless and rule the world with "divine authority." 

In the meantime, these unorganized but merely 
called out ones, who are seeking to make their calling 
and election sure, that they may obtain a share in the 
Kingdom (2 Peter 1:10; 2 Cor. 5:9), are "a voluntary 
association of believers," drawn together for mutual 
assistance in seeking to know and to do the Master's 
will, that they may be accounted worthy the honors 
and glories promised, and not now to rule men by divine 
authority; for they have as yet no such authority. 
In this "voluntary association" of the consecrated, 
there is no imperial authority of one over another; 
and no lording over God's heritage should be permitted; 



for the one and only Lord has left the instruction, 
"Be not ye called Rabbi; for one is your Master, even 
Christ, and all ye are brethren."— Matt. 23:8. 

Instead of the kingly and lordly rule prevailing in 
the customs of the world, the Master gave all another 
and an opposite rule, saying, "Ye know that they which 
are accounted to rule over the Gentiles exercise lordship 
over them; and their great ones exercise authority 
upon them. But so shall it not be among you; but 
whosoever will be great among you, shall be your minister 
[literally, servant]; and whosoever of you will 
be the chiefest, shall be servant of all [or greatest 
servant]; for even the Son of man came not to be 
ministered unto [to be served], but to minister [to 
serve], and to give his life a ransom for many."— 
Mark 10:42-45. 

The Lord was chief servant; and those among the 
apostles who served the Church at greatest cost to 
themselves— Paul, Peter, John and James— are esteemed, 
by those who have the spirit of the truth, in proportion 
to their service, and not in proportion to their 
titles, their priestly vestments, or their praise among 
men, etc., of which they had none. 

The Church, or company of believers, probationers 
for coming glory, in its "voluntary association," 
was indeed to recognize "teachers," "helps," "apostles," 
etc., but not to make them. If they recognize a man 
"mighty in the Scriptures," "apt to teach," able to 
make clear the divine plan, and specially qualified to 
build them up in the most holy faith, they gladly acknowledge 
God's favor in raising up among them such 
a servant of all to assist them in the understanding of 
his Word. But they should be careful always, even 
while rejoicing in and thanking God for such a servant, 
to require a "thus saith the Lord" for every point 
of doctrine, and to search the Scriptures daily to see 
whether these things be so— whether the deductions 
and arguments of the teacher agree with the whole 
testimony of God's revealed plan. 

Thus the Lord is the teacher of his followers, 
sending, now and again, of their own number, certain 
ones to call attention to truths being overlooked, or to 
injurious errors being entertained. The "meek" among 
the probationers will hear the Master's voice by whomsoever 
he speaks; and these will be guided into the 
truth, and prepared in due time for organization as 
his Kingdom. "The meek will he teach his way."— 
Psa. 25:9. 

Thus seen, both the Catholic and the Protestant 
views of the Church are erroneous. The Catholic view 
gets the future organization applied to the present 
time, and the Protestant view, though ridding itself of 
some of Papacy's error, carries along enough of it to 
injure itself; for, instead of admitting all consecrated 
believers into a "voluntary association," in which God 
would raise up his own teachers, Protestantism attempts 



also to organize and bind with creeds and confessions 
into various sects, each of which, anxious to 
perpetuate itself and its ideas, selects and makes its 
own teachers in its own seminaries. 

THE TRUE CHURCH 

Today there are many organizations claiming to 
be the Church, and having various bonds of union; 
but we wish now to show, upon the authority of God's 
Word, first, what Church our Lord established, and 
what are its bonds of union; second, that every Christian 
should belong to that Church; third, the injurious 
effects of joining the wrong church; and fourth, having 
joined the right Church, what would be the results 
of losing our membership. 

First, then, the Church which our Lord Jesus began 
to gather during his ministry, and which was 
recognized by the Father at Pentecost, after the ransom 
price for all was paid, was the little company of 
disciples who had consecrated earthly time, talents and 
life, a sacrifice to God. Theirs was a "voluntary association" 
for mutual aid; and this society was under 
the laws and government of Christ, its Head or recognized 
ruling authority. The bonds were bonds of love 
and common interest. Since all were enlisted under 
the captaincy of Jesus, the hopes and fears, joys and 
sorrows and aims of one were those of the others; 
and thus they had a far more perfect union of hearts 
than could possibly be had from a union on the basis 
of any man-made creed. Thus their only union was 
of the spirit; their law for the government of each was 
love; and all, as a whole, were put under obedience to 
the "law of the spirit," as it was expressed in the life, 
actions and words of their Lord. Their government 
was the will of him who said, "If ye love me, keep my 
commandments." 

There are two senses in which the true Church of 
Christ may be considered: All who, like the early 
Church, are fully consecrated to the doing of our 
Father's will, amenable only to Christ's will and government, 
recognizing and obeying none other— these, 
the saints, from the beginning of the Gospel Age down 

R4163 :page 121 

to its close, when all of this class are sealed— 
constitute 

THE CHURCH OF THE FIRST-BORN 

[whose names are] written in heaven." These are all 
one in aim, hope and suffering, and in due time will 
be joint-heirs with Christ Jesus to the great "inheritance 
of the saints in light"— joint-heirs with him of 
the Kingdom which God has promised to them that 



love him. 

The other sense, in which this same class is recognized, 
is by counting a part for the whole. Thus all 
the living of this class may be spoken of as "the 
Church"; or, again, any part of this class of living followers 
who may meet together may properly be called 
the Church; for, wherever two or three are assembled, 
the Lord has promised to be among them. Consequently, 
that would be a Church meeting— an assembly 
of "the Church of the First-born." The general 
assembly will be when all the Church are made like 
their Head, and glorified with him. 

Such, then, is our definition of the Church of 
Christ. It is perfectly illustrated by Paul (Rom. 12:4,5), 
when he compares the Church to a human body. 
In this figure the head represents our Lord, and all 
who are his constitute the body, over which the head 
rules. Jesus has been and always will be the Head 
over his Church as a whole; he is likewise the Head 
and ruler of the entire living Church; and in every 
assembly where two or three meet in his name (when 
his Word is sought and heeded), he is the Head, ruler 
and teacher.— Eph. 1:20-23. 

If it be asked, In what sense does he teach? we 
answer, by exercising the qualities of the Head or 
teacher; by using one or more of those present as his 
mouth-pieces in unfolding truth, strengthening faith, 
encouraging hope, inspiring zeal, etc., just as the head 
of the human body calls upon one member to minister 
to another. But here a word of caution: If one become 
as useful a member as a right hand, he should 
take care that he assume not the position and authority 
of the Head, to put forth his own words and ideas 
as truth. He must ever remember that his highest 
honor is to be an index-finger to point out, or a mouthpiece 
to express, the will of the one Lord and Master. 
Be not puffed up: pride will paralyze and render useless. 
"Be not ye called Rabbi [master, teacher], for 
one is your Master [head], even Christ, and all ye are 
brethren." And let not the least member despise his 
office, "for if all were one member, where were the 
body?" "Nay, those members of the body which seem 
to be more feeble are necessary"— "God hath set the 
members, every one of them, in the body, as it hath 
pleased him."— I Cor. 12:12-31. 

How simple, beautiful and effectual is God's plan 
of the "voluntary association" of his children! 

This brings us to our second proposition, viz.: 
that all Christians should be joined to this association 
or incipient organization. In the light of what has just 
been said as to the class constituting the Church which 
our Lord is calling, it is evident that if you have given 
up all your will, talent, time, etc., you are recognized 
by the Lord as a probationary member of the Church, 
of which he is the Head, and whose names are written 
in heaven. Thus, by consecration, we join the true 



Church, and have our names recorded in heaven. But, 
says one, must I not join some organization on earth, 
assent to some creed, and have my name written on 
earth? No: remember that our Lord is our pattern 
and teacher, and in neither his words nor acts do we 
find any authority for binding ourselves with creeds 
and traditions of men, which all tend to make the 
Word of God of none effect, and bring us under a 
bondage which will hinder our growth in grace and 
knowledge, and against which Paul warned us, saying, 
"Stand fast, therefore, in the liberty wherewith Christ 
hath made you free, and be not entangled again with 
the yoke of bondage."— Gal. 5:1. 

Another says: If it is not proper to unite with 
any of the present nominal churches, would it not be 
well to form a visible association of our own? Yes, 
this is what we have— a society modeled after that of 
the early Church. We think we have come back to 
primitive simplicity. The Lord Jesus alone is our 
Head or law-giver; his Word is our rule of faith and 
practice; the holy Spirit is our interpreter and guide 
into truth; our names are all written in heaven; and 
we are bound together by love and common interest. 

Do you inquire— How shall we know one another? 
We ask, How can we help knowing one another when 
the spirit of our Master is made manifest in word and 
act and manner and look? Yes, the living faith, the 
unfeigned love, the long-suffering meekness, the childlike 
simplicity, coupled with the constancy and zeal 
of maturity, make manifest the sons of God, and we 
need no earthly record, for the names of all such are 
written in the Lamb's book of life. 

Do the sick need visiting or assistance? These 
stand ready with consecrated time. Does the Lord's 
work require money? These stand ready with consecrated 
means. Does his work bring upon them the reproach 
of the world, and of a degenerate nominal 
church? These have also sacrificed reputation and all 
else to God. 

But, again, do you inquire, How shall we deal 
with one who walks disorderly in our midst? if we 
have no organization such as we see about us, how 
can we free ourselves from such, as the Lord requires 
us to do? We answer: Do just as the Scriptures 
direct. 

Now, as in the early Church, there are various 
degrees of advancement among the individual members, 
and, Paul says (I Thess. 5:14), some are feeble-minded, 
comfort them; some are weak, support them; 
but, while you should be patient toward all, warn the 
disorderly (those who are drifting away from the true 
spirit of Christ). Don't mistake the disorderly for 
the weak, and comfort them, nor for the feeble-minded, 
and support them; but patiently, lovingly, warn the 
disorderly. Whom does he call disorderly? There 
are many-ways of walking disorderly. In 2 Thess. 3:11, 



he speaks of some who work not at all, but are 
busy-bodies, and says they should do as he did— work, 
that they be not chargeable to any; and if any will not 
work, neither should he eat. Thus he said he did, that 
he might be an example to others; and (verse 14), 
after you have warned such a one, if he "obey not, 
...note that man, and have no company with 
him, that he may be ashamed.... Yet count him 
not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother." He 
warns us also against immoral and unjust persons, and 

R4163 :page 122 

those who wrest (twist) the Scriptures, and thus turn 
the truth of God into a lie. And the following citations 
clearly show that, in the Apostle's estimation, 
doctrinal disorders are among the chief.— 2 Thess. 3:6-14; 
I Cor. 5:11; Eph. 5:6-11; Rom. 16:17; 2 John 9-11; 
Gal. 1:8,9; Tit. 3:10. 

Our Lord gives explicit directions where there is 
a matter of offense between two brethren (Matt. 18: 15,17): 
"If thy brother shall trespass against thee, go 
and tell him his fault between thee and him alone. If 
he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother; but 
if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or 
two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses 
every word may be established. And if he shall neglect 
to hear them, tell it unto the Church [the company 
of brethren who assemble together]; but if he 
neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an 
heathen man and a publican." If, under the captaincy 
of our Head, we heed his commands, which we will do 
if we love him, how few will be the misunderstandings 
and difficulties among the brethren. And if the true 
brotherhood in Christ is in any degree realized, the 
admonition of the Apostle will be gladly heeded— 
"Not forsaking the assembling of yourselves together, 
and so much the more, as ye see the day drawing on." 
-Heb. 10:25. 

And if new converts be properly begotten by the 
Word of Truth, they will be far more eager to meet 
with two or three possessed of the right spirit and 
seeking to understand the Word of the Lord, than they 
would be to mingle with those whose religion consists 
chiefly of forms of godliness. And here will be the 
opportunity for those who are strong (in the faith and 
love of God) to bear the infirmities of the weak and 
not to please themselves merely— in the choice of subjects, 
studies, etc. 

Should the newly enlightened one know none with 
whom he can meet personally and regularly, let him 
not forget his privilege of communion with the Father 
and the Son in prayer, and with the WATCH TOWER 
by mail; and let him seek for others of the truth-hungry 
among his neighbors— "holding forth the Word of 
life," the Truth. 



This association has its evangelists, pastors and 
teachers, appointed and directed by the Lord. (I Cor. 12:28.) 
They need no laying on of hands by the so-called 
"apostolic succession"; for the "Spirit of the 
Lord hath anointed" all the members of the Body "to 
preach," etc. (Isa. 61:1), and it is the duty of every 
member of the Body to exercise his office for the edification 
of the other members. All the true Church are 
priests, an association of priests, and not an association 
under the control of a clerical or priestly class. (I Pet. 2:9.) 
There is one great Bishop or overseer, who, 
from time to time, raises up and sends his own special 
messengers to uncover truths, overthrow errors, etc. 
—Luther seems to have been one of these, and Wesley 
another. But our Lord retains the Bishopric himself. 
(I Pet. 2:25.) How complete is the voluntary union 
of the Church of Christ, with its heaven-written, love-bound, 
Spirit-ruled membership, and how sad the error 
of mistaking the nominal for the real Church! 

The importance of our fourth proposition need 
not be urged. It would, indeed, be a dreadful calamity 
to lose our membership in the true Church or Body of 
Christ. And no member is out of danger except when 
keeping a vigilant watch over the old nature, counted 
dead, lest it come to life again, and assert itself in the 
form of pride, selfishness, envy, evil-speaking— or 
what not? But, filled with love (the love that prompts 
to sacrifice), and clothed with humility, and under 
cover of the redeeming blood, we are safe in the 
Church (the Body), having the assurance that it is our 
"Father's good pleasure to give us the Kingdom." 

Yes, the Kingdom is the glorious destiny of the true 
Church— the "little flock"— now treading the pathway 
of humiliation, and drinking the bitter cup of death. 
The glory that shall be revealed in us does not yet appear, 
except to the eye of faith, but the temptations 
and trials are very apparent on every hand. "Let us, 
therefore, fear lest, a promise being left us of entering 
into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of 
it."-Heb. 4:1. 

Thus Paul warned others, and thus he feared, lest 
even after having preached to others, he himself should 
be a castaway. (I Cor. 9:27.) We may have our 
names cast out as evil by those of the nominal church, 
and yet "rejoice and be exceeding glad because our 
names are written in heaven." They may frown upon 
us and despitefully use us and say all manner of evil 
against us falsely, or they may seek to win us back by 
flattery, saying they cannot afford to lose our influence, 
we could do so much good by remaining among 
them, etc.; but we must let none of these things move 
us; but, rather, rejoice that we are counted worthy to 
suffer (Acts 5:41,42) for his name's sake. Oh, how 
necessary in this "evil day" is the faith 

"That bears unmoved the world's dark frown, 



Nor heeds its flattering smile; 
That seas of trouble cannot drown, 
Nor Satan's arts beguile." 

Dearly beloved, let us again repeat the warning: 
"Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made 
you free, and be not again entangled with the yoke of 
bondage." 

CHRISTIAN FELLOWSHIP 

Humanity longs for fellowship; and, of recent 
years, the morally inclined have very generally found 
this in the nominal, Protestant churches— in their committees, 
socials, prayer-meetings, etc. Such fellowship 
and such influences have done much to elevate the 
tone and moral and respectable standard of the world; 
but such fellowships are seldom worthy of the name 
Christian fellowship; because, not Christ and his 
Word, but worldly ambitions, pride, dress, show and 
social gossip are generally the grounds and subjects of 
fellowship. Hence, while disapproving church organizations 
as churches, we do esteem them as the highest 
order of worldly diversion. For, although they are 
often schools in which pride, envy, hatred and scandals 
are cultivated, these evils are less gross than the 
many vices which flourish outside these schools of 
morality. 

But, however beneficial these social clubs, called 
churches, may be to the world, as tending to tone down 
murder to malice and envy, and to moderate theft to 
slander— the really consecrated believer, who has passed 
from death unto life, finds in them but little real 
fellowship, except as he discovers here and there a 
kindred spirit, similarly begotten to newness of life— 

R4163 : page 123 

to new motives, thoughts, words and deeds. Nevertheless, 
custom draws them together, and the very 
thought of disturbing that social union is dreadful, because, 
poor as it is, it is all they have. 

Then, to many, there comes the thought of influence 
—upon wife or husband or child or sister or 
brother or friend. What if their withdrawal and the 
admission that their church and all others are really 
worldly and unsatisfying should hinder some one from 
joining some church, and thus, outwardly at least, from 
confessing Christ? What then? Perhaps next winter 
their social club will get up a revival of religion, and, 
by dint of an imported revivalist, and hymns, and 
prayers, and sermons, hot with descriptions or inferences 
of the everlasting torment awaiting all who do 
not join some sect, some might be induced to assume 
the outward forms of godliness without the power; 
and, by withdrawing now you would be debarred from 



helping them in this work.— What then? 

So much the better, we answer. If we have found 
that God's name and character are dishonored and 
misrepresented by every denomination of Christendom, 
why should we want our children and friends to join 
a society under those dishonoring confessions of misbelief? 
Why should we want to join in such work- 
so contrary to all that our Lord and the apostles taught 
and practiced?— which so seriously misrepresents, to 
the seeker after God, the real way to find him, and 
which so deceives the penitent as to what is the real 
"Church of the living God"— "whose names are written 
in heaven"? Why should not every one who finds 
the Truth, or, rather, who is found by the Truth, in this 
time of harvest, be glad to use every atom of his influence 
for the Truth, and against those errors which 
bind so many of God's dear saints? 

Surely the more conscientious we are the more we 
must regret the influence already given in years past 
toward error, to God's dishonor and to the enslavement 
of his children; and the more must be our 
anxiety to reverse our influence as rapidly as possible, 
in order that our future influence for the truth may 
as far as possible counteract past influence given to 
error. And, if we find the bonds of sectarianism difficult 
and painful to burst, we should the more jealously 
seek to spare our children similar pain. An outward 
confession of full consecration to Christ, not 
lived up to, and of faith in a creed not really believed, 
is an injury to whoever makes it. Better far teach 
your children to be honest with themselves, with 
others, and above all with God, than teach them to 
stultify themselves by dishonest professions. It will 
be to their advantage now, as well as in the purgatory 
of the future. See TRACT NO. 58-Purgatory. 

But, still, we shall need fellowship. And the 
scarcity of the proper sort in the nominal churches 
should lead us nearer to the Lord, that we may the 
more appreciate and value his love, his Word, his fellowship, 
and the love and fellowship of all who are of 
his true family and spirit. Soon you will learn to appreciate 
the words of our Master— as true respecting 
the worldly church today, as in his day— "Marvel 
not, if the world hate you; ye know that it hated me 
before it hated you"; "for the friendship of the world 
is enmity against God." Thus, separated more and 
more from the worldly-spirit, you will learn what 
the Apostle meant when he said, "Hereby we know 
that we have passed from death unto life, because we 
love the brethren." Your love for Jesus, our Elder 
Brother, will grow more intense, affecting your every 
thought, word and deed, and begetting a love for all 
who bear his likeness; and this love will not depend 
upon wealth or personal beauty or social conditions. 
But only those somewhat grown in the Spirit and likeness 
of our Redeemer can appreciate such counsel or 



such fellowship. Others love the worldly because the 
love of the Father has not been developed in them, and 
because they do not hate every evil way. 

THE TRUE CHURCH NOT A SECT 

The Church of Christ is neither a sect nor an aggregation 
of sects: it is one and indivisible. It is 
Christ and all who are united to him— joined by a 
living faith in his redemptive work for them, and in a 
full consecration to him, his will and his work, even 
unto death. This true Church is represented by our 
Lord himself under the simile of a vine, of which and 
in which all truly his are, individually, branches. 

Webster's Dictionary defines the word "sect" to 
mean, "A part cut off,. ..hence a body of persons 
who have separated from others by virtue of 
some special doctrine, or set of doctrines, which they 
hold in common." 

This description fits all the various denominations 
of Christendom. All separate themselves from other 
Christians; all do so by virtue of some doctrine or set 
of doctrines which they hold in common. But the 
members of the true Church are each individually 
united to Christ, and not to each other. As the spokes 
of a wheel are each separately fastened in the hub, so 
each member of the Body of Christ is, in his inner or 
spiritual life, bound only to Christ. And as the tire 
steadies and gives unity of operation to the spokes at 
their extremities, so love, the bond of perfectness, is 
the only bond that should be permitted between those 
whose wills are buried into Christ's. 

Our Lord declared that he did not come to put 
a patch or amendment upon Judaism, nor to put the 
new wine of his teaching into the old bottles of Judaism. 
It follows that Christianity is not a schism or 
sect or split off from Judaism. It is, on the contrary, 
a new system of religious teaching, introducing a New 
Covenant between God and man by Christ, the Mediator, 
whose blood seals that New Covenant and makes 
it operative. 

The only test of fellowship therefore is,— to be a 
Christian; one truly united to Christ by faith and consecration; 
—not without a real consecration, nor without 
the true faith. But the meaning of a full consecration 
of thought, word and deed is readily understood 
by some who doubt and question what is the 
true faith necessary to the true membership in Christ 
—the faith at first delivered unto the saints by our 
Lord and his apostles. This true faith is— that all 
were sinners, justly under God's condemnation to 
death through the fall; that Christ Jesus our Lord died 
for OUR SINS according to the Scriptures, and that he 
was raised from the dead by the Father, who thus 
gave assurance to all that Christ's sin-offering 
on our behalf was complete and fully satisfactory, 



under which those of Adam's race who 

are sick of sin and desirous of harmony with 

R4163 : page 124 

God can be justified and return to his love, favor 
and blessing. (I Cor. 15:3,4; Rom. 5:1,6,12,18.) 
Whoever holds this simple faith is a believer, a 
member of "the household of faith." Whoever with 
this faith fully consecrates himself to the Lord's service 
is a baptized believer, a probationary member of 
the one, true Church, whose names are written in 
heaven. If he run the Christian race as he has covenanted 
to do, he will win the prize, and be one of the 
Elect Church in glory, granted a place with the Lord 
in his throne. 

This is the basis of our hope: the only foundation 
—the one which no man ever could lay, but which God 
laid for us (I Cor. 3:11); for, "while we were yet sinners, 
Christ died for us" (Rom. 5:8), the "just for the 
unjust, that he might bring us to God." (I Pet. 3:18.) 
Realizing that we are sinners under condemnation to 
death, and that we may have peace with God and be 
justified to life by appropriating to ourselves the merits 
of his death, we gladly accept him as our Redeemer. 
"We have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness 
of sins." (Eph. 1:7.) This is justification; 
and, being thus justified by faith, we have peace with 
God. Then, realizing, further, that those who are 
thus redeemed should not live the remainder of their 
lives to themselves and their own pleasure, but to him 
who died for them (2 Cor. 5:14,15), we consecrate 
ourselves to his service. 

Built upon this foundation are the minor doctrines 
and those principles which must be worked out in the 
life. Thus we are admonished by the Apostle (2 Pet. 1:5-8) 
to add to this faith various graces and further 
attainments— of virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, 
godliness, brotherly-kindness and charity (love). 

This was the faith of the early Church; and this 
is the faith of all who acceptably bear the name of 
Christ; and such only are properly termed Christians. 
True, the early Church progressed beyond these first 
principles, to the use of the "strong meat," and a comprehension, 
with all saints, of the deep things of God; 
but the "babes in Christ," and those "who, by reason 
of use, had their senses exercised," were together one 
family— "all one in Christ Jesus." They were not to 
leave these principles by displacing them with other 
theories, but by adding to them as above explained. 
The more advanced in grace and doctrine bore the infirmities 
of the weak, each and all seeking to grow in 
grace and knowledge, more and more. Where this 
apostolic rule was observed, there could be no sect, no 
division in this Body. It was only when error began 
to develop in the congregation that Paul wrote to 



some: I hear that there are divisions (sects) among 
you, and I partly believe it; for it is evident from 
what I learn of the worldliness and error coming in 
among you, that there would of necessity be divisions; 
for those true to the Lord could not have fellowship 
with such unfruitful works of darkness, but must 
rather reprove them.— I Cor. 11:18,19. 

Divisions were objected to in the one true Church, 
and all the apostles taught that there is one Lord, one 
faith and one baptism. There is one fold and one 
Shepherd. (I Cor. 12:25.) Christians are a separated 
class— separate from the world, separate from sinners, 
separate from all others— in that they accept salvation 
through the redeeming blood of Christ. Their sympathy 
and co-operation are not of force, doctrinal or 
other, but merely of love and common interest, as fellow-pilgrims 
and fellow-heirs. The doctrine of the 
ransom serves to guard each one thus in Christ against 
all professing Christ's name but denying or ignoring 
this fundamental part of his work. Neither collectively 
nor individually should the saints have fellowship 
with works of darkness.— Eph. 5:11. 

It is not remarkable that Satan should seek to 
divide and separate the sheep, and to put up fences, 
such as the denominational creeds prove to be, which 
would hinder some of the sheep from following the 
Shepherd into green pastures of fresh and living truth. 
This would be but wisdom on his part. But it is 
strange that he should be able to fetter the reason of 
so many, that they should think it a mark of spirituality 
to say, I am of Luther, a Lutheran; I of Calvin 
or Knox, a Presbyterian; I of Wesley, a Methodist, 
and so on. The Apostle Paul, on the contrary, said to 
some of his day, who were in danger of this spirit of 
sectarianism: While one saith, I am of Paul, and I of 
Apollos, and I of Peter, are ye not carnal? Is it not 
in direct opposition to the Spirit of Christ to think or 
act thus? "Is Christ divided?" Did Paul or Peter 
or Knox or Calvin or Wesley or any one else than 
Christ die for your sins, and redeem you? They, as 
servants of Christ and the Church, should be esteemed 
very highly for their works' sake, but to name the 
Bride after any other than the Bridegroom is manifestly 
improper. 

Oh, that all could see that in God's sight there is 
but one Church— whose names are written in heaven 
—and that God cannot and does not sympathize with 
or recognize any split in the real Church! He does not 
recognize the narrow creeds in which so many of the 
sheep are confined and starving. As we have shown, 
he has placed but one fence around his fold. Inside 
of it there is plenty of room, for both the lambs and 
the fully matured sheep. 

A PARABLE OF FALSE SHEEP-FOLDS 



Picture in your mind a fine, large pasture, surrounded 
by a strong and high fence (the Law of 

God), which keeps all the sheep within, but which recognizes 
no means of access to that fold (justified condition), 
except Christ, the door, faith in whose sacrifice 
for sin is the only way into the fold. All climbing 
into the fold by any other way are thieves and 
robbers. This is the pasture provided by the Good 
Shepherd for his sheep, for whom he once laid down 
his life. Into the true fold of Christ quite a flock of 
sheep have entered. They belong to the true Shepherd; 
but, as we look before us at the grassy slopes, 
only a few sheep, a little flock indeed, seem to be enjoying 
the liberty of the fold— the liberty wherewith 
Christ hath made them free. Where are the others? 
We look, and see inside the door, on either side of the 
pathway, small enclosures. Over each is written a 
peculiar name— Presbyterian, Methodist, Baptist, Second 
Adventist, Roman Catholic, Greek Catholic, Episcopalian, 
Lutheran, etc. Looking at these pens we find 
they differ. Some are built like prisons with iron 
frames and bars and chains, others less strong, and 

R4163 : page 125 

some are merely marked out "dead lines," over which 
the sheep understand they must not go. 

These pens are full of sheep, but they are weak, 
delicate and sickly for lack of proper exercise and 
fresh, nourishing food. They are regularly fed, but 
only upon husks, with occasionally a little milk, but 
they eat without relish and get no good from it. Many 
of them are leaner and poorer than when they first 
entered the fold, and some have become blind. Strange 
to say, all seem to be perfectly satisfied, each with his 
own pen, and very seldom does one attempt to escape. 

We also noticed that under-shepherds had been 
appointed to help to pasture the sheep, and that they 
had constructed these pens, but apparently without 
the Chief Shepherd's permission. 

Perplexed to know why the sheep thus submitted 
to be penned, we watched to see how they were induced 
to enter the various enclosures. As they entered 
the fold through the only door (faith in Christ), 
each under-shepherd tried to impress upon them, as 
they passed, the necessity of getting into one of the 
many pens, and the desirability of the particular one 
he represented. As a consequence, nearly all the sheep 
which entered the fold got penned, for they trusted 
the under-shepherds and followed the majority; and 
only a few passed on to enjoy all the liberty of the 
fold. The under-shepherds sought continually to impress 
upon their sheep that the free sheep were 
heretics and en route to destruction. 

We watched to see the end of this matter, for we 
learned that the Chief Shepherd was expected by some, 



and we knew that his coming would soon demonstrate 
whether he approved this dividing and imprisoning of 
his flock. Nearly all the under-shepherds claimed that 
he would not come for a long time yet. 

Presently we heard great rejoicing among the free 
sheep. We looked, and found that the Chief Shepherd 
had come quietly, unobservedly ("as a thief"), and 
was now recognized by some of the sheep; and hence 
the rejoicing. Some of those imprisoned heard the 
Shepherd's voice; they looked and listened, yet could 
scarce believe. It was indeed the voice of the Shepherd 
as he tended and ordered his flock. His true sheep 
seemed to hear his voice condemning the penning 
process, and saying to his sheep, "Come out!" 

Some leaped the fences and thus gained liberty 
and food from the Shepherd's hand, while others were 
so weak and faint for lack of nourishment that they 
trembled with anticipation, but did not come out 
through fear of the under-shepherds. We noticed, outside 
the fences, that some of the free sheep brought 
food to the bars, thus nourishing the weak ones until 
they were strong enough to leap the fence. The under-shepherds, 
meanwhile, were alert with redoubled vigilance, 
and by varying policies sought to keep control 
of their (?) flocks. Some denounced and scoffed at 
those without, and threatened the sheep within; and 
others redoubled the customary exercises— the "forms 
of godliness." 

We waited to see the outcome, and saw the unfaithful 
under-shepherds bound and beaten with 
stripes, the prison-pens all destroyed, and the fold used 
as designed— the flock one, its name one, and its Head 
—the true Shepherd who gave his life for the sheep 
—Christ Jesus. 

"COME OUT OF HER, MY PEOPLE" 

In Revelation 18:4-8, we have most emphatic instructions 
from our Lord, respecting our proper course 
at the present time. This advice was not always applicable; 
not until mystic Babylon's fall under divine 
condemnation, which prophecy shows was in A.D. 
1878. As shown in the Scriptures, Babylon, the 
mother of abominations, had long misrepresented the 
truth and the true Church, which to a large extent was 
in her and in her daughter systems (See SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES, VOL. II., pages 271-282, VOL. III., pages 135-197); 
but her sentence of rejection was reserved until 
the time of "harvest." 

The expression, "Come out of her, my people," 
indicates clearly that some of God's true saints have 
been in Babylon, and that, up to the time of her fall, 
God did not object to their being in the nominal 
church systems, and did not call on them to come out. 
Indeed the Lord himself sometimes spoke to and 
through Babylon up to the time when, having knocked 



at the door, he declared his presence, and, being unheeded 
by the self-conscious, but really blind and miserable 
Laodicea, he spewed her out of his mouth (to 
be no longer his mouth-piece) forever.— Rev. 3:14-22. 

But now the judgment of the great Millennial day 
has begun; and its beginning is with the Church— to 
separate the true from the false or nominal. 

To accomplish this separation, the truth— "the 
sword of the spirit"— sharper than any two-edged 
sword, is unsheathed. The conflict now in progress between 
truth and error, light and darkness, is for the 
very purpose of testing, sifting and separating the 
"children of light," who love the truth, from the children 
of darkness, who love the error. As heretofore 
shown, the second advent of our Lord is in this respect 
like his first advent; and his words, "Think not 
that I am come to send peace on earth; I came not to 
send peace, but a sword" (Luke 12:51), are applicable 
now— until his Church has been gathered and 
glorified, and his Kingdom set up in glorious authority. 

The expression, "that ye be not partakers of her sins, 
and receive not of her plagues," implies that, in this 
time in which they are called out, God's people will be 
brought to a clear knowledge of the truth;— they will 
see clearly what constitute Babylon's sins— errors of 
doctrine and of life. And, when so enlightened, those 
who are God's people, having his Spirit, his love for 
right and truth, will hate the error and darkness in 
which for so long they have been. Such will be ready 
and anxious to know their duty toward the nominal 
church. The effect of the light of truth upon their 
hearts will be such that they will instinctively feel and 
ask themselves, "What communion hath light with 
darkness?" and they will look to the Lord to indicate to 
them his wisdom and will. To such the Lord answers, 
through his Word, "Come out of her, my people." 

The expression, "that ye be not partakers of her 
sins," is in the nature of a reminder, as well as a 
threat. It is a reminder that, when in ignorance of the 
truth, they had no responsibility for the errors and the 
wrong course of Babylon, mother and daughters; but 

R4163 : page 126 

that now since they see those errors— those sins— they 
are responsible; and that if now they stay in these 
systems they, by intelligently assenting, are as responsible 
as those who formulated those errors, or more 
so, and will surely and justly partake of the 
consequences. 

But, for various reasons, some seem anxious to 
excuse themselves, and to stay in Babylon. Such indicate 
that they lack the proper spirit of the truth, or 
else that they have not yet digested a sufficiency of the 
"meat in due season" to give them the necessary perception 
of her sins, which in the Lord's estimation are 



piled up to heaven. Another confusing thing is that 
some of the daughters of the Roman Mother have put 
away many of the mother's outward marks and forms, 
while retaining much of her spirit and doctrines. 

For instance, Baptists, Congregationalists, Second 
Adventists, Disciples, and a few other denominations, 
claim to be without bondage; claim that the Bible is 
their creed and that each group or congregation has 
charge of its own affairs, and that the meetings in 
which these independent congregations of each denomination 
unite are merely voluntary associations, in 
which denominational supervision or bondage finds no 
recognition. Then, especially with the "Disciples," the 
confession demanded is very simple. But they mostly 
mention the doctrine of the trinity, or eternal torment, 
or both. And where these are not specified, they are 
understood, and if attention be called to these subjects, 
or to the manner of our Lord's second coming, 
or to "the times of restitution," there is always a strong 
current of opposition, and, whether written or unwritten, 
a creed will be found which admits no Biblical examination 
or criticism; and, unless you assent, you 
must either keep quiet or get out. 

The word "creed" comes from credo, and means 
I believe. It is entirely proper that every Christian 
have for himself a creed, a belief. And, if a number 
of Christians come to a unity of faith upon the lines of 
the Word of God, their assembling together for fellowship 
and communion is both proper and helpful, as 
the Bible declares. The general difficulty is that, when 
groups of Christians meet as brethren, they either 
make a written or an understood creed which goes beyond 
the Word of God and includes human tradition; 
or else they ignore all faith, and make morality— good 
works— the only basis of fellowship. But, as the name 
indicates, Christians are believers in Christ, and not 
merely moralists. While, therefore, a creed is necessary, 
and he who has none has no belief, and would 
therefore be an unbeliever, and while in Christian fellowship 
harmony of faith is necessary to communion, 
all should see that the fellowship and faith of the early 
Church, under divine direction, were built upon the 
first principles of the doctrine of Christ; and nothing 
more or less should be the basis of Christian fellowship 
here and now. 

We will suggest a safe way to judge whether your 
present associations in the name of Christ are part of 
Babylon or not, and whether, therefore, you are one of 
those called to "Come out." It is this: If there is no 
meeting of the congregation at which believers can call 
up a passage of Scripture for discussion, in which discussion 
you, with others, can present your views of 
God's Word, there is something wrong. You cannot 
long have fellowship there. Your light is under a 
bushel, and will go out, unless you give it more liberty. 
You must come out of such condition or your light will 



become darkness. 

But if there be meetings at which you have an 
equal opportunity with others of calling up any portion 
of Scripture and expressing your view of its meaning 
on a par with others, you may conclude that you have 
found at least some evidence of Christian liberty; for 
no Christian has the right to refuse to give, when 
asked, a reason for the hope that is in him. And since 
the credo or belief of each Christian professes to be 
built upon God's Word, it follows that each should be 
not only willing but ready at all times to change his 
belief for one more Scriptural, if such can be pointed 
out to him. 

Having found those who follow Berean methods, 
rejoice— but with fear, until you have tested them further. 
Do not abuse their hospitality by attempting to 
monopolize the time; be content and thankful to get 
your proportion of it. And, when your choice of a 
subject comes up, see (1) that it is wisely chosen, one 
that will strengthen, and not strangle, your hearers. 
(2) Pray that, as a minister (servant) of the truth, 
you may be "a workman that needeth not to be 
ashamed." (3) Let nothing be done through strife, 
contention or vainglorious effort to display yourself or 
your knowledge of the Word; but (4) "speak the 
truth in love," while you speak it none the less clearly 
and forcibly. 

So long as you have such opportunities to hear 
others and to express yourself, you may conclude that 
you are in a safe place. As you progress, in hearing 
from others, and in expressing yourself to others 
freely and candidly, either you or they will be likely to 
come into harmony with the spirit of the truth. If 
your views be Scriptural and theirs not, they will doubtless 
come to hate you and the truth, and soon you will 
find no fellowship with them. 

But in a majority of cases no such proving of 
spirits will be necessary. Generally you will find that 
congregations have formulated a creed to which each 
member is obliged to subscribe— if not in writing or 
by voice, at least by silent assent. In such a case, get 
such creed or confession, and see whether or not it 
fairly, frankly and truthfully represents your faith. If 
it does not, you should lose no time in repudiating it, 
however conscientiously ignorant of it you may have 
been for years past. Now you know, and now if you 
remain in, intelligently, you belie yourself, and thus 
prove yourself not a lover of the truth and a pleaser of 
God, but a lover of error and a pleaser of men. 

It does not matter at all that you may have told 
the minister and some or all of the elders of the church 
of your disagreement and disbelief. They have no authority 
with God or men to absolve you from your 
public confession. If, for instance, you are a Presbyterian; 

R4163 : page 127 



it is not the minister, nor the Session, nor the 
local congregation merely that you have joined, but as 
well the entire body of Presbyterians, everywhere. 
And so long as you are professedly a member, you are 
obligated in your belief and conduct to them all. And 
before the whole world you stand numbered as one of 
them, and as a partner in all that is professed by them 
all in common. If you do not believe as they do, it is 
your duty to them all, and to the world, to withdraw, 
and thus set yourself and others right before all. If by 
the Lord's mercy you are one of the few who have 
passed from darkness into his marvelous light, you will 
now feel ashamed of the doctrines you once delighted 
to confess, and will delight to reduce by one the number 
of errorists, and to add one to the number of the 
despised little flock— disowned, indeed, of men, but 
owned and loved and cherished of God. 

As you did not join the minister or Session 
merely, but the congregation and the entire denomination, 
your dissolution of your membership should, if 
possible, be as public as was your joining. And, in reply 
to many inquiries, we suggest below a general outline 
for a letter of withdrawal which such as desire 
are at liberty to copy and use. If possible, it should be 
read aloud at some general congregational meeting, at 
which general speaking, remarks, etc., are in order- 
such as a prayer-meeting. After being read, it should be 
handed to the leader of the meeting as the representative 
of the congregation and officers. If by reason of 
sickness or from any other cause this course be not 
possible, we advise that a copy of the letter be sent to 
each member of the congregation, that there be no 
room for misunderstanding or misrepresentation. We 
will gladly supply copies of this letter printed in typewriter 
type, together with envelopes, and tracts to accompany 
same— free, upon being advised of the number 
necessary. 

THE SUGGESTED LETTER: 

Dear Brethren and Sisters, 

Members and Officers of the 

Church. The Lord has of late been teaching me some 
wonderful things out of his Word, whereof I am glad. 
The Bible has become a new book to me, so widely 
have the eyes of my understanding been opened. God 
is now my Father, Christ my Redeemer, and all believers 
my brethren, in a sense never before 
appreciated. 

I would not have you understand that I saw a vision 
or had a special revelation; I merely have God's 
Word, "written aforetime for our learning;" but God 
has recently made it clearer to my understanding, 
through some of his servants. Nor do those servants 



claim special inspirations or revelations, but merely 
that God's due time has now come to unseal and make 
known his glorious plan, wisely kept secret in the past, 
as the Scriptures themselves declare.— Dan. 12:9. 

Of these blessed things I might mention a few, 
very briefly: I find that the Scriptures do not teach 
the eternal torment of all except the saints. I find 
that the full penalty of willful sin against clear knowledge 
will, in the language of the Apostle, be "everlasting 
destruction from the presence of the Lord." But, 
still better, if possible, I find that, while so many of 
our race (indeed by far the majority) have died in 
total or partial ignorance of God and his offer of life 
everlasting through Christ, God has graciously provided 
that during the Millennial Age all such of the 
families of the earth shall be blessed with the needed 
knowledge, and granted opportunity for obedience 
unto eternal life. And, further, I find its teaching to 
be, that we, the Gospel Church, as joint-heirs with 
Christ our Lord, are to be God's agents in bestowing 
that great Millennial blessing. And, finally, it appears 
that this time of blessing for which God's people 
have so long prayed, saying, "Thy Kingdom come, thy 
will be done on earth as it is done in heaven," is very 
near at hand, and even now wheat and tares are being 
separated, and soon a great time of trouble will overthrow 
existing institutions and usher in Christ's Kingdom 
of peace and equity. 

I shall be glad to furnish the Scriptural evidences 
of these things to any who may desire to search the 
Word, and to prove whether these things be so. 

But now, dear friends, comes an unpleasant duty. 
I find that many of these gems of truth are in direct 
conflict with our views as held and taught and confessed 
in our denominational literature; and hence, in 
honesty to you and myself, I must withdraw from 
membership with you in this church. To remain would 
be to misrepresent your views, and to have you misrepresent 
my views— the doctrine of the eternal torment 
of nine-tenths of our race being now in my judgment 
horrible— indeed a blasphemy against the God of 
love, whose Word, when understood, teaches quite the 
contrary. 

For nearly. ..years I have tried faithfully to 
keep my engagements with you as a fellow-member of 
this church, and have learned to love some of you very 
dearly— some for social qualities and some for saintliness 
— Christlikeness. It is, therefore, with pain that 
I announce to you my withdrawal, and I owe you this 
explanation. Let me assure you that it is not because 
my love is less than formerly, for, by God's grace, I 
believe it is expanding toward him and his, and, sympathetically, 
toward all our race. This action, therefore, 
is not to be understood as a withdrawal from the 
Church of Christ, whose names are written in heaven, 
but merely a withdrawal from the.... Church, 



whose names are written on earth. I withdraw in 

order that I may be more free in my conscience, toward 

God and men, and that I may most fully fellowship 

all who are heartily the Lord's people— not only 

such in this congregation and denomination, but in all 

others as well. I ask no letter of dismission, for I 

could not hope to be better suited elsewhere. So far 

as I am concerned, I wish to remove every barrier between 

myself and fellow-pilgrims. So then, to all of 

you who are in Christ Jesus— members of his Body— I 

still am a fellow-member, a branch in the true Vine 

(Christ), whom nothing can separate from the love of 

God in Christ, my Lord.-John 15:5; Rom. 8:38,39. 



page 129 



SEMI-MONTHLY 