
Theocratic Schools—Evidence of Jehovah’s Love




JEHOVAH is our “Grand Instructor.” (Isa. 30:20) Love motivates him to educate and train others. For example, moved by deep love, Jehovah shows Jesus “all the things he himself does.” (John 5:20) Love for us, his Witnesses, moves Jehovah to give us “the tongue of the taught ones,” as we put forth every effort to honor him and help others.—Isa. 50:4.
In imitation of Jehovah’s pattern of love, the Teaching Committee of the Governing Body uses ten theocratic schools to train ones who have both the desire and the circumstances to enroll. Do you view these schools as an evidence of Jehovah’s love?
Enjoy an overview of the current theocratic schools and comments from some who have attended them. Then ask yourself, ‘How can I benefit from this divine education?’



BENEFIT FROM THEOCRATIC TRAINING

As “the God of love,” Jehovah provides training that adds meaning to our lives, prepares us to overcome challenges, and helps us to experience great joy in our ministry. (2 Cor. 13:11) Like first-century disciples, we are well-equipped to help others, “teaching them to observe all the things” we have been commanded.—Matt. 28:20.
Although we may not be able to attend all of these schools, we can benefit from one or more of them. And we can apply the Bible-based instruction thus available. We can also increase our effectiveness in the ministry by working alongside well-trained servants of Jehovah.
Ask yourself, ‘Do my circumstances allow me to reach out for attending any of these schools?’
Jehovah’s worshippers consider it a privilege to support these valuable schools and to be taught there. May the training you receive draw you closer to God and equip you to fulfill your responsibilities before him, especially the urgent commission to preach the good news.



THEOCRATIC SCHOOLS OVERVIEW
Theocratic Ministry School
Purpose: To train publishers to be effective preachers and teachers of the good news.
Duration: Continuous.
Location: Local Kingdom Hall.
Qualifications: All who are regularly associating with the congregation, who agree with the teachings of the Bible, and whose lives are in harmony with Christian principles.
Enrollment: The Theocratic Ministry School overseer enrolls students.
Sharon, who is paralyzed with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), says: “The Theocratic Ministry School has taught me to do research and to present information logically. I have also learned to focus on the spiritual needs of others—not just my own.”
Arnie, a longtime traveling overseer, comments: “I grew up stuttering and had trouble making eye contact with others. This school has helped me gain confidence and self-worth. With Jehovah’s help through this training, I have learned breathing and concentration techniques. I am very grateful for the ability to praise God in the congregation and in my ministry.”
Bethel Entrants’ School
Purpose: To help new arrivals to Bethel to make a success of their service.
Duration: 45 minutes each week for 16 weeks.
Location: Bethel.
Qualifications: Must be a permanent member of the Bethel family or a temporary volunteer who has been approved to serve at Bethel for a year or longer.
Enrollment: New members of the Bethel family are automatically enrolled.
Demetrius, who attended this school in the 1980’s, says: “This course improved my study habits and helped prepare me for a long Bethel career. The instructors, curriculum, and practical counsel convinced me of Jehovah’s loving concern and of his desire to help me to succeed in my Bethel service.”
Kaitlyn comments: “I was helped to focus on what is most important—being a spiritual person. Entrants’ School has enhanced my appreciation for Jehovah, his house, and his organization.”
Kingdom Ministry School
Purpose: To train traveling overseers, elders, and, at times, ministerial servants to care for their oversight and organizational responsibilities. (Acts 20:28) Current situations, trends, and immediate needs of the congregations are covered. This school is held every few years as decided by the Governing Body.
Duration: In recent years, this school has been conducted for two to two and a half days for traveling overseers, one and a half days for elders, and one day for ministerial servants.
Location: Usually at a Kingdom Hall or an Assembly Hall.
Qualifications: Must be a traveling overseer, an elder, or a ministerial servant.
Enrollment: Elders and ministerial servants receive an invitation from the circuit overseer. The branch office invites traveling overseers.
“The school, though compact and concise, invigorates elders and helps them to maintain joy and ‘carry on as men’ in Jehovah’s service. Both new and longtime elders learn to shepherd effectively and to be fitly united in the ‘same line of thought.’”—Quinn.
“This training struck the perfect balance between building our spiritual appreciation, warning us of dangers, and providing us with practical suggestions to care for the flock. How kind of Jehovah to help us.”—Michael.
Pioneer Service School
Purpose: To help pioneers ‘fully accomplish their ministry.’—2 Tim. 4:5.
Duration: Two weeks.
Location: Decided by the branch office; usually at a Kingdom Hall.
Qualifications: Must have been a regular pioneer for a year or longer.a
Enrollment: Eligible pioneers are automatically enrolled and are informed by their circuit overseer.
“That school has helped me deal with challenges in the ministry and in my life,” says Lily. “The way I study, teach, and use the Bible has greatly improved. I am better prepared to help others, support the elders, and contribute to the growth of the congregation.”
Brenda, who has attended the school twice, notes: “It allowed me to be 100 percent absorbed in spiritual things, to strengthen my conscience, and to focus on helping others. Clearly, Jehovah is generous!”
If a class does not have a full complement of new pioneers, some pioneers who have not attended in the last five years may be invited to attend again.

School for Congregation Elders
Purpose: To help elders care for their responsibilities in the congregation and to deepen their spirituality.
Duration: Five days.
Location: Decided by the branch office; usually at a Kingdom Hall or an Assembly Hall.
Qualifications: Must be an appointed elder.
Enrollment: The branch office invites elders.
Note comments from some in the 92nd class in the United States:
“The school has benefited me greatly, helping me to look at myself and see how I can take care of Jehovah’s sheep.”
“I am ready to be more encouraging to all by stressing the main points in the Scriptures.”
“I will carry this training with me for the rest of my life.”
School for Traveling Overseers and Their Wives
Purpose: To help circuit and district overseers to be more effective in serving congregations as they “work hard in speaking and teaching.”—1 Tim. 5:17; 1 Pet. 5:2, 3.
Duration: Two months.
Location: Determined by the branch office.
Qualifications: Brother must be a circuit or a district overseer.
Enrollment: The branch office invites traveling overseers and their wives.
“Our appreciation for Jesus’ headship over the organization was enhanced. We saw the need to encourage the brothers we serve and to strengthen the unity of each congregation. The course impressed on our minds that while the traveling overseer offers advice and even correction on occasion, his main goal is to help the brothers to see that Jehovah loves them.”—Joel, 1st class, 1999.
Bible School for Single Brothers
Purpose: To prepare single elders and ministerial servants to care for additional responsibilities in Jehovah’s organization. Many graduates will receive an assignment in their home country, wherever there is a need. Others may be assigned to another country if they make themselves available. Some graduates may serve as temporary special pioneers to open up and expand the work in remote and isolated areas.
Duration: Two months.
Location: Decided by the branch office; usually at a Kingdom Hall or an Assembly Hall.
Qualifications: Single brothers between 23 and 62 years of age who are in good health and who want to serve wherever there is a greater need. (Mark 10:29, 30) They must have served as regular pioneers for at least two years and have served for at least two continuous years as elders or ministerial servants.
Enrollment: A meeting is held at the circuit assembly to provide information for those interested.
“Being immersed in this course allowed Jehovah’s spirit to make changes deep within me,” says Rick, from the 23rd class in the United States. “When Jehovah extends an assignment, he supports you in that assignment. I learned that if I focus on God’s will and not on myself, he will strengthen me.”
“I learned to appreciate God’s organization as a modern-day miracle,” notes Andreas, who serves in Germany. “The training helped prepare me for the work ahead. Also, many Bible examples taught me this fundamental truth: Serving my brothers and Jehovah leads to true happiness.”
Bible School for Christian Couples
Purpose: To give married couples specialized training so that they can be used more fully by Jehovah and his organization. Many graduates will be assigned to serve where there is a greater need in their home country. Some may receive an assignment in another country if they make themselves available. Graduates may serve as temporary special pioneers to open up and expand the work in remote and isolated areas.
Duration: Two months.
Location: This school is conducted in the United States, and beginning in September 2012, it also will be held in selected branch territories worldwide, usually at a Kingdom Hall or an Assembly Hall.
Qualifications: Married couples between 25 and 50 years of age who are in good health, who have the circumstances to serve wherever there is a greater need, and who have the attitude: “Here I am! Send me.” (Isa. 6:8) They must have been married for at least two years and have been in the full-time service for at least two years without interruption. The husband must have been an elder or a ministerial servant for at least two consecutive years.
Enrollment: A meeting is held at the district convention to provide information for those interested in enrolling. If there is no meeting at conventions in your country and you would like to apply, you may write your branch office for further information.
“What a life-changing eight weeks and a great opportunity for couples wanting to reach out! We are determined to keep a balanced life that will enable us to use our time wisely.”—Eric and Corina 1st class, 2011.
Watchtower Bible School of Gilead
Purpose: To train students to serve as field missionaries in densely populated areas, to be traveling overseers, or to be Bethelites. The goal is to strengthen and stabilize field and branch organization.
Duration: Five months.
Location: Watchtower Educational Center, Patterson, New York, U.S.A.
Qualifications: Married couples who are already serving in some form of special full-time service—that is, as field missionaries who have not attended the school, special pioneers, traveling overseers, or Bethelites. They must have been in such service together for at least three years without interruption. They need to speak, read, and write English fluently.
Enrollment: Couples may be invited by their Branch Committee to apply.
Lade and Monique from the United States now serve in Africa. “Gilead School prepared us to go anywhere in the world, roll up our sleeves, and work with our dear brothers,” says Lade.
Monique adds: “As I apply what I’ve learned from God’s Word, I find great joy in my assignment. I see that joy as further proof of Jehovah’s love.”
School for Branch Committee Members and Their Wives
Purpose: To help those on Branch Committees to supervise Bethel homes, to give attention to service matters affecting congregations, and to oversee circuits and districts. They also learn about translating, printing, and the shipping of literature.
Duration: Two months.
Location: Watchtower Educational Center, Patterson, New York, U.S.A.
Qualifications: Brother must be a Branch Committee or a Country Committee member or being assigned as such.
Enrollment: The Governing Body invites brothers and their wives.
Lowell and Cara, from the 25th class, serve in Nigeria. “I was reminded that no matter how busy I am or what work I have been given, the key to pleasing Jehovah is spirituality,” says Lowell. “The course also stressed that how we treat others must revolve around the love that Jehovah shows his servants.”
“One comment I have meditated on is this,” adds Cara. “If I cannot state a point simply, I need to study the subject before trying to teach others.”



