Fine Conduct​—a Powerful Witness
DEEP love for Jehovah God and fellow humans moves true Christians to conduct themselves in a laudable way. Their fine conduct ‘adorns the teaching of God.’ (Titus 2:10) It makes that teaching appealing to honest-hearted persons. In fact, many who are now associating with Jehovah’s Christian witnesses were initially attracted to the Bible’s message by observing the powerful witness given by commendable conduct.
● While working at the Customs Agency Service in Atlanta, Georgia, a woman met one of Jehovah’s witnesses. Regarding this Witness, she writes: “There was something outstandingly different about this woman. Her modesty and manner of conducting herself were unlike that of most businesswomen. We became friends and, during one conversation, she told me that she was one of Jehovah’s witnesses.
“Although at first this seemed rather strange to me, I was interested in hearing more about it. As she answered my barrage of questions, I realized that this was definitely the truth.”
Today this woman is also a dedicated, baptized witness of Jehovah.
● A manager of a large restaurant in the United States had his interest aroused when a Witness began working there. About twenty-five cooks and busboys and between fifty and seventy-five women worked in the restaurant. But it was the Witness who stood out from all the others. In a short period of time she became known as one of the better workers. She never cursed nor did she smoke, share in off-color stories or attend any of the after-hour parties. She also made good use of her ‘break’ periods to consider Biblical matters.
All this made a favorable impression on the manager. He tried to assist her by extending to her the opportunity to get off on religious holidays. But she would turn these opportunities down, always explaining Scripturally why she did not share in them.
Eventually the manager began to ask more questions. Discerning his interest, the Witness directed him to one of the male Witnesses, and a home Bible study was started with him.
Later, this manager married the Witness whose conduct had impressed him, quit his job as manager and, as a baptized witness of Jehovah, took up the full-time “pioneer” ministry. For some thirteen years now he has been serving as a traveling overseer.
● Relating her personal experience, a Witness from California says: “When most people think of Jehovah’s witnesses they think of their door-to-door activity. But this wasn’t the case with me. I was contacted by a Witness at school. We had no classes together or any friendship. But I observed her from a distance. I could tell that she was different and this attracted me.
“One day this Witness approached me and my twin sister and asked if we would like to study the Bible with her. I readily agreed, but my sister just ‘went along’ with it. During our studies, when I got to know this Witness better, I could see that her whole outlook on life was different. She was so secure, happy and satisfied. She had a clean moral life and was uninvolved in extracurricular school activities.
“After a while my twin sister quit studying but I continued. My sister always tried to discourage me and made it very hard for me. My brother also discouraged me, especially when he noticed how I started to change the way I dressed. Even my father tried to keep me from getting involved.
“As time went by I began to see more of a distinction between Jehovah’s witnesses and the world. For example, at my first district assembly I really started to notice the difference between the modest length of the Witnesses’ skirts and dresses and the length of my dresses, which were like the world’s. In fact, I was so embarrassed because of this that the whole last day of the assembly I wore an apron to hide my dress.”
Today this girl, along with the Witness whom she met in school, is sharing in the full-time ministry as a pioneer. She is very grateful for having found someone different in school, someone who reflected Christianity in every way.
Clearly fine Christian conduct gives a powerful witness and lends weight to the public proclamation of Bible truth. Should this not give true Christians added encouragement to let their love for God and neighbor prompt them to maintain fine conduct at all times?

