Help Others Learn About the Greatest Man
1 Many who have read the book The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived have expressed sincere appreciation for the effect that it has had on their lives. One wrote: “When I got to the end of the book, I felt as if I had been invited by Jesus to associate with him, to live by his side, to share his sufferings, his emotions, every aspect of his ministry. . . . Reading the book is like watching a film about Jesus’ life.”
2 The Greatest Man book helps us to get better acquainted not only with Jesus but also with Jehovah. (John 14:9) One 12-​year-​old said concerning the book: “It comforted me so much that I prayed to Jehovah with tears of joy as soon as I read it. Deep down inside, I was reassured to know that Jehovah and Jesus are watching over us.” Jesus said, as recorded at John 17:3, that it means everlasting life for us to know Jehovah and his Son. Studying this book about Jesus’ life gives us special insight into Jehovah’s personality because Jesus is “the exact representation of his very being.”​—Heb. 1:3.
3 Over 19 million copies of the Greatest Man book have been printed in over 70 languages. This shows how well the book is being received. Many read the entire book as soon as they receive it. One interested man read it through within two weeks of obtaining it. A clergyman who accepted the book stated: “I cannot put the book down. My wife and I read some of it every night before we go to bed.”
4 Informal Witnessing: One brother showed the Greatest Man book to people at his place of employment. Word got around that he had this book, and reports circulated about what it contained. His coworkers got up a list of those who wanted a copy. He placed 461 books! Five of those who received it are studying. A sister, while traveling on an airplane, placed the Greatest Man book with a priest who was going to attend the ordination of a new cardinal. The priest had been in the Vatican for 40 years. All of us should take full advantage of opportunities to recommend the book to others.
5 Youths Appreciate It: Youngsters are showing much interest in the book. One nine-​year-​old wrote: “My favorite publication is The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived because I learn a lot from it.” When we meet young people in the field service, we should take the time, if their parents are agreeable, to show these young ones the book and review some of its highlights and artwork. We may be able to place books with these youngsters. When given the opportunity to know about Jesus, young people today can relate to him. Jesus was an approachable person.​—Matt. 19:14, 15.
6 Reading the Greatest Man book can change people’s lives. Try to acquaint as many as you can with its contents. Use the material on the last page of the introduction to the book, under the subheading “Benefit by Learning About Him.” This material will help people focus on what they can gain from reading the book. Many in your territory may exclaim as one person did after reading the book: “It is the best book I have ever read! It changed my life.”

