Service Meetings for June
NOTE: Our Kingdom Ministry will schedule a Service Meeting for each week during the summer. Congregations may make adjustments as needed to allow for attending the “Divine Teaching” District Convention and then for a 30-​minute review of the program highlights at the Service Meeting the following week. The day-​by-​day review of the district convention program should be assigned in advance to two or three qualified brothers who will be able to focus on outstanding points. This well-​prepared review will help the congregation remember key points for personal application and for use in the field. Comments from the audience and experiences related should be brief and to the point.
Week Starting June 7
Song 162
10 min: Local announcements. Call attention to and briefly review “Summer Reminders.” Demonstrate value of having magazines on hand to use in informal witnessing.
15 min: “Help Others Learn About the Greatest Man.” Question-​and-​answer discussion. As time permits, entertain comments from audience on how they have enjoyed considering publication at Congregation Book Study.
20 min: “Use Tracts to Introduce the Greatest Man Book.” Discussion with audience. Have two demonstrations. The first should use suggested presentation in paragraph 2. After introducing tract, publisher discerns little interest on part of householder and so decides to offer two magazines instead of book. The second demonstration should use the same presentation in paragraph 2, but this time householder shows interest. Publisher proceeds to present book after brief discussion of information in tract, and he also makes brief explanation of donation arrangement. Remind publishers to offer current magazines when interest manifested by householder does not warrant offering the book or when he does not accept the book.
Song 205 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 14
Song 196
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Suggest appropriate talking points in current magazines for use in field service this week.
15 min: Question Box. Talk by elder. Point out our responsibility to conduct ourselves properly when attending baptisms. Incorporate related points from December 1991 Our Kingdom Ministry Question Box.
20 min: “Why Tracts Are So Valuable in Our Ministry Today.” Question-​and-​answer discussion. After last paragraph, have brief demonstration showing how easy it is to use a tract in informal witnessing.
Song 126 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 21
Song 31
10 min: Local announcements. Mention highlights of March Service Report. Also mention the part the local congregation had in the field service report for that month. Include accounts report and read any donation acknowledgments. Express appreciation for financial support of local congregation as well as Society’s worldwide work.
15 min: “Starting Bible Studies in the Greatest Man Book.” Question-​and-​answer discussion. After paragraph 2, demonstrate how to start a Bible study in book. Publisher begins by reading first three paragraphs in chapter 111 of book and then proceeds with suggested presentation in paragraph 2 of article.
20 min: Talk on Creation, based on Reasoning book, pages 84-8. Speaker should be selective in using only as many points as can be covered adequately in allotted time.
Song 79 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 28
Song 130
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Call attention to a few talking points in current magazines that could be used in house-​to-​house ministry or when witnessing informally.
20 min: “Be Regular in Field Service.” Talk by service overseer or other qualified brother. Review information in Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry, pages 106-10, as time allows. Stress the need for all to participate regularly in ministry and to turn in field service reports promptly at end of month.
15 min: Local needs. Could review points on needs of congregation as pointed out during last circuit overseer’s visit, or use item from Our Kingdom Ministry that was or will be missed while attending convention.
Song 71 and concluding prayer.

