Starting Bible Studies in the Greatest Man Book
1 Having a home Bible study would be most enjoyable and rewarding for both you and the householder. There is nothing to compare with the joy of sharing Bible knowledge with others.​—Prov. 11:25.
2 Sign of the Last Days: If you used the suggestion in the above article and initiated your discussion with the tract Will This World Survive?, how can you now start a study using chapter 111 of the Greatest Man book? Open the book to chapter 111, and read the first three paragraphs. You may then ask the first question at the end of the chapter: “What prompts the apostles’ question, but apparently what else do they have on their minds?” Help the householder reason on the answer, and use the illustration to teach. After reading the fourth paragraph through the sixth, ask the second question: “What part of Jesus’ prophecy is fulfilled in 70 C.E., but what does not occur then?” If the householder appears interested and has time available, continue your discussion.
3 When it appears that another time may be more suitable for the householder, you might ask: “Would you like to know more about when the end of the system of things will be?” You may then arrange to return to answer the question.
4 Is a Peaceful World Possible? If you used the tract Life in a Peaceful New World to lead into the Greatest Man book, how can chapter 133 be helpful in starting a Bible study?
After reading 2 Peter 3:13, you may read or summarize the second paragraph on page 3 of the tract and then say:
▪ “Jesus Christ, the Son of God, will be the King of Jehovah’s Kingdom. Notice how the book The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived describes Jesus and informs us about what he will accomplish in the future.” Then read the entire chapter. Ask the householder the first question at the end of the chapter: “‘What will be the happy privilege of Armageddon survivors and their children?’ [Allow for a response. The other questions may be discussed similarly.] Would you like to be a part of the new earth that Jesus will rule over as King? I would like to have the opportunity each week to help you see from the Bible how this can be your experience.”
5 Some individuals may also be interested in a further discussion about Jesus Christ on this visit.
You might say:
▪ “An effort has been made in this book to present Jesus’ earthly life as set forth in the four Gospels. Would you like to learn more about Jesus’ life on earth?” If the householder is agreeable, you may wish to discuss the first of Jesus’ miracles, in chapter 15.
6 There are still many honesthearted people who have a love for righteousness and who are looking for solutions to the problems they face. Truly, offering to share the teachings of Jesus Christ by means of a Bible study is a most rewarding endeavor.

