Use Tracts to Introduce the Greatest Man Book
1 During the month of June, many publishers will be using tracts to arouse interest in the book The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived. This approach helps them to determine the degree of interest and to decide whether it would be appropriate to offer the book to a particular householder on the initial visit.
2 Will This World Survive? Tracts are of great assistance in starting conversations. They help to capture the attention of householders because the tracts deal with meaningful subjects that affect them personally.
For example, you may say something like this:
▪ “In talking with people, we have noticed that many mention their concern over . . . [choose a current event in the news]. It seems that world conditions are going from bad to worse. Some even wonder if this world can survive. How do you feel about that? [Allow householder to respond. Most people are optimistic.] I read something encouraging I would like to share with you. It is in this tract. [Hand householder the tract Will This World Survive? as you hold an identical tract in your hand.] Notice how Jesus prophesied that . . . ” Read from a paragraph on page 4 or 5 that coincides with the current event mentioned in your introduction. If the individual shows genuine interest, you may decide to show the Greatest Man book. If it seems appropriate, turn to additional information on Jesus’ prophecy highlighted in chapter 111. Before leaving, you may be able to explain briefly the overall nature of our worldwide work and describe how it is supported. Also, be sure to raise a question on a subject for discussion when you return.
3 Life in a Peaceful New World: What does living in a peaceful new world mean to you? Generally, people think of lovely scenes of majestic rivers and peaceful valleys, with beautiful animals living at peace with one another. Those who are distressed by present world conditions may find the prospect of a peaceful new world most refreshing.
4 Are you prepared to offer something refreshing and pleasant to your neighbors, your workmates, and those you meet from house to house?
Using the tract “Life in a Peaceful New World,” you could say something like this:
▪ “Do you think it will ever be possible for people to live in peace as shown on the cover of this tract? [Allow householder to respond.] Please look at the last sentence in the first paragraph on page 2. It asks: ‘But is it just a dream, or fantasy, to believe these conditions will ever exist on earth?’ [Then read the next paragraph in the tract.] That quotation about new heavens and a new earth is from the Bible, at 2 Peter 3:13. If it’s convenient for you to get your Bible, we can read Psalm 104:5 to learn more about the earth’s future.” Or you could just read the verse from your Bible. If the individual shows interest, direct the discussion to the Greatest Man book, chapter 133.
5 Further return visits will need to be made to ‘water’ the seed that has been planted. (1 Cor. 3:6, 7) The article below suggests how a study might be started in the Greatest Man book, either on the initial call or on your return visit.

