Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Out of the Mouth of Babes
JESUS said that “out of the mouth of babes and sucklings you have furnished praise.” (Matthew 21:16) This proved to be true of a three-year-old girl in Guadeloupe whose mother is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. The little girl often was left with the grandmother when the child’s mother was working, and the child witnessed to her grandmother.
The mother said: “My little daughter was always after grandmother, bothering her to study the book My Book of Bible Stories with her.” The answer usually was: “Sorry, but you know I am in a hurry and I do not have time for that, as I have to do the work of your mother.” But one day the three-year-old insisted on having the study, opened the book and began to explain its Bible-based pictures to her grandmother. Amazed at the knowledge of her granddaughter, the woman took the book and began reading it. She soon realized that what the little girl was telling her was correct. Her interest was aroused, and she read more and more.
Sometime afterward, the grandmother said to the child’s mother: “In the past, I did not pay much attention to what you would tell me regarding the Word of God. But I cannot say that anymore, as I do read the Holy Scriptures now.”
The child urged her grandmother to attend the meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses, and the woman did so to please the child. She was deeply impressed by what she heard. Today, the grandmother is a dedicated, baptized Witness of Jehovah.
Truly, out of the mouth of babes Jehovah has furnished praise. How joyful are all three of them now as they serve Jehovah together!
□ Another experience of a young one comes from Nigeria. A Bible study was conducted with a family consisting of a father, mother and two young girls. The father died, and the mother lost interest and returned to her former church. She pressured the young girls, 7 and 12, to go with her. The girls put up a hard fight for the faith, even arguing with church leaders, including the pastor. Being defeated by Bible truths, he stopped visiting their home. Because the seven-year-old would not accompany her mother to her church, the woman would not give the child any food to eat.
One day, the child went to the Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses, but no one was there, as the Witnesses had gone to a convention. Nevertheless, the child sang, prayed and studied as if she were at a regular meeting.
At home that evening, the child was not disrespectful to her mother. This conduct impressed her mother and helped to revive her interest in the truth. She resumed her Bible study with the Witnesses, attended meetings and continued her progress in Bible knowledge. Today the mother is a dedicated, baptized servant of Jehovah and the seven-year-old is doing well in the truth.
Jehovah indeed blessed the integrity-keeping stand of this seven-year-old. What joy she now has in seeing her mother a baptized Witness! And how thankful the mother is that her child maintained integrity to Jehovah!

