They Have ‘Offered Themselves Willingly’
SURINAME is a tropical country, one of the more than 200 lands where Jehovah’s Witnesses are active. Recently, a missionary couple in Suriname made a 200-mile (320-km) ride by jeep to visit some bauxite mines and talk to the workers there about God’s purposes. They found great interest.
At their first stop, a camp manager said: “I’m really glad to have you here. We really need something like this.” Then he pinned up in the cafeteria an announcement of a Bible talk and slide show to be held that night at 7:30. When the time came, 70 people turned up and listened intently to a talk on how to get to know God through creation and through the Bible, and then they watched some selected slides showing the worldwide preaching work.
Afterward, the missionaries introduced various publications that would help the audience to obtain more information. “I want a book,” said an elderly man, walking to the front. That was a signal to the others. The missionaries’ supply was soon exhausted, and the husband had to rush out to the jeep to get a new supply, while the wife was busy jotting down addresses of those who wanted to be visited.
That was only the first night of their tour. This missionary couple spent a week in the area, finding similar success everywhere they went. Their experience is a demonstration of the great desire that still exists in many hearts to hear the truth and learn about Jehovah’s will. It is to satisfy that desire that thousands of Jehovah’s Witnesses during these last days have made themselves available to be sent to countries such as Suriname to help the local Witnesses handle all this interest. Thus they have fulfilled the psalmist’s promise: “Your people will offer themselves willingly on the day of your military force.” (Psalm 110:3) And Jehovah is richly blessing them for it.
Would you like to have a share in the blessings they enjoy? Perhaps you will answer: ‘But I could never be a missionary!’ And that may be true. Nevertheless, it may be that you are one of many who have already played an important part in the wonderful experiences being enjoyed by missionaries around the world. In what way?
‘Give It to the Missionaries’
In the same way that a young girl named April did. No, April is not a missionary, although probably she would like to be one someday. But at the moment she is too young to travel to a foreign land and have such exciting experiences. Nevertheless, she wanted to be a part of it all, so she wrote a letter to the Watchtower Society’s headquarters in Brooklyn: “Someone gave me a dollar at the circuit assembly. I want to give it to you to give to the missionaries to help them teach people about Jehovah.” Hence, in a very important way, little April has played a part in the worldwide missionary work. She has contributed from her resources to help finance it.
Another letter came from someone a little older than April. She wrote: “I am enclosing a check for $100 to be used in Kingdom work. This is a gift which was just handed to me, so I am passing it on to you . . . Pioneering has been my way of life for 46 years. However, I will soon be 90 and have had to slow down.” This sincere, long-time servant of Jehovah could not herself handle missionary service. But she wanted to have a part, and she did so by contributing financially.
These two letters highlight another way in which God’s people have ‘offered themselves willingly in the day of Jehovah’s military force.’ They have fulfilled the exhortation of the Biblical proverb: “Honor Jehovah with your valuable things and with the firstfruits of all your produce.” (Proverbs 3:9) For one reason or another, they are unable to offer themselves physically to the same extent that some others can. Nevertheless, they have contributed “valuable things” and thus helped to make it possible for others to do so. In times past, such willing giving demonstrated some important principles. Let us see what those principles were, and whether they are still valid today.
Their “Hearts Impelled Them”
In the time of Moses there was a job to be done. A tabernacle had to be built to be the center of true worship in the nation of Israel. Qualified Israelites were invited to contribute their time and talents to the building work. (Exodus 35:10) And everyone was invited to contribute from his material possessions so as to finance it. The result: an enormous contribution, far more than was needed. And it was noteworthy that the contributions were made by willing-hearted ones. The record tells us that their “hearts impelled them,” their “hearts incited them.” Yes, their contributing was an expression of faith in Jehovah and a demonstration of support for the purpose of the tabernacle​—true worship.​—Exodus 35:20-29; 36:4-7.
In the days of Hezekiah, another work had to be accomplished. After years of neglect, the temple had to be cleansed and the people taught to respect Jehovah’s law. The Israelites were informed of the need for material contributions “in order that [the priests and Levites] might adhere strictly to the law of Jehovah.” (2 Chronicles 31:4) The people’s response was so enthusiastic that high priest Azariah concluded: “Jehovah himself has blessed his people.”​—2 Chronicles 31:10.
Hence, the Israelites’ willingness to give was a demonstration of their fine heart condition and of their support for true worship, as well as of Jehovah’s blessing upon them. What about today?
Jehovah Has Blessed His People
Well, today there is another special work to be done. Jesus prophesied: “This good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations; and then the end will come.” (Matthew 24:14) The Bible also foretold that this preaching work would be accompanied by a teaching work and a gathering together of true worshipers. (Isaiah 2:3, 4; 54:13; Zechariah 8:23; Matthew 28:19, 20; Revelation 7:9) Do contributions play a part in this work?
They do indeed. For example, to bring a missionary to the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead and maintain him there during the course, then send him to a country like Suriname and maintain him there for several years, costs thousands of dollars. Yet the Watchtower Society has sent out more than 6,000 such missionaries since Gilead School was first opened.
Of course, this is only part of the expenses related to preaching the good news. There are also the circuit and district overseers and their wives, and the workers in the Society’s Bethel homes, whose privileges of service prevent them from supporting themselves with secular work. There are also the special pioneers who receive financial help to enable them to serve in difficult territories. But that is the support only for the workers!
Add to that the cost of new printing presses and bindery equipment, as well as the expense of new Bethel facilities being erected around the world, along with Assembly Halls and hundreds of new Kingdom Halls. Remember, too, the “hidden” costs, such as the regular mailing of letters written to the more than 46,000 congregations, and the printing of the many forms and documents necessary for theocratic organization. Now you begin to realize the enormous amount of money expended each year in preaching the “good news” and ensuring that the “sheep” have places to meet in and spiritual food to enjoy.
The wonderful thing is that Jehovah has made this possible. How? Largely, by moving the hearts of people to make voluntary contributions. Thus, individual Christians make cash donations​—as well as donate their time and labor—​to support local projects such as Kingdom Halls and Assembly Halls. Many congregations send regular contributions to the Watchtower Society or, outside the United States, to the branch office located in their country. Individuals also make contributions in different ways directly to the Society. (See box.) The result? Even in these difficult economic times, Jehovah is moving the hearts of his people to provide what is needed to complete the task that he has assigned.
What conclusion can we draw from this? That, as in the days of Hezekiah, “Jehovah himself has blessed his people.” He has shown his support in a wonderful way for the work they are doing. Also, as Jehovah’s people backed His arrangement in Moses’ day, we can see that today Jehovah’s people are 100 percent behind the work of preaching the good news of God’s Kingdom and the gathering of the interested ones. They have contributed, not because they were harangued by professional fund raisers, but because their hearts “incited them,” yes, “impelled them.”
Jehovah ‘Carries It to Completion’
In the first century the apostle Paul engaged in missionary work and had wonderful experiences​—rather like those that the missionary couple in Suriname had. He, too, was often supported by the contributions of his fellow believers. One congregation that was particularly helpful was the one in Philippi. Hence, when writing to them, Paul was moved to utter these words: “I thank my God always upon every remembrance of you in every supplication of mine for all of you, as I offer my supplication with joy, because of the contribution you have made to the good news from the first day until this moment. For I am confident of this very thing, that he who started a good work in you will carry it to completion until the day of Jesus Christ.”​—Philippians 1:3-6; 4:16.
Christians, today, feel similarly encouraged. True to Jehovah’s promise, he has moved his people to “offer themselves willingly” in many different ways in his service. Jehovah’s Witnesses thus ‘thank their God always’ and are confident that Jehovah, who developed such a fine spirit in his modern-day people, will carry his work to completion.
[Box on page 24]
How Some Contribute to the Kingdom Work
  Gifts: Some individuals make outright gifts and donations to the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania, or to the branch office in the country where they reside. Such gifts should always be accompanied by a short letter stating that the money is intended as a voluntary donation.
  Gifts With Special Provisions: Under this arrangement, individuals donate money with the special arrangement that if they should need some or all of it during their lifetime, it will be returned to them. Or, in order to avoid the expense and uncertainty of probate, some people give the Society stocks, bonds or land properties. Others make such gifts, reserving life rights to themselves.
  Insurance: Many have made the Watch Tower Society a beneficiary of their life insurance policy.
  Wills: Others, with the help and advice of their lawyers, make the Society a beneficiary in their wills.
  More information or advice regarding such matters may be obtained by writing to the Society’s local branch office, or to the following address: Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania, Office of the Secretary and Treasurer, 25 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, New York 11201.
[Picture on page 23]
Jehovah’s people willingly support Kingdom increase

