Your Life, Your Integrity and the Card
“WHEN ills approach, a prudent man is hidden: but the simple pass on to their sorrow.”​—Proverbs 27:12, Septuagint, by Charles Thomson.
That inspired proverb bears out the value of forethought. One ‘ill,’ or calamity, that God’s servants want to avoid is a violation of their integrity. For some years Jehovah’s Witnesses have diligently been doing that as regards God’s command that Christians ‘abstain from blood.’​—Acts 15:28, 29.
Christians realize that after an accident they might be unconscious or unable to give a detailed explanation of why they cannot accept blood transfusions. Even if an injured Witness could speak and say that​—in line with the principle of informed consent—​he did not want blood administered, doctors or hospital personnel might worry that a lawsuit could result if they did not follow standard treatment. So for some years Jehovah’s Witnesses have carried a Medical Alert card. This is a signed, witnessed document that relieves physicians and hospital officials of liability for any complications that might seem to result from knowing about the refusal of blood. A new card is signed and dated each year; thus, the document is always current and valid.
If you want to obey God’s law on blood, do you regularly carry one of these documents? Do you make sure that it is current and, if possible, is signed by your next of kin? Note from the following letter why you should do so:
“My husband and I want to thank you so much for providing us with spiritual food at the proper time and instructional material to help us. I would like to relate how that material saved our lives.
“It was June 6, 1983, and a rather rainy evening as we headed home from work. We had been working as contractors in a new housing development 30 miles from home and had just picked up our three small children from school. As my husband, John, was driving northward on the highway in our small truck, we were discussing the coming district convention. I saw a southbound tractor-trailer truck jackknife, turn around and hit the dividing strip with such force as to send mud and grass flying. In the instant it takes to blink one’s eyes the truck had plunged across the divider and stopped in front of us like a huge brick wall.
“We had often wondered what would happen if we were involved in an accident. We had followed the instructions about talking to our family physician and the local hospital about the use of blood transfusions. But what if we were unconscious, out of town and unable to refuse a blood transfusion? This is where one of those aids you [the Watchtower Society] have so lovingly provided really paid off: the Medical Alert card. We carry ours with us at all times. They are properly filled out, dated and signed.
“While I was unconscious in the twisted wreckage, a lady who was a registered nurse stopped. She wanted to take the two children who could be reached, for one of them was bleeding badly from a scalp wound, and John gave his permission. The other little girl was pinned in the truck with me until the door could be pried open.
“When the Emergency Medical Service arrived, John asked the attendant to radio ahead to the hospital and tell them that under no circumstances were they to give the children blood. The attendant refused, until John had him read the Medical Alert card. It convinced him to radio the message to the hospital.
“John was in bad shape, with severe head lacerations, a broken left wrist and multiple bruises. But he kept praying that he would stay conscious long enough to be able to see that the needs and wishes of his family were cared for.
“I suffered two broken hips, one of which was shattered, and a broken left thighbone, which produced internal bleeding. When we arrived at the hospital I was still unconscious. The doctor told John that within the next few hours I would lose over half my blood and would die if I didn’t get a blood transfusion. Despite John’s condition, he continued to tell them, ‘No blood.’ They still harassed him, telling him that he would be without his wife, and saying, ‘Who will care for the children then?’ Finally they found my Medical Alert card. The doctor had copies of it made and recorded it. Being a legal document, they respected it and stopped trying to force a blood transfusion. Six hours later I regained full consciousness and was able to speak for myself. But the wonderful​—though some would think, insignificant—​little card saved me from having a blood transfusion forced on me while I was unconscious.
“I was in the hospital for almost seven weeks, but I feel the recovery was rather speedy due, in part, to not having had foreign blood, with its complications, given to me. We are all united as a family and recovering nicely. Thanks be to Jehovah for providing us with such wonderful aids as the Medical Alert card. It really works!”
Jehovah’s Witnesses obtain these valuable documents from the elders in their congregations. The above experience illustrates why you and your family should be “prudent” and regularly carry a completed and current Medical Alert card.​—Proverbs 22:3.

