A Good Conversation
[This is a translation of an article written by a “Reverend” P. C. Shoonenboom, coeditor of Kerk en olde lantschap, a semimonthly religious paper for the province of Drenthe, Netherlands, dated January 10, 1958.]
“Recently he stood at my door. A blushing, handsome young man of twenty. He was one of Jehovah’s witnesses. Oh! dear reader, you likely know them too. At one time or another they have been at your door. What did you then do? Have you ever invited him in? Or was it restricted to a skirmish with a few Bible texts at the outside door, followed by your declination, just as you tell a vacuum cleaner salesman that you do not need anything? Let it at once be said that most of us know Jehovah’s witnesses only from this aspect. Often we know them as queer and annoying people, who simply knock at your door, and with support of many citations out of the Bible inform you that the end of the world is at hand. Our knowledge goes no further.
“When I saw the young man standing at my door, I could not say I viewed him as being queer. At once I thought to myself: A clean-cut young fellow of twenty who comes to testify for his faith, where do we have such in our church or congregations? I was very much interested. What inspired this young man? What has he found by Jehovah’s witnesses, of which so little or none at all is to be found in the church? What can I learn herefrom for my own faith?
“With these questions in my heart I invited him in. We talked the whole evening and it was a good conversation. Every time I think back, I am still thankful for it. And this I would like to say: You should all do that at one time or another, when there is occasion for it. Let him talk. Listen well. He will naturally declaim against the church and all her shortcomings. They all do that. Jehovah’s witnesses have very strong complaints against the Christian churches. The joke is that you then discover that you yourself in part share these objections and hesitations. And still you will note that your faith will hereby be sharpened and revived. Your love for the church is put to the test. And this can only be good and wholesome.”

