Announcements
FULFILLING THE COMMISSION TO GO PREACH—Isa. 6:8, 9.
“Keep watching the ministry . . . that you fulfill it,” said the apostle Paul. (Col. 4:17) These words are important advice and admonition to all who are witnesses of Jehovah, for their commission to preach the good news of Jehovah’s established kingdom to all nations is clearly stated at Matthew 24:14. Just as Isaiah, after experiencing divinely provided cleansing from his uncleanness, accepted the commission, saying: “Here am I; send me,” so today the cleansed and enlightened witnesses of Jehovah willingly offer themselves and are desirous of fulfilling the commission to go preach. This month of July will be no exception. From house to house, and also on the way to the great international assembly, they will preach to all who will listen. As an aid to persons hungering for Bible knowledge two Bible-study aid books and two booklets will be offered on a $1 contribution. Be sure to share in fulfilling the commission to go preach.
BROOKLYN BETHEL VACATION
The Society’s office, factory and Bethel home in Brooklyn, New York, will be closed from August 16 to 31 inclusive. Orders and correspondence sent in during that period will not be handled until sometime after the reopening of the offices. Please anticipate your needs and place your orders in ample time for attention before the vacation period.
TO PLAN YOUR VACATION
The most profitable place you could be this summer is New York city. Why? Because it is in Yankee Stadium and the Polo Grounds there that Jehovah’s witnesses and their friends will convene from the ends of the earth for their 1958 Divine Will International Assembly. How will you benefit? From association with dedicated Christians from all walks of life and every major country of the world. From eight days packed full of Bible counsel and instruction. How can you come? By private car or by other arrangements of your own or by taking advantage of the many special travel plans being made through local congregations or branch offices of Jehovah’s witnesses. Where can you stay? Accommodations are available in hotels and private homes at reasonable rates, all secured for your convenience by voluntary effort of the congregations in the New York area. Where can you get further information? From the Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s witnesses nearest you or by writing Watchtower Convention, 77 Sands St., Brooklyn 1, N.Y. What are the dates? July 27 to August 3. Will you be there?
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
August 3: Studying with a Purpose, ¶1-24. Page 401.
August 10: Studying with a Purpose, ¶25-30, and Keeping a Firm Grip on the Word of Life. Page 406.

