Not Fair-Weather Christians
THE apostle Paul was no fair-weather Christian. Said he: “For I am convinced that neither death nor life nor angels nor governments nor things here nor things to come nor powers nor height nor depth nor any other creation will be able to separate us from God’s love that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.” (Rom. 8:38) That there are Christians today who have the same firm conviction that Paul had can be seen from the following experiences taken from the 1958 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Firm in Spite of Prison
A native man of good will toward Jehovah in the Solomon Islands was sentenced to two weeks in jail because of having in his possession some Watch Tower publications. Far from its discouraging him, he said: “Even if I spend my life in jail, they will not be able to take my new religion from me!” His onetime jailer is now his companion as they diligently witness to Jehovah’s name and kingdom.—Page 90.
Firm in Spite of Family Opposition
A young man of Eire, as a result of discussing religion with his neighbor, became convinced that Jehovah’s witnesses had the truth and so took his stand. Talking about his new religion at home, he met with fierce opposition and also had to face the rage of the priest. He being unmoved by all this, his family then threatened to turn him out of his home, but he quietly told them that if they did he would find a home among the witnesses. This firmness shook his family and they relented a little. In fact, in a few weeks a complete change came over them; they themselves began to appreciate that this new religion of his was the truth and began telling it to others. The young man has been baptized and his mother and sister are fast following in his steps.—Pages 107, 108.
Mother Fails to Separate Daughter
A twenty-year-old girl in Colombia took her stand for Jehovah and was baptized. Because of family opposition she left her home. The mother, finally locating her, urged her to come back, which the daughter agreed to do on the condition that her service to Jehovah be not interfered with. Before long the mother herself began to witness and then was baptized.—Page 120.
Firm in Spite of Husbands’ Opposition
A husband in the French island of Guadeloupe repeatedly beat his wife because, while “adultery and drunkenness are things one can bear,” he could not bear her being interested in Jehovah’s witnesses. One night he got so violent that she fled for her life, walking ten miles to the home of witnesses. She wanted to be baptized at once, saying: “If I have to face death, at least I will know that I am counted among the members of the New World society.” After a month two witnesses worked out an agreement with her husband regarding her return to him. He continues opposed while she continues firm.—Pages 171, 172.
And in one village in Holland a Catholic husband put his wife in a mental institution because of her interest in Jehovah’s witnesses. After strenuous efforts she was released at the end of six weeks. She immediately sought out the witnesses, began studying with them outside her home, was soon sharing in the preaching work and now hopes to be baptized at the very next opportunity.—Page 214.
Yes, the witnesses of Jehovah are not fair-weather Christians!

