Questions From Readers
▪ If a Christian cannot be at the celebration of the Lord’s Evening Meal, what should he do?
It is important that Christians attend the annual celebration of the Lord’s Evening Meal, for Jesus said when instituting it: “Keep doing this in remembrance of me.” (Luke 22:19) The early Christians did so. The apostle Paul thus could write about the Corinthian brothers who each year ‘met as a congregation,’ or ‘came together,’ for the Memorial of Jesus’ sacrificial death. (1 Corinthians 11:20, The New English Bible; NW) But what would they have done about the Memorial in difficult circumstances? For example, what did Paul himself do during the years that he was imprisoned (under guard and perhaps even chained) in Caesarea?​—Acts 23:35; 24:26, 27.
In view of Jesus’ plain command, even if Paul was in isolation on the occasion of the Lord’s Evening Meal, he certainly would have reviewed the Scriptural aspects of the event. Being a spirit-anointed Christian, he would have made every effort to partake of the most appropriate things he could use for emblems. Wine was then a common beverage, so despite being a prisoner Paul might have had some wine and a type of bread to use. That was even more likely when he was later confined in Rome, where he was permitted to have visitors. Probably some brothers from Rome tried to “come together” with him in a small group to celebrate the Lord’s Evening Meal.​—Acts 28:30.
Around the earth today, congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses gather on the date corresponding to Nisan 14 for the Memorial of Christ’s death. But sometimes unusual obstacles arise. On occasion, raging storms or floods have prevented a congregation, or some of its members, from meeting together as planned. In rare cases, martial law has been in effect with armed soldiers barring citizens from being out-of-doors after sunset. Other Christians have not been able to be at the congregation’s celebration because of being hospitalized or seriously ill. What can be done in such instances?
While it is fitting for the whole congregation to unite for this important event, circumstances such as noted above may make that impossible. When extreme weather, a natural disaster, or the like, absolutely prevents a family or a portion of a congregation from meeting with the congregation, the isolated ones can meet and discuss Scriptural accounts such as found in Luke 22:7-23, 28-30 and; 1 Corinthians 11:20-31, as well as discussing the meaning of the occasion. Similarly, if an enforced curfew makes it impossible for a congregation to gather on the appropriate night, meeting in Congregation Book Study groups or neighborhood groups might be the best alternative, the sum of those in attendance serving as the congregation’s attendance report. A brief talk may even be given if a capable, dedicated brother is in the group. There need not be concern that no suitable emblems are available as long as no one in this emergency situation previously partook of the bread and the wine as an anointed Christian.
God’s Law to Israel had a special arrangement for someone who was not in a position to partake of the regular Passover meal; the individual could do so a month (30 days) later. (Numbers 9:10, 11; 2 Chronicles 30:1-3, 15) Comparably, in an extreme situation with a spiritual Israelite who absolutely cannot attend or be served the emblems on Nisan 14, he or she could partake 30 days later. This would apply only in the case of an anointed Christian who is under command to partake of the bread and the wine.​—Galatians 6:16.
On April 4, 1985, after sundown, congregations of true Christians around the earth will gather in obedience to Jesus’ command: “Do this as a memorial of me.” We invite you to assemble with them.​—1 Corinthians 11:25, NE.

