Will You Start a Bible Study During October?
 1. What is the offer for October?
1 The offer for October is the Watchtower and Awake! magazines. To follow up interest, we are encouraged to present the tract Would You Like to Know the Truth? and endeavor to start a Bible study. How can we do that on the return visit?
 2. How might we use the Know the Truth tract to start a Bible study when making a return visit on someone who accepted magazines?
2 How to Use the Tract: We might say: “The magazines I left you encourage people of all backgrounds and religions to examine the Bible. [Hand the householder the Know the Truth tract, and point to the questions on the front.] Here are some intriguing questions to which the Bible gives satisfying answers. Have you ever asked any of these?” After getting the householder’s response, consider together from the tract the answer to one of his questions, and read one of the cited scriptures. Then explain that this is just a sampling of what the Bible teaches, and hand him a Bible Teach book. We could then discuss the opening paragraphs of a chapter that he selects from the table of contents. Or we may choose to turn to where more information is found on the subject we discussed from the tract. Here are references that we might use:
● Does God really care about us? (pp. 9-11, pars. 6-10)
● Will war and suffering ever end? (p. 12, pars. 12-13)
● What happens to us when we die? (pp. 59-60, pars. 7-8)
● Is there any hope for the dead? (p. 71, pars. 13-15)
● How can I pray and be heard by God? (pp. 166-167, pars. 5-8)
● How can I find happiness in life? (p. 9, pars. 4-5)
 3. How may we vary our approach depending on the circumstances?
3 Of course, if circumstances do not allow us to start and demonstrate a study in the Bible Teach book on the initial return visit, we can always make arrangements to return and continue our discussion. And depending on the person’s interest, we may even choose to discuss more than one question in the tract on several visits before introducing the book. May we make good use of this versatile tract during October to start a Bible study and help honesthearted ones to “know the truth.”—John 8:31, 32.

