VOL. XXXV SEPTEMBER 15 No. 18 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

"Thy Judgments Are a Mighty Deep" 275 

Why God Permits the Present Reign 
of Sin 275 

God's Glorious Character Revealed 277 

The Anointed Only Are Commissioned to 
Preach 277 

The "Body" of Christ No Part of the 

Ransom 277 

The Blessing of the "Cup of Salvation" 279 

Deeper Significance to Spiritual Israel 280 

The Christian's Tower of Strength 282 

"That Wicked One Toucheth Him Not" 282 

Mary's Sweet Perfume 283 

The Attitude of the Religious Teachers 283 

A Suggestion Worth Consideration 284 

Two Passover Memorials 284 

The Crisis in Judas' Life 285 

The Signification of the Memorial 285 

Interesting Letters 286 

A Reply by the Editor 286 

Berean Bible Studies, Vol. II 287 



page 274 



PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 



BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



"SHARPSHOOTING" WITH LEATHERETTE STUDIES 

We now have a good supply of red leatherette (karatol) 
STUDIES, in all volumes. These are compact, light and very 
attractive— edges burnished, round corners. From sixteen to 
twenty complete sets may be easily carried in an ordinary suitcase, 
the gross weight of each set being less than 2-1/2 lbs. 
With each full set goes a splendid De Luxe carton, of same 
material as the binding. We believe this to be a most opportune 
time for "sharpshooting," giving due prominence to 
the title of Volume IV., "The Battle of Armageddon," although 
urging a careful, systematic perusal of all in consecutive 
order. Sharpshooters and class secretaries may now have 
these leatherette volumes at colporteur rates, viz., 96c. per set 
of six books (express or freight collect), in quantities of five 
full sets or more, with no additional charge for the carton. 
Individual volumes, in lots of 20 or more, same rate. Make 
each order definite, accompanied by remittance, and always 
specify how the books are to be shipped. 



FREE LITERATURE IN THIRTY LANGUAGES 

We can supply literature on Present Truth in any of the 
following languages: English, German, French, Swedish, 
Danish, Norwegian, Finnish, Welsh, Polish, Hungarian, Hollandish, 
Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, Greek, Russian, Armenian, 
Arabic, Tamil, Malayalam, Zulu, Esperanto, Maori, 
Gujarati, Marathi, Telugu, Urdu, Chinese (Wenli and Mandarin), 
Korean, Japanese, Roumanian and Slovak. 



R5534 : page 275 

"THY JUDGMENTS ARE A MIGHTY DEEP!" 

"The foolishness of God is wiser than men; and the weakness 
of God is stronger than men."-l CORINTHIANS 1:25. 

THE Plan which God has adopted for dealing 

with sin and with sinners seems to the 

worldly mind, to worldly wisdom, to be a 

very foolish, a very unwise plan. The declarations 

of the Bible along this line do not 

appeal to such minds as reasonable. First 

of all, God created man perfect. Then He 

placed him under conditions where he was 

tempted and fell into sin. God then pronounced 

upon him a sentence of death, as 

He had forewarned him would be the result of disobedience. 

After thus sentencing man, Jehovah Himself provided 

for a release from that death penalty by furnishing 

a Redeemer for the sinner at great cost. When He wished 

to proclaim to the world His provision for their salvation 

from the curse, He sent forth preachers chosen from the 

race of sinners to tell the good tidings. 

For nearly two thousand years these preachers have 
used their best efforts. As some of them would die, 
others would take their places. But with all the preaching 
that has been done only a very few have believed the 
Message or given an attentive ear. Often have these imperfect 
messengers grown weary and faint. They have 
gone to the Lord with burdened hearts, telling Him of 
the meager results that attended their labors. But the 
Lord has answered, "Continue to give forth the words 
which I have delivered to you; this is My will; it is just 
what I wish you to do." So they have toiled on, leaving 
the results with God. 

But the world has shaken the unbelieving head. To 
them the proclaiming of such a Message has seemed foolish, 
a waste of valuable time, an evidence of unsoundness 
of mind. Few have believed that it is of God— even if 
a God of Love existed at all. Yet, as the Apostle tells 
us, "It pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to 
save them that believe." (1 Corinthians 1:21.) He chose 
this method, which men denominate foolishness, to select 
a special class for a very special purpose, in connection 
with His great Plan. Although from the human 
standpoint this appears a very small and weak beginning, 
as if God's work is almost a failure— if He purposes to 
save and uplift the world— yet when the Plan of God shall 
have been brought to its glorious consummation, it will 
be seen by all to have been most wise, powerful and effective. 
No more shall it be 

"The unbeliever's jest, the heathen's scorn." 



God is not now choosing the great ones of earth, but 
chiefly the mean things, the humble and obscure, "that 
no flesh shall glory in His presence." He is choosing 
these as instruments to bless the remainder of the world. 

LIFE A GREAT BOON EVEN NOW 

The question has been asked: How is the Love of 
God to be seen from the standpoint of a deliberate arrangement 
beforehand which, in its outworking, has involved 
so vast an amount of sin, suffering and death? In 
thinking of this question, one should first of all rid himself 
wholly of the erroneous thought that sin, suffering 
and dying are only preludes to an eternity of woe. Then 
we are to remember that God is not in any way our 
debtor. We are His debtors, even for our existence; He 
owes the race nothing. 

Suppose that we could disabuse all minds of the idea 
of eternal torture or of a purgatory of suffering after 
death, and should then say to them, Consider, now: 
Would you prefer to live on for a few years more, or 
would you rather die at once? Or, suppose we put it this 

R5535 : page 275 

way: Are you glad that you have an existence, or would 
you rather that you had never been born? We believe 
that the great majority would reply that they desire to 
live, that they prefer to live as long as possible. They do 
not wish to die, either today or tomorrow or next year; 
indeed they would never die if they could help it! 

Those who feel that they would be glad to die, or who 
wish that they had never been born, are those who have 
had more than ordinarily evil and unhappy experiences; 
or else they are unbalanced in mind. Many have not so 
much money as they would like, not so pleasant surroundings 
and conditions as some have and as they would wish 
to have. Still life is sweet; and they hold on to it with as 
firm a grip as possible. Love of life is inherent in man, 
and has survived even the sorrowful experiences consequent 
on the fall. 

WHY GOD PERMITS THE PRESENT REIGN OF SIN 

But why does God permit things to be as they are? 
This has ever been one of the perplexing problems to the 
minds of those who have still sufficient faith to believe in 
the existence of a Supreme Creator. We do not know 
that we can make the matter any clearer or state it any 
more plainly than we have stated it in STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES, Volume I., in the chapter on "Why Evil Was 
Permitted." Putting ourselves in God's place we are 
able to see that He must create man either without moral 
faculties, like the lower animals, or else with mental and 
moral faculties capable of appreciating the standards of 
right and wrong, of appreciating his Creator, with power 



to reason and to choose between good and evil— between 
obedience and disobedience to that Creator. 

Having previously brought into existence the brute 
creation, God wished to create a nobler order of beings, 
creatures in His own image and likeness, on the earthly 

R5535 : page 276 

plane of life. He purposed to have a race of beings who 
were perfect like the angels, able to appreciate the same 
moral standards, the same principles of righteousness. 
The question might be asked: How could God so create 
these beings that they would not be in danger of sometime 
falling into sin? Evidently it was not God's purpose so to 
create them. He desired that they should possess the 
quality of free moral agency, the power to exercise their 
own wills for either righteousness or unrighteousness. 

At the time of the creation of man, Lucifer, Son of the 
Morning, began to cherish ambitious designs, disloyal to 
his Maker. He realized that a race on a lower plane of 
existence than himself might be induced to choose a 
course at variance with the expressed will of God— their 
Creator. Before man's creation God had foreseen that 
Lucifer would deflect from the path of obedience, would 
become a rebel against His righteous Government, a great 
Adversary, and that as the result evil would break forth 
later in His Empire. He foresaw that through the influence 
of the rebellious Lucifer (thenceforth Satan- 
adversary, accuser, hater) man would become disobedient 
and fall from the condition of perfection in which he 
would be created. 

Knowing this, and doing man no injustice, but creating 
him with full ability to resist temptation, God so arranged 
and timed the creation of man that he would be 
an object of attack by Satan, who would take advantage 
of the inexperience of Father Adam and Mother Eve and 
seek to capture the entire race of man. In other words, 
God purposed to permit this test to come to man, and 
knowing that Adam would fail in the testing and thus 
incur the penalty of death, He designed to make the experience 
of the race an object lesson to all His created 
intelligences, and at the same time to so overrule the 
matter that the human family would themselves eventually 
be delivered from the evil results of the fall and be greatly 
blessed, if they would profit by the lessons learned in their 
bitter experiences with sin, and would come back into 
harmony with righteousness. 

TIME AN IMPORTANT FEATURE 

God's infinite Wisdom could not approve any as worthy 
of everlasting life who would not prove themselves to be 
in full accord with His Divine Law. The nature of sin is 
to propagate itself and to produce misery and degradation. 
With this knowledge God arranged in advance to 
let man have his own way. He foreknew that intelligent 



beings with liberty of choice and of will would eventually, 
if untaught and unrestricted, fall into sin, even though 
a penalty was attached to disobedience. He chose not to 
restrain Lucifer. 

The Plan of God is so comprehensive that it cannot 
be viewed and judged from the standpoint of a few years 
—not even of a thousand years or six thousand years. It 
must be viewed from the standpoint of eternity. It was 
arranged, not for the well-being of creatures who would 
live for a few years or a few centuries, but for those who 
would live throughout eternal ages. His Plan must, therefore, 
be laid so broadly as to include all time and all 
beings created in His likeness, for His glory and their 
own eternal good. 

We are not to suppose that Jehovah weeps in anguish 
because mankind are suffering and dying. He is a God 
of infinite love and sympathy; but from the beginning He 
knew that man would fall, and that He Himself could 
overrule the entire matter for the ultimate blessing and 
instruction of men and angels— all His created intelligences; 
and He purposed so to do. We ourselves know 
that sin and death with all their direful effects have prevailed 
in the world for six thousand years. We also 
know that our God is at the helm, and that all things will 
be made to work out good in the end. We think of the 
flood as a terrible overthrow, because so many lives were 
lost. Yet the calamity would have been far greater if 
one half had been left to mourn for the others. It is 
claimed that men do not suffer very much when drowning 
—that death by this means is comparatively easy. 

Six thousand years of sin, sorrow and death seem a 
long while for humanity to suffer. Yet the majority of 
the race have not lived beyond the age of twenty years. 
Perhaps one-half have not lived to the age of five. Very 
few have reached the age of one hundred years. We all 
have seasons of comparative comfort, blessing and enjoyment; 
even under present conditions, God has been very 
merciful. And from the viewpoint of the glorious future, 
with its marvelous opportunities of blessing, its hope of 
eternal life for man, and its great lessons learned for all 
eternity by all of God's intelligent creatures, the reign of 
Sin and Death presents an altogether different aspect from 
what could otherwise be had. 

In permitting the long reign of Sin and its train of 
evils, God has been showing forth the principles of His 
Government, that all may clearly discern in time what are 
the inevitable results of disobedience to their great 
Creator. We are sure that Adam and Eve were glad that 
God did not instantly carry out the sentence of death pronounced 
against them. We are sure that they were glad 
to be permitted to continue their existence for many 
years, even after they had been driven out of the Garden 
of Eden; and we believe that they had many experiences 
of more or less happiness, in spite of the tears, the pain 
and the sorrows that fell to their lot. 

So when we view the entire history of the race of 



Adam, and perceive that all the experiences with sin, 
suffering and death are to be caused to outwork God's 
glorious purposes for the world, and are designed to prove 
a lasting lesson to all His intelligent creatures who now 
exist or ever will exist, we can see why He has permitted 
the reign of evil which to man has seemed so long. When 
we see, too, that God is now choosing a very select class, 
of very humble and obedient ones, to be used as agencies 
under His Only Begotten Son to recover and uplift to 
perfection and life everlasting all the human race who 
will accept the gracious provisions, we can understand 
why He has been pleased to call this class through the 
"foolishness of preaching," by very imperfect instruments. 
Thus He has manifested the humble ones, who will 
receive His Message by any means which He is pleased 
to use, and who are glad to forsake sin and serve Him. 

A SAVIOR AND A GREAT ONE 

God might have said, I will lift My curse from mankind 
and let them have another trial for life— an individual 
trial. But even if this had been in harmony with 
God's Justice, it would not have sufficed alone. Mankind 
have long been floundering in the mire of sin. They 
were powerless to profit from any new trial granted 
them that would not include a Redeemer, a Savior, who 
was strong, not only to bring about the abrogation of the 
death sentence by a payment of their penalty, but also to 
deliver them from all the bonds of Sin and Death in their 
members. He must be a Savior having power to bind the 
great Adversary who has so long held the race of man in 
slavery and blindness. He must heal their wounds, open 
their blinded eyes and their deafened ears, and lift them 
up, up, into the light and liberty of the sons of God. 
Truly, man needs a mighty Savior; and such, praise 
God, has been provided in His beloved Son! 

As we trace the various steps of the marvelous Plan 
of the Ages, we perceive that to all who shall gain eternal 

R5535 : page 277 

life, on whatever plane of being, the path of humility is 

the path to glory. "He that exalteth himself shall be 

abased; but he that humbleth himself shall be exalted." 

None will be granted the inestimable blessing of life everlasting 

who are not thoroughly proven and found worthy 

under testing, who do not cheerfully humble themselves 

under the mighty hand of God. This principle applies to 

both human and spirit beings. Only those who gladly 

obey God, out of love for Him and for His righteous laws, 

will be permitted to live beyond the Harvest time of the 

Millennial Age. All others shall utterly perish. 

GOD'S GLORIOUS CHARACTER REVEALED 

Then the holy in every sphere of life, in every part of 



the mighty Universe of God, shall ascribe glory, honor 
and praise to the Almighty Creator and to His glorious 

R5536 : page 277 

Son throughout the ages of eternity. All will then see 
and acknowledge how marvelous was Jehovah's Plan of 
Redemption, how far beyond the power of fallen man to 
fathom. The majesty and glory of the Divine Character 
will stand revealed— His unswerving Justice combined 
with infinite compassion, His glorious Wisdom, His marvelous 
Love, His mighty Power. Then all will bow 
before Him and adore ! 

"When all Thy mercies, O my God, 

My rising soul surveys, 
Transported with the view, I'm lost 

In wonder, love and praise!" 



R5536 : page 277 

THE ANOINTED ONLY ARE COMMISSIONED TO PREACH 

"The Spirit of the Lord God is upon Me; because the Lord hath 

anointed Me to preach good tidings unto the meek: He hath 

sent Me to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty 

to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that 

are bound; to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, 

and the Day of Vengeance of our God; to comfort 

all that mourn; to appoint unto them that mourn 

in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil 

of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for 

the spirit of heaviness; that they might be 

called trees of righteousness, the planting 

of the Lord, that He might be glorified."— 

ISAIAH 61:1-3. 

WHEN the Prophet Isaiah uttered these words 

he spoke by the power of the Holy Spirit. 

As the Apostle Peter tells us, "Holy men of 

old spake as they were moved of the Holy 

Spirit." Further, he says, "Of which salvation 

the Prophets have inquired and 

searched diligently, who prophesied of the 

grace which should come unto you, searching 

what or what manner of time the Spirit 

of Christ which was in them did signify, 

when it testified beforehand of the sufferings of Christ, 

and the glory that should follow; unto whom it was revealed, 

That not unto themselves, but unto us they did 

minister the things which are now reported unto you by 

them that have preached the Gospel, with the Holy Spirit 

sent down from Heaven."— 2 Peter 1:21; 1 Peter 1:10-12. 

In our text the word anointed is used in the sense of 
ordination. The high priests of Israel were successively 



anointed, or ordained, of God, the anointing oil representing 

the Holy Spirit. Their kings were anointed to reign 

over the typical kingdom of God, the oil here also representing 

the Holy Spirit. And so Christ, the great High 

Priest and King, was ordained of God by the anointing 

of the Spirit. It was not an anointing of men or by men. 

In our Lord's case we know exactly when this prophecy 
was fulfilled. It was when He came to John at Jordan 
to be baptized, and there presented Himself in sacrifice to 
God. The Divine acceptance of this sacrifice was manifested 
by the impartation of the Holy Spirit. John the 
Baptist saw the Spirit as a dove descending upon the Lord, 
the sign given to John, but seen by no one else. Jesus 
recognized that He had received a special anointing and 
unction from the Father— and others from that time perceived 
it. We are not to suppose that Jesus performed 
miracles before He was anointed, but this does not signify 
that He did not speak kind words and do kind acts before 
that time; for as a perfect man He possessed the Spirit 
of God in the full measure that a man in the image of God 
would possess it. 

The fact that our Lord Jesus waited until He was thirty 
years of age before making His special consecration and 
receiving His ordination and commission to preach does 
not mean that His followers should wait until they are 
thirty before they begin to preach. It was necessary that 
Jesus should conform Himself to the requirements of the 
Law of Moses, given by God to the Jews; for Jesus as a 
man was a Jew, born under the Law and subject, therefore, 
to its every feature. Full manhood under the Law 
was not attained until the age of thirty. Our Lord came 
to give His life as a substitute for the forfeited life of 
Adam. Adam was a complete, perfect man, and our Lord 
must attain maturity as a perfect man before He could be 
a perfect substitute, a corresponding price. 

THE "BODY" OF CHRIST NO PART OF THE RANSOM 

With the disciples of the Lord Jesus during this Gospel 
Age, the matter is quite different. Consecration is appropriate 
to whoever has the maturity of mind to realize 
clearly what he is doing— to realize the merit of Jesus' 
death and the significance of becoming a joint-sacrificer 
with Him. The giving of the Ransom is not shared by the 
followers of Christ. That was His work alone. But His 
disciples are permitted of God, in the opulence of His 
favor, to be counted in with Jesus as a part of the Sin-Offering 
for the world, after His merit has been imputed 
to them and they have become members of His Body, 
which gives to their offering a virtue which it could not 
otherwise possess. His merit is all-sufficient, and it is His 
merit that purchases the world, through His Body, the 
Church. 

The anointing that was upon Christ Jesus continued 
with Him throughout His earthly ministry— the fulness, 
or completeness, of God's favor rested upon His every 



word and act. God was manifest in His flesh; for He 
was the perfect human representation of all the qualities 
of Jehovah's glorious character. This was demonstrated 
in His resurrection from the dead after His sacrifice had 
been finished. Otherwise His work of sacrifice would 
have been a failure and He would have remained in the 
congregation of the dead, and there would have been no 
benefit accruing to mankind from His death. Jesus was 
begotten of the Holy Spirit and anointed at His baptism, 
and was born a completed Spirit Being of the very highest 
rank at His resurrection. No other being had ever been 
created on this plane of life. Hitherto Jehovah alone had 
possessed Divine, incorruptible life. 

OUR TEXT APPLIES TO THE ENTIRE CHRIST 

We might have inferred without any direct statement 
that the words of the Prophet in our text apply to our 
Lord Jesus, but no doubt is left in our minds when we find 
that He Himself quoted these words in His sermon in the 
synagogue at Nazareth, where He was brought up. He 
there stood up and read a part of this prophecy aloud. 
Then closing the Book He said, "This day is this Scripture 
fulfilled in your ears." (Luke 4:16-21.) He pointed 

R5536 : page 278 

out that He was the one referred to by the Prophet. And 
we see the appropriateness of this application in every way. 

But while the prophecy was primarily fulfilled in 
Jesus, and applied especially to Him, we understand that 
it applies also to the members of Christ. These by becoming 
His Body, thus became a part of Himself. It is not 
because of any merit of their own. 

This anointing that is on the Church comes to us 
through Christ, flowing down from the Head over all the 
Body members, as shown in the type of the high priest of 
Israel, and as declared by the Psalmist. (Psalm 133:2.) 
The Lord Jesus is our great Advocate with the Father, 
and in Him alone have we any standing before God. We 
are thus received of the Father as spirit-begotten sons, 
even as was our Head. We are begotten of the Spirit, 
as was He. 

Our vital union with our Lord as members of His 
Body is also further shown by the Prophet Isaiah. Read 
carefully the 49th chapter, vs. 7-9, and their interpretation 
by the Apostle Paul in 2 Corinthians 6:1,2. This 
same Apostle further declares, "For as the body is one, 
and hath many members, and all the members of that one 
body, being many, are one body, so also is Christ." Again, 
"The cup for which we bless God, is it not the participation 
of the blood of Christ? The loaf which we break, is 
it not the participation of the Body of Christ? For we, 
the many, are one loaf and one Body." "Now ye are the 
Body of Christ, and members in particular."— 1 Corinthians 12:12; 
10:16,17; 12:27. 



Again, the Apostle Paul declares of the Church, 
"Whereunto He [God] called you by our Gospel to the 
obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ." How 
the deep sayings of the Savior become luminous in the 
light shed upon them by the Apostles after their anointing 
of the Spirit! How the Master fulfilled to them His 
promise made just before His crucifixion! He said, as 
we remember, "I have yet many things to say unto you, 
but ye cannot bear them now. Howbeit, when the Spirit 
of Truth is come, it shall guide you into all Truth, for it 
shall not speak of itself; but whatsoever it shall hear, that 
shall it speak, and it will show you things to come." 
(John 16:12,13.) These were the deep things of God, 
which only the spirit-begotten, spirit-taught children of 
God can understand. 

We are, if faithful, to be made like Him and share 
His exceeding glory. No wonder the Apostle exultingly 
declared, "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have 
entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath 
prepared for them that love Him; but God hath revealed 
them unto us by His Spirit; for the Spirit searcheth all 
things, yea, the deep things of God."— 1 Corinthians 2:10. 

APPLICATION OF OUR TEXT NOW 

The Apostle John says that "the anointing which we 
have received of Him abideth in us." Again, "Hereby we 
know that we dwell in Him [God] and He in us, because 
He hath given us of His Spirit." The Apostle Peter declares 
that Jesus "having received of the Father the promise 

R5537 : page 278 

of the Holy Spirit [for the Church], hath shed forth this." 
(1 John 2:27; 4:13; Acts 2:33.) It is from the Father 
and by the Son. This corroborates St. Paul's statement 
that all things are of the Father, and all things are by 
the Son. (1 Corinthians 8:6.) The Scriptures tell us 
that we were begotten and anointed of God. 

The anointing of the Church is for a work yet future. 
The work of Christ and the Church will not be accomplished 
in this present Age. But God gives to those whom 
He has accepted opportunity to use in His service in the 
present life talents which He has entrusted to them. They 
are, as far as they are able, to bind up broken hearts and 
give "the oil of joy for mourning," and thus to help to 
allay the sufferings of others, especially of the Lord's 
Household, though they are to assist any as they have 
suitable opportunity. But their special work in blessing 
and comforting the world will be in the kingdom. All 
mankind will be brought back from the tomb and will 
have all the blessed assistances of Messiah's Reign. 
Everything evil will be uprooted, and everything good 
will be fostered and blessed. 

While the anointed of God are on this side of the veil 
they are, as His ambassadors, to show forth His praises 



by telling others of the coming Kingdom and the blessings 

then to be showered upon all, when the favors of the 

Lord shall be poured out upon all men. They are to tell 

that these blessings are both for those now living and for 

those who have gone down into the grave. God's great 

Plan for the world is much broader and grander than once 

we thought. It is worthy of such a God as ours! Then let 

us tell to all who have an ear to hear, that the Lord is 

now pouring out His Spirit upon His servants and handmaidens, 

and soon will pour it upon all flesh— all mankind. 

We are instructed that this anointed class are to preach 
to "the meek." They are not to preach to the rebellious 
or the indifferent; these are to be dealt with by and by. 
The judgments of the Lord will forcibly break their 
hearts, and will effectively deal with all. The ambassadors 
of the Lord are to seek especially all those everywhere 
who manifest that they are feeling after the Lord, who 
are not satisfied with the things of the world, but who 
are longing for better, nobler things, who have and manifest 
a teachable disposition. 

WHO MAY SPEAK IN THE LORD'S NAME 

The text intimates that nobody is to speak in God's 
name except those who have been Divinely commissioned 
to do so. Others may tell the story so far as they have 
learned it, but they are not authorized to speak in the 
name of the Lord. We are inclined to think that such do 
more harm than good, mixing error with Truth; for 
those who do not understand the Message have not been 
commissioned of the Lord to be His ambassadors. With 
God, human ordination counts for nothing. In human 
ordination, each denomination qualifies its own ministers. 
But the ordained ministers of God are servants of God 
and not of error. They are servants of His Truth, not of 
the traditions of men. 

What we have said as to speaking in the Lord's name 
does not mean that we are to carry the matter so far as 
to say that no one but those who see the real Plan of 
God should even sing a hymn. In fact, the children of 
God are not to endeavor to hinder any from declaring the 
Truth. Jesus gave a good illustration of this principle 
when His disciples told Him that they had found some 
who were doing a work in His name and that they had 
forbidden them, because they did not follow Him. The 
Lord replied, "Forbid them not." And so with us. We 
are not to interfere with any who are preaching the 
Gospel, even through strife, for they may do some good. 
Neither are we to endeavor to stop any who preach what 
they believe to be the Gospel. This is not our present 
commission, or any part of it. We are not as yet judges 
of the world; but we are to recognize the difference between 
such and those who are the true ambassadors, or 
ministers, of God. 

God says of some who profess to be His mouthpieces, 
but whom He calls "wicked," "What hast thou to do to 



declare My statutes, or that thou shouldest take My 
Covenant into thy mouth, seeing thou hatest instruction, 
and castestMy words behind thee?" (Psalm 50:16,17.) 
Why should any undertake to give out the Message of 

R5537 : page 279 

God when He has not recognized them by granting them 
the anointing of His Holy Spirit, when they have not been 
taught of Him, and are not doing His will? Let all others 
do whatever they like in co-operation with the Truth, but 
only those who have been ordained of God in this one 
way should preach the Gospel. All who have received 
the Divine commission should rejoice in their wonderful 
privilege of proclaiming the Good Tidings. 

One of the features of our commission as ambassadors 
of the Lord is "to comfort all that mourn." The children 
of God, who have learned the true Source of comfort, 
are the only ones properly qualified to be real comforters, 
in the Scriptural sense. These have had their own hearts 
bound up and healed by the great Physician, and hence 
they know where to direct longing hearts who need the 
balm which only God can give. As the Apostle says: 
"Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, the Father of mercies, the God of all comfort, 
who comforteth us in all our tribulation, that we may be 
able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort 
wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God." (2 Corinthians 1:3,4.) 
So then, whether while still in the 

flesh or after we have come into our inheritance beyond 
the veil, we are to be comforters, to lift up those who 
are oppressed with sorrow and care, to bring to them "the 
oil of joy," the Message of grace. 

We are to be comforters at this particular time of 
"them that mourn in Zion." This is a work that the saints 
of today, who have been enlightened and blessed by the 
Message of Present Truth, are eminently qualified to do. 
Many of us were mourners in Zion before this refreshing 
Message came to us, mourning because of the confusion 
and worldliness and dearth that prevailed in the nominal 
systems wherein we were bound. But now we are free, 
and no more are "our harps hung upon the willows of 
Babylon." They are attuned to the harmonies of Heaven, 
and we can now sing with the spirit and with the understanding 
the glorious "Song of Moses and the Lamb." So 
let us be zealous in carrying this glad news to all the 
mourners in Zion not yet delivered, that they may join with 
us in this glad song. 

The entire Message as given in our text is now due to 
be proclaimed. We remember that on the occasion when 
our Lord read from the prophecy in the synagogue, He 
omitted the words, "and the Day of Vengeance of our 
God." That part of the prophecy was not due to be proclaimed; 
and Jesus could not have said of these words, 
"This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears," for He 
was not to proclaim as then at hand the Day of Vengeance. 



So He read only the parts of the prophecy whose fulfilment 
was then due to begin. 

But today the passage is due to be given as a whole. 
We are on the very eve of this great Day of Vengeance. 
We are now proclaiming in the words of the Prophet 
Zephaniah, "The great Day of the Lord is near; it is near 
and hasteth greatly, even the voice of the Day of the 
Lord; the mighty men shall cry there bitterly. That Day 
is a Day of Wrath, a Day of trouble and distress, a Day 
of wasting and desolation, a Day of clouds and thick darkness, 
a Day of the trumpet and alarm against the fenced 
cities and against the high towers [strong and well intrenched 
governments]. And I will bring distress upon 
men, that they shall walk like blind men, because they have 
sinned against the Lord. And their blood shall be poured 
out as dust, and their flesh as dung. Neither their silver 
nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the Day 
of the Lord's Wrath; but the whole land shall be devoured 
with the fire of His jealousy."— Zephaniah 1:14-18. 

In that Day of terror and darkness men shall come to 
learn their need of a strong arm to deliver them. Their 
pride and self-sufficiency will be humbled into the dust. 
But out of that awful trouble mankind will come forth 
chastened and broken, and will be ready to be led out of 
the ruin and defeat of their own schemes and hopes, out 
of the darkness and chaos which in their ignorance and 
selfishness they precipitated upon themselves, out of the 
power of evil angels, into the light and blessing and deliverance 
then brought to them by the establishment of 
the Kingdom of God's dear Son, long promised for the 
blessing of all the families of the earth. 

It will be a lesson never to be forgotten. The sons of 
God, then exalted to the rulership of the Kingdom, will 
begin their work of healing and blessing, of binding up 
the crushed and broken hearts of men. Their own experience 
in the present life will have taught them how to 
sympathize with the poor, sin-sick world; and they will be 
able to pour into humanity's wounds the blessed balm of 
Gilead, "to give beauty for ashes," to wipe away all tears, 
and to lead all who will step by step up the grand Highway 
of Holiness then cast up for the people. "And the ransomed 
of the Lord shall return and come to Zion with 
songs and everlasting joy upon their heads; they shall 
obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall 
flee away." (Isaiah 35:10.) Only the incorrigible shall 
again have pronounced upon them the penalty of death— 
the Second Death, utter destruction. "These shall go away 
into everlasting cutting off, but the righteous into life 
eternal. "-Matthew 25:46. 



R5538 : page 279 

THE BLESSING OF THE "CUP OF SALVATION" 



"What shall I render unto the Lord for all His benefits toward 
me? I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name 
of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto the Lord now, 
in the presence of all His people."— Psalm 116:12-14. 

TO SPIRITUAL ISRAEL these words have a 

peculiar significance which they could not 

have had to the Prophet David. Nevertheless, 

we would suppose that the Prophet had 

to a considerable degree the proper thought 

as to the sentiment of the words. King 

David no doubt felt an appreciation of 

God's goodness. His Psalms show us that 

he had a very appreciative heart, grateful 

for the blessings that came to him from the 

Lord. Properly enough his heart cried out: "What shall 

I render unto the Lord?" What return can I make for 

all His lovingkindness? 

David knew of God's promise to Abraham; he knew 
that God would sometime bless all the families of the 
earth, and that this blessing would come through the Seed 
of Abraham. The Children of Israel knew that they were 
Abraham's seed. King David was one of these, and he 
felt that in some way he would be identified with this 
Promise. The matter was more or less vague to him; 
but, nevertheless, Abraham's Seed was to bless the world. 

In proposing to "take the cup of salvation," we think 
the Psalmist had in mind that whatever experiences the 
Lord might consider necessary for him he would accept; 
for he must have a share in that salvation. He would 
continue to call upon the Lord that he might have such a 
share; he would pay his vows unto the Lord "in the presence 
of all His people." He had made solemn vows, and 
he would fulfil them— he would consider this a privilege; 
he would delight in doing God's will. 

R5538 : page 280 

DEEPER SIGNIFICANCE TO SPIRITUAL ISRAEL 

To the Christian, however, all this has a much deeper 
significance. Beginning with our Lord Jesus, these words 
have a special meaning to each of the sons of God called 
to joint-heirship with the great Head of the Church. 
Having been begotten of the Holy Spirit and received 
into sonship, these wish to make a special return for all 
God's mercies. These have the actual forgiveness of 
their sins through Jesus, as David did not. His sins 
were only typically covered; and if he could say: "What 
shall I render?" surely much more should we say: "What 
shall I render unto the Lord?" 

The Apostle Paul exhorts us: "I beseech you, 
brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your 
bodies a living sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto God— 
your reasonable service." This is what we gladly render, 
then— our bodies as living sacrifices. In every truly noble 



heart gratitude is the responsive chord to kindness and 
love; and no harmony is sweeter or more inspiring to 
noble deeds and lofty purposes. God would have His 
children cultivate for their own sake, as well as for the 
sake of others, all the graces of true nobility and moral 
excellence. It is therefore most fitting that we should 
note every deed of love and kindness toward us, and be 
careful to return the gratitude and appreciation due. How 
often does love go unrequited because selfishness or 
thoughtlessness crowds out the nobler instincts of the soul! 

While human love and acts of kindness often draw 
largely upon us for the exercise of this grace of gratitude, 
appreciation, how much more does the constant loving-kindness 
and tender mercy of our Heavenly Father thus 
fittingly draw upon our inmost being to respond in grateful 
acknowledgment and praise! To Him we are indebted 
for every good that we possess. What this implies only 
those can know who have been brought by His love into 
the secret place of the Most High, and made to feast upon 
the "finest of the wheat," the wealth of our Father's 
Storehouse. We are the special objects of His grace. 

"HIS LOVING KINDNESS, OH, HOW GREAT!" 

And who of us cannot trace a long line of special 
providences on our behalf? Who of us as we take a mental 
retrospect of our lives cannot exclaim with the poet: 
"Looking back I praise the way 
God has led me day by day!" 

How wonderfully the Lord has guided His people! 
His children have ever been His constant care. No good 
thing hath He withheld from them, and all things have 
been made to work together for their good if they obeyed 
Him. Who that has trusted the Lord through many years, 
through sunshine and shadow, through smiles and tears, 
by still waters and through storm and tempest, has not 
proved the verity of His precious promises and His abiding 
faithfulness! Surely, "Not one thing hath failed of 
all the good things which the Lord your God spake concerning 
you!" (Joshua 23:14.) In the smallest and in 
the greatest affairs of our lives He has ever watched for 
our interests. Every cloud has had a golden lining! 

What, then, shall we render unto the Lord for all His 
benefits? What have we, indeed, that we have not received 
from Him? Nothing! As a tender parent loves 
to see his child appreciatively accept his favors, so does 
our Heavenly Father regard our attitude toward Him, 
and our manifestation of appreciation of His favors and 
love toward us. His unspeakable gifts to us were purchased 
at a great cost to His heart. Then we will thankfully 
take the cup of salvation, through faith in our 
Redeemer, and pay our vows unto the Lord. We will 
drink this cup with our dear Master— this cup of suffering 
and of joy. "We will trust and not be afraid." 

The Father has made a special provision for those who 
have made a full surrender of themselves to Him. The 



experiences which He has arranged for them constitute 
"the cup of salvation." And in accepting this cup from 
the Lord, we are accepting all the experiences that come 
to us in His providence, whatever they may be— joy or 
sorrow, pain or pleasure or anything. As Jesus exclaimed: 
"The cup which my Father hath poured for 
me, shall I not drink it?" so should this be the language 
of our hearts. It had in type been foretold of our Lord 
that He should be lifted up, even as Moses lifted up the 
serpent in the wilderness. He knew that He was to be 
the great antitypical Sin-Offering; that He was to be 
"made sin" for fallen man. Yet this cup that the Father 
had poured for Him He declared Himself very willing to 
drink. And this is the cup which He has given to us. 
Our Savior said to His disciples who desired to sit 
next to Him in the Kingdom: "Are ye able to drink of 
the cup that I shall drink of?" He Himself continued to 
drink of that cup until the end— He drank the dregs of 
the cup. And so it will be with His followers. We are 
to drink of this same cup. It is our individual cup, and 
yet it is His cup. If we be truly loyal we will accept our 
share of the cup thankfully, gladly. And we know that as 
we drink of it He will be with us; we shall not be alone. 
He supervises the experiences of each of His members; 
and with every temptation and trial He will provide some 
way of escape, if the trial threatens to become too severe. 

THE CUP OF JOY IN THE KINGDOM 

On the occasion of the institution of the Memorial of 
His death, the Master in His conversation with the 
Apostles said: "But I say unto you, I will not drink 
henceforth of this fruit of the vine until that Day when 
I drink it new with you in My Father's Kingdom." 
(Matthew 26:29.) Our Lord was here contrasting two 
great Days— the Day of suffering and the Day of glory. 
This Gospel Age has been the Day of suffering. The 
Millennial Age will be the Day of glory, and is especially 
spoken of as "the Day of Christ." 

The fruit of the vine, the literal cup, represents two 
thoughts. The cup of wine is produced at the cost of the 
life of the grape. The grape loses its own individuality. 
The juice is pressed out, and thus the fruit of the vine is 
made ready for use. The cup of wine— the juice of the 
grape— represents, however, not only the crushing of the 
grape, but also the exhilaration that comes as the result. 
So in our drinking of this figurative cup. To us it 
symbolizes our Savior's sufferings and death, and our 
own participation with Him in these sufferings. But wine 
also represents joy, gladness, and is thus used in the 
Scriptures. So in the sense in which the Lord used the 
words "fruit of the vine," quoted in the preceding paragraph, 
the cup represented the joys of the Kingdom. 

In the earthly experiences of our Lord Jesus the 
Father marked out for Him a certain specific course. 
This course constituted His cup of suffering and death. 



But the Father promised Him that after He had drunk 
this cup faithfully, He should be given a different cup, a 
different experience— glory, honor and immortality. And 
then the Savior was authorized by the Father to make the 
same proposition to those who might desire to become 
His followers— that if they would suffer with Him, would 
drink His cup of death with Him, then they should participate 
with Him in His future cup of joy. 

"NOW IS THE ACCEPTABLE TIME" 

Our cup is a cup of joy and also a cup of bitterness. 
But when we are called upon to drink a bitter draft, let 
us remember Him who bravely and faithfully partook of 
this bitterness, rejoicing to do the Father's will; and let 

R5539 : page 281 

us take courage, and likewise rejoice that we are accounted 
worthy to share this cup with our beloved Lord. 
And as He who was perfect needed strength and help 
Divine in connection with His experiences in the drinking 
of the cup, as He sought the Father in earnest prayer for 
the needed assistance, so must we do. We should also be 
continually on our guard lest we enter into temptation, 
lest we look away from Him from whom alone cometh 
our help. 

"I will pay my vows unto the Lord now," said the 
Psalmist. And "now is the acceptable time— now is the 
Day of Salvation"— for the Church. Now is the time 
sacrifices are to be offered— not by and by. The Lord has 
so arranged that this Vow which we take upon ourselves, 
this Covenant of Sacrifice, must be fulfilled by us. The 
flesh which we consecrate must be consumed. If we seek 
to withdraw the sacrifice from the altar, we shall be 
dealt with in such a manner as to destroy the flesh; else 
we ourselves shall be destroyed. If we faithfully drink 
of the cup which the Father has prepared for us, we shall 
afterward receive the blessings which He has promised 
to those who thus drink. Therefore, now, in the present 
life, we drink of this cup He has given us; for unless we 
do this now, we shall have no share in the Kingdom 
blessings in the life to come. 

In our Lord's case, literal crucifixion was necessary. 
He must bear the fullest measure of the Law's demand; 
He must bear the penalty of its every violation, even as 
in the case of the vilest criminal under the Law; otherwise 
He could not have redeemed every Jew. He must 
bear the curse of the Law— He must hang on a tree. But 
in our experiences, the cross will not be a literal cross of 
wood; the nails will not be literal nails; but bitter words 
and slander and misrepresentation will surely be our portion 
—and perhaps physical violence in some form to 
some of the last members of the Body. We do not know. 

BY WAY OF THE CROSS 



"Whosoever will save his life shall lose it." We are 
all to pass through the trying experiences represented by 
the wine-press. We are to lay down our lives in the 
Divine service. We are to submit ourselves to the crushing 
experiences, to be obliterated as individuals, in the 
human sense, and to become New Creatures. "If we 
suffer [with Him], we shall also reign with Him"— not 
otherwise. So we joyfully accept the invitation to drink 
of His cup. And not until the cup has been drained to 
the last shall we receive the other cup— the cup of Kingdom 
joys. While our Lord had a great blessing in the 
obedience which He rendered to the Father, yet it was a 
trying time for Him down to the last moment, when He 
cried, "It is finished." And so with the Church. We 
must drink all of the cup; none of the contents is to be 
left. We must endure all of the experiences. 

All the sufferings of Christ will be complete when the 
Body of Christ shall have finished its course. The new 
cup of joy was given our Lord when He was received 
up into glory. Then all the angels of God worshiped 
Him. Soon our cup of joy will be given to us. No doubt 
it was a glorious time when the sleeping saints were 
awakening in the spring of 1878, and entered into their 
reward and received the cup of blessing. And one by 
one, those who were alive and remained at the Coming 
of the Master are being gathered Home. Undoubtedly 
we shall all partake of this joy with them soon, if we 
are faithful. We believe the fulness of joy will not be 
reached until all the members of Christ are with Him 
beyond the veil. Then we shall share His Throne and 
partake of His glory. Then with our beloved Lord we 
shall drink of the "new wine" in the Kingdom; for the 
promise is to all His faithful saints. 

"YE ARE MY WITNESSES, SAITH JEHOVAH" 

The concluding statement of the Psalmist as given in 
our text is that he would pay his vows "in the presence 
of all His [God's] people." It is not enough that we shall 
be loyal in our hearts; but the Lord desires a public confession, 
a witness before men. "With the heart man 
believeth unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession 
is made unto salvation." (Romans 10:10.) And 
all the witnesses for the Truth must be martyrs for the 
Truth. They must, in other words, be willing to suffer 
for it. And so it will be to a large extent with those who 
are faithfully, courageously, holding up the banner of 
Truth. They will be targets for the Adversary. 

Our Master said that whoever would not confess Him 
before men, He would not confess before the Father and 
before the holy angels. Only those who are thoroughly 
loyal are to be of this very select company of which our 
Lord is the Head, and which is soon now to be gathered 
into the Heavenly Garner. 

Then let us appreciate more and more this "cup of 



blessing" which we are privileged to drink with our 
blessed Master; and let us "call upon the name of the 
Lord" for grace to help in every time of need. We need 
Him daily, hourly, momentarily. And we may come to 
the Throne of Grace at any time in the name of our great 
Advocate. 

Our Father's ear is ever open to the cry of His children. 
They are as dear to Him "as the apple of His eye." 
They "are graven upon the palms of His hands." "As 
one whom his mother comforteth, so will I comfort you," 
is His promise to His own. All that we can render will 
be at best very, very little in return for all His bounties, 
for all His matchless grace toward us. But the measure 
of love and zeal that accompanies our little all will indicate 
the measure of our gratitude to our Heavenly 
Father and our great Redeemer. 

"What shall I render, Lord, to Thee? 

Thy love surpasses all my thought! 
What can a fitting tribute be 

To Him who my poor life hath bought? 

"Who sought me in my low estate, 

And raised me up to heights Divine! 
What words can fitly sound Thy praise, 

Or thought encompass love like Thine? 

"What shall I render, Lord, to Thee? 

My heart, my strength, my life, I bring ! 
My hands, my voice, in service glad, 

To Thee, my Savior and my King ! " 



DAY BY DAY, HOUR BY HOUR 

"God broke our years to hours and days 

That, hour by hour and day by day, 

Just going on a little way, 

We might be able all along 

To keep quite strong. 

Should all the weight of life 
Be laid across our shoulders, and the future, rife 
With woe and struggle, meet us face to face 

At just one place, 

We could not go. 

Our feet would stop; and so 

God lays a little on us every day. 

And never, I believe, on all the way 

Will burdens bear so deep, 
Or pathway lie so threatening and so steep, 
But we can go, if by God's power 
We only bear the burden of the hour." Anon. 



R5539 : page 282 

THE CHRISTIAN'S TOWER OF STRENGTH 

"The Lord is my Helper, and I will not fear 
whatman shall do unto me."— HEBREWS 13:6. 

THE Christian's position in the world is a 

peculiar one. None others can afford to be 

so courageous and independent as he. Yet 

the true child of God is not self-sufficient 

nor independent of any outside help. He is 

exhorted in the Word of the Lord to be not 

boastful, but humble-minded, realizing his 

powerlessness of himself and his need of 

God. Indeed, unless he is humble-minded 

he cannot be pleasing to the Lord. But at 

the same time he is to be full of courage and confidence. 

No power in the Universe is able to cope with our God; 

and He has declared that He is the Support and Shield of 

His children. He is the Strong Tower of those who put 

their trust in Him. 

If we abide in Christ and His Word abides in us, He 
will be our Deliverer in six troubles, and in the seventh 
He will not forsake us— because we have been called of 
God, because we have responded to that call, because we 
are seeking to glorify Him in our bodies. Hence we 
need not fear what any man can do unto us. The Apostle 
Paul, who exhorts us to courage and confident trust in 
God, was a noble example of courageous faith. He tells 
us why we have such abundant reason for assurance of 
faith and absence of fear of man. He says, "Let your 
conversation [conduct, manner of life] be without covetousness, 
and be content with such things as ye have; 
for He hath said, I will never leave thee nor forsake 
thee. So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my Helper, 
and I will not fear what man shall do unto me." 

TRUE FAITH NOT PRESUMPTION 

We should not say, The Lord is my Helper, and therefore 
He will not suffer my house to burn, nor burglars to 
break in and steal my belongings. I will not lock my 
doors at night; for the Lord is watching over me and 
mine. This would not be the spirit of a sound mind. It 
would not be true faith, but presumption. We should take 

R5540 : page 282 

all reasonable precautions to prevent losses of such kinds. 
The Lord expects us to do all in our power for our own 
protection, and not expect Him to work unnecessary miracles 
to protect us from our own carelessness and inefficiency. 
Under such circumstances He might allow us to 
become involved in difficulty and loss, and thus to learn a 
needed lesson. We are stewards of whatever the Lord 



has entrusted to us, and He expects us to exercise care in 
regard to whatever is properly under our care but belonging 
to Him. We should have buckets and water at hand 
so as to be ready in case of fire. We should have proper 
fastenings upon our doors and our windows. When our 
own duty is done, we are to leave ourselves fully in the 
Lord's hands, knowing that all will be well with us. 

If the Lord permits seeming calamity to come, we may 
rest assured that it will work out our good, if we are properly 
exercised by the experience. After having done our 
part, we should trust all consequences to Him, not doubting 
that He will care for us in His own best way. The 
Lord will give us whatever help along temporal lines He 
sees is for the highest interests of the New Creature, if 
we do not remove ourselves from His keeping and seek 
to manage our own interests. Even in the event of such 
a mistake, if we come to see where we have been wilful 
and have leaned to our own understanding and renew 
full allegiance to the Lord, the difficulties in which we 
have become involved may prove to be a real blessing in 
opening our eyes to our wrong course, in showing us our 
own insufficiency to guide ourselves, and in bringing us 
wholly back to God. 

"THAT WICKED ONE TOUCHETH HIM NOT" 

Our highest interests, our real interests, are matters of 
our Father's constant care. If we keep very near to the 
Lord, we are protected from the power of the fallen 
angels, who would, if permitted, bring about our ensnarement 
and overthrow. They cannot really harm us if we 
are watching and keeping our garments white. Only a 
lack of faithfulness would subject us to their power to 
any extent so far as our New Creature interests are concerned. 
They can neither harm our bodies in any way 
nor cause any violence to us, unless the Lord permits it 
for our highest good— perhaps for our deliverance and 
exaltation, as in the case of our Master. 

Let us, then, keep ourselves, that "that Wicked One 
touch us not." We are subject to various attacks by the 
deluded servants of the powers of darkness. There may 
be attacks upon our good name, our reputation, our bodies, 
or what not, with more or less legality. We are to a considerable 
extent subject to man, through "the powers that 
be." Yet our bitterest enemies are powerless to touch 
us, unless permitted by the Lord. And we cannot be 
touched by the great Adversary, if we remain true to our 
Covenant— true to the Vows we have taken to the Lord. 
The Adversary can never touch our real selves as New 
Creatures save by our own unfaithfulness. 

WE WILL WORSHIP OUR GOD ALONE 

It may be the will of God to permit us to suffer, just 
as He permitted John the Baptist to be imprisoned and 
finally beheaded, just as He permitted Jesus to be arrested 



and crucified, and He has permitted many of His saints 
in the past to be maltreated or killed. But we need not 
fear what men may do unto us, knowing that our God, 
whose we are and whom we serve, will be with us constantly, 
and will cause all things to work out His own 
glorious purposes for us and in us. 

We would, of course, be glad to please men, if this 
were possible. But wherever it is a question of pleasing 
God or pleasing man, we will say, as did the three young 
Hebrews to the king of Babylon: "Our God whom we 
serve is able to deliver us. ...But if not, be it 
known unto thee, O king, that we will not serve thy gods, 
nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up." 
We will not do anything contrary to the Divine will, to 
the command of Jehovah. We will worship our God alone! 

When the Jewish Council (Acts 4:13-20) commanded 
the Apostles Peter and John to speak no more in the name 
of Jesus, their reply was: "Whether it be right in the 
sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God, 
judge ye; for we cannot but speak the things which we 
have seen and heard." When Pontius Pilate, the Roman 
governor of Judea, said to our Lord on the night of His 
arrest and trial, "Knowest Thou that I have power to 
crucify Thee, and have power to release Thee?" Jesus 
answered: "Thou couldst have no power at all against 
Me, except it were given thee from above." So it is with 
all the footstep followers of the Master. God's grace 
will be sufficient. Man is powerless to harm a hair of 
our heads, unless it is permitted of our Father in Heaven 
for His glory and our own highest welfare. 

COURAGE BORN OF FAITH 

The world has often wondered at the calmness of the 
Lord's humble little ones under circumstances which 
would cause the stoutest heart to quail. But to follow the 
course in life which will glorify our God and magnify 
His grace, to be able to meet wisely and courageously the 
trials and difficulties as they come to us as Christians, representatives 
of the King of Heaven, and to meet them in 

R5540 : page 283 

the spirit of rejoicing, counting our tribulations all joy, 
it is necessary that our hearts be in attune with the Lord, 
that we have no will but His, and that the fear of man, 
which bringeth a snare, shall be overcome. We cannot 
accomplish this in our own strength, but in the strength 
of God alone. We are instructed to fear Jehovah, and 
not to fear a weak mortal. The righteous are as bold 
as a lion, as gentle as a dove, as meek as a lamb. This 
peculiar combination of boldness, gentleness and meekness 
should characterize every Christian. 



R5540 : page 283 

MARY'S SWEET PERFUME 

--OCTOBER 4.-MARK 14:1-11.— 

"She hath done what she could."-VERSE 8. 

THE last five days of Jesus' ministry are full of 

interest. The incident especially marking 

our lesson occurred at the close of the 

Jewish Sabbath day just preceding our 

Lord's crucifixion. Jesus and His disciples 

had come to the Passover Feast, He telling 

them that He would there be crucified, but 

they thinking that He was speaking in some 

kind of figurative language. Indeed, at no 

time during Jesus' ministry did His crucifixion 

seem to be less likely than when it occurred. His 

preaching and the preaching of His disciples, first the 

Twelve and afterward the Seventy, had awakened considerable 

interest throughout all Jewry— especially in Galilee. 

Great throngs of people were at Jerusalem to celebrate 
this Feast, which would last a week. Thousands of them 
had heard of Jesus; and many of them had been recipients 
of His mercy in the healing of their diseases. Just a 
short time before, a considerable number had discussed the 
propriety of proclaiming Jesus king. Indeed, on the very 
next day after the incident of this lesson, the multitude, 
some following and some preceding Him while He rode 
upon the ass, had acclaimed Him king. They had cried 
out, "Hosanna in the highest to the Son of David, who 
cometh in the name of Jehovah!" 

But the Master knew that the masses would be only as 
children in the hands of the great teachers of the time. 
He knew that there was a murderous hatred against Him 
amongst the chief priests, the Scribes and the Pharisees. 
True, it is written that they hated Him without a cause; 
that is to say, without a just cause (John 15:25); but they 
had cause enough to hate Him, from their own viewpoint. 

THE ATTITUDE OF THE RELIGIOUS TEACHERS 

Although the Jewish nation had lost its liberty long 
before and had no prospect of ever winning it back, nevertheless 
there had never been a time since the days of 
Solomon when their political prospects looked so favorable. 
The Roman Emperors had manifested their willingness 
to co-operate with these very priests, scribes and 
religious leaders. The Emperors wished merely to rule, 
and realized that they could exercise more influence 
through these religious leaders than in any other way. 

Thus the great religious teachers felt themselves sponsors 
for the people. They perceived that their hold over 
the more ignorant Jews was being impaired by the teachings 
of Jesus. They felt so satisfied with themselves as 



claimed representatives of God and as intermediaries with 
the Roman government that they did not think it worth 
while to make inquiry respecting Jesus and His teachings. 
Indeed, from their viewpoint, everything was going along 
reasonably well. They could wish for nothing better than 
that their plans might not be interfered with. 

Many of them had lost all faith in God and in a future 
life. Others, retaining faith in God and His promised 
Kingdom, thought that affiliation with the Roman Empire 
would be the best way of strengthening their nation and 
preparing it for the Messianic glories. From this viewpoint, 
Jesus was a disturber of the peace. He did not 
belong to their clique. His manner, no less than His teachings, 
reproved them and tended to break all their influence 
with the people. 

The religious leaders had heard that Jesus was coming 
to the Feast. Our lesson tells us that they discussed how 
He could be wisely dealt with, killed, gotten rid of in any 
way. They seem to have been unanimous in believing 
that His destruction would be for the good of the Lord's 

R5541 : page 283 

Cause, as they misunderstood that Cause. Another Scripture 
tells us that Caiaphas, the chief priest, had declared 
that it was expedient that one man should perish rather 
than that the nation should perish. (John 1 1 :49-52.) 
They fancied that the teachings of Jesus, if allowed to 
proceed, would certainly awaken the people to a faith in 
the Messianic Kingdom. They thought of Jesus as an 
imposter, but feared that His teachings would incite some 
kind of fanatical uprising. 

The religious leaders had murder in their hearts. It 
was merely a question of how they could accomplish the 
murder and deceive the people, so as not to provoke those 
who had begun to exercise faith in Jesus. Their conclusion 
was that the Feast time would be an unfavorable 
one; for He would be surrounded by the multitude, some 
of whom thought Him a great prophet, others of whom 
considered Him to be the Messiah. Such was their attitude 
of mind when Judas went to them privately, suggesting 
that he would be in touch with the movements of Jesus, 
and that for a certain amount of money he would inform 
them of the most suitable time for making Jesus a prisoner 
—a time when the multitude would not be with Him. His 
plan was finally decided upon and carried out. 

THE FEAST--THE ANOINTING 

Jesus and His disciples were the honored guests of 
that Lazarus whom Jesus awakened after he had been 
dead three days. It was at the home of Simon the Leper, 
who probably was dead. Jesus was the guest of honor, 
His disciples sharing with Him. Martha and Mary, with 
Lazarus, were hostesses. The supper had progressed 
when Mary entered with a vial of very expensive perfume, 



the contents of which she poured upon the head of Jesus 
and, according to another account, subsequently poured a 
portion of the same perfume upon His feet. 

The house was filled with the perfume; Jesus was honored. 
Then came a voice of murmuring— "Why this 
waste?" St. John tells us that the leader of the murmurers 
was Judas, and that evidently several were influenced by 
his speech. Judas posed as the friend of the poor, intimating 
that his regrets were not selfish or personal, but 
that he thought what good might have been done to others. 

The Apostles afterward learned that this speech was 
hypocritical. At the time Jesus understood the anger of 
Judas, which led him openly to insult one of the hostesses 
of the occasion. St. John tells us the anger of Judas was 
because he had failed to get this money himself. He was 
the treasurer of the little company of disciples; he carried 
the money-bag; and, as they afterward came to know, 
he was a thief, who privately was laying by for himself. 
(John 12:6.) And Judas is probably not the only person 
who has plead for the poor and at the same time sought to 
divert funds to himself. 

R5541 : page 284 

THE MEASURE OF MARY'S DEVOTION 

The statement of Judas that the perfume was worth 
three hundred pence is probably not an extreme valuation. 
Three hundred pence would be about six dollars. At a 
time when the silver penny, worth sixteen cents, represented 
a day's labor, three hundred pence would practically 
represent the labor of a year. Sixteen dollars per ounce, 
sometimes more, has been paid for the attar of rose; and 
history tells us of fabulous prices paid for perfumes in 
the past. 

Today perfumes can be made and sold at trifling cost, 
in comparison with the past. And yet the ancients were 
passionately fond of perfumes; and the liberal use of 
them, as in the case before us, marked a deep respect, yea, 
reverence. Mary doubtless felt that her very highly 
esteemed friend Jesus, who had brought her brother back 
from the tomb, was none other than the Messiah, the Son 
and Representative of Jehovah God. The reverence which 
she felt for Jehovah she sought to express toward His 
highest Representative, Jesus. 

Poor Mary must have felt quite crushed as she heard 
the harsh criticism. But Jesus came to her defense, saying, 
"Let her alone. Why trouble ye the woman? She 
hath wrought a good work on Me. She hath done what 
she could; she hath anointed My body for its burial. The 
poor ye have always with you; and whensoever ye will ye 
may do them good; but Me ye have not always." 

Surely the Master's approval comforted Mary; and 
wherever the Gospel of the Lord has been preached, this 
story of her loving devotion, to the extent of considerable 
cost and probably considerable self-denial, has been told 



as a memorial of her, not merely to honor her, but especially 
to inspire and encourage others of God's people 
to the obtaining and exercising of a love which delights in 
service, yea, in costly sacrifice. 

A SUGGESTION WORTH CONSIDERATION 

A Boston printer, now dead, put on his business card 
the following helpful and practical suggestions:— "Do not 
keep the alabaster boxes of your love and tenderness 
sealed up until your friends are dead, but fill their lives 
with sweetness. Speak approving and cheering words 
while their ears can hear them. The kind things you say 
after they are gone, say before they go. The flowers you 
mean to send for their coffins, bestow now; and so brighten 
and sweeten their homes before they leave them. 

"If my friends have alabaster boxes laid away, full of 
fragrant perfumes of sympathy and affection, which they 
intend to break over my dead body, I would rather they 
would bring them now in my weary and troubled hours, 
and open them, that I may be refreshed and cheered, while 
I need them and can enjoy them. I would rather have a 
plain coffin without a flower, and a funeral without an 
eulogy, than a life without the sweetness of love and 
sympathy. Let us learn to anoint our friends beforehand 
for their burial. 

"Post-mortem kindness cannot cheer the burdened 
spirit. Flowers on the coffin shed no fragrance backward 
over the weary way by which the loved ones have 
traveled." 



-R5541 : page 284 

TWO PASSOVER MEMORIALS 
-OCTOBER 11. -MARK 14:12-25.- 



"As oft as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do proclaim 
the Lord's death till He come."-l CORINTHIANS 11:26. 

THE SUBJECT of today's lesson is one of the 

most interesting features of Jesus' earthly 

ministry. He knew that the Apostles did 

not know that this was to be His last supper 

with them. Although He had intimated the 

nearness of His death, His disciples had 

found it impossible to comprehend that any 

such disaster could be so near at hand as 

He had intimated. Jesus, however, with full 

consciousness of what it meant, was longing 

for the consummation of His work. It was probably on 

the very day at the close of which He and His disciples 

went to eat the Passover that Jesus said, "I have a 

baptism to be baptized with; and how am I in difficulty 



until it be accomplished!"— a baptism into death, which 
was finished the following day. 

Peter and John were the two disciples sent to make 
ready the Passover. Evidently Jesus was at Bethany, at 
the home of Lazarus, when He sent this word. It is supposed 
that the large upper room in which the Passover 
was eaten by Jesus and His disciples was the same one in 
which the Apostles and others were gathered to await the 
Pentecostal blessing. This very room is still pointed out 
by tradition, but is controlled by Mohammedans, who are 
especially jealous of Christians. 

In the evening of the same day, Jesus with the entire 
Twelve met in this room, all the preparations having been 
attended to. They met to celebrate the Jewish Passover at 
its appointed time. The lamb had been roasted, and the 
unleavened bread prepared, also the bitter herbs. Everything, 
we may be sure, was exactly in conformity with the 
original requirement; for Jesus and His Apostles were 
bound by every feature of the Jewish Law as much as 
were other Jews— the New Dispensation not yet having 
been ushered in. Every feature of the Law was binding 
up to the time of the Pentecostal blessing, which marked 
the Divine approval of the sacrifice of Jesus and the 
Divine acceptance of all those who had become His disciples 
by a full consecration. 

KINGDOM HONORS DESIRED 

So far from realizing that they were on the eve of a 
great tragedy, the Apostles believed that Jesus would very 
soon be enthroned as King. They remembered His promise 
that they should sit with Him in His Throne. This 
promise seemed so near of realization to them that they 
could think of little else but the degree of honor which 
they would have in the Kingdom. They seemed to feel 
that unless they contended stoutly for it, they would not 
get so honorable positions. Perceiving their attitude of 
mind, Jesus said to them, "The kings of the Gentiles exercise 
lordship over them; but ye shall not be so: but he 
that will be greatest amongst you, let him be as the 
younger; and he that is chief, as he that doth serve." 

These were new standards, difficult for them to understand; 
and apparently they are still difficult for the followers 
of Jesus to comprehend fully. The One who will 
be chief in the Kingdom will be the One who was the chief 
Servant in the flesh. This greatest Servant of all was, of 
course, the Lord Jesus Himself. But the Master intimates 
that the same principle holds good in respect to all of His 
followers. Whoever of them will most faithfully, most 
earnestly, most zealously, serve the brethren will thereby 
be increasing his favor with God, and be preparing himself 
for so much higher station in Messiah's Kingdom. 

With the thought that any menial service would signify 
admission of their unworthiness of a high place, the disciples 
made no arrangement for feet-washing, none wishing 
to assume the role of servant. In that sandy country 



feet-washing was almost a necessity when sandals were 
worn. By way of rebuke, Jesus arose from the table and 

R5542 : page 285 

performed this menial service for His disciples, telling 

them the import of the lesson— namely, humility— and intimating 

that no matter how humble a service they might 

be able to render to each other, they should be glad to 

render it. 

The lesson is still with us, not as a form or ceremony 
to be performed, but as an illustration of a principle. 
Any humble act of service done to one of the Lord's 
brethren corresponds to this feet-washing. 

THE CRISIS IN JUDAS' LIFE 

The Passover Supper proceeded— the eating of the 
lamb with the bitter herbs and the unleavened bread, which 
considerably resembled thick pancakes, and which was 
sometimes used instead of a spoon to sop up the essence 
of the meat. One of the Gospels declares that Jesus 
began to be heavy-hearted, and then said, One of you 
Twelve, eating with Me as My guest, as a member of My 
family, is plotting My betrayal. 

There may have been a double object in this statement. 
First, it would show the disciples that Jesus was fully 
aware of the premeditated betrayal. They would not, 
therefore, think that something had happened to Him unexpectedly, 
or out of the Divine Program. Second, our 
Lord may have meant this as a final reproof to Judas— 
to startle him, to cause him to think. At very best a 
traitor's course is dishonorable, but doubly so when the 
traitor accepts the hospitality of the one against whom he 
is plotting and eats his bread. 

Consternation spread amongst the disciples; and one 
after another they asked, "Is it I?" The import of this 
question would be, It is not I whom You have meant! 
Even Judas joined in the general inquiry, "Is it I?" The 
Apostle John was seated next to Jesus, and St. Peter 
beckoned to him that he should ask the Master who was 
meant. It was probably a whispered inquiry, heard by 
Jesus only. Our Lord's whispered reply was, "It is the 
one to whom I will give a sop." Presently, having prepared 
a special sop, a mark of special interest, He handed 
it to Judas. Thus St. John and St. Peter knew the affair. 

Apparently it was but a short time after this that Judas 
withdrew, the record being that "Satan entered into him." 
The spirit of the Evil One got complete control of him 
while he stopped, and weighed and balanced the matter of 
selling his best Friend for thirty pieces of silver. It is 
entirely probable, therefore, that Judas was not present 
when Jesus, a little later, instituted the Memorial Supper 
which Christians now celebrate. 

THE SIGNIFICATION OF THE MEMORIAL 



The Memorial Supper which Jesus instituted is totally 
separate and distinct from the Passover Supper, and yet 
they are closely related; for the one was the type and the 
other its archetype, or higher type, with a still higher signification. 
In the one a literal lamb was used to typify 
Jesus, the Lamb of God; in the other, the archetype, the 
breaking of the bread represented the death of Jesus. 

The Jews celebrated the birth of their nation and its 
deliverance from Egyptian bondage. This had its start in 
the passing over of their first-born when the tenth plague 
came upon the Egyptians. St. Paul shows us that the first-borns 
of Israel, spared in that Passover night, typified the 
Church of the First-borns, spared, or passed over, in the 
present time, while the night of sin prevails and before 
the morning of Messiah's Kingdom is ushered in. 

More and more Bible students are reaching the conclusion 
that the Memorial of Christ's death should not be 
celebrated monthly or quarterly or weekly; but that it 
should be considered the archetype of the Jewish Passover, 
and should properly be celebrated annually, and 
at about the same time as the Jewish Passover. 

We are not to understand that the Apostles comprehended 
the meaning of Jesus' words when He explained 
to them the signification of the Supper which He instituted. 
Rather, as He had already foretold, the Holy Spirit 
brought these things to their attention and enabled them 
to comprehend their meaning, after they had received the 
Pentecostal blessing and enlightenment. Now we may see 
the import of Jesus' words, "This is My body, broken for 
you." We perceive that He could not have meant, as some 
have thought, that the bread was turned into His actual 
body and the wine into His actual blood. On the contrary, 
He still had His actual body and His actual blood. 
He could not, therefore, have meant more than to say, 
This bread symbolically represents My body, which is to 
be broken for you; and this wine represents My blood, 
which is to be shed for you tomorrow— My life given up. 

Neither should we think that Jesus meant that special 
virtue would result to the disciples from the eating of that 
bread and the drinking of that literal cup. We should 
properly look far beyond these things, and see that He 
meant this: Only as you by faith partake of the merits 
secured by My death can you have the great blessing provided 
for you as My disciples. The Apostles believed that 
the death of Jesus was for their sins, and that it constituted 
the basis of their acceptance with the Heavenly 
Father. They realized that only as they appropriated the 
life of Christ would they be truly the recipients of all these 
blessings. 

St. Paul points out for us another important signification 
of this bread and cup. He declares the oneness of 
Christ and His Church. He tells us that there is but the 
one Loaf and the one Cup. Primarily, this Loaf was 
Christ Jesus; but in a secondary sense all the followers of 
Christ, after having been justified through His Sacrifice, 



are privileged to become members of His Body, parts of 
the one Loaf that is being broken. Likewise, after partaking 
of the merit of Christ's blood, His sacrifice, all of 
His true followers are counted as members with Him and 
as participators in that one Cup. 

Hear the Apostle's words: "The cup of blessing which 
we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? 
The bread which we break, is it not the communion of 
the Body of Christ? For we being many are one Bread, 
and one Body; for we are partakers of that one Bread."— 
1 Corinthians 10:16,17. 

THE SEALING OF THE NEW COVENANT 

Jesus spoke of the cup, the fruit of the vine, as representing 
the blood of the New Covenant. The Law 
Covenant was the Old Covenant, which failed to bring 
the blessings to the Jews, because they could not keep it. 
Hence, also, they were not qualified to bless the other 
nations of the earth. But God promised a New Covenant, 
a better one, which would be introduced by a new and 
higher, or superior, Mediator than Moses. That New 
Covenant, God declares, will accomplish what the old 
Law Covenant failed to accomplish; for the New 
Law Covenant will be inaugurated by Messiah, its 
Mediator, at His Second Advent. His Kingdom, established 
in power and great glory, will rule, bless and instruct 
mankind, and will "take away the stony heart and 
will give a heart of flesh" to all who will respond to those 
blessed opportunities. 

Jesus' death constituted the blood which seals, or 
makes efficacious, that New Covenant. But mark further: 
The Church is not to be blessed under that New 
Covenant of the Millennial Age, which will be inaugurated 
at the Second Coming of Jesus, at the establishment of 
His Kingdom. The Church is to be blessed in advance of 
that New Covenant. Indeed, their consecrated lives 

R5542 : page 286 

(blood), accepted by our Lord, are counted in as a part 
of His own sacrifice, which seals the New Covenant. 
Hence the New Covenant cannot be fully sealed until the 
entire Body of Christ, which is the Church, shall have 
shared with Him in the drinking of His Cup— in the 
sacrifice of earthly rights, privileges, life itself. 

THE COVENANT OF SACRIFICE 

Meantime, we see that Jesus and the Church receive 
their reward neither under the Law Covenant nor under 
the New Covenant, but under a special Covenant, called a 
Covenant of Sacrifice. Reference is made to this Covenant 
of Christ and the Church in the Psalms, where the Lord 
is represented as saying, "Gather My saints together unto 
Me, those who have made a Covenant with Me by sacrifice." 



(Psalm 50:5.) The gathering of those who enter 
into this special Covenant of Sacrifice with the Lord has 
been in progress for now over eighteen hundred years. 
We have every reason to believe that the sacrifice is 
nearly completed, and that soon all the sacrificers, members 
of the Body of Christ, will be glorified, changed by 
the power of the First Resurrection and will enter into 
the joys of their Lord, according to His promise: "To him 
that overcometh will I grant to sit with Me in My Throne." 

Our Lord indicated that He would no longer drink of 
the Cup; nor did He. His work, His drinking of the Cup, 
was finished the next day, on Calvary. There He completed 
the drinking of the Cup which the Father had 
poured for Him. The Father has poured the same Cup 
for all the followers of Jesus; and they must drink of 
His Cup, as well as partake of the merits of His broken 
Body, if they would be His joint-heirs in the Kingdom, 
soon to be established. 

This was the import of our Lord's words to St. James 
and St. John, His disciples, when they asked for special 

R5543 : page 286 

places in the Kingdom. Jesus asked, "Are ye able [willing] 
to drink of the Cup that I shall drink of, and to be 
baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?" They 
heartily declared their willingness. Jesus assured them 
that they should have their request; that if they were willing, 
He would see to it that they would drink of His Cup. 
And so it is with all of His followers. The Scriptures 
assure them, saying, "All things shall work together for 
good to them that love God, to the called ones according to 
His purpose." 



R5543 : page 286 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
A REPLY BY THE EDITOR 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am pleased to acknowledge receipt of yours of 16th 
ultimo. 

After making copies of your letter, I went to the Editor 
of the Gazette and submitted to him your original letter. 
After reading it he said he would publish all except that 
portion relating to ordination. I hand you herewith the page 
of the Gazette containing the article, and I praise the Lord 
for rewarding your efforts in defending the Truth here. 

Through the Lord's providence I had heretofore been 
able, apparently, to parry every blow directed against the 
Truth, but in this attack of Rev. Ross the javelin seemed to 
pass me and strike notwithstanding my best efforts to turn it 
aside; but now the darkness disappears and the light again 



shines on the cause of Present Truth through the good defense 
which you have offered; the Lord has shown us again 
how He can make the "Wrath of His enemies to praise 
Him." The Editor of the Mirror (Protestant), a contemporary 
of the Gazette, told me he would run your letter in 
full. 

Dear Brother, would it not be well to let your letter come 
out in one of the BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY or in THE 
WATCH TOWER? It would give many of the dear friends 
some good ideas as to how to offer defense along this special 
line of the Adversary's attacks on you and the cause of 
Present Truth. I received a letter from a brother in Grenada, 
stating that some prominent Plymouth Brethren were circulating 
Rev. Ross' pamphlet. Of course, they will not circulate 
so very many, as the pamphlet costs 10 cents, and very 
few of the Plymouth Brethren or other denominations are 
willing to pay that much to defend their errors. 

How grand it will be when the people are delivered from 
the bondage of error! I am glad for the ministers' sake 
also, for they will not have to fight any more, and I am sure 
that will be a great relief to their minds! One Catholic 
gentleman told me that Catholics and others could argue with 
us until we got to the Bible, and then they had to stop ! 

Assuring you of my continued love and fullest confidence, 
which you have always had and which have never wavered 
since I laid my life upon the altar of sacrifice in 1 897, 1 am, 

Yours in the Redeemer's service, E. J. COWARD. 



Below we reprint the portion of our letter as published in 
The Port-of-Spain Gazette, Trinidad, B.W.I.: 

PASTOR RUSSELL REPLIES. 

MR. E. J. COWARD, 

Port-of-Spain, Trinidad, B.W.I. 

Dear Brother in Christ:— Yours of October 3d is before 
me. Thanks for its clippings from the Gazette and the 
Evangelical Christian. 

I am quite familiar with the slanderous screed issued by 
Rev. J. J. Ross. In Canada they have just two laws governing 
libel. Under the one the falsifier may be punished by 
the assessment of damages and money. Under the other, 
criminal libel, he is subject to imprisonment. I entered suit 
against Rev. Ross under the criminal act, at the advice of 
my attorneys, because, as he has no property, a suit for damages 
would not intimidate him nor stop him. The lower 
Court found him guilty of libel. But when the case went to 
the second Judge he called up an English precedent, in 
which it was held that criminal libel would only operate in a 
case where the jury felt sure that there was danger of rioting 
or violence. As there was no danger that myself or 
friends would resort to rioting, the case was thrown out. I 
could still bring my action for financial damages, but it would 
be costly to me and impotent as respects Rev. Ross. He, 



however, is having troubles of his own. Since he began to 
attack me, he has split two Baptist Congregations— one in 
Toronto, the other in Hamilton. The last heard of him, he 
was in London, Ont, and again in trouble with his congregation. 
A lying spirit is sure to be a boomerang. 

As respects my education in Greek and Hebrew: Not only 
do I not claim very special knowledge of either language, but 
I claim that not one minister in a thousand is either a 
Hebrew or a Greek scholar. To be able to spell out a few 
Greek words is of no earthly value. Nor is it necessary 
longer to study these languages, in order to have knowledge 
of the Bible. Our Presbyterian friends have gotten out at 
great cost Young's Analytical Hebrew, Chaldaic, Greek and 
English Lexicon Concordance, which anyone may procure. 
And our Methodist friends have issued a similar work- 
Strong's Analytical Concordance and Lexicon. And there is 
a still older one entitled Englishman's Hebrew, Chaldaic, 
Greek and English Lexicon and Concordance. Additionally, 
Liddell and Scott's Greek Lexicon is a standard authority. 
The prices of these are not beyond the reach of the average 
man. By these works scholarly information respecting the 
original text of the Bible is obtainable. I have all four of 
these works and have used them faithfully. Very few college 
professors, even, would risk to give a critical translation of 
any text of Scripture without consulting these very works 
of reference, which are standard. To merely learn to read 
the Greek and Hebrew without a six years' course in their 
grammars is more likely to hinder than to help in Bible 
study; far better take the acknowledged scholarship to which 
I have referred. 

Additionally I remind you of the many translations of 
the Bible now extant— all of them very good. I have all of 
these and find them useful in comparison in the study of 
any text— one sometimes giving a thought which another may 
not. The other day, for curiosity's sake, I counted Bibles in 
different translations, etc., in my study and found that I have 
thirty-two. 

As respects my business dealings, Brother Coward, I need 
not remind you that American Courts are very strict and that 
if anybody feels that I have wronged him out of a dollar, he 
would have no difficulty in haling me into Court. You have 
my assurance, dear Brother, that I do not owe any man on 
earth a penny and that I have never taken a penny from 
anyone unjustly. On the contrary, as you know, I have spent 

R5543 : page 287 

several small fortunes in seeking to do good to my fellow-men 
—in helping them to a better understanding of God and 
the Bible. Having once been an infidel myself, and having 
subsequently found that I had confused the teachings of the 
Bible with the teachings of the creeds, and that the Bible's 
teaching is a glorious, grand doctrine, it has since been my 
business and pleasure to do all in my power to help fellow-mortals 
out of darkness into the true light. 



If you choose, you may make such extracts of this as are 
likely to reach intelligent people through any of the newspapers. 
But really I care little for what men may say or 
think about me. Of course, such things are painful; but they 
are only what the Bible tells us will be more or less the experience 
of all who would be loyal to God and His Word. 
So persecuted they the saints and prophets of the past- 
even the Master Himself. And as for how I got my education 
—it seems to me of little consequence. I have enough 
to serve my own purposes, and, apparently, too much to 
please Rev. Ross and others of his type, who, not knowing 
how to meet my theological teachings, do not attempt to do 
so at all, but merely charge me with ignorance. As I read 
his vile slanders I thought of what the New Testament says 
about St. Peter and St. John. They were so woefully 
ignorant that all the people perceived that they were 
"ignorant and unlearned men." If they were living today, I 
suppose that the Rev. Ross and Co. would be after them to 
show them up as not having been ordained by the Baptists 
and not knowing anything anyway. 

Very truly your servant in the Lord, 

C. T. RUSSELL. 

The portion of our communication omitted above, follows: 
I need not tell you how absurdly untrue Rev. Ross' statements 
are in respect to my ordination; but really it seems 
strange how little people use their thinking faculties in such 
matters— how few who would read the Rev. Ross' statements 
would see their absurdity. For instance, he is a Baptist 
and was authorized or ordained by the Baptists— not by 
Methodists, Presbyterians, Lutherans, Catholics or Episcopalians. 
Would an Episcopalian recognize Rev. Ross' ordination? 
Surely not! Would a Roman Catholic recognize his 
ordination? Of course not. Ordination merely means authorization. 
The Catholics will authorize, or ordain, those 
only who belong to their faith. The Baptists will ordain, or 
authorize, those only who are Baptists. How foolish, then, 
to talk about ordination from their standpoint! 

But ordination from my standpoint, the Bible standpoint, 
the standpoint of an increasing number of Bible students all 
the world over, is different. It is a Divine ordination. But 
our Baptist friends and our Methodist friends would say 
that they, also, recognize Bible ordination, that they are not 

R5544 : page 287 

merely dependent upon each other. But we challenge them 
to prove that they ever had a Divine ordination or that they 
ever think of it. They merely think of a sectarian ordination, 
or authorization, each from his own sect or party. 

True, Catholics and Episcopalians are different and do 
recognize a Divine ordination. They claim that Jesus ordained 
His Twelve Apostles and that these have successors 
in the Bishops, who are styled "apostolic bishops," and under 



the theory of "apostolic succession" have the same power as 
the original Twelve Apostles to ordain and to teach. Bible 
students believe that they err in this claim and that the 
doctrine of "apostolic succession" is unscriptural. The 
Bible recognizes only Twelve Apostles. More than that, the 
Bible denounces all apostolic bishops as being in error. Referring 
to them, Jesus said that they claimed to be apostles, 
and are not, but do lie. (Revelation 2:2.) In other words, 
contrary to the superstitions of Catholics and Episcopalians, 
their bishops have no authority whatever to ordain anybody. 

What, then, is the proper ordination of a minister of 
Christ, and how can it be obtained, according to the Bible? 

We answer that God's ordination, or authorization, of 
any man to preach is by the impartation of the Holy Spirit 
to him. Whoever has received the Holy Spirit has received 
the power and authority to teach and to preach in the name 
of God. Whoever has not received the Holy Spirit has no 
Divine authority or sanction to his preaching. In other 
words, he is unordained in the highest, truest sense of that 
word. 

What is the secret of the opposition and slander that is 
being raised up against me and against all who, like me, are 
Bible students? It is malice, hatred, envy, strife, on the 
part of those who are still hugging the nonsense of the Dark 
Ages and neglecting true Bible study. They see that their 
influence is waning. But they have not yet awakened to the 
true situation. They think that I am responsible for their 
smaller congregations and small collections. But not so. 
The real difficulty with them is that the people are becoming 
more intelligent and can no longer be driven with the crack 
of a merely man-devised whip of fear. The colleges of the 
world have been teaching that the Bible is a foolish old book, 
until few preachers and few of the educated of the world 
believe it to be of Divine inspiration. Losing faith in the 
Bible, in the preachers and in the creeds, the people are drifting 
toward atheism. That is the real difficulty. 

While my work does not, indeed, help to build up any of 
the sects of Christendom, it is helping to establish Christian 
people in a true faith in God and in the Bible. It is giving 
them a firm foundation and an intelligent understanding such 
as they had prayed for and hoped for before, but never 
found. This is not because of great ability on my part, nor 
on the part of my associates, but because God's time has 
come for blessing Bible study in the light of present-day opportunities. 
It is as Jesus promised— the Wise Virgin class 
of Christian people, who "trim their lamps"— study the Bible 
—find it to shine out brightly and to point them to the new 
Age of blessing under Messiah's Kingdom. 

page 287 

"TIMES AND SEASONS" 

DEAR PASTOR:- 

The letter of a dear brother in THE WATCH TOWER of a 
somewhat recent date, drawing attention to the fact that a 



total eclipse of the sun would occur August 21, visible to the 

whole of "Christendom," exactly 40 days before October 1, 

the day which we believe marks the close of the Gentile Times, 

interested me deeply— particularly so, in view of the other 

coincidences which specially mark this year. April 10 synchronized 

with Good Friday and with the 14th of Nisan. On 

that day the moon reached its full at the moment (as near as 

we can ascertain) in which our Lord died (3:49 p.m. 

Jerusalem time). 

But more remarkable still, the following is worthy of 
notice: Next to the Passover, the great day of the Israelites 
was the Day of Atonement, which was commanded to be observed 
on the 10th day of the seventh month. (Leviticus 23:27; 
16:29.) After the daily sacrifice, the high priest sacrificed 
for himself and his fellow-priests a bullock for a sin-offering. 
After this a goat was offered, part of its blood being 
sprinkled in the Most Holy and the remainder, mingled with 
the blood of the bullock, was sprinkled toward both sides of 
the sanctuary. "Then shalt thou make the trumpet of the 
Jubilee to sound on the 10th day of the seventh month; in the 
Day of Atonement shall ye make the trumpet sound throughout 
all your land."— Leviticus 25:9. 

If we now turn to the dedication of the Temple, we find that 
it also took place in the seventh month, and "fire came down 
from Heaven, and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifice." 
(2 Chronicles 7:1.) This apparently was on the 10th 
day of the month, the Atonement Day; and it was followed 
by the Feast of Tabernacles, beginning on the 15th day of the 
month. Then the assembly was dismissed on the 23d day of 
the month. (2 Chronicles 7:10.) This 10th day of the seventh 
month (Jewish sacred year) so particularly marked, falls this 
year on the 30th of September, the day closing the Gentile 
Times. 

The real 14th of Nisan this year seems to be an uncertainty 
among the brethren, some considering it to be April 9th. Page 
470, Vol. VI., states: "The Hebrew year begins in the Spring 
with the first appearance of a new moon after the Spring 
Equinox." Some seeing that the new moon occurred on 
March 26th at 6:9 P.M., Greenwich time, consider the following 
day to be the 1st of Nisan. But the Lord never acknowledged 
either Greenwich or New York time, and the time mentioned 
is 8:30 P.M. Jerusalem time, which was after sunset. The 
appearance of the new moon was therefore on the 27th, and 
the following day, the 28th, was the 1st of Nisan, commencing 
the Jewish sacred year. With all Christian love, dear Pastor, 

Yours in His service, A VINEYARD LABORER.-England. 

READ IT TEN TIMES 

A deeply interested subscriber to THE WATCH TOWER 
writes: 

"Will you please publish the First Chapter of the Second 
Volume of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES in THE WATCH TOWER? 
I have just read it for the tenth time, and its every word is so 
full of meaning, strength and encouragement to me that I 
would like others to have the same." 



Instead of re-publishing the Chapter we refer our readers 
to the Volume, merely approving the above suggestion of re-reading 
it. 



page 288 

INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION CLASSES 

STUDIES AND LECTURES UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



B. S. A. BEAREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR THE MONTH OF OCTOBER 



QUESTIONS FROM MANUAL ON SERIES SECOND OF 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES' 

STUDY V. 

Week of October 4 Q.37 to 41 Week of October 18 Q.47 to 5 1 

Week of October 11 Q.42 to 46 Week of October 25 Q.52 to 56 

Question Manuals on Vol II., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c each, or 
50c. per dozen, postpaid. 



page 289 
