Letter
“EACH MARRIED COUPLE MIND ITS OWN CONDUCT”
Dear Sister:
Answering yours of September 22 on the matter of sexual intercourse:
Of course, it is best for everyone not to pry into the private affairs of a married couple and even appear to attempt to dictate to them in regard to this subject. The safest thing we can do is to quote the inspired advice of the apostle Paul thereon at 1 Corinthians 7:1-6 (Moffatt’s translation):
“Now for the questions in your letter. It is indeed ‘an excellent thing for a man to have no intercourse with a woman’; but there is so much immorality, that every man had better have a wife of his own and every woman a husband of her own. The husband must give the wife her conjugal dues, and the wife in the same way must give her husband his; a wife cannot do as she pleases with her body—her husband has power, and in the same way a husband cannot do as he pleases with his body—his wife has power. Do not withhold sexual intercourse from one another, unless you agree to do so for a time, in order to devote yourselves to prayer. Then come together again. You must not let Satan tempt you through incontinence [through your lack of self-control, An Amer. Trans.]. But what I have just said is by way of concession, not command.”
It is plain here that the apostle is speaking not just of sexual intercourse for the sake of reproducing children, but for the sake of sexual relief. For this reason, he says, it is better for some passionate persons to have a marriage mate of their own to help keep them from indulging in the immorality prevalent in this world. So married couples should not withhold sexual intercourse; otherwise, Satan might tempt one or both of the couple to immorality with persons outside. But, of course, in this matter self-control must be exercised so as not to overindulge to one’s spiritual harm, even to interfering with ‘devoting yourselves to prayer’. In this respect let each couple regulate its own life and not try to dictate to another couple.
Faithfully yours in Kingdom service,
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
Sing unto Jehovah, all the earth; show forth his salvation from day to day. Declare his glory among the nations, his marvellous works among all the peoples. For great is Jehovah, and greatly to be praised: he also is to be feared above all gods. For all the gods of the peoples are idols: but Jehovah made the heavens. Honor and majesty are before him: strength and gladness are in his place. Ascribe unto Jehovah, ye kindreds of the peoples, ascribe unto Jehovah glory and strength; ascribe unto Jehovah the glory due unto his name: bring an offering, and come before him; worship Jehovah in holy array. . . . say among the nations, Jehovah reigneth.—1 Chron. 16:23-29, 31, A.S.V.

