Accelerating the Kingdom Hall Construction Program
1 Those who exert themselves in doing good things for others prove to be real ‘neighbors.’ (Luke 10:36, 37) Like the Samaritan benefactor in Jesus’ illustration, Jehovah’s Witnesses expend much of their strength, their time, and their material resources in helping others. During the past few years such neighborly spirit has been outstandingly manifested throughout this country in the Kingdom Hall building program.
2 As Jehovah has continued to ‘speed up’ the work and to give the increase, in the United States the 1986 service year ended with 207 more congregations than there were the previous year. (Isa. 60:22) Happily, the loving concern shown by so many of Jehovah’s people has helped to provide some of the Kingdom Halls needed for the growing number of congregations. The fine support given to the Society Kingdom Hall Fund has been very much appreciated, as have the efforts of the thousands who have volunteered their time and skills to assist in constructing new Kingdom Halls and renovating others.​—Ps. 110:3; John 13:35.
3 The generous giving of the brothers has made it possible for the Society Kingdom Hall Fund to assist in the construction of 244 new Kingdom Halls in all 48 states under the United States branch. These are accommodating over 370 congregations. During the past year alone, financial assistance has been provided for 132 new Kingdom Hall projects. (Some of these are shown in this insert.) Congregations that may not have been able to obtain financing otherwise have been aided. Many other congregations have constructed or renovated additional Kingdom Halls by making their own financial arrangements.
4 Even though much has been accomplished in providing new and improved Kingdom Hall facilities, a pressing need remains. A recent survey indicates that over 200 additional new Kingdom Halls are needed now. More will be required to accommodate future growth. Thus, arrangements are being made to accelerate our Kingdom Hall building program. As more contributions are received, other congregations will be able to obtain loans through the Society Kingdom Hall Fund.
SOCIETY-APPOINTED REGIONAL BUILDING COMMITTEES
5 As a means of accelerating the Kingdom Hall construction program, the Society is now appointing elders to serve on Regional Building Committees to assist with Kingdom Hall construction. Many of these spiritually qualified brothers have secular experience in construction, real estate, business, safety, and other related fields. Thus, they are in a position to offer valuable guidance from the beginning to the completion of a project, whether it involves new construction or renovating buildings for use as Kingdom Halls. These committees are now being provided with guidelines from the Society. Each committee is being assigned a certain number of circuits to assist with Kingdom Hall projects. The circuit overseer will be advising the local elders how they may contact the appropriate committee when there is a need.
6 If a congregation contemplates undertaking a new construction or major renovation project and desires assistance from the Regional Building Committee, their contacting this committee before purchasing property or selecting a plan can help avoid costly pitfalls. Where a construction project is being undertaken in a city having more than one congregation, the selection of property may also be discussed with the circuit overseer(s), the city overseer, and possibly other local elders. This may aid in choosing a site that will not only benefit the congregation(s) involved in the present project but also relieve overcrowded conditions in neighboring Kingdom Halls and allow for future growth in the general area. Even in less densely populated areas, a location can often be selected that can serve two or more congregations.
CONSTRUCTION PROCEDURE
7 Usually the ‘quick-build’ method of construction is preferred by the Regional Building Committees. Experience has shown that there are many advantages to this method. It has also shown that existing procedures can be further refined.
8 We have learned many things about building Kingdom Halls in recent years. Already, many persons have been trained to help with the work. So now there can be an acceleration of the building program. We are also in a position to simplify some of the procedures so as to accomplish the most good in a short period of time and with a reduced number of workers.
9 The Society recommends that skilled workers be scheduled as their particular trades are needed during the period of construction. Usually the other volunteers needed for a particular project can be obtained from the congregations in the local area, and they also may be scheduled to work at certain times. This means fewer people will be on the construction site at any one time. More of the brothers will be able to be with their families and their home congregations and share in field service activities for portions of the construction weekend. Having a limited number of persons on the construction site is recommended not only for safety reasons but also out of consideration for the congregation, which has the burden of providing food, rooming, and other accommodations. Those who have not been scheduled to assist with a particular project are encouraged to support the spiritual activities in their own congregations.​—See December 1985 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 6, paragraph 14.
DESIGNS
10 There is a need to be judicious in selecting building designs so as to avoid placing an unnecessary burden on either the local brothers or the resources of the Society Kingdom Hall Fund. While we plan for our Kingdom Halls to be attractive in appearance, it is appropriate that they be simple and functional rather than pretentious. We are happy to inform you that for this reason the Society has produced a variety of new Kingdom Hall designs that are available to congregations involved in building projects. These will be provided to the elders upon written request to the Kingdom Hall Desk.
11 Give careful thought to selecting a plan that will accommodate the present needs of the congregation(s) and allow for a reasonable amount of growth. All factors should be carefully weighed so as to build a hall that is neither unnecessarily large nor too small.
12 In some rare instances, it may be advisable for congregation elders to consult a local attorney experienced in zoning matters before proceeding with plans for the actual construction of a Kingdom Hall. While this may be an added expense, it could save the congregation extra costs later. In communities where the brothers know in advance that their project will be viewed favorably by the local city departments, this legal assistance will likely not be needed. However, where a congregation anticipates that problems will arise, it might be the course of wisdom at the outset to seek competent legal counsel locally.
PROGRESSIVELY MEETING THE NEED
13 How can a congregation know when it qualifies for assistance from the Society Kingdom Hall Fund to build a new Kingdom Hall? Periodically the Society arranges for surveys to be taken to determine which congregations have the greatest need for a new Kingdom Hall. Priorities are determined on the basis of the surveys made, plus other relevant factors. Then, as funds become available, the Society progressively initiates correspondence with such congregations. However, if a congregation faces an emergency situation, the elders should feel free to contact the Society regarding its need.
14 If a congregation has in mind renovating or enlarging an existing Kingdom Hall, it may be guided by what was stated a year ago, namely: “Congregations faced with urgent remodeling or repair needs can contact the Society, since some funding is available for such projects from time to time on a limited basis.”​—See Our Kingdom Ministry, December 1985, insert, paragraph 7.
15 If congregations are in a position to move forward with their construction projects because locally they are financially able, there is no objection to their doing so.
THE NEED IS URGENT
16 The principal meeting place used by congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses is the Kingdom Hall. It thus plays an important role in the growth of true worship. As dedicated witnesses of Jehovah, taught by him, we regularly assemble together “to incite to love and fine works.” (Heb. 10:24) What a blessing it is to see increasing numbers of people joining with us because they, too, want to be instructed by Jehovah and walk in his ways! (Isa. 2:3) In course of time, this continuing growth calls for the building of even more Kingdom Halls.
17 The Society is aware that the economic situation today has made it difficult for some congregations to acquire adequate facilities for their meetings and that there is an urgent need to assist these congregations. This is one reason why the Society Kingdom Hall Fund was set up to help congregations in financing construction of needed Kingdom Halls.
18 The generosity of the brothers in contributing to the Society Kingdom Hall Fund is particularly noteworthy and contrasts sharply with the world’s selfish “me-first” attitude. These contributions are an expression of brotherly affection and love, and they give evidence that we are interested in those “related to us in the faith” and want to do good for one another. Such fine qualities along with our positive action on behalf of others have a sure reward: “For if these things exist in you and overflow, they will prevent you from being either inactive or unfruitful regarding the accurate knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.”​—Gal. 6:10; 2 Pet. 1:7, 8.
19 Do you remember how Jehovah’s people responded to King David’s appeal and contributed generously to build ‘the house of Jehovah’? 1 Chronicles 29:6-9 says that “the people gave way to rejoicing over their making voluntary offerings, for it was with a complete heart that they made voluntary offerings to Jehovah.” That same spirit motivates Christians today to continue showing concern for their brothers and sisters in other congregations that need adequate Kingdom Hall facilities.
20 Giving of our time and resources to assist in providing new Kingdom Halls is a fine way to honor Jehovah. (Prov. 3:9) Sharing in an effort to help other congregations to obtain needed Kingdom Halls is in harmony with 2 Corinthians 8:14, 15, which mentions that “an equalizing” takes place. Let it be our constant prayer that Jehovah will continue to bless and direct our efforts in this activity to his praise.
[Picture on page 3]
Michigan​—Quickly built with assistance from Society Kingdom Hall Fund
[Pictures on page 4]
Kingdom Halls constructed with assistance from Society Kingdom Hall Fund
Pennsylvania
Minnesota
Mississippi
Wisconsin
Virginia
South Carolina
[Pictures on page 5]
New York City​—Machine shop converted into double-auditorium Kingdom Hall. Inset: Lower-floor auditorium
[Pictures on page 6]
Double-auditorium Kingdom Halls
California
Louisiana

