Announcements
● Literature offer for December: My Book of Bible Stories for a contribution of $2.50. The new “Look!” brochure can also be offered for a contribution of 30¢. January and February: Any of the following books for a contribution of 50¢: Choosing, Commentary on James, “Eternal Purpose,” Evolution (old edition), Holy Spirit, Life Does Have a Purpose, Peace and Security (old edition), This Life, Truth, and World Government. Congregations may request credit for all the old books placed by publishers and pioneers. (See November Our Kingdom Ministry.) Supplies of Choosing, Commentary on James, Holy Spirit, and Truth may be ordered from Brooklyn. If there are older booklets on hand in the congregation, these may also be presented in the field service. March: You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth for a contribution of $2.50.
● During November many congregations and circuits have sent contributions to the Society to help with the Kingdom work in this country and others. Many have also sent contributions for the Society Kingdom Hall Fund. Your support of the work of Kingdom expansion is sincerely appreciated by the Society. You can be sure that it is appreciated also by your brothers and sisters in this land and others who are likewise supporting the Kingdom work by their labors of love and material contributions. “May Jehovah reward the way you act.”​—Ruth 2:12.
● The presiding overseer or someone designated by him should audit congregation’s accounts on December 1 or as soon as possible thereafter.
● It is suggested that all congregations display the new yeartext by January 1, 1987.
● The special public talk for the 1987 Memorial season will be given worldwide on Sunday, March 29. The subject of this talk will be “What Is Your Relationship With God?” An outline will be provided as soon as possible. Those congregations having the visit of the circuit overseer or a circuit assembly scheduled that week will have the special talk the following week. No congregation should have the special talk before March 29.
● Congregations should begin ordering bound volumes of The Watchtower and Awake! for 1986 on their December literature orders. (See the 1986 Cost List, paragraphs 7-10, for the date you should submit your order.) The bound volumes will be available in Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Italian, Japanese, Portuguese, and Spanish. Until the bound volumes are available and shipments are made, these will appear as “Back Ordered” on congregation invoices. Bound volumes are controlled stock items (see the Cost List, paragraphs 23-25) and will be charged at $5.00 each for congregation, public, and pioneers.
● New Publications Available:
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures​—With References (Rbi8)—​German
Tanakh Bible (1985, Jewish Publication Society; congregation and public: $19.95; pioneers: $14.00)​—English
Aid to Bible Understanding (Volume 6, Ni-Ri)​—French
God’s “Eternal Purpose” Now Triumphing for Man’s Good​—Turkish
Survival Into a New Earth​—Cibemba, Croatian
United in Worship of the Only True God​—Arabic, Chichewa, New Guinea Pidgin, Ukrainian
Watch Tower Publications Index for 1930-1985 (congregation and public: $7.00; pioneers: $4.50)​—English
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth (Large size)​—Malayalam, Tamil
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth (Small size)​—Cebuano
Bible Topics for Discussion​—Indonesian
The Government That Will Bring Paradise​—Gujarati, Hindi, Lifou, Malayalam, Marathi
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Album of Hebrew Scriptures​—Volume 2, First of Samuel to Psalms (set of 21 cassettes in album; congregation and public: $33.25; pioneers: $21.50)​—English
Numbers (set of three; congregation and public: $4.50; pioneers: $3.75)​—German

