Do You Appreciate Their Value?
1 It was a thrilling moment when the speaker at the 1978 “Victorious Faith” International Convention released the new Bible study aid My Book of Bible Stories. Its potential for teaching the Bible to young and old alike was quickly recognized. Adults were pleased to learn that the stories are in chronological order. This has helped many to become acquainted with the sequence of Bible events.
2 One mother whose three-year-old son had a very short attention span was pleasantly surprised to see him quietly “studying” the book for 20 minutes. It soon became a practice with him. A young couple began teaching their son from the Bible Stories book shortly after they had begun to study the Bible. On one occasion, when the family was about to eat a meal, the boy refused to eat until a prayer was said.
3 Since the Bible Stories book was first released over eight years ago, 23 million copies have been printed in 66 languages. We appreciate the value of this fine Bible study aid and are in a good position to offer it wholeheartedly to young and old alike during December.
“LOOK!” BROCHURE
4 Jehovah presented us with another treasure this past summer in the form of the new brochure “Look! I Am Making All Things New.” A pioneer sister from Texas who was having difficulty starting studies recently wrote: ‘By just letting the householder see the beautiful cover picture, discussing it, showing the scriptures at the bottom of page 4, then reading the first four paragraphs, you have started a study!’
MAKING THE OFFER
5 When working in your area, you might say: “As a neighbor of yours, I would like to share some good news about a reliable promise that soon there will be peace worldwide. Isn’t that something you would like to see? [Pause for reply.] We have all observed the efforts of men to accomplish this goal. But notice who it is that the Bible says will bring lasting peace. [Read Psalm 46:8, 9.] Once war and those who promote it are gone, never again will God permit hostility on the earth. We are assured of this by the words of the inspired writer of Psalm 72:7. [Read.] The ones God will preserve to live on a peaceful earth will be those who have learned about him and who serve him. My Book of Bible Stories has helped many people to do that. I am sure you will be greatly encouraged by reading it. This copy can be yours for a contribution of just $2.50.”
6 If the householder already has the Bible Stories book or if it would be more appropriate to offer the “Look!” brochure, you might use the suggestion given in paragraph 4. Or you may point out one of the subheadings in the brochure that you believe would be of interest to the householder. The “Look!” brochure is designed especially for starting new Bible studies. So when you show the householder the subjects discussed, direct attention also to the questions at the bottom of the page, the scriptures cited, and the Bible-based answers in the paragraphs. You may be able to start a study on the initial visit.
7 We thank Jehovah for the Holy Scriptures by which “the man of God may be fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.” (2 Tim. 3:17) We are also grateful for such publications as the Bible Stories book and the “Look!” brochure. We appreciate their value and are happy that we can offer them to others during the month of December.

