Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 30
Song 108
10 min: Appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry and local announcements. Encourage all who can to share in the field service on the first Sunday of the month.
20 min: “Do You Appreciate Their Value?” Questions and answers. Demonstrate presentations in paragraphs 5 and 6. Encourage all to have a share in presenting the Bible Stories book and “Look!” brochure this weekend.
15 min: “Accelerating the Kingdom Hall Construction Program.” Question-and-answer consideration of first nine paragraphs of insert. Draw attention to benefits congregation will receive from adjustments in the Kingdom Hall construction program. Encourage congregation’s continued support of Society Kingdom Hall Fund.
Song 211 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 7
Song 72
10 min: Local announcements. Encourage support of magazine work on Saturday, December 13. Demonstrate a 60-second presentation featuring an article in either The Watchtower or Awake!
20 min: “‘Go Make Disciples!’​—Do You?” Question-and-answer consideration of article. Emphasize the importance of a right attitude, constant prayer for Jehovah’s help, putting forth the effort to find a study, and a willingness to be used by Jehovah to help someone else learn the truth. Conclude with four-minute demonstration of publisher approaching service overseer and saying he appreciates the suggestions just discussed and will apply them. Asks if service overseer can help him in any additional ways. Service overseer determines that publisher has been making placements of “Look!” brochure in the house-to-house work and asks if he feels it would help him if someone went with him while making return visits and trying to start a study. Publisher agrees. Service overseer assures him that he will be glad to make such arrangements. Also, when service overseer visits his Congregation Book Study, he would like to work with him in making return visits in an effort to be of further assistance to him. Publisher expresses appreciation. Service overseer suggests that publisher might also approach neighbors, relatives, workmates, or schoolmates in his effort to start a study. If he sees new ones at the Kingdom Hall, he might approach them to see if they have a study.
15 min: “Accelerating the Kingdom Hall Construction Program.” Question-and-answer consideration of paragraphs 10 through 20. Read all paragraphs. Draw attention to pictures of Kingdom Halls that have been built in different states.
Song 53 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 14
Song 130
13 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Draw attention to contributions sent to the Society and to the Society’s Kingdom Hall Fund. Read the paragraph under Announcements having to do with these contributions and assure the brothers that their contributions in support of the Kingdom work are very much appreciated.
17 min: “Presenting the Good News​—During the Holidays.” Questions and answers. Demonstrate suggested presentations. Announce regular arrangements for group witnessing, as well as those for December 25 and January 1. Encourage all who can to have a full share in the witness work during the holidays.
15 min: Local needs. Or talk on “Must You Be in the Limelight?” from September 1, 1986, issue of The Watchtower.
Song 54 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 21
Song 101
13 min: Local announcements. Include encouragement for field service with magazines on the fourth Saturday. Demonstrate two model 60-second magazine presentations suitable for your local territory. One of them should be simple enough for a child to use. Share an experience or two from the congregation’s work in holiday witnessing and encourage participation in group witnessing on December 25 and January 1.
17 min: A Sure Hope for Our Youth. After brief introduction, elder invites two or three exemplary young publishers to platform and discusses with them material in cover articles of November 8 Awake! Youths express own optimistic outlook in harmony with articles. May include appropriate points from “Young People Ask . . . ” article in same issue.
15 min: Go On Making Progress. (Phil. 3:16) Talk by presiding overseer. Commend congregation for its activity in the ministry and the ways in which the brothers have been showing love. (2 Thess. 1:3) Invite all to consider ways to expand personal ministry. (See om, chapter 9.) Include expressions of commendation and warm appreciation for progress being made by regular and auxiliary pioneers. To help regular pioneers further, a meeting was held with them earlier in month. Conclude with heartfelt motivation to continue to “declare abroad the kingdom of God.”​—Luke 9:60.
Song 123 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 28
Song 46
12 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News. Invite all to share in field service on first Sunday of the month. Especially encourage new ones to share and parents to work with their children.
15 min: “Benefiting More From the Theocratic Ministry School.” Talk by school overseer encouraging appreciation for school and drawing attention to arrangements for the school during the coming year. Encourage enrollment by those who qualify.
18 min: “Contributions That Make the Heart Happy.” Talk on article in December 1, 1986, issue of The Watchtower. Make local application.
Song 118 and concluding prayer.

