Presenting the Good News​—During the Holidays
1 During this time of year many people are desperately trying to enjoy some happiness amid the cares of this world. Have you ever felt a negative attitude about trying to witness to such people during this period of obvious preoccupation? Despite the abuses and excesses prevalent during the holiday season, the minds of many are turned to God as they hear the oft-repeated phrase “Peace on earth, goodwill toward men.”
2 We will no doubt meet many people who are genuinely busy during the holidays. This will require consideration on our part. When Jesus was on earth, he not only recognized the feelings of others and felt pity for them but also recognized their need and endeavored to help them. God-fearing people today have the same need for the Kingdom message.​—Matt. 9:36, 37.
3 When a householder comes to the door, try to be aware of the circumstances in the home and to be considerate. Is he busy entertaining guests or in the midst of elaborate preparations? Then it may be best to make your presentation brief. However, in another case you may discern that a person is not really busy, and by showing kindness and a sincere personal interest in the individual, you may be able to proceed tactfully with a witness.
WHAT COULD YOU SAY?
4 After a friendly introduction, you might say: “Much is being said these days about peace on earth and goodwill toward men. Have you ever wondered if real peace on earth will come, and if so, how it will be brought about?” Allow householder to reply, and then proceed with the current Topic for Conversation and the literature offer.
5 If you sense that a briefer presentation would be appropriate, you might say: “At this time of year, we find many people thinking about the birth of Jesus. That was a most important event. May I show you what the Bible says about another very important event​—the coming of God’s Kingdom? It was Jesus himself who said . . . [Read Matthew 6:33.].” Then offer the householder the current offer, featuring a point about the Kingdom.
6 If people wish us a happy holiday, there is no need to make an issue over their holiday greetings. Rather, we can briefly thank them for their kindness and time in listening to us. Of course, if they specifically ask us how we feel about the holidays, we will answer truthfully and respectfully. The Reasoning book provides some excellent information on pages 176-8 that will help you.
SHOW CONSIDERATION
7 On Christmas Day and New Year’s Day we can show consideration by not calling too early. Instead of disturbing those who want to sleep late on those days, it may be more appropriate for us to begin our house-to-house activity a little later than usual. Or we could start our service by making some return visits on those we know are in a position to receive us. We appreciate the wisdom of the apostle Paul’s counsel: “In every way we recommend ourselves as God’s ministers.”​—2 Cor. 6:4.
8 Many good experiences have resulted from sharing in holiday witnessing. However, there will be a need for all of us to be tactful and to present the message of truth in a way that appeals to the heart and mind of the householder. Remember Paul’s counsel at Colossians 4:6, and “let your utterance be always with graciousness, seasoned with salt.” This fine counsel is especially appropriate during the holidays.

