Attend the “Godly Fear” District Convention!
Have you made plans yet to attend the 1994 “Godly Fear” District Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses? Surely, you will benefit by being present all three days! With over 165 conventions scheduled in the United States alone, likely a convention will be held near where you live.
Certain fear can undermine courage and destroy hope; however, Friday morning’s keynote address will define godly fear and describe its many benefits. Indeed, the entire convention program will highlight these benefits.
Friday afternoon you will hear how godly fear can strengthen marriage and family life, as well as how it can help young ones remain steadfast in their loyalty to God. The afternoon session will conclude with the heartwarming presentation “Comfort for the Bereaved.” You will appreciate the practical information provided during that talk to help those who have lost loved ones in death.
Saturday’s program will show how godly fear can fortify our adherence to Jehovah’s direction regarding the congregation and our ministry. In the talk “Read God’s Word, the Holy Bible, Daily,” delegates will receive practical suggestions for reading and studying the Bible. Saturday’s program will conclude with the address on the interest-arousing theme “Jehovah’s Fear-Inspiring Day Is Near.”
A feature of Sunday’s program is the talk “There Will Be a Resurrection of the Righteous.” In the following discourse, “Saved Alive Through the Great Tribulation,” an explanation will be provided of Jesus’ marvelous promise regarding those who will never die at all.​—John 11:26.
Sunday morning’s session will conclude with the thought-provoking 40-minute drama entitled The Choices You Face. The audience will be brought back to Joshua’s day and will see portrayed his firm resolve to serve Jehovah. The fire test in the days of Elijah will also be presented, and lessons will be drawn from both these events that will help delegates demonstrate godly fear today. In the afternoon, the public discourse, “Why Fear the True God Now,” will be a convention highlight.
Make plans now to attend. To find the location nearest your home, contact the local Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses or write the publishers of this magazine. The June 8 issue of Awake! will also list the addresses of all convention locations in the United States, Canada, Britain, and Ireland.
[Picture Credit Line on page 32]
T. Rosenthal/​SUPERSTOCK

