Gilead Graduates Find “More Happiness in Giving”
ON SUNDAY, March 6, 1994, the world headquarters Bethel family of Jehovah’s Witnesses and guests gathered for a festive occasion​—the graduation of the 96th class of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead. In his introductory comments, program chairman Karl F. Klein, who has served on the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses for nearly two decades, told the 46 students: “Jesus said that there is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving. So it will be in your missionary assignment​—the more you give, the happier you will be.”​—Acts 20:35.
Parting Words of Admonition
A series of talks to the students followed. Leon Weaver, a member of the Service Department Committee, developed the theme “Endurance Glorifies Jehovah.” All of us face trials. (2 Corinthians 6:3-5) “When we’re under pressure,” noted Brother Weaver, “it’s so easy to rely on ourselves.” However, he reminded the students: “Whatever you must face in the way of human trials, Jehovah has an interest in it. He will never allow you to be tempted beyond what you can bear.”​—1 Corinthians 10:13.
“Always Cherish Your Assignment” was the title of the next talk, given by Lyman Swingle of the Governing Body. The Israelites did not always choose where they would live and what they would do. Each tribe was allotted a portion of land, and the Levites were assigned specific duties to perform. Similarly, many in special full-time service today​—such as missionaries and Bethel family members—​do not decide for themselves where they will live and what work they will do. What if one experiences feelings of uncertainty about one’s assignment? “If you look intently at the Chief Agent of our faith, Jesus, and consider his example closely, you will not give out,” said Brother Swingle.​—Hebrews 12:2, 3.
Leonard Pearson, of the Watchtower Farms Committee, followed with the subject “Remain Focused.” He said: “You can have the best camera, the most beautiful subject, an ideal setting, and still get poor results​—if your camera is not in focus.” Like a wide-angle lens, our view must include the worldwide preaching being done. We should never lose sight of the big picture. “Those who focus on themselves will be unhappy in their assignments,” said Brother Pearson. “Those who focus on Jehovah and on the work he has given them to do will succeed.”
“So Much to Be Thankful For” was the title of the next talk, given by John E. Barr, another member of the Governing Body. “Never lose your feeling of thankfulness to Jehovah,” Brother Barr admonished the students. “It is one of the greatest sources of contentment, no matter what assignment you have.” A thankful attitude impelled David to write: “The measuring lines themselves have fallen for me in pleasant places. Really, my own possession has proved agreeable to me.” (Psalm 16:6) “You have such a treasured possession in feeling close to Jehovah in your daily life,” said Brother Barr. “Jehovah will never take that relationship away from you as long as you keep looking upon it as something very agreeable that you are thankful for.”
Gilead instructor Jack Redford was next to speak, on the theme “How Will You Use Your Tongue?” What wreckage thoughtless speech can cause! (Proverbs 18:21) How can the tongue be brought under control? “You must first train your mind,” answered Brother Redford, “because the tongue reflects the mind and the heart.” (Matthew 12:34-37) Jesus provided a sterling example; he used his tongue to magnify Jehovah’s name. “Today there is a famine for hearing the words of Jehovah,” Brother Redford told the class. “You know those words. You have ‘the tongue of the taught ones.’ So always let your tongue be guided by a mind and a heart that are fully dedicated to Jehovah.”​—Isaiah 50:4.
The importance of prayer was stressed in the talk “Are You Walking as in Jehovah’s Presence?” Ulysses Glass, registrar of the school, noted: “If a father worked hard to support his family but never spoke to them and never made expressions of endearment, his family might well conclude that his motive was one of unpleasant duty rather than love. So it is with us. We may be busy in God’s service. But if we do not pray, then we are merely dedicated to a work rather than to a loving heavenly Father.”
Theodore Jaracz, of the Governing Body, spoke on the theme “Why Multitudes Are Associating With God’s People.” Each year hundreds of thousands flock to Jehovah’s organization. (Zechariah 8:23) What identifies Jehovah’s Witnesses as God’s people? First, they accept the entire Bible as God’s Word. (2 Timothy 3:16) Second, they are politically neutral. (John 17:16) Third, they bear witness to God’s name. (John 17:26) Fourth, they display self-sacrificing love. (John 13:35; 15:13) With these credentials, we can boldly ‘declare abroad the excellencies of the one that called us out of darkness into his wonderful light.’​—1 Peter 2:9.
After these stirring talks, all 46 students received diplomas. They are assigned to 16 lands around the globe.
A Varied Afternoon Program
In the afternoon an abbreviated Watchtower Study was conducted by Donald Krebs of the Bethel Committee. Then the graduates presented a program entitled “Wisdom Keeps Crying Aloud in the Very Street.” (Proverbs 1:20) They reenacted rewarding experiences that they had had in both street and business witnessing. Truly, Jehovah blesses those who muster up courage to preach informally. “I like to think of us as sickles in the hands of angelic reapers,” said one graduate. “The sharper our skills, the more work those angels can use us to do.” (Compare Revelation 14:6.) The student program also included a slide presentation that took the audience on an educational tour of Bolivia, Malta, and Taiwan​—three of the lands to which graduates from this class have been sent.
Next, Wallace and Jane Liverance​—missionaries for 17 years—​were interviewed. In October 1993 they were invited to Watchtower Farms, where Brother Liverance now serves as one of the Gilead instructors.
A four-scene presentation followed, entitled “Honoring Worthy Ones in Their Older Years.” As people age, fears of becoming useless and abandoned may gnaw at their self-confidence. (Psalm 71:9) This touching presentation showed how all in the congregation can support such faithful older ones.
After a closing song and prayer, all 6,220 in attendance at the Jersey City Assembly Hall and satellite halls felt refreshed. Our prayers are with the graduates in their new assignments. May they continue to experience the greater happiness that comes from giving.
[Box on page 26]
Class Statistics
Number of countries represented: 9
Number of countries assigned to: 16
Number of students: 46
Average age: 33.85
Average years in truth: 16.6
Average years in full-time ministry: 12.2
[Box on page 27]
Spotlight on Malta
CHRISTENDOM muzzled Bible truth in Malta for many years. The last Gilead missionaries to be sent there, Frederick Smedley and Peter Bridle, graduated from the eighth class back in 1947. However, they were arrested and expelled from Malta shortly after they arrived. The 1948 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses reports: “These two missionaries have spent as much time in the courts and with the officials of the land as they have in performing their ministerial duties, just because of the opposition of the Roman Catholic Hierarchy. The priests say that Malta belongs to the Catholics and everyone else must get out.” Now, some 45 years later, four missionaries from the 96th class of Gilead have been assigned to Malta.
[Picture on page 26]
96th Graduating Class of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead
In the list below, rows are numbered from front to back, and names are listed from left to right in each row.
(1) Ehlers, P.; Giese, M.; Sellman, S.; Zusperregui, J.; Rowe, S.; Jackson, K.; Scott, T. (2) Liehr, T.; Garcia, I.; Garcia, J.; Fernández, A.; Davidson, L.; Liidemann, P.; Gibson, L.; Juárez, C. (3) Fouts, C.; Pastrana, G.; Claeson, D.; Fernández, L.; Walls, M.; Dressen, M.; Pastrana, F.; Burks, J. (4) Burks, D.; Scott, S.; Jackson, M.; Mauray, H.; Juárez, L.; Zusperregui, A.; Brorsson, C.; Rowe, C. (5) Sellman, K.; Liidemann, P.; Davidson, C.; Mauray, S.; Walls, D.; Dressen, D.; Schaafsma, G.; Liehr, S. (6) Claeson, T.; Gibson, T.; Giese, C.; Ehlers, D.; Fouts, R.; Schaafsma, S.; Brorsson, L.

