Kingdom Proclaimers Report
God Is Not Partial
OVER 1,900 years ago, the apostle Peter witnessed to the army officer Cornelius, saying: “For a certainty I perceive that God is not partial, but in every nation the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.” (Acts 10:34, 35) Cornelius manifested a fear of God and a love of righteousness. He accepted the witness given by Peter and became a Christian.
The same principle holds true today​—God is not partial. We note this from an experience from Germany. The report says:
“In our congregation’s territory, there is a large Russian army barracks. In 1989, shortly after the Berlin Wall fell, the elders asked if any of the publishers knew the Russian language. Some of us did, and we went to work in this territory, which has proved to be a real joy. The following is one of many experiences.
“I was with an unbaptized publisher (who has since been baptized) when we spoke to a commander. The commander listened to what we had to say and then invited us to speak to his soldiers. He said that they must hear about God and the Bible too, so we made an appointment to come back.
“We asked a sister who speaks Russian fluently to go with us as interpreter. In the clubroom of the barracks, we set up a literature table and were able to speak to 68 soldiers and answer their questions. Afterward they gladly accepted 35 books and nearly 100 magazines. As we left the clubroom, we saw small groups discussing the literature.
“We made an appointment to return on July 4, 1992. Upon our arrival at 10:50 a.m., the guard at the barracks gate told us that the soldiers were expecting us. A major took us into the clubroom, and we found that a lady, who had previously received literature from us for the library, had announced our coming by placing placards in the barracks. Three brothers gave short talks about our worldwide work and showed why we can have confidence in the Bible. Then we entertained questions from the audience, giving answers from the Bible. Among the questions was, What is the position of Jehovah’s Witnesses on military service, and are any of them soldiers? This gave the unbaptized publisher who had accompanied me previously an opportunity to describe his 25-year career in the East German military, the last years as an air-force captain. He related how he had learned about God and the Bible and now wanted to become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. The soldiers were impressed by what they heard. Within seven minutes all the literature that we had brought was in the hands of the soldiers, and many wanted Bibles. At a bookstore we were able to obtain seven Russian Bibles, which they appreciated receiving. It was a real joy to give these spiritually hungry ones Bible information, and we hope they will act on it.”
Truly, God is not partial. Through his Word he appeals to honesthearted people whoever and wherever they may be. He invites them to learn of him and his Son, Jesus Christ, and many from all walks of life are doing that.​—John 17:3.

