Why Be Interested in Religion?
IN EVERY country on the face of the earth, there is interest in religion. On the other hand, there are also many who say quite frankly that they have no interest in religion. But did they always feel that way?
The human makeup is such that a person is not really content with only material things. Humans need spirituality. Day-to-day existence that is built around obtaining merely physical necessities, with occasional periods of recreation, does not fully satisfy a person’s inmost needs. Unlike animals, humans want to know, ‘What is the purpose of life?’ ‘This brief life, which includes much that is beautiful but also much that is ugly, is this all there is?’ Have you not asked questions like these?
Yet, many millions of people who are alive today grew up in surroundings that discouraged any meaningful interest in religion. That influence may have come from their parents, from teachers, from peers, or even from the government.
Skalabrino, a young man from Albania, explained that under Communist rule the people were taught that there is no God. Furthermore, it was dangerous for them to talk about religion; doing so could lead to imprisonment. Yet, in 1991, when in Switzerland as a refugee, he was given the opportunity to study the Bible. He accepted. Why?
Well, in Albania he had heard that there was such a book as the Bible, but he did not really know anything about it. Thus, at the outset it may not primarily have been a desire to understand the Bible that motivated him. While he was told that he would be studying about God’s purpose for mankind and the earth, he also saw it as an opportunity to improve his use of the local language. Quickly, though, he found that what he was learning satisfied a deep-seated spiritual yearning on his part. His heart was warmed by God’s promise of a new world where peace would prevail, a world in which people could live forever and enjoy an abundance of all the things necessary for life. His interest was heightened when he learned that he and his family could be part of this new world. Unable to keep the good news to himself, he phoned his family back in Albania to share it with them.
Aleksei, who lives in Russia, was also surprised at the effect that accurate knowledge of the Bible could have on a person’s life. Overwhelmed with problems and unable to find a satisfying explanation of the purpose of life, he planned to commit suicide. First, though, he went to Finland to visit a friend. En route on the train, he spoke about his problems to some fellow passengers. Among them was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, who urged him to study the Bible because it gives solutions to such problems. He was skeptical. On the return trip, he had a similar experience. This time it was another Witness who spoke up and told him that she used to have the same sort of problems but that the Bible had helped her to overcome these. She too encouraged him to study the Bible. When he arrived home, the phone rang. It was another friend, who was studying with the Witnesses and was very happy. The man was beginning to realize that perhaps the Bible really could provide what he needed, but he knew that without help he could not understand it. He agreed to have a regular home Bible study with Jehovah’s Witnesses, and he began to attend their meetings. It did not take him long to understand why those who mold their lives around what the Bible teaches are so happy, even though they too face problems that are common to mankind.
With insight into the human makeup, Jesus Christ stated: “Man cannot live on bread alone.” (Matthew 4:4, The New English Bible) He also said: “Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need.” (Matthew 5:3) Their happiness comes because they are keenly aware of their need, take proper steps to satisfy it, and experience God’s blessing. However, our spiritual need is not satisfied simply by joining a church or attending some religious services. Religion that is largely ritualistic may have emotional appeal, but does it provide realistic solutions to the problems of life? Even though a religion advocates certain basic precepts that are sound, if it fails to come to grips with the real purpose of life, will it satisfy your spiritual need? Of even greater concern, will practicing such a religion lead to a good relationship with God? Without that, true contentment will be lacking.
In this regard many people are searching for something they have not yet found.
[Picture on page 3]
Will your spiritual needs be truly satisfied by joining a church?
[Picture on page 4]
Many have found that when they understand the Bible, life takes on new meaning

