Tending Our Shepherd’s Flock Skillfully
WHAT a privilege it is to be an undershepherd, to be tending the flock of our great Shepherd, Jehovah God! Yes, what an honor, what a responsibility, what a challenge! Each undershepherd should be keenly concerned with discharging his duties skillfully, remembering that he is accountable to Jehovah God and that the eternal lives of the sheep are involved. Each one should want to be a shepherd such as Jesus was, of whom it was prophetically written: “And he began to shepherd them according to the integrity of his heart, and with the skillfulness of his hands he began leading them.”—Ps. 78:72.a
What does it take to shepherd our Shepherd’s sheep skillfully? How can we best do so? Before answering, let it be noted that these questions apply not only to undershepherds specially appointed by Jehovah’s channel on earth but to every dedicated Christian, regardless of education, age or sex. All have the obligation to find, feed, lead and protect the sheep of our Shepherd’s flock and to do so skillfully.
To find the sheep we must, of course, look for them. This we should do particularly by going from house to house. We may also offer magazines on the street to passers-by and take advantage of opportunities for incidental witnessing, and we should welcome those who come to our Kingdom Hall. These we are to feed by witnessing to them orally, by placing literature with them and by making return visits upon them. All should be encouraged to benefit from the spiritual table at our Kingdom Halls. And how do we lead them? By setting the proper example for them in walking in our integrity, as regards both our right everyday conduct and our zealous field ministry. Also by endeavoring to awaken in them the desire not only to know but also to do God’s will. As for protecting the sheep, this we can do by being alert to the dangers that confront them: by giving them special attention when they are passing through a crisis, by warning them of the harm that can come to them from higher criticism and other faith-destroying teachings, and by pointing out to them the snares and pitfalls of materialism and careless conduct.
To tend Jehovah’s sheep skillfully it takes knowledge of Jehovah’s name, purposes and will for us as found in his Word. It requires faith; not being like many theological students today, in quest for faith, but having an unshakable faith in God and his Word, even as Jesus Christ and his apostles did. Further, it takes love—love for our great Shepherd, so wanting to please him, and love for the sheep entrusted in our care. It takes knowledge and understanding of the sheep themselves. Love, heavenly wisdom and practice will make us skilled in understanding the sheep, will give us the sensitive mental discernment to note their needs and problems and how best to care for these.
How are we to go about tending our Shepherd’s flock? Peter tells us: We are not to do so reluctantly, complainingly, begrudgingly, under compulsion, but willingly, appreciating the privilege. Nor may we serve for dishonest gain, for selfish advantage. No, we must serve out of love, eagerly. Neither may we get puffed up and want to lord it over the sheep. Rather, we want to be like a good sheep ourselves, gentle, lowly, mild-tempered and submissive, and thus an example to them.—1 Pet. 5:1-3.
Finally, we may not overlook the obligation of each undershepherd to care for himself so as to keep spiritually strong and balanced. This also is included in tending skillfully our Shepherd’s flock.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, June 15, 1959.

