Can You Pioneer This Summer?
1 Can you share in the pioneer service this summer? It is encouraging to see how many are adjusting their affairs to have a part in the auxiliary and the regular pioneer service, with some reaching out for still other privileges of full-time service, such as serving as a missionary or at Bethel.
CAN YOU?
2 Jehovah knew that as his people became imitators of him and his Son during this time of the end, they would devote themselves to their God-assigned work of Kingdom preaching. (Matt. 24:14; Mark 13:10; see also John 4:34; 5:17.) The psalmist said that ‘Jehovah’s people would offer themselves willingly’ as He gathers them for this important work. (Ps. 110:3) Psalm 68:11 describes the women telling the good news as “a large army.” And it has proved to be just that way with Jehovah’s people today. More people than ever before, including men, women, and youths, are now sharing in the work of Kingdom preaching. More are participating in the auxiliary pioneer work. There have never been more serving in the regular pioneer work or in Bethel service. More and more are giving heed to Jesus’ counsel to serve with our ‘whole heart, mind, and soul,’ and are delighted to be doing just that.​—Matt. 22:37.
3 Satan and his system of things tend to make life complicated and would keep us so fully occupied that we would have little or no time for Kingdom interests. (1 Cor. 15:58) Jesus counseled, ‘If your eye is simple, your whole body will be bright.’ (Matt. 6:22) Could you adjust your affairs so that your view, your goals, and your life become simpler, less complicated? As you adjust your affairs to concentrate more on promoting Kingdom interests, you will find that you will reflect enlightenment that glorifies God and benefits fellow humans.
4 Could you share in the auxiliary pioneer work this summer? Do you have the time to serve in this capacity? Could you adjust your affairs so you do have the time? Could you meet the hour requirement in June? Perhaps July or August would be better for you. Give prayerful thought to your personal circumstances. How fine it would be to use a part of the summer months to increase service to Jehovah in this way!
5 Are there others in the congregation who meet the requirements for auxiliary pioneer work who could serve with you? If so, by all means invite them to do so. If you are a parent, could your son or daughter serve with you? Could your husband or wife? your sister or brother?​—See om pp. 113-14.
YOUR GOALS
6 If you will be serving as an auxiliary pioneer, a regular pioneer, or as a congregation publisher who is endeavoring to have an increased share in Jehovah’s service, what will your goals be? If you are a pioneer, you will have a requirement of hours to meet. However, why not also make it a goal to speak about the Kingdom good news to someone in every home? Will you make it a goal to call again on all interested persons you meet? Can you start a magazine route? Can you start a Bible study? Perhaps you can help someone in your congregation to have a fuller share in the ministry by inviting him to accompany you in your increased activity this summer.
7 Apply the counsel Paul gave Timothy: ‘Make your advancement manifest.’ “Fully accomplish your ministry.” Pray that Jehovah will bless your efforts and those of his people in every place who are also endeavoring to ‘fully accomplish their ministry.’ May our united activity be an honor to him.​—1 Tim. 4:15; 2 Tim. 4:5.

