Daily Tell the Good News of Salvation
1 What a joyful privilege it is to share regularly in proclaiming the message of salvation! How richly blessed we are to bear this message to others! As we share this good news of salvation, our own faith and zeal are strengthened. Our hearts rejoice as we heed the exhortation to “sing to Jehovah, bless his name.”​—Ps. 96:2-4.
2 Are you making it your goal to speak the message of salvation every day? Those who engage in the auxiliary or the regular pioneer work usually have a daily share in telling the good news. Could you do this? If not, could you at least have some share, even a small informal share, each day? What a grand shout of praise to Jehovah would result if all of us could do this! You will experience Jehovah’s good pleasure and many other rich blessings as you proclaim the Kingdom hope each day.
3 Our attitude toward the ministry can influence how often we share the good news with others. We must not become discouraged and slow down in presenting the Kingdom message due to a lack of response on the part of people. Rather, a positive attitude and keen appreciation for the message of salvation can strengthen our endeavor to share daily in telling the good news.​—Luke 6:45.
4 As family members work together unitedly in ‘ascribing glory and strength’ to Jehovah, many rich blessings can be enjoyed. (Ps. 96:7) Both family and spiritual bonds are strengthened when time is scheduled to work in the ministry as a family. Special field service days, such as the first Sunday and the second and fourth Saturdays of the month, provide excellent opportunities for family members to work together along with other families in the congregation in telling the Kingdom hope.
USE LIVE FOREVER BOOK
5 During June we will be offering the Live Forever book, both the regular and the reduced-size editions. People are concerned about day-to-day living and desire a happy future. Honest-hearted persons rejoice to learn about the prospect of long life without the problems so common to mankind today. Accurate knowledge of this hope, and faith in its soon becoming a reality, should stir us to positive action in presenting the Kingdom message.
6 Give prayerful advance thought to what you will say to make your presentation appealing. After introducing yourself, you might say something like this: “What kind of future would you like to have for yourself and your family? [Allow response.] All of us enjoy life and desire to live as long as we can. Yet, so many problems surface and seem to threaten our very lives. For this reason you may be interested in learning the Bible’s message of a bright future and how to cope with life’s anxieties.” At this point you can highlight the scriptures in the current Topic for Conversation. Use specific talking points, such as those on pages 9, 11-13, 161, and 162 in the Live Forever book, to emphasize the bright future that lies ahead.
7 What a joyful and faith-strengthening message Jehovah has given us to proclaim! We also have the great privilege of working closely with others who have a deep appreciation for Jehovah’s grand promises. Since the work we are now performing is never to be repeated and will soon come to an end, should we not use our available time and resources to tell the good news of salvation each day?

