Keep Assisting One Another
1 The apostle Paul wrote, “Through love slave for one another.” (Gal. 5:13) This statement reflects the spirit that should govern our relationships with others, both inside and outside the Christian congregation. Our genuine concern for others causes us to take the initiative in helping new and weaker ones who are associated with us. There are those who are making steady progress in coming to an accurate knowledge of the truth; they, too, need assistance. Our loving personal interest extends also to those in our congregation who may have special needs. May our spirit be like Paul’s as we ‘let all our affairs take place with love.’​—1 Cor. 16:14; Phil. 2:4.
AN ACCEPTABLE TIME
2 In view of the rapid growth now taking place, we are being called upon to “work what is good toward all, but especially toward those related to us in the faith.” (Gal. 6:10) If you are sharing regularly in the ministry, possibly even as an auxiliary pioneer or as a regular pioneer, can you invite others to work along with you during the summer months? Experienced publishers can offer practical assistance and encouragement to newer and weaker ones. Your kind and repeated invitations may help them to have a more regular share in the service.
3 We also want to help our Bible students to accompany us in the field service when they have made good progress and qualify. We will need to show them how the work is carried out. Practice sessions will be especially helpful in preparing them for the work. Help them to prepare a simple presentation using either the regular offer or the magazines. Perhaps you can discuss together an article or two in the current magazines. Then help your Bible student to pick out appropriate points from the article that can be used effectively in a house-to-house presentation. If you will be offering Awake!, the message on the inside cover about the feature articles can be used. Demonstrate what can be done. Practice the presentation together. Your helping them to prepare for field service will no doubt bring positive results.
4 Have you observed that some of your brothers regularly miss meetings? What can be done to help them? Perhaps a friendly telephone call or a brief visit will be encouraging. Make it your aim to share with them interesting points from a meeting or good experiences you have heard. Let the person know that he was missed. Can you help the individual to get to the meetings regularly?
5 Situations may arise that call for us to be persistent in aiding those who have special needs due to their circumstances. Tireless efforts are especially needed when assisting one who has grown old or when helping an individual or a family affected by long-term illness. The aged or sick one and perhaps other members of the family may need encouragement. Regular visits can lift up their spirits and build endurance. Telephone calls and cards are much appreciated by such persons. A friendly smile and a brief word of encouragement will assure our brothers that we care. (Prov. 25:11) There may be a need to prepare meals, run errands, or do housework to help those family members who must cope with such adversity while seeking to carry on their normal daily routine and to have a regular share in the witness work.
6 Endeavor to discern the true needs of others, and then act accordingly. (1 John 3:16-18) Your book study conductor is usually well acquainted with those assigned to the group, so seek his direction and advice. Unselfish brotherly love can stir ‘each of us to please his neighbor in what is good for his upbuilding.’ (Rom. 15:1, 2) As we endeavor to care for ourselves and ‘those who are our own’ in whatever situation we find ourselves, we draw courage and strengthen our hope, knowing that Jehovah cares for us and will bless us as we keep assisting one another.​—1 Tim. 5:8; 1 Pet. 5:6, 7.

