Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
NOTE: Our Kingdom Ministry will schedule a Service Meeting for each week during the summer. Each congregation may make adjustments as needed to allow for attending the district convention and then for a 30-minute review of the program highlights at the Service Meeting the following week.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 2
Song 109
10 min: Local announcements and Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: “Subjecting Ourselves to Jehovah by Dedication.” Talk on article in June 1, 1985, Watchtower, pages 29-31.
20 min: “Daily Tell the Good News of Salvation.” Questions and answers. Brief demonstration of portion of family practice session with one member of family giving simple presentation from Our Kingdom Ministry to another member of family. Encourage all to share in magazine work on second Saturday as well as house-to-house work with the offer on Sunday, if possible.
Song 129 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 9
Song 91
10 min: Local announcements and accounts report.
20 min: Teach With the Use of the Magazines. Audience discussion and demonstrations. How can we use the art of teaching in presenting the magazines? Emphasize the fundamentals of good teaching: Reliance on Jehovah. (2 min.) Remember our message is from Jehovah; promote God’s interests and not our own. Direct attention to the Bible and its message of Kingdom good news; this is vital in reaching hearts. Preparation. (2 min.) We can teach someone else only what we know. Do you read the magazines? We all need to. As you read them take particular note of points that may interest the people you meet. Which articles or points will interest a man, a woman, a child, a professional person, or someone unemployed? Try to present these points in your own words. Anticipate the interests and objections of the householder. Questions. (2 min.) Well-phrased questions can be very effective in capturing the interest of people and drawing attention to the article you wish to feature in your presentation. Effective use of questions will help you to teach and to stimulate interest. Illustrations. (2 min.) Jesus taught by using word pictures. (Matt. 13:34, 35) The magazines contain actual pictures that graphically illustrate major points or lessons discussed in the material. Calling attention to these pictures involves both hearing and seeing, enhancing the effectiveness of your teaching. Repetition. (2 min.) Regularly returning with the latest issues may progressively help the householder to learn more about the Kingdom hope. It may also help you to build a rapport with the householder that could lead to a Bible study. (sg pp. 49-54)
(9 min.) Two demonstrations. Have experienced publisher(s) demonstrate 30- to 60-second presentations of the current magazines. In first demonstration, feature The Watchtower and in the second demonstration, feature Awake! Encourage audience to observe closely. After each presentation, ask audience to comment on how the teaching techniques previously discussed were used.
(1 min.) Chairman encourages all to apply points discussed. We spend much time in the field service offering magazines. To accomplish the most, we should all try progressively to improve our ability to teach with the use of magazines.
15 min: “Can You Pioneer This Summer?” Questions and answers. Read key paragraphs.
Song 12 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 16
Song 116
 8 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Use for local needs or talk on “Never Forget You Are a Witness!” in June 1, 1984, Watchtower, pages 20-5. Emphasize points under subheadings “Using Our Time to Help Others” and “Be Alert to Informal Witnessing.”
15 min: “Keep Assisting One Another.” Questions and answers.
 7 min: Field service for the weekend. Encourage all to share in magazine witnessing on the fourth Saturday of the month. Draw attention to articles in current issues of The Watchtower and Awake! that would appeal to various people in the congregation’s territory. Demonstrate 30- to 60-second presentation of current magazines, featuring an appropriate article.
Song 216 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 23
Song 92
10 min: Local announcements. Include May field service report for local congregation. Commend brothers for work done in the field.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—To All People.” Questions and answers. Brief demonstration with publisher approaching a person who is watching Witnesses go from house to house. As time permits, entertain comments of publishers concerning their efforts to reach all people with the good news.
Be alert to share the good news with others while traveling to the district convention and while in the convention city. Ask congregation to mention opportunities when this might be done. Then ask for suggestions on the type of approach that might bring good results. Take literature with you. Note time spent and placements made so they can be reported at end of month.
15 min: Presenting the Survival Book in July. Suggest appropriate talking points, such as the titles of the first seven chapters or the first paragraph of each of these chapters. Pictures on pages 4, 5, 33, and 41 might be used. Prepared publisher demonstrates use of Topic for Conversation and features paragraph 1 of chapter 3 in offering the Survival book. Publisher places book in householder’s hands.
As an alternate offer, any of the brochures, but especially Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! or The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever, may be presented for a contribution of 30¢. Or offer one of the brochures with the current magazines for 70¢.
Encourage support of field service this Sunday.
Song 220 and concluding prayer.

