Presenting the Good News​—To All People
1 Jesus Christ gave the Kingdom of God wide publicity. He went throughout the whole of Galilee proclaiming: “Repent, you people, for the kingdom of the heavens has drawn near.” (Matt. 4:17) This was a timely message of good news that warmed the hearts of Jesus’ listeners and gave them hope. Such good news had to be shared with others, and because of its urgency, those doing this work carried a weighty responsibility.
2 Who has accepted this responsibility? At the beginning of our Common Era it was the disciples of Jesus, including the faithful apostles. Centuries later we have been made aware of this message, and so we too have the responsibility of sharing it with others. (1 Cor. 9:16) By taking advantage of all appropriate opportunities, we can show our heartfelt obedience to Jesus’ command to preach the “good news of the kingdom . . . in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations” before the end comes.​—Matt. 24:14.
3 When sharing in the house-to-house work, do we make an effort to contact someone at every home? With so many people working secularly, there may be no response at many doors. Of course, a lack of response at the front door does not always mean that no one is at home. Are there indications that they use a side or back entrance? If so, a knock there may bring a response. Or it may be that the householder is in the backyard or garage. Sometimes you will find a separate apartment with an entrance at the side of the house. After going on to other homes, you may see the householder return. Should this prove to be the case, after a few minutes, why not go back and knock again?
4 What about homes where you are unable to contact anyone? Note these on your House-to-House Record. Usually it is best to keep a separate record of interested persons you plan to visit again so that the list of not-at-homes can be passed on to someone else if you are unable to return. When following up not-at-homes, many have found it good to call at different times, as this may increase the possibility of finding someone. Some publishers have been successful in reaching people by calling later the same day or in the evening. People not at home during the week are often there on the weekend and vice versa. Groups that do weekday and weekend witnessing may exchange their lists of not-at-homes and find they get good results in reaching some of these people. Our faithfulness in keeping this record and following it up demonstrates our love for others and our desire to please Jehovah.​—Luke 16:10.
5 Be prepared to take advantage of other opportunities to witness while in the territory. For example, you may encounter individuals out for a stroll, or they may be sitting on a bench or waiting for a bus. By using a tactful approach along with a friendly smile, you may get a listening ear. Also, it is good to call at small stores and business establishments if they are not unusually busy. Very often you will encounter youths in the course of your ministry. Do not pass up an opportunity to share a Scriptural thought with them, because their lives are important too.​—Matt. 19:14.
6 God’s Word makes it clear that it is Jehovah’s ‘will that all sorts of people be saved.’ (1 Tim. 2:4) “He does not desire any to be destroyed but desires all to attain to repentance.” (2 Pet. 3:9) When we work our assigned territory thoroughly and make a sincere effort to contact everyone, we show that we love others as Jehovah does. That spirit is sure to result in blessings to us and to those who listen to us.​—1 Tim. 4:16.

