From Our Readers
Rainbow  Your “Make Your Own Rainbow” article (January 8, 1989) surprised me in that you hedge your bets by saying, “Some experts discount indigo.” This should read “all physicists.” When Isaac Newton discovered that white light could be split by a prism, he stated six colours. The church objected, as six is an evil number, and made him say that God’s most beautiful sign to man must have been seven colours, as seven is a holy number.
J. F., Scotland
J. F.’s historical note is of interest. We might add that “The New Encyclopædia Britannica” (1987), whose contributors likely include physicists, states that the common rainbow has arcs “of violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange, and red.”​—ED.
Parents’ Homework  I have just finished reading “Parents​—You Have Homework Too!” (September 8, 1988) I needed that article. I am 27 years old and have a young boy of 4. Parents sometimes are so involved in their work that they don’t have enough time to play with their children or just spend time with them. But thanks to your article, from now on I am determined to find time for my boy. Even if I start off by dedicating ten minutes at a time, I know it will be worth while​—my child is more important than all the rest.
A. F., Italy
As a teacher, I appreciated the fine articles. Teachers need parents’ help with discipline and need to know that they are supportive. Most parents are too busy to take time to talk with teachers. They expect teachers to do the parenting for them and very often blame teachers when something goes wrong. Your articles gave many good suggestions on how parents can help by becoming involved and most of all by letting the child know they care about their schoolwork. Thanks again for bringing this problem and its solution to the attention of parents. Teachers need their support!
R. N., United States
I am the president of the La Cumbre Junior High School Parent-Teachers Association. You have published a series of articles relating to schools, parenting, etc., that I would like to make available to our parents. We have many who need to read material like this.
G. B., United States
Artwork  The photograph that appears on the inside cover page of the July 8, 1988, Awake! is just so creative and stunning. As an artist, observing the formats, colors, and designs, I find that it is truly magnificent! The graphic work is so updated. The artwork complements the very informative articles and really whets the appetite. As is the case with any appetizing dish, the eyes “taste” first.
E. S., United States
I read the cover title (August 22, 1988), saw the troubled child looking at the nuclear destruction, and then turned the page! No words were needed. What an impact the two pictures make. Here’s a magazine that in just two pictures can give hope, true hope, to many children.
V. K., United States
A belated thanks for the article “India’s Catholic Church” in the Awake! of September 22, 1987. At that time I was still very much for the church, but then the Witnesses called, and I started to have doubts. Those pictures in the article really opened my eyes. Now I am all for Jehovah’s Witnesses. Many thanks.
A. L., Federal Republic of Germany

