Violence​—The End in Sight!
HUMANS have had plenty of time to bring violence under control, but it has only grown worse. Is it not obvious that men cannot do it? What hope, then, is there for the end of violence?
Surely, it is to their Creator that humans need to look for the solution to the problem, as well as to all other problems. His answer is his Kingdom, which is a righteous heavenly government. Jesus Christ devoted his preaching work on earth to telling people about this Kingdom government. You pray for that government when you say: “Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.”​—Matthew 6:9, 10, King James Version.
But how will God’s Kingdom eliminate violence? Foretelling the very days in which we live, the Bible says: “In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin. And the kingdom itself will . . . crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.” (Daniel 2:44) Yes, God’s Kingdom government will completely destroy earth’s present governments and the societies they govern, with all their violence and crime.
But when will this occur? The fulfillment of Bible prophecy shows that it will be within our lifetime. Why do we say this? Because “the sign” that Jesus said would mark “the conclusion of the system of things” is now undergoing fulfillment. This “sign” includes “the increasing of lawlessness.” (Matthew 24:3-14, 34) What a marvelous relief when God wipes out this violence-ridden world! However, to enjoy the benefits then, we must do the will of God now.​—1 John 2:17.
A Bible prophecy recorded by the ancient prophet Isaiah tells about God’s invitation to submit to His instructions and “walk in his paths.” Those who respond, the prophecy says, “will have to beat their swords into plowshares” and will not “learn war anymore.” (Isaiah 2:3, 4) Another prophecy recorded by Isaiah tells of the result: “No more will violence be heard in your land, despoiling or breakdown within your boundaries.” Why? Because “Jehovah himself will become for you an indefinitely lasting light.”​—Isaiah 60:18-20.
Although a measure of peace can be enjoyed even now by learning the will of Jehovah God and submitting to it, just imagine what it will soon be like when God’s Kingdom rids the earth of all unrighteousness. Then there will be no cause for fear, no reason to be afraid to walk on any street or to enter any park at night. There will be no need for locks on your doors, no need to worry about protecting yourself.​—2 Peter 3:13.
Would you like to live in such a new world free of violence? This can be your happy prospect, for it is based on the sure Word of our Creator himself. Jehovah’s Witnesses will be happy to help you understand these fine prospects our Creator is extending to all of us. Why not take the initiative to find out for yourself? You too can rejoice, knowing that violence will end​—soon!

