Do You Remember?
Have you given careful thought to recent issues of The Watchtower? If so, you will probably be able to recall the following:
□ In what sense does Paul use the term “mediator” when referring to Jesus at 1 Timothy 2:5, 6?
In this text, Paul uses the Greek word me·siʹtes for “mediator,” which term has a legal significance, so he is not using this word in the broad sense common in many languages. Hence, Paul is not saying that Jesus is Mediator between God and all mankind. Rather, he is referring to Christ as legal Mediator of the new covenant, which laid the basis for Christ’s anointed followers to share with him in his heavenly Kingdom. (2 Corinthians 5:1, 5; Ephesians 1:13, 14; Hebrews 8:7-13)​—8/15, pages 30, 31.
□ At Matthew 25:34, what does Jesus mean when he says to sheeplike ones: “Inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the founding of the world”?
Jesus did not mean that these sheeplike ones will reign with him in heaven. Instead, the sheep will inherit the earthly realm of the Kingdom prepared for them “from the founding of the world” of redeemable mankind. In this way they become the earthly children of their “Eternal Father,” the King, Christ Jesus. (Isaiah 9:6, 7)​—9/1, page 20.
□ Would it be necessary for the anointed remnant to be alive on earth to welcome back resurrected faithful ones who died prior to 33 C.E.?
No, this would not be necessary. Many of the great crowd who will survive the great tribulation are now being trained to take care of organizational responsibility. Therefore, they would be able to take care of that situation and to acquaint the resurrected ones with the “new earth” under the “new heavens.” (2 Peter 3:13)​—9/1, pages 20, 21.
□ What things are involved in getting “saved”? (Acts 16:30)
The prime requirement is: “Believe on the Lord Jesus and you will get saved.” (Acts 16:31) This involves taking in accurate knowledge of God’s purposes and his way of salvation. Then faith has to be exercised in Jesus Christ as the Chief Agent of salvation. (John 3:16; Titus 2:14) This places the Christian in a saved condition, but he must now persevere in doing God’s will and continue to adhere to all of God’s requirements for the rest of his life. Only then will he be saved to eternal life. (Matthew 24:13)​—9/15, page 7.
□ How did Noah’s faith condemn the world? (Hebrews 11:7)
Noah’s obedience and righteous acts demonstrated that others besides him and his family could have survived the Flood if they had been willing to change their life-style. Despite pressures from his own imperfect flesh, the world around him, and the Devil, Noah proved that it was possible to live a life that pleased God.​—10/1, page 11.
□ Why should we guard against even light gossip?
We may make a remark not meant to hurt anyone, but this seemingly innocent gossip may become hurtful when it is repeated, embellished, or twisted, so that it damages the reputation of the one talked about, robbing him of his good name. (Proverbs 20:19)​—10/15, page 13.
□ What are the advantages when marriage partners are evenly yoked?
Husband and wife are in a position to encourage each other as to worshiping their God. Also, they can look to the Scriptures for guidance in settling their differences.​—11/1, page 20.
□ How can the Ten Commandments help us today?
They reveal Jehovah’s viewpoint on matters and serve as reminders of our obligation to love God and neighbor. (Matthew 22:37-39; 2 Timothy 3:16, 17)​—11/15, pages 5, 6.
□ On what three occasions did God speak in the hearing of Jesus and other men?
The first occasion was at the time of Jesus’ baptism by John the Baptizer (Matthew 3:17); the second was when Jesus was transfigured in the sight of James, John, and Peter (Matthew 17:5); and the third was on Nisan 10, four days before Jesus’ death, when God’s voice was heard by a crowd standing in the temple. (John 12:28)​—12/1, page 8.

