Bless Jehovah’s Holy Name!
“The praise of Jehovah my mouth will speak; and let all flesh bless his holy name to time indefinite, even forever.”​—PSALM 145:21.
 1, 2. (a) In what way has Satan challenged God’s rulership? (b) What questions are raised concerning Psalm 145:11-21?
JEHOVAH is unquestionably the Universal Sovereign. But Satan has challenged the righteousness and rightfulness of God’s rulership. (Genesis 2:16, 17; 3:1-5) The Devil has also called into question the integrity of all servants of God in heaven and on earth. (Job 1:6-11; 2:1-5; Luke 22:31) So Jehovah has allowed time for all intelligent creatures to see the bad fruitage of rebellion against his rulership and to show where they stand on these issues.
2 Psalm 145 helps us to take a firm stand for God’s rulership. How so? What does David say about Jehovah’s kingship? And how does God treat its advocates? Helpful answers appear at Psalm 145:11-21.
Talk About Jehovah’s Kingship
 3. If Jehovah’s kingship is dear to us, what will we do?
3 Jehovah’s rulership was of great concern to David, who said: “About the glory of your kingship they will talk, and about your mightiness they will speak, to make known to the sons of men his mighty acts and the glory of the splendor of his kingship.” (Psalm 145:11, 12) People talk about things that interest them. So a man speaks of his family, his home, his crops. “A good man brings forth good out of the good treasure of his heart,” said Jesus. (Luke 6:45) If God’s rulership is dear to our heart, we will pray for his Kingdom to come, and we will tell others about the justice, peace, and righteousness that will prevail under its rule. We will praise Jehovah as the “King of eternity,” and we will speak about the expression of his sovereignty through the Messianic Kingdom in the hands of his dear Son, Jesus Christ. (Revelation 15:3; Isaiah 9:6, 7) What a privilege it is to speak about the heavenly glory of Jehovah’s kingship, which will soon be reflected in the beauty of an earthly paradise filled with perfectly happy creatures!​—Luke 23:43.
 4. When do we have occasion to speak about Jehovah’s “mightiness,” and how are we sustained in such activity?
4 Appreciation will also move us to speak about Jehovah’s “mightiness.” Though “he is exalted in power,” he never misuses it. (Job 37:23) He used his power to create the earth and mankind and will exercise it to destroy the wicked. We have occasion to speak about God’s mightiness when we declare the good news. And are we not grateful that this ultimate Source of strength empowers us to do this work? (Isaiah 40:29-31) Yes, as Jehovah’s Witnesses, we are sustained in sacred service by God’s strength and spirit. It is only in this way that the Kingdom message is being proclaimed with marvelous success worldwide.​—Psalm 28:7, 8; Zechariah 4:6.
 5. Since multitudes do not know about Jehovah’s “mighty acts,” what should we do?
5 There is a need for us to make known to the sons of men the “mighty acts” of Jehovah, even as the Israelites told their children about the way God delivered them from Egyptian bondage. (Exodus 13:14-16) Men build monuments to humans whose deeds they consider notable, but how many know about the mighty acts of God? As one scholar put it: “They inscribe the deeds of their heroes upon brass, but the glorious acts of Jehovah are written upon the sand, and the tide of time washes them from present memory.” Those acts are not really washed away, though they are unknown to multitudes. So in our house-to-house work, when conducting home Bible studies, and on other occasions, let us zealously speak of God’s mighty acts.
 6. (a) On what occasion years ago was the zealous spirit with which we carry out our ministry well expressed? (b) In essence, what was said in 1922 about advertising the Kingdom?
6 We should also zealously make known the glory of God’s kingship. Zeal for such Kingdom service surely was evident when, in 1922, J. F. Rutherford, then president of the Watch Tower Society, addressed conventioners at Cedar Point, Ohio, and said: “Since 1914 the King of glory has taken his power . . . The kingdom of heaven is at hand; the King reigns; Satan’s empire is falling; millions now living will never die. Do you believe it? . . . Then back to the field, O ye sons of the most high God! Gird on your armor! Be sober, be vigilant, be active, be brave. Be faithful and true witnesses for the Lord. Go forward in the fight until every vestige of Babylon lies desolate. Herald the message far and wide. The world must know that Jehovah is God and that Jesus Christ is King of kings and Lord of lords. This is the day of all days. Behold, the King reigns! You are his publicity agents. Therefore advertise, advertise, advertise, the King and his kingdom.”
 7. How should we feel about our activity as Kingdom proclaimers?
7 What a joy to ‘think upon God’s name,’ to tell others about his rulership, and to advertise the Messianic Kingdom of his dear Son! (Malachi 3:16) As Kingdom proclaimers and advocates, we cherish our privilege of declaring the good news and turning the hearts of others toward God, Christ, and the Kingdom. Within us, there should be a burning desire to tell others about the glorious splendor of Jehovah’s kingship.​—Compare Jeremiah 20:9.
 8. (a) In what is Jehovah’s rulership represented today? (b) Why can it be said that God has dominion “throughout all successive generations”?
8 We should be moved to announce God’s Kingdom with great zeal, for David next said: “Your kingship is a kingship for all times indefinite, and your dominion is throughout all successive generations.” (Psalm 145:13) As the psalmist’s meditations on Jehovah’s kingship continued, he changed pronouns from “his” to “your,” addressing his prayerful words directly to God. Of course, Jehovah’s rulership as represented in the Messianic Kingdom does not replace God’s eternal kingship. In fact, when obedient mankind has been uplifted to perfection, Christ will hand the Kingdom over to his Father. (1 Corinthians 15:24-28) So God does have dominion “throughout all successive generations.” Jehovah was King when Adam was created and will have dominion over righteous humans forever.
 9. In Psalm 145, what can be said about a verse beginning with the Hebrew letter nun?
9 In this acrostic psalm, the Masoretic text omits a verse starting with the Hebrew letter nun. But in accord with the Greek Septuagint, the Syriac Peshitta, and the Latin Vulgate, one Hebrew manuscript reads: “Jehovah is faithful in all his words, and lovingly kind [or, “loyal”] in all his works.” (New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures​—With References, footnote) God fulfills all of his promises and is loyal, loving, and kind to all who appreciate his goodness.​—Joshua 23:14.
Jehovah’s Support Never Fails
10. How does God ‘give us support’?
10 The King Eternal never ignores the plight of his servants. Thus, David could say: “Jehovah is giving support to all who are falling, and is raising up all who are bowed down.” (Psalm 145:14) Since the days of Abel, Jehovah has supported His worshipers. Left to ourselves, we would fall many times under our burdens. We lack sufficient strength to bear all of life’s woes and the persecution that comes our way as God’s people, but Jehovah upholds us. The form of the Hebrew verb used here indicates that God continuously ‘gives us support.’ It may be noted that John the Baptizer and God’s own Son helped to raise up fallen sinners morally. When these individuals repented and became Jehovah’s servants, they enjoyed the wonderful blessing of divine support.​—Matthew 21:28-32; Mark 2:15-17.
11. In what way does Jehovah ‘raise up all who are bowed down’?
11 It is comforting to know that ‘Jehovah is raising up all who are bowed down’ by various trials. He cheers the despondent among us, comforts our grieving ones, and helps us to speak his word boldly when we are persecuted. (Acts 4:29-31) Never does he allow our burdens to crush us if only we accept his help. (Psalm 55:22) So, like the “daughter of Abraham” who was “bent double” but was physically cured by Jesus, we should “glorify God” when he lovingly raises us up spiritually. (Luke 13:10-17) Anointed ones bowed down in Babylonish bondage were grateful when God raised them up in 1919, and he has been raising up appreciative “other sheep” since 1935.​—John 10:16.
12. How is it that “the eyes of all look hopefully” to God?
12 Jehovah never fails his people, as David next made clear by saying: “To you the eyes of all look hopefully, and you are giving them their food in its season. You are opening your hand and satisfying the desire of every living thing.” (Psalm 145:15, 16) It is as though the eyes of all living creatures are turned in hope to the Universal Sovereign. The angels look to God for continued life. And as a child looks to a parent for things needed, we look to our heavenly Father. In fact, from him humans and animals alike receive sustenance. No one else can satisfy their needs. God gives them “their food in its season,” that is, when it is needed.
13. In what ways does Jehovah ‘open his hand and satisfy the desire of every living thing’?
13 God ‘opens his hand and satisfies the desire of every living thing.’ (Psalm 104:10-28) True, some animals die for lack of food. Many humans hunger as victims of selfishness, oppression, and misuse of resources. Moreover, Jesus foretold that “food shortages” would be a feature of “the sign” of his presence in these last days. (Matthew 24:3, 7) But none of this occurs because Jehovah is stingy or unable to provide. Think of the thousands of millions of creatures that are sustained! Moreover, this psalm provides assurance that under Kingdom rule, when ‘man does not dominate man to his injury,’ God will satisfy our material and spiritual needs. (Ecclesiastes 8:9; Isaiah 25:6) Even today, we need not hunger for spiritual food, for God provides it abundantly in its season through “the faithful and discreet slave.” (Matthew 24:45-47; 1 Peter 2:2) Spiritually speaking, Jehovah’s Witnesses are the best-fed people on earth. Do you show deep appreciation for such bounties?
Jehovah Guards Those Loving Him
14. Why could David say that “Jehovah is righteous in all his ways and loyal in all his works”?
14 Our foolishness may ‘distort our way’ and bring hardships upon us, but never should we blame God for these difficulties. (Proverbs 19:3) David shows why when he says: “Jehovah is righteous in all his ways and loyal in all his works.” (Psalm 145:17) God always acts in an upright, just, and merciful way. Especially is his mercy evident in his provision for salvation through Jesus’ ransom sacrifice. (Acts 2:21; 4:8-12) Jehovah is also “loyal in all his works,” always faithful, loving, and impartial. As “imitators of God,” then, let us be upright, just, merciful, impartial, and loyal.​—Ephesians 5:1, 2; Deuteronomy 32:4; Psalm 7:10; 25:8; Isaiah 49:7; Acts 10:34, 35.
15. How have we ‘called upon God in trueness,’ and what has resulted from our doing so?
15 Since God is righteous and loyal, we are drawn to him. Moreover, David assures us: “Jehovah is near to all those calling upon him, to all those who call upon him in trueness.” (Psalm 145:18) In getting baptized as dedicated believers, we called on the name of Jehovah. (Acts 8:12; 18:8; Romans 10:10-15) Since we thus drew close to God, he draws near to us. (James 4:8) We “call upon him in trueness” because we do so in the true way, through Jesus Christ. And Jehovah will remain near if we worship him “with spirit and truth,” exhibit “faith without hypocrisy,” and ‘continue steadfast as seeing the One who is invisible.’ (John 4:23, 24; 1 Timothy 1:5; Hebrews 11:27) Then we will not pray in vain or have to face Satan’s world alone, but we will continue to enjoy divine help and guidance. (Psalm 65:2; 1 John 5:19) What security that means!
16. Why and how does Jehovah ‘perform the desire of those fearing him’?
16 We have true security, too, because of other things Jehovah does in our behalf. Said David: “The desire of those fearing him he will perform, and their cry for help he will hear, and he will save them.” (Psalm 145:19) Jehovah ‘performs our desire’ because we have deep reverence for God and a wholesome fear of displeasing him. (Proverbs 1:7) Our obedient heart has moved us to make a dedication to Jehovah, and our attitude is, “Let your will take place.” Since it is his will that we declare the Kingdom message, he fulfills our desire to do that work. (Matthew 6:10; Mark 13:10) God ‘performs our desire’ because we do not pray selfishly but ask for things in harmony with his will. He grants what is in accord with his will and is for our good.​—1 John 3:21, 22; 5:14, 15; compare Matthew 26:36-44.
17. Why can we be sure that our “cry for help” will be heard by God?
17 As Jehovah’s loyal Witnesses, we may also be sure that our “cry for help” will never fall on deaf ears. God delivered David from calamity and saved Jesus, even resurrecting him from the dead. Under enemy assault, especially during Gog’s attack, we may be sure that Jehovah will deliver us. (Ezekiel 38:1–39:16) In fact, during any time of trouble, like David we can confidently pray: “Show me favor, O Jehovah, for I am in sore straits. . . . I have heard the bad report by many, fright being on all sides. When they mass together as one against me, it is to take away my soul that they do scheme. But I​—in you I have put my trust, O Jehovah. I have said: ‘You are my God.’”​—Psalm 31:9-14.
18. How do we benefit from knowing that Jehovah ‘guards all those loving him’ but will ‘annihilate the wicked’?
18 Jehovah God is always ready to help us. As David says: “Jehovah is guarding all those loving him, but all the wicked ones he will annihilate.” (Psalm 145:20) Yes, if we love God, he will bless and keep us. (Numbers 6:24-26) He ‘rewards the haughty exceedingly’ but safeguards his humble servants, letting nothing happen that will do them permanent injury. Since Jehovah is with us, let us be courageous. (Psalm 31:20-24; Acts 11:19-21) ‘No weapon formed against us will succeed.’ (Isaiah 54:17; Psalm 9:17; 11:4-7) That is the experience of those who prove their love for God as his faithful dedicated servants. As a group, Jehovah’s Witnesses will safely pass through “the great tribulation” brought upon the wicked. (Revelation 7:14) And what a blessing the settling of the great issue of Jehovah’s universal kingship will be to “all those loving him”!
Continue to Bless Jehovah’s Holy Name
19. Why do our mouths speak “the praise of Jehovah”?
19 David concludes this moving psalm with the words: “The praise of Jehovah my mouth will speak; and let all flesh bless his holy name to time indefinite, even forever.” (Psalm 145:21) As Jehovah’s Witnesses, we appreciate God’s greatness, goodness, benevolent kingship, unfailing support, and tireless watchcare. So, like David, our mouths speak the praises of God. We are moved to give him exclusive devotion, thank him for his many blessings, and praise his “beauteous name.”​—1 Chronicles 29:10-13; Exodus 20:4-6.
20. With eternity in view, what should now be our determination?
20 Since Jehovah blesses us daily, let us regularly bless him, or speak well of him. Let us preach the good news zealously in praise of God, telling others that soon ‘all flesh will bless his holy name.’ How splendid it will be to live when all inhabitants of the earth​—indeed, all intelligent creatures in the universe—​will sing praises to our heavenly Father! (Psalm 148:1-13) Blessed be Jehovah for revealing his name and granting us the privilege of being his Witnesses. (Psalm 83:18; Isaiah 43:10-12) May we deport ourselves in a manner befitting those who hold that name sacred and pray for its sanctification. (Luke 11:2) Let us serve God loyally, so that in his new system, our voice may be heard in the chorus of those who bless Jehovah’s holy name forever.
What Are Your Comments?
□ What will we do if Jehovah’s kingship is dear to us?
□ In what is God’s kingship represented today?
□ How does Jehovah ‘raise up all who are bowed down’?
□ In what ways does God ‘open his hand and satisfy the desire of every living thing’?
□ How can we bless Jehovah’s holy name?
[Picture on page 17]
In 1922 the words ‘advertise the King and the Kingdom’ spurred advocates of Jehovah’s kingship on to greater action

