Jehovah Deserves Eternal Praise
“All day long I will bless you, and I will praise your name to time indefinite, even forever.”​—PSALM 145:2.
 1. Why did David have many reasons for praising Jehovah?
JEHOVAH’S loyal servant David had many reasons to praise God. This well-known king of ancient Israel knew of Jehovah’s greatness and goodness and realized that His kingship was eternal. The Most High deserved praise for satisfying the desire of every living thing and for extending mercy to his faithful servants.
 2. (a) How is Psalm 145 arranged? (b) What questions will we consider?
2 David offered such praise to God in the 145th Psalm. Each verse of this acrostic psalm starts with a successive letter of the Hebrew alphabet, though one letter (nun) was omitted. The acrostic arrangement may have served as a memory aid. Psalm 145 extols Jehovah, as in the words: “All day long I will bless you, and I will praise your name to time indefinite, even forever.” (Psalm 145:2) But how can this psalm affect us? What can it do for our relationship with God? To find out, let us first consider Ps 145 verses 1 to 10.
Jehovah’s Greatness Unsearchable
 3. Like David, what do we owe to ‘our God the King,’ and why?
3 David was a king, but he acknowledged Jehovah’s sovereignty over him, saying: “I will exalt you, O my God the King, and I will bless your name to time indefinite, even forever.” (Psalm 145:1) With similar reverence, Jehovah’s Witnesses lift up the name of God and praise him earth wide. Our life is enriched as we share in such activity. Like David, we owe obedience and subjection to Jehovah as ‘our God the King.’ And why not? He is the “King of eternity.” (Revelation 15:3) Moreover, the Greater David, Jesus Christ, who has been reigning from heavenly Mount Zion since 1914, provides us with a splendid example of subjection to Jehovah, the King Eternal.
 4. How can we ‘bless God’s name’?
4 David said that he would ‘bless God’s name.’ How is this possible for a mere human? Well, among other things, to bless someone means to speak well of him. Blessing God’s name indicates that we have strong love for him and his holy name, Jehovah. We never complain about God, never find fault with him, never question his goodness. Only if we have that attitude, have made a dedication to Jehovah, and maintain integrity as his baptized Witnesses can we say with David that we ‘will bless God’s name forever.’ If we keep ourselves in God’s love, we will receive the gift of everlasting life and thus be able to bless Jehovah eternally.​—Jude 20, 21.
 5. The desire to bless Jehovah “all day long” should have what effect on us?
5 If we truly love our Life-Giver, we will say with David: “All day long I will bless you, and I will praise your name to time indefinite, even forever.” (Psalm 145:2) How barren a day would be if we did not bless God! May we never be so busy or so anxious about material things that we fail to speak well of our heavenly Father or pray to him daily. Jesus implied that we should pray every day when he said in the model prayer: “Give us our bread for the day according to the day’s requirement.” (Luke 11:3) Many in full-time service praise God daily as they engage in the Christian ministry. But whatever our circumstances, our heart should move us to praise God in some way each day. And just think! As Jehovah’s dedicated Witnesses with the hope of eternal life, we have the grand prospect of praising his name forever.​—John 17:3.
 6. Why is Jehovah “very much to be praised”?
6 We surely have reason to praise God all day long, for David added: “Jehovah is great and very much to be praised, and his greatness is unsearchable.” (Psalm 145:3) So great is Jehovah that he is matchless, and his sovereignty is absolute. Babylonian king Nebuchadnezzar had to admit: “There exists no one that can check [God’s] hand or that can say to him, ‘What have you been doing?’” (Daniel 4:34, 35) Jehovah “is fear-inspiring above all other gods.” (Psalm 96:4) No wonder he is “very much to be praised.” Why, no words of praise are too lofty when lauding Jehovah! He deserves unlimited, eternal praise.
 7. What proves that God’s “greatness is unsearchable”?
7 Jehovah’s “greatness is unsearchable.” Regardless of how large he is bodily, his greatness rests in the kind of God he is. Yes, the things he has created are too wonderful for us to understand, and we ourselves are “wonderfully made.” (Psalm 139:14; Job 9:10; 37:5) Moreover, how grandly Jehovah God conducts himself! He faithfully keeps his promises and lovingly reveals his purposes. Yet, we will never know everything about God. Throughout eternity, we will be able to grow in knowledge of him, his creation, and his purposes.​—Romans 11:33-36.
Commend Jehovah’s Works
 8. (a) How has “generation after generation” commended Jehovah’s works? (b) If we teach our children about Jehovah’s works and acts, how are they likely to view worship of him? (c) As a joyful “generation,” what has the anointed remnant done?
8 So much can be said in praise of our unsearchably great God that David was moved to say: “Generation after generation will commend your works, and about your mighty acts they will tell.” (Psalm 145:4) Successive generations of mankind have commended Jehovah’s works and recounted his mighty acts. What a privilege it is to relate these things to those with whom we conduct home Bible studies! For example, we can tell them that God created all things. (Genesis 1:1–2:25; Revelation 4:11) We can speak about his mighty acts at the time he delivered the Israelites from Egyptian bondage, helped them to vanquish Canaanite foes, preserved them from genocide in ancient Persia, and much more. (Exodus 13:8-10; Judges 4:15; Esther 9:15-17) And are we not moved to tell our children about Jehovah’s works and acts? If we give our offspring such instruction and they see us joyously serving God, they are likely to view worship of him as a delight and to grow up with ‘the joy of Jehovah as their stronghold.’ (Nehemiah 8:10; Psalm 78:1-4) The anointed remnant constitute one joyful “generation” of Jehovah’s Witnesses that commends God’s works to the “great crowd,” part of the generation that will inhabit the Paradise earth.​—Revelation 7:9.
 9. As we reflect on God’s works and mighty acts, of what can we be certain?
9 As we reflect on God’s works and mighty acts, we become even more convinced that “Jehovah will not desert his people for the sake of his great name.” (1 Samuel 12:22; Psalm 94:14) When we face trials, hardships, and persecution, we can be tranquil and confident that “the peace of God” will guard our hearts and mental powers. (Philippians 4:6, 7) So how fitting it is that we tell others about our loving, protective heavenly Father!
10. Jehovah’s “wonderful works” include what, and how do we benefit from meditating on them?
10 We should take time to meditate on Jehovah’s majesty and works, for David added: “The glorious splendor of your dignity and the matters of your wonderful works I will make my concern.” (Psalm 145:5) God’s dignity is fear-inspiring and unequaled. (Job 37:22; Psalm 148:13) Thus, David made the glorious splendor of Jehovah’s dignity his concern. The psalmist also concerned himself with matters of God’s “wonderful works.” These include the exercise of divine justice in destroying sinners and preserving the godly, as at the Flood. (Genesis 7:20-24; 2 Peter 2:9) Meditation on such matters strengthens our relationship with Jehovah and enables us to tell others about his dignity and wonderful works. During 40 days in the wilderness, Jesus was fortified against temptation by meditating on the things that the opened heavens had brought to his attention. (Matthew 3:13–4:11) He thereafter talked to others about Jehovah’s dignity and wonderful works.
11. (a) Why had fright fallen upon the residents of Jericho? (b) With what spirit do Jehovah’s Witnesses talk about God’s “fear-inspiring things” and his “greatness”?
11 When we speak about God’s dignity and works, we prompt others to talk about them. Said David: “And they will talk about the strength of your own fear-inspiring things; and as for your greatness, I will declare it.” (Psalm 145:6) Rahab spoke of the fright that fell upon Jericho’s residents when they heard how Jehovah had rescued the Israelites at the Red Sea and made them victorious over two Amorite kings. There must have been much talk about such “fear-inspiring things” in Jericho. (Joshua 2:9-11) And surely the imminent “great tribulation” will be fear-inspiring. (Matthew 24:21) But things so frightening to people alienated from God inspire within righteous hearts “the fear of Jehovah,” a wholesome awe of him. (Proverbs 1:7) With such a reverential spirit, Jehovah’s Witnesses talk about manifestations of God’s power. Why, the great Wonder-Worker is the main subject of conversation between the anointed and their earthly companions! And even persecution does not prevent them from telling others about these things and the “greatness” of Jehovah.​—Acts 4:18-31; 5:29.
Praise Jehovah for His Goodness
12. How does Jehovah’s goodness make us “bubble over”?
12 God deserves praise not only for his greatness but also for his goodness and righteousness. So David said: “With the mention of the abundance of your goodness they will bubble over, and because of your righteousness they will cry out joyfully.” (Psalm 145:7) Jehovah’s goodness is so great that we “bubble over” with joyous expressions concerning it. In the Hebrew, the idea is that of water gushing from a fountain. So may we bubble forth grateful praise to God, just like a torrent. (Proverbs 18:4) To their great spiritual injury, Israel forgot Jehovah’s goodness. (Psalm 106:13-43) But let our heart overflow with such gratitude that others repent after they learn how good Jehovah is to his dedicated Witnesses.​—Romans 2:4.
13. Manifestations of divine justice and righteousness should have what effect on us?
13 May manifestations of divine justice and righteousness also move us to cry out joyfully. If we feel this way, we will seek first not only God’s Kingdom but also his righteousness. We will always want our conduct to bring praise to Jehovah. Yes, we will be regular Kingdom proclaimers with plenty to do in God’s service. Our praise to Jehovah will never be buried in a tomb of silence.​—Matthew 6:33; 1 Corinthians 15:58; Hebrews 10:23.
Jehovah Is Merciful
14. What evidence is there that “Jehovah is gracious and merciful”?
14 Citing additional praiseworthy qualities of God, David said: “Jehovah is gracious and merciful, slow to anger and great in loving-kindness.” (Psalm 145:8) God is gracious in that he is wholly good and generous. (Matthew 19:17; James 1:5) He does good things even for those not serving him. (Acts 14:14-17) Jehovah is also merciful, compassionate, “remembering that we are dust.” He does not despise a crushed heart or deal with us according to our sins but is far more merciful than the most loving human father. (Psalm 51:17; 103:10-14) Why, in the greatest display of mercy, he sent his beloved Son to die for us so that we might be reconciled to God and really taste of his graciousness!​—Romans 5:6-11.
15. Why can it be said that Jehovah God is “slow to anger” and “great in loving-kindness”?
15 Our heavenly Father is slow to anger. He does not unleash blind rage. Jehovah is also “great in loving-kindness.” Here the Hebrew denotes kindness that stems from love and attaches itself to an object. It does so until its purpose with regard to that object is realized. An alternate rendering is “loyal love.” Among other things, God’s loving-kindness, or loyal love, is displayed in acts of deliverance, preservation, protection, relief from troubles, and recovery from sin through the ransom. (Psalm 6:4; 25:7; 31:16, 21; 40:11; 61:7; 119:88, 159; 143:12; John 3:16) The fact that Jehovah did not bring Armageddon right after the ‘war in heaven’ enables multitudes to gain salvation, a great expression of divine loving-kindness.​—Revelation 12:7-12; 2 Peter 3:15.
16. How has Jehovah proved to be “good to all”?
16 In view of God’s mercy, it might be said that he has a big heart. David declared: “Jehovah is good to all, and his mercies are over all his works.” (Psalm 145:9) Yes, God was good to the Israelites. For that matter, “he makes his sun rise upon wicked people and good and makes it rain upon righteous people and unrighteous.” (Matthew 5:43-45) In Eden, Jehovah promised a “seed” that would be a blessing. Later he told Abraham: “By means of your seed all nations of the earth will certainly bless themselves.” (Genesis 3:15; 22:18) And God’s goodness is so great in this “time of the end” that anyone can ‘come and take life’s water free.’ (Daniel 12:4; Revelation 22:17) Jehovah is willing to do good to all intelligent creatures, and his goodness should draw us ever closer to him.
17. In what sense are Jehovah’s ‘mercies over all his works’?
17 Jehovah’s “mercies are over all his works” in that he makes ample provision for humans and animals. He is “the One giving food to all flesh.” (Psalm 136:25; 147:9) God does not honor the rich and scorn the downtrodden, exalt the haughty and despise the humble, elevate the foolish and debase the wise. Sinful men do so but not our merciful heavenly Father. (Psalm 102:17; Zephaniah 3:11, 12; Ecclesiastes 10:5-7) And how great God’s mercy, goodness, and loving-kindness are in making salvation possible through the ransom sacrifice of his beloved Son!​—1 John 4:9, 10.
Loyal Ones Bless Jehovah
18. (a) How do God’s works “laud” him? (b) When should we be moved to laud Jehovah?
18 God deserves praise from every quarter. As David put it: “All your works will laud you, O Jehovah, and your loyal ones will bless you.” (Psalm 145:10) God’s works of creation “laud” him, even as a well-built house is a credit to its builder and a lovely vase to its skillful potter. (Compare Hebrews 3:4; Isaiah 29:16; 64:8.) So wonderful are Jehovah’s creative works that they have moved angels and humans to praise him. Angelic sons of God joyously shouted in applause when he founded the earth. (Job 38:4-7) David said that ‘the heavens declare God’s glory and the expanse tells of the work of his hands.’ (Psalm 19:1-6) We may well laud Jehovah when we see a falcon soaring in the heavens or a gazelle bounding over a verdant hill. (Job 39:26; Song of Solomon 2:17) Praise is fitting when we harvest crops or enjoy a meal with friends. (Psalm 72:16; Proverbs 15:17) Our marvelously designed bodies may also prompt expressions of grateful praise to God.​—Psalm 139:14-16.
19. Who are the “loyal ones,” and what do they do?
19 Today, Jehovah’s spirit-anointed “loyal ones” on earth bless him. They speak well of him and yearn to see his will done on earth as it is in heaven. (Matthew 6:9, 10) As the anointed ones tell others about God’s wondrous works, the great crowd respond in ever-increasing numbers. Along with the anointed loyal ones, they serve zealously as Kingdom proclaimers. Is gratitude moving you to have a regular share in this work to God’s praise?
20. (a) How will Jehovah’s name be sanctified? (b) Concerning Psalm 145, what questions remain for consideration?
20 As Jehovah’s Witnesses, we are like David in giving God praise. To us the sanctification of Jehovah’s holy name and the praising of it are matters of vital concern. Since the divine name will be sanctified by God’s Kingdom, this Bible teaching of the Kingdom is a prominent feature of the good news we declare. Does Psalm 145 provide spiritual enlightenment in this regard? What will our discussion of the rest of this psalm reveal? In what other ways does it prove that Jehovah deserves eternal praise?
What Are Your Comments?
□ How can we bless Jehovah’s name?
□ What are some of God’s commendable works?
□ How will we act if we appreciate Jehovah’s goodness?
□ God’s mercy has been shown in what ways?
[Picture on page 12]
Do you tell your children about Jehovah’s mighty acts, as did godly parents in ancient Israel?
[Picture on page 15]
As a well-built house is a credit to its builder, so Jehovah’s creative works bring Him praise

