Be on Time!
“TARDINESS is a chronic problem among chief executive officers,” reports USA Today. “They arrive late for six in 10 meetings,” it adds, citing a survey of 2,700 chief executive officers.
In the business world, tardiness is considered more than just a display of bad manners. A study of 81,000 job applicants concluded: “Lost hours through tardiness and unauthorized absences are a major source of lost revenue.” Of course, it is not only in the business world that tardiness creates problems. A survey of secondary-school principals revealed that “students’ tardiness was the primary and most frequently recurring discipline problem.”
Our Creator intended for us to be time conscious. He put “the two great luminaries”—the sun and the moon—in place to help us measure time. (Genesis 1:14-16) Nowadays, modern timepieces allow us to measure our time in minutes and seconds. In spite of technology, though, many of us still have problems being on time—for work, school, or other important appointments.
Is the problem necessarily a lack of time? Granted, the demands of work and family can be overwhelming. Nevertheless, a working mother named Wanda Rosseland says: “I stopped whining about not having enough time when I realized that we all have 24 hours a day. I’ve thought about it and decided that in our modern world, it’s not that we have so little time, but that we have so many disruptions and distractions.”
Consider also Renee,a a mother of five who is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. She recalls: “When my children were small, getting them ready for school and Christian meetings was a challenge. Still, I had no problem being on time. But now that they’re all grown, I’ve developed the bad habit of being late.” Do you also have this bad habit? If so, it is possible to change! Here are some things you can do.
● THINK OF THE CONSEQUENCES. Chronic lateness may seem like a little thing. But consider the Bible’s words: “Dead flies are what cause the oil of the ointment maker to stink, to bubble forth. So a little foolishness does to one who is precious for wisdom and glory.” (Ecclesiastes 10:1) Yes, just “a little foolishness” in the form of a lack of consideration for others can tarnish your reputation with a teacher or an employer.
While taking some courses at a local college, a woman named Marie noticed that some of her classmates “were quite casual about time,” often arriving late for class. “But it wasn’t long before they had to change,” she recalls. “Two of the professors were sticklers for time. So if any students were just a few minutes late, they were marked absent. And so many absences made a failing grade.”
Chronic lateness can also tarnish your reputation with friends and peers. A middle-aged man named Joseph recalls a fellow Christian he knew decades ago. Although this man was respected for his abilities as a teacher, he had an embarrassing flaw. “He was always late,” recalls Joseph. “I mean late for everything! And he never seemed to be concerned about it. People joked about his lateness.” Have people begun to refer to you as the person who is always late? If so, they could easily overlook your good qualities.
● CONSIDER OTHERS. Tardiness is rude and distracting to others. And it can give the impression that you have a superior attitude. Explaining why so many business executives tend to be tardy for meetings, one businessman admitted: “Most of us are just arrogant.” In contrast, Christians treat others as superior to themselves. (Philippians 2:3) They also apply the Golden Rule and treat others as they like to be treated. (Matthew 7:12) Does it not irritate you when you have to wait for others? Then don’t make others wait for you.
● LEARN TIME-MANAGEMENT SKILLS. Do you procrastinate and rush around at the last minute? Do you overschedule yourself, trying to do too many things in too short a period of time? The principle at Ecclesiastes 3:1 can prove helpful: “For everything there is an appointed time.” Having “an appointed time” for things allows you to do them in an orderly manner.
First, list all the things you need to do. Next, follow the principle at Philippians 1:10: “Make sure of the more important things.” Yes, prioritize. What absolutely has to be done? What are some things that can safely be put off for later? Finally, figure out how much time you need to get things done and when you can do them. Be realistic, and avoid scheduling too much in too little time.
A woman named Dorothy credits her parents with teaching her to be punctual. She relates: “If we had to be at a Christian meeting by 7:30 p.m., my mom started getting us ready an hour and 45 minutes before it. We had to allow time for eating supper, washing the dishes, dressing, and driving to the meeting place. It just became a normal part of our lives to be on time.” Sometimes it helps to factor in time for the unexpected. Dorothy recalls: “Recently I had to pick up a few people for a meeting. On the way I had a flat tire. I had it fixed and was still on time to pick them up. You see, I always allow time for car trouble or heavy traffic.”
● GET SUGGESTIONS FROM OTHERS. The Bible says at Proverbs 27:17: “By iron, iron itself is sharpened. So one man sharpens the face of another.” In harmony with that principle, talk to others whose circumstances are similar to yours—but who manage to be on time for things. Often they will have a number of useful suggestions.
Renee, quoted earlier, is determined to change her tardy behavior. She says: “I have recently resolved to do better. Although it hasn’t been easy, I am making some progress.” So can you. With the right mind-set and with effort, you can learn to be on time!
[Footnote]
Some of the names have been changed.
[Pictures on page 24]
Being chronically late can make a bad impression on employers and shows a lack of consideration for others
[Picture on page 25]
Good personal organization can help you to avoid wasting time

