The Beautiful Moldavite
BY AWAKE! WRITER IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC
What comes to your mind when you hear the word “moldavite”? In some languages the word may cause one to think of something that comes from the Central European river the Moldau, presently called the Vltava River. Or you might think of a rare, beautiful stone. Interestingly, the moldavite is both.
A moldavite is a green, glassy object. It is found in the southern part of the Czech Republic, in the area along the Vltava River. It is classified as a tektite—a term derived from the Greek word tektos, meaning “melted,” or “molten.” The Encyclopædia Britannica explains: “Tektites have been the subject of intense scientific scrutiny throughout much of the 20th century owing to their unknown and possibly extraterrestrial origins, but they are now recognized as having formed from the melting and rapid cooling of terrestrial rocks that have been vaporized by the high-energy impacts of large meteorites, comets, or asteroids upon the surface of the Earth.”
Tektites have been found on every continent except Antarctica and South America. Because moldavites have such an exotic origin, some people might think they are charged with mysterious cosmic energy and possess healing powers. Nevertheless, moldavites are just stones—albeit stones that are most beautiful and impressive.
These rare stones have a deep-green color. Unlike other tektites, they can be cut into breathtaking gemstones. Visitors to the Czech Republic can admire moldavites in the mineralogical section of the National Museum in Prague.
The Bible reminds us: “To Jehovah belong the earth and that which fills it.” (Psalm 24:1) This includes all the precious stones in the world. You might think of that should you ever have a chance to admire the beautiful moldavite!
[Picture on page 31]
Raw moldavites
[Picture on page 31]
Cut moldavite
[Picture on page 31]
Moldavite jewelry
[Picture Credit Line on page 31]
Cut moldavite and bottom photos: Z knihy Svĕt drahých kamenů

