Questions From Readers
● I have heard that Moses received the Law on the day of Pentecost. How could that be, since Exodus 19:1 says the Israelites got to Sinai in the third month after leaving Egypt?—D. S., U.S.A.
Jewish tradition is quite plain in identifying the festival day of Pentecost or Shabuóth with Moses’ receipt of the Ten Commandments. For instance, we read: “In the cycle of Jewish historical memory, Shabuoth is the day of the encounter at Sinai, when God revealed Himself to Moses and the Jewish people. The Voice was heard speaking the Ten Commandments.” (Judaism, Rabbi A. Hertzberg, ed., page 118, 1961; see also The New Jewish Encyclopedia of 1962, page 442.) The Bible does not specifically state that this is so. However, by examining what the Bible does say, we can see that the information it presents allows for this possibility.
The Jewish Passover was on Nisan 14. According to the Jewish festivals, Nisan 15 was a sabbath, and on Nisan 16 the firstfruits of the barley harvest were presented. Fifty days later, on Sivan 6, the Jews celebrated the festival of weeks, also called Pentecost. Since the Jewish months were of twenty-nine and thirty days, the third month after leaving Egypt might appear to be beyond the time of Pentecost.—Lev. 23:4-17.
But let us examine Exodus 19:1. It reads: “In the third month after the sons of Israel came out of the land of Egypt, on the same day, they came into the wilderness of Sinai.” Note that it does not say, ‘three months after’ the Israelites came out of Egypt, which would be three complete months or about ninety days. Rather, partial months would be included. Passover falls in the Jewish month of Nisan (30 days). The next month is Iyar (29 days), followed by Sivan (30 days). The Jews left Egypt in Nisan, so Sivan would be “the third month after” they departed. But just when did Moses begin to receive the Law? Could that time correspond with the date later established for the celebration of the festival of weeks, or Pentecost?
Though scholars are not unanimous on the point, it is widely believed that Sivan 1 is meant by the comment, “In the third month . . . on the same day.” For instance, the famous Jewish commentator Rashi wrote: “THE SAME (lit., this) DAY—on the day of the New Moon,” which would be the first of the month. Professor James G. Murphy wrote: “As the term here employed denotes the new month, and a precise day, ‘on this day,’ is indicated, we may safely conclude that the first day of the month is intended.”
Earlier God had told Moses that he would worship on Mt. Sinai; so after the people encamped, “Moses went up to the true God.” (Ex. 3:12; 19:2, 3) If the above-stated view of Exodus 19:1 is correct, this could have taken place on Sivan 2 or 3. Moses received a message from Jehovah. Next he took this to the people and they agreed to do all that God had said. Finally, Moses took the words of the people back to Jehovah, possibly on Sivan 4. God told Moses to sanctify the people “today and tomorrow” and “they must prove ready for the third day,” which could be Sivan 6.—Ex. 19:10, 11.
Consequently, when on the “third day” God gave the Ten Commandments, the fundamental laws of the Law covenant, that could very well match the date on which Pentecost was later celebrated.
We might add that certain Jewish customs involve the belief that the giving of the Law corresponds with the date for Pentecost. Some Jews adorn their houses with flowers on Pentecost, with the declared purpose of testifying their joy at possessing the Law. And, according to The Jewish Encyclopedia, “a popular custom on Pentecost is to eat dairy foods and cheesecakes in honor of the Law, which is likened to ‘honey and milk.’”

