What We Learn From Jesus
About the True God
Does God have a name?
Jesus taught that God has a name. Jesus said: “You must pray, then, this way: ‘Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sanctified.’” (Matthew 6:9) The Bible reveals that God’s name is Jehovah. (Psalm 83:18) Speaking about his disciples, Jesus said in prayer to his Father: “I have made your name known to them.”—John 17:26.
Who is Jehovah?
Jesus called Jehovah “the only true God” because Jehovah is the Creator. (John 17:3) Jesus said: “Did you not read that he who created them from the beginning made them male and female?” (Matthew 19:4) Jesus also said: “God is a Spirit.” (John 4:24) So we cannot see God.—Exodus 33:17-20.
What does God expect of us?
When someone asked Jesus which is the greatest commandment, he replied: “The first is, ‘Hear, O Israel, Jehovah our God is one Jehovah, and you must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole mind and with your whole strength.’ The second is this, ‘You must love your neighbor as yourself.’”—Mark 12:28-31.
How can we show that we love God?
Jesus said: “I love the Father.” How did he show his love? “Even as the Father has given me commandment to do,” he said, “so I am doing.” (John 14:31) He also stated: “I always do the things pleasing to him.” (John 8:29) We can please God by learning about him. While praying for his disciples, Jesus said: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God.”—John 17:3; 1 Timothy 2:4.
How can we learn about God?
One way of getting to know God is by observing the things he has made. For example, Jesus said: “Observe intently the birds of heaven, because they do not sow seed or reap or gather into storehouses; still your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not worth more than they are?” Jesus’ point? We should not allow anxiety about our physical needs to stop us from serving God.—Matthew 6:26-33.
The best way to come to know Jehovah is by studying his Word, the Bible. Jesus called the Scriptures “the word of God.” (Luke 8:21) Jesus said to God: “Your word is truth.”—John 17:17; 2 Peter 1:20, 21.
Jesus helped people learn the truth about Jehovah. Regarding Jesus, one of his disciples said: “Were not our hearts burning as he was speaking to us on the road, as he was fully opening up the Scriptures to us?” (Luke 24:32) To learn about God, we must be humble, willing to be taught. Jesus said: “Unless you turn around and become as young children, you will by no means enter into the kingdom of the heavens.”—Matthew 18:3.
Why does knowledge of God bring happiness?
God satisfies our need to understand the purpose of life. Jesus said: “Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need.” (Matthew 5:3) Jehovah teaches us the best way of life. “Happy are those hearing the word of God and keeping it!” said Jesus.—Luke 11:28; Isaiah 11:9.
For more information, see chapter 1 of the book What Does the Bible Really Teach?a
[Footnote]
Published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
[Picture on page 16]
“I have made your name known to them.”—John 17:26
[Pictures on page 16, 17]
We can learn about Jehovah from creation and from the Bible

