Where Did We Come From?
WHY DOES THE ANSWER MATTER? Many people are taught that life on earth emerged by accident. They are told that through a series of unlikely, random events, evolution produced the human race with all its emotional, intellectual, and spiritual capacities.
But consider: If we really are the product of evolution and there is no Creator, the human race would, in a sense, be an orphan. Mankind would have no source of superior wisdom to consult—no one to help us solve our problems. We would have to rely on human wisdom to avert environmental disaster, to solve political conflicts, and to guide us through our personal crises.
Do these prospects bring you peace of mind? If not, contemplate the alternative. Not only is it more appealing but it also makes more sense.
What the Bible Says
The Bible teaches that mankind is a direct creation of God. We are not the product of uncaring, mindless evolution. Rather, we are the children of a loving, intelligent Father. Note these clear statements made in the Bible.
Genesis 1:27. “God proceeded to create the man in his image, in God’s image he created him; male and female he created them.”
Psalm 139:14. “I shall laud you because in a fear-inspiring way I am wonderfully made. Your works are wonderful, as my soul is very well aware.”
Matthew 19:4-6. “Did you not read that he who created them from the beginning made them male and female and said, ‘For this reason a man will leave his father and his mother and will stick to his wife, and the two will be one flesh’? So that they are no longer two, but one flesh. Therefore, what God has yoked together let no man put apart.”
Acts 17:24, 25. “The God that made the world and all the things in it, being, as this One is, Lord of heaven and earth, does not dwell in handmade temples, neither is he attended to by human hands as if he needed anything, because he himself gives to all persons life and breath and all things.”
Revelation 4:11. “You are worthy, Jehovah, even our God, to receive the glory and the honor and the power, because you created all things, and because of your will they existed and were created.”
How the Bible’s Answer Brings Real Peace of Mind
Knowing that “every family . . . on earth owes its name” to God alters the way we view other people. (Ephesians 3:15) Having such knowledge also influences how we view ourselves and our problems. Our thinking will be affected in the following ways.
When faced with difficult decisions, we will not become unduly worried about man’s conflicting opinions. Instead, we will confidently rely on the Bible’s counsel. Why? Because “all Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness, that the man of God may be fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.”—2 Timothy 3:16, 17.
True, applying the Bible’s counsel involves effort and self-discipline. Sometimes its guidance may even require that we act in ways that seem contrary to our inclinations. (Genesis 8:21) However, if we accept that we were created by a loving heavenly Father, it is only logical to conclude that he knows the best course for us to take. (Isaiah 55:9) His Word thus assures us: “Trust in Jehovah with all your heart and do not lean upon your own understanding. In all your ways take notice of him, and he himself will make your paths straight.” (Proverbs 3:5, 6) If we apply that counsel, much of the anxiety we experience when facing challenges and decisions will be removed.
When confronted by prejudice, we will not be burdened by feelings of inferiority, thinking that we are somehow less valuable than people of a different race or another cultural background. Instead, we will develop a healthy sense of self-respect. Why? Because our Father, Jehovah God, “is not partial, but in every nation the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.”—Acts 10:34, 35.
This realization will also prevent us from allowing prejudice to warp our attitude toward others. We will appreciate that there is no legitimate basis for feeling superior to people of another race, since God “made out of one man every nation of men, to dwell upon the entire surface of the earth.”—Acts 17:26.
Certainly, knowing that we were created and that our Creator cares for us lays the foundation for gaining real peace of mind. But more is needed if we are to maintain inner peace.
[Blurb on page 4]
Did the human race evolve?
[Picture on page 5]
Knowing that our Creator cares for us can bring real peace of mind

