VOL. XXIII. MARCH 1, 1902. No. 5. 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 67 

Hermogenes to Titus 67 

Progress in Church Federation 

Abroad and at Home 68 

Madame Guyon's Full Surrender 

to the Lord 69 

God's Providences Cooperate 69 

Awake Thou that Sleepest and Arise 73 

Sanctified Through a Knowledge 

of the Truth 76 

Letters of Interest 79 

Volunteer Work for 1902 66 

page 66 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



ABOUT BIBLES-CORRECTED PRICES. 

On January 1st we received word from all Bible-publishers 
that the prices were thereafter advanced. We had 
a good supply on hand then, but now, as we are obliged to 
re-order, we must also advance prices, as our Bibles are 
sold at cost prices. 

Notice price list in December 15th issue, and add five 



cents each on all prices under 70 cents, ten cents to all 

between 70 cents and $1.15, and twenty cents to all above $1.15, 

except the India Paper Bibles, which are unchanged. 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER APRIL 20 

In the interest of friends in far off lands— China, Australia, 
Alaska, etc.— we give early notice that the anniversary 
memorial of our Lord's death this year falls on 
Sunday evening, April 20th,— after 6 p.m. 

ORDER ALL THE TRACTS YOU NEED. 

The Post Office Department is considering whether or 
not they will deprive us of the cheap mail rate on the "Old 
Theology Tracts." If you have not a good supply we advise 
that you send your orders at once. 

THE VOLUNTEER WORK FOR 1902. 

Many of the dear friends are still doing splendid service 
in the circulating of the pamphlet "Food for Thinking 
Christians," on Sundays, near church entrances. The 
weather this winter has been quite favorable. The Washington 
City friends, having finished their own territory, 
have been going to nearby cities and towns. The same is 
true of the Boston friends: recently forty-six of them went 
to Lawrence, Mass., and served forty-two churches;— taking 
some as they assembled and others as they dismissed. 

We advise that those who have not completed the distribution 
of "Food" shall do so; we hope to be able to 
supply all the ammunition requisite. Meantime, for those 
who have finished the distribution, we are preparing other 
literature which we hope to have ready for announcement 
in April. Meantime, let us get ready for an active campaign 
—choose captains and lieutenants, and so far as possible 
get all the friends interested. Our experience is that 
those who can and do engage in this volunteer work are 
proportionally blessed. 



R2963 : page 67 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



HERMOGENES TO TITUS. 



PERHAPS the best article which has yet appeared 

in the religious press bearing upon the 

higher criticism, came out in the last number 

of The Wesleyan Christian Advocate over the title of 



"The Epistle of Hermogenes to Titus," written in 

archaic style, belonging to the apostolic days and purporting 

to explain many passages of Scriptures which 

have furnished the bones of contention in recent controversies. 

Every Bible student will enjoy reading 

it. In part, the article reads as follows: 

"Hermogenes, a servant of God, and a minister 
of Christ, and a teacher of the true faith of the Gospel, 
according to the ripe judgment of the present 
age; to Titus, mine own brother, whom I greatly love 
in the truth: Grace, mercy and peace unto thee. 

"Thou hast heard, beloved, of our aged brother 
Paul, that he hath written epistles to Timotheus; and 
I hear, also to thee; in the which he hath set forth 
many things in exhortations unto each one of you. 
In some of these he hath sought to hinder my usefulness 
with thee, and with many others. Remember, 
brother, that he is old and hath divers infirmities, 
and hath little knowledge of sound philosophy which 
edifieth. Therefore, I bear no malice toward him. 
But I write to set in order for thine instruction a 
more reasonable Gospel, which will make thee wise 
and will enable thee to instruct others also. 

"Thou hast heard how our brother Demas hath 
written Timotheus, to teach him how he may gain 
favor with them that be somewhat in authority above 
us; and, moreover, with high esteem among them 
that will not endure the hard doctrines declared by 
Paul in his preaching and epistles. I know thee, thy 
promise and great talent, and earnestly desire that 
thou mayest rise above this Timotheus. Thou hast 
gifts many, and I would that thou mightest be a 
bishop over the Church. Give heed, therefore, to 
my counsel. 

"This Paul hath a lively imagination, such as maketh 
him exceedingly superstitious concerning the 
Scriptures, and an unsafe guide for such as would 
be wise; whilst I am yet young and have had long 
training in the schools of men skilled in reasoning 
concerning divine things, being in their company no 
less than sixty and seven days. Those great men instructed 
me fully in the approved laws, by the which 
we may know of the things which cannot be taken; 
wherefore, I think myself able to lead thee in a broad 
way. I will now set in order unto thee that which 
I have learned. 

"The fathers did teach that Moses hath written 
how God made the heaven and the earth, having been 
instructed in this of God. Know thou, therefore, 
that Moses did beguile them. He obtained many 
accounts of a tradition of creation among several 
ancient peoples, and did patch them together for the 
Hebrews. That Paul accepteth this book of Moses 
as true history, doth show him to lack sound 
judgment. 

"Thou knowest also that it hath been taught that 



the law and the prophets were given by inspiration of 
God. Herein is grievous error. The priests of the 
people of Israel, greatly desiring to lead our fathers 
into righteousness and to make of them a great nation, 
devised those great books. It is true, I cannot 
make known unto thee by which way this is proved; 
but beware of questioning my knowledge in this 
thing; thou wilt show thyself ignorant shouldest thou 
at all call in question our judgment. None but the 
instructed can fully understand these matters. The 
simple and unlearned must needs believe what we 
teach. If they fail to hearken, they are blind and 
cannot see into the deep things of our wisdom. 

"We now conclude that at the least one thousand 
scribes were required to devise the law and the prophets; 
and peradventure, if that number doth not appear 
sufficient we can enlarge it to be even five thousand. 
It was a great work of imagination, and God must 
needs have many men to imagine each a little. 
Moreover, in these books the wise find many things 
contrary to sound reason. I will inform thee concerning 
some of them, in order that thou mayest be 
able to explain them to thy people. The writing 

R2963 : page 68 

which beareth the name of Moses doth declare that 
God did feed our fathers in the wilderness with manna 
from heaven. It is most confidently taught 
among us who are wise that they did lick with their 
tongues a honey, which is found on the leaves of 
the trees in the wilderness, and named it manna. The 
rock which gave forth water when this Moses did 
strike it flowed from a deep well, which he and his 
servants bored through a great rock by night while 
the people slept. The great pillar of cloud by day 
and fire by night which followed the people was produced 
by cunningly mixed powders. Moreover, this 
Moses was a wise magician, and did charm these people 
into a deep sleep, and while they slept, with his 
chosen helpers, he prepared many vessels into which, 
when full of water, they did cast a fine powder. After 
this they soaked the garments of all the people in the 
vessels of water, and it was so that they could no more 
wear out. Give heed concerning what we declare to 
be the truth of the record of the walls of Jericho, 
how they fell. They that be searchers after truth 
set forth that the horns and trumpets which the men 
of Israel did blow mightily made a great commotion 
in the air, insomuch that the walls began to tremble 
greatly, which continuing many days they were 
shaken down and did fall. Know thou also that 
Joshua did, by cunning magic, cause the ignorant 
people to imagine that the sun obeyed him to stand 
still. They were deceived, for their own good, that 
it might profit them withal. Joshua did cause their 



memory to stand still. But we are wiser than to 
teach men that reason that this record is more than a 
fable. 

"I will instruct thee, moreover, concerning the 
book which beareth the name of Esaias. The learned 
now show unto us that many men did bear that name, 
and every one a little part hath written; how many 
it doth not yet appear. When the searching in the 
matter hath ended, it may be shown that peradventure 
a score of scribes had part in making the 
book as it now is. We are now assured that Esaias 
prophesied nothing concerning the sufferings and 
glory of Christ. He spake only of the sufferings of 
all Israel for the sins of King Ahaz. (Why Israel 
should be called to suffer because of wicked Ahaz's 
sins, or why Esaias did write of this, it doth not concern 
us.) The book speaketh nothing of Jesus Christ. 
This we say, and if any teach otherwise, he is thereby 
shown to be in ignorant company, with Paul and 
Peter and John, who have fallen into error, and teach 
old wives' fables, which the instructed reject. 

"We have, also, a deep knowledge of the truth of 
Daniel and his prophecy, which will greatly edify 
thee, and will satisfy those who doubt concerning the 
miracles. Daniel was a man acquainted with many 
strange secrets. He knew how to charm the lions 
that they should not devour him when he should be 
cast into their den. So he feared not to pray; and 
when he was thrown to the lions, he cast a spell over 
them, that they could not bite or hurt him. Thou 
seest he saved himself, and gave God the praise. The 
record of the three Hebrew children and their trial 
in the fiery furnace hath also been shown to be according 
to reason. It hath been made known unto 
us by the teachers of science at whom Paul doth only 
sneer, that at the center of the hottest fire there doth 
always remain a cool place which will neither burn nor 
scorch garments, nor flesh. These Hebrew children 
were aforetime instructed regarding this; and therefore 
they feared not the wrath or power of the king; 
and when cast into the fire they knew immediately the 
place of safety and so were protected. See how reason 
doth make clear things hard to be believed, 
brother.... 

"Finally, I declare unto thee the true explanation 
of the record of Jonah. He fled before the Lord that 
he might not perish at Nineveh. He had not sought 
that appointment and rebelled against going. When 
he took ship, the Lord ordered a vessel bearing the 
name "Great Fish" to follow Jonah's ship. So when 
the sailors did throw Jonah overboard he was picked 
up by the crew of the "Great Fish" and tarried with 
them three days. These earnestly persuaded him to 
accept his appointment, and had such weight with him 
that he consented, and so went to Nineveh. 

"Thou seest, brother, how our views do appeal to 



reason and sound judgment. I am assured that thou 
wilt gladly accept them, and assist us in spreading 
them, especially since Paul hath proven himself unable 
to lead the thinking classes of this great age. 
Thou mayest now be a leader in our school and get 
unto thyself a great name, for much learning, if thou 
dost act with us in this great warfare of the wise 
against the dull and ignorant. Paul hath had the help 
of Peter, John, James and Jude in this contention 
against us, but we faint not and continue to teach the 
people everywhere this doctrine, which maketh faith 
an easy matter. Meditate on these things I have 
written, and thy profiting will appear to all. When 
thou hast fully understood this, I will instruct thee 
in the correct knowledge of the gospel of Jesus Christ 
in another epistle. The salutation of me, Hermogenes, 
by mine own hand. Farewell." 

PROGRESS IN CHURCH FEDERATION ABROAD 
AND AT HOME. 



English Journals are noting and commenting upon 
the unusual conduct of the Rev. R. C. Fillingham 
of the Episcopal Church. He has recently been exchanging 
pulpits with Baptist and Congregational 
ministers. This is contrary, not only to usage, but 

R2964 : page 68 

to Episcopal law on the subject, and the query is respecting 

what action may be taken by the Episcopal 

authorities,— whether his course will be ignored, 

and thus indirectly sanctioned as being in the interest 

of Christian unity and fellowship, or whether he 

will be reproved, or dismissed, and thus the separating 

fence be kept intact. In his sermon in the Carleton 

Hill Baptist Church, Mr. Fillingham is reported 

by the English Journals, as follows:— 

"Mr. Fillingham took his text from Revelation, 
5th chapter, and part of the 10th verse: 'And hast 
made us unto our God kings and priests.' There 
had always, he said, been an ugly sound about 
priestcraft; it was a word of evil associations. It 
was connected with persecution and with human 
misery. If a number of men got hold of the idea 
that they alone had the truth, it was not unlikely but 
that they would persecute. But, again, it was an unwarrantable 
attempt to rule over the consciences of 
men. Every little curate, who had but just scraped 
through his theological college, claimed to have the 

R2964 : page 69 

keys of heaven and hell in his waistcoat pocket, 



whereas a Spurgeon and a Clifford were to be outside 
altogether. 

"After dwelling on these points, Mr. Fillingham 
declared such claims to be contemptible as well as 
dangerous. The truth was their Orders were no 
better than those of the Nonconformists. Their 
claims were preposterous. The first Archbishop of 
the Church of England was Archbishop Parker, and 
he was consecrated by Barlow. But all the evidence 
went to show that Barlow himself was never a bishop 
at all. He was appointed in 1536 to the bishopric of 
St. Asaph, and then to St. David's. But there was 
only one consecration of Bishops in that year— namely, 
on June 1 1th, and Barlow's name did not appear 
among them. Still further, Cromwell, the Vicar-General, 
addressed him as Bishop-Elect. Henry 
VIII, therefore, apparently made Barlow a Bishop 
by his mere word. Therefore, even from a sacramentarian 
point of view, Ritualism was a mere imposture. 
Priestcraft must be fought, and one of the best ways 
of fighting it was a union of Protestants of all 
denominations." 



Church federation is progressing in Great Britain. 
All the large Nonconformist bodies— all denominations 
of Protestants outside of the Episcopal 
Church— have effected a general union or co-operative 
arrangement as respects mission work, etc. This 
is supposed to be the forerunner of a still closer federation 
of interests. Local federations of Protestant 
denominations have been formed in this country, and 
seven or eight State Federations, but, so far as we 
are informed, the movement has not yet attained a 
general or national scope. Evidently the complete federation, 
which surely is to come, is still a few years 
in advance of us. The nearest approach to it, thus 
far, is represented in the "Second Annual Conference 
of the National Federation of Churches and 
Christian Workers," held in Washington City, February 
4 and 5, in Y.M.C.A. Hall. 

MADAME GUYON'S FULL SURRENDER TO THE LORD 



Madame Jeanne De La Mothe Guyon was educated 
in convents, saved at the foot of the cross in 
1668, sanctified in Notre Dame, witnessed for Jesus 
in the Court of Louis XIV., in France, Switzerland, 
and Italy, to bishops, priests, nuns and common people; 
was imprisoned for seven years, and died. 

Of her conversion day she said: "I bade farewell 
forever to assemblies which I had visited, to 
plays and diversions, dancing, unprofitable walks 



and parties of pleasure. The pleasures and amusements 
so much prized and esteemed by the world now 
appeared to me dull and insipid— so much so that I 
wondered how I ever could have enjoyed them." 
After making a full consecration she wrote: "I 
henceforth take Jesus Christ to be mine. I promise 
to receive him as a husband to me. And I give myself 
to him, unworthy though I am, to be his spouse. 
I ask of him, in this marriage of spirit, that I may be 
of the same mind with him— meek, pure, nothing in 
myself, and united in God's will. And, pledged as 
I am to be his, I accept, as a part of my marriage portion, 
the temptations and sorrows, the crosses and 
contempt which fell to him." Concerning her imprisonment, 
she wrote as follows: "I passed my 
time in great peace, content to spend the remainder 
of my life there, if such should be the will of God. I 
employed part of my time in writing religious songs. 
I and my maid, La Gautiere, who was with me in 
prison, committed them to heart as fast as I made 
them. Together we sang praises to Thee, O, our 
God! It sometimes seemed to me as if I were a little 
bird whom the Lord had placed in a cage, and that I 
had nothing to do now but to sing. The joy of my 
heart gave a brightness to the objects around me. 
The stones of my prison looked in my eyes like rubies. 
I esteemed them more than all the gaudy brilliancies 
of a vain world. My heart was full of that 
joy which thou givest to them who love Thee in the 
midst of their greatest crosses." 



R2964 : page 69 

GOD'S PROVIDENCES COOPERATE. 

-ACTS 8:29-39.-MARCH 16.- 

"With the heart man believeth unto righteousness, and with 
the mouth confession is made unto salvation."— Rom. 10:10. 

DIVINE PROVIDENCES in our experiences 

as Christians should be sought for, if we 

would find them and enjoy their blessings to 

the full. But this requires faith, in a larger measure 

than we at first possess; and the increase of faith requires 

knowledge and experience. Our lesson 

illustrates God's providential care over his people 

from two standpoints: (1) His care for those who 

are seeking the light of truth; his intention that their 

earnest longings for it shall be rewarded, and his provision 

that the truth shall reach them under favorable 

conditions. (2) The Lord's willingness to use in his 

service, as instruments of his providence, those of his 

consecrated people who put themselves in the proper 



condition for his service. 

Deacon Philip, the instrument of divine providence 
in starting the Ethiopian eunuch in the narrow 
way of discipleship— and through him possibly introducing 
the good tidings into Africa— we have already 
seen was just such a man as the Lord is pleased to 
use as his mouthpiece in the service of the truth. 
Having proven himself faithful in the inferior work 
of serving tables, he had been advanced, and been 
made an ambassador for God in the preaching of the 
Gospel at Samaria; and the present lesson shows 
him still further guided and used of the Lord in his 
blessed service. There is an encouraging lesson here 
for all who have the same spirit— the same desire to 
serve the Lord and his cause. Faithfulness in little 
things is sure to bring larger opportunities. 

We are not informed by what means the Lord 
"spake to Philip," sending him to the road in which 
he would find the eunuch's chariot. We may be 
sure however, that the indication was sufficiently 
clear to Philip to be more than a mere guess or impression. 
We are to remember, too, that it was at 
a time when the Lord used miraculous means of 
communication, more than at present— doubtless for 

R2964 : page 70 

the very purpose of establishing the faith of his servants 
as well as their work. Today we walk more 
by faith, less by sight and miracle. Yet so bright is 
the light of truth now shining upon the divine plan 
and Word that we may safely say that we have much 
advantage every way, even over those of that time. 
We are to remember that up to the time of this lesson 
there were no New Testament writings; nothing, 
therefore, aside from the Law and the Prophets to 
assist and guide the apostles and early evangelists 
except the more or less miraculous interpositions of 
God's providence. 

Even after we have learned of God's particular 
care for all of his people, we are inclined to surprise 
that a solitary individual should be so particularly 
cared for as was this eunuch;— that a special messenger 
should be sent to him for his instruction in 
righteousness. Very evidently divine providence 
does not guard the going of all mankind to this same 
degree. Very evidently there was something in the 
character of this eunuch, something in his heart-attitude 
toward God, that was pleasing and acceptable 
to the Lord, and caused the working of this miracle 
on his behalf— that he might have needed instruction 
in the truth. 

The eunuch belonged to the kingdom of Meroe, 
which lay on the right bank of the Nile River, from 
its junction with the Atbara— as far south as Khartoum, 
and thence to the east of the Blue Nile to the 



mountains of Abyssinia. He was a court officer, 
evidently deeply religious, who had come in contact 
with, and been impressed by, the Jewish religion; 
and in his religious fervor he had gone up to Jerusalem 
to worship, and to gain additional knowledge of 
the true God. His case, like that of the Samaritans 
and of Cornelius, indicates that this occurrence was 
after the close of Israel's "seventy weeks," of special 
favor, for this eunuch was not a Jew in the fullest 
sense,— eunuchs not being fully accepted as proselytes, 
nor granted the privileges of the congregation. 
(Deut. 23:1.) Up to this time the eunuch, like Cornelius 
and the believing Samaritans, had been a part 
of the Lazarus class, lying at the gate of Dives, desiring 
to be fed with some of the crumbs from the 
bountiful table of blessing and promises which God 
had spread for Israel. Now the change had come. 
The house of Israel had been cast off; the end of 
Israel's special favor as respects the Gospel had 

R2965 : page 70 

come; and the time for receiving the Lazarus class 
to Abraham's bosom had arrived. Philip, as an angel 
or messenger of the Lord, was sent to carry this 
representative of the Lazarus class to the arms of 
father Abraham, as a true child of Abraham, through 
faith. 

The eunuch had been to the head centre of the 
religion which he esteemed to be the true one. He 
had come away from Jerusalem with a manuscript copy 
of one of the holy prophets— Isaiah— a treasure in 
those times, costly. That his manuscript was written 
in the Greek language, and not in the Hebrew, 
seems to be indicated by the word Esaias, which is the 
Greek form of Isaiah. He was hungering and thirsting 
for the truth, and making his best possible endeavor 
to obtain it, as is evidenced by his purchase of 
the manuscript, and his long journey, and his reading. 
That he was doing more than simply reading,— that 
he was studying, is evidenced by his language to 
Philip. Can we wonder that God's special providences 
would be manifested toward such an one— toward a 
person in such a condition of heart, hungering and 
thirsting for the truth? We cannot wonder at it. It 
is in full accord with the Lord's promise, that such 
shall be filled; that such seekers shall find; that such 
knockers shall have the door of truth opened to them. 
Let us remember that we are under the care of the 
same God, and that he changes not; and let us learn 
the lesson that he is as well able today as ever to 
assist the sincere truth-seeker. 

Another lesson connected with this matter pertains 
to times and seasons. God could have directed 
the eunuch to the meeting of the Church at Jerusalem, 
and to the instructions of the apostles there. But 



this probably would not have been so favorable for 

the eunuch. After receiving the apostolic instruction 

he might have referred the matter to the scribes 

and Pharisees, and have received in return explanations 

more or less confusing. In the Lord's providence 

he quite likely heard something of the Christians, 

and their claims that Messiah had come and 

had been crucified, and he quite probably knew the 

other side of the story, that the chief priests and 

teachers claimed that the whole matter was a fraud, 

an imposition. Possibly these very thoughts had 

led him to procure the manuscript he was reading, 

and had brought him into the attitude of mind favorable 

for the reception of the truth when Philip expounded 

it. 

Let us learn from this, not only in respect to our 
own affairs, but also in respect to the general service 
of the truth, to trust implicitly in divine wisdom and 
power— to remember that the Lord knoweth them 
that are his, and that he knoweth how best to bring 
them in contact with the truth. Properly learned, this 
lesson will not slack our hands in the divine service; 
for true servants will still be anxious and ready to 
serve, as was Philip; but it will serve to strengthen 
our hearts and to take from us that fearfulness that 
is a hindrance to the peace of many of God's children. 
Let us not fear for the Lord's Word, but remember 
his declaration, through the Prophet, "My 
word, that goeth forth out of my mouth, shall not return 
unto me void; it shall accomplish that which 
I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I 
sent it."— Isa. 55:11. 

The chariot probably overtook and passed Philip 
in the road, the eunuch driving leisurely, in order that 
he might read. He was reading aloud, after the 
custom of that time and country, and according to 
the injunctions laid upon the people by the Jewish 
teachers. Indeed, it was one of the Jewish rules that 
the faithful, in traveling, should read if they had no 
companionship. We are not informed how the spirit 
told Philip to hail the eunuch; possibly in the same 
miraculous way in which he was sent to this road, or 
possibly having been sent to this road he was on the 
look-out for the object of his mission, and hearing the 
eunuch reading from the prophecy, Philip may have 
understood at once that this was the favored person, 

R2965 : page 71 

and a favorable time for delivering the message to 
the service of which his life had been consecrated. 
This gives us a suggestion— all of the Lord's people, 
in proportion as they desire to be the servants of 
the truth, should be continually on the alert to note 
opportunities for service, and should expect to be 
guided and used of the Lord. All of the Lord's people 



are ministers, servants, of the truth; and each 

should seek to use every opportunity presenting itself, 

knowing not which may be specially prospered 

of the Lord. Wherever we see evidences of devotion 

to the Lord and to his Word, we should be on the 

alert to extend a helping hand. We should, as 

Philip did, seek an opportunity for conversing with 

such, with a view to giving them the help which they 

need, the very assistance which the Lord has extended 

to us through some channel. We are to be 

on the alert to pass along the blessing which we have 

received, and to esteem that this is the chief business 

of life with those who have consecrated themselves 

to the service of the King of kings. 

Philip's inquiry, "Understandest thou what thou 
readest?" may not always be well received; but it was 
a very direct way of approaching his errand. It is 
well to use tact, but we have the thought that many 
of the Lord's people are inclined to use rather too 
much tact, and are not sufficiently direct in their endeavors 
to present the Gospel message. Had Philip 
been too much under the control of this wrong sentiment 
respecting tact, he might have talked to the 
eunuch quite a while about the weather and the 
crops; about his home in Ethiopia; the peace and 
prosperity of that country; its exports and imports; 
and the religious status of the people; and might thus 
gradually have gotten his hearer's mind quite off the 
most important of all subjects. Considering that he 
heard him and knew the subject of his study, we cannot 
think of a better introduction to his message than 
the method and language which Philip adopted: 
"Understandest thou what thou readest?" 

This was a test question, so to speak. If the 
eunuch did have an understanding of what he was 
reading he would take no offence at this, but would 
gladly have said, "Yes, friend, I thank God that I do, 
and the knowledge is very precious to me. Do you 
also understand it?" But had he been of the wrong 
condition of heart his answer might have been, with 
more or less manifestation of offence, "What is that 
to you? Mind your own business." Or had he 
been of a hypocritical cast of mind, like the Pharisees 
to whom Jesus spoke, he would have professed 
a knowledge of the subject, and then, to cover his 
own ignorance of it, he would have made some general 
remarks and have turned the subject into another 
channel. We are not to expect those who are 
in the Pharisaical condition to receive the truth from 
us, any more than from the Lord. We are to know, 
according to the Lord's Word, that the truth is purposely 
hidden from all not in the right attitude of 
heart to receive it — it is indefinite, indistinct, unintelligible 
to them. This is one difficulty with the 
teachers of churchianity today; like the Pharisees and 
scribes and chief priests of old, they say, "Are we 



blind also?" They claim to know; but we know that 
they know that they don't know. Therefore, as our 
Lord said to their prototypes, their blindness continues; 
for no one can expect to be taught of God 
while in that self-sufficient and dishonest condition of 
mind which boasts of knowledge and the faith which 
it lacks. --John 5:40,41. 

All those to whom the Lord specially sends the 
message of his grace during this Gospel age are in 
considerable degree like this eunuch of our lesson- 
earnest, honest, truth-seekers, not afraid to acknowledge 
that they do not know, and not afraid nor 
ashamed to receive whatever assistance the Lord may 
provide. The eunuch did not stop to inquire of 
Philip, "Are you a priest? or a Pharisee? or a Doctor 
of the Law?" It was sufficient to him that he held in 
his hand what he believed to be a message from God, 
and that he knew it contained various statements, 
promises, etc., which he did not understand. He believed 
that the God who gave this prophecy was both 
able and willing to furnish an interpretation of it, 
and he was seeking that interpretation; and whoever 
could give such an interpretation as would shed light 
upon his questions would by that means be proven 
a teacher of God, a servant of the truth, a light-bearer. 

The eunuch's answer implied this, when he said, 
"How can I understand, unless some man should 
guide me?" So earnest was he in his quest of the 
truth that the bare suggestion of assistance implied 
in Philip's question was sufficient to arouse fully his 
interest; and he entreated Philip to have a seat with 
him in his chariot, and thus grant him the benefit of 
whatever information could be given. We are not 
surprised that a heart so noble, and yet so humble 
and teachable, should be specially favored of the Lord, 
and have a messenger sent specially to him for his 
instruction, while others by the million were passed 
by— not esteemed worthy. It is the same today; 
and while the Lord does not generally direct his people 
in the miraculous manner in which he directed 
Philip to the eunuch, we nevertheless have general 
instructions along the same line; viz., "Preach the 
Gospel to the meek." "He that hath an ear, let him 
hear."-Isa. 61:1; Matt. 13:9; Rev. 2:7. 

Our message, as the Prophet declares, is to bind 
up broken hearts, and not to break hearts: we are to 
preach to the meek, and not to the froward, the Gospel 
of Christ. The hard hearts, and the froward, 
God will deal with in another way. He will break 
them upon the anvil of affliction and trouble and discipline 
in his own due time and manner. Meantime, 
in this Gospel age, he is seeking for the Bride 
amongst those who are already broken, and already 
to some extent meek and teachable. We should not 
waste our time in futile efforts, contrary to this 
Scriptural rule. Let those who have not the Gospel, 



but who have merely a message of reformation, 
preach political reforms, social reforms, moral reforms. 
The Lord's Word to his consecrated servants, 
the Royal Priesthood, is, "Preach the good tidings 
to the meek, bind up the broken hearted!" 

It was evidently not of chance, but of providence 
that the eunuch had under consideration the particular 
part of Isaiah's prophecy which refers to our Lord 
as the Lamb before his shearers opening not his 

R2966 : page 72 

mouth in protest; telling about his humiliation, and 
how his life would be taken from the earth; and instituting 
a query respecting his posterity. No wonder 
the poor eunuch was mystified; no wonder the 
Jews were all mystified. Unquestionably this prophecy, 
like the majority of prophecies, could be but imperfectly 
comprehended until fulfilled— could be 
understood only in the light of its fulfilment, and then 
only by those in a proper attitude of heart and under 
the instruction, the guidance, of the holy spirit. 
We should notice in this connection, (1) that 
while the Scriptures are "the sword of the spirit, the 
Word of God," able to make wise, they cannot be 
understood until the Lord's due time. (2) They can 
only be understood under the leading and instruction 
of the holy spirit, and yet (3) the holy spirit was not 
exercised upon the truth-seeker either through the 
Scriptures nor through any mental process, but 
through the living representative of the spirit- 
through the Gospel message, delivered by a fellow-servant. 
The true child of God, the real truth-seeker, 
following the proper lines, and properly trusting 
to the Lord, according to his Word, will neither 
ignore nor reject the assistance which God has been 
pleased to render through teachers in the Church. He 
will merely seek to find such teachers as God shall 
raise up, and the distinction between these and sectarian 
teachers; and one of his best, safest and surest 
methods of knowing the teachers whom the Lord will 
raise up, will be by their ability to make simple, clear, 
plain, the Word of God,— "written aforetime for our 
admonition." This was the only credential offered 
by Philip in his ministry of the truth. He had been 
taught of God through the apostles, and was now 
able, in turn, to communicate to the hearing ear of 
the eunuch the simple story of how Christ had come 
into the world to redeem the world, had died for 
man's sins, had arisen, and ascended up to glory: that 
now, meantime, before blessing the world through 
Christ according to promise, God was calling out an 
elect "little flock" to be joint-heirs with Jesus in the 
Kingdom; and that as soon as this election should 
be completed the Messiah (Jesus, the Head, and the 
Church, his body) would be manifested in glory and 



in ruling and blessing power to the world of mankind, 
—the long looked-for Messiah, whose work had 
been foretold by all the holy prophets since the world 
began. 

Philip undoubtedly further explained to the 
eunuch, that those who accepted Christ as their 
Savior, and who desired to become his disciples, taking 
up their cross to follow him, should give their 
assent to this matter by baptism. Apparently it did 
not take the eunuch long to decide what his course 
should be, and his readiness of heart to follow the 
Lamb, whithersoever he would lead, is indicated by 
his promptness to be baptized. 

Philip was ready to receive him as a fellow-member 
of the Church of Christ, and ready to give him the 
symbol of introduction into the body of Christ— baptism 
—as soon as he gave evidence of having accepted 
the Lord, and having made consecration to him. He 
made no request that the eunuch learn the catechism, 
nor that he confess something else such as well-meaning 
but mistaken men in the dark ages promulgated 
as necessary, and as explanatory of the Bible. 
Neither did he say, "Now I will write your name, 
and you will be considered a member of the Church 
on that account, and I will procure for you some 
authority to preach the Gospel in Ethiopia." No; 
at that time the subject had not been confused and 
befogged as now. Philip preached the Gospel in its 
simplicity, and the eunuch received it in like manner; 
and with the Gospel itself went the right and authority 
to declare it. "He that hath my word let him 
speak my word." (Jer. 23:28.) All who have received 
the anointing of the spirit, the unction from 
the holy one, are thus recognized as members of the 
"royal priesthood," and fully commissioned to tell 
forth the good tidings. 

This is in full accord with our Golden Text 
which does not say, "With the mouth a creed is confessed," 
which is neither understood by the head nor 
believed in the heart, and thus a membership is 
gained in a nominal church of human establishment, 
and without divine sanction or authority as to name 
or methods. It does state, on the contrary, most 
simply and beautifully, that whatever is believed that 
has any force or weight in the Lord's estimation is 
that which is believed by the individual himself, in 
his own heart, and he can believe nothing in his heart 
that he does not to some extent comprehend. It is 
not a belief of mysteries, but a belief of facts, and 
subsequently coming to a comprehension of things 
which are still mysteries to "those that are without," 
—outside the true Church. 

The second part of the text is evidently as important 
as the first part: "With the mouth confession 
is made unto salvation." This implies that a 
dumb believer will never make his calling and his 



election sure. We do not refer to those who are naturally 
dumb; but understand the word "mouth" in 
the same sense that we speak of the "ears" of our 
heart, and the "eyes of our understanding." A heart 
that sees and hears the grace of God, and that truly 
accepts the same, must in due time become so enthused 
with the things heard and seen, that it cannot 
refrain from some outward manifestation of its joy 
and peace and hope and trust and thankfulness. As 
the apostles declared, "We cannot but speak the 
things which we have seen and heard." All Christians 
who, having received the light of truth, having 
seen the grace of God in the divine plan, having 
tasted that the Lord is gracious, having heard the 
wonders of "so great salvation, which began to be 
spoken by our Lord, and was confirmed unto us by 
them that heard him"— these must not, cannot, keep 
silence nor put their light under a bushel. If they do, 
it means the extinguishment of their light, the stoppage 
of their growth; and persevered in this would 
ultimately mean to them destruction in the Second 
Death;— for those who are ashamed of the Lord and 
of his Word, after they have discerned clearly, not 
only are not fit for the Kingdom, but of such the 
Lord would be ashamed under any and all conditions. 
-Luke 9:26. 



R2966 : page 73 

AWAKE THOU THAT SLEEPEST, AND ARISE. 

-EPH. 5:1 1-21. -MARCH 23.- 

"Be not drunk with wine, wherein is 
excess; but be filled with the spirit." 

OUR LESSON inculcates the transforming 

tendency of the truth. Like all of the New 

Testament epistles, it is addressed, not to the 

wicked, not to the worldly, but to Christians. The 

Lord's spirit, the spirit of truth and of righteousness, 

received as a result of faith in the Redeemer and consecration 

to him as a follower, a pupil, is the beginning 

of a new life, which starting in the will, should 

grow, develop, increase, until it permeates and fills 

all the avenues of life— its affections, its ambitions, 

its cravings. 

Today, as in the Apostle's day, those who have become 
the Lord's people through faith and consecration 
need to be informed respecting the possibilities 
of their new life, else they may permit it to lie comparatively 
dormant— permit it to be covered up, and 
finally to be extinguished, smothered by the old nature 
—the will of the flesh, its affections, its ambitions, 



its cravings. While, therefore, it is important 
that conversion should take place— a turning of the 
will, the intention, from sin to holiness, from self to 
God,— it is very important that conversion be not 
esteemed to be the end, but merely the beginning of 
the Christian's course. It is, of course, important 
that the begetting should be of the truth, and not of 
error, so that the new mind may be of the proper 
kind; but even when properly begotten of the truth, 
as a child of the Kingdom, it is essential that the 
new creature shall be nourished first with the "milk," 
subsequently with the "meat" of the truth, which God 
has provided for this very purpose. 

New converts, like new-born babes, are much inclined 
to sleep; but while this in nature is profitable, 
in grace it is dangerous; for the new creature to sleep 
in self-satisfaction means death; the begetting of the 
spirit has been for the very purpose of energizing; 
and hence, the Apostle here calls upon such "babes 
in Christ," fallen asleep under the spirit of the world 
and of the nominal church, and thus in danger of 
complete failure in the way of character development, 
saying,— "Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from 
the dead, and Christ shall shine upon thee." (R.V.) 
The "new creature" is to recognize the fact, that the 
whole world is dead;— not merely under a death 
sentence, nor merely figuratively dead— but in a death 
condition, as respects the highest and noblest things 
of righteousness and truth. Our begetting of the 
holy spirit of truth gives us merely a first suggestion 
of our own condition by nature, and the condition 
of the whole world, in trespasses and sin— in thought, 
word, and deed. It is necessary that the mind 
should first be awakened to seek for other things; it 
is necessary that the ear should hear the voice of him 
who now speaks unto us from above— the anointed 
Head of the anointed body; it is necessary that the 
eyes of our understanding should be opened that we 
may see the true situation of things; and all this is 
well represented in the Apostle's figure of 
awakening. 

We regret to say that the general tendency in 
Christendom is not to awaken the sleepers, but rather 
to lull them to sleep. This, however, is not always, 
nor generally, done with a view to serving the adversary, 

R2967 : page 73 

and permitting the new life to become extinct, 
just as not many nurses and mothers wilfully 
contribute to the weaknesses, diseases, and death of 
the infants under their charge. In both cases good 
intentions are often thwarted by ignorance of the 
governing laws. Those who occupy the position of 
teachers in the various denominations, while not devoid 
of good intentions as respects the babe in 



Christ, lack the theoretical and practical knowledge 
which they should inculcate— they are babes in spiritual 
matters themselves, as the Apostle wrote in one 
of his epistles,— "For when for the time ye ought to 
be teachers, ye have need that one teach you again 
which be the first principles [rudiments] of the oracles 
of God."-Heb. 5:12. 

When the believing, converted, consecrated, begotten, 
sleeping, "new creature" has been awakened 
—when the eyes and ears of his understanding have 
been opened, as above suggested, to see the true conditions 
of the world, and to realize himself as a "new 
creature" in Christ,— his next duty is to arise. His 
arising from the dead signifies the activity of the new 
mind, the new will, in directing and controlling his 
mortal body. This implies effort; the putting forth 
of all the energy of the new creature. It requires 
no effort to sleep, or to lie after one gets awake; but 
to rise requires the exercise of every muscle. Arising 
is not an instantaneous act, but a process requiring 
one movement after another, until it is fully accomplished; 
so also is the arising of the "new creature" 
from the dead conditions of sin and trespass 
against the laws of righteousness and truth and purity; 
it requires his every effort, and is a work of time. 
Indeed all experienced Christians who have followed 
the Apostle's injunction to arise from the dead, have 
found that it requires days, months, years, of energetic 
effort to rise up above, superior to the fallen 
tendencies of his own flesh,— common to the world of 
mankind. He finds that even after he has risen 
fully up, so that he does not wilfully practice sin, nor 
countenance it in any sense or degree, he still must 
be on his guard lest he be entrapped by the weaknesses 
of his mortal body; or by the allurements of 
the world; or by the temptations of the adversary; 
and thus stumble again over some of the things of 
sin and death from which he had arisen by the Lord's 
grace. 

The Apostle in the previous verses has explained 
some of these things of sin and death to which the 
Lord's people should become thoroughly awake, and 
from which they should arise completely. In verse 3, 
he mentions some evils which should be "not so much 
as named among you— as becometh saints." In vs. 4, 
he mentions "foolish talking" as among the things 
of sin and death from which the Lord's people must 
arise. While we believe that the saints will make 
most progress themselves, and be most helpful to 
others, by avoiding all kinds of light and unedifying 
conversation, and while we strongly recommend this 
course to all, nevertheless, we do not understand the 
Apostle here to refer to what might be designated as 
harmless jokes or levity. From the text we understand 
him to refer to coarse, lascivious talking, and to 



R2967 : page 74 

a more refined jesting with half-suggestions of profanity 
or vice, sometimes practiced by the educated 
and witty. 

We are to arise from all such low conditions of 
thought, word, and deed as we find prevalent about 
us; because as children of God, begotten by his spirit, 
we can have no fellowship with these things. We 
must regard them as the Apostle suggests, as "unfruitful 
works of darkness." The Apostle by this word, 
unfruitful, no doubt intended to give us the thought 
that sin is destructive instead of productive— that its 
tendency is toward death. On the contrary, the 
tendency of the new mind of Christ is toward fruit-bearing 
development, blessing, uplifting, refreshment. 
Not only is this true in the individual Christian, 
but as our Lord's words suggest, the individual 
Christian exercises a preservative influence on others; 
wherever he may live he is a shining light dispelling 
the darkness of sin; he is the salt of the earth, preserving 
the mass from corruption. The moral standing 
of the civilized world today, is unquestionably 
largely due to the indirect influence of the holy spirit 
in God's people;— which as the Apostle declares, reproves 
the world. Our reproof of sin may always 
be through the living epistles of our daily lives which, 
as bright and shining lights, should ever reprove by 
manner, look, act, and tone, everything tending 
toward darkness and sin,— "Let your light so shine 
before men that they seeing your good works may 
glorify your Father in Heaven." Occasionally it 
may be proper, and still more occasionally it may be 
duty, for us to speak or to act in opposition to darkness; 
but the light of a godly life, testifying for the 
truth and exhibiting the holy spirit, is certainly one 
of the most forceful reproofs of sin that can be 
administered. 

While passing, we might have in mind the 
Apostle's words, "unfruitful works of darkness," laying 
emphasis upon the last word. Sin is figuratively 
represented by darkness; and, additionally, it generally 
prefers literal darkness for the accomplishment of its 
purposes. The Lord's children are children of the 
light, and are to walk in the light of truth; they are 
to have their hearts enlightened and their minds so 
illuminated as to make them burning and shining 
lights in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, 
blinded and darkened by the Prince of Darkness. 
And all such while endeavoring to arise from 
the dead and to live separate from the world are 
recommended to walk in the light of truth; and so 
far as possible to live in the light actually,— to see 
that their homes are well lighted,— recognizing that 
even the natural light is a foe to the darkness of sin. 

The Apostle suggests the necessity of taking the 



various steps above outlined, before the Christian will 
get fully into the light himself. It is after he has 
arisen from the dead by the Lord's help, by the help 
of the brethren, by the assistance of the exceeding 
great and precious promises of the Word, by the 
indwelling spirit of the Word;— after he has arisen 
from the dead and indeed while he is arising from the 
state of sin and death, while he is attempting to bring 
his members into subjection to the new life, a new 
light is shining upon him— his light is increasing, his 
knowledge of the Lord, his knowledge of sin, his 
knowledge of righteousness, his appreciation of truth 
and righteousness "in the inward parts," as the 
prophet expresses it. The light shining upon him, 
and deep into the recesses of his heart, may sometimes 
cause distress, as he finds that his own natural 
weaknesses and imperfections are even greater than 
he had at first been aware of; nevertheless, as a child 
of the light, begotten by the Father of lights, he loves 
the right, and hates the sin; and the more clearly 
the light shines upon him and shows him the blemishes 
of his own mortal body, the more he runs for 
and strives for the perfection which the Lord assures 
him he shall attain to in the actual resurrection— of 
which the present "rising to walk in newness of life," 
is but the figure. 

The Apostle, progressing with the thought before 
us, declares that the one who thus arises from the 
dead is not even then to stand still. He must walk- 
not after or toward the flesh and its standard, but after 
and toward the spirit and its standard. And he will 
need to walk circumspectly— with careful scrutiny 
of each footstep. The Apostle suggests that any 
other course than this would be foolish. We are to 
remember that our adversary was more disposed to 
let us alone while we were asleep, but that now, when 
we are awake and seeking to walk after the spirit, 
he will be on the alert to ensnare and entrap us;— 
hence the need of our circumspection. The Lord 
gives us light, not only on our own characters, and 
upon sin and righteousness in general, but, additionally, 
he gives us light upon the road we are to 
travel. This light upon our pathway is the light 
shining from the Scriptures of which the Prophet declares, 
"Thy Word is a lamp to my feet, a lantern to 
my footsteps." He who neglects the lamp, neglects 
one of the very important means of walking circumspectly. 
And alas, how many Christian people 
today, with the Bible in their homes, are neglecting 
to trim and use it as a lamp;— if not standing in the 
dark they are walking in the darkness, stumbling, or 
in danger of stumbling, continually. Let us remember 
the importance of this lamp, and use it; to the intent 
that ours may be the "path of the just, shining more 
and more unto the perfect day." 

Thus we are to redeem the time— to purchase 



opportunities for the new creature and its interests 
and concerns, at the expense of the old nature. We as 
new creatures are to exchange the things of darkness 
for the things of light; the opportunities for sowing 
to the flesh for the opportunities of sowing to the 
spirit. The opportunities must be thus purchased 
else we will have none: if we give way to the inclinations 
of the flesh, its appetites and desires, it will consume 
all there is of time and opportunity, strength 
and influence, and leave nothing for the new 
creature,— "because the days are evil;" that is because 
they are unfavorable to spiritual progress. 
They present thousands of temptations for worldly 
pleasure and worldly ease and worldly fame and 
worldly progress;— and thus they multiply the tests 
which come upon us as "new creatures." We must 
remember that the Lord desires that these tests shall 
demonstrate the degree of our love, the degree of our 

R2967 : page 75 

sincerity, the degree of our consecration to him: the 
more our love for the Lord and for righteousness, the 
greater will be our zeal in snatching time, opportunity, 
influence from the flesh and consecrating it to spiritual 
things. In so doing we will not be unwise, but 
will display our understanding of the Lord's will.— 
Verses 16,17. Unless we are awake we cannot arise 
to present newness of life; and unless this arising to 
newness of life is accomplished we cannot share in 
the First Resurrection. 

The Golden Text of the lesson is the 18th verse; 
in it the Apostle contrasts two spirits. Under present 
conditions men naturally look for something to 
exhilarate them, to refresh, to revive— to counteract 

R2968 : page 75 

life's trials, burdens and sorrows: many of the dead 

in trespasses and sins find this stimulant and relief 

from care, in various intoxicating stimulants,— wine, 

spirituous liquors, opium, etc.; but the child of God 

is to look in a totally different direction for his stimulant, 

his exhilaration, his relief from care and trouble 

—he is to be "filled with the spirit" of the Lord. He 

is not merely to have a little of it, but is to become intoxicated 

with it to the extent that it will change the 

general appearance of all his surroundings and conditions 

in life. And cannot each advanced Christian, 

filled with the Lord's spirit testify that this is true?— 

that all things are changed from the new standpoint 

and its new hopes, new ambitions, new relationships? 

Can he not say, "Old things have passed away, all 

things have become new?" What need has he for 

the wine cup to drown his troubles, or smother his 

sorrows? He knows from observation if not from experience 



that all such exhilaration and oblivion to 

sorrow brings an after effect of pain: he knows also 

from experience and observation that to be filled 

with the Lord's spirit need not be a temporary oblivion 

to sorrow, but a permanent one— that,— "Earth 

has no sorrows that Heaven cannot cure;"— that even 

the deepest pains and sorrows of the heart are 

more than counterbalanced and cancelled by the joys 

of the Lord secured through the possession of a fullness 

of his spirit. 

The lightness of heart of the intoxicated "dead 
in trespasses and sin" often leads to bacchanalian 
revelry and song, repulsive even to the same person 
when sober; but the filling of the spirit of the Lord 
leads to songs and rejoicings, not only with the lips 
but with the heart,— refreshing, comforting, and uplifting, 
not only to the singer but also to the hearer. 
It is this "new song" in the heart that constitutes the 
Christian a separate and distinct being from all others 
about him. "Thou hast put a new song in my mouth, 
even thy loving kindness, O Lord!" Because it is in 
the heart, therefore, it must be in the mouth also, 
and must influence all the affairs of life; for we cannot 
but speak the things which have so wonderfully uplifted 
and refreshed our souls. And the speaking of 
these things is the proclamation of the Gospel, 
—"good tidings of great joy which shall be to all 
people." 

In our new attitude, figuratively risen from the 
dead and walking in newness of life with the Lord 
our Redeemer and Head, all of life's affairs have a 
new coloring. Not only can we sing,— 

"Sweet prospects, sweet birds and sweet flowers, 
Have all gained new sweetness to me. 
but we can glory in tribulation also, and give thanks 
for these, as well as life's blessings, to the Heavenly 
Father, in the name of our Lord Jesus; knowing, having 
the conviction, the assurance, that life's disciplines 
are working out for us a "far more exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory." And not only so, but, this 
dependence upon the Lord and filling with his spirit 
makes us humble; so that we do not think of ourselves 
above what we ought to think, but think soberly. 
It is in view of the humility of this class that 
the Apostle suggests that they submit themselves 
one to another in the reverence of the Lord. Those 
who have the Lord's spirit will have the brotherly 
kindness which is a part of it; and will be quite willing 
to defer to each other's preferences in many 
things— in all things not contrary to the principles of 
righteousness,— in all things in harmony with reverence 
to the Lord, his Word, and the principles it 
inculcates. 

It may not be amiss here to remind the brethren 
that the Scriptures show two kinds of symbolic or 
figurative intoxications: the one above described, filling 



with the spirit of the Lord and its joys, and peace, 
and comfort;— the results of the fruitage of the vine 
which the Heavenly Father planted, of which Christ 
is the central stock, and of which his followers are 
all "branches." The other wine is a counterfeit, an 
illicit wine; it is not produced by the vine of the 
Father's planting, but from the grapes of the "vine 
of the earth." It is of this wine that the Lord tells 
us Great Babylon has made all the nations drunken 
—the wine of her inconsistency, of her infidelity. 
This is the wine or spirit of the world,— of 
Churchianity. 

Looking all about us we fear that many, who 
think they are filled with the holy spirit of the truth, 
are really filled with this intoxication of Churchianity. 
Those intoxicated with this wine will shortly be 
aroused to a realization that it was sadly adulterated, 
and the effects will be painful. Those who are intoxicated 
with this wine of Churchianity are rejoicing 
not in the cup of the world and of devils, not in 
gross sins, but nevertheless not in the spiritual things. 
They glory each in the prosperity of his own sect, 
they are generally intoxicated with love for sectarianism, 
so that worldly persons, dead in trespasses 
and sins are often loved and brothered by those intoxicated 
with this adulterated spirit, while saints are 
spurned and treated as enemies because of faithfulness 
to God in rebuking sectarian Churchianity and 
its doctrinal falsities. 

Let us, dear brethren, beware of the natural wine 
and its drunkenness,— of the cup of devils, gross sins 
and immoralities; let us beware of the still more deceptive 
wine of Babylon's cup of mixture which has 
a form of godliness, in which church and world and 
lodge combinations tend to stupefy and to give illicit 
joy; let us, however, having made sure of the Lord's 
cup, drink thereof and be filled with the spirit of our 
Master and with his joys. 

page 75 

QUARTERLY REVIEW. -MARCH 30. 



Golden Text:— "Therefore let all the house of Israel know 
assuredly, that God hath made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, 
both Lord and Christ."-Acts 2:36. 



R2968 : page 76 

SANCTIFIED THROUGH A KNOWLEDGE OF THE TRUTH. 
-ACTS 9:l-20.-APRIL 6.- 



"Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted 

out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence 

of the Lord; and he shall send Jesus Christ, which before 

was preached unto you; whom the heaven must receive until 

the times of restitution of all things, which God 

hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets 

since the world began."— Acts 3:19-21. 

CONVERSION is a proper enough word 
to use respecting the change of course necessary 
for Jews to make in becoming 
Christians. The word is used in a totally different 
sense, however, today, when we refer to the conversion 
of the dissolute and unbelieving to faith and 
obedience as disciples of Christ. Any radical change 
or revolution of thought or conduct is not improperly 
called conversion. It is well that this point be 
clearly enunciated, because the misapprehension is 
so general. Paul's conversion, for instance, is likened 
to the conversion of sinners, strangers, aliens and 
foreigners from God; whereas it more nearly resembled 
the conversion of a Christian of today from 
opposition to present truth to its love and service. 
Such conversions today are quite frequent— many 
who once burned Millennial Dawn now love it, and 
are doing all in their power to spread abroad its teachings, 
its views of the divine character and plan, its 
presentation of Messiah and his work, past and future. 
The change, or conversion of such persons is acknowledged 
to be remarkable— things they once 
hated now they love— things they once loved now 
they abominate— old things are become new to them, 
from the new standpoint,— the new light upon the 
divine plan which has shined into their hearts. 
Saul of Tarsus, the bitter enemy of the Lord 
Jesus and his followers, was, at the same time, a zealous 
servant of God; and his persecutions of the truth, 
as he himself assures us, were undertaken and prosecuted 
with zeal, because he thought that thus he did 
God service. He was a good man according to his 
light— but that light was a dim one. It was because 
he was at heart honest, sincere, good, loyal to the 
Lord, that a special miracle was wrought for the opening 
of the eyes of his understanding— that he might 
see the truth. His sincerity is amply attested by the 
promptness of his obedience as soon as his mental 
eyes were opened. He changed not as respected his 
zeal for God and his cause, but merely in the direction 
in which that zeal was exercised, and in the manner of 
its exercise, after it was subjected to the mind of 
Christ through the holy spirit received. So today 
while we have the Scriptural assurance that "None 
of the wicked shall understand," we have also the 
assurance that "The wise shall understand." The 
"wise" are not the "wicked," and we esteem those 



who have manifested a bitter opposition toward present 
truth to be not "wicked" at heart, but deceived, 
blinded. 

We confidently expect that many of this class 
will yet be found amongst the "wise" to whom it shall 
be granted to understand the glorious things of the 
divine plan now being revealed through the Scriptures. 
It will be revealed to them because they are 
not of the wicked; but are like Saul of Tarsus, true 
children of God, whose zeal for him has been misdirected, 
misguided, misused. Some may kick against 
the pricks of facts, evidence, conscience, etc., longer 
than others; but eventually the Lord will grant to 
each of them some experience, or trial, the bitter experience 
of which will prepare them to see the light, 
the truth, in the right direction. Thus many of them 
sing,— "E'en though it be a cross that raiseth me." 

Saul's father was a Roman citizen; probably a 
man of wealth and influence: he was a Jew of the 
holiness sect called Pharisees— the most exact and 
rigid in respect to the divine law. His son named 
after Saul, the first king of Israel, was also given a 

R2969 : page 76 

Roman name, Paul, because of his father's Roman 

citizenship. The Apostle's reference to having suffered 

the loss of all things for Christ's sake, is understood 

to imply that he had been disinherited by his 

father because of his acceptance of Jesus as the Messiah. 

Quite evidently he was poor in the beginning 

of his ministry, as is evident from his laboring at tent-making 

while preaching. The fact that subsequently 

the record represents him as a man of considerable 

influence, and with one or more servants, is considered 

by many to justify the inference that at a later 

date he inherited property, possibly by reason of his 

father's death. In no other way can his "own hired 

house" in Rome, and his influence with officials, shipmasters, 

etc., be accounted for;— little attention and 

consideration are given to a pauper prisoner. 

As to Paul's personal appearance: An iron medal 
was recently found which purported to give a likeness. 
There is also a Roman tablet of about the fourth 
century, which shows Paul seated in a curule chair; 
both represent him as of fine appearance, somewhat 
bald, with beard, and a fine open countenance; about 
medium stature and weight. In the "Acts of Paul 
and Thecla," the first Christian romance, written about 
A.D. 150, there is a description of Paul which is 
probably the best, and a true tradition. In this he 
is described as "small in size, bald-headed, bandy-legged, 
well built, with eyebrows meeting; rather 
long nosed; with motions full of grace, for sometimes 
he seemed like a man, and sometimes like an angel. 
His manner was singularly winning." Very evidently 



his good education and contact with people in the 
higher walks of life gave him that grace and ease of 
manner and speech he manifested so conspicuously 
in the presence of the many high officials with whom 
he came in contact in various ways, as the representative 
of the Lord. 

Our lesson connects with the narrative of Philip: 
while the latter was preaching Christ, Saul was breathing 
out threatenings against all of "this way," and 
doing all that he could to stamp out Christianity. In-as-much 
as the persecution had caused the scattering 
of believers, Saul was pursuing them— going 
even outside the province of Judea in his zeal to crush 
out that which he believed to be dangerous heresy. 
Some may wonder how he could be at heart loyal to 
the Lord, and yet in mind be so bitter against the 
Lord's faithful. Let us suggest how the matter probably 
appeared to Saul's mind: Doubtless he was 
full of the Jewish sentiment respecting Messiah, respecting 
his nation, Israel; he considered it a certain 
and unquestionable fact that the Pharisees represented 
God and all the glorious prophecies and 

R2969 : page 77 

traditions of the nation; and that as Jehovah had favored 
this nation for now these many centuries, his 
favor, undoubtedly, must still be with it; so that if 
he had any further revelations to make they would 
undoubtedly come through the scribes and pharisees 
who "sit in Moses' seat"— as representatives of God 
and of the Law. He expected a Messiah of dignity 
and wealth and social standing in the nation;— if born 
in the natural way at all to be of one of the best 
families. He expected him to establish the dignity 
of Israel upon a plane similar to, but higher than that 
of Solomon;— that he would be a great leader and 
commander to his people, who would successfully 
carry them through every difficulty and opposition 
like as did Moses, Joshua, David,— but still greater, 
still grander, still more successful. 

It is surely difficult for us to imagine how absurd 
would be the claims of Jesus, to a mind filled with 
such expectations. Jesus had neither wealth nor 
social standing nor influence amongst his own people; 
he was despised and rejected by the religious 
chiefs and elders of the nation Moses represented; 
he could have no power or influence whatever with 
the Roman Emperor or others— in the way of establishing 
Israel as the chief nation of the world, 
whose laws should ultimately extend to every nation, 
carrying with them the foretold Messianic blessings. 
No, from Paul's standpoint Jesus was a fraud, a deceiver, 
a false Messiah, his disciples were crack-brained 
dupes, and their doctrines were calculated 
to bring odium upon the religious rulers, who represented 



Moses in the nation,— calculated to stir up 
strife and division amongst the people and to mislead 
them and turn their minds entirely away from Moses 
and the Law and the hopes of Israel; and thus to hinder 
the good cause of God which had been gradually 
developing for centuries. 

It was Paul's zeal for God and his cause that made 
him a persecutor, and not his love for persecution itself, 
—nor any brutal desires that gloried in the sufferings 
of others. His impulse was duty— toward 
God and toward his nation; for if the false doctrines 
spread it meant to him a spreading of opposition to 
both, and temporarily, at least, a frustration of the 
hopes of Israel— putting further off the glorious day 
of blessing for which all Israel had longed and hoped. 
Similarly we find today noble Christian people opposing 
the present truth in the very same spirit. It 
is not that they love or appreciate persecution, but 
that they believe they are doing God service,— that 
the promulgation of present truth means the shaking 
if not the overthrow of all the religious systems in 
which they trust— which they believe to be of divine 
origin, and through which they are hoping to bring 
about the Kingdom of God condition through missionary 
efforts, and the conversion of the world. 
Present truth declares all these efforts to be misdirected 
and futile; it points out the fall of Babylon and 
everything pertaining to her; it declares the establishing 
of God's Kingdom, and the exaltation of the royal 
priesthood outside of sectarian lines; ignoring sect 
membership, it acknowledges only "Israelites indeed," 
personally attached to the Redeemer. The 
revolution of thought, the conversion necessary now, 
is almost as great, and almost as difficult as was that 
which came to Paul and other sectarians of his nation. 
Let us rejoice then, if by the Lord's grace our eyes 
are opening to the truth; and let us have more of 
compassion for others who are still in the condition 
in which Saul of Tarsus was when he persecuted those 
of "this way." 

The light which shone about Saul and those who 
went with him, was evidently a supernatural one, 
because the time of the manifestation was about noon 
(Acts 22:6) and the light was far brighter than that 
of the sun which at the same time, no doubt, was 
shining with great brightness, as is general in that 
country. The phenomenon was seen by the entire 
band, but its special features were known only to 
Saul; the others saw something of the light but they 
saw not the vision which Saul saw representing the 
Son of Man in his glorified condition. The others 
heard a sound but did not distinguish the words which 
Saul heard. All fell to the ground, but all apparently 
were able to rise again and to stand wondering, except 
Saul whose eyes were seriously injured so that he was 
blind. Similarly Stephen saw a vision while those 



who were near him saw nothing: similarly John saw 
the dove descending upon Jesus while the others 
about saw nothing: similarly Jesus heard certain 
words of the Father while the multitude said it 
thundered. It is even mentioned here that the voice 
spoke in the Hebrew tongue: whereas those who 
were with Saul probably spoke in the Syriac or the 
Greek language. 

Saul's astonished answer was, "Who art thou 
Lord?" This was the entire difficulty, he did not 
know the Lord; and as our Master himself declared, 
this lack of knowledge of the Son implied a lack of 
correct knowledge of the Father. We have his 
further explanation that however others in the past 
might have known something about God, they could 
never really know him, in the sense of personal acquaintance 
and appreciation of his character and 
spirit, except through the Son— a part of whose object 
in coming was to reveal the Father. So we might 
say of all who have persecuted the body of Christ, 
even when they did it ignorantly, it was because they 
did not know Jesus— because they had not received 
of his spirit in sufficient measure. Let us beware that 
no such spirit of persecution finds any sympathy or 
lodgment in our hearts, or any expression in our 
words or deeds. This will not mean, however, that 
we shall never offer criticism either of persons or 
doctrines; nor that we shall never reprove or rebuke 
and that publicly (2 Tim. 4:2); but it surely does 
mean that our reproving and rebuking, of teachings 
and of teachers, shall be done from a Scriptural standpoint 
—giving reasons, giving them plainly but without 
bitterness, without harshness, without unkindness 
in any degree. 

The statement, "And he trembling and astonished 
said, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" quite 
probably well explains Paul's condition of body and 
mind at the time; but these words are not found in the 
ancient Greek manuscripts: likewise the words, "It 
is hard for thee to kick against the pricks," are 
omitted. 

For three days Saul neither ate nor drank, and 
was totally blind. What a season for reflection! 

R2969 : page 78 

What a humiliation to think that he had fought 
against the truth! What prayers for forgiveness, and 
what pledges of consecration to Jesus, we may imagine 
filled his heart during those days! Unquestionably 
it was a time of good resolution as respected 
the future, if peradventure, the Lord would graciously 
forgive him and grant an opportunity to retrieve the 
past. He had a dream, too, and in it he beheld a man 
anointing his eyes, restoring his sight. On the 
fourth day a man, a poor and humble disciple of Jesus, 



named Ananias, came, not without fear, to visit Saul; 
—knowing him by reputation, as an enemy of all who 
believed in "this way;" knowing that he was lodged 
in the house of one who was not a friend of the truth, 
but assured of the Lord that Saul was praying and 
would welcome him, having been informed in a vision: 
Ananias when sent of the Lord courageously did his 
part. 

There is a lesson here for all of us; the Lord did 
not send one of the Apostles from Jerusalem, nor 

R2970 : page 78 

was Ananias one of the elders or deacons, as far as 

we know; but he was a plain, humble, obedient disciple, 

"A broken and emptied vessel, for the Master's 

use made meet." Let all of the Lord's dear people 

be similarly filled with the Lord's spirit, and on the 

alert; emptied of self, feeling their own brokenness 

and littleness, let them be ready and anxious to do 

God's service; that they may be used of him as opportunity 

shall occur. What a blessing must have 

come to Ananias in connection with his service! Ever 

afterward he could think how he had been a humble 

instrument in the Lord's hands in carrying a blessing 

to one who subsequently became such a noble servant 

of the cross of Christ. Likewise some of the 

Lord's faithful ones in recent times have taken the 

Lord's message either by word or tract or pamphlet, 

and have opened the eyes of some who subsequently 

have become mighty for the truth and for the pulling 

down of the strongholds of error. What a rejoicing 

such have had in the privileges of their service! 

We know not which will prosper, this or that, therefore 

let us diligently use every opportunity as it may 

come to us; praying the while for much wisdom and 

grace and many opportunities for service. 

The Lord's foreknowledge is clearly displayed 
in verses 15,16; he knew Saul— knew of his honesty 
and of his zeal;— he knew that this honesty and zeal 
as soon as they should be rightly directed would make 
just such an instrument for his service as he desired 
to use. The Apostle Paul recognized this himself, 
and even traces divine providence so far back as his 
birth, declaring that the Lord had chosen him from 
his mother's womb. He could see in the light of 
subsequent events how all of his affairs, from earliest 
childhood, had been tending in a favorable direction 
to prepare him for his work of ministry, as an 
apostle;— and even his experiences as a persecutor 
proved profitable, for they humbled his estimate of 
himself and undoubtedly gave him a larger degree of 
sympathy for those suffering from a similar blindness, 
increasing his helpfulness toward them. This 
does not signify, however, that God had predetermined 
that Paul should have a place in the Kingdom: 



that he determined for himself,— making his calling 
and election sure by faith and obedience. The Lord 
providentially guided his steps in childhood and youth, 
so that he learned certain lessons, and gained certain 
preparations which might be useful in due time; and 
in due time he opened the eyes of his understanding, 
knowing well what would be his own choice thereafter. 
Nevertheless, this same Apostle declares that 
even after having preached the gospel to others, he, 
himself, might have become a castaway;— having 
borne the Lord's name before the Gentiles and Israelites 
and kings, and having suffered great things 
for the Lord's name's sake, he might still fail to maintain, 
faithfully to the end, the character of an overcomer, 
and thus fail to become a joint-heir with his 
Lord. 

Ananias coming to Saul introduced himself beautifully 
—he had the Lord's spirit: he was glad to know 
Saul as a brother; glad to forget that he had been 
a persecutor of the Church; he did not upbraid him; 
he did not say, You deserve eternal torment; nor 
You deserve a cowhiding;— he made no unkind allusion 
to the past, but addressed him on the contrary 
in the light of the information the Lord had 
given him, saying, "Brother Saul." There is a beautiful 
lesson here for many of the Lord's people who 
seem more disposed to chide and upbraid than to 
commend and rejoice with former persecutors: this 
is one of the necessary lessons to be learned by all— 
it is an evidence of the indwelling of the spirit of 
Christ, the spirit of love, parts of which are brotherly 
kindness, gentleness, meekness. 

Great scales fell from Saul's eyes, and a measure 
of natural sight was restored; but oh, how much 
greater was the spiritual sight which he received,— 
the illumination of his heart, his mind! The darkness 
and obscurity of tradition upon the Law and the 
Prophets were now largely dissipated, because he saw 
Jesus— Jesus as the Redeemer suffering death for the 
sins of the whole world;— Jesus glorified, directing 
the election of the Church, his members, his body, his 
joint-heirs,— and who were, by and by, to be with 
Jesus the Messiah in glory and majesty to bless, to 
restore, to uplift Israel and all the families of the 
earth. True, the evidences are that Paul never fully 
recovered his eyesight; and he likewise testifies 
that his spiritual sight never reached perfection, saying, 
"Now, we see through a glass obscurely, then, 
face to face." 

Having taken his stand for Christ, he acknowledged 
him in the usual way, by baptism, and not by 
joining a sectarian system. He joined the body of 
Christ, and thus became a fellow-member with all who 
are joined to Christ, the one Head of the one body. 
Immediately he met with the Lord's people; he was 
no longer ashamed of them; he could not now do too 



much for them; any honor and dignity which were 

his by virtue of his birth, and wealth, and Roman citizenship, 

were none too good to be sacrificed for the 

Lord, and having learned that in persecuting the 

Lord's people he persecuted the Lord himself, so 

he now understood that in meeting with the Lord's 

people and honoring them, he was meeting with and 

honoring the Lord. Forthwith he preached Jesus. 

He preached him as the Son of God, the one 

in whom the prophecies of the past were being fulfilled, 

the Messiah who had redeemed, and who in 

R2970 : page 79 

God's due time would deliver Israel and the world 
from the bondage of Satan— sin and death. 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT. 

This is from Peter's discourse shortly after the 
day of Pentecost; his words were doubtless in some 
degree prophecies; they point down to the second 
coming of our Lord— though Peter may not have 
comprehended how far distant that event would be. 
The exhortation to be converted to the Lord was delivered 
to the Jews who were already his typical people, 
in covenant relationship, but who needed now to 
accept the conditions of the New Covenant and to 
make a corresponding change in their lives— from 
membership in the house of servants, to membership 
in the house of sons— from being amongst those for 
whom atonement sacrifices were made year by year 
continually, which could never take away sin, to be of 
those accepting the one sacrifice of Christ and its redeeming 
merit,— to trust for a present covering for 
their sins, through faith in the precious blood, and 
to hope for an ultimate blotting out of them at the second 
coming of the Lord, as the text declares. 

So long as the believer is blemished physically, 
mentally, morally, by sin, so long he has the evidence 
that his sins are not blotted out. He may, nevertheless, 
rejoice greatly as the prophet indicates, saying 
"Blessed is the man whose sins are covered," but he 
should look forward longingly to the time when every 
evidence of the sin, every mark of guilt, will be so 
completely blotted out as to need no further covering. 
This to the saints of the gospel age will occur at the 
second coming of Christ, when they shall be 
"changed," in an instant, receiving the new spiritual 
bodies which the Lord has promised them in the 
first resurrection. To the world this blotting out of 
sins will come gradually, during the Millennial age. 
In proportion as each being comes into full harmony 
with the great Prophet, Priest and King then reigning, 
each will gradually experience the blessings of 
restitution— eliminating all traces of evil and sin, 



and restoring gradually to the original perfection lost 
in Adam, redeemed by Jesus, and restored by the 
blotting out of sins under the ministry of his 
Kingdom. 



R2970 : page 79 

LETTERS OF INTEREST. 



Dear Editor:— 

For some time I have been somewhat puzzled over the 
present and future problem of the Children of Ham. Our 
progenitors paid but little or no attention to the study 
of the "Times of Restitution of all Things" and a "Ransom 
for all to be testified in due time." And looking at the 
matter as I do, past, present and future, I must with sorrow 
confess that the problem, as it now stands, presents 
one of the darkest pictures known to the Children of Ham. 
The sons of Japheth have sent out their pilgrim sons all 
over the United States and in portions of Great Britain. 
But the poor African race of the United States takes no 
part in that precious work of trying to set forth or send 
out her colored pilgrims to work among their own race. 

What would be the chance of putting a few colored 
pilgrims in the field to travel in Texas and other states? 
It is the opinion of several of my colored brethren of Texas 
that such a plan, if rightly carried into effect, would 
do much good in opening the blinded eyes of our colored 
brethren and friends. 

Now Brother, I do not wish to be misunderstood in 
my request as advocating a division or color line between 
the white and colored brethren: we want no color division; 
but, what we do want is to stand together to work 
up some plan that they may be an aid in this good work 
of harvest and present truth. 

My Dear Brother, I have read the five volumes of Millennial 
Dawn, and have been studying them for nearly three 
years with their charts, etc. I have been a minister many 
years. Pray for us all. 

Yours in Christian love, 

J. J. H. Dozier.— Texas. 

[We are not aware that there are many groups of 
negro brethren, interested in present truth, altho we 
have had four offers like the above quite recently. If there 
are such, they are as welcome as the whites— proportionately 
to their numbers and intelligent interest— and they 
should send the Pilgrim-request postal cards mentioned 
in Jan. 15 issue, page 2, stating that they are colored. 
Thus we will know and be able to judge.— Ed.] 



Dear Friends:— Enclosed you will find order. I wish 
I could do more, but the dear Lord knows all about it. 
The Dawns have been such a help to me that I long to 
have others receive the light on God's word. It is 
truly a Lamp unto my feet and a Light unto my path, 
and the path is shining more and more unto the perfect 
day. The last two years have been wonderful years to 
me. For years I had a great longing in my heart to have 
the "eyes of my understanding enlightened," that things 
which were such a mystery to me might be made plain; 
and I praise God for answering prayer, through dear Bro. 
Russell. I would not trespass upon your valuable time in 
telling in detail how I came into present truth. Suffice it 
to say, it was through a minister from your own city denouncing 
the Watch Tower Society. Very soon after a 
friend asked me if I had ever read the Dawns. I said, 
"No." As soon as I saw the title, I said, "I want to read 
them." Oh, how I praise my God for his wonderful leadings! 
I am reading them over the tenth time, and every 
time I understand God's words better! and if he needs me 
I trust by and by to give out some at least of the precious 
meat now due. 

May you increase more and more until the door is 
shut, is my prayer. I long for the other volumes, but perhaps 
I have enough to feed upon a little while longer. 
Yours for Jesus. 

Mrs. J. M. Smith. -Pa. 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

I cannot tell how much I am indebted to you for the 
marvelous light I have received from reading your publications. 
The whole system of the Christian religion has 
been transformed to my view, so much so that the common 
manner of preaching is neither interesting nor helpful. 
And I feel to pity the ministers because they don't understand 
and are not willing to learn the truth. I do not condemn 
them, for my own life is not what I would it should 
be, either in faith, knowledge, or works; and yet I praise 
God that through your instrumentality, he has helped me 
to see some of the riches of his grace toward fallen humanity. 
I pray that you and your co-workers may be supplied 
with every needed good, spiritual and temporal, and continue 
to make you a blessing to as many as may be privileged 
to hear or read your doctrine, restraining you from 
every error and unveiling to you every truth. 
Yours for the truth, 

H. R. Clarke.-Pa. 



page 81 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 


