R195 : page 1 

VOL. II. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., MARCH, 1881. 

NO. 9. 



pagel 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 

REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H. PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 

L. ALLEN, HONEOYE, N.Y. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN, . FT. EDWARD, N.Y. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance-includes 
postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R196 : page 1 



SPIRITUALISM. 



Wherever we find a counterfeit we may rest assured there exists 
a genuine. If there were no genuine gold dollars, there could be 
no base imitations, or counterfeits. Then too, the base or 
spurious article must appear very much like the genuine or it 
would not be a counterfeit. 

This is what we claim relative to what is at the present time 
called "Spiritualism": That it is a counterfeit of the true, as 
taught in the Bible. 

Whoever has carefully searched the scriptures cannot have 
failed to see that while God throughout all past ages has 
condemned evil and sin in their various forms, and warned his 
children both "Israel after the flesh" and also the spiritual 
children (the Gospel Age Church) of the danger and bad results 
of evil, yet He has nevertheless permitted evil and good to stand 
side by side before the people, for their choice. If we take heed 
to his Word we may discern which is evil and by obedience to 
that Word, shun the evil and choose the good. 

God is the head and fountain of goodness and truth and the 
Scriptures teach that Satan is the head and fountain of all evil 
and error~"The father of lies" (deceptions). Both of these are 
spiritual beings. "God is a spirit," and Satan, as we have 
heretofore shown, was once an angel of God- The chief or 
Prince of "Those angels which kept not their first (sinless) 
estate." These though cast out from God's presence, are not yet 
destroyed -they still preserve their nature as "angels," though 
through sin they have become evil angels; consequently they 
still are spiritual beings (not human) and have the same powers 
as they ever had, and as good angels have, except that God has 
put them under certain limitations and restraints which we shall 
more fully discuss farther along. 

If we trace them through the Scriptures we shall find that these 
fallen spiritual beings have continually made use of their 
spiritual-super-natural powers, to lead mankind astray into 
disobedience of God and injury to themselves. 

Spiritual beings, as we have heretofore shown, possess powers 
greater and higher than humanity. We have seen from the 
statements relative to good angels that they can be present in our 
midst without our being conscious of their presence. (The angel 
of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him. Psa. 
34:7.) (Are they not all ministering spirits sent forth to minister 
to those who shall be heirs of salvation? Heb. 1:14.) 

These we have seen, have power to appear as a flame of fire 
(The Angel of the Lord so appeared to Moses in the bush. Gen. 



3:2) or they can and have appeared as men. Of this power there 
are numbers of instances in the Bible. 

Some other powers of angels can be discovered by examining 
the record, for instance, the angels who delivered Lot and his 
family from Sodom, had power to smite the rioters of Sodom 
with blindness. (Gen. 19:11.) An angel "did wondrously before 
Manoah;" another performed a miracle before Gideon. (Judges 
6:21 and 13-19.) The Angel of the Lord delivered the Apostles 
from prison, and yet left the prison doors unmolested; again, an 
angel delivered Peter from prison, the doors opening of their 
own accord. Acts 5:19-23 and 12:8. On many occasions they 
made known to men things which were about to come to pass, 
etc. 

Now, the evil angels, "the devil and his angels," have by nature 
the very same powers, but are restrained. So much of evil as can 
be overruled for good, and tend to the development of 
experience and the education and discipline of the "heirs of God, 
joint heirs with Jesus Christ, "--is permitted and the remainder 
restrained. As God through his Spirit and influence works in and 
through men who give themselves up to His control, so does 
Satan operate in and through those who "yield themselves as 
instruments of unrighteousness unto sin." "His servants ye are to 
whom you render service." As Jesus said to some, "Ye are of 
your father the devil for his works ye do." 

As "God in times past spake unto the fathers through the 
prophets," who were His mouthpieces, so Satan spake through 
his agents and agencies. His first agent was the serpent which 
became his agent in beguiling Eve into disobedience. He 
manifested his powers through the magicians and soothsayers of 
Babylon and remarkably in those of Egypt, where God's powers 
were manifested through Moses and Aaron before Pharaoh, 
while Satan's powers, of a similar kind, were used to oppose the 
truth for a time. Here these two spiritual powers were strikingly 
manifested; both did miracles -things which men alone could 
not do-but which men possessed of evil and good powers, did 
do. (Exod. 7:11-22 and 8:7-18.) "There were false prophets also 
among the people, " who evidently spoke by an inspiration, or 
power in them almost like the real prophets of God; these were 
the counterfeits. (See 2 Pet. 2:1 Jer. 23:21.) 

We are aware that to the worldly mind it seems superstitious to 
believe that men and women may be so given up of themselves 
to Satan, and so controlled by him as to be wizards and witches; 
but they are recognized as such in the Scriptures, and we believe 
it. Israel was commanded to put such to death. (Exod. 22:18; 
Lev. 20:27, etc.) Manasseh, King of Judah made Judah to err, 
&c. ; he "used enchantments and used witchcraft and dealt with a 
familiar spirit and with wizards." (2 Chron. 33:6.) 



Take a concordance and see how much God says against 
wizards, witches, and "they that have familiar spirits "--mediums 
of the devil for communicating with mankind. It was the claim 
of these mediums of "familiar spirits" that they held 
communication with the dead and received their information 
from them. In this claim they contradicted the plain statements 
of God's word, which assure us that the dead could not furnish 
any information. (See Job 14:10-21; Eccl. 9:10.) 

But this was merely another way in which Satan sought to 
continue the lie imposed upon Eve in Eden. ["He is a liar from 
the beginning" said Jesus.] God had said that if disobedient they 
should die; Satan contradicted this statement; claimed that man 
had naturally, immortality and could not die, and that God was a 
liar. Ever since, he seeks to uphold the statement, "Ye shall not 
surely die. " Full well does he know that if people realized that it 
was the "spirits of demons" who spoke to them through the 
mediums they would shun them; hence, the claim that it is dead 
people (not dead, but more alive than ever) who communicate 
the information. 

An illustration of this sort, is given in 1 Sam. 28. Saul, King of 
Israel, had become wicked, and God would no longer 
communicate with him through the Prophets. He was engaged in 
a war with the Philistines, and a great battle was about to be 
fought. He wanted council and desired to know what would be 
the outcome. Since the Lord would not answer him, he sought 
out one of the condemned and forbidden class, a medium, a 
woman who had a familiar spirit—the witch at Endor. 

All are familiar with the story: (1 Sam. 28:3-20) how that the 
medium pretends ignorance as to her visitor, knows what Saul 
desires, gives a description of Samuel, etc. Then follows an 
account of the coming defeat of Saul's army and the death of 
himself and his sons. The fact that these things occurred just as 
foretold by the medium, has been thought by some, to be a proof 
that Samuel really furnished the information. But, Satan could 
foretell those things as well as Samuel could were he alive. Not 
that Satan is a prophet, nor that God reveals coming things to 
him, but he is a student of God's word and a believer of it. 
"Devils also believe and tremble." (Jas. 2:19.) The defeat of Saul 
and accession of David to the throne had been foretold by the 
Prophet and both Saul and Satan knew it, and Satan had learned 
that every word of God's is sure. 

Besides we should not forget the words of the apostle that "He 
that hath the power of death is the devil." (Heb. 2:14.) Since he 
is the executor of the death penalty, and must have the 
permission to execute from God, (Job 1:12) is it strange that he 
knew that he was to have power over the lives of Saul, his sons 
and many others on the next day? No, it is the reasonable 
inference. Certainly we should not for a moment suppose that 
God (or Samuel if he could) would recognize, or use any means 



of communication which He had prohibited on pain of death and 
condemned as wicked. Read 1 Chron. 10:13. 

Coming further down the stream of time, we learn that the same 
wicked spirits continued to operate in the same manner. The 
Lord, while still permitting them, warns the people against such, 
saying: "They shall say unto you, 'Seek unto them that have 
familiar spirits (spirit mediums) and unto wizards that peep and 
mutter.' (But) should not a people seek unto their God? For [why 
should] the living [go] to the dead? To the law and to the 
testimony, [the Bible], if they speak not according to this Word 
it is because there is no light in them." (Isa. 8:19.) God warns 
people not to believe any one whose 

R196 : page 2 

teachings are contrary to the Word, no matter what powers they 
may exercise. 

Coming down to the days of Jesus and the apostles we find that 
Satan still operated in much the same manner, as well as a 
variety of other ways. Among the more notable instances [not to 
mention the numerous cases of casting out of devils, etc., by 
both Jesus and the disciples] we might remind you of the 
experience of Philip and Peter with Simon the sorcerer (Acts 
8:7-9-24.) "Unclean spirits crying with loud voice came out of 
many that were possessed;... but there was a certain man named 
Simon which... used sorcery and bewitched the people... to whom 
they all gave heed... saying, This man is the great power 
(medium) of God." Thus did Satan use his power to delude the 
people. 

Paul and Barnabas had an experience with another of these 
mediums of the devil named Elymas, who withstood them. Paul 
addressing him said: "O full of all subtilty and all mischief, thou 
child of the devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, wilt thou not 
cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord?" (Acts 13:10.) And 
he was blinded immediately. Again Paul and Silas met a female 
medium at Phillippi. "A certain damsel possessed with a spirit of 
divination... which brought her masters much gain by 
soothsaying." But Paul "turned and said to the spirit [Satan] I 
command thee in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her. 
And he came out the same hour." Acts 16:16. 

And so ever since, Satan has kept up his practices with various 
changes of method to suit the circumstances; sometimes with 
characteristic devilishness, at other times in the garb of religion, 
"For Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light, 
therefore it is no great thing if his ministers [mediums] also be 
transformed as ministers of righteousness"... (2 Cor. 11:14.) In 
our day when knowledge is so great, and morality (called 
Christianity) so popular, Satan must if he would continue to 
oppose truth, take the religious cloak; and so he does. To-day 



Spiritualism ranks itself among the religious sects. ["The 
synagogue [church] of Satan," truly.] 

Spiritualism though refined and modernized is yet the same that 
it ever was, in ages past. Its object is not the inculcation of truth, 
nor of love for God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ. They 
claim that Jesus was a fine medium and taught and used 
spiritualism in His day as well as He understood it. They do not 
outwardly profess to oppose the Bible and its teachings, but they 
do so really, both teaching and practicing the very things therein 
condemned and still seeking to prove by their enchantments that 
men are not dead, thus endeavoring to uphold Satan's first 
falsehood. Gen. 3:4. 

They still possess supernatural powers, too, just as in the days of 
Saul and Paul and Moses, etc. While we do not question that 
some of the things claimed to be done by them are mere 
deceptions, yet we know of many things done by them where no 
deception was possible. Among those who believe "in this way" 
we know of several who once were mediums of the devil and 
did "those things whereof they are now ashamed." These, when 
coming to a knowledge of the truth, are thankful for their escape 
from that "snare of the devil." Spiritualism hates the light and 
their wonders are done under cover of their favorite principle- 
darkness. Their work of proselyting, too, is dark, covered - 
secret. Jesus gives us a word of wisdom on this subject. "Every 
one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh to the light 
lest his deeds should be reproved." John 3:20. 

Though working stealthily, their numbers are large and embrace 
many of the influential of earth- Judges, Senators, etc. The 
queen of what is known as the greatest Christian kingdom of 
earth, on whose possessions the light of day is said never to set, 
called the "Christian Queen," is known by many to be a 
"Spiritualist." It is coming before people in a way that 
commands attention, and those who do not realize it to be the 
work of Satan are almost sure to regard it as a power of God. 
The Rev. Joseph Cook, justly celebrated for his able defense of 
the Bible and its author, God, against the attacks of Atheists and 
Infidels, such as Huxley, Darwin, Arnold, et. al., has lately had 
his attention aroused to the recognition of the growing influence 
of "Spiritualism," and having investigated the subject to some 
extent he recently delivered a lecture on the subject, in which he 
expressed his belief that many of their tricks and performances, 
are performed by no human power and are actually super- 
natural. He does not pretend to say how, or by what power, but 
claims that not only himself but some of the profoundest 
scientific minds of Germany have reached the conclusion that 
Spiritualism cannot be condemned as false by any scientific tests 
yet applied to it. 

Nor is this power of Spiritualism difficult to account for if we 
take the Bible as our authority and recognize it as the work of 



Satan, whom Jesus designates "The prince of this world." (John 
14:30.) "The prince of the power of the air (spiritual power) the 
spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience." (Eph. 
2:2.) And the same book is our authority for saying that 
"Spiritualism" has not yet reached the climax of its power; its 
powers are to increase wonderfully. Paul says, (1 Tim. 4:1), 
"Now the Spirit [of God] speaketh expressly that in the latter 
times some shall depart from the faith giving heed to seducing 
[deceiving] spirits and doctrines of devils." Jesus says, "They 
are the spirits of devils working miracles, which go forth unto 
the kings of the whole world to gather them to the battle of that 
great day of God Almighty." Rev. 16:14. 

Peter (2:4) and Jude (6) tell us, that when cast out of God's 
presence as evil angels, they were bound by "chains of 
darkness" "unto the judgment of the great day." Many scriptures 
have shown us that the closing part of the Gospel age is to be 
upon the living a time of trial and trouble preparing them for the 
coming Millennial reign of Christ, and is called "the day of the 
Lord"~"the great day"~"the great day of His wrath," etc. We 
understand, then, that Satan and his angels have been limited: 
might not appear except through human beings who willingly 
gave themselves up to be "possessed of devils" or became his 
"mediums." He has thus been confined or chained. But we claim 
that this "day of the Lord"~day of the "presence of the Son of 
man"-- has already commenced, that the Scriptures prove it to 
be so; and if the chains of darkness restrain Satan until "the great 
day," we should expect that very soon those chains will be 
loosed and no longer restrain. (Any who expect soon the loosing 
of those powers should, to be consistent, recognize both "The 
day of the Lord" and the trial as commenced.) 

The facts correspond to this exactly. "Spiritualism" claims that 
they are having more power to show their wonders daily, and 
they claim now (one case very recently) that the Spirits can 
materialize in broad day light: and they promise wonderful 
revelations and manifestations very soon. Now, materialization 
of a spiritual being, just as they claim, has been possible all 
along to the angels of God, of which we have many records - 
angels on many occasions appearing as men. Jesus, as we have 
seen, when born of the Spirit at his resurrection, a spiritual body, 
("That which is born of the Spirit is spirit.") was, as all other 
spiritual beings, (good and evil) invisible to human sight, and in 
making known his resurrection to his disciples he appeared in 
various fleshly "forms." (Mark 16:12.) These are the powers 
which Satan has desired, but could not heretofore use, because 
bound or limited, but which he will have when the judgment 
(trial) of "the day of the Lord" begins. (Which we believe is 
now.) 

The trial of this day is not only a day of trouble and distress 
among nations, but it includes a trouble or fire upon the living 



phase of the church. This church trouble comes first, and we 
believe began in the spring of 1878, and is to result in the 
purifying of faith and bringing of those who will continue to 
bear the name of Christian to the firm foundations of the 
teachings of the Word of God. For all the errors of human 
traditions shall be consumed as dross, wood, hay, stubble, in the 
fire (trial) of this day. The apostle says, "Think it not strange 
concerning the fiery trial which shall try you (the church) as 
though some strange [unforetold] thing happened unto you." (1 
Pet. 4:12.) For the fire of that day shall try every man's work of 
what sort it is: "He that hath built [his faith] with gold, silver and 
precious stones [the truths of God's word] the same shall remain. 
(His faith will not be destroyed.) But if any man build with 
wood, hay, stubble, (the teachings and creeds of man) the same 
shall suffer loss, &c. (1 Cor. 3:12-15.) 

This trial is "the trial of your faith" and in this "day of the Lord" 
not only does the light of truth shine strongly and beautifully, 
showing us the great prize of our high calling as we never saw it 
before; revealing to us the present king, who causes us to sup 
with Him and feeds us with His truth which is, "meat in due 
season," giving strength needed in this day; but it is also a day 
for the increase of the powers of evil, that the separation 
between the wheat and tares (the children of the kingdom and 
the children of the wicked one. Matt. 13:38) may be complete. 

Because of this struggle between truth and error, the real and the 
false spiritualism, etc., Paul says, "My brethren, be strong in the 
Lord and the power of His might. Put on the whole armor of 
God that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. 
For we wrestle not against the flesh and blood [not against 
human beings, but against evil spiritual beings] but against 
principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness, 
of this world, (Satan -the prince of this world. John 12:31) 
against spiritual wickedness in high (controlling) places. 
Wherefore, [on this account] take unto you the whole armor of 
God, that ye may be able to withstand [the spiritual wickedness- 
-the devil's wiles] in the evil day [this day of the Lord's presence 
-day of trial.]... Stand, therefore, having your loins girt about 
with truth and having on the breastplate of righteousness, etc. 
Eph. 6:11. 

This same day of trial is referred to in Psalm 91, where only 
those who have made God's "Truth their shield and buckler 
[support] are able to withstand the snares of the devil, the arrows 
of infidelity and the moral pestilence of Spiritualism. While 
thousands shall fall at their side." 

In God I have found a retreat, 
Where I can securely abide, 
No refuge, nor rest so complete, 
And here I intend to reside. 



The pestilence walking about, 
When darkness has settled abroad, 
Can never compel me to doubt 
The presence and power of our Lord. 

A thousand may fall at my side, 
Ten thousand at my right hand, 
Above me His wings are spread wide, 
Beneath them in safety I stand. 

His truth is my buckler and shield; 
His love He hath set upon me, 
His name in my heart He hath sealed; 
E'en now His salvation I see. 

-Songs of the Bride. 

There are portions of Scripture which seem to teach that during 
this "Day of the Lord" there will be manifestations of the saints 
as men in fleshly bodies of those who have been changed to 
spiritual bodies like unto Christ's glorious body-and that they 
will appear as He "appeared" after His resurrection, and do a 
work of teaching as He taught the Disciples, opening men's 
understandings that they might understand the Scriptures. 

We have seen that the coming of Moses the first and second 
times to deliver Israel from Egypt, was a type of the two 
comings of the Lord. The second time he came with power, and 
"Aaron, the saint," was his mouthpiece before Pharaoh, and 
during the signs, &c. So we expect that the living 
representatives of the church will sometime be used as the 
mouthpiece of their Lord before the world [Egypt in type]. As 
there in type Jannes and Jambres, and the other magicians under 
Satanic power, opposed and hindered for a time the effect of the 
wonderful powers wrought through Aaron, so we anticipate that 
in the antitype, when the living church is used as the Lord's 
mouthpiece, they will be withstood and their teachings 
controverted by the same spiritual wickedness~"Spiritualism" - 
which will seek to do the same things and partly be able. Paul 
seems to refer directly to this in 2 Tim. 3:1-8, when, after 
saying: "In the last days [of the age] perilous times shall come," 
&c, he adds: "Now, as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so 
do these also resist the truth... but they shall proceed no further; 
for their folly shall be manifest unto all men as theirs also was." 

We suggest again, then, that every counterfeit is a proof of a 
genuine; second, that none but valuable things are counterfeited, 
and third, that a counterfeit must resemble the genuine very 
closely, or it would not deceive. Already, Spiritualists, are 
talking much as we do, of "the good time coming," the "glorious 
day," and even declare that Jesus is present, &c. This is an old 
practice with our opponent. At the first advent, the devils knew 
Jesus and crying out said: "Thou art Christ the Son of God," and 
He rebuking them, suffered them not to speak, "for they knew 



that he was Christ." (Luke 4:41.) (See also Paul's experience, 
Acts 16:17.) Yes, "The devils also believe and tremble." (James 
2:19.) And 



[Continued on Eighth Page.] 

R196 : page 8 

[Continued from Second Page.] 

no doubt they would fain call some of us, Spiritualists, both for 
the purpose of bringing to their credit our knowledge of God's 
word and plan, and to seek to offset the value and effect of our 
Bible teaching, by claiming us as one with themselves. 

But, beloved, "believe not every Spirit, but try the spirits 
whether they be of God" or of Satan. "By their fruits ye shall 
know them. " That system, by whatsoever name it calls itself, 
whose time and talent is spent in doing useless and foolish 
things, and making use of supernatural power to obtain money; 
which appeals merely to the human credulity, and neither seeks 
nor develops an increase of faith and love toward God and men; 
ignores Jesus and the plan of salvation; repudiates the Bible; 
whose tendency is toward things earthly, sensual, devilish- 
"Free-loveism," &c, is not of God, but bears unmistakable signs 
of Satan being its author. 

On the contrary, a system based not on forbidden and pretended 
communications with the dead, but upon the word of God only; 
whose teachings tend to the glory of both the Father and His 
Son, our Lord; which seeks to unfold to those who have "ears to 
hear" and "eyes to see" the glorious beauty and grandeur of 
God's plan of salvation, of which Jesus is the recognized 
foundation; which tends not to the ignoring of any part of the 
Word, but to a searching of the Scriptures daily; which tends 
toward and teaches that the prize of our high calling is 
obtainable only by patient perseverance in well-doing -the 
death of the old nature and newness of life as a new creature in 
Christ Jesus, bears unmistakably the stamp of God and is of 
God- for it speaks according to His word. 



R204 : page 8 

Truth itself, severed from the love of the truth, may be an idol.— 
Pascal. 



R204 : page 3 



GOD'S LOVE TO ME. 

I love to sit, and think, 
How Jesus came to me; 
And brought his box of Jewels 
Which Angels longed to see. 

He opened wide the lid, 
And took them, one by one; 
He showed them unto me~ 
Their light was like the sun. 

He said, my chosen one 
Put on these Jewels bright; 
And follow where I lead you, 
To lands of pure delight. 

I soon will take you hence 
My home to share, with me; 
There you shall ever be my Bride, 
Throughout eternity. 



-MRS. A. M. B.-Newark, N.J. 



R196:page3 

THE UNPARDONABLE SIN. 

"Whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of Man it shall be 
forgiven him; but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost it 
shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the 
world to come. (Matt. 12:32.) [The word here rendered world, as 
in many other places should be rendered age and is so rendered 
in all translations.] 

This text teaches first that there is such a thing as forgiveness of 
sins both in the present gospel age and in the coming- 
millennial-age. The basis of all forgiveness of sins, is in the fact 
that "Christ died for our sins." 

Secondly it teaches that some sins are possible, which God will 
not reckon as a part of the Adamic sin which passed upon all 
men and which is to be forgiven all men. If men looked at Jesus 
and ignorantly supposed him an imposter and blasphemed him, 
it would be excusable and forgivable as a result of the fallen 
nature. Even should they blaspheme the name of God, and say 
they believed in no such being, &c, this too might be forgiven 
for the same reasons: But when God's power (the Holy Ghost) 
was manifested in doing them good as it was manifested through 
Jesus, there certainly was no excuse for even the most depraved 
of men ascribing those good works to an evil power-Satan. And 
this is just what Jesus tells them, that such conduct cannot be 



classed as a part of the general human depravity and it therefore 
cannot be forgiven. 

The light was shining so clearly, that though their eyes were 
nearly blinded by sin, they could not help realizing some of the 
light as Jesus manifested some of "the powers of the world (age) 
to come." As he said to them on another occasion their "stripes" 
(punishment) in the next age will be in proportion as they have 
been able to comprehend and do justly and have not so done. 
They whose moral sight and hearing have been totally destroyed 
by Adam's sin and its results (if any such there be~the Lord 
knoweth) will have no stripes in the future, will be forgiven 
fully. They who see a little and could obey a little and do not so 
do, shall be forgiven the things they did not see and could not 
do, but will be beaten (punished) with a few stripes for the few 
things they saw and could but did not do. They who saw more 
and whose ability to perform was less impaired by the fallen 
nature, and who fail to do according to their ability, are to be 
beaten with many stripes. 

Now notice that all who receive "stripes" receive them for 
unpardoned sins, for if the sins were pardoned they would not be 
punished for them. In our earthly courts if a man had trespassed 
against the law in two ways, and the penalty of the first crime 
was imprisonment for five years, and for the second six months; 
if it could be shown that he was not really to blame for the first 
crime, but was forced into it by circumstances over which he 
had no control, but the second crime was measurably under his 
control, the decision of the court would be "guilty" on both 
charges: but he would be pardoned on the first charge and not on 
the second; the result would be that he would serve the six 
months punishment. 

Here are two earthly crimes, one pardonable and one 
unpardonable: So it is with God's law; all are sinners and 
condemned~guilty~on account of Adam's sin, but the full 
ransom from that sin has been paid and so though condemned 
before the court of heaven, it is announced that all of our 
imperfections traceable to that cause are freely and fully 
forgiven. But neither more nor less is pardonable. All sins 
against light and ability are unpardonable, cannot be forgiven at 
any time, and hence must be punished. The world will have 
many such sins to be punished in the age to come, and they 
receive in some instances much punishment in the present life 
and age. In a word all punishment indicates unpardoned sin, for 
if it were pardoned it would not be punished as well. 

Paul tells us of extreme cases of this sort of unpardonable sin. 
Men of the world who have a little light we have seen can 
commit it, but when a man becomes a Christian and has the eyes 
of his understanding opened -when he is brought from the 
condition of darkness and ignorance, into the light of the 
knowledge of the Lord, to then sin willfully is terrible indeed. 



Due and full allowance is made for all our weaknesses and 
imperfections which come to us through our fallen nature, and 
which clog and hinder our doing as we should wish to do— our 
Father's will but no more. If we cease to desire to do God's will, 
we cut loose from our Lord and begin to walk according to our 
own will as natural and no longer spiritual beings. This is the 
thing pictured by the proverb: "The dog is returned to his vomit, 
and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire." 2 
Pet. 2:22. 

In Heb. 6:4-6, Paul assures us that any Christian who has 
reached a full and mature development in the spiritual life, 
having "been enlightened," "tasted of the heavenly gift," "been 
made partaker of the Holy Ghost," "tasted of the good word of 
God"~if such shall fall away, it is impossible to renew them 
again unto repentance. Why? Because this is an unpardonable 
sin. But can they be punished for this sin and thus go free from it 
in time? No, with the above description of the Apostle, we 
understand that these had enjoyed all the blessings due them on 
account of Christ's ransom: i.e. They were reckoned of God 
justified from all sin, as new creatures had been brought to a 
condition of enlightenment and knowledge of the Lord's will, 
and then, had deliberately and willfully acted contrary to it. We 
do not refer to a child of God stumbling or being overcome of 
the old nature for a time, but as expressed in Heb. 10:26--If we 
sin willfully after that we have received the knowledge of the 
truth, there remaineth no more (a) sacrifice for sins, but a certain 
fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation which shall 
devour (destroy) the adversaries." 

In a word we understand Paul to teach that the class here 
described have received all the benefits due them through 
Christ's ransom, and that their willful sinning against 
knowledge, &c, places them in the same position as Adam 
occupied when he sinned; the penalty of all such willful sin is 
death. In Adam's case it was the first death. In the case of these 
it is the second death. They had been reckoned dead as 
Christians and then reckoned of God alive as new creatures and 
now they die for their own willful sin— the second death. There 
is neither forgiveness nor excuse for such sin; they must have 
the full penalty and die. They have lightly esteemed the ransom 
after they knew of it and thus have "trodden under foot the Son 
of God and counted the blood of the covenant wherewith they 
were sanctified (set apart as new creatures) an unholy (ordinary- 
-common) thing and done despite (disrespect) unto the spirit of 
(favor) grace." 

These have no hope; they could not be recovered from the 
second death in any other way than as Adam and his children 
were redeemed from the first death i.e. by some one dying for 
their sin as Jesus died for Adam's sin. Will Jesus die again for 
them? No, "Christ being risen dieth no more; death hath no more 



dominion over him." Nor could there be any object in bringing 
such to life again; having had full redemption and having come 
to know both good and evil, if they love evil rather than good 
and willfully do it, let them be deprived of life. All will say it is 
love on the part of our Father to deprive them of life, which, if 
continued, would be only of injury and evil both to themselves 
and others. 

It will readily be seen, that this sin to this last mentioned extent- 
punishable with the second death-could not possibly have been 
committed prior to the gospel age, since not until Pentecost did 
the Holy Ghost come as a teacher to guide the church into the 
truth. (John 16:13.) It had in past time been active through holy 
men of old as they "spoke and wrote as they were moved by the 
Holy Ghost," but it moved them to write but not to understand. 
It came upon the Prophets as servants to communicate; it comes 
to us as a seal of sonship and to enable us as sons to understand 
our Father's will, (Rom. 8:14.) consequently in previous ages 
none ever "tasted of the good word of God," or "became 
partakers of the Holy Ghost, etc., and consequently none who 
lived in past ages could sin away forever all hope of a future 
life. 

The millions of past ages never have been recovered from the 
first death (Adamic) in any sense and must be so recovered 
before it will be possible for them to commit the "sin unto 
death." (Heb. 6:4-6). That Israelites, Sodomites, Egyptians and 
others have not fully lived up to the knowledge they possessed 
we doubt not, and they will doubtless therefore have "stripes" in 
the coming age for sins not pardoned by Jesus' ransom. 

here's a wideness in God's mercy, 
Like the wideness of the sea; 
There's a kindness in His justice 
Which is more than liberty." 



R195 : page 3 

THE SHEEP AND GOATS. 

(MATT. 25:31-46.) 

The scene of this parable is laid after the time of trouble, and 
after the exaltation of the "little flock" to the throne, when the 
nations have been subdued, Satan bound and the authority of 
Christ's kingdom established. So we read: "When the Son of 
Man shall come in his glory... then shall he sit upon the throne of 
his glory, and before him shall be gathered all nations." The 
Bride of Christ before this time, has been seated with him in his 
throne, and has taken part in executing the judgments of the 
great day of wrath. Now, "the Son of Man appears" (is made 
manifest) to the world, "in his glory"— The glory of the husband 



is the wife (1 Cor. 11:7) and together Jesus and his Bride "shine 
forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father." 

Here is the "New Jerusalem" as John saw it (Rev. 21)~"that 
holy city... coming down from God out of heaven." During all 
the time of trouble it was coming down, and now it has touched 
the earth. This is the stone cut out of the mountains (kingdoms 
of earth) without hands, (but by the power of God) and it has 
become a great mountain (kingdom) and has filled the whole 
earth. (Dan. 2:35.) Its coming has broken to pieces (Dan. 2:34- 
35) the evil kingdoms of the Prince of darkness. Here is that 
glorious city (government) prepared as a bride adorned for her 
husband, (Rev. 21:2) and the nations of them which are saved 
(restored -brought back from the Adamic death) are walking in 
the light of it. (Vs. 24.) These may "bring their glory and honor 
into it, but there shall in no wise enter into it anything that 
defileth, etc." (Vs. 27.) Here from the midst of the throne, 
proceeds a pure river of water of life, (truth, unmixed with error) 
and the Spirit and the Bride say come and take it freely. (Rev. 
22:17.) Here begins the world's probation-the world's great 
judgment day-a thousand years. 

But even in this glorious time of blessing and healing of the 
nations, when Satan is bound, evil restrained, mankind released 
from the grasp of death, and when the knowledge of the Lord 
fills the earth, two classes will be developed, which Jesus in this 
parable calls sheep and goats. These he tells us he will separate. 
Gradually throughout the age he gathers his sheep (those who 
know and obey his voice) to his right hand (place of favor) but 
the goats (the disobedient) to the left. 

In the end of the Millennial age, at the final adjustment of 
human affairs, Jesus thus addresses his sheep: "Come ye 
blessed... inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the 
foundation of the world." What kingdom? Is not the kingdom 
under the whole heavens given to the people of the saints of the 
Most High God to possess it forever? Yes, as we have already 
learned, a "little flock," "the saints," the "sheep" of the gospel 
age, having followed the Lamb (Jesus) whithersoever he went, 
through evil and through good report, even to the sacrificing of 
the human life, with him have been exalted to the divine nature 
and to the throne of the spiritual unseen kingdom, to possess it 
forever (for the age)— "He (the Christ, head and body) must 
reign, till he has put all enemies under his feet." (1 Cor. 15:25.) - 
-The saints shall reign with Christ a thousand years. Rev. 20:6. 

Jesus calls believers of the gospel age, who know and obey his 
voice, his sheep. But he says- "Other sheep I have which are not 
of this fold (referring to those who should follow him in the 
millennial age) them also I must lead (into truth and 
righteousness during that age) and there shall be one fold and 
one shepherd." Jesus and the "little flock"-the bride— made one 



will be the good shepherd who will lead mankind into the one 
fold of safety-harmony with God. 

This work of separating sheep and goats is a gradual one, 
requiring all 

R195 : page 4 

of the millennial age for its accomplishment. During that age 
each individual as he comes to a knowledge of God and his will, 
takes his place at the right hand of favor, or the left hand of 
disfavor according as he improves or misimproves the 
opportunities of that golden age. And by the end of that age, all 
the world of mankind (not the church of the gospel age) will 
have arranged themselves as shown in the parable, into two 
classes. In nature sheep are far more numerous than goats, and 
we do not doubt that with the perfect knowledge then possessed, 
the sheep company will far outnumber the goats. With the end 
of that age (1,000 years) is the end of the world's trial, or 
judgement, and final disposition is made of the two classes. The 
goats who have not developed the element of love- the law of 
God's being and kingdom -are not counted worthy of life and 
must be destroyed, while the sheep who have developed and by 
deeds exhibited Godlikeness (love) are to be installed as the 
rulers of earth for future ages. 

The work of restitution will not be quite complete until the great 
mass of mankind, having been restored to the perfect condition, 
is again restored to the dominion of earth as given originally to 
Adam before sin entered. For God said: "After our likeness, let 
man have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of 
the air, over the cattle and over all the earth... and over every 
living thing that moveth upon the earth"— a ruler over earth, like 
as God is ruler over all things. And the Psalmist expresses the 
same idea saying: "Thou hast made man a little lower than the 
Angels and hast crowned him with glory and honor; thou madest 
him to have dominion over the works of thy hands." Not over 
each other; when the law of love controls human hearts, there 
will be no necessity for dominion over one another, though by 
mutual consent, prompted by mutual love, regulations may be 
made among themselves for the common good and blessing of 
all. 

This then, is the kingdom that has been preparing for mankind 
from the foundation of the world. It was necessary that they 
should suffer 6,000 years under the dominion of evil, hatred and 
strife, to learn their certain results, misery and death, and in 
order by contrast to prove the justice, wisdom and goodness of 
God's law-love. Then it requires the seventh thousand years 
under the reign of Christ to restore him from ruin and death to 
the perfect condition, thereby fitting him wisely to exercise 
dominion over earth. 



But why is man thus crowned with glory and honor, a king in all 
the earth? The Lord makes them answer -because "I was 
hungry and you fed me, thirsty and you gave me drink, I was a 
stranger and you took me in, naked and you clothed me, I was 
sick and you visited me, in prison and you came unto me." But, 
they answer, when saw we thee hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, 
or naked, or sick, or in prison, and ministered unto thee? Hear 
the reply- Ye have done it to each other; ye are all my Father's 
children; I also am his Son, though on a higher plane, and all we 
are brethren: (Christ and the saints of the gospel age-children of 
God on the spiritual plane; mankind in general will be sons of 
God on the restored, or fleshly plane as Adam was before sin.) 
The love you have shown to the least of my brethren, I count as 
shown to me. No great deeds are assigned as the ground for this 
honor and favor-they have simply come into harmony with 
God's law, love, and proved it by their works. "Love is the 
fulfilling of the law," (Rom. 13:10.) and "God is love," so when 
man is restored again to the image of God -"very good"-man 
also will be love. 

Then the message to those on the left- "Depart from me ye 
cursed, (condemned as unfit vessels for the glory and honor of 
life, who would not yield to the moulding hand of the potter-the 
moulding and shaping influences of divine love). When these 

R196 : page 4 

my brethren were hungry and thirsty, naked, sick and in prison, 
ye ministered not to their necessities, thus continually proving to 
be out of harmony with the law of the heavenly city (kingdom) 
and "there shall in no case enter into it anything that defileth." 
"Depart from me into everlasting fire (symbol of destruction) 
prepared for the Devil and his Angels." Satan is to be destroyed, 
as we read- "That old serpent which is the devil and Satan was 
cast into the lake of fire; this is the second death." Christ will 
"destroy... him that has the power of death, that is the Devil." 
"And these (the goats) go away into everlasting cutting-off 
(destruction) but the righteous into life eternal." (Never ending.) 
Diaglott. 

Of the "sheep" it is said: "inherit the kingdom prepared for you 
from the foundation of the world." But because God gave it to 
man at first and designs restoring it to him again, when he has 
prepared and repaired him for the great trust, we are not to 
suppose that God intends man to rule it except as under, or in 
harmony with His heavenly laws. "Thy will be done on earth as 
it is done in heaven" will be the rule. 

There could scarcely be a better illustration of Man's dominion 
under God, than that afforded in the government of this country. 
Each state is permitted to have dominion over its own territory, 
but all must be subject to the general government of the United 
States. And no one state may make a law which will conflict 



with any law of the United States. When in the late rebellion 
some of the states attempted so to do, the general government 
was obliged to reduce to subjection the refractory states, and 
when they were restored to harmony, they were again permitted 
to occupy their former position. 

So we learn that God's government is a general government over 
all his works; that he rules in justice equity and love; that His 
kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall 
serve and obey Him; that the Most High ruleth in the kingdom 
of men and giveth it to whomsoever he will"~but the kingdom 
of earth is sure to man after that he has learned that the heavens 
do rule. (Dan. 4:17-26.) 

When the perfect man to whom it was first given, through sin 
lost his ability and right to reign, the dominion was taken away 
and given to his adversary whose reign of terror and death lasted 
6,000 years. But a limit was set by the Almighty to his time and 
power to hurt mankind and while used for man's discipline and 
final good, the remainder of his wrath was restrained. When the 
powers of darkness have accomplished their part in God's 
purpose, the Son of God is sent to restore all things and to bring 
order and harmony out of confusion. When his work is finished 
he "gives up the kingdom to the Father that God may be all and 
in all." (1 Cor. 15:28.) 

Man henceforth rules his dominion in harmony with the law of 
heaven- delighting continually to do his will, in whose favor is 
life, and at whose right hand (place of favor) there is fullness of 
joy and pleasure forevermore. O who would not say "Haste thee 
along ages of glory," and give glory and honor to him whose 
loving plans blossom out into such fullness of blessing. 

This parable as we now understand it, is in complete harmony 
with the ideas advanced in article headed "The restored 
dominion." See WATCH TOWER, Dec. 1880. 



R196:page4 

LOOKING UNTO JESUS. 

There are two principles involved in the word look, two 
mediums by which we are enabled to discern objects, light and 
the eye. Without these mediums there may be ever so many or 
interesting objects to be seen, but they will not be seen; there 
must be both light and the instrument of seeing (the eye). These 
are the requisites in nature; these are the necessary things for 
material sight, and the basis of our understanding of spiritual 
things, the things of God. Light in nature is the means of 
knowing (or seeing) natural things; so in spiritual things means 
of knowing are called light- "By using such lights as we have 
we arrive at probability, if not certainty. " 



Explanation and illustration are other means of knowing or 
understanding and are also called light: "one part of scripture 
throws light on another part." Point of view-situation to be 
seen, is called light- this is a use of the word taken from 
painting; "let every thought be presented in the strongest light." 
Looking in the natural is to direct the eye-in the spiritual to 
direct the mind of the understanding; "the eyes of your 
understanding being enlightened." 

With these terms in mind let us consider the subject before us, 
"Looking unto Jesus." Let us bring in the lights and turn the eyes 
of our understanding toward the desire of all nations," the hope 
of the world. How, "we see Jesus who was made a little lower 
than the angels for the suffering of death"— Heb. 2:9. O earth! 
bow down, hide thy face in the dust, the Lord of life dies for 
thee. The mystery of God is among men. Did we see rightly? 
How was he made? A little lower than the angels? Let us look 
closely. Does Paul mean just that? Yes, it seems so. But man is a 
great deal lower than the angels. Did he not take upon him the 
nature of man? Yes, he took the "seed of Abraham." Heb. 2:16: 
Well, if he took on him the seed of Abraham did he not take a 
nature much lower than angels, even the fallen nature, and work 
his way up to this position a little lower than the angels? We 
think not— let us see. Hold the light this way a little, brother; 
there, now. What said the scriptures? ABRAHAM believed God 
and it was counted unto him for righteousness.... How was it then 
reckoned? When he was in circumcision or in uncircumcision? 
Not in circumcision but in uncircumcision... for the promise that 
he should be the heir of the world, was not to Abraham or to his 
seed, through the law, but through the righteousness of faith." 
Romans 4:10-13. If then, Abraham was justified by faith- 
reckoned in God's sight a perfect and righteous man, who will 
say that Jesus must have taken the fallen nature-imperfect, 
because it says: He partook of the "seed of Abraham." But was 
he not made of the seed of Abraham according to the flesh? 
Well, yes; he was "made of the seed of David according to the 
flesh." Rom. 1 :3. "When the fullness of the time was come God 
sent forth his son, made of a woman, made under the law, to 
redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the 
adoption of sons." Gal. 4:4-5. But he was "made not after (down 
towards) the law of a carnal (fleshly) commandment but after 
the power of an endless life, for there is verily a disannulling of 
the commandment going before for the weakness and 
unprofitableness thereof; for the law made nothing perfect but 
the bringing in of a better hope did, (viz: Jesus, the perfect one, 
in whom was no sin,) by the which, we draw nigh to God. Heb. 
7:16,18-19. But was he not made in all things like unto his 
brethren? And does not this plainly show that he took the fallen 
nature of man, the lowest step that could be taken? "In all things 
it behooved him to be made like unto his brethren that he might 
be a merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God, 



to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. Heb. 2:17. But 
was he not made like other men, was he not in his fleshly nature 
just as low in the scale of being as any other man, only that he 
did not actually sin? No; if he had been, he could not have 
resisted actual sin; the fallen human nature is "prone to sin as the 
sparks to fly upward," and as long as we are of the fallen human 
nature we cannot avoid sin. Of such "there is none righteous; no, 
not one." [It is only when justified, new creatures, that we can 
realize ourselves as no longer sinners and enemies, but sons of 
God.] 

Again, if on the depraved plane of being he could not be said to 
have been "made a little lower." He as a perfect one was to 
mediate and bring about a reconciliation between God and his 
fallen carnal creatures who by sin had become His "enemies;" 
hence Jesus was made a little lower than the angels, "for the 
suffering of death," that he might raise us up to a point but a 
little lower than the angels, (as perfect beings—justified or 
reckoned perfect,) thus becoming our mediator "for if when we 
were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his 
Son, much more being reconciled we shall be saved by his life." 
Rom. 5:10. But in what sense was he higher or superior to 
Adam? In this, that Adam was created of God, but Christ was 
begotten of God; now do we see how he was made like unto his 
brethren? Not like unto fallen man, they are not begotten of the 
spirit Christ and his brethren are. Now we, brethren, as Isaac 
was, (and Jesus) are children of promise. But as then he that was 
born after the flesh persecuted him that was born after the spirit, 
even so it is now. Nevertheless what saith the scripture? "Cast 
out the bond woman and her son: for the son of the bond woman 
shall not be heir with the son of the free woman." So then, 
brethren, we (nor Christ) are not children of the bond woman, 
but of the free. Gal. 4:28-31. But was he not for our sakes made 
poor that we through his poverty might be 

R197 : page 4 

made rich? Yes, he became poor for our sakes; when he died 
upon the cross he consummated his poverty, giving up all, even 
life itself, and thus reconciled us to God; for, as by Adam's death 
in or because of sin all die, so by Christ's death in or because of 
righteousness all are made alive; but we who are reckoned in the 
Adamic nature by the death of 

R197 : page 5 

Christ are much more"... "saved by his life;" we begin to be new 
creatures in Christ Jesus, and so we are not (reckoned) in the 
fallen condition, as the world, but in that which he recognizes as 
brethren. "For both he that sanctifieth and they who are 
sanctified are all of one for which cause he is not ashamed to 
call them brethren." Heb. 2:1 1 . He came low enough to reach us 
and taste death for every man, but a little lower than the angels 



was low enough for that, for from that intermediate position God 
can reach us through Christ and "raise us (from our fallen 
condition where we were with the world) up together and make 
us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, that in the ages 
to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace in his 
kindness toward us through Christ Jesus. Eph. 2:6-7. Now, if we 
can see clearly that his being made a little lower than the angels 
was for no other reason than that he might suffer death (to which 
he was not legally subject) and destroy him who had the power 
of death for us, do we not see that there is no reason for his 
being made a little lower, or even as low as the angels again for 
us whom (in our brotherhood condition) he was made like unto? 
He was as we are (reckoned) and we shall be as he is now. 

Beloved, now are we (reckoned) the sons of God, and it doth not 
yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when he shall 
appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. And 
every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself even as 
he is pure. 1 John 3:2-3. 

Now let us look close, (hold the light steady and keep an humble 
position,) there, now, if it behooved him to be made like unto his 
brethren, if we can get a good view of him we can get a good 
idea of what his brethren are, for they will be somewhat as he 
was, "wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly 
calling, consider the apostle and high priest of our profession, 
Christ Jesus, who was faithful to him that appointed him. " He 
was "appointed heir of all things." "And ye are complete in him" 
"In whom ye are builded together for an habitation of God 
through the spirit." Now, dear brethren, is it not clearly God's 
design to glorify his Son and his church (bride) by what he shall 
accomplish through them? Think you they are to be exalted and 
honored merely for the honor? Ah, no! Honor and glory and 
happiness are in store for those "who are the called according to 
his purpose," and that purpose is the bringing of "many sons 
unto glory," and to accomplish that purpose it was necessary 
that the captain of our salvation should pass through suffering, 
"leaving us an example, that ye should follow in his steps." Dear 
brethren, are we willing to do that? Is the lesson so often set 
before us in the "Watch Tower" (drawn from the word) 
forgotten and overlooked in our eager gaze at the coming glory? 
Wherefore let us suffer "according to the will of God and 
commit the keeping of our souls to him in well-doing as unto a 
faithful Creator. 



R197 : page 5 



NUMBER THREE. 

PART I. 

We have found in the past that the number seven is a fruitful 
and interesting topic; and that on this sacred number many 
things in God's plan are based. The investigation of the 
Tabernacle with its three apartments has suggested that number 
three is also a sacred and important number. We are convinced 
that three is fundamental in Heaven and Earth, as to God and 
man, in the structure of the universe, in the plan of the ages, and 
in the process of Christian development or of coming to God. 
For these reasons and in harmony with the Spirit and method of 
prophecy, we think a glimpse of God's plan was the basis of the 
pattern which the Lord showed Moses in the mount, from which 
pattern the tabernacle and all its arrangements were made. No 
part can fail. 

In seeing these underlying principles in the construction of the 
word, we have additional evidence that the Bible reveals a 
science, and is God's truth. As men can be made to see these 
things, it will be like taking the vail of unbelief from their 
minds, which will let in a flood of God's light and love. One 
motive in our writing is the desire to guard some against the 
overspreading wave of unbelief. 

The number three is surprisingly prominent, as the subject opens 
before us. We may not, in every case, see its significance- 
sometimes little, perhaps, but often much. Others may enlarge 
on thoughts suggested. Our hope is that all who read may love 
the word more and more, as the rich treasure house of its great 
Author. 

We would first call attention to the Divine Three-Father, Son 
and Holy Spirit-often mentioned in the Bible. This is 
fundamental, as shown by the commission of Christ, (Matt. 
28:19) and is related to our faith in the Creator, Redeemer and 
Regenerator, and suggests the three steps in bringing men into 
the Divine image. 

Man, in his composition, is spoken of by Paul as having three 
elements -"spirit and soul and body," which he prays may be 
sanctified wholly, and preserved blameless unto the coming 
(presence) of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Thess. 5:23. 

The Divine Spirit is the Sanctifier, and the word of truth is the 
instrument. 2 Thess. 2:13 and John 17:17. 

Man's spirit, in the above passage, which needs sanctifying, 
should not be confounded with the indwelling Spirit of God, by 
which we are sanctified. The distinction is observed by the 
apostle when he says: "The Spirit itself beareth witness with our 
spirit, that we are the children of God." Rom. 8:16. 



We would now call attention to 

THE THREE WITNESSES. 

There are three that bear witness in earth, the Spirit and the 
water and the blood: "and these three agree in one." 1 John 5:8. 
The three witnesses agree in one testimony. What is their 
testimony? It is God's testimony concerning His Son. It must be 
important. "If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God 
is greater." vs. 9. As the Son is the great expression or revelation 
of the Father, we should expect this important testimony of the 
three witnesses to have reference to the revelation of God's love 
for the world. "God is Love," and He wants us to believe it. Let 
Paul speak: "Because the love of God is shed abroad [made 
known] in our hearts by the Holy Spirit, which is given unto us." 
Rom. 5:5. Here is one of the three witnesses telling us of God's 
love for us while we were yet sinners. How are we to know that 
love? What is the Spirit's testimony -the record that God gives 
concerning His Son? Listen— "For when we were yet without 
strength in due time CHRIST DIED FOR THE UNGODLY." 
Verse 6. The death of Christ must, then, be an important event in 
God's plan. 

By reference to Daniel 9:26 the "due time" -the time appointed- 
will be seen. "After the threescore and two weeks, Messiah shall 
be cut off, but not for himself"— it was for sinners. This shows 
that the death could not have been from His birth, nor all the 
period of His earthly life as some maintain. The weeks mark the 
time of His baptism, after which He should pour out His soul 
(life) unto death. He came to His death by the way of water and 
blood. His baptism in water was a symbol of His baptism into 
death, and because it was a symbol it became a pledge that He 
would die, in obedience to the Father's will. It was His 
consecration to the cross. For this reason if for no other, it could 
truly be said: "This is He that came by water and blood-even 
the anointed Saviour; not by water only, but by water and 
blood." 1 John 5:6. The coming, or manifestation of the 
Messiah, taken as a whole, was to make known the love of God 
to the world, and the manifestation included the death. 

But is the death of Christ, after the weeks, an expression of 
God's love? Listen to Paul again: "For scarcely for a righteous 
man will one die: [that would be a great stretch of love] yet 
possibly for a good man some would even dare to die. But 
[wondrous beyond measure] God commendeth His love toward 
us in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us." Rom. 
5:7-8. The death of Christ, according to verse 10 and onward, 
secures reconciliation in the sense that it reverses the curse that 
came on all by the first Adam; and because of this removal of 
the encumbrance, it opens the way for the impartation of the 
Spirit to the obedient, and so for the gift of eternal life. Hence it 
is written that "If when we were enemies we were reconciled to 



God by the death of His Son; much more being reconciled, we 
shall be saved [the higher and spiritual form of salvation] by His 
life." Christ is thus shown to be both the Restorer of the old, and 
Giver of the higher life-the second Adam. 

No one who can appreciate the Spirit's testimony can ignore or 
belittle the death of Christ. He not only came to His death by the 
way of water and blood, as the Spirit hath borne witness, but the 
water and blood that flowed from His side when He was 

R198:page5 

pierced add their testimony to that of the Spirit that He was 
dead, and also that it was a voluntary death. He poured out His 
soul unto death. 

The statement of John concerning the testimony of the three 
witnesses, finds its foundation in the gospel written by him: 
"But one of the soldiers with a spear pierced His side, and 
forthwith there came out blood and water. And he that saw it 
bear record, and his record is true: and he knoweth that he saith 
true, that ye might believe." John 19:34-35. The Spirit says, 
"Christ died for our sins" and that "He gave his life a ransom." 
The separation of the watery portion of the blood, gave proof 
that He was already dead, and had been dead for some time; for 
had He not been dead, the flow would have been red blood. 

We offer this as evidence that His death was not the direct result 
of crucifixion. The record is that He lived only six hours on the 
cross, from the third hour until the ninth hour of their day, 
(Mark 15:25-34) while men who were crucified usually lived 
much longer, even for days. The case of Jesus was so 
exceptional that when Joseph, the counsellor, asked Pilate for 
the body of Jesus, "Pilate marvelled if he were already dead, and 
would not believe it until he had called the centurion and knew 
it from him. Mark 15:43-45. 

The Jews had no thought of the possibility of His being dead so 
soon, when they "besought Pilate that their legs might be 
broken." The soldiers on account of finding Him dead, made an 
exception of His case, and so "brake not his legs: But one of the 
soldiers pierced His side." Thus a prophecy was fulfilled: "A 
bone of him shall not be broken." A type too was fulfilled, no 
bone of the passover lamb was to be broken. Num. 9:12. And in 
the piercing of His side, the foundation was laid for the 
fulfillment of another scripture in reference to the nation of 
Israel, when at His second coming He appears for their 
deliverance, viz: "They shall look on him whom they pierced." 
Zech. 12:9-10. It was therefore, for all these reasons, necessary 
that He should die sooner than crucifixion by men would secure. 

We are led to believe that Christ's death was a voluntary act in 
the Divine administration. This is in harmony with the idea 
which was shown sometime since, in our paper, that Christ was 



both human and Divine, and thus became the antitype of both 
priest and sacrifice— Aaron and the beast. Not the life of the 
Priest, but the lower nature, as represented by the beast, was 
required as a sacrifice. The Divine is the priest power both in 
Jesus and all His true followers. A body was prepared for Him 
and He offered it. Heb. 10:5-10. We are to sacrifice our bodies. 
Rom. 12:1. The power by which we do this is the indwelling 
Divine Spirit. Rom. 8:13. Christ said He had received power or 
authority of His Father to lay down His life." "Therefore doth 
my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take 
it again. No man taketh it from me [this could have no force if it 
referred to His pre-existent life. No one thought of taking that. 
The force of the statement is sure in that while men might seem 
to take His life by crucifying Him, yet they were mistaken;] in 
reality "No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself." 
I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. 
This commandment [authority or power] have I received of my 
Father." John 10:15-18. And when speaking of the temple of His 
body, (which is equally true of His own person and of His body, 
the church, for it is Christ that raises all the dead, i.e. God in 
Christ, or Christ as a Divine Person) He said: "Destroy this 
temple and in three days I will raise it up." John 2:19-22. "I will 
raise them up at the last day;" Which when applied to the 
church, is the seventh thousand from the first Adam and the 
third thousand from the second Adam. 

Now we can see that the real crucifying power is also the saving 
power, and therefore that the only way of salvation is by 
following Christ. As the Divine is the Priest power, so when the 
Humanity of Christ was forsaken of that Divinity which held the 
human in His hands, it was (the writer thinks) the antitype of 
Aaron killing the beast; so Jesus immediately bowed His head 
and died. 

It seems certain that the sacrifice was a special preparation of 
God and in the act of sacrifice was a voluntary offering. In this 
fact as well as in the ransom thus provided, we may well see the 
Father's love commended, "in that while we were yet sinners 
Christ died for us." And as God has given us the combined 
testimony of three witnesses to the truth, let us believe in the 
truth, and thanking Him for it, 

R198 : page 6 

may we be able to see also the value of Christ's example, and so 
follow the Lord in sacrifice. If we are made conformable to His 
death we shall share in His glory. 

J. H. P. 



R198:page6 



NUMBER THREE. 

PART II. 

There are three baptisms spoken of as related to God's dealings 
with men, that of water, of Spirit, and of fire. All are mentioned 
by John, "I indeed, baptize you with water... but He shall baptize 
you with the Holy Spirit, and with fire." Matt. 3:11. 

This statement doubtless had reference, primarily, to the 
disposition made of the Jewish nation, at the end of their age, 
and is intimately related to the harvest work of Christ, 
mentioned in the next verse, which also has three elements, 
separation of wheat and chaff, gathering of wheat, and burning 
of chaff. This work covered a space of forty years, not being 
complete until the destruction of Jerusalem in A.D. 70. Jesus 
was clearly the Lord of the harvest, and Himself the chief 
Reaper, though He had assistants under His control. 

John baptized and addressed a mixed multitude, of which, when 
passed over to Christ, some were baptized with the Spirit and 
some with fire. It seems clear that the baptism of the Spirit 
agrees to the gathering of the wheat into the Gospel barn, and 
the baptism of fire to the burning of the chaff, or judgments on 
the rejected nation. Those who bore the fruit Christ was seeking, 
were counted worthy, and were filled with the Spirit as the sons 
of God; and those not bearing good fruit, were cut down, and 
cast into, or baptized with fire. Read the context and see if the 
"wrath to come," the baptism of fire, and the "unquenchable 
fire" are not identical. 

It may be observed here, as has often been shown, that the 
harvest of the Gospel age, as mentioned by the Saviour, in the 
parable of tares and wheat, (Matt. 13) is parallel to the Jewish 
harvest, and also has its three elements, separation, gathering 
and burning. Then, it was the Jewish nominal church, wheat and 
chaff, that was disposed of; now, it is the nominal Gospel 
church, wheat and tares, that is to be disposed of. The harvest 
here, according to the prophetic periods, [see "Day Dawn"] also 
covers a period of forty years, reaching to and including the year 
1914. 

The Saviour says: "The harvest is the end of the age," (verse 39) 
and in the next verse includes the burning of the tares in the 
closing work of the age; so let us not overlook the fact that in 
some sense the age, and therefore the harvest reaches to 1914. 
The tares are not to be burned after the end of the age, but in the 
end of the age. 

According to the order of events, as the Saviour explains them, 
the shining forth as the sun is not due until after the tares are 
burned. We believe it must be "Day Dawn" until 1914. Of 
course the exaltation to glory precedes the shining forth in that 
glory. 



The extension or prolonging of the Jewish age after A.D. 33, 
and of the Gospel age after A.D. 1878, is an expression of the 
long suffering of God to His defiled people; He is not willing 
that any [of them] should perish, but that they should come to 
repentance." 2 Pet. 3:9. His encouragement to the lukewarm 
church, is, "As many as I love I rebuke and chasten; be zealous, 
therefore, and repent." Rev. 3:19. And it seems from the 
Saviour's parable of the lost sheep, that he will not be content 
until He finds and brings in the lost one [of the sheep, not of the 
world.] 

There is nothing in what is said above, on the extension of the 
harvest, to militate against the idea of the exaltation of the king 
and priest company immediately, if the Lord so wills; in fact, it 
has often been shown that the little flock are to share in the 
administration of the coming judgments, which will purify the 
defiled, or ripen the unripe wheat. 

Returning from the seeming digression, we would say, that 
while the three baptisms had primary application to the Jewish 
nation, there seems to be a sense in which they are applicable to 
each Christian. Water baptism is of course external, and has to 
do with external relationships; but it is important as an act of 
obedience, or expression of loyalty to the Savior, and may 
appropriately be regarded, on account of the place given it by 
the Savior in His commission, and by the apostles in their 
practices, as an incipient step in a life of loyalty. And we know 
that it is the obedient who can claim the promises attached. And 
as a symbol, we may safely say it represents all there is of 
Christianity, -its faith or foundation, in the death and 
resurrection of Christ; its life, in dying to sin and rising to walk 
in newness of life; its hope, in the death and resurrection of the 
saint. 

The baptism of the Spirit, we understand is necessary, to enable 
the Christian to carry out what was symbolized in the water 
baptism; in other words to enable him to keep his covenant. That 
to be baptized with the Spirit, is to be filled with the Spirit, 
seems clear by comparing the promise of Christ, (Acts 1:5,) and 
the fulfillment. Acts 2:4. He said, "Ye 

R199 : page 6 

shall be baptized with the Holy Spirit not many days hence;" 
and when the day of Pentecost was fully come, "They were all 
filled with the Holy Spirit." Speaking of the same thing Jesus 
said, "After the Holy Spirit has come upon you." Acts 1:8. 

While, as has been clearly shown by another, the company who 
received the Holy Spirit, on the day of Pentecost, represented 
the whole church; and it has remained with the church ever 
since; yet, there is of course, a time when each individual, 
passing from death unto life by faith, receives that same Spirit. 
So at the conversion of Cornelius and his family, "The Holy 



Spirit fell on all them who heard the word." Acts 10:44. And all 
with Peter were "astonished" ..."because that on the Gentiles 
also was poured out the gift of the Holy Spirit," ver. 45. Peter 
said they "have received the Holy Spirit as well as we." ver. 47. 
And he afterward said, "And as I began to speak the Holy Spirit 
fell on them as on us at the beginning &c. Acts 11:15-17. 

"The gift of the Holy Spirit is to all that obey the gospel," even 
as many as the Lord our God shall call. Acts 2:38-39. "And the 
disciples were filled with joy, and with the Holy Spirit." Acts 
13:52. Paul exhorts the church at Ephesus to "be not drunk with 
wine... but [to] be filled with the Spirit." Eph. 5:18. 

We understand the baptism of fire, in the individual is 
equivalent to the trials, chastisements, afflictions, and 
tribulations, through which we must pass in order to overcome 
and so reign with Christ. The baptism into death which the 
Saviour endured, and with which He said His disciples must also 
be baptized, is the very thing pledged in water baptism, but it 
has often been shown that it can only be carried out by the 
power of the indwelling Spirit of Christ. Rom. 8:13. The 
baptism of fire and of death seem to be identical, or rather 
different parts of the same thing, the former being the process 
and the latter the completion of the work. To be baptized into 
the Savior's death means far more than to be baptized into water, 
though the former is represented by the latter. 

It is doubtless true that much of our chastisement and affliction 
comes by our own natural conditions, and the Apostle tells us 
that, "Whom the Lord loveth He chastiseth... that we might be 
partakers of His holiness." Heb. 12:6-10. 

As judgments and troubles are represented by fire in the 
Scriptures, so the Christian's trials are called "fiery trials." 1 Pet. 
4:12. Some of these trials come from the enemies without, but 
the Christian's greatest enemy is his old self, or carnal nature, 
against which the Spirit within, or new nature wars. Rom. 7:15- 
25. 

It is one of the great mistakes of the nominal church that it is 
considered so easy to be a Christian; as if we might sail to 
Paradise by balmy breezes, and rest on flowery beds. The road 
the Master went, was a thorny road, and He said, "Follow me." 
The way of the cross is the way to the crown. The cross is a 
symbol of death by crucifixion. The word teaches that through 
much tribulation (fire) we must enter the kingdom of God. Acts 
14:22. 

The Lord is represented as a refiner of silver, watching His 
children in the fire, and thus He will purify the sons of Levi. 
Mai. 3:3. These trials are often severe, but they have their 
attending joys. Jesus said to His disciples, "In the world ye shall 
have tribulation; but in me ye shall have peace." John 16:23. 
Paul says, "We glory in tribulations also," because of the good 



effects on character. Rom. 5:3-6. None of these things can 
separate us from the love of God in Christ. Rom. 8:35-39. 

It seems that the fiery baptism whether it be of a nation, church 
or an individual is permitted in mercy, as a purifying process, 
without which the final good is not attainable. 

We understand the baptism of fire is for the destruction of the 
flesh— the old nature; that as a means to that end we need the 
baptism of the Spirit; but the Spirit has the double work of 
killing, and of making alive with a new and immortal life; and 
we believe that both are represented by the baptism of water- 
which is a symbolic death and resurrection. 

J. H. P. 



R199:page6 

JUSTIFICATION, SANCTIFICATION, 
REDEMPTION. 

These are the three steps by which we are to reach "the prize of 
our high calling "--glory, honor and immortality. Not one of 
these steps can be omitted by those who win the great prize, nor 
can they be taken in any way but their order as directed in the 
Scriptures. 

Justification comes first as a necessity, because, all the human 
race being sinners, as such God could not either sanctify or 
glorify them; therefore, by some means, they must be "made 
free from sin" (brought to a condition of sin-less-ness) in order 
that they might "have their fruit unto holiness" (sanctification), 
and eventually receive "the end thereof— eternal life" 
(redemption). Rom. 6:22. 

As sinners, men "are not subject to the law of God, neither 
indeed can they be." (Rom. 8:7). We are "made free from sin" 
by faith; that is, we are told of God that a ransom has been given 
for our sin, and that if we by faith accept the ransom, he no 
longer regards or treats us as sinners, but as perfect and sinless 
beings. This cleansing from sin is a complete work. You are 
justified— reckoned of God just and perfect, but it cannot be seen 
with the natural eye. You cannot realize that physically you are 
any more perfect than before you believed yourself justified. It 
is entirely by the eye of faith that you know yourself now as a 
being, justified freely from all things. God's word declares it and 
you believe Him. 

We need not fear that our justification is incomplete, for 
Jehovah Himself is the justifier, as we read, God is "just and the 
justifier of him which believeth in Jesus" (Rom. 3:26), and 
again, "Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect? It is 
God that justified!." 



Upon what grounds does God reckon human sinners as justified 
or righteous persons? Because the ransom for our sins has been 
paid by Jesus, who "Himself bare our sins in His own body on 
the tree." (1 Pet. 2:24). For "Christ suffered, the just for the 
unjust (sinners), that He might bring us to God" (1 Pet. 3:18) as 
justified beings. Jesus was treated as a sinner on our behalf, and 
we are now treated as just persons on His behalf. As we read 
again, "Ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus." (1 Cor. 
6:11). And again, "Being now justified by His blood, we shall be 
saved from wrath through Him." (Rom. 5:9). But 

ONL Y BELIEVERS ARE JUSTIFIED 

during this Gospel age. They who do not believe that Christ died 
for our sins according to the Scriptures, and that "He rose again 
the third day," for our justification (1 Cor. 15:14; Rom. 4:25), 
are not justified: "Ye are yet in your sins." So we read, God "is 
the justifier of him which believeth in Jesus." Again, "All that 
believe are justified from all things" (Acts 13:39), and "A man is 
justified by faith." (Gal. 2:16 and 3:24). 

When we believe the "good news" of our justification, it causes 
us joy and peace to realize that we may now come to God; and 
we no longer dread but now love God, because we see His 
goodness and love, for "herein is the love of God manifested." 
(1 John 4:9). 

We are thus brought into fellowship with God as justified 
human beings --"Being justified by faith, we have peace with 
God." (Rom. 5:1). Few, very few, lay hold upon justification 
fully; few believe God that they "are justified from all things" 
and are in God's sight clothed in the spotlessness of Jesus, in 
whom was no sin; consequently very few have the joy and peace 
which spring from believing. And it is no uncommon thing to 
hear, in church meetings of all denominations, men and women 
tell God that they know themselves to be "miserable sinners." 
Poor creatures, no wonder they agonize and daily ask the 
forgiveness of those sins which God's word declares are 
forgiven. 2 Pet. 1:9. They know not that they partake of the 
justification by believing. If they would only believe God, they 
would have the realization of forgiveness, and consequently joy 
and peace. "For without faith it is impossible to please God." 
Beyond this point of rejoicing in a consciousness of forgiveness 
of sins, and acceptableness in God's sight, few Christians go. 

Did you ever think why God has 

R199 : page 7 

made known to us our justification now, but keeps it hidden 
from the great mass of the race until the millennial age, though 
the ransom price is eventually to release all mankind from sin 
and its penalty, and bring them to the same condition of 
acceptance —sinlessness— perfection which we now enjoy by 



faith? It is because God has a plan which He is working out 
according to the counsel of His own will, and a part of that plan 
is that He will select from among mankind a number who will 
eventually be transferred from the earthly conditions and human 
nature to spiritual conditions and the "divine nature"~to be 
"heirs of God, joint heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord." 

God's object in the development of this "little flock" is two-fold: 
first, He will make them everlasting monuments of His 
goodness, to be known and read of angels and men. As Paul 
expresses it (Eph. 2:7), God's plan in the development of the 
Gospel church of overcomers, is, "That in the ages to come, He 
might show the exceeding riches of His grace, in His kindness 
toward us through Christ Jesus." The second part of God's 

R200 : page 7 

plan, in which we are directly associated, is, that He purposes to 
use us during the next~millennial~age as kings (rulers) and 
priests (teachers), when we shall reign with Christ a thousand 
years. (Rev. 5:10, 20:6). Thus shall the "seed," of which Jesus is 
the head, bless all the families of the earth. (Gal. 3:29). 

No sinners are called to have part in this "high calling, which is 
of God in Christ Jesus." True, Jesus called "sinners to 
repentance"~so does the word of God, and all his children seek 
to bring men to repentance and faith in Christ and consequent 
justification. But only the justified ones are called to be "kings 
and priests unto God, and to reign on the earth." It is worse than 
useless to present the grand prize for which we run to the 
attention of sinners-the unjustified. For the natural man 
receiveth not the things of the spirit of God, neither can he know 
them, for they are spiritually discerned—they are foolishness 
unto him. Therefore, "cast not your pearls before swine, lest 
they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend 
you." 

This being true, that none are called to the high calling except 
the justified ones, the fact that you know of your justification 
may be the proof to you that you are one of those whom God 
has "called" to spiritual life and joint-heirship with Jesus. What 
a blessed privilege to be called with such a high calling. Now do 
you realize that you are called to be a member of the Bride of 
Christ? Then remember who called you- God; and that 
"Faithful is He that calleth you, who also will do it." (1 Thess. 
5:24). Our Father mocks none with a call which they cannot 
attain to. His grace is sufficient for us. 

All who are called may take the second step- 

SANCTIFICATION 

To sanctify is to set apart or separate to a special thing or use. 
God's will is that all justified ones should be sanctified or set 



apart to his service as we read: "This is the will of God even 
your (believers) sanctification." (1 Thes. 4:3.) There are two 
parts to sanctification-first ours, secondly God's part. As we 
have seen, God provides for our justification as men and then 
calls us to set apart-sanctify -or consecrate to him, that 
justified humanity. When we do, thus consecrate or give up our 
will, our time, talent, life and all we have and are to God, and 
ask him to take our little all and use it as seemeth to him good, 
and agree to let the will of God dwell in us richly-when we 
have done this we have done all that we can do; and here God 
who accepts of every such sacrifice, begins His part of the 
sanctification work. He begins to use this will resigned to his 
care and "to work in you both to will and to do" in harmony 
with his will. From that moment it is no longer you (the human) 
but "Christ in you. " Even the earthly (human) body, under the 
new controlling will (God's) is used in God's service and is 
thereby made holy. 

From this moment when we give consecrate— ourselves— we are 
reckoned dead, as human beings for the human will, should be 
buried from that moment forward; and when the will of God- 
the mind of Christ-the Holy Spirit takes possession of us so that 
it becomes our will and our mind, we are called "new 
creatures"— we are thus begotten to newness of life. This new 
creature is only an embryo being: It is not complete; but it grows 
and develops and "we all with open face, beholding as in a glass 
the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from 
glory to glory even as by the Spirit of the Lord." (2 Cor. 3:18.) 
Thus as new spiritual creatures we grow in his likeness during 
the time we abide in this earthly condition. As the spiritual 
nature grows stronger the human nature grows weaker and is the 
easier to keep dead, for I must not only give up my will to God, 
but keep it in a surrendered condition, "keep my body under" - 
under God's will. 

As the new spiritual nature grows it longs for its perfection 
when it will no longer be trammeled and fettered by human 
conditions, but be "like unto Christ's glorious body." This is 
promised us-we have been begotten, and by and by shall be 
born of the Spirit-spiritual bodies, for "that which is born of the 
Spirit is Spirit," just as truly as "that which was born of the flesh 
was flesh." Our begetting we have and our spiritual life is 
begun. It is to be completed, perfected, when this corruptible, 
and mortal condition shall give place to the incorruptible, 
immortal conditions of the Spiritual body. This will be at the 
moment of resurrection to those who sleep in Jesus-raised 
spiritual bodies; and it will be the moment of change to the 
living (from the fleshly body to their own spiritual bodies- 
theirs as new creatures.) Thus, "we which are alive and remain 
shall be changed in a moment." 1 Cor. 15:52. 



If I in Thy likeness, O Lord, may awake, 
And shine a pure image of Thee, 
Then I shall be satisfied when I can break 
The fetters of flesh and be free. 

When on Thine own image in me Thou hast smiled, 
Within Thy blest mansion, and when 
The arms of my Father encircle His child, 
O ! I shall be satisfied then. 

And O ! the blest morning already is here; 
The shadows of nature do fade; 
And soon in Thy likeness I'll with Thee appear, 
In glory and beauty arrayed. 

This change of residence or condition, from the earthly body to 
the spiritual body is the third step of our development, viz: 

REDEMPTION. 

This redemption from the present earthly conditions, finishes 
and completes our salvation and the glory of power will follow. 

Toward this the end of the race we are looking with longing 
eyes, "Ourselves, that have the first fruits (begetting) of the 
Spirit, even we groan within ourselves waiting for sonship, -the 
redemption of our body" (the body of which Jesus is the head 
and all overcomers are members.) Rom. 8:23. 

THE POWER WHICH SANCTIFIES. 

It is not a power of physical force that is used by the Spirit of 
God in our development, but a mental power which appeals to 
our minds and wills. 

The Spirit appeals to our reason, and uses the word of God as its 
agent. In the Word, the Spirit has in former ages stored up, both 
by prophetic utterances and Law shadows and types, those truths 
which God designed should during this Gospel age be the food 
to sanctify the body of Christ and build it up in the most holy 
faith. And we act wisely if we make use of this spiritual food. 
("Thy words were found and I did eat them." Jer. 15:16). It is 
furnished us for the purpose of sanctifying us. If we go to our 
Father and say, Father, I give myself all to thee; I pray thee, set 
me apart as holy to thy service, both now and hereafter. Give me 
needed strength to do thy will. He answers, yes, my child, I have 
already provided a rich store-house of truth, from which, if you 
eat, you shall have the strength you ask. "Knock, and it shall be 
opened unto you"~seek, and you shall find." 

The seeker returns, saying, Father, I found the store-house, but 
saw little but plain food exposed to view; most of the choice 
viands must have been locked up in the great closets which the 
keys did not seem to fit. Father, give me strength in some other 



way. Not so, my child. Part of your lesson is to learn that my 
way is best; that my way of giving is your best way of receiving 
strength. Go; your strength, joy, zeal and love for me will 
increase as one after another these closets open before you, 
revealing their rich treasures. 

Yes, the word of God is the treasure-house of our Father, in 
which He has stored truth to sanctify the church in every age, 
wherein is "given us exceeding great and precious promises, that 
by these we might become partakers of the Divine nature" (2 
Pet. 1 :2,4). In it is revealed "the love of Christ (which) 
constraineth us." (2 Cor. 5:14), and by means of it our Master 
prayed that we should be sanctified: "Father sanctify them 
through Thy truth. Thy word is truth." (John 17:17.) What 
Christian, then, who desires sanctification can afford to ignore 
the Scriptures? Which one will say he has no time to examine 
and seek in it for truth? As well say he has no time for 
sanctification. "It is the power of God unto salvation." (Rom. 
1:16.) Let us, then, who seek this great salvation— high calling- 
say to ourselves as Paul said to Timothy (2 Tim. 3:15-17), 
"From a child thou hast known the Holy Scriptures which are 
able to make thee wise unto salvation." "All Scripture given by 
inspiration of God is profitable, for doctrine, for reproof, for 
correction, for instruction in righteousness; that the man of God 
may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works." 

Now call to mind the steps: First, justification of the human 
nature; second, a consecration or sacrifice of that human nature 
to God, its consequent death and the beginning of your existence 
as a spiritual new creature in the human body during the present 
life; third, the completion of your new, divine nature, by the 
power of God, when you will be like unto Christ's glorious 
body- who is the express image of the Father's person. Glorious, 
high calling! You are called: "Many are called, few are chosen," 
"Make your calling and election sure." 

Do you ask how you can make it sure? I answer, by doing 
according to your covenant; give up your all to Father and let 
Him use you as he sees best- 
All for Jesus ! all for Jesus ! 
All your being's ransomed power: 
All your thoughts and words and doings, 
All your days and all your hours. 

"If you do these things (which you covenanted) ye shall never 
fall: for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly 
into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus 
Christ." (2 Pet. 1:10-11.") God will surely keep His part of the 
agreement [Faithful is He that called you.] "If we suffer, we 
shall also reign with Him." (2 Tim. 2:12.) 



R202 : page 7 



AN OPEN LETTER. 



Dear Brother Russell, I write to ask your prayers for Mr. C, his 
wife, son and daughter. They are steeped in sin. Pray that they 
may be saved and become members of the Bride of Christ. 

My dear brother, your request would be considered a very 
reasonable and proper one by most of Christian people; but from 
our standpoint it would be the height of presumption. I can and 
do thank God that they and all others of our race ARE SAVED, 
are redeemed, and that in God's "due time" they will be entirely 
released from the bondage of sin and death, and during the next 
(Millennial) age will come to a full knowledge of their 
Redeemer, and have abundant opportunity to come to the 
condition of perfect men and women for "Jesus Christ, by the 
grace of God tasted death for every man," "Gave himself a 
ransom for all to be TESTIFIED IN DUE TIME." 

To ask God to convert by any other means than the word "which 
is able to make them wise (now) unto salvation," would be to 
ask Him to perform a miracle. If this be HIS WILL He can do so 
(as in Paul's case) without my asking Him; and would do so 
whether I ask or not. If not God's will to make an exception of 
Mr. C. and family, who am I that I should ask Him to change 
His plans to suit mine? Oh, no! rather reverse the order and 
change my will to suit His plans. 

His plan is to give "Restitution" to the billions in the next age, 
but to select now during the Gospel age "a little flock" (from 
among the billions who are redeemed from death)~to take out a 
people for His name-to be "the Bride, the Lamb's wife" and 
bear His name. It is not our business to help the Lord decide 
who shall be of that selected company. 

The key to many unanswered prayers is "ye ask and receive not 
because ye ask amiss." To be sure of an answer we must ask in 
harmony with God's plan and word. Suppose now that I should 
ask the Lord that Mr. C. and family may be a part of Christ's 
bride, and suppose Mr. C. should not be the Lord's choice for 
that exalted position, one of two things would surely follow: 
either the Lord would take some one contrary to His will, or my 
prayer would go unanswered. And undoubtedly it would be the 
latter-an unanswered prayer. 

Unacceptable prayers come from one of two causes: Either they 
are the desire of our old (human) nature or of the new spiritual 
nature uninstructed as to how to ask and what to ask for. 

Now brother, your request was undoubtedly made by your 
spiritual nature. 

R202 : page 8 



So far it was good; but our new nature or new mind can at 
present operate only through the natural body and may 
consequently make mistakes (therefore, "in this tabernacle we 
groan"— longing for our spiritual body, which will be fully in 
harmony with our new nature—our birth). It is because we are 
thus hampered by the imperfections of earthly conditions that 
"the Spirit helpeth our infirmities;" for we know not what things 
we should ask for as we ought, but "the Spirit maketh 
intercession for the saints according to the will of God." (Rom. 
8:26.) Therefore, sometimes God answers very improper prayers 
in a very gracious manner, though not according to the asking. 

If we would ask and receive, we should study to ask aright. "Let 
the words of our mouth and the meditations of our heart be 
acceptable before Thee, O Lord, our strength and our 
Redeemer." 

There is only one source from which we can learn "what things 
we should ask for," and that is the Spirit's text-book-the Bible. 
How important, then, it is for us to use our text-book and be well 
acquainted with God's plan that we may ask in harmony with it 
and receive. How fully this point was covered by our Lord 
Jesus, when he said: "If ye abide in me (first condition) and my 
words abide in you (second condition), ye shall ask what ye will, 
and it shall be done unto you." 

Truly, your brother in Christ. 



R201 : page 8 

QUESTIONS OF CORRESPONDENTS. 

QUESTION. -Bro. R., how could Moses appear on the Mount 
of transfiguration if not translated? 

ANSWER.-Moses was not translated; he died. (See Deut. 
34:5.) He could have been resurrected by God's power, but not 
as a spiritual body since Jesus was "the first-born from the dead" 
to a spiritual body; "put to death in the flesh but quickened by 
the Spirit." Moses may have been on the Mount as a fleshly 
being but nothing in the narrative demands it. Jesus doubtless 
knew all about it and He charged them straightly, saying, "See 
that ye tell no man the vision until," etc. (Matt. 17:9.) If He thus 
calls it a vision who am I that I should call it a reality. 

QUES.-Bro. R., why do you advise us to read the tracts 
carefully before handing to others? I read them many times and 
have been much instructed by so doing. I don't know why I 
should doubt the truths they teach. 

ANS.-The habit of giving tracts, etc., of whose contents the 
distributors are ignorant, often does harm. We should be as 
careful about not distributing moral poison as any other-more 



so. If all our readers learn to examine the tracts it will aid them 
in the use of the same care with other writings, to see whether it 
be food or poison. If by reading they are convinced that the 
tracts are food, such as many are starving for, it will fire their 
zeal in distributing them. 

Then, too, we should like to think of all readers of the WATCH 
TOWER as preachers of God's plan and truth: "living epistles 
known and read of all men" "ready always to give an answer to 
every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you, 
with meekness." (1 Peter 3:15.) The reading of the tracts might 
be God's way of making ready your answer. 

QUES.-Dear Bro., do you not see that we, the people of these 
U.S. are the seed of Abraham, the lost tribe of Israel? 

ANS. —Abraham was the father of two seeds, the children of the 
flesh [twelve tribes of Israel] and the children of promise, 
[faith], of which two seeds Ishmael and Isaac were types. (Rom. 
9:8. and Gal. 3:23,28,31.) "There are spiritual promises for the 
spiritual seed, which is Christ," "and if ye be Christ's (members) 
then are ye Abraham's (spiritual) seed." (Gal. 3:16,29.) None of 
the spiritual promises belong to the natural fleshly seed, though 
any of them may give up their earthly promises and with the 
"Gentiles become fellow-heirs and of the same body [of Christ] 
and partakers of His promise, in Christ." Eph. 3:6. 

Almost all of the fleshly seed are so blinded by the fleshly 
promises, that they do not see the greater spiritual prize. (See 
Rom. 9:30-32.) "What, then, Israel hath not obtained that which 
he seeketh for (the chief blessing through Abraham) but the 
election (the remnant, the few, in connection with the Gentiles) 
hath obtained it, and the rest were blinded. " But, "they also, if 
they abide not still in unbelief, shall be grafted in again" -into 
the spiritual promises. [That is, as a nation they lost those 
spiritual promises and were cut off from them; but believing 
Israelites, as well as Gentiles, may be grafted into the spiritual 
vine by faith.] But, I would not, (spiritual) brethren, that ye 
should be ignorant of this mystery... that blindness in part (to the 
larger part) hath happened unto Israel until the fullness of the 
Gentiles be come in (to the spiritual blessings) "And (thus) all 
Israel shall be saved," (receive the things promised them as the 
natural seed,) viz: "There shall come out of Zion the deliverer 
(the spiritual seed) who shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob, 
(fleshly seed.) For this is my covenant unto them." (Rom. 1 1:7- 
23-25 and 26.) 

These two seeds of Abraham are referred to in Rom. 4:16: That 
"the promise might be sure to all the seed (natural and spiritual) 
not to that only which is of the law (the natural) but to that also 
which is of the faith." 

We know not whether the people of these United States and of 
England are the natural, fleshly descendants of Israel or not. It 



could make no difference as regards the spiritual "prize of our 
high calling in Christ Jesus." If they are, and were made to know 
it, the effect of those earthly promises would probably be to 
blind them to the spiritual prize as it did the others, 1 800 years 
ago. If they are of the natural seed, they will receive grand 
blessings in the coming age, after the spiritual seed has been 
exalted to glory and power; as it is written. "They shall obtain 
mercy (God's promised blessings) through your mercy" (through 
the spiritual seed.) Rom. 11:31. 

Bro. A. Hipsher, for answer to your question: see 
"Unpardonable Sin," page 3. 

QUES.-Dear Bro. what kind of bodies will little children have 
in the resurrection? 

ANS.-Paul gives us an answer to this question in 1 Cor. 15:38: 
"God giveth...to every seed His own body." "There is a natural 
body and there is a spiritual body"~vs. 44. Adam, the perfect 
man will serve as an illustration of a perfect natural (human) 
body, what the earthly ones shall all be when the work of 
resurrection and restitution, is complete. Christ's body after his 
resurrection will serve as an illustration of a spiritual body. Like 
Him, we who have been begotten of the Spirit shall be, when we 
get our birth, as we have borne the image of the earthly, we shall 
also bear the image of the heavenly.-- Vs. 48,49. 

Now, let us use this rule: Were these children begotten and born 
of the flesh— fleshly bodies? Yes. Were they afterward "begotten 
of the Spirit by the word of truth?" No. Then they remained 
natural, or human, and as such belong to the natural body, while 
we who have been begotten of the spirit and are therefore of the 
spiritual seed, and in the resurrection, God will give to every 
seed his own body; consequently they as part of the natural seed 
will have a natural body, while we who have been begotten of 
the spirit and are therefore of the spiritual seed, will have our 
own bodies, viz: Spiritual bodies, "like unto Christ's glorious 
body." 

While they are designed ultimately to reach the same grand 
perfection of powers, and being enjoyed by the head of the 
human family, (Adam), yet we do not suppose that they will 
come out of their graves thus perfect. We presume (merely) that 
they will arise children and develop. The government, etc., of 
children will be much easier when the curse begins to roll away; 
besides, in past ages the proportion of deaths in childhood, was 
much less than now. 

Bro. J. Baldwin: It would require the entire space of Z.W.T. for 
a year or more to answer all your questions in full. We 
commend to you the reading of all the tracts 3 or 4 times; then 
read "DAY DAWN." You need not expect to obtain all the truth 
on so great and grand a subject at one swallow, it is a continuous 



eating. You must seek. "He that seeketh findeth." "Then shall we 
know if we follow on to know the Lord." (Hos. 6:3.) 

QUES.-Dear Bro. R., may we be sure we belong to the "little 
flock," or must we be in doubt? 

ANS.-'T know in whom I have believed, and am persuaded that 
He is able to keep (preserve) that (life) which I have committed 
unto Him against that day." Paul thus expresses his and our 
confidence in God that He is both able and willing to do for us, 
all of his part of the covenant. The question, then, of our 
membership in the little flock depends entirely upon our keeping 
our part of the covenant. We are His spiritual sheep, ever since 
we entered our covenant relationship, --we are His workmanship. 
If we are entirely given up to Him, so that His will is 
accomplished in us [the human nature crucified] He will give us 
the grand prize. If we hinder the work by opposition of our 
wills, we lose the prize and are obliged to come through the fire 
of tribulation in order to obtain the spiritual body. 

We may not be able to say: the prize will surely be mine; but we 
can say if now entirely given up, -The prize is mine to-day 
unless I lose it to-morrow; and by God's grace I will "keep my 
body (humanity) under lest after having preached to others (of 
the grand prize) I myself should be a castaway" (from it.) 



R202 : page 8 



TIME SERVERS. 



The trimming, hesitating policy of many reminds us of Luther's 
words to Erasmus: "You desire to walk upon eggs without 
crushing them, and among glasses without breaking them!" This 
is a difficult game to play at, and one which is more suitable for 
a clown at a theatre than a servant of Christ. When you are 
attempting to compromise, you have to look around you and 
move cautiously as a tight-rope dancer, for fear of offending on 
one side or the other. A little too much this way or that and over 
you go. A cat on hot cinders is in an enviable position. No true- 
hearted man will ever bear such wretched constraint for any 
length of time, or indeed at all. Think of being able to go no 
further than the aforementioned timorous, time-serving 
Erasmus, who said, "I will not be unfaithful to the cause of 
Christ; at least so far as the age will permit me." Out upon such 
cowardice: life is too dear when bought at such a price. - 
Spurgeon. 



R202 : page 8 

When a cloud comes between us and the sun, it robs us for the 
time of the enjoyment of its beams. It does not prevent him from 



shining, it merely hinders our enjoyment of him. Exactly so it is 
when we allow trials and sorrows, difficulties and perplexities, 
to hide from our souls the bright beams of our Father's 
countenance, which ever shine with changeless lustre in the face 
of Jesus Christ. There is no difficulty too great for our God; yea, 
the greater the difficulty the more room there is for Him to act in 
His proper character, as the God of all power and grace. It is the 
privilege of faith to find God behind the cloud in all His 
faithfulness, love andpower.-Sel. 


