Are Doubts About Jesus Justified?
DID Jesus of Nazareth really perform miracles? Was he resurrected from the dead, as his disciples proclaimed? Did he live at all? In our modern age, many seem to be unable to answer such questions with certainty. Why? Because they entertain doubts about Jesus, and doubts are feelings of uncertainty, not knowing whether something is true or possible. But are feelings of uncertainty concerning Jesus justified? Let us see.
How Doubts About Jesus Were Sown
Certain German theologians of the late 19th and early 20th centuries portrayed Jesus as “a fictitious figure of the ancient Church.” Their impugning Jesus’ historicity led to a controversy among scholars at the beginning of this century that reached the public at that time and still has an influence today. For example, a recent study in Germany revealed that 3 percent of those interviewed believe that Jesus “never lived” and that “the apostles invented him.” Yes, the seeds of doubt about Jesus that were sown early in this century find fertile soil in people’s hearts even now.
Why is the conclusion that Jesus was “invented” simply not justified? Bible scholar Wolfgang Trilling comments: “The controversy as to whether Jesus ever lived, in other words whether he was a historical figure or a myth, was settled. The question was resolved in a scholarly manner, at least in such a way that serious-minded people no longer see the problem as an academic issue.” Nevertheless, some still doubt that Jesus ever existed. Consequently, let us investigate how one can establish Jesus’ historicity as well as remove other doubts concerning him.
Testimonies That Dispel Doubts
The ignominious execution of Jesus as a contemptible criminal provides “the most convincing argument against opponents of the historicity of Jesus,” states Trilling. Why? Because the execution “encumbered, even hindered, the dispersion of the new faith among Jews and non-Jews.” (Compare 1 Corinthians 1:23.) If the execution of Jesus the Messiah was such an effrontery to both Jews and Gentiles, it hardly would have been an invention of the apostles! Furthermore, Jesus’ death is attested to as an historical event not only by the four Gospels but also by the Roman writer Tacitus and by the Jewish Talmud.a
Other events during Jesus’ life are also viewed as internal evidence of the credibility of the Gospels, hence of what they tell us about him. For example, would the followers of Jesus have fabricated his coming from Nazareth, a place seemingly out of favor? Or is it likely that they would have invented his betrayal by Judas, a trusted companion? Does it seem realistic to think that they would have made up a story about Jesus’ being abandoned by the rest of the disciples in such a cowardly manner? It is surely illogical that the disciples would have constructed particulars so detrimental in nature and then proclaimed them far and wide! In addition, the art of teaching employed by Jesus was characterized by a unique style. Jewish literature of the first century contains nothing comparable to his illustrations. Which anonymous person could ever have “invented” such a masterpiece as the Sermon on the Mount? These arguments all tend to corroborate the trustworthiness of the Gospels as reports of Jesus’ life.
There is also external evidence for the historicity of Jesus. The four Gospels portray him against a specific, accurately detailed, historical background. Places, such as Bethlehem and Galilee; prominent individuals and groups, such as Pontius Pilate and the Pharisees; as well as Jewish customs and other peculiarities were not simply concocted. They formed part of the structure of life in the first century, and they have been confirmed by non-Biblical sources and by archaeological findings.
There is, thus, convincing evidence, both internal and external, that Jesus is a historical person.
However, quite a number of people entertain doubts about miracles involving him. Indeed, according to the survey quoted above, only a minority of German churchgoers firmly believe that Jesus’ miracles and his resurrection “really happened.” Are doubts about Jesus’ miracles and resurrection justified?
Why Some Doubt Jesus’ Miracles
Matthew 9:18-36 reports that Jesus miraculously healed sick ones, resurrected the dead, and expelled demons. Professor Hugo Staudinger, a historian, comments: “It is quite simply unbelievable, and from the standpoint of history impossible, that these extraordinary reports are the product of a vivid imagination.” Why? Because it seems that the earliest Gospels were penned at a time when most eyewitnesses to these miracles were still alive! Further confirmation is found in that, as Staudinger goes on to say, the Jewish opponents “never denied that Jesus performed extraordinary works.” Ignoring all other proof and basing our judgment simply on this external evidence, we find that Jesus’ miracles are definitely worthy of our belief.​—2 Timothy 3:16.
Although “the majority of Germans are convinced that Jesus healed sick people,” many have doubts about the power behind these healings. For instance, a well-known German theologian stated publicly that healings performed by Jesus were the result of the power of suggestion influencing people who were suffering from mental distress. Is this a sound explanation?
Just consider. Mark 3:3-5 reports that Jesus cured a man’s withered hand. But is a withered hand the result of mental distress? Definitely not. Consequently, this healing could not be attributed to the power of suggestion. So what enabled Jesus to perform miracles? Professor Staudinger admits: “If there are no laws that are absolutely valid, and if one does not completely deny God, then fundamentally one cannot rule out the possibility that God, whose power exceeds man’s, is able to perform things that are not common practice.” Yes, indeed, with the aid of the “power of God,” Jesus literally healed people who were ill. There is thus no reason to doubt the genuineness of his miracles.​—Luke 9:43; Matthew 12:28.
As The American Peoples Encyclopedia puts it, if the greatest of all miracles​—Jesus’ resurrection—​took place, all other miracles reported in the Gospels “fall within the realm of possibility.” Was Jesus really raised up from the dead?
Doubts About Jesus’ Resurrection Justified?
Consider first a piece of strong circumstantial evidence that supports the truthfulness of the resurrection of Jesus​—his empty tomb. The fact that Jesus’ grave was discovered to be empty was undisputed by his contemporaries, even by his opposers. (Matthew 28:11-15) Deception would easily have been exposed! The above-mentioned reference work rightly concludes: “No valid explanation for the empty tomb has ever been suggested except the biblical statement, ‘He is not here; for he is risen’ (Matt. 28:6).”
Some object, saying that it was only Jesus’ own disciples who proclaimed everywhere that he was the resurrected Messiah. They did. But was not the credibility of their message firmly anchored in historical fact, especially the death and resurrection of Jesus? Of course. The apostle Paul was aware of this connection when he wrote: “If Christ has not been raised up, our preaching is certainly in vain, and our faith is in vain. Moreover, we are also found false witnesses of God, because we have borne witness against God that he raised up the Christ.”​—1 Corinthians 15:14, 15; compare John 19:35; 21:24; Hebrews 2:3.
In the first century, there were many people whose identities were well-known and who could bear witness to the appearance of Jesus after his death. Among them were the 12 apostles and Paul, as well as more than 500 other eyewitnesses.b (1 Corinthians 15:6) Bear in mind also the reason why Matthias fulfilled the qualifications to succeed the unfaithful apostle Judas. Acts 1:21-23 reports that Matthias could testify to Jesus’ resurrection and to earlier events in connection with Him. If the life and resurrection of Jesus had been fiction instead of fact, such a requirement for the appointment would certainly have been completely pointless.
Because so many first-century eyewitnesses could testify to the life, miracles, death, and resurrection of Jesus, Christianity spread relatively quickly throughout the Roman Empire, despite the above-mentioned obstacles. His followers were willing to put up with hardship, persecution, and even death so as to declare everywhere the resurrection and the fundamental truth emanating from it. Which truth? That his resurrection had been possible only by reason of the power of God. And why had Jehovah God resurrected Jesus from the dead? The answer to that question shows who the historical Jesus is.
On the day of Pentecost, the apostle Peter freely declared to astonished Jews in Jerusalem: “This Jesus God resurrected, of which fact we are all witnesses. Therefore because he was exalted to the right hand of God and received the promised holy spirit from the Father, he has poured out this which you see and hear. Actually David did not ascend to the heavens, but he himself says, ‘Jehovah said to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand, until I place your enemies as a stool for your feet.”’ Therefore let all the house of Israel know for a certainty that God made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus whom you impaled.” (Acts 2:32-36) Yes, Jehovah God made Jesus of Nazareth “both Lord and Christ.” Are doubts concerning his role in this part of God’s purpose justified?
Why Doubt Jesus’ Present Role?
How can all doubts about the identity and role of Jesus be dispelled? By the fact that he was clearly a true prophet. He predicted the wars, famines, earthquakes, crime, and lack of love that we see today. Additionally, he predicted: “This good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations; and then the end will come.” (Matthew 24:3-14) The fulfillment of these prophecies proves that Jesus is the resurrected Christ, invisibly ruling ‘in the midst of his enemies,’ and soon he will usher in God’s new world.​—Psalm 110:1, 2; Daniel 2:44; Revelation 21:1-5.
Now as never before, mankind urgently needs a Savior equipped with superhuman wisdom. Why should we doubt that Jesus is the one rightly selected to save mankind? John, who was an eyewitness to the impressive miracles and to the resurrection of Jesus, declared: “In addition, we ourselves have beheld and are bearing witness that the Father has sent forth his Son as Savior of the world.” (1 John 4:14; compare John 4:42.) Just as we have no reasonable grounds to doubt Jesus’ existence, miracles, death, and resurrection, we have no reason to doubt that he has been enthroned by Jehovah God as lawful King at His right hand. Without doubt, Jesus of Nazareth is the King of God’s Kingdom and “Savior of the world.”​—Matthew 6:10.
[Footnotes]
Polemic references to Jesus in the Talmud are accepted as genuine by certain scholars only. On the other hand, references to Jesus by Tacitus, Suetonius, Pliny the Younger, and at least one by Flavius Josephus, are generally accepted as proof of the historical existence of Jesus.
On one occasion, the resurrected Jesus ate fish with his disciples, which proves that his appearance was not simply a vision, as some claim today.​—Luke 24:36-43.

