Do You Remember?
Have you enjoyed reading the recent issues of The Watchtower? If so, you will find it interesting to recall the following:
▫ Is religious truth attainable?
Jesus Christ said: “You will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.” (John 8:32) Jesus not only pointed out that the truth is attainable but showed that finding it is required in our worship of God. He told a Samaritan woman: “True worshipers will worship the Father with spirit and truth.” (John 4:23)​—4/15, page 5.
▫ Who was Robert Estienne, and how did he leave his mark?
Robert Estienne was a printer who lived in the 16th century. He devoted his life to the publication of the Holy Scriptures and strove to uncover the words of the Bible as originally written. His system for dividing the Bible’s text into numbered verses is the system universally used today.​—4/15, pages 10, 14.
▫ How do we benefit from daily Bible reading?
The Scriptures constantly take on fresh meaning for us, and prophecies regarding the last days become more impressive in the light of what we have seen, heard, and personally experienced. As our own experience in life is broadened and we cope with problems, we appreciate more fully the Bible’s counsel. (Proverbs 4:18)​—5/1, page 15.
▫ How can Bible texts be remembered?
As you read the Bible, mark selected texts that you want to remember, or copy them on cards and put these cards where you will see them daily. As you try to memorize the verses, meditate on them and make use of them. Do not try to memorize too many at once, perhaps only one or two each week.​—5/1, pages 16, 17.
▫ What information does the Gospel of Luke contain that is in addition to what the other Gospel writers provided?
While much recorded by Luke is similar to that in Matthew’s account, 59 percent is different. Luke recorded six miracles unique to his book, and he reported more than twice that number of Jesus’ illustrations not mentioned by other Gospel writers.​—5/15, page 12.
▫ What outstanding flash of the light of truth was revealed in 1935?
That year Jehovah’s people came to understand that the great crowd mentioned at Revelation 7:9, 14 referred, not to a secondary heavenly class, but to those whose hopes are earthly. (John 10:16)​—5/15, page 20.
▫ In what practical ways can we comfort the bereaved?
Listen. Provide reassurance. Be available. Take the initiative when appropriate. Write a comforting letter or card. Pray with them. (James 5:16) Continue to help them.​—6/1, pages 13, 14.
▫ What can spiritual brothers and sisters do to help those living in religiously divided families to endure?
Regularly speak encouraging, positive, and comforting words to them. (1 Thessalonians 5:14) This acts like a refreshment to their mind and body. When practical and appropriate, include them in your theocratic and social activities. Include them in your prayers. (Romans 1:9; Ephesians 1:16)​—6/1, page 29.
▫ What rewards come from exercising patience while engaging in the field ministry?
Patience helps the Kingdom publisher to endure any indifference or opposition. Instead of arguing with angry householders, patient ministers will be able to give a mild answer or quietly leave, thus retaining peace and joy. (Matthew 10:12, 13) Furthermore, sheeplike ones will be drawn to the Kingdom message.​—6/15, page 9.
▫ Why is knowing Bible truth so valuable?
Knowing the truth sets us free from lies, delusions, and superstitions. When we live by it, the truth strengthens us to endure hardships and inspires us with hope that enables us to stand up under test.​—7/1, page 8.
▫ What primary responsibility did the anointed Christian congregation take over from natural Israel?
The privilege of witnessing to Jehovah’s greatness among the nations. (Isaiah 43:21; 1 Peter 2:9)​—7/1, page 19.
▫ What is implied by the apostle Peter’s words that a husband should ‘assign honor’ to his wife? (1 Peter 3:⁠7)
The husband who honors his wife does not humiliate or downgrade her. Rather, he demonstrates by his words and his deeds​—in private and in public—​that he esteems her. (Proverbs 31:10-31)​—7/15, page 19.
▫ Why can it be said that it is loving to expel an unrepentant wrongdoer from the Christian congregation?
Disfellowshipping is an expression of love for Jehovah and his ways. (Psalm 97:10) It shows love for those pursuing a righteous course because it removes from their midst one who could exercise a bad influence on them; this also protects the purity of the congregation. (1 Corinthians 5:1-13)​—7/15, page 25.
▫ How can “the faithful and discreet slave,” spoken of by Jesus at Matthew 24:45-47, be identified today?
They are particularly identified by the work they do in providing Bible-based publications, in teaching and preaching the “good news of the kingdom,” and by their close adherence to God’s Word, the Bible. (Matthew 24:14; 28:19, 20)​—8/1, page 16.

