Faithful Households Speed Up the Increase in Sri Lanka
KNOWN as Ceylon until 1972, Sri Lanka is a lovely island with palm-fringed beaches, mountain ranges, and small deserts. In the uplands, Adam’s Peak, at 7,360 feet [2243 m], is a site sacred to four major religions.a Nearby is World’s End, an escarpment where the rocky cliff drops precipitously over 5,000 feet [1500 m]. The site offers one of Sri Lanka’s most spectacular views.
Sri Lanka’s 18 million inhabitants share an interesting background. Since the fifth century B.C.E., people of Indo-European stock from northern India have populated the island. They are the Sinhalese, now making up about three quarters [75%] of the population. Then, through about the 12th century, came a wave of Tamils from southern India; these now live mainly in the north and east of the island. The Portuguese, Dutch, and British too have left their mark from the colonial days. Additionally, seafaring merchants from the Arabian and Malayan peninsulas have settled in among the local people. There also are pockets of Europeans, Parsis, Chinese, and others.
Besides the racial mix, language and religion in Sri Lanka reflect its diverse background. The principal languages in the island are Sinhalese, Tamil, and English. Many Sri Lankans speak at least two of the three. Ethnic backgrounds also play a large role in the people’s religion. Most Sinhalese are Buddhists, whereas most Tamils are Hindus. Those with Arabic or Malayan ties usually adhere to Islam, and those with European background are generally members of Christendom’s churches, Catholic and Protestant.
Meeting the Challenge
All of this presents a tremendous challenge to Jehovah’s Witnesses in Sri Lanka. These work hard to carry out Jesus’ commission: “This good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations.” (Matthew 24:14) Besides having to deal with several languages, publishers of the good news may talk to Buddhists, Hindus, members of Christendom’s churches, as well as atheists​—all in a few hours of preaching.
To be effective in their ministry, the publishers must carry with them the Watchtower and Awake! magazines and other Bible literature in Tamil, Sinhalese, and English. Those strong enough to manage it even carry Bibles in those languages. The publishers were recently overjoyed when the brochures Does God Really Care About Us? and Our Problems​—Who Will Help Us Solve Them? and the tract Will This World Survive? were released in the three languages simultaneously. This meant more tools for the work.
The Witnesses have been working hard since 1912, when Charles Taze Russell, then president of the International Bible Students Association, paid a brief visit to Ceylon. Significant growth, however, had to await the arrival of graduates of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead in 1947. Since then, the publishers in Sri Lanka have enjoyed fine results from their preaching work. In 1994 the 1,866 Kingdom publishers conducted, on the average, 2,551 home Bible studies each month. And the Memorial attendance of 6,930 was almost four times the number of publishers in all the congregations. What a marvelous blessing!
In comparison with some other lands, the progress in Sri Lanka may seem to be slow. One factor appears to be the strong family ties. However, things can go the other way as well. When the Roman army officer Cornelius took his stand for the truth, his household stood alongside him. (Acts 10:1, 2, 24, 44) The book of Acts also mentions other strong Christian households, including those of Lydia, Crispus, and the jailer of Paul and Silas.​—Acts 16:14, 15, 32-34; 18:8.
Indeed, strong family ties may work to an advantage where there is good organization and faithful persistence. With the words of Isaiah 60:22 in mind, longtime missionary Ray Matthews observes: “It appears that Jehovah is now speeding things up at the proper time, not just by individuals but also by households.”
Organized Family Brings Praise
There certainly are such faithful households in Sri Lanka today. For example, there is the well-organized Sinnappa family who live in Kotahena, a zone of Colombo, the principal city of Sri Lanka. Though the family head, Marian, died not long ago, his wife, Annamma, and 12 of their 15 children, ranging in age from 13 to 33, continue to serve Jehovah as a household. At the time of writing, eight of the children were baptized, and three of them were in the full-time ministry, serving as regular pioneers. Three others had enrolled in the auxiliary pioneer service from time to time. Among the younger ones of the household were four unbaptized publishers. In addition, four grandchildren, though still of tender years, were studying the Bible and attending Christian meetings at the Colombo North Congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
It was in 1978 that Annamma first heard the Kingdom good news when she accepted a copy of The Watchtower. A Bible study was started, and after completing the Bible study aid The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life, Annamma dedicated her life to Jehovah God and was baptized, thus setting the initial example for many of her household.
Like the military man Cornelius, Annamma has good organization in her household. “We had to plan for Christian meetings and assemblies​—to say nothing of school,” Annamma recalls. “Clothing was a challenge, but with Jehovah’s blessing we were able to make some new clothes for each assembly. All the family arrived well clothed and well fed​—and wearing a large smile too.”
The children remember their household organization with affection. To help the whole family to attend Christian meetings, the older ones generally were given special responsibilities. For example, Mangala did the washing, and Winnifreda the ironing. Winnifreda, who also helped the younger ones to dress, says: “Everyone looked really nice as they left home.”
Spiritual provisions were equally well organized. Daughter Pushpam, now a regular pioneer, remembers: “Each day, our family enjoyed reading the Bible and reviewing the daily Bible text together.” Annamma adds: “Every child has a personal copy of the Bible, The Watchtower, and other publications. I listen carefully to all their comments at the meetings. Where it seems necessary, I follow up at home with encouragement and correction. At night we unite to conclude the day with our family prayer.”
The older children are invaluable in helping Annamma to provide a fine Christian education for all in the family. The tight schedule, however, does not hinder their desire to share the good news outside the home. In all, various members of the family conduct 57 home Bible studies with people in the neighborhood. Son-in-law Rajan remarks: “The family conducts progressive Bible studies. My wife, Pushpam, has already had the privilege of seeing one of her students dedicate her life to Jehovah.”
It caused quite a stir in Kotahena when such a large family left the Roman Catholic Church. Though the priest himself never visited the family to find out why, he did ask lay members of the church to investigate. Several discussions ensued, mostly about the Trinity doctrine. Annamma always relied on Jehovah and the Bible to defend her faith. Her favorite scripture in these discussions was John 17:3.
The Sinnappa household clearly demonstrates that good organization and consistent effort can bring satisfying results. By their zealous efforts, a new generation of Kingdom publishers is growing up, all to Jehovah’s praise.
Opposition Unites Family in True Worship
The Ratnam household is located a few miles down the road from the Sinnappas, in Narhenpitya, another zone of Colombo. They too were formerly Roman Catholics. In 1982, Witnesses engaged in the house-to-house ministry contacted Balendran, husband of the eldest daughter, Fatima. A Bible study was started with the entire family. Soon their three children were asking Grandmother Ignasiamal about God’s name. When the children supplied the answer “Jehovah,” they aroused Grandmother’s interest, and a Bible study was started with her. Later, two of her daughters, Jeevakala and Stella, joined in the study, and by 1988 all three were baptized.
Meanwhile, Balendran and Fatima shared the truth with another of Fatima’s sisters, Mallika, and her husband, Yoganathan. By 1987 this couple were baptized, and they have instilled in their two children a growing love for Jehovah. Pushpa, another of Fatima’s sisters, came next. She made her dedication and was baptized in 1990. While in Tokyo, her husband, Eka, served with an English congregation, and Pushpa helped their young son, Alfred, to be brought up in Jehovah’s way.
Thus far, four of the ten children of the Ratnam family have taken their stand for true worship. Happily, three more are making good progress in their personal Bible studies. Among the 11 grandchildren, one girl, Pradeepa, is already baptized. Seven other younger ones are regularly being instructed through their family Bible studies. In addition, a total of 24 home Bible studies are being conducted with interested people in the neighborhood.
All of this did not come about easily. Initially, there was family opposition. The father, Muthupillai, and the older brothers were very opposed to any of their family attending meetings at the Kingdom Hall or engaging in the public preaching work. While some of this had to do with concern for personal safety, Muthupillai adds: “I was totally committed to the ‘saints’ and did not approve of my family leaving the Catholic Church.” Now, however, he believes that they are worshiping the true God because he can see the benefits that their faith has brought them.
For instance, once their Buddhist landlord attempted to evict them from his property by using charms on them. He came one night and placed “charmed” lime fruits around the house. Fear came over the superstitious neighbors, all of whom were expecting some unhappy event to strike the Ratnam household. When Ignasiamal discovered this, however, she and the children simply removed the fruits without any fear or trepidation​—and nothing evil happened to them. Their fearless action became quite a witness in the area, causing people to have great respect for them. Stella was able to start two home Bible studies in the adjoining lanes. Encouraged by this, daughter-in-law Nazeera also accepted a Bible study.
Looking back over the many blessings that have come upon her family, Ignasiamal observes: “I am very happy to see the spiritual growth within the family. We have been blessed by Jehovah because opposition has softened, and our family unity has increased.”
What a blessing these large households have proved to be. They have added their voices to those of the smaller families, the one-parent families, and the single Christians who are striving hard to speed up the proclamation of the Kingdom good news in “the resplendent land,” as the name Sri Lanka means. Together with their fellow Christians worldwide, the Sri Lankan Witnesses look forward to the restoration of Paradise, which we may call to mind even now as we see the beaches and mountains of lovely Sri Lanka.
[Footnotes]
A large depression there is purported to be the footprint of Adam, Buddha, Siva, and “Saint” Thomas, respectively, in Muslim, Buddhist, Hindu, and church legends.
[Pictures on page 24, 25]
Many in Sri Lanka are responding to Christian preaching and teaching

