How Can You Survive in a Dangerous Neighborhood?
“I WAS scared all the time. I was afraid on the elevator. I was afraid in my car. I was afraid in my apartment. There was crime everywhere. People were always getting robbed,” says Maria. Do you feel like this Brazilian woman, afraid in your neighborhood, especially in the darkness of the night?
To read detective stories may be exciting, but in real life there often is no happy ending. A crime may remain unsolved. Or in cases of homicide, someone has to go on living without a husband, father, or son, without a wife, mother, or daughter. Is violent crime increasing in your area? Do you long for a quiet place where your family would be safe? Or, if you are compelled to raise your children in a crime-ridden area, what can you do to survive?
Granted, there are still cities where little crime is reported. In many lands, people still live in rural tranquillity or in cozy villages. But things are changing rapidly even in areas formerly considered crime-free. For example, in Brazil 50 years ago, 70 percent of the population lived in the country. Now 70 percent live in the cities. Along with job opportunities has come an increase in urban problems, such as crime and violence. Whether living in a dangerous area or not, you still must go to work or school and do scores of things away from home.
Acknowledging the prevailing “panic syndrome,” a chief of police in Rio de Janeiro cites social injustice and organized crime as contributing factors. He also feels that newspapers and television contribute to widespread fear, “influencing the population’s spirit with tragic news.” Drug addiction, family breakdown, and faulty religious education also contribute to the growing lawlessness. And what will the future bring? Will the steady diet of violent scenes, trivialized in books and films as entertainment, cause people to become insensitive toward others? Will areas considered crime-free also become dangerous?
Since violence is no fun for the victim, we have a strong desire to be safe. No wonder concerned citizens demand more police officers on the streets and stiffer prison sentences or even capital punishment! Despite the risks, some acquire guns for self-defense. Others want the authorities to restrict the sale of firearms. But despite the bad news that crime abounds, there is no need to despair. In fact, many habitants of such large cities as Johannesburg, Mexico City, New York, Rio de Janeiro, and São Paulo have never been robbed. Let us examine how people cope in a dangerous neighborhood.
Maintaining a Positive Attitude
Regarding a crime-ridden area, a writer comments on “the ingenuity and perseverance of thousands of Brazilians who have fashioned some dignity and decency out of still-harsh living conditions.” After 38 years in Rio de Janeiro, Jorge says: “I avoid certain streets and areas and do not show any curiosity. I also avoid staying on the street late and do not display excessive fear. Although I am cautious, I view people as if they were honest, treating them with dignity and respect.”
Yes, avoid unnecessary trouble. Mind your own business. Never downplay the fact that overwhelming fear can try the nerves, making even well-behaved people act irrationally. Regarding his work in dangerous areas, Odair observes: “I try to be positive, not feeding my mind with fear of bad things that might happen because this causes unnecessary tension and panic. I try to show respect to all people.” Besides being alert and keeping at a distance from suspicious ones, he adds another aid to control one’s emotions: “Above all, I cultivate confidence in Jehovah God, remembering that nothing escapes his eyes and anything that happens is with his permission.”
Yet, no one likes to live in constant fear. Moreover, who will deny that excessive fear and stress are harmful to emotional and physical health? Hence, what hope is there for those who fear that they could be attacked at any time? Since many are afraid that the worst regarding crime is still ahead, will we ever see the end of violence? We invite you to read the following article, “When Will Fear End?”

