When Will Fear End?
WOULD it surprise you to know that real security has to do with a man who lived 2,000 years ago? Showing the need for love, Jesus Christ told a remarkable parable: “A certain man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho and fell among robbers, who both stripped him and inflicted blows, and went off, leaving him half-dead.” Although two travelers ignored the victim, a kind Samaritan showed mercy. Who, though, cares for the victims of crime today? What relief from fear can we expect?​—Luke 10:30-37.
While professing to believe in God, many think that law and order have to be enforced by man. But will heavier prison terms or more and better-paid police put an end to violent crime? Do you really believe that law-enforcement agencies, notwithstanding sincere efforts to provide a measure of security, will eliminate such things as drug abuse, organized crime, and poverty? Yet, our hungering and thirsting for righteousness need not be in vain.​—Matthew 5:6.
Psalm 46:1 says: “God is for us a refuge and strength, a help that is readily to be found during distresses.” We will see that these words are not mere beautiful poetry.
As you know, the news media daily report wanton killing in civil wars and terrorist attacks. In some parts of the world, it has become commonplace to exterminate unwanted youths or eyewitnesses. Why has life become so cheap? Although there may be various causes of such violence, there is one reason we should not overlook.
According to God’s Word, the Bible, “the whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one.” (1 John 5:19) In fact, Jesus Christ identified Satan the Devil not only as a liar but as “a manslayer.” (John 8:44) Influencing mankind in various ways, this powerful spirit creature is promoting today’s increase of violence. “Woe for the earth and for the sea, because the Devil has come down to you, having great anger, knowing he has a short period of time,” says Revelation 12:12. Happily, though, this wicked system will be replaced with “new heavens and a new earth . . . , and in these righteousness is to dwell.”​—2 Peter 3:13.
In addition to this marvelous hope of a new world, what help do we have right now?
Before looking at the positive answer to that, it is good to fix in mind that even genuine Christians have no guarantee that they will be protected from crime. The apostle Paul described some risks that he personally faced. He had been “in dangers from rivers, in dangers from highwaymen, in dangers from [his] own race, in dangers from the nations, in dangers in the city, in dangers in the wilderness, in dangers at sea.” (2 Corinthians 11:26) Yet Paul survived these dangers. It is the same today; by being cautious, we can still carry out our tasks as normally as possible. Let us consider some things that will help.
If one is living in a dangerous neighborhood, fine conduct can be a protection, since people observe others closely. Although robbers plan and execute crimes, many consider themselves to be normal people. Avoid criticizing what they do, and do not try to find out what they are involved in. Thus, you can lessen the possibility of your becoming the object of retaliation. Keep in mind that thieves try to find out who has bought something new or who is going on vacation and therefore will be out of their homes, so be discreet in what you reveal to others.
Many of Jehovah’s Witnesses have found that their reputation as ministers has offered them a distinct measure of protection. Criminals have often shown that they respect such Christians, who without partiality give of themselves in helping people in the community. The Witnesses are not themselves murderers or thieves, nor are they ‘busybodies in other people’s matters,’ hence not a threat.​—1 Peter 4:15.
Security in God’s New World
We deplore “the increasing of lawlessness” foretold by Jesus Christ, but rather than be overanxious, we can be confident that God will soon eradicate this wicked system. Besides foretelling a worldwide preaching of “this good news of the kingdom,” Jesus reminded his followers: “He that has endured to the end is the one that will be saved.”​—Matthew 24:12-14.
We can be sure that those who prey on others, at times with unbelievable cruelty, will be eliminated. Proverbs 22:22, 23 says: “Do not rob the lowly one because he is lowly, and do not crush the afflicted one in the gate. For Jehovah himself will plead their cause, and he will certainly rob of soul those robbing them.” Jehovah will eliminate evildoers, such as robbers, murderers, and sex perverts. Furthermore, he will not ignore the victims of such crimes. He will overcome their losses and fully restore their health.
Indeed, those who “turn away from what is bad and do what is good” will gain everlasting life either by surviving the coming great tribulation or by being resurrected from the dead. “The righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it.” (Psalm 37:27-29) Such benefits will be available because of Jesus’ ransom sacrifice. (John 3:16) But what will life be like in the restored Paradise?
Life under God’s Kingdom will be a real pleasure. Jehovah foretells: “My people must dwell in a peaceful abiding place and in residences of full confidence and in undisturbed resting-places.” (Isaiah 32:18) All who gain everlasting life will have adjusted their personality. No one will be evil or unjust, nor will anyone be a potential victim of such a person. The prophet Micah says: “They will actually sit, each one under his vine and under his fig tree, and there will be no one making them tremble.” (Micah 4:4; Ezekiel 34:28) What a contrast with today’s dangerous neighborhoods!
[Box on page 6]
BE CAUTIOUS
  Many criminals work full-time, making crime a profession. They may work in groups of two or three, even if only one points a gun at you. It is increasingly evident that the younger the criminal, the more dangerous he is. What can you do if you become a victim?
  Remain calm so as not to make the thief nervous​—his inexperience can kill. If you are one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, identify yourself as such. Yet, be ready to hand over what the thief wants. If you delay, the danger increases. Later, you may feel that it is safe to ask that identification papers or bus fare be returned.
  Often you cannot tell who is a criminal. Some thieves are drug addicts or professionals, others merely want to eat. In any event, do not carry a large amount of money. Avoid exhibiting jewelry, gold rings, or expensive watches. Walk and travel normally, showing no fear. Do not fix your eyes on individuals as though you want to identify them. In case of street shootings, throw yourself on the ground; clothes can be cleaned afterward.​—A former policeman in Rio de Janeiro.
[Picture on page 5]
Remain calm and hand over what the thief wants. If you delay, the danger increases

