VOL. XV. MAY 1 & 15, 1894. NOS. 9 & 10. 

THE SHEPHERD AND THE SHEEP. 



"And when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth 
before them, and the sheep follow him; for they 



know his voice. And a stranger will 
they not follow, but will flee from him; 
for they know not the voice of 
strangers."— John 10:4,5. 

IN the days of our Lord's first advent, as today, 
there were many widely recognized 
leaders and teachers; and various systems of 
human philosophy claimed the attention of 
thinking men. Among the Jews much uninspired 
teaching was added to the sacred literature 
of the Law and the Prophets, while the 
neighboring Greeks were diligently dealing in 
philosophic speculation and ever seeking something 
new. And now the long expected, but 
generally unrecognized, Messiah of Israel was 
about to introduce a new system of teaching, 
the philosophy and the ethics of a new dispensation 
of divine providence and grace, the 
outgrowth and the antitype of Judaism. 

But the changes were to be so radical and 
revolutionary, and so different from all human 
expectations among either Jews or Gentiles, 
that the Lord realized that its announcement 
would be to the Jews in general a stumbling-stone 
and to the Greeks foolishness, and that, 
under the blinding influence of the prince of 
this world, to the few only would it be manifestly 
the power of God and the wisdom of 
God. (1 Cor. 1:23,24.) And this few he knew 
would be the meek and humble-minded ones 
in Israel. Such he characterized as his sheep, 
sheeplike meekness being the chief trait of 
their character, the same symbol being applied 
also to the Lord himself— "Behold the Lamb 
of God that taketh away the sin of the world." 

Upon the few who had thus far received his 
teaching and become his disciples, as well as 
upon all such subsequently, he desired to impress 
the lesson of meekness and to assure 
them of his tender care over them. Therefore 
he says, "I am the good Shepherd: the good 
shepherd giveth his life for the sheep," etc. 
And no matter how many others might claim 
to be the shepherd, he declared himself to be 
the only true one, and that he would prove it, 
even to the sacrifice of his life for them. 

Again he said, "I am the door: by me if 
any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall 
go in and out and find pasture." But how 
does this harmonize with that other statement 
—"He that entereth in by the door is the 
shepherd of the sheep?" How could our Lord 
both enter by the door and also be the 
door? In this way: According to God's plan 
of salvation the way of man's recovery from 



death and of his access to eternal life was to 
be legally opened up by a ransom sacrifice; 
and when our Lord Jesus freely offered himself 
to fulfil that requirement of the divine plan, 
he thereby entered the divinely arranged door 
of opportunity to become the Savior of the 
world and the Shepherd of the Lord's sheep. 
He entered the door of the divine plan and 
thus became to us the door of opportunity, the 
way of access to eternal life, and was also 
therefore counted worthy to be the good Shepherd 
to lead the lost flock of humanity back 
to the fold of God, in whose favor is life and 

R1647 : page 132 

at whose right hand there are pleasures forevermore. 

(Psa. 16:11.) He that entered in 

by the way of Jehovah's appointment is thus 

both the door of access to God and the good 

shepherd of the sheep. "To him the porter 

[the holy spirit of God] openeth [the way 

to the sheep]." This opening was done in all 

the various ways which proclaimed him to us 

as the beloved Son of God, in whom the 

Father was well pleased, and our Redeemer 

and Savior— in the testimony at his baptism, 

and again on the mount of transfiguration; in 

the vailed heaven and the rent rocks on the occasion 

of his death; in the fact of his resurrection 

and its testimony by angels and eye-witnesses; 

in the perfect agreement of all the 

prominent features of his life and character 

with the testimony of prophets regarding him; 

and in the authority and character of his 

teaching and the simplicity and purity of his 

character which outshone that of every other 

man, so that even those who did not recognize 

him as the Son of God, declared, "Never 

man spake like this man." 

And the sheep, thus assured, recognize Jehovah's 
Anointed as their shepherd; and thenceforth 
they "hear his voice." "And he calleth 
his own sheep by name [he is interested in 
them, not only as a general flock, but as individuals] 
and leadeth them out." 

While the Lord thus proclaimed himself the 
true shepherd and the only door into the fold 
of God, he characterized all others as strangers, 
false and hireling shepherds, and thieves 
and robbers; for there is none other name 
under heaven given among men whereby we 
may be saved than the name of Jesus. (Acts 4:12.) 
Plato, uninstructed in divine truth and 
blindly groping about with the torch of human 
reason, in seeking to solve the mysteries of 



human life, may at times have struck a chord 
of the divine harmonies with thrilling effect 
upon thoughtful minds; but soon the clash of 
discords broke the spell or led the mind into 
channels of error. So also with Aristotle, 
Socrates, Confucius and other seekers after 
God, before life and immortality were brought 
to light by Jesus Christ. Such men could not 
be classed as false shepherds; for they evidently 
were seeking and following the best light 
they had. Rather, they, or at least some of 
them, were bell sheep which themselves had 
lost the way and were wandering upon the 
mountains, and leading the flocks to the best 
pastures and the purest waters they could find. 
But those who, after light has come into the 
world, and after they themselves have seen and 
realized it, love darkness rather than light, 
and who, instead of pointing men to Christ, 
direct them to the human philosophies of 
Plato, or Darwin, or others— all such merit the 
appellations which the Lord applies to them. 
They truly are thieves and robbers, teaching 
men that they can climb up into God's favor 
and into his fold by some other way than that 
which God hath appointed— through faith in 
the atoning sacrifice of Christ. Such teachers 
are the hireling shepherds to whom the Master 
refers; they have little or no real interest in 
the sheep and seem reckless of their eternal 
interests, their own present advantage being 
always of paramount importance. They want 
to be known as popular leaders and teachers, 
or original thinkers and great philosophers; 
or they are linked with old systems of error 
which furnish liberal remuneration, or at least 
a livelihood which they could not so easily secure 
in any other way. 

Such are the hirelings, whose number in these 
days is legion. And now that the wolf of infidelity 
has boldly made its appearance among 
the sheep, these hireling shepherds are scattering 
in all directions and leaving the sheep to 
wander about alone. Some of these shepherds 
are fleeing away from the old systems and running 
after Darwin and Huxley and Spiritism 
and so-called Christian Science; and many of 
them are industriously endeavoring to dissuade 
the sheep from all faith in the inspiration 
of the sacred Scriptures. Witness the prominent 
cases of Dr. Chas. A. Briggs, Prof. Henry 
Drummond, Dr. Lyman Abbott, Prof. Swing, 
Dr. Smith, and the recent and startling developments 
in the great Chicago University where 
the president, Dr. Harper, and the entire faculty 
and all the students are boldly declaring 



themselves against the divine authority of the 
Bible, and the reliability of its records. The 

R1647 : page 133 

great Parliament of Religions held in Chicago 
last summer was a most remarkable manifestation 
of the disposition of prominent hireling 
shepherds, who sought to attract the attention 
of the sheep to the various heathen philosophies 

R1648 : page 133 

—Buddhism, Brahminism, Mohammedanism, 
Shintoism, Confucianism, and others, 
saying in effect, These, whom we have been 
accustomed to think of as heathen, are really 
about as much Christian as we are, except in 
name. Therefore let us receive them as brethren 
and make common cause with them. And 
the people looked in astonishment upon this 
new departure, scarcely knowing what to think. 
This great movement, as we pointed out in 
our issue of Nov. '93, was a most significant 
feature of present-day tendencies in religious 
circles. And now some of those representatives 
of the heathen religions have returned to 
their homes, and reports have already come 
back from Japan to the effect that at a great 
mass meeting in Yokohama the people were 
gathered to hear the reports from Christian 
America. And the returned Japanese delegates 
told them they had been most agreeably 
disappointed; for instead of having been invited 
to America, as they surmised, to be 
Christianized or perhaps indirectly ridiculed, 
they actually found that the Christians were 
in great doubt themselves about their religion, 
and were eager to learn what the foreigners 
had to say of their religions and what points 
of their philosophies could be engrafted upon 
Christianity. Indeed, they pointed to America 
as a hopeful field for the propagation of 
their faiths, and mentioned that an influential 
and wealthy convert had been made during 
the sessions of the Parliament. Thus the hireling 
shepherds are bewildering, confusing and 
scattering many of the timid sheep who are 
not sufficiently attentive to the voice of the 
good Shepherd which speaks through his inspired 
Word. 

Yet only the wayward and heedless sheep 
can be harmed and scattered by these things. 
The obedient, trusting sheep will all be tenderly 
cared for by the good Shepherd, to whose 
voice they hearken and the softest tones of 



which are familiar to their ears. There are 
really, we thus see, two classes of the sheep, as 
the Lord indicates— the obedient ones just described, 
who are easily led by the voice of the 
Shepherd, and a more listless and somewhat 
wayward class who need some driving and guiding 
with the crook. The former are the sheep 
of this flock referred to in verse 16, while the 
latter are those "other sheep" whose number 
shall also be greatly augmented, when, by and 
by, the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the 
earth as the waters cover the sea— i.e., during 
the Millennial reign of Christ— when there will 
not be conflicting voices seeking to drown the 
voice of the good Shepherd. 

Nor need we be surprised at the exceedingly 
small number who now diligently hearken and 
obediently follow the Shepherd's voice; for 
the Lord forewarned us it would be only a 
little flock, saying, "Fear not, little flock, it 
is your Father's good pleasure to give you the 
Kingdom." It is a choice flock the Lord is 
selecting now— a flock that needs no driving 
nor coaxing, but who meditate in it day and night. 
The good Shepherd does not propose to drive 
any sheep into his kingdom; and he desires 
for the high office to which he is calling them 
in this age only such as need no driving, and 
who gladly follow him through evil and through 
good report. "And when he putteth forth his 
own sheep, he goeth before them [to lead, and 
not behind them to drive], and the sheep follow 
him; for they know his voice." 

Of the sheep of this flock the Master says, 
"My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, 
and they follow me,. ..and they shall never 
perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my 
hand. My Father, which gave them me, is 
greater than all; and no man is able to pluck 
them out of my Father's hand." (John 10:27-29.) 
How blessed is the assurance of heavenly 
guidance and protection now to all the 
sheep of this flock, the truly consecrated and 
obedient. 

"And a stranger they will not follow, but 
will flee from him; for they know not the 
voice of strangers." If the stranger come 
with enticing words, saying, Let me show 

R1648 : page 134 

you a broader salvation than that you have 
learned from the apostles and prophets to hope 
for; that eternal salvation is to be universal, 
and that not one of God's creatures shall ever 
perish, the true sheep says, That sounds very 



benevolent, and yet it has not the ring of the 
Shepherd's voice in it; for he tells us of 
"wolves in sheep's clothing" and of "vessels 
of wrath fitted to destruction" and warns 
against "presumptuous sins" and of a possible 
destruction for all wilful sinners and "whosoever 
loveth and maketh a lie," and plainly 
says that the devil and those following him 
shall be destroyed. (Rev. 21:8; Matt. 25:41; 
Heb. 2: 14.) No, this voice that prophesies 
smooth things, contrary to the Word of God, 
is not the voice of the good Shepherd. 

If he come again with a show of logic and 
of worldly wisdom (which is foolishness with 
God) and says— Let me show you a more 
reasonable way of salvation than by the barbarous 
Bible method of an atoning sacrifice; 
viz., a salvation by a process of evolution and 
the survival of the fittest, according to which 
theory there was no original human perfection, 
no fall, and consequently no necessity for a 
ransom sacrifice— the sheep says, No, I cannot 
receive this teaching; for the voice of the 
good Shepherd tells me there is no other way 
than the one he opened up for us by freely 
offering up his life on our behalf, and I am 
not prepared to begin at the first chapter of 
Genesis and reconstruct the whole Bible after 
your theory. 

Then he hears other voices declaring that 
the unalterable purpose of God is the eternal 
torment of a very large majority of his human 
creatures; some even declaring that such has 
been God's purpose, determined long before 
man's creation. No, says the true sheep, 
I cannot think that of God: though I cannot 
understand all your reasonings, nor fully combat 
your doctrine with the Scriptures, I surely 
cannot credit such a slander on my Heavenly 
Father's name; but this I do know— that 
"the Judge of the whole earth will do right," 
and so I will trust him where I cannot trace 
him, and wait for further light. 

Such is the attitude of all the true sheep; 
and such being their attitude, God is both able 
and willing to shield and protect them under 
all circumstances and at all times; and the 
good Shepherd of his appointment shall lead 
them into green pastures and beside the still 
waters. They shall be abundantly fed with 
the "meat in due season,"— with the spiritual 
food so necessary to their life and to their 
growth and development; and such temporal 
things as are needful will not be withheld. 
Truly we can say with the Psalmist, "I have 
never seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed 



begging bread." 

While all the true sheep of this flock may indeed 
rejoice in the loving care of the good 
Shepherd, it is also a further cause for rejoicing 
that all the other sheep now lost and 
wandering, and blinded by the god of this 
world and misled by other voices, are also to 
be sought out and found and rejoiced over 
when the Lord, in his own good time, shall 
spread "a feast of fat things and of wines on 
the lees well refined." And then there shall 
be one fold and one Shepherd. 

Though only a "little flock" is now recognized 
as the Lord's sheep, there shall by 
and by be a mighty host (John 10:16); and 
the redeemed of the Lord shall go forth with 
songs and ever lasting joy upon their heads. 
Glorious plan of salvation! how worthy it is 
of the character of our God! 



R1648 : page 134 

"WHO HATH HEARD SUCH A THING?" 



"Before she travailed she brought forth; before her pain 
came she was delivered of a man-child. Who hath 
heard such a thing? who hath seen such things? 
Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day? 
or shall a nation be born at once? for as 
soon as Zion travailed she brought forth 
her children."— Isa. 66:7,8. 

THE name "Zion" was anciently applied 
to a prominent hill of Jerusalem, generally 
regarded as the south-western and highest of 
those on which the city was built. It included 
the most ancient part of the city with the 
citadel; and, being first occupied for a palace, 

R1648 : page 135 

it was called "the city of David." (2 Chron. 5:2.) 
It was also called the "holy hill," or 
"hill of the sanctuary." (Psa. 2:6), being the 
original site of the tabernacle, pitched by 
David for the reception of the ark. 

By the prophets the name was often put for 
Jerusalem itself, and also for its inhabitants, 
sometimes called sons or daughters of Zion. 
It was also used in a wider sense, as was Jerusalem 
also, to signify the entire nation of Israel. 
And since fleshly Israel was typical of 



spiritual Israel, the Gospel Church, the symbolism 
applies with still deeper significance to 
the Gospel Church, which term, throughout 
the Gospel age, included the entire body of 
professed Christians, all of whom are on probation 
for full membership in the Church triumphant 
—the true Church, the Zion of the 
future, and the true Zion of the present age, 
the elect "little flock" to whom it is the Father's 
good pleasure to give the Kingdom. In 
the symbolic application of the term we must 
therefore judge from the character of the 
prophecy whether the reference is to the fleshly 
or to the spiritual house of Israel, or to 
both; or, if to the latter, whether it applies in 
its broadest sense to the nominal gospel church, 
or to the elect little flock, the only true Church 
in God's estimation. 

The symbolic travail, in the above prophecy, 
is a reference to the great time of trouble— 
the travail that is to come upon the nominal 
gospel church, great "Babylon," from which 
some are to be counted worthy to escape. 
(Luke 21:36.) This is indicated by the preceding 
verse which locates the time of this 
prophecy as synchronous with that wherein is 
heard "a voice of noise [confusion] from the 
city" (Babylon), and "a voice [of truth and 
warning] from the temple" (the elect little 
flock of consecrated and faithful ones), and "a 

R1649 : page 135 

voice of Jehovah that rendereth recompense to 
his enemies"— in the great time of trouble. 

The travail that is coming is to be upon 
nominal Zion— "Christendom," "Babylon;" 
and it will be a great and sore affliction— "a 
time of trouble such as was not since there 
was a nation." But the marvelous thing the 
Prophet here has to record is that a man-child 
is to be born out of Zion before this travail 
comes. This is a striking reference to the 
fact, elsewhere clearly taught, that the ripe 
wheat of the Gospel Church is to be separated 
from the tares, that they are to be exalted and 
glorified before the burning, the consuming 
trouble, shall come upon the latter. This 
man-child is, therefore, the little flock— the 
true Zion in God's estimation, the body of 
Christ; as it is written, "There shall come out 
of Zion [the nominal gospel church] the deliverer 
[the Christ, Head and body], and shall 
turn away ungodliness from Jacob [the fleshly 
Israel or Zion]."— Rom. 11:26. 

This is the man-child that is to bless all the 



families of the earth. (Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:16,29-) 
The birth of the man-child is the first 
resurrection. Blessed and holy are all they 
that have part in the first resurrection. Such 
are now begotten of God by the Word of 
truth, and quickened by the holy spirit (Jas. 1:18; 
Eph. 2: 1 ; Rom. 8: 1 1), and in due time 
—before the travail— they will be born in the 
glorious likeness of Christ. The birth of this 
man-child began over eighteen hundred years 
ago with the resurrection of Christ Jesus. 
There the head of this body of Christ came 
forth; and as surely as the head has been born, 
so surely, shall the body come forth. "Shall 
I bring to the birth, and not cause to bring 
forth? saith the Lord: shall I cause to bring 
forth and shut the womb? saith thy God." 
(Isa. 66:9.) Ah, no: "the man-child," the 
Christ complete, the Great Deliverer, shall 
come forth. 

Yet "who hath heard such a thing? who 
hath seen such things?" for not only shall the 
body of Christ, the true overcoming Zion, the 
"holy nation, the peculiar people," be delivered 
out of nominal Zion, before the travail; 
but when she travails a great company of other 
children will be born. This is the great company 
described in the Apocalypse as coming 
up out of the great tribulation, having washed 
their robes and made them white in the blood 
of the Lamb. (Rev. 7:14.) The body of Christ, 
the man-child, born before the travail, will be 
composed of those who heard and obeyed the 
call, "Come out of her, my people," etc. 

R1649 : page 136 

(Rev. 18:4), and who were counted worthy 
to have part in the first resurrection; while the 
many children born through the great tribulation 
will be those believers in nominal 
Zion, Babylon, who have allowed themselves 
to become measurably intoxicated by the spirit 
of Babylon, the spirit of the world, and who, 
therefore, are not quick to discern and prompt 
to obey the voice of the Lord in this harvest 
time. They fail to see that it is harvest time, 
and consequently fail to understand the separating 
work which the sickle of present truth is 
accomplishing, regarding those servants of God 
who wield it as enemies, and hence as opposing 
them and the Lord whom they serve. 

The great tribulation or travail that is coming 
upon nominal Zion is the only thing that 
can convince such as these— and they include 
a large number of believing children of God, 



whose manner of life is righteous and generally 

circumspect, but who are nevertheless worldly-minded, 

and who are not rendering themselves 

a living sacrifice to God, following him through 

evil and through good report, and meekly 

bearing the reproach of Christ. They have 

respect to men's opinions, traditions and plans, 

and fail to fully submit themselves to the will 

and plan of the Lord. And only when they 

behold the wreck of nominal Zion— Christendom, 

Babylon— will they realize its gross errors 

and be delivered from them and it. 

"Behold," says the Prophet, "I lay in Zion 
a stumbling-stone and Rock of offence; and 
whosoever believeth on him shall not be 
ashamed." (Rom. 9:33; Isa. 8:14,15; 28:16.) 
That stumbling-stone is the doctrine of redemption 
through the precious blood of Christ. 
At that stone the fleshly Zion stumbled, and 
so now the nominal spiritual Zion is stumbling 
at the same stone; for it was to be "a stone 
of stumbling and a rock of offense to both the 
houses of Israel"— the fleshly and the spiritual. 
The elect little flock of overcomers do not so 
stumble, but recognize this as the chief corner-stone 
of the true Zion, remembering the words 
of the Prophet, "Behold I lay in Zion a chief 
corner-stone, elect, precious; and he that believeth 
on him shall not be confounded. Unto 
you, therefore, which believe [in Christ as 
your Redeemer, who bought you with his 
precious blood] he is precious; but unto them 
which be disobedient, ...the same is made 
...a stone of stumbling and a rock of offence, 
even to them which stumble at the word, being 
disobedient; whereunto also they were appointed" 
(1 Pet. 2:6-8); for God does not 
propose to deliver his Kingdom unto any of 
the disobedient. They need the fiery trial of 
the coming tribulation to bring them into a 
proper attitude before God; and hence must 
come up through the great tribulation. 

While those who are truly begotten of God 
and who have been quickened by his spirit to 
the new spiritual life, and who are faithful in 
fulfilling their covenant of entire consecration 
as living sacrifices unto God, may well rejoice 
in hope of the first resurrection, and of being 
born before the travail upon nominal Zion, it 
is also a cause for rejoicing that many of the 
weaker children of God, now stumbling with 
nominal Zion, will, nevertheless, by and by 
be recovered and saved so as by fire (born) 
through the great tribulation (travail), in 
which nominal Zion shall expire, but from 
which they shall come forth. 



REJOICE YE WITH JERUSALEM. 



"Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad 
with her, all ye that mourn for her." "Behold, 
I create Jerusalem a rejoicing and her people 
a joy. And I will rejoice in Jerusalem and 
joy in my people, and the voice of weeping 
shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice 
of crying. "-Isa. 66:10; 65:18,19. 

This call to rejoice with Jerusalem immediately 
follows the prophetic announcement of 
the birth of Zion, the terms Zion and Jerusalem 
being used here interchangeably. The 
birth of Zion, the exaltation of the body of 
Christ to kingdom power and glory, will indeed 
be cause for rejoicing on the part of all people; 
for it is for this exaltation and manifestation of 
the sons of God that the whole creation waits, 
groaning and travailing together in pain until 
now.— Rom. 8:22,23. 

When the true Zion is thus exalted, then will 
follow the great work of the Kingdom. The 
travail upon nominal Zion immediately succeeding 

R1649 : page 137 

will quickly liberate the true children 
of God still in her, and they shall come forth 
to larger views and higher principles, and to 
develop rapidly into nobler characters. The 
rule of the iron rod will quickly subdue all 
things, completely breaking up the whole present 
social fabric and accomplishing the leveling 
process which will make ready for the 
peaceful reign of righteousness. 

Then the great Millennial reign of righteousness 
will begin, when every man will have a 
full, fair opportunity to win eternal life by faith 
and obedience. And no man's opportunity 
will be less than a hundred years; though if 
he wastes all of that time without taking any 
steps toward reformation, he will be considered 
unworthy of life and will be cut off in the 
second death. (Isa. 65:20) But the obedient 
shall eat the good of the land (Isa. 1:19): 
"They shall build houses and inhabit them 
[There will not be so many houses to let in 
those days probably, but more improved and 
cultivated homesteads in which the owners 
shall take pleasure and comfort]; and they 
shall plant vineyards and eat the fruit of them. 
They shall not build and another inhabit; they 
shall not plant and another eat: for as the days 



of a tree are the days of my people ["They 
shall renew their strength"— Isa. 40:31]; and 
mine elect [all the faithful and obedient then] 
shall long enjoy the work of their hands. They 
shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth for 
trouble; for they are the seed [the children] 
of the blessed of the Lord [the Church] and 
their offspring with them." 

"And it shall come to pass that before they 
call I will answer, and while they are yet speaking 
I will hear"— so near will the Lord be, so 
mindful of all their interests. 

"The wolf and the lamb shall feed together 
[The reference here may be to men formerly 
of wolf-like or lamb-like character, or to animals, 
or to both— the expression signifying in 
any case a reign of peace]; and the lion shall 
eat straw like the bullock, and dust shall be 
the serpent's meat [—another expression similar 
to, "His enemies shall lick the dust," 
signifying the destruction of the serpent, or 
rather of Satan whom the serpent symbolizes]. 
They shall not hurt, nor destroy, in all my 
holy mountain [Kingdom], saith the Lord."— 
Isa. 65:21-25. 

Thus the birth of the true Zion will be cause 
for rejoicing among all who truly love righteousness: 
for, though it will first dash in pieces 
all their long cherished hopes, it is the dawn 
of real hope for all the world. It will humble 
all their pride, despoil them of all their cherished 
possessions and what they have come to 
esteem their rights, break down all their boasted 
institutions, civil, social and religious, and 
completely wreck all their order and all hope 
until they begin to see hope in the new order 
of things inaugurated by the Kingdom of God. 

Yes, rejoice with Jerusalem, Zion, and be 
glad with her, all ye that love her, as well as 
all ye that mourn for her now and try to dissuade 
her from her course, not seeing the prize 
at the end of her life of faithful self-sacrifice; 
for soon her glory will appear, not only to her 
own exceeding joy, but also to the joy and 
blessing of all the families of the earth. 



R1650 : page 137 
VESSELS UNTO HONOR. 



"If a man therefore purge himself from these, he shall 
be a vessel unto honor, sanctified and meet for the 



Master's use, and prepared unto every good work."— 2 Tim. 2:21. 

IT is important to notice that this instruction 
is given, not to the world, but to the 
Church— to those who are believers in Christ 
and who are consecrated to him and desirous 
of being used in his service. If the counsel 
were given to worldly people, no such incentive 
would be held out; for such have no ambition 
to be in the Lord's service. The world 
can better appreciate such maxims as, "Honesty 
is the best policy," etc.; for temporal 
good is all they seek. Yet it is indeed a good 
thing for worldly men to purge themselves of 
evil dispositions and practices. Moral reforms 
are always commendable as steps in the right 
direction, and we are always glad to see worldly 
men trying to break away from the bondage 

R1650 : page 138 

of bad habits— from the drink habit and from 
lying, profanity and other vices. 

But such purging from the filth of the flesh 
can never render such vessels fit for the Master's 
use. With all their efforts at cleansing 
they are still unclean, and the Lord desires 
clean vessels for his use. It is only when, by 
faith, we are plunged in the cleansing blood 
of our Redeemer that we are clean and acceptable 
to God. 

"There is a fountain filled with blood 

Drawn from Immanuel's veins; 
And sinners plunged beneath that flood, 
Lose all their guilty stains." 

But having been thus reckonedly cleansed 
from sin and clothed in the pure robe of 
Christ's righteousness, it is all-important that 
we strive to make this reckoned righteousness 
an actual thing to the extent of our ability; 
for only so can we prove ourselves worthy of 
the imputed righteousness. It is purely of divine 
grace that we are reckoned of God as 
righteous, before we have actually become so. 
Seeing in us the desire to be righteous and the 
effort to be so in his appointed way, God, accepting 
the will for the deed, reckons us righteous 
now, and treats us as sons, since we have 
been redeemed from the curse and have accepted 
this gracious provision for reconciliation. 

If, however, after being thus reconciled to 
God and reckoned righteous, our course of 
conduct proves that we no longer love righteousness; 
if we do not endeavor to make the 
reckoned righteousness an actual thing by a 
constant endeavor to purge out the old leaven 



of sin; if we are content to let it remain and 
to work in us, and if we neglect to strive 
against it, then we are proving by such a 
course that our love of righteousness is growing 
weaker, and we are proving our unworthiness 
of the Lord's gracious reckoning in our favor. 
But if, on the contrary, we are striving daily 
to purge out the old leaven of sin,— not merely 
working it down occasionally and allowing it 
again and again to ferment and disturb the 
whole spiritual being and to endanger its complete 
souring and spoiling,— but purging it 
out by constantly resisting it, cleansing our 
thoughts, words and deeds with the truth, 
and cultivating the blessed fruits of the spirit 
of love, joy and peace, then indeed, as the 
Apostle affirms, we shall be vessels meet for the 
Master's use. 

And not only so, but the Lord can honor 
such vessels because they honor him: they fairly 
represent him and his cause. If they are 
meek and humble-minded, not inclined to 
think of themselves more highly than they 
ought to think, but to think soberly, the Lord 
can exalt them to positions of trust and honor 
without injury either to themselves or to the 
cause; and thus they are more and more sanctified 
and prepared for every good work. 

Let as many, therefore, as would be honored 
and used of the Master now and hereafter— as 
many as have this hope in them— seek to purify 
themselves, to purge out the old leaven of 
sin. In the language of another forceful illustration, 
let us endeavor to war a good warfare 
against the world, the flesh and the devil. 
And be assured that in these duties we have 
the work of a lifetime; and even at its close 
we will still find the necessity for the robe of 
Christ's righteousness to cover our remaining 
deformities of character. 

While the purging here spoken of has reference 
to the general cleansing from all sin and 
uncleanness, the Apostle had special reference 
on that occasion to purging from a disposition 
to hearken to false doctrines of those who 
would subvert the faith of the Church. His 
counsel is to avoid foolish questions and strife 
about words to no profit, to shun profane and 
vain babblings which increase only unto more 
ungodliness, which savor more of bombast and 
self-exaltation than of truth and godliness, and, 
on the contrary, to study to show ourselves approved 
unto God, workmen that need not be 
ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of truth. 

There is much significance in that word 
"study;" and only the studious find the narrow 



way to the divine approval and acceptance. 
Study to show thyself approved— study 
the doctrine, study your course of conduct, to 
keep it in harmony with the doctrine. Study 
how to promote the peace and prosperity of 
Zion, and how to shield yourself and others 
from the missiles of error and from the poison 
of an evil, worldly spirit. Study to perform 

R1650 : page 139 

the duties of a faithful soldier of the cross- 
trie seemingly insignificant, as well as the 
bravest and noblest deeds. A soldier has 
many seemingly trivial duties to perform; and 
he is as really doing his duty as a soldier when 
he is polishing his armor, foraging, cooking his 
meal, cleaning camp, clearing the way or building 
bridges for the army to pass as when he is 
fighting the enemy. All such necessary incidental 
work is entirely compatible with his 
commission as a soldier, and is not to be considered 
"entanglements" or hindrances. And 
these things cannot be avoided or carelessly 
done without a measure of unfaithfulness. 

So with the Christian soldier. The routine 
of life, house-work, daily toil, any and everything 
incidental to a proper and honest provision 
of "things needful" for ourselves and 
those dependent on us for support, as well as 
provision for the prosecution and care of the 
Lord's work,— all this is a proper part of our 
engagement as soldiers of the Lord. The 
Apostle Peter was as truly serving the Lord 
when catching the fish from whose mouth he 
got the coin wherewith to pay the Lord's taxes 
and his own, as when proclaiming, The Kingdom 
of God is come nigh unto you. The 
Apostle Paul was as truly a soldier of the cross 
and doing his proper work as such when making 
tents (rather than be chargeable to any) 
as when he preached Jesus and the resurrection 
at Mars hill. Whatever is done with a view 
to the glory of our Lord, the Captain of our 
salvation, or for the benefit of any of our 
fellow-soldiers, or for our own preparation for 
this warfare, or in the discharge of obligations 
which our Captain has recognized and approved, 
—this is proper work for us as soldiers, and 
not entanglement in the affairs of this life. 

But the Christian soldier must study to perform 
even the commonest duties in a manner 
creditable to his calling. Nor must he permit 
himself to become entangled with other 
things which do not relate to his duties as a 
soldier, and thus to be side-tracked. For instance, 



if a soldier knowing how to repair 
watches were to divert his attention from his 
regular duties, neglect his camp and battle 
duties, and the commands of his Captain and 
the proper work of a soldier to acquire some 
extra compensation by this means, he would 
be an unfaithful soldier. And so the Christian 
who turns aside to seek some personal, 
temporal advantage, to the detriment of his 
duties as a soldier, is likewise, to some extent, 
an unfaithful soldier and likely to be drawn 
out of the ranks entirely. 

Study to show thyself approved. Study the 
Word. Study yourself that you may become 
well acquainted with yourself— that you may 
know your talents for service and in what directions 
they lie, and your weak points and 
how they may be guarded against; that you 
may know both your abilities and your shortcomings. 
Then study to avoid error and to 
shun all foolish questions and profane and vain 
babblings. Remember that only the foundation 
of God standeth sure, and that all other 
foundations are worthless and all other theories 
must come to naught. But "The foundation 
of God standeth sure, having this seal, 
The Lord knoweth them that are his. And 
let every one that nameth the name of Christ 
depart from iniquity." 

And if any man desire honor from God, 
let him not fail to seek it in God's appointed 
way— along the pathway of humility; 
for the Lord giveth his favors to the humble. 
If you would be a vessel fit for the Master's 
use and a vessel of honor, humble yourself under 
the mighty hand of God and he will exalt 
you in due time. Do not be in a hurry about 
it either; but whatsoever thy hand findeth to 
do, do it with thy might, beginning and ever 
continuing to cleanse your earthen vessel, 
that it may be fit for the Master's use. 



R1650 : page 139 

THE MEMORIAL CELEBRATED. 



We have received 99 reports of celebrations of 
our dear Redeemer's death, upon its last anniversary, 
April 19th. These gatherings were of 
course small,— the Allegheny meeting, at 
which about 160 were present, being the largest; 
while New York and Brooklyn meetings 



R1650 : page 140 

consolidated report a larger than usual attendance 
—eighty-five, Chicago (two meetings), 
Des Moines, Altoona, Boston, Baltimore and 
Philadelphia followed in order, down to the 
threes and twos and even the solitary ones. 

All the gatherings report blessed seasons of 
communion, though marred in some instances 
by a knowledge of the great trial which the 
adversary has brought upon the Church, as 
explained in our Extra edition, of April 25th. 
All this, however, only deepened the impressiveness 
of the impressive occasion. 

The conduct of some who learned of the 
trial and who, though sorely grieved and perplexed 
by it, kept it from others and made 
them subjects of prayer, that their faith might 
not fail when the storm of trial should reach 
them, was indeed a beautiful manifestation of 
the spirit of Christ, in which we greatly rejoice. 
And thus we are made to understand 
more fully that expression of the Apostle Peter 
(1 Peter 1:7): "The trial of your faith, being 
much more precious than of gold," etc. 

The effect of the latest trial and sifting 
seemed to be to draw all our hearts nearer 
together than ever; and the reports show 
that the dear ones assembled in little groups 
poured out earnest prayers to the throne of 
grace on our behalf and on behalf of all the 
members of the body of Christ everywhere. 
These prayers, dear friends, in our case were 
answered. We enjoyed the peace of God 
which passeth all understanding. It ruled our 
hearts while "unreasonable and wicked men" 
did all that they knew how to do to injure and 
distract us— even circulating their slanderous 
circulars amongst our worldly neighbors. 

Appropriate to our feelings, therefore, was 
our opening hymn at the Memorial,— 
"Blest be the tie that binds 
Our hearts in Christian love." 

The meaning of the service was explained— 
we communed with the Lord in prayer and 
meditation, and closed with the hymn, 
"Abide, sweet Spirit, heavenly dove, 
With light and comfort from above." 



R1650 : page 140 

"FERVENT IN SPIRIT, SERVING THE LORD." 



Many who cannot go out into the Colporteur 
work, but who burn with a desire to tell 
the good tidings and show forth the praises of 
him who hath called us out of darkness into 
his marvelous light, inquire— What can we do? 
Can you not help us to use our limited talents 
and opportunities? 

We can only suggest methods of labor;— 
your talents (opportunities, etc.) and your 
zeal must decide to what extent you can or will 
use these or better methods, if you know of 
better. 

(1) One good plan is by a systematic distribution 
of Old Theology Tracts. This may 

be done at any time, but especially on Sundays. 
Have slips like No. 14 for the masses 
and larger tracts for the thoughtful and earnest 
looking,— at the hotels, in the parks, etc. 
And a good plan is for several to serve those 
who go toward or return from church service. 
But do not stand near the church building- 
go at least half a block away so as not to appear 
to specially seek their conversion: they 
will take it as an insult and resent it— for "surely 
it is in vain that a net is spread in the sight 
of any bird." 

(2) Another good method is to visit your 
friends and tell them what great things God 
has done for your soul. Speak chiefly of the 
fruits and graces of the spirit and afterward 
about the truths which enlightened and refreshed 
your hearts and brought forth those 

fruits. When you come to speak of the latter 
—the doctrines of God's Word— be very cautious, 
and feed them with "milk" rather than 
"strong meat." Remember the Lord's words, 
to some under similar circumstances, "I have 
many things to tell you, but ye cannot bear 
them now." Remember to ignore yourself in 
telling the blessed tidings. Don't try to shine; 
don't try to impress your hearer with your 
wisdom, your knowledge of Scripture, etc. 
Forget self entirely, and let your whole aim be 
to glorify God and bless your hearer. 

(3) Unless you are very well versed in the 
truth and apt at teaching it, your success will 
lie chiefly in awakening a curiosity and interest 
and then selling or loaning the M. DAWN 

or a specially selected Old Theology Tract. 
The gospel in print is doing many times more 
good than the gospel by voice in the present 
harvest; but the latter introduces and supplements 
well the former and the two together are 
preferable to either alone,— if the spoken gospel 



be spoken with wisdom and to the ignoring 
of the speaker. 

How can you get an opportunity to speak a 
word in season, and to loan the book or tract? 

R1650 : page 141 

We reply that there are several good ways,— 

(a) Select your most consecrated Christian 
friends to begin with, and next any of your 
acquaintances that are inclined to be skeptical. 

(b) When you have done what you can for 
your friends and acquaintances, and when you 
find opportunity to enlarge your sphere of 
labor, attend Methodist Class-meetings, and 
Christian Endeavor meetings, and prayer-meetings 
common to all denominations. Take 

part in these according to the liberty accorded, 
confining yourself within the recognized 
liberties of said meetings in speaking and 
praying. Seek to give no offense; manifest 
the spirit which is from above, which is first 
pure; then "Let your moderation be known 
unto all men." Avoid wrangling; "for the 
servant of God should not strive," but should 
"speak the truth in love." 

Let your light shine before them, the light 
of the spirit of the truth,— the light of a justified 
life, and more, of a sanctified life. Do 
not intrude doctrines, or anything else at their 
meetings, that a large majority present would 
disapprove. Speak on lines of Christian experience, 
etc., in harmony with their rules and 
habits. Leave your doctrinal explanations, 
etc., for private conversation or for an occasion 
specially arranged at which they would be 
agreeable. At these meetings get well acquainted 
with the whole hearted and pure 
hearted— the consecrated or those "feeling 
after God," and let them get acquainted with 
your heart. If they come to take knowledge 
of you that you have been with Jesus and 
learned of him, and that you are truly his 
"brethren," you will then be able to introduce 
to them the precious present truths 
which you can see to be so needful for their 
ripening. 

(c) While always careful not to belie the 
truth, careful not to be mistaken for a member 
in any of the nominal churches, this need not 
hinder any from sometimes attending divine 
worship in any of them, if thus we may do 
more good than in any other way known to us. 
By mingling with them occasionally you may 
have opportunities for speaking a word in 
season and handing a tract or book, that you 



would not otherwise have. 

(d) Study very thoroughly the Chart which 
you find in M. DAWN VOL. I., until you understand 
its every feature and can explain it clearly. 
(See explanation, Chapter xii.) Then you 
might procure one of our new five feet charts 
(See notice page 2), invite in your neighbors 
and friends and explain it to them; and 
when you have callers it may sometimes prove, 
not only of interest and profit to them, but a 
blessing to yourself; for every time we explain 
God's great plan to others we get a fresh blessing 
therefrom upon our own hearts. 



page 141 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

--INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1650 : page 141 
ISRAEL IN EGYPT. 



II. QUAR., LESSON VII., MAY 13, EXOD. 1:1-14. 

Golden Text— "Our help is in the name of the Lord. 
Psa. 124:8. 

As preceding lessons showed us how God 
prepared a place for his people in Egypt 
and transported them thither and planted 
them in the best of the land and gave them 
great temporal prosperity during the lifetime 
of all the first generation, we now come 
to view them under another course of instruction 
—this time in the school of adversity. 

In the midst of prosperity they had marvelously 
increased so that the second generation 
filled the land of Goshen; and the 
new king which knew not Joseph, and the 
new generation of Egyptians, too, which 
forgot the gratitude of their fathers toward 
Joseph and the disposition to manifest it in 
favor to his relatives and descendants, began 



to fear lest this prosperous people in their 
midst might some time rise up against them 
or ally themselves with their enemies. Hence 
the decree of the king mentioned in verse 10. 
VERSES 1 1-14 tell the bitter story of their 
oppression, under which they were taught 
valuable lessons of humility and patience, 
of dependence upon God, and of hope for 
deliverance inspired by his precious promises. 
Here, too, their common sufferings 
bound them together as a people, and kept 
them distinct and separate from the Egyptians 

R1651 : page 141 

and consequently from their influence 
in matters of religion, etc. 

But notwithstanding their hard bondage 
the promises of God that they should rapidly 
multiply (Gen. 15:5; 22:17) was being 
fulfilled, so that, from the handful of seventy 
souls that went down into Egypt, there 

R1651 : page 142 

came out, after about three centuries, about 
six hundred thousand men, which implies a 
population of about two millions. 

To those who are able, through a knowledge 
of God's plan, to rise to his standpoint 
in viewing his dealings with his people, 
there is a most manifest exhibition of fatherly 
wisdom and care in this discipline in 
Egypt, as well as in all their subsequent 
leadings. As a wise father, God foresaw 
that too much prosperity would be greatly 
to their disadvantage— tending to pride, ambition, 
independence, self-gratification, self-indulgence, 
indolence; and to assimilation 
with friendly aliens from the commonwealth 
of Israel and the imbibing of their 
idolatrous principles and practices. All this 
was checked and guarded against by the 
bitter experiences of Israel in Egypt, while 
the opposite tendencies were all encouraged. 
And thus also the way was paved for a 
grand exhibition of God's further care and 
wisdom in their timely and wonderful deliverance 
when his purposes for them in 
Egypt had been fully accomplished. 

R1651 : page 142 

THE CHILDHOOD OF MOSES. 



II. QUAR., LESSON VIII., MAY 20, EXOD. 2:1-10. 

Golden Text— "I will deliver him and honor him."— 
Psa. 91:15. 

This lesson presents several features of 
divine interposition worthy of very special 
consideration. (1) It calls to mind the 
promise of God to Jacob hundreds of years 
previous (Gen. 46:4)— to bring his posterity 
back to the land of promise, his purposes 
in sending them down into Egypt 
having been accomplished; and now he is 
preparing to fulfil that promise. 

(2) It is another illustration (See also 
Rom. 9: 1 1) of God's elections of certain 
individuals for special services in the present 
life, and the shaping of their course in 
view of that purpose. Like the Apostle 
Paul (Gal. 1:15) Moses seems to have been 
chosen, even before he was born. These 
elections were not unto everlasting life, but 
to a place of service in the present life. 
Though Paul was "a chosen vessel" to 
preach Christ to the Gentiles, he might 
have become "a castaway" (1 Cor. 9:27) 

so far as future honors are concerned. 

(3) It affords another illustration of 
special divine providence in the protection, 
preservation and training of the chosen instruments 
of service. Born under the cruel 

edict of death, that very circumstance was 
divinely overruled for Moses' advantage, 
and through him for that of all Israel: and 
so the wrath of opposing men was made to 
advance the divine plan, instead of to retard 
it, as intended. It was due to this circumstance 
that Moses was brought up in 
all the learning of the Egyptians, and thus 
fitted for his future work as a great leader 
and statesman. 

(4) It shows how God, while working 
out his grand designs on a large scale, is 
not unmindful of the faith and devotion of 
humble individuals who put their trust in 
him. By faith Moses' parents hid him 

three months, and then took him to the river's 
brink and left him alone in the hands 
of God; and confidently trusting him, "they 
were not afraid of the king's commandment." 
-Heb. 11:23. 

(5) It shows how God has respect both 

to the character and to the natural qualifications 

of his chosen instruments. Thus, 

for instance, for the leadership of Israel he 



chose a good man, a godly man, one who 
preferred to suffer affliction with the people 
of God rather than to enjoy the pleasures 
of an Egyptian court, esteeming the 
reproach of Christ greater riches than the 
treasures of Egypt. (Heb. 11:24-27.) But 
for the throne of Egypt at that particular 
time he chose one of very opposite character 
(Rom. 9:17), and thus his purpose was 
wrought out in the fullest exercise of the 
free moral agency of both. 

It is notable also that in choosing Moses 
for his great work as a deliverer and statesman, 
God did not choose a novice, but, on 
the contrary, he chose one of great natural 
ability and gave to him just the kind of education 
he needed for his work— his earliest 
years under the training of godly parents, 
whose instilling of the principles of truth 
and righteousness and whose instructions 
in the hope of Israel, were not without 
their desired effect in all the subsequent 
years of life; then the remainder of forty 
years under the most favorable circumstances 
for learning what the most enlightened 
nation of that day afforded; and then 
forty years in the retirement of domestic 
life, well suited for the mellowing and refining 
of his character and the deepening, 
and enriching of experience. 

And yet in choosing this man of learning 
and ability God, as in the case of the Apostle 
Paul, permitted a thorn in the flesh, lest 

R1651 : page 143 

he should be exalted above measure by the 
honors of his high position. He was slow 
of speech— a diffident, retiring man and not 
at all gifted as an orator. The office, however, 
did not require oratory, and so the charms 
of eloquence were not given— his meekness 
coupled with great executive ability especially 
fitted him for it. A similar course 
of previous training is also very noticeable 
in the case of the Apostle Paul. (See Gal. 1:15; 
Acts 22:3; 26:24.) And the same 
Apostle urges all who would be used of the 
Lord to study to show themselves workmen 
approved unto God.— 2 Tim. 2:15. 

(6) It is also noticeable that for special 
leadership God chooses the few and not the 
many, and more frequently only one at a 
time. There was only one Lord Jesus to 
redeem and restore our lost and ruined race. 
There was only one Paul to lead on in declaring 



the unsearchable riches of Christ to 
the Gentiles, and to leave his rich legacy of 
inspired love to the Gentile Christians of all 
subsequent generations. There was only 
one Moses to lead the hosts of Israel out of 
bondage and to be a father unto them and 
a judge, though there was a host of honored 
co-workers with him— Aaron, Hur, 
Joshua, Caleb, et al. So also in later days 
God has from time to time raised up special 
instruments, amply fitted to serve in 
special emergencies, and to lead in reforms, 
etc.; e.g., Martin Luther, John Knox, John 
Wesley, etc. But in every such case the 
present reward has been persecution. And 
so severe have been the trials and so perilous 
the positions of such men, that nothing 
but their zeal and devotion to the cause and 
its future recompenses could be a sufficient 
incentive to induce them to fulfil their 
mission. 

In view of these facts, it becomes the 
people of God at all times to carefully observe 
such remarkable evidences of God's 
appointment, and to co-operate with God 
in whatever way he may be pleased to use 
their talents. If any man would be more 
abundantly used of the Lord in his blessed 
service, let him seek first to be fitted for it 
more and more. Let him imitate that beloved 
and honored servant, Moses, in meekness, 
humility, energy and untiring zeal and 
self-sacrificing service of the Lord. But 
the wise steward will seek always to cultivate 
along the lines of his natural abilities, 
and not expect the Lord to work a miracle 
for his advancement, and so waste valuable 
time seeking to develop that which he does 
not by nature possess. True, the Lord could 
work a miracle if he desired to do so; but 
that is not his usual method. Miracles are 
his reserve forces, and are only brought forward 
when the natural means are insufficient 
to accomplish the divine purpose. 

R1651 : page 143 

MOSES SENT AS A DELIVERER. 



II QUAR. LESSON IX., MAY 27, EXOD. 3:10-20. 

Golden Text— "Fear them not, for I am with thee."- 
Isa. 41:10. 



When God would deliver Israel, he chose 
for his servant and representative the meekest 
man, Moses. (Num. 12:3.) This disposition 
was necessary not only for the 
task before him, but also because this one 
was to be a type of the great deliverer of 
all mankind from the bondage of sin— "the 
man Christ Jesus," who was "meek and 
lowly of heart;" and also the body of Christ 
which is the Church.— See Acts 3:22,23. 

Moses' humble birth, as one of an enslaved 
race, would naturally incline him to 
humility. And this disposition continued 
with him, even though he became an adopted 
member of the royal family. His subsequent 
boldness and ability as an executive 
were due to the fact that he acted as God's 
agent and representative. This gave that 
beautiful blend to his character, of ability 
with humility. 

It was forty years from the time that 
Moses was born to the time when he first 
essayed to help his brethren and was misunderstood 
(Exod. 2:11-15), and it was 
forty years from that time until he became 
their deliverer. These two equal periods 
seem to be typical of the two ages— the 
Jewish and the Gospel ages, which were 
also of equal length— 1845 years. At the 
end of the Jewish age Christ offered himself 
to Israel as their deliverer, but they refused 
him and he went away. His return 
is due at the end of a like period, at the 
close of the Gospel age. At his second 
presence, during the Millennial age, he will 
deliver all who are "God's people" from 
the bondage of sin under Satan, as Moses 
delivered his people from the bondage of 
Egypt under Pharaoh. 

During Moses' absence he married a Gentile 
wife, and so in the interval between 
Christ's first and second advents he selects 
a wife from among the Gentiles— the Gospel 
Church, the Bride, the Lamb's wife. 

R1652 : page 144 

After the long preparation of his chosen 
instrument— God's time had come to send 

R1652 : page 144 

him, and his servant was ready; and lo, 

from the midst of the burning bush that 

was not consumed, and which forcibly illustrated 

the power of God to preserve and 



use his servant in the midst of fiery trials, 
Moses heard the call of God to become the 
leader of his people out of Egyptian bondage. 
-Verse 10. 

But how could he do it? Moses looked 
at himself and at the magnitude of such an 
undertaking, and feeling his own insufficiency 
he replied, "Who am I, that I should 
go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring 
forth the children of Israel out of Egypt?" 
It seemed a most improbable thing that the 
Egyptians would give up two millions of 
profitable slaves for any consideration that 
he could present, or any power that he 
could bring to bear upon them. Then how 
could the people be induced to follow his 
leadership? To these misgivings concerning 
himself, Moses received the all-sufficient 
assurance of the Lord— "Certainly I 
will be with thee," etc. That was enough; 
and strong in this confidence, he went forth 
to prove at every step of the way the abundant 
sufficiency of divine grace. 

Herein is encouragement also for every 
true servant of the Lord who humbly relies 
upon his promises while striving to walk 
in the ways of his appointment: "Certainly 
I will be with thee." Oh, how much 
we need this blessed assurance; for who, 
of himself, is sufficient for the responsibilities 
of the Lord's service? 

The great deliverance was indeed wrought 
out by God by miracles and wonders by 
the hand of his servant Moses; and those 
modern critics who reject the testimony of 
miracles are simply insisting that God 
should always operate within the range of 
human understanding. But to the sincere 
inquirer after truth there is no clearer testimony 
of the divine power and resources 
than the testimony of miracles. The ten 
miraculous plagues upon Egypt did their 
appointed work, and Israel went out a free 
people under the leadership of Moses; and 
all the world were witnesses of the power 
of the God of Israel. 

This deliverance of Israel from Egypt 
was a marvelous deliverance, and yet the 
prophets tell us of a still greater deliverance 
for the people, yet to be accomplished, 
when they shall be gathered out of all nations 
whither they have been driven, and 
when even the generations of them that are 
in the graves shall come forth, and they 
shall be brought into their own land and 
securely planted there. (See Jer. 16:14,15; 



Ezek. 37:12-14; Isa. 65:21-23.) In 
comparison with this deliverance yet to be 
accomplished, we are assured that the former 
from Egypt will seem so insignificant 
as not to be named any more; for that was 
but a type of the one to come. Then Abraham 
will realize the reward of his faith, 
when he and his posterity actually come into 
the land which God promised him for an 
everlasting possession (Gen. 17:8), and which 
Stephen said (Acts 7:5) he never owned a 
foot of in his past life, but died in faith that 
the promise would be fulfilled at his return, 
—in the morning of the resurrection. 

"For this purpose have I raised thee up," 
is recorded of this Egyptian Pharaoh. 
(Rom. 9:17.) As God made choice of 
Moses for one purpose, he also made choice 
of this Pharaoh for another. He did not 
make the one hard and tyrannical, and the 
other meek and obedient; but he chose 
such as were so naturally and of their own 
free will and choice. The meek man was 
chosen to one position and the froward one 
to another. God did not let a good man 
come to the throne and then corrupt him; 
but he raised up a bad man, and thus had 
in him a suitable one by whom to show 
forth his power. 

God's dealings, always just, and often 
merciful, have an effect upon men according 
to their hearts. The same providence 
that would move one man to repentance 
would move another to hardness of heart. 
In Pharaoh's case the plagues brought repentance, 
but the goodness of God in hearing 
his prayer and removing the plagues 
each time produced hardness of heart. 
Thus seen, it was not by exerting some bad 
influence upon Pharaoh's mind, but by extending 
his mercy to Pharaoh and his people, 
that God hardened his heart. 

The Egyptian bondage typified the bondage 
of sin; Pharaoh typified Satan; and 
Israel typified all those who long for deliverance 
that they may present themselves 
to God and his service. The deliverance 
from Egypt represented this overthrow of 
the power of sin at our Lord's second advent. 
The plagues upon Egypt represented 
the troubles coming upon the whole world 
in the near future which will effectually 
break down the various enslaving and oppressive 
systems of the present time— social, 
political, religious and financial— and 
engulf them all in utter ruin. 



page 146 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1655 : page 146 

LETTERS OF CONGRATULATION. 



Our mails are very large since the Extra 
TOWER was sent forth. We are receiving from 
all quarters congratulations on the completeness 
of the answer to the charges of the 
conspirators. 

Please accept our thanks for these; and be 
assured that we will no more be puffed up by 
the loving congratulations of our friends than 
we were cast down by the slanders of our enemies. 
To the Lord be praise, now and ever 
more. Give thanks with us for our mutual 
deliverance.-THE EDITORS. 

R1652 : page 146 

ANCIENT RECORDS. 



ACCOUNTS OF THE HEBREW INVASION FOUND IN 
EGYPT. 

Science contains an interesting account of 
the Tellel-Amorna tablets from the pen of the 
Rev. Thomas Harrison, of Staplehurst, Kent. 
These tablets, 320 in number, were discovered 
by a fellah woman in 1 887 among the ruins of 
the palace of Amenopis IV., known as Khu-en-Aten, 
between Missieh and Assiout, about 180 
miles south of Cairo. They have been found to 
contain a political correspondence of the very 
greatest interest, dating from some 3,370 years 
back. Many are from Palestine, written by 
princes of the Amorites, Phenicians, Philistines, 
etc., the burden of almost all being: "Send, 
I pray thee, chariots and men to keep the city 
of the King, my Lord." Among the enemies 
against whom help is thus invoked are the 
Abiri, easily recognized as the Hebrews. The 
date fixes that of the Bible (1 Kings 4:1) as 
accurate. Many names occur which are familiar 
in Scripture, as for example, Japhia, one 
of the Kings killed by Joshua (Josh. 10:3); 
Adonizedec, King of Jerusalem (ditto); and 
Jabin, King of Hazor. (Josh. 1 1.) Very pathetic 
are the letters of Ribadda, the brave and 
warlike King of Gebel, whose entreaties for 
aid are observed to grow less obsequious and 
more businesslike as his enemies prevailed 
against him, robbing him eventually of his wife 
and children, whom he was powerless to protect. 
But the greatness of Egypt was waning 
under the nineteenth dynasty; enemies were 
pressing her at home, and the chariots and the 
horsemen went not forth. 



Remittances from foreign countries should 
be made by Foreign Money Order. From 
Canada by International Money Order. 

Please remember that Canadian and all 
other Foreign stamps are useless to us. 



R1652 : page 147 
