From Our Readers
Shyness
I just read your article “Why Am I So Shy?” (October 22, 1982) You stated: ‘Shyness is merely acting out the thoughts or beliefs you have of being different, odd, or inferior to other persons.’ Truly, it is not my imagination that I am a man of short stature. I am shorter than most 12-year-old children who are not shy about telling me I am short. When I converse with a group of men, it is like standing in a grove of trees. Most women tower over me. It is true that there are short people who do not let these things bother them. That does not mean that it is a product of imagination. Not all of us share the same strength. Why do you not recognize that shyness can come from real situations as well as imagined ones?
M. W., Arizona
We did not intend to imply that shyness stemmed only from imaginary causes. The point being made was that by properly understanding the causes of shyness one could better overcome the problem. And further, that shyness primarily describes a behavior or reaction to a situation and not a state or condition. We truly sympathize with persons who are overly shy, regardless of the cause, and agree that if others would show proper understanding of the problem it would make it much easier for the shy ones. But admittedly, not all people have this understanding. So it is up to the shy person to do what he or she can to work to overcome the problem from within and benefit from the good counsel that can be had from God’s Word. The article “What Can I Do About My Shyness” appearing in our November 8, 1982, issue provides good counsel in this regard.​—ED.
I want to extend my sincere appreciation for the articles on shyness. (October 22, 1982, and November 8, 1982) I can’t express how much these articles have helped me with the steps I can take to overcome some of my shyness.
J. J., New York
Childbirth
I want to express my appreciation for the article “Childbirth​—Must It Be So Painful?” (September 22, 1980) Last year my second daughter was born with very little pain, and I am convinced it was partly because I read that article over and over again three or four months before the due date. I was determined to have complete control of myself in labor because I felt it was my last chance to have a child.
L. M., Canada
Crying Infants
The article “Johnny, Please Be Quiet!” (September 8, 1982) expresses so well what an exhausting and frustrating experience it can be for the parents of such babies. The suggestions made for comforting the baby work. Providing our baby with what seemed like an endless need for love and attention has paid off. We now enjoy our days with an adorable, responsive little person. Thank you for supplying us with so much helpful and encouraging information.
D. W., Canada

