Psalms
Survival Depends upon God
COMPARED with the world’s population, God’s people have always been few. Yet time and again they have been the object of intense hostility. Without divine protection, therefore, they could never have survived.
The psalmist David was convinced of this. In one of his psalms, he declared: “‘Had it not been that Jehovah proved to be for us,’ let Israel now say, ‘had it not been that Jehovah proved to be for us when men rose up against us, then they would have swallowed us up even alive, when their anger was burning against us. Then the very waters would have washed us away, the torrent itself would have passed over our soul. Then there would have passed over our soul the waters of presumptuousness.’” (Ps. 124:1-5) If Jehovah had not come to the aid of his people, the destruction that their enemies would have brought upon them would have been comparable to the ground’s splitting apart during an earthquake and swallowing up everyone alive in the affected area. It also would have been similar to the effects of an overwhelming deluge that sweeps away everything in its path. The proud, swelling waves would have engulfed the Israelites completely.
In view of the danger, there certainly was good reason to thank the Most High for his help. Appropriately, the psalmist continued with an expression of gratitude in behalf of Israel: “‘Blessed be Jehovah, who has not given us as a prey to their teeth. Our soul is like a bird that is escaped from the trap of baiters. The trap is broken, and we ourselves have escaped. Our help is in the name of Jehovah, the Maker of heaven and earth.’”​—Ps. 124:6-8.
The enemy, like a predatory beast, desired to devour the Israelites. But Jehovah did not permit that to happen. The Israelites were like a bird caught in a trap. Then, suddenly, Jehovah provided escape. Truly, God’s people had sound reason for looking to the name of Jehovah for aid, that is, to the person represented by that name. This One will never fail his people, for he is the Almighty Creator.
When experiencing great difficulties, God’s servants today can take comfort in the words of this psalm. It may look as though all of them will perish off the earth. But Jehovah God will never permit the enemy to exterminate his people. Relief is certain to come.
“None that rests his faith on him will be disappointed.”​—Rom. 10:11

