The Challenge to Government
OVER 200 years ago a people felt oppressed by the government to which they were subject. In declaring independence from that government of Great Britain, the American statesman Thomas Jefferson wrote about “certain unalienable Rights,” including “Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness.”
The challenge to government now, as it was then, is to provide these “rights” for people. Few persons today really enjoy a full, satisfying life, with liberty and happiness. To attain such a life, what changes, do you think, are necessary?
Many have given this matter much thought. In their book A Sane and Happy Life: A Family Guide, Doctors Abraham and Rose Franzblau wrote: “If we were to take a poll of the world population and consult humanity on the kind of world we would all like to live in, it is very likely that we could all agree on certain minimum requirements.” What are these “minimum requirements,” or needs?
NEEDS WE WANT SATISFIED
First, the doctors listed “world without war.” Surely, we can all agree with the need to end war. How tragic it is, sapping the economy of nations and crippling and killing our loved ones! But can any government meet the challenge to eliminate war?
“Second,” wrote the doctors, “it would be a world without hunger, from which famine and want would be banished forever. Oh, how we can agree with the need to provide adequate food for all! How grand it would be never again to experience gnawing hunger or malnutrition, and to know that every human on earth had enough to eat! Is it too much to hope for government to solve the problem of food shortages?
“Third,” continued the doctors, “it would be a world without disease, a world in which all would have the chance to grow up in health and live out their days free of preventable and curable illnesses.” All of us, without question, recognize the need to have good health in order to enjoy life to the full. What a welcome relief it would be to live in a world where no one ever again got sick, where no one would have a cold or any other affliction! Is it too great a challenge for government to satisfy this need?
Yet for people truly to enjoy ‘life, liberty and happiness,’ government must be able to satisfy still other basic needs. In a world in which we all would like to live, the doctors noted, there would be ‘work for persons so they could provide for themselves and their families.’ Yes, no unemployment; but satisfying, productive activity for all. Can government meet this need?
Going on, the doctors added: “It would be a world in which every man would enjoy freedom under law, with justice for all.” Also, “every human being would have opportunity to develop his capacities and talents to the full, and be rewarded for his endeavors, without prejudice.” Surely we can all agree with the need to eliminate today’s terrible injustices, inequalities and prejudices. But can any government really do this?
Most of us will agree that there are still other needs that must be met if we are to have the kind of world in which it would be desirable to live. As the doctors said: ‘Such a world would be one in which all men would have ample leisure to enjoy the good things in life.’ And they concluded: ‘The highest premium would be placed upon such qualities as integrity, love, unselfishness and concern for fellow humans.’
Although these needs are not generally being fulfilled today, is it really too much to expect them to be? In what way can the real needs of mankind be satisfied?
THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENT
Thomas Jefferson, in composing the American Declaration of Independence, noted: “To secure these rights [life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness], Governments are instituted among Men.” Yes, good government is essential to satisfy mankind’s needs. As the early American political leader John C. Calhoun wrote: “Man is so constituted that government is necessary to the existence of society, and society to his existence.”
But just what is government? It has been defined as “authoritative direction or control.” Governments make and enforce laws to regulate human behavior. And we can be thankful for this, especially in our complex society. Think, for example, what would happen at a busy street corner if there were no direction to control the flow of traffic. It could be disastrous.
Yet controlling the flow of traffic is comparatively easy. It is much more difficult to enforce laws to preserve peace between peoples, to direct the production and distribution of food so that all have plenty to eat, to provide services to keep everyone in good health, to furnish meaningful employment for all, and so forth. To fill these needs, and the many others that must be satisfied in order for people truly to enjoy life, a masterful government is essential.
WHO CAN MEET THE CHALLENGE?
The Creator of mankind recognizes the human need for government, for “authoritative direction or control.” So it is not by chance that the Bible tells of a government under God’s direction. In fact, this promise of rule by God is the Bible’s dominant theme. Perhaps it surprises you to learn this.
You may ask: “Where does the Bible speak of God’s government?” Please locate a copy of the Bible, and turn in it to Isaiah chapter nine, verses six and seven. If yours is the commonly used King James Version (or, Authorized Version), it says:
“For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end.”
God’s prophet Isaiah was here telling about the then future birth of a child, a prince. Eventually this ‘son of a king’ would become a great ruler, “The Prince of Peace.” He would have charge of a truly masterful government, one that would bring peace without end. Perhaps you recognize the identity of this child. The angel Gabriel, announcing his birth, said that he should be called Jesus, and added: “He will rule as king . . . , and there will be no end of his kingdom.”​—Luke 1:31, 33.
The primary activity of Jesus Christ and his earthly disciples was to preach and teach about this kingdom of God. Over 140 references are made by them in the Bible to that government. Recall that Jesus even taught his followers to pray to God: “Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.”​—Matt. 6:10, AV.
But just how will the rule of this Kingdom government be established, and how will it function? Will humans bring it about and operate it? Can men provide a government that will create the kind of world in which we would all like to live?

