Walking in the Steps of the Master
WHAT are you doing with your life? What do you really want to do with your life?
Many dedicated Christians have secular employment that requires them to spend long hours making a living to support themselves and their families. They may also have other responsibilities that require much of their time and attention. Consequently, they may feel the need to spend time pursuing other interests from time to time because these contribute to their enjoyment in life and personal satisfaction. How can they balance things out, so as to live a life that will be pleasing to God?
Most of us know that physical work on material things can be satisfying to the worker and an honor to God. Before God’s Son came to the earth as a human, he worked with his Father in making all the material things in the universe. He was described as a Master Worker.​—Col. 1:15, 16; Prov. 8:30, 31.
Later his life was transferred to the earth. When he came to young manhood, he worked as a carpenter. But the time came for him to do another work, in his Father’s service. This included preaching and disciple-making.​—Mark 1:14, 15; John 18:37.
When Jesus turned his attention to this new activity, it became his primary interest in life. He was delighted with this new assignment. He called it his “food.” (Heb. 10:7; John 4:34) And the way he lived his life showed that he meant it. In fact, the course Jesus pursued showed he believed that his Father would continue to provide for his material needs as he made this new assignment his primary pursuit.
WHAT SOME ARE DOING
Followers of Jesus Christ recognize the responsibility to care for themselves and those dependent upon them and still have something to distribute to someone in need. (1 Tim. 5:8; Eph. 4:28) Yet some wish that they did not have to spend so much time and energy in secular pursuits. Many wish they had more time to devote to the preaching, teaching and disciple-making activity. Do you share that desire? Some have been able to arrange their affairs so that they have more time for this work​—so it can have a primary place in their lives.
One of Jehovah’s Witnesses who lives in New York city worked for years as an employee of an import/​export agency and had a good income. His wife also worked. But they wanted to spend more time in the disciple-making work.
The wife’s employer complained that he could not find reliable help to keep his place of employment clean. So the Witness approached the man and offered to clean the establishment for a specified price. His offer was accepted. The couple were encouraged. In fact, they determined that if they could just find one or two more accounts like that, they would not have to keep their full-time jobs.
Now they work together in a small cleaning business. Their income is considerably less than it was before, but it is adequate for them to live comfortably. Both are very pleased that they are able now to spend more time looking for persons interested in the Bible. They also have the time they desire to discuss and study the Bible with these people.
A mother with five children at home desired to have a fuller share in the preaching work. She made the needed adjustments in order to do so. She assigned the children to make their own beds and put their rooms in order before coming to breakfast. Each of the children was also assigned to dust and tidy up one other room in the house. The mother often got up early to do other cleaning in the home, to do the laundry and to begin preparing meals for the day. So, when the children were ready to leave for school, she was usually ready to leave too, in order to share in the disciple-making work in her community until the children returned from school.
PREACHING AND MAKING DISCIPLES FULL TIME
In almost every country of the world there are those who have arranged to serve as “pioneers” (engaging full time in declaring the “good news”). This sometimes requires considerable adjustment in their daily routine. What has helped them to find fulfillment and joy is the example of the Master. He was moved with pity for the people he served. He viewed them as “sheep without a shepherd,” skinned and knocked about. He was willing to give his soul in their behalf. All of us can be encouraged by his example.​—Matt. 9:36; 20:28.
A pioneer from Illinois (U.S.A.) who has been in the full-time work for six years said: “These past years have been filled with so much happiness, contentment and joy that I had to tell you. I just pray that with Jehovah’s blessing I can continue on in full-time service as long as there is work to do.”
Is it possible that your circumstances will permit you to have a fuller share in this work, or can you make adjustments so that this might be possible? Discussing your desire with those who are already in the full-time service may be of assistance to you. It may be that at the conventions or circuit assemblies of Jehovah’s Witnesses you will be able to seek out some of these individuals. Their observations and the spirit they show may stimulate you so that you are moved to feel, ‘If they did it, I can do it too!’
You will find that, while adjustments may be necessary in a number of respects, it is primarily FAITH that will be needed. You may already have seen evidence of this when observing others, or you may have had experiences yourself that are evident demonstrations that what Jesus said is really true: “Keep on, then, seeking first the kingdom and his [God’s] righteousness, and all these other things will be added to you.”​—Matt. 6:24-33.
Those who are exerting themselves to have as full a share as possible in the special work that Jehovah God and Jesus Christ have given Christians at this time enjoy fulfillment and happiness in life. This is what God purposed for his servants. Is this your lot in life? If not, it may be that with well-thought-out and well-planned adjustments it could be.
There is happiness in giving. There is warmth and satisfaction in knowing you have used your time and energy fully in the special work Christians have been given to do during this time of the end. Yes, it is walking in the steps of the Master that will bring us the greatest happiness and result in the greatest honor to Jehovah.​—Matt. 22:37-39; Acts 20:35.

