A Strong Refuge Today
 1, 2. Why must we have the same confidence in Jehovah’s name today as his servants did in times past? And what circumstances are we likely to encounter?
THE forceful and telling experiences brought to our attention in the foregoing article show clearly how faithful servants of God in times past took refuge in the name of Jehovah as a “strong tower”. We do exactly the same today. The same Jehovah in whom they had confidence is the One we believe and trust in today. We must have strong confidence in Jehovah, both individually and collectively, and whether it be individuals, or local groups, or international organizations that try to harm us, the course to take is clearly marked out for us.
2 In these last days loud-mouthed bullies and braggarts threaten Jehovah’s people with bodily injury, and we know that in ourselves we cannot withstand their attacks. A certain course may have to be taken in faithfulness to the truth and in obedience to the Lord’s commandments, but in doing so evil is threatened. Or, it may be that one’s position in the commercial world has been threatened because of association with the Lord’s people. Or perhaps home conditions have become very precarious resulting from faithfulness to the truth and there are threats of brutality and other forms of opposition unless the right course is abandoned. Or maybe a mob has gathered to beat up or run faithful witnesses out of town and there is no way of escape. What would we do in these circumstances?
 3. What must we do in time of need so that we can take refuge in His name?
3 First of all, remember just who you are, that you are a child of God, a faithful follower of Christ, that these things would not come unless you had been doing your best to serve Jehovah.They have not come to you from your own foolishness or wrongdoing. Remember too that your God is the Almighty Creator of the universe, he is the Most High and his Son is the King of the new world, and is now enthroned; that Jehovah has made many promises to care for his faithful ones, and when there is need he should be called upon to come to our rescue. He will be as good as his word. You will find it difficult in certain circumstances to be immediately convinced about this, but trust in Him and find it is true. In trusting you must have complete confidence, not merely hoping that God may do something to aid you but being absolutely sure he will. And how can we be so sure? Simply because he has promised. His name means so much. It means everything and is sufficient for all our needs. Can we remember? Are we assured? Can we trust?
 4. How do we encourage ourselves in Jehovah, and why is this necessary?
4 Encourage yourself in his name by calling to mind what it means and what is involved in it. It is very necessary to encourage and strengthen ourselves. Of King David it is written: “And David was greatly distressed; for the people spake of stoning him, . . . but David strengthened himself in Jehovah his God.” (1 Sam. 30:6, AS) He would call to mind that he had asked Jehovah whether he should go and smite the Philistines, and had been told to go, and now the Amalekites had made their raid and wrought much havoc; so he strengthened himself. (See Psalm 42:6-8.) We must do the same thing. It is so necessary to call to mind the course we have taken, how it was tested to the best of our ability to make sure it was in harmony with God’s will, and, being assured, we stand firm. Then trust, be confident, do not doubt, realize fully the name Jehovah can be relied upon as a strong tower, and in it we are safe.
 5. Mention some of the promises Jehovah has made in which we must have confidence. Why must our trust be complete?
5 Remember how the name stands for the Eternal One. He who does whatever he pleases, the all-powerful, all-wise, ever-loving Supreme Sovereign. This God is our God, our protector at all times. His eye never sleeps, his ear is always open and he can never be caught off guard. Recall some of his promises, such as: “He that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. I will say of Jehovah, He is my refuge and my fortress; my God, in whom I trust. For thou, O Jehovah, art my refuge! Thou hast made the Most High thy habitation; there shall no evil befall thee, . . . He shall call upon me, and I will answer him; I will be with him in trouble: I will deliver him, and honor him.” (Ps. 91:1, 2, 9, 10, 15, AS) These true, Jehovah-given promises are to encourage his people in all extremities, pressures, troubles, assaults, and dangers. So, they may have assurance to put confidence in him. The name is an invisible fortress, and by relying completely on what the name means we are thereby putting ourselves in the strong tower. But our trust must be entire. His mercy and faithfulness will be our portion if we claim it.
 6. What are some of the scriptures showing opposition to God’s people from the nations? and how has this been fulfilled in a measure?
6 Opposition to us is national and international, for this world hates Jehovah and his people. This is described in the Psalms: “Why do the nations rage, and the peoples meditate a vain thing? The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against Jehovah, and against his anointed, saying, Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast away their cords from us.” “Forget not the voice of thine adversaries: the tumult of those that rise up against thee ascendeth continually.” “For, lo, thine enemies make a tumult; and they that hate thee have lifted up the head. They take crafty counsel against thy people, and consult together against thy hidden ones. They have said, Come, and let us cut them off from being a nation; that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance.” (Ps. 2:1-3; 74:23; 83:2-4, AS) The enemies of Jehovah have tried more than once to cut God’s people off, one recent attempt being 1917-1918. It failed, for Jehovah heard the cry of those trusting in him and rescued them from the pit of death. Again, in 1933, when the sadistic demonized boasters, with the infamous, abominable Nazi organization, broke into the ranks of Jehovah’s people, they did their utmost to destroy them. They failed miserably, for those in Jehovah’s organization trusted in the name, and these enemies were cut off. Then again in 1939, and during World War II, the enemies of God’s kingdom tried to cut them off by their inhuman persecution, prisons, bans, tortures and deaths. Again they failed to cut off the holy nation, which was strictly holding to the truth. This nation had come to know the name and what it meant, and was trusting in it.
 7. To make Jehovah’s purposes our purposes involves what?
7 Some of Jehovah’s people suffered bitterly, and some were put to death by their enemies, but the purpose of Jehovah has not been hindered and the destiny of the faithful is sure—just as sure as Abraham’s, David’s, Daniel’s, and many others’. They all died in faith, knowing his name. We all must understand as these did that our interests must be completely submerged in Jehovah’s purposes. As long as these prosper we are happy, whether we live or die, for our everlasting life is assured to us if faithful. No promise has been made that we shall never on any account be persecuted or hurt mentally or physically. Indeed, all the faithful before this time have suffered, and Paul’s warning is: “In fact, all those desiring to live with godly devotion in association with Christ Jesus will also be persecuted.” (2 Tim. 3:12, NW) But we have been definitely promised protection if we trust in Jehovah with all our heart.
 8. Is Jehovah demonstrating his power on behalf of his people today? What does this lead our enemies to conclude?
8 Now at the end of this present evil system of things Jehovah is going to perform a marvelous work, for he is going to exhibit his wondrous strength on behalf of his faithful ones. They will be overwhelmed with gratitude as they witness his power in operation to defend them and destroy the opposers. To those outside, terror will strike them as they see Jehovah’s terrible acts. Today we are subject to reproach and all kinds of hurt, and therefore obedience and faithfulness have to be exercised. In fact, we are an easy target for the enemies. Our enemies say, “They cannot defend themselves. Their God is not able to save them. If he could, why has he not done so already?” True it is, Jehovah is not aggressively fighting our battles at present, and at times it seems that we have been left to the enemy attacks without much protection—just enough to see the work through, and from time to time some evidence is granted us of his strength on our behalf.
 9. Will Jehovah rise up and fight for his people? When, and what will happen then?
9 Jehovah has promised it will not always be like this, for the tables will be turned. Then our many foes will be the targets for Jehovah’s displeasure. Today Jehovah lets them go a long way in hurting us, but when he rises up to fight, their hateful persecution will come to a dead stop, and their dead bodies will litter the ground. How futile then will be the mighty organization of Satan, for Jehovah will blow on it and it will disappear! We have only to wait until Jehovah really fights for us, and then there will be complete and absolute safety in every way. Jehovah will defend his people from all physical harm, to demonstrate that his word is true. The many experiences describing Jehovah’s power over his people with the destruction of their enemies will then be fulfilled on a much larger scale than ever before. There will be no question as to who our God is, for they will know it by what they see and experience. He is Jehovah, and will do what he pleases. “Therefore, wait ye for me, saith Jehovah, until the day that I rise up to the prey; for my determination is to gather the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce anger; for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy.” “Then shall Jehovah go forth, and fight against those nations, as when he fought in the day of battle. And it shall come to pass in that day, that a great tumult from Jehovah shall be among them.”—Zeph. 3:8; Zech. 14:3, 13, AS.
HATING JEHOVAH’S ENEMIES
10. Explain the difference between loving our enemies and hating God’s enemies.
10 The Lord Jesus said, “Continue to love your enemies.” (Matt. 5:44, NW) And he also said, “Every kind of sin and blasphemy will be forgiven men, but the blasphemy against the spirit will not be forgiven. For example, whoever speaks a word against the Son of man, it will be forgiven him; but whoever speaks against the holy spirit, it will not be forgiven him, no, not in the present system of things nor in that to come.” (Matt. 12:31, 32, NW) Men may condemn us and still may be forgiven. We do not love them for their hurtful works to us, but there must not be hatred toward them on this account. Rather the commandment is to pray for such persons. But the situation is entirely different when opposers get to a state of antagonism against God and the spirit, so that even regardless of the facts in evidence of Jehovah’s workmanship and power, they distort them and accuse God of wickedness. Such extreme debasement is only identifying them with Satan the great opposer whose end is destruction. Satan is our enemy and he is also God’s enemy. The Lord Jesus was not calling upon us to love those who hated God. His own course of conduct is our guide. When tempted by the Devil he said: ‘Go away Satan, for it is written, It is Jehovah your God you must worship.’ Again he said, “That one was a manslayer when he began, and he did not stand fast in the truth, because truth is not in him. . . . he is a liar and the father of the lie.” God has put enmity between the seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent, and enmity means hostility or hatred. We cannot therefore love this world, Satan, or his seed.—Luke 4:8; John 8:44, NW; Gen. 3:15; Jas. 4:4; 1 John 2:15-17.
11. What does hatred of God’s enemies mean, and what does it not mean?
11 Haters of God and his people are to be hated, but this does not mean that we will take any opportunity of bringing physical hurt to them in a spirit of malice or spite, for both malice and spite belong to the Devil, whereas pure hatred does not. We must hate in the truest sense, which is to regard with extreme and active aversion, to consider as loathsome, odious, filthy, to detest. Surely any haters of God are not fit to live on his beautiful earth. The earth will be rid of the wicked and we shall not need to lift a finger to cause physical harm to come to them, for God will attend to that, but we must have a proper perspective of these enemies. His name signifies recompense to the enemies.
12. How does God’s Word say we have to treat those who hate Jehovah? What will be our decision and attitude?
12 What do you do with anything loathsome or repugnant that you detest and abhor? The answer is simple. You get away from it or remove it from your presence. You do not want to have anything at all to do with it. This must be exactly our attitude toward the haters of Jehovah. Prophetically it is written: “Surely thou wilt slay the wicked, O God: depart from me therefore, ye bloodthirsty men. For they speak against thee wickedly, and thine enemies take thy name in vain. Do not I hate them, O Jehovah, that hate thee? And am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee? I hate them with perfect hatred.” (Ps. 139:19-22, AS) Bloodthirsty men are shedders of blood, and therefore guilty men. We hold their conduct in complete abhorrence. Think about the awful treatment meted out to our brothers in Germany, Greece and Poland during World War II and since, by reason of the ferocity and beastliness of the totalitarian organization, whereby thousands were killed by those bloodthirsty creatures! Their motives, opposition to Jehovah and his people, their perfidy and wicked idolatrous purposes we perfectly abhor. With them we have neither part, interest nor affection.
13. Show how the scripture at Psalm 74:10, 11 is receiving fulfillment today. May we expect God to answer this prayer?
13 Jehovah’s enemies are recognized by their intense dislike for his people and the work these are doing. For they would break it down and have all of Jehovah’s witnesses sentenced to jail or concentration camps if they could. Not because they have anything against the witnesses personally, but on account of their work. They publish blasphemous lies and reproach the holy name Jehovah. Do we not hate those who hate God? We cannot love those hateful enemies, for they are fit only for destruction. We utter the prayer of the psalmist: “How long, O God, shall the adversary reproach? Shall the enemy blaspheme thy name for ever? Why drawest thou back thy hand, even thy right hand? Pluck it out of thy bosom and consume them.” (Ps. 74:10, 11, AS) We pray with intensity and cry out this prayer for Jehovah to delay no longer, and plead that his anger be made manifest. Bring forth your arm and let the enemies see it, and use it for their hurt and destruction. Surely the time is now ripe, the iniquity of Jehovah’s enemies has come to the full. Surely we all say, “O Jehovah, do not hold back your punishment of the wicked. Pluck your hand out and use it to let the enemies know your name! Exert your power again, for with one blow from your arm the enemies would disappear!”
14. How do other expressions in the Psalms concerning Jehovah’s enemies help us to get the correct view today?
14 Jehovah’s people express as their own other prophetic words: “Awake thou to help me, and behold. Even thou, O Jehovah God of hosts, the God of Israel, arise to visit all the nations: be not merciful to any wicked transgressors. They return at evening, they howl like a dog.” Here the enemies of Jehovah are viewed just like flea-bitten, mangy, scavenger dogs. “Scatter them by thy power, and bring them down, . . . let them even be taken in their pride, and for cursing and lying which they speak. Consume them in wrath, consume them, so that they shall be no more: and let them know that God ruleth in Jacob, unto the ends of the earth.” (Ps. 59:4-6, 11-13, AS) These are the true sentiments, desires and prayers of the righteous ones today. Are they yours? You may be sure they will be to the extent you know and love the name Jehovah. If you do not know him, then obviously you will be unconcerned about what happens. But if you love Jehovah then you will be greatly concerned about what happens to his holy name, and about those who would cast it into the mud, slime and filthiness of this degenerated, disgusting old system of things.
15, 16. Why do we pray as directed at Psalm 83? And what words of comfort and assurance did Paul give?
15 The true lovers of Jehovah lift the glorious name on high, and seek to remove all the dirty marks men have smeared upon it, and Jehovah loves them for this precious service. He can exalt his own name and very shortly he will do so, but during the present time he takes pleasure in those demonstrating their love for him in this manner. Loving his name means to treasure, guard, defend, fight for it. Such are honored by Jehovah. How keenly we feel the hurt to his holy name! How we despise the workers of iniquity, and those who would tear down God’s organization! So we pray: “Do thou unto them as unto Midian, as to Sisera, as to Jabin, at the river Kishon; who perished at Endor, who became as dung for the earth. . . . make them like the whirling dust; as stubble before the wind. As the fire that burneth the forest, and as the flame that setteth the mountains on fire, so pursue them with thy tempest, and terrify them with thy storm. Fill their faces with confusion, that they may seek thy name, O Jehovah. Let them be put to shame and dismayed for ever; yea, let them be confounded and perish; that they may know that thou alone, whose name is Jehovah, art the Most High over all the earth.”—Ps. 83:9-18, AS.
16 There is no doubt that those wicked creatures who reproach and dishonor Jehovah, who blaspheme pure and true religion, who endeavor to destroy the faithful worshipers, who break into God’s holy city, Zion, and try to terrify and brutally ill-treat and kill the Lord’s children, who are in every way the real enemies of Jehovah, are fit only to be taken and destroyed. But that execution work is Jehovah’s, for he will determine who are the incorrigible. Such ones are surely now fixing their own destiny, and then comes the time when the sin and the sinner cannot and never will be separated. The apostle Paul said: “This takes into account that it is righteous on God’s part to repay tribulation to those who make tribulation for you, but, to you who suffer tribulation, relief along with us at the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven with his powerful angels in a flaming fire, as he brings due punishment upon those who do not know God and those who do not obey the good news about our Lord Jesus. These very ones will pay the penalty of everlasting destruction from before the Lord and from the glory of his strength.”—2 Thess. 1:6-9, NW.
17. What must we be on guard for in ourselves?
17 In our holy zeal for Jehovah’s name we must always be on the watch ourselves that we too are pure in our worship of Jehovah, and have the very heart sentiment the psalmist had when he prayed: “Search me, O God, and know my heart: try me, and know my thoughts; and see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting.” “But I will sing of thy strength; yea, I will sing aloud of thy lovingkindness in the morning: for thou hast been my high tower, and a refuge in the day of my distress. Unto thee, O my strength, will I sing praises: for God is my high tower, the God of my mercy.” (Ps. 59:16, 17; 139:23, 24, AS) To our strong tower we run always, for we know the name Jehovah means that he is merciful, gracious, slow to anger, abundant in loving-kindness.
SINGING AND TRUSTING
18. Why must we sing? What is the song? And how does Moab come into the picture?
18 We must sing as we trust. What shall we sing about? The prophetic word supplies the information and instruction. “In that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah: We have a strong city; salvation will he appoint for walls and bulwarks. Open ye the gates, that the righteous nation which keepeth faith may enter in. Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee; because he trusteth in thee. Trust ye in Jehovah for ever; for in Jehovah, even Jehovah, is an everlasting rock.” (Isa. 26:1-4, AS) The context of this scripture is briefly considered. Isa Chapter 25 pertains to Moab, the near neighbors of Judah and descendants of Lot’s eldest daughter. They had been the opposers of the Israelites right from the time when refusal was given by them to supply provisions to Israel as they journeyed to the promised land. Moab hired Balaam to curse Israel. (See also Numbers 22; Nu 23; Nu 24; Nu 25:1-5 and Deuteronomy 23:3.) They had much contempt for Jehovah’s people, and prided themselves on their own “lofty city”, her counterpart today being that rich, lofty city, the mighty religious organization standing for the whole of Satan’s organization. The modern-day Moabites are the professing Christians, whose words and actions are as far removed from Christianity and pure worship of Jehovah as Moab was removed from true worship and the covenant of Jehovah. Jehovah had warned Moab of his purposed punishment for her iniquity and opposition.
19. Who are the modern-day Moabites, and what is their attitude toward Jehovah’s people?
19 The modern-day Moabites have opposed Jehovah’s witnesses with a hatred not born of righteousness, but from the Devil and against all righteousness. Their hatred for God’s true people increases as they see upon us the very plain evidence of Jehovah’s favor and the obvious disfavor they themselves are in. They put forth every effort to prevent the people of good will from entering the new world. They are richer than Jehovah’s witnesses in material things and with it they have much pride and arrogance. They are on one side of the great “Dead sea” and we on the other. The gulf is fixed, and is as immovable as Jehovah’s judgment, reminding us very forcibly of the great chasm between the “rich man” class and the “Lazarus” class in the illustration recorded at Luke 16:19-31 (NW): “And besides all these things, a great chasm has been fixed between us and you people, so that those wanting to go over from here to you people cannot.”
20. When Jehovah brings down their pride, how low will they be brought?
20 The modern-day Moabites will be brought low, for Jehovah has completely finished with them. Hear just a part of the punishment: “For in this mountain will the hand of Jehovah rest; and Moab shall be trodden down in his place, even as straw is trodden down in the water of the dunghill. And he shall spread forth his hands in the midst thereof, as he that swimmeth spreadeth forth his hands to swim; but Jehovah will lay low his pride together with the craft of his hands.” It is a sure thing that one cannot have much pride left when one is being pressed down into a manure pile, showing the utter contempt Jehovah has for modern-day Moab, keeping her wallowing in the mire of shame. “For thou hast made of a city a heap, of a fortified city a ruin, a palace of strangers to be no city; it shall never be built.” “For he hath brought down them that dwell on high, the lofty city: he layeth it low, he layeth it low even to the ground; he bringeth it even to the dust. The foot shall tread it down; even the feet of the poor, and the steps of the needy.”—Isa. 25:10, 11, 2; 26:5, 6, AS.
21. Why does Moab have no defense against the day of judgment? How does this encourage our singing?
21 When this happens, what a tremendous change will take place! The tables will be turned! Brought down will be the lofty from dwelling on high as the great, rich, influential ones of this world, to the lowest possible place imaginable, so low and degraded that it can only be compared to being trampled underfoot by the poor like straw on a manure heap. Christendom’s lofty looks, boastful words, bragging tongue, her superior attitude toward the holy Word of God, her trust in idols and men and riches, such as belong to this world, will not provide her with security or any safety from Jehovah’s storm and blast. They have no defense and are disgraced. At this time ‘this song shall be sung’. This is a command from Jehovah and it must be obeyed, namely, to sing this song. It is: “We have a strong city; salvation will he appoint for walls and bulwarks. Open ye the gates, that the righteous nation which keepeth faith may enter in.” (Isa. 26:1, 2, AS) This is the theme, and the song may also be understood more completely by considering many of the other prophetic utterances, such as Isaiah 12, Isaiah 4:2-6, Psalms 145, 146, 150. Put your whole heart into this song. Sing aloud, “Great is Jehovah, and greatly to be praised, in the city of our God, in his holy mountain. Beautiful in elevation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion, on the sides of the north, the city of the great King.” (Ps. 48:1, 2, AS) God’s organization is marvelous and supremely beautiful and the kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ is the hope of all peoples.—Ps. 48:12, 13, AS.
22. What does Jehovah’s “strong city” offer to the “prisoner” class, and how far-reaching is this song to be sung and heard?
22 Christendom’s defenses are of no value, but Jehovah’s witnesses have a “strong city”, and this is something to sing about. There are millions who want a safe place and are in need of security. Let them know we have a “strong city”! “Thou shalt call thy walls Salvation, and thy gates Praise.” (Isa. 60:18, AS) Only God’s kingdom offers such protection and salvation, for inside the city one is then safe. Those desiring salvation must make for God’s organization, and find entrance into it and remain there permanently. It is a real city of refuge. The multitudes must come in through the gates; so sing loudly, clearly and harmoniously that all may know there is a strong city offering salvation, and it is our city. It is Jehovah’s! To all countries the song must go: “Wherefore glorify ye Jehovah in the east, even the name of Jehovah, the God of Israel, in the isles of the sea. From the uttermost part of the earth have we heard songs: Glory to the righteous.” (Isa. 24:15, 16, AS) This song will never stop, but will continue until everyone living sings it. Everything that has breath, praise ye Jehovah!
THE GATE, NATION AND PURPOSE
23. When is Zion built up? When God opens the gates, what nation marches in, and who follow?
23 “Open ye the gates, that there may enter in a righteous nation preserving fidelity. A purpose sustained thou wilt guard, saying, Prosper! Prosper! because in thee hath he been led to trust. Trust ye in Yahweh unto futurity,—for in Yah Yahweh is a rock of ages.” (Ro) The gates must be unlocked, so that the nation can march in. The faithful anointed remnant in 1919 were awaiting entrance into the newly established city, Zion. “Thou wilt arise, and have mercy upon Zion; . . . yea, the set time is come. . . . For Jehovah hath built up Zion; he hath appeared in his glory.” (Ps. 102:13-16, AS) They prayed, “Jehovah hath chastened me sore; but he hath not given me over unto death. Open to me the gates of righteousness: I will enter into them, I will give thanks unto Jehovah. This is the gate of Jehovah; the righteous shall enter into it.” (Ps. 118:18-20, AS) As a result Zion received many more children. It is exactly as foretold. “Before she travailed, she brought forth; before her pain came, she was delivered of a manchild. Who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen such things? Shall a land be born in one day? shall a nation be brought forth at once? for as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her children.” (Isa. 66:7, 8, AS) The King is brought forth as the new Ruler in 1914 by the mother organization, Zion, and after great trials and tribulations (1917-1918) Zion brings forth the rest of her royal children, the remnant of the Kingdom class. Since then, too, hundreds of thousands of persons of good will have been brought into association with the members of the remnant class. Just how many more thousands of these may be added to the ranks before the battle of Armageddon we do not know. This class will be carried through Armageddon with the faithful remnant when Jehovah rises up and fights for his people as he did in the days of old. The gates are now opened wide for the prisoners’ return. In Zion they will be fed, mothered and taught Jehovah’s commands and will learn to know him truly.
24. What is the “purpose sustained”?
24 Verse 3 of Isaiah 26:3 reads: “A purpose sustained thou wilt guard.” (Ro) This is not a vain imagination but is one inspired by God’s Word, gained from a clear appreciation of his purposes. They are our purposes and he will bring them all to pass. He will sustain them. There is no need for us to doubt or get disturbed as to whether certain promises will come to fulfillment, for they will. Jehovah is as good as his name. Complete trust and assurance we must therefore have. Such ones will be sustained and held up by Jehovah, for they are part of his purpose. He has promised to guard them and therefore he will.
25. How do the inhabitants of Zion gain peace and prosperity? And how do we make sure Jehovah’s name is a “strong tower”?
25 These trusting confident ones have their imagination clear and minds settled. They try to be godlike, unchangeable, uncompromising, resolute and reliable, having fixity of purpose and determination to see it through. Jehovah is always equal to every possible emergency. Knowing and trying to copy Jehovah, they are greatly blessed and are endowed with peace. They rest in Jehovah the strong tower, though troubles increase and all forms of hostility are stirred up to break down the faith of God’s people or attack His city. The loyal and obedient children of Zion will keep the truth, maintain fidelity and remain in the organization. Shortly the greatest time of trouble is to come on this present system of things, but we know Jehovah is with us. Therefore we need not fear. He is our refuge. Just as nothing in the universe can disturb the peace, serenity and tranquillity of Jehovah, for he is the Rock of Ages, so we will trust in him and be safe, not only now, but forevermore. Therefore trust in Jehovah, ever keeping in mind the name of Jehovah. It is a ‘strong tower, and the righteous run into it and are safe’. Trust completely in Jehovah and be at peace.

