Announcements
“HOLD A GOOD CONSCIENCE”—1 Pet. 3:16, NW.
A good conscience toward God is what all lovers of eternal life must have. It is won not merely by putting away fleshly filth and sin, but by positive right doing, serving God, based on faith in the blood of Christ Jesus, of which Paul says, “How much more will the blood of the Christ, who through an everlasting spirit offered himself without blemish to God, cleanse our consciences from dead works that we may render sacred service to the living God?” During November this “sacred service” on the part of Jehovah’s witnesses will take the form of presenting to the people the three bound books What Has Religion Done for Mankind? “Let God Be True” and “This Means Everlasting Life”, on a contribution of 50c each. This splendid combination of books presents a wide field for profitable Bible study that will help people to attain and hold a good conscience. Join in the special effort by introducing these books to others, and by reporting your activity to the Society at the conclusion of the month.
WORDS OF LIFE
Words of life are those found in the Bible, the Creator’s revelation to his creature, man. Knowledge of God is of primary importance. As stated by the greatest prophet that ever lived: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.” (John 17:3, NW) Life actually depends on our gaining this knowledge, as found in God’s Word, the Bible. His Word is truth, and we can “let God be true” at all times, depending on it completely. He has been proved to be true down through the long centuries, even though many religions have given the people cause to wonder, What has religion done for mankind? For a consideration of these important subjects in helpful and authentic detail obtain the three beautiful bound books bearing the titles: “What Has Religion Done for Mankind?” “Let God Be True” and “This Means Everlasting Life”. Available on a contribution of only $1.50, or 50c each. Let these fine publications help you find the words of life.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of November 9: The Name of Jehovah a Strong Tower; also, A Strong Refuge Today, ¶1-3.
Week of November 16: A Strong Refuge Today, ¶4-25.

