




Warwick, NY: World Headquarters





Highlights of the Past Year




AS Satan’s world experiences one calamity after another, Jehovah’s true worshippers continue to have “plenty to do in the work of the Lord.” (1 Cor. 15:58) The following reports show how Jehovah’s Witnesses throughout the world endeavor to display “trust in Jehovah . . . , do what is good . . . , and act with faithfulness.”​—Ps. 37:3.



World Headquarters and Branch Office Relocation

The expansion of the facilities at Wallkill, New York, was completed on February 1, 2016, allowing for the transfer of the United States Branch Committee, the Service Department, and other United States branch departments to that site. And with work on the new world headquarters at Warwick coming to completion, the Brooklyn Bethel family has undertaken the huge task of moving out of New York City and into the countryside.





On Monday, April 3, 2017, world headquarters at Warwick will open for tours, which will include three self-guided exhibits and a guided tour.
                “The Bible and the Divine Name” features rare Bibles and highlights the fact that God’s name belongs in the Scriptures.

              “A People for Jehovah’s Name” presents a visual history of the spiritual heritage of Jehovah’s Witnesses, showing how Jehovah has progressively guided, taught, and organized his people to do his will.

               “World Headquarters​—Faith in Action” is an interactive exhibit that explains what the Governing Body committees do to help Jehovah’s people to meet together, to make disciples, to take in spiritual food, and to show love toward one another.


These self-guided tours will be available Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Visitors will also be able to enjoy a 20-minute guided tour that will highlight certain sections of the Offices/​Services Building and the Bethel grounds. The brief guided tours will be available Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. and from 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Before planning your visit, please check jw.org and look under ABOUT US > OFFICES & TOURS > United States.



