Announcements
GIVING GOD’S WORD FIRST PLACE IN OUR LIVES
“How can a young man keep his path pure? By heeding thy word. I find joy in thy statutes; I will not forget thy word.” (Psalm 119:9, 16, AT) This is pre-eminent counsel for both young and old and shows the attitude one should take toward God’s Word. Honest and sincere persons today seek to know and do God’s will. The study of God’s Word is essential for such. They learn precious truths from the perusal of its pages, and then also seek to share the knowledge gained with others, near and far. Accordingly, during the months of June, July and August, Jehovah’s witnesses throughout the world, will make a special effort to get into the isolated and more-difficult-to-reach places with the message of God’s kingdom. You, too, may share the knowledge you have with others, calling on your friends and neighbors. If you desire further particulars, contact Jehovah’s witnesses in your vicinity or write the Society. Giving God’s Word the first place will bring you joy.
DISTRICT ASSEMBLIES
All readers of The Watchtower are cordially invited to attend the district assemblies of Jehovah’s witnesses that will be held throughout the United States and Canada on September 5, 6 and 7, 1952. There will be 35 assemblies in American cities and 10 assemblies in Canadian cities. Auditoriums are now being leased. In a succeeding issue a list of the cities and rooming accommodation committee addresses will be published.
THE “AWAKE!” MAGAZINE
Awake! as a companion magazine to The Watchtower, is a champion for the truth. Whether in the field of politics, economics, religion or things social, the facts are set forth and analyzed in this journal. It supplies its readers with valuable information that keeps them aware of the development of the pressing issues of these trying times. International in its scope, Awake! keeps you well informed and enables you to follow the trend of world events with an appreciation of their real significance. There is a wide variety in its 32 pages that will keep you keenly interested. Send in your subscription, enclosing $1, and you will receive Awake! twice a month for a whole year.
BROOKLYN BETHEL VACATION
The Society’s offices, factory and Bethel home in Brooklyn, New York, will be closed from August 9 to 24 inclusive for the annual vacation. Orders and correspondence sent in during that period will not be handled until some time after the reopening of the offices. To avoid delays it will be necessary to anticipate your needs well in advance and place your orders in ample time for attention before the vacation period.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of July 27: Fear Jehovah the Superior; also, Subjection to Superior Authorities, ¶1-4.
Week of August 3: Subjection to Superior Authorities, ¶5-24.

