Following Jehovah’s Way in His Name
AMONG the many promises Jehovah God caused to be recorded in his Word for our instruction, comfort and hope as his dedicated Christian witnesses is the one found at Isaiah 30:21: “And your own ears will hear a word behind you saying: ‘This is the way. Walk in it, you people,’ in case you people should go to the right or in case you should go to the left.” In view of world conditions, how timely this counsel is!a
We all do want to follow Jehovah’s way, for it is a plain way, a way of righteousness and wisdom, a way of happiness and peace, a way of everlasting life. Surely there is no better way to follow than it.—Ps. 27:11; Prov. 3:13-18.
Following Jehovah’s way, however, is not following the line of least resistance. Far from it! Jesus told us that it is a narrow and cramped way, consequently a way that few find. But it is not so difficult that any, even those who are aged or of tender years, infirm or unlearned, cannot walk in it if they sincerely wish to do so.—Matt. 7:13, 14.
Note also that Jehovah has only one way, not many different, conflicting and confusing ways. He is a God of order, so he requires that all his servants on earth follow his one way, that they may all be at unity and speak in agreement.—1 Cor. 1:10.
What does it take, what do we need to follow Jehovah’s way? We need, first of all, the right heart condition, the right mental disposition, one of humility, sincerity and mildness. (Ps. 25:9) We also need knowledge, for ignorance will lead us only blindly into the ditch of destruction. We must therefore ‘rove about’ in God’s Word and in the helps he has provided, so as to ‘make our true knowledge abundant.’ We may not be content with knowing merely the first or elemental things about Jehovah’s pure worship but must progress to maturity.—Dan. 12:4; Heb. 6:1.
Today, even as in times past, Jehovah has a visible organization upon the earth. One of its chief purposes is to help Christians to follow Jehovah’s way; so we must avail ourselves of all its provisions. Scripturally identified as the “faithful and discreet slave” class, it provides servants, pastors, teachers and missionaries as well as printed publications. We also need God’s holy spirit, which he provides generously to all who ask him in sincerity and truth.—Matt. 24:45-47; Eph. 4:11, 12.
What does it mean to follow Jehovah’s way in his name? It means to serve as his representatives, bearing his name as his witnesses. It means following his righteous example and being exclusively devoted to the vindication of his name, even as he is. It means following the many instructions he has set forth in his Word. That means we must show a willing spirit and put the interests of his kingdom first in our lives. We may not follow our own whims or inclinations, nor may we content ourselves with haphazard service. It also means learning to work in harmony with his earthly organization and with those dedicated Christians with whom we are associated. There is much work to be done and a short time in which to do it; only by fully cooperating with one another can we work effectively and efficiently. It means working hard to make a success of every assignment given us, whether an assignment for a part in a meeting program or in the training program.
Knowing Jehovah’s way, it would be sin for us to fail to follow it, as well as folly. Let us wisely follow it, for it is the way of happiness and life.—Jer. 7:23; Jas. 4:17.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, September 1, 1959.

