
Do You Remember?




Have you carefully read this year’s issues of The Watchtower? Well, see if you can answer the following questions:
What is involved in “making your mind over”? (Rom. 12:2)
It involves more than filling your life with good works. It includes examining what we are inside and making changes to bring our life as close as possible to God’s standards.​—w23.01, pp. 8-9.
How can we show balance when observing world events?
We are interested in how current events are fulfilling prophecy. Instead of speculating, which could cause disunity, we do well to base our discussions on what is published by Jehovah’s organization. (1 Cor. 1:10)​—w23.02, p. 16.
How does Jesus’ baptism differ from that of his followers?
Born into a nation dedicated to God, Jesus did not need to dedicate himself to Jehovah, as we do. Jesus was a perfect, sinless man. He did not need to repent of his sins.​—w23.03, p. 5.
How can we help others to comment at meetings?
We can keep our comments brief, allowing others to have a share. We can also avoid commenting on too many points. There will thus be aspects for others to comment on.​—w23.04, p. 23.
To what does “the Way of Holiness” mentioned at Isaiah 35:8 refer?
This figurative highway first referred to the Jews’ route from Babylon to their homeland. What about in more recent times? In the centuries leading up to 1919, preparatory work was done​—the translating and printing of Bibles, among other things. God’s people have been traveling on “the Way of Holiness” to a spiritual paradise, which leads to Kingdom blessings.​—w23.05, pp. 15-19.
Proverbs chapter 9 offers advice that is built around what two figurative women?
Proverbs speaks of “a stupid woman” whose invitation leads to “the Grave” and of “true wisdom,” personified as a woman, whose invitation leads to “the way of understanding” and to life. (Prov. 9:1, 6, 13, 18)​—w23.06, pp. 22-24.
How were God’s humility and reasonableness evident in his dealings with Lot?
Jehovah instructed Lot to flee from Sodom to the mountainous region. When Lot pleaded to take refuge in Zoar instead, God granted his request.​—w23.07, p. 21.
What can a wife do if her mate views pornography?
She must remember that she is not to blame. She should focus on her relationship with God and meditate on Bible accounts of troubled women who found comfort in him. She can help her mate avoid high-risk situations.​—w23.08, pp. 14-17.
When we are challenged about our beliefs, how can insight help us to be mild?
We can view the question or the challenge as a means to learn what the other person thinks or cares about. We are thus better equipped to respond in a mild way.​—w23.09, p. 17.
What can we learn from Mary about acquiring strength?
On learning that she would be the mother of the Messiah, Mary gained strength from others. Gabriel and Elizabeth provided Mary with Scriptural encouragement. We too can gain strength from fellow worshippers.​—w23.10, p. 15.
How may Jehovah answer our prayers?
He promises to hear our prayers and consider how they relate to his purpose. (Jer. 29:12) He may respond to similar requests in different ways, but he will always support us.​—w23.11, pp. 21-22.
Romans 5:2 mentions “hope,” so why is it discussed again in verse 4?
On hearing the good news, a person might gain the hope of enjoying life in an earthly paradise. But as he faces tribulations, endures them, and senses God’s approval, his hope likely grows stronger and becomes more personal.​—w23.12, pp. 12-13.




