
STUDY ARTICLE 52
Young Sisters​—Become Mature Christian Women

“Women should likewise be . . . moderate in habits, faithful in all things.”​—1 TIM. 3:11.
SONG 133 Worship Jehovah During Youth
PREVIEWa



 1. To grow to Christian maturity, what must we do?
WE ARE amazed at how quickly a child grows into an adult. This growth seems to take place automatically. However, growing to Christian maturity is by no means automatic.b (1 Cor. 13:11; Heb. 6:1) To reach that goal, we need a deep personal relationship with Jehovah. We also need his holy spirit as we cultivate godly qualities, develop practical skills, and prepare for future responsibilities.​—Prov. 1:5.
 2. What do we learn from Genesis 1:27, and what will we discuss in this article?
2 Jehovah made humans to be male or female. (Read Genesis 1:27.) Obviously, men and women are physically different, but they are different in other ways as well. For example, Jehovah made men and women to fulfill specific roles, so they need qualities and skills that will help them to carry out their respective assignments. (Gen. 2:18) In this article, we will consider what a young sister can do to become a mature Christian woman. In the following article, we will consider what young brothers can do.



CULTIVATE GODLY QUALITIES





Imitating the qualities of faithful women, such as Rebekah, Esther, and Abigail, will help you to become a mature Christian woman (See paragraphs 3-4)



3-4. Where can young sisters find good examples to imitate? (See also picture.)
3 The Bible mentions many remarkable women who loved Jehovah and served him. (See on jw.org the article “Women in the Bible​—What Can We Learn From Them?”) They were, as our theme text advises, “moderate in habits” and “faithful in all things.” In addition, sisters can find in their own congregation examples of mature Christian women who are worthy of imitation.
4 Young sisters, why not identify a few mature Christian women you know whose example you can imitate? Note their appealing qualities; then consider how you can manifest them. In the following paragraphs, we will discuss three important qualities needed by mature women.
 5. Why is humility essential for a mature Christian woman?
5 Humility is an important aspect of Christian maturity. If a woman is humble, she will enjoy a good relationship with Jehovah and with others. (Jas. 4:6) For example, a woman who loves Jehovah humbly chooses to support the principle of headship that her heavenly Father established. (1 Cor. 11:3) That principle has specific applications in the congregation and in the family arrangement.c
 6. What can young sisters learn about humility from Rebekah?
6 Consider the example of Rebekah. She was an intelligent and decisive woman who took the initiative in appropriate ways throughout her life. (Gen. 24:58; 27:5-17) Yet, she was respectful and submissive. (Gen. 24:17, 18, 65) If you humbly support Jehovah’s arrangements, as Rebekah did, you will be a positive influence on your family and on the congregation.
 7. How can young sisters imitate Esther in showing modesty?
7 Modesty is another quality that all mature Christians need. The Bible says that “wisdom is with the modest ones.” (Prov. 11:2) Esther was a modest, godly woman. Her modesty protected her from acting presumptuously. She listened to the advice of her older cousin Mordecai and followed it. (Esther 2:10, 20, 22) You can demonstrate similar modesty by seeking out and applying good advice.​—Titus 2:3-5.
 8. According to 1 Timothy 2:9, 10, how will modesty help a sister make wise choices in dress and grooming?
8 Esther showed modesty in another way. She was “beautifully formed and attractive in appearance”; yet, she did not draw undue attention to herself. (Esther 2:7, 15) How can a Christian woman benefit from Esther’s example? One way is highlighted at 1 Timothy 2:9, 10. (Read.) The apostle Paul instructed Christian women to dress with modesty and soundness of mind. The Greek words used here suggest that a Christian woman’s dress would be respectable and would show consideration for the feelings or opinions of others. How we admire our mature Christian sisters for dressing modestly!
 9. What can we learn from the example of Abigail?
9 Discernment is another quality that all mature Christian sisters demonstrate. What is discernment? It is good judgment​—the ability to tell right from wrong and then to choose the wise course. Consider the example of Abigail. Her husband made a bad decision that was going to have a serious impact on his entire household. Abigail took immediate action. Her good judgment saved lives. (1 Sam. 25:14-23, 32-35) Discernment also helps us to know when to speak and when to keep silent. And it helps us to maintain balance when showing personal interest in others.​—1 Thess. 4:11.



DEVELOP PRACTICAL SKILLS





How have you benefited from learning to read and write well? (See paragraph 11)



10-11. How can you benefit yourself and others by reading and writing well? (See also picture.)
10 A Christian woman needs to develop practical skills. Some skills that a girl learns in childhood will continue to benefit her throughout her life. Consider a few examples.
11 Learn to read and write well. In some cultures, reading and writing are not considered to be important skills for women to learn. However, they are essential skills for every Christian.d (1 Tim. 4:13) So do not allow any obstacle to stop you from learning to read and write well. How will you be rewarded? Such skills may help you to find and keep a job. You will become a better student and teacher of God’s Word. Best of all, you will draw closer to Jehovah as you read his Word and meditate on it.​—Josh. 1:8; 1 Tim. 4:15.
12. How can Proverbs 31:26 help you to become a good communicator?
12 Develop good communication skills. Christians need to communicate effectively. In this regard, the disciple James provides practical counsel for us, saying: “Everyone must be quick to listen, slow to speak.” (Jas. 1:19) When you listen carefully as others speak, you show empathy, or “fellow feeling,” for them. (1 Pet. 3:8) If you are not sure that you understand what a person is saying or how he feels, ask appropriate questions. Then take a moment to think before you speak. (Prov. 15:28, ftn.) Ask yourself: ‘Is what I am about to say true and upbuilding? Is it tactful and kind?’ Learn from mature sisters who are good communicators. (Read Proverbs 31:26.) Pay attention to the way they speak. The better you learn this skill, the better your relationships with others will be.




A woman who has learned to manage a home is a powerful force for good in her family and in the congregation (See paragraph 13)



13. How can you learn to manage a home? (See also picture.)
13 Learn to manage a home. In many places, women carry much of the load of running a household. Your mother or another capable sister may be able to help you learn the needed skills. A sister named Cindy says: “One of the most valuable gifts my mom gave me was teaching me the joy that comes from hard work. Learning such skills as cooking, cleaning, sewing, and shopping made my life easier and opened the way for me to do more in Jehovah’s service. Mom also taught me how to be hospitable, and this allowed me to meet wonderful brothers and sisters whose examples I could imitate.” (Prov. 31:15, 21, 22) A diligent, hospitable woman who has learned to manage a home is a powerful force for good in her family and in the congregation.​—Prov. 31:13, 17, 27; Acts 16:15.
14. What do you learn from Crystal’s experience, and what should be your focus?
14 Learn to be self-sufficient. Being self-sufficient is an important goal for all mature Christians. (Phil. 4:11) A sister named Crystal says: “My parents were involved in choosing which courses I would take in high school so that I would learn practical skills. My father urged me to take accounting classes, which proved to be invaluable.” In addition to learning skills needed to obtain secular work, try to learn how to make a budget and stick to it. (Prov. 31:16, 18) Keep your focus on spiritual goals by avoiding unnecessary debt and by being content with a simple lifestyle.​—1 Tim. 6:8.



PREPARE FOR FUTURE ROLES

15-16. How do single sisters benefit others? (Mark 10:29, 30)
15 When you develop spiritual qualities and valuable skills, you will be better equipped for future roles. Consider a few examples of what you could do.
16 You could remain single for a time. In harmony with Jesus’ words, some women choose not to marry, even if singleness is discouraged in their culture. (Matt. 19:10-12) Others may remain single because of circumstances. Be assured that Jehovah and Jesus do not look down on single Christians. Around the world, single sisters are a positive influence on the congregation. Their love for and sincere interest in others motivate these Christian women to become spiritual sisters and spiritual mothers to many.​—Read Mark 10:29, 30; 1 Tim. 5:2.
17. How can a young sister prepare now to enter the full-time service?
17 You could become a full-time servant. Christian women have a tremendous impact on the worldwide preaching work. (Ps. 68:11) Can you plan now to enter the full-time ministry? You might serve as a pioneer, a construction volunteer, or a Bethelite. Pray about your goal. Talk to others who have reached such a goal, and find out what you need to do to qualify. Then make a realistic plan. Reaching your goal will open up many exciting opportunities for you in Jehovah’s service.




If you are considering marriage, you should choose your mate very carefully (See paragraph 18)



18. Why should a sister choose her husband very carefully? (See also picture.)
18 You may choose to get married. The qualities and skills that we have discussed will help you to become a capable wife. Of course, if you are considering marriage, you should choose your mate very carefully. It is one of the most important decisions you will ever make. Remember, you will come under the headship of the man you marry. (Rom. 7:2; Eph. 5:23, 33) So ask yourself: ‘Is he a mature Christian? Is he putting spiritual interests first in his life? Does he make wise decisions? Can he admit his mistakes? Does he respect women? Does he have the skills needed to support me spiritually, materially, and emotionally? Does he handle responsibility well? For example, what congregation assignments does he have and how does he handle them?’ (Luke 16:10; 1 Tim. 5:8) Of course, if you want to find a good prospective husband, you will need to be a good prospective wife.
19. Why is the role of “a helper” a dignified one?
19 The Bible says that a good wife is “a helper” for her husband and “a complement” of him. (Gen. 2:18) Is this a demeaning description? No! A wife’s role as a helper is a dignified one. In fact, the Bible often describes Jehovah as a “helper.” (Ps. 54:4; Heb. 13:6) A wife is a true helper to her husband when she supports him and helps him to implement decisions that affect the family. And because she loves Jehovah, she works to enhance her husband’s reputation. (Prov. 31:11, 12; 1 Tim. 3:11) You can prepare for this possible future role by deepening your love for Jehovah and by being a helper to others at home and in the congregation.
20. What impact can a mother have?
20 You could become a mother. After you marry, you and your husband might have children. (Ps. 127:3) Thus, it is wise to think ahead. The qualities and skills that we have discussed in this article will help you if you become a wife and mother. Your love, kindness, and patience will contribute to a warm home environment where your children will feel secure and are likely to flourish.​—Prov. 24:3.




Many young women who were taught from the Scriptures and applied what they learned have become mature Christians (See paragraph 21)



21. How do we feel about our sisters, and why? (See cover picture.)
21 We love you, sisters, for all that you do for Jehovah and his people. (Heb. 6:10) You work hard to cultivate spiritual qualities, to develop skills that enrich your life and the lives of those around you, and to prepare well for possible future roles. You are a real asset to Jehovah’s organization!



WHAT DID YOU LEARN FROM:
  1 Timothy 2:9, 10?

  Proverbs 31:26?

  Mark 10:29, 30?




SONG 137 Faithful Women, Christian Sisters
a You dear young sisters are valued in the congregation. You can reach Christian maturity by cultivating godly qualities, developing practical skills, and preparing to take on future roles. As a result, you will enjoy many blessings in Jehovah’s service.
b EXPRESSION EXPLAINED: Someone who has reached Christian maturity is guided by God’s spirit, not by worldly wisdom. He or she imitates Jesus’ example, works hard to maintain a close relationship with Jehovah, and shows self-sacrificing love for others.
c See The Watchtower, February 2021, pp. 14-19.
d For a discussion of the importance of reading, see on jw.org the article “Why Reading Is Important for Children​—Part 1: Read or Watch?”

