





LIFE STORY
My Journey From Shyness to Missionary Service
AS TOLD BY MARIANNE WERTHOLZ

AS A child, I was shy and afraid of people. But in time, Jehovah helped me to become a people-oriented missionary. How? Initially, through the guidance of my father. Next, by the excellent example of a teenage sister. And finally, by the kind and patient words of my husband. Let me share my journey with you.


I was born in 1951 in Vienna, Austria, to a Catholic family. I was timid, but I believed in God and prayed often. When I was nine, my father started studying with Jehovah’s Witnesses; my mother joined him a little later.




With my sister, Elisabeth (on the left)



We soon became part of the Döbling Congregation in Vienna. As a family, we did a lot together. We read and studied the Bible, attended congregation meetings, and served as volunteers at assemblies. Early on in my childhood, my father instilled in me a deep love for Jehovah. In fact, my father’s prayer was that my sister and I become pioneers. But back then, that was not my goal.
STARTING FULL-TIME SERVICE
I got baptized in 1965, at the age of 14. However, I found it difficult to approach strangers in the ministry. I also struggled with feelings of inferiority and desperately wanted to be accepted by other young people. So not long after my baptism, I started associating with those who didn’t serve Jehovah. Although I liked their company, my conscience bothered me because I spent so much time with non-Witnesses. But I did not have the strength to change. What helped me?




I learned so much from Dorothée (on the left)



About that time, a 16-year-old girl named Dorothée joined our congregation. Her zeal for the house-to-house work impressed me. I was a little older than she was, but I was not very active in the ministry. I thought to myself: ‘My parents are Witnesses, but Dorothée has no family in the truth. She lives with her sick mother, and yet she is always out in the ministry!’ Her example motivated me to do more for Jehovah. Soon thereafter, Dorothée and I became pioneer partners. First, we were auxiliary pioneers, then called vacation pioneers, and later, we served together as regular pioneers. Dorothée’s enthusiasm was contagious. She helped me to start my first Bible study. In time, I began to feel a little more relaxed about approaching people at the door, on the street, and in other situations.
During my first year as a regular pioneer, an Austrian brother named Heinz came to our congregation. He had learned the truth in Canada while visiting his brother, who was a Witness. Heinz was assigned to our congregation in Vienna as a special pioneer. I liked him right from the start. But he wanted to become a missionary, and I had no intention of serving as a missionary. So at first, I hid my feelings for him. Later, though, Heinz and I started dating, got married, and began pioneering together in Austria.
MISSIONARY WORK AS A GOAL
Heinz would often speak to me about his desire to become a missionary. Although he never pressured me, he would ask motivating questions, such as, “Since we do not have children, could we do more in Jehovah’s service?” Because of my shy personality, I was afraid to be a missionary. True, I pioneered, but the whole idea of a missionary assignment seemed overwhelming. Yet, Heinz patiently kept the goal alive. He also encouraged me to focus more on caring about people than on worrying about myself. His advice really helped.




Heinz conducting the Watchtower Study in a small Yugoslavian-speaking congregation in Salzburg, Austria, 1974



Gradually, I developed the desire to enter the missionary work, so we applied for Gilead School. However, the branch servant suggested that I first improve my English. After three years of striving to improve my English, we were surprised to receive an assignment to a Yugoslavian congregation in Salzburg, Austria. We worked in that field for the next seven years, including one year in circuit work. The Serbo-Croatian language was difficult, but we had many Bible studies.
Then in 1979 we were asked to go on “vacation” to Bulgaria. The preaching work there was banned. So we did not do any preaching on that “vacation.” But we did smuggle miniature literature into the country for the five sisters who lived in Sofia, the capital city. I was terrified, but Jehovah helped me with that exciting assignment. Seeing the courage of those sisters and the joy they had despite the risk of imprisonment gave me confidence to do my best at whatever Jehovah’s organization asked of me.
Meanwhile, we reapplied for Gilead, and this time, we were accepted. We thought we would be attending the school in English in the United States. But in November 1981, the Gilead Extension School started at the branch in Wiesbaden, Germany. So we were able to attend the course in German, which was easier for me to understand. Where would we be assigned?
SERVING IN A WAR-TORN COUNTRY
Our assignment was Kenya! However, the Kenya branch office asked us if we would be willing to serve in the neighboring country of Uganda. Over ten years earlier, the Ugandan government had been overthrown in a military coup led by General Idi Amin. In the years that followed, his dictatorship brought death to thousands and turmoil to millions. Then in 1979 the Ugandan government was once again overthrown. Needless to say, I felt somewhat unsure about moving to a war-torn country. But Gilead had prepared us to trust in Jehovah. So we said yes.
The situation in Uganda was chaotic. Heinz described it this way in the 2010 Yearbook: “Many services, . . . such as water supply and communication, had broken down. . . . Shootings and robberies were common, especially at night. . . . Everyone remained at home, hoping​—and often praying—​that the night would pass without uninvited visitors.” Despite these challenges, the local brothers were thriving spiritually!




Preparing a meal at the home of the Waiswa family



In 1982, Heinz and I arrived in Kampala, Uganda’s capital. During the first five months, we stayed at the home of Sam and Christina Waiswa along with their five children and four relatives. Brother and Sister Waiswa and their family often had only one meal a day, which made their hospitality truly remarkable. During our time with the Waiswas, Heinz and I learned many practical lessons that helped us with missionary life. For instance, we learned how to save water by bathing with just a few liters and using the rinse water to flush the toilets. In 1983, Heinz and I found our own home in a reasonably safe area of Kampala.
We truly enjoyed the ministry. I recall that in one month we placed over 4,000 magazines! But the people were the best part. They respected God and wanted to talk about the Bible. Heinz and I typically had 10 to 15 Bible studies each. And we learned a lot from our students. For example, we appreciated their positive spirit as they walked to and from the meetings each week, never complaining and always smiling.
In 1985 and 1986, there were two more military conflicts in Uganda. We often saw child soldiers armed with assault rifles and manning checkpoints. During that time, we prayed for discernment and a calm heart as we searched for interested ones in the ministry. And Jehovah answered our prayers. We often forgot our fears as soon as we met someone who responded positively to the Kingdom message.




Heinz and me with Tatjana (in the middle)



We also enjoyed witnessing to foreigners. For example, we met and studied with Murat and Dilbar Ibatullin, a married couple from Tatarstan (Central Russia). Murat was a health-care professional. The couple came into the truth and have been active ever since. Later, I was privileged to meet Tatjana Vileyska, a woman from Ukraine who had been contemplating suicide. After Tatjana got baptized, she moved back to Ukraine and later served as a translator of our publications.a
NEW CHALLENGES
In 1991 while Heinz and I were on vacation in Austria, we were contacted by the local branch and informed about a new assignment: Bulgaria. After the fall of communism in Eastern Europe, the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses was legalized in Bulgaria. As mentioned, Heinz and I had previously smuggled literature into that country while the work was banned. But now we were being sent there to preach.
We were directed not to go back to Uganda. So without returning to our missionary home to pack our things or to say goodbye to friends, we went to Bethel in Germany, got a car, and traveled to Bulgaria. We were assigned to a group of about 20 publishers in Sofia.
We faced several new challenges in Bulgaria. First, we did not know the language. In addition, the only publications readily available in Bulgarian were The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life and My Book of Bible Stories. And we found it difficult to start Bible studies. Despite these challenges, our small but zealous group of Witnesses was making progress. The Orthodox Church noticed, and that is when the real problems began.
In 1994 the Witnesses were deregistered and treated like a forbidden sect. Some brothers were arrested. The media spread terrible lies about us, claiming that Jehovah’s Witnesses not only killed children but also convinced other Witnesses to commit suicide. Heinz and I found it difficult to preach. We often encountered aggressive people who screamed at us, called the police on us, and even threw things at us. It was not possible to get literature into the country, and renting halls for meetings became a challenge. The police even broke up one of our conventions. Heinz and I were not used to such hatred. How unlike the productive, friendly field we were used to in Uganda! What enabled us to deal with the change?
We found joy in associating with the local brothers and sisters. They were happy to have found the truth and appreciated the assistance we gave them. All stayed close together and supported one another. We learned from those experiences that we can be happy in any assignment if we remain people-oriented.




At the Bulgaria branch, 2007



In time, however, things did improve. Our organization was reregistered in 1998, and many publications soon became available in Bulgarian. Then in 2004 a new branch building was dedicated. Today, there are 57 congregations in Bulgaria, with 2,953 publishers. This past service year, a total of 6,475 attended the Memorial. While at one time there were only five sisters in Sofia, we now have nine congregations! We have truly seen “the little one . . . become a thousand.”​—Isa. 60:22.
COPING WITH PERSONAL TRIALS
I have had my share of health problems. Over the years, I have developed several tumors, including one in my head. I received radiation therapy and underwent a 12-hour surgery in India to remove most of it. After I recovered at the India branch, we returned to our assignment in Bulgaria.
Meanwhile, Heinz started suffering from a rare hereditary condition called Huntington’s disease. He struggled to walk, talk, and control his movements. As the disease progressed, he became more and more dependent on me. I felt overwhelmed at times and worried about how things would turn out. However, a young brother named Bobi regularly invited Heinz to preach with him. Bobi was not embarrassed by Heinz’s speech or by his uncontrolled movements. I could always count on Bobi when I was not able to assist Heinz. Although Heinz and I put off having children in this system, we felt that Jehovah gave us Bobi as a son!​—Mark 10:29, 30.
Heinz also struggled with cancer. Sadly, my dear husband passed away in 2015. I felt so insecure after Heinz died; it was unreal to me that he was gone. But in my memory, he is so alive! (Luke 20:38) I often vividly recall his kind words and sound advice as I go about my day. I’m very thankful for our years of faithful service together.
GRATEFUL FOR JEHOVAH’S SUPPORT
Jehovah certainly has sustained me in all my trials. He also helped me to overcome my shyness and to become a people-oriented missionary. (2 Tim. 1:7) Thanks to Jehovah, my younger sister and I are now both in full-time service. Today, she and her husband are serving in a Serbian circuit in Europe. My father’s prayers spoken all those years ago were answered!
My study of the Bible gives me inner peace. In difficult times, I have learned to pray “more earnestly,” as Jesus did. (Luke 22:44) One way my prayers are answered is through the love and kindness of the friends in my congregation in Nadezhda, Sofia. They invite me for association and often express their appreciation, which gives me intense joy.
I often meditate on the resurrection. I imagine seeing my parents in front of our house, looking as beautiful as they did when they got married. I see my sister preparing a meal. I picture Heinz standing next to his horse. Such images take my mind off negative feelings and fill my heart with gratitude to Jehovah.
Reflecting on my life and looking to the future, I wholeheartedly agree with David’s words found at Psalm 27:13, 14: “Where would I be if I did not have faith that I would see Jehovah’s goodness in the land of the living? Hope in Jehovah; be courageous and strong of heart. Yes, hope in Jehovah.”

a See Tatjana Vileyska’s life story in the December 22, 2000, issue of Awake! pp. 20-24.

