
Questions From Readers


When will the current preaching work end?
Jesus stated: “This good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come.” (Matt. 24:14) The Greek word translated “end” in this verse, as well as in verses 6 and 13, is teʹlos. It refers to the final end of Satan’s world at Armageddon. (Rev. 16:14, 16) Thus, we will continue to preach the good news until just before that final end. This adjusts our earlier understanding.
Previously, we understood that we would stop preaching the good news when the great tribulation began with the destruction of Babylon the Great. (Rev. 17:3, 5, 15, 16) This event, we believed, would mark the end of the figurative “year of Jehovah’s goodwill.” (Isa. 61:2) We also felt that those who would survive the great tribulation would prove their devotion to Jehovah before that event. We compared them to the Jews who survived the destruction of Jerusalem in 607 B.C.E. These individuals had been marked for survival earlier because they worshipped Jehovah and hated wickedness. (Ezek. 5:11; 9:4) That comparison, however, does not harmonize with Jesus’ words found at Matthew 24:14, which indicate that people may have the opportunity to respond to the good news until just before the final end at Armageddon.
Our clarified understanding of Matthew 24:14 also adjusts our understanding of the hailstonelike message foretold at Revelation 16:21. Further examination has revealed that the two scriptures complement each other. How so? The answer lies in how people respond to the Kingdom message. To “those who are being saved,” wrote the apostle Paul, the message is good news, “a fragrance of life.” But to God’s enemies, it is bad news, “an odor of death.” (2 Cor. 2:15, 16) They hate the Kingdom message because it exposes their world for what it is​—wicked, ruled by Satan, and headed for destruction.​—John 7:7; 1 John 2:17; 5:19.
Note, too, that the symbolic hailstorm will be “unusually great.” This suggests that during the great tribulation, the preaching work may become more hard-hitting, that is, Jehovah’s name will be made known as never before. (Ezek. 39:7) At that late point in time, after the destruction of Babylon the Great, will some be drawn to the message as to a sweet fragrance? This is quite possible. Perhaps they may recall or learn that for many years Jehovah’s Witnesses had announced the end of false religion.
By way of comparison, consider what happened in ancient Egypt following the Ten Plagues. After Jehovah “[executed] judgment on all the gods of Egypt,” his people were joined by “a vast mixed company” of non-Israelites. (Ex. 12:12, 37, 38) These foreigners may have turned to Jehovah when they saw Moses’ warnings about the Ten Plagues come true.
Any who turn to Jehovah after the destruction of Babylon the Great will have the privilege of doing good to Christ’s brothers who will still be on earth. (Matt. 25:34-36, 40) Of course, that opportunity to be judged as sheep will end shortly before Armageddon when the remaining anointed ones receive their heavenly reward.
This clarified understanding powerfully illustrates Jehovah’s great love and mercy. Yes, he “does not desire anyone to be destroyed but desires all to attain to repentance.”​—2 Pet. 3:9.


