An Interesting Conversation
AT A Spanish-language assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses in Miami, Florida, a minister who is a free-lance contractor in his secular work related a conversation he had some months earlier. His report, translated into English, goes basically like this:
“Last October I was in the process of putting the final touches on some offices that I had built for a doctors’ clinic. Some men entered through the front doors, openly carrying on their discussion on how loving the people of Spain are. I offered the comment that I had lived in Madrid, Spain, for six months, and one of them asked:
“‘How did you get along in Madrid?
“I replied: ‘Although I arrived alone, I was immediately taken care of by many brothers.’
“‘How do you mean, by brothers?’ the man inquired.
“‘By Christian brothers,’ I replied. “‘Oh, you are a Christian?’ he asked.
“‘Actually,’ I answered, ‘I’m one of Jehovah’s witnesses.’
“He continued: ‘You don’t say, chico. Well, I’m pleased to meet you. My name is “Father Andres.”’
“After I introduced myself he added, ‘Let me tell you that I am well acquainted with the Witnesses.’
“So I commented, ‘Really? Tell me what you think of them.’
“‘I’ll tell you, I have my own ideas about religion even though I’m a priest. I have the highest opinion of you Jehovah’s witnesses. And I believe, and don’t hide it, that if there is a group on earth today with the zeal of true Christianity, with the characteristics of Christian martyrs, who do the will of God as the Bible says, that group is made up of you Jehovah’s witnesses.’
“Surprised to hear this from a priest, I asked, ‘Then, if you know what we are doing is right, why don’t you do it?’
“He replied: ‘You know how things are, one’s own interests. It isn’t easy to change religion. But I want you to know that I read your magazine.’
“I said, ‘So you read Awake!’
“‘No, not Awake!,’ he answered. ‘The Watchtower is the one I read, or, better stated, the one I study.’
“‘What did you say? That you study it?’
“He answered, ‘Yes, that’s the magazine I use, that is, its articles, to give sermons every Sunday in my church.’
“I then observed, ‘Then that means you like The Watchtower.’
“The priest said, ‘In my opinion, what it offers is the true explanation of the Bible.’
“Realizing the significance of his comments, I offered to help him in a regular study and analyzing of the Bible. Just at that time, though, a call came over the loudspeaker to the effect that the doctor was waiting for this priest. Though I have not had opportunity to meet or speak with the priest again, there is satisfaction in knowing that the clear ring of Bible truth is easily discernible, even by priests.”

