Love Toward Those ‘Related in the Faith’
GENUINE Christians have a familylike bond among themselves. Indeed, since the first century C.E., they have referred to one another as “brother” and “sister.” (Mark 3:31-35; Philemon 1, 2) These are not just words; they constitute a description of how worshipers of God feel about one another. (Compare 1 John 4:7, 8.) Jesus said: “By this all will know that you are my disciples, if you have love among yourselves.”​—John 13:35.
Such love was evident in July 1997 when a prolonged drought was followed by torrential rains and flooding in Chile. Suddenly, many were in need of food, clothing, and other items. In disaster situations, Jehovah’s Witnesses strive to follow Paul’s admonition to the Galatians: “Really, then, as long as we have time favorable for it, let us work what is good toward all, but especially toward those related to us in the faith.”​—Galatians 6:10.
Hence, Jehovah’s Witnesses quickly organized themselves to respond. Food, clothing, and the like were collected, sorted, packed, and then shipped to the disaster area. Children even donated toys! One sister was amazed when she saw the Kingdom Hall filled with relief supplies. “I stood dumbfounded, not knowing whether to laugh or to cry,” she says. “It was just what we needed.”
Then, unexpectedly, an earthquake struck a portion of the same area affected by the flooding. Many homes were demolished. To meet the need, more relief committees were formed. Regional Building Committees, which normally handle the construction of Jehovah’s Witnesses’ meeting facilities, pitched in and gave their support. The result? Modest houses​—designed and built by the brothers—​were donated to those who lost their homes. While these homes were not elaborate, they stood in stark contrast with the ones provided on a loan basis by secular relief efforts and which were without floors and windows and were unpainted.
Some brothers traveled long distances to help out. The chairman of one Regional Building Committee made an extensive tour on two consecutive days​—despite being confined to a wheelchair. A blind brother worked arduously, carrying beams to the carpenter who cut them to the desired size. A deaf brother collected the beams and delivered them to where they were needed.
Many observers were impressed with the assistance provided by the brothers. In one town a police vehicle was parked near a sister’s house that was being repaired. The policemen were curious. One asked a brother: “Who are these workers who seem to be so happy, and how much are they getting paid?” The brother explained that they were all volunteers. One of the officers explained that he paid a monthly tithe to his church, yet his pastor had not even visited him since the earthquake! The next day the sister received a phone call from a police official. He too had observed the workers. He said that he was so impressed by the enthusiastic spirit of the workers that he was tempted to join in!
Truly, the relief effort in Chile was a joyful experience for the volunteers and an excellent witness to observers.

