Should You Broaden Your Viewpoint?
A DEVASTATING earthquake struck Kobe City in western Japan, and self-sacrificing volunteers quickly came to the aid of stricken residents. However, a visiting team of doctors found their request for medical supplies rebuffed by someone at the city’s Health Bureau. That official, who was also the director of a large municipal hospital, wanted the victims to go to Kobe hospitals rather than have the doctors administer expensive injections and intravenous fluids at relief centers. Eventually, the doctors’ request was granted, but the official’s initial inflexible attitude and seeming lack of compassion drew widespread criticism.
Perhaps you have been on the receiving end of similar intransigence by someone in authority. You may even have been guilty of it yourself. Could you benefit from developing a broader point of view?
Get the Complete Picture
It is common for individuals to look at matters from just one angle, or point of view, thereby limiting their perception and understanding of matters. Often this is due to such factors as education, experience in life, and background. Wiser decisions can be reached when one endeavors to get the complete picture. For instance, if you were crossing a busy intersection where there are no stoplights, would it be wise just to look straight ahead? Certainly not! Similarly, broadening your thinking to get the entire view can be very helpful in making decisions and acting in a responsible manner. It can even be lifesaving.
Likely, all of us could make improvement in this regard. So ask yourself, ‘What are some areas where I could possibly benefit by broadening my thinking?’
Your View of Others
What do you see when you look at others? Do you have the tendency to view what they say or do as either black or white, as if no other colors or shades existed? Is a comment someone makes either a compliment or an insult? Is someone either completely right or thoroughly wrong? Having that viewpoint would be like a photographer who ignores the large variety of brilliant hues and shades in an autumn landscape, as if only black and white images existed. Or do you tend to concentrate on the negative areas of a person’s personality, much like a traveler who lets his enjoyment of a beautiful scene be spoiled by a bit of litter left by some inconsiderate visitor?​—Compare Ecclesiastes 7:16.
Much can be learned by considering Jehovah’s view of human error. While aware of man’s many weaknesses and failings, he chooses not to focus or dwell on them. The grateful psalmist observed: “If errors were what you watch . . . O Jehovah, who could stand?” (Psalm 130:3) Jehovah is willing to put errors far off from repentant sinners, yes magnanimously wiping them out, so that they are not a blemish on our relationship with him. (Psalm 51:1; 103:12) Jehovah could say of King David, who had at one point committed serious sins with Bath-sheba, that he was a man “who walked after me with all his heart by doing only what was right in my eyes.” (1 Kings 14:8) Why could God say this of David? Because he focused on repentant David’s better qualities. He considered all the pertinent factors and chose to continue to extend mercy to his servant.
Christ Jesus flawlessly mirrored this broad view of the faults of others. (John 5:19) When faced with the shortcomings of his apostles, Jesus was merciful and understanding. He recognized regarding imperfect humans that even when ‘the spirit is eager, the flesh is weak.’ (Matthew 26:41) With this in mind, Jesus could deal with the weaknesses and faults of his disciples in a patient and understanding manner. He did not concentrate on their failings but, rather, focused on their good qualities.
On one occasion after correcting the apostles because they argued about who seemed to be the greatest, Jesus added: “However, you are the ones that have stuck with me in my trials; and I make a covenant with you, just as my Father has made a covenant with me, for a kingdom, that you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit on thrones to judge the twelve tribes of Israel.” (Luke 22:24-30) Yes, despite the apostles’ many failings, Jesus remembered their faithfulness and their love for him. (Proverbs 17:17) Jesus had confidence in what they could and would do, so he concluded a covenant for a Kingdom with them. Yes, ‘Jesus loved his disciples to the end.’​—John 13:1.
So if someone’s personality quirks and faults tend to irritate you, be like Jehovah and Jesus. Broaden your thinking, and try to take all factors into consideration. By putting things in their proper perspective, you will find it easier to love and appreciate your brothers.
In Material Giving
The privilege of giving is one of the joys extended to Christians. But need we limit our giving to just one activity, say for example, engaging in the field ministry? (Matthew 24:14; 28:19, 20) Or could your thinking be broadened to include the physical needs and welfare of others? Of course, all Christians appreciate that giving spiritually is of utmost importance. (John 6:26, 27; Acts 1:8) Yet, as important as giving spiritually is, giving materially is certainly not to be neglected.​—James 2:15, 16.
As we contemplate the urgent needs of our spiritual brothers in our own congregation and the world over, we can see more fully what we can do to help them. When those who are in a position to do so share generously with others, an equalizing takes place. In this manner the needs of all of our brothers are cared for. A Christian elder expressed it this way: “If a need arises in one part of the world, brothers in another part of the world will come to their aid. If they are not in a position to help, then brothers somewhere else will do so. Thus the needs of our brothers worldwide are cared for. The worldwide brotherhood is certainly marvelous.”​—2 Corinthians 8:13-15; 1 Peter 2:17.
One Christian sister who sincerely desired to attend one of the international conventions held in Eastern Europe was just not in a position to do so. She heard, however, that the brothers there had a great need for Bibles, so she made a contribution for such Bibles through someone who attended. Thus she experienced the happiness of giving, of sharing with her brothers in a foreign land.​—Acts 20:35.
Perhaps by widening out in your thinking you can make an even greater contribution to the ever-expanding worldwide Bible educational work, bringing joy to yourself and to others as well.​—Deuteronomy 15:7; Proverbs 11:24; Philippians 4:14-19.
When Giving Counsel
When called on to give counsel or correction, considerate and balanced reasoning will help us to gain the respect of our spiritual brothers and to render truly effective assistance. It is so easy to concentrate on a few facts and jump to a hasty, one-sided conclusion. This gives the impression that we are narrow-minded, if not closed-minded, like the religious leaders of Jesus’ day, who tended to burden others with their endless regulations. (Matthew 23:2-4) On the other hand, if we avoid extremes and provide fine counsel solidly based on Scriptural principles, reflecting Jehovah’s righteous yet balanced and merciful thinking, it will be much easier for others to accept and to apply our suggestions.
Some years ago young brothers from several congregations got together to engage in sports. Unfortunately, a spirit of competition developed among them, resulting in harsh verbal encounters. How did the local elders handle the problem? Recognizing the need for young ones to have recreation, they did not recommend that they stop altogether. (Ephesians 5:17; 1 Timothy 4:8) Rather, they gave firm yet reasonable warnings about what the spirit of competition could lead to. They also offered helpful suggestions, such as having older, responsible ones present. The youths appreciated the wisdom and balance of the counsel and responded well. Moreover, their respect and affection for the elders grew.
Work to Broaden Out
While you may not intentionally or knowingly hold prejudices, it will still take determined effort to broaden out in your thinking. As you study God’s Word, meditate on it so as to grasp and appreciate Jehovah’s way of thinking. (Psalm 139:17) Try to understand the reasons for statements made in the Bible and the principles involved, and strive to evaluate matters as Jehovah does. This will be in harmony with David’s prayer: “Make me know your own ways, O Jehovah; teach me your own paths. Make me walk in your truth and teach me.”​—Psalm 25:4, 5.
As you adopt a broader perspective, you will be blessed. One blessing of a broadened viewpoint will be your gaining a reputation for being balanced and understanding. You will be able to respond in a more reasonable and understanding manner when rendering aid in varying situations. This, in turn, will contribute to the marvelous unity and harmony of the Christian brotherhood.
[Pictures on page 12]
Giving generously helps others, brings joy to the giver, and pleases our heavenly Father

