Vandalism Can Be Eliminated
“TEENAGE vandalism has always been considered an expression of disrespect for and hostility toward adults and their standards,” explain authors Jane Norman and Myron W. Harris. While many youths believe that nothing can be done to change the situation, “one out of 3 thinks that teenage vandalism could be curbed if parents paid more attention to their children, and if teenagers weren’t so bored,” the authors reported. While keeping young people occupied and giving them better parental control may reduce vandalism, would that in itself get at the root causes?
When alone, many young people are not troublemakers, yet in a group or in pairs, they may try to get attention, doing foolish and nasty things. That was the case with Nelson, who under the influence of drugs or alcohol often expressed his anger and discontent by acts of vandalism. José, stirred up by sermons in the Catholic Church about land reform and labor rights, felt that he should take part in strikes and organized vandalism as a means of protest. However, both Nelson and José found something far better than riots or vandalism.
Some Deeper Causes of Vandalism
Let us examine more closely why some youngsters engage in vandalism. Many adolescents are confused and “describe the world as a mixed-up, crazy place, filled with crazy people.” Nonetheless, and contrary to what some believe, one report said: “Teenagers do worry about the direction of their lives. They care more than adults think they do.” Unwittingly or not, a youth involved in vandalism may in this way be expressing his deep-seated frustrations, unresolved problems, or unfulfilled needs. According to the study mentioned at the outset, “not one of [the] respondents defended or justified vandalism, not even those who [had] engaged in it.”
A youth may seldom hear a word of appreciation or encouragement. Since education is increasingly important and more jobs require a high degree of specialized knowledge or technical skill, he or she may feel intimidated. Moreover, parents, teachers, or peers may be very critical and demanding, putting the emphasis on what the youth achieves and not on what he or she is as a person. Many rebel or vandalize simply because they are disappointed with themselves. Would not the love and attention of parents greatly reduce such distress?
You may have seen that while certain authorities have seemingly given up on trying to control graffiti and other kinds of delinquency, concerned citizens in general still look to teachers and school personnel to control vandalism. Regarding law enforcement, The World Book Encyclopedia says: “Vandalism is punishable by fine or imprisonment. Some local governments have laws that hold parents responsible for vandalism committed by their children. But most acts of vandalism are not punished. Law enforcement is difficult in such cases, and the cost of most individual acts of damage is not large enough to make legal action worthwhile.” One report showed that only 3 percent of offenders were ever caught.
You likely will agree that adequate parenting may be the best way to attack a root cause of delinquency. But when family life deteriorates, communities suffer. Professor Ana Luisa Vieira de Mattos, of São Paulo University, Brazil, notes that some of the reasons for problems with young people are “weak parental supervision, lack of rules, lack of communication, neglect, indifference or apathy.”
In our time we certainly have seen a fulfillment of Jesus’ words: “Because of the increasing of lawlessness the love of the greater number will cool off.” (Matthew 24:12) And who will deny that the words recorded at 2 Timothy 3:1-4 are proving true? The apostle Paul wrote: “Know this, that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here. For men will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, self-assuming, haughty, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, disloyal, having no natural affection, not open to any agreement, slanderers, without self-control, fierce, without love of goodness, betrayers, headstrong, puffed up with pride, lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God.” The fact is, just living among people with such characteristics contributes to delinquency. We need not give up though. Communities in general have failed to eliminate vandalism, but we can find people who have succeeded in changing their own life-style, no longer being ill-mannered or reckless. In their cases vandalism has been stopped.
Sound Guidance for Young People
What has helped vandals and others to change their personality? Although it may seem incredible to some educators and parents, the Bible provides excellent and up-to-date guidance. By following it, former vandals have been moved to obey God’s specific law: “You must not follow after the crowd for evil ends.” (Exodus 23:2) Many have been attracted to the truth from God’s Word about beliefs and doctrines that they never before understood, and what they have learned has affected them for the better. Consider the experience of José, a youth in São Paulo. He was raised believing in the use of images in worship. When he learned that God has a name, Jehovah, and that He does not approve of image worship, José made changes so as to do what is pleasing in God’s eyes.​—Exodus 20:4, 5; Psalm 83:18; 1 John 5:21; Revelation 4:11.
Nelson, rather than having one frustrating experience after another in violent gangs and strikes, found a real hope for the future, and that has given him enormous relief. He says: “Instead of being rejected by my family because of bad company and a life as a drug addict, now I am the one who is most respected at home. Often my father asks me to counsel my older brothers. Since I began to study the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses, I have known joy because I now have a purpose in life.” And for an urban youth like Marco​—accustomed to living in a violent environment—​getting to know that God’s Kingdom will make the earth a paradise has indeed been heartwarming.​—Revelation 21:3, 4.
Consider also the case of a former gang member, street brawler, and vandal. Being an orphan with a very sad childhood, Valter was impressed that in the midst of a corrupt, wicked system, God has a people. They sincerely endeavor to apply Bible principles in their lives, showing compassion, consideration, and kindness. Valter explains: “True to Jesus’ promise, I now have an enormous family, ‘brothers and sisters and mothers and fathers.’ Regarding the future, I look forward to the time when people will live in happiness and unity under God’s righteous government.”​—Mark 10:29, 30; Psalm 37:10, 11, 29.
Something Better Than Protest
In addition to showing consideration and love for their fellowmen, these former vandals have learned to “hate what is bad.” (Psalm 97:10; Matthew 7:12) What about you? Even if you are just one who suffers from the effects of widespread vandalism, a study of God’s Word will make Jehovah real to you as a loving heavenly Father who wants to care for you. (1 Peter 5:6, 7) God can help you to grow spiritually, despite personal weaknesses or poverty. That in itself is a marvelous experience!
Jehovah and his Son, Jesus Christ, truly want all kinds of people to have the opportunity to learn Bible truth. God’s Word can do more than help individuals to stop being vandals right now. It can motivate them to make further progress in applying divine principles. As a result, they become members of an international brotherhood known for cleanness and good manners, the worldwide congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses. In harmony with Ephesians 4:24, these sincere Christians have “put on the new personality which was created according to God’s will in true righteousness and loyalty.” Soon the world will be filled with such people because these will be the only ones who will survive and live forever.​—Compare Luke 23:43.
A New World Free From Vandalism Is Possible
Do you believe that vandalism really can be eradicated? If so, how will such a momentous change come about? God’s Kingdom will soon eliminate this wicked system. Those inhabiting the earth will be held responsible for any deliberate breaking of God’s righteous laws. (Compare Isaiah 24:5, 6.) While “transgressors themselves will certainly be annihilated together,” those who love righteousness will be delivered. “Jehovah will help them and provide them with escape. He will provide them with escape from wicked people and save them, because they have taken refuge in him.”​—Psalm 37:38-40.
Really, the roots of vandalism will be eliminated completely. And so will all crime, oppression, suffering, and wickedness. Instead, peace, true righteousness, quietness, and security will characterize life in the new world. Isaiah 32:18 describes what will prove true in a literal way: “My people must dwell in a peaceful abiding place and in residences of full confidence and in undisturbed resting-places.” Yes, a beautiful, global paradise will be inhabited by people who show love and consideration toward others.
Together with millions of others, former vandals already enjoy an intimate relationship with Jehovah God. They no longer have any share in acts of vandalism. Will you too allow God’s Word to guide you to life in his new world? Why not imitate the ancient psalmist who recorded Jehovah’s declaration: “I shall make you have insight and instruct you in the way you should go. I will give advice with my eye upon you.”​—Psalm 32:8.
[Picture on page 7]
Parental attention and love protect young people

