‘Fires of Curiosity in Heart and Mind’
“Words cannot express the joy and excitement that continue to grow as I devour Is There a Creator Who Cares About You? It just creates within one a desire​—no, a need—​to know more. Thank you for lighting fires of curiosity in my heart and mind.”
THAT is how one of Jehovah’s Witnesses from North Carolina, U.S.A., felt about the book released by the Watch Tower Society at the “God’s Way of Life” District Conventions during 1998/99. Even if you do not have a copy of the book, note other responses.
Days after receiving his copy at a San Diego, California, U.S.A., convention, a man wrote: “I’m finding this book to be very faith strengthening. It fills my heart with deep appreciation for Jehovah’s creative works. I’m up to page 98, and I’m dreading the day I’ll reach the end! It is that much of a satisfying joy.”
An Oriental woman wrote: “The convention speaker used the expression ‘a unique book,’ and that expression really matches the content. An outstanding feature is that the book does not push the existence of God on the reader, yet it presents the facts.”
The facts include fascinating scientific discoveries about our universe, life, and us. This impressed many. “I really do not have words to express how deeply this little book has affected me,” wrote a woman from California. “I could not put the book down as each page described more unfolding discoveries about our universe and life itself. I really learned so much! I will treasure this little book and share it with as many as possible.”
A feature that delighted many is how the book gives a synopsis of the Bible, highlighting the Creator’s personality. “The overall view of the Bible, presented toward the back of the book, is one of the best that I have read,” is a typical comment. On the heels of an early convention in New York, U.S.A., another wrote: “The new release has got to be the most absorbing publication you’ve printed. I was enthralled with the scientific proofs that there is a Creator. The concise synopsis of the Bible itself is just enough to explain the points being made and to whet the appetite to read more.”
Understandable Science
The scientific information in early chapters might seem to be intimidating, but here are typical reactions.
A Canadian man wrote: “What a contrast to the technical books whose authors try to impress us with their big words. Your scholarship is outstanding in making the subjects of physics, chemistry, DNA, chromosomes, etc., so understandable to us. If only you had written the university textbooks I studied years ago!”
A university professor of physics wrote: “[It] clearly presents the issues involved without getting bogged down by technical detail. The book reasons with the reader and quotes from many leading scientists. This is a ‘must read’ for anyone interested in the origin of the universe and life, either as a scientist or as a layman.”
A young woman taking a nursing course commented: “I could not believe my eyes to open to chapter 4 and read a quote from the book that we are using in class! I gave the book to our professor and told him I knew that he would find the information refreshing. I showed him page 54 about the brain. He read it to himself and said, ‘This is interesting! I’ll check it out.’”
A member of parliament in Belgium wrote: “What struck me and captivated me was the scientific outline that underlines that modern science is not opposed to the Bible’s monotheism intuition but, rather, joins them. This is a very successful outlook.”
Knowing the Creator Better
The book helped people in many lands to know God better and to feel much closer to him. A reader in Fukuoka City, Japan, observed: “It is as though the lens were precisely focused on Jehovah for the first time. The book is wonderfully convincing. I was able to come to know Jehovah from a standpoint I’ve never thought of until now.” A Salvadoran wrote: “You explain very clearly how merciful, gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in loving-kindness God is. Truly, this is precisely what we need to be closer to him and to his Son. It is the first book that explains the sentiments of Jehovah and the human feelings of his Son, Jesus.” And a reader in Zambia responded: “Jehovah took on an altogether new meaning for me.”
Understandably, Jehovah’s Witnesses are excited about sharing with others Is There a Creator Who Cares About You? One noted: “As I finished reading chapter 10 [“If the Creator Cares, Why So Much Suffering?”], I just could not help but exclaim, ‘This is exactly the book that we need in Japan!’ I would like to make the material in this chapter my own and use it in the field service more and more.” Another woman is studying the Bible with a girl who was brought up in a temple where her father is the priest. “She has a hard time accepting the concept of the Creator. There is nothing pushy in this book’s explanation, but the facts are there, so I think even Buddhists can read it without hesitation. It also makes us feel Jehovah’s love more.”
From England came the evaluation: “I have just finished the Creator book and am about to start reading it again. What a marvelous book! One can only love Jehovah when reading it. I have given one to my neighbour, who after reading just two chapters said, ‘I cannot put it down, it’s so exciting.’ I’m sure this will help people get to know and love our Grand Creator.”
A man in Maryland, U.S.A., said: “It truly has been incisive to my spiritual bones and marrow! I plan to give a copy to all the people I do business with. I sometimes find it difficult to begin a witness with such busy, educated people. With this book I will now find the appealing, effective approach.”
Clearly, the book Is There a Creator Who Cares About You? will have a positive impact on people earth wide.
[Picture Credit Line on page 25]
Cover photo above, Eagle Nebula: J. Hester and P. Scowen (AZ State Univ.), NASA

