A Mother’s Faith Triumphs Over Tragedy
“If you are reading this letter, it means that I did not survive the surgery and that I am not with you any longer.”
THESE are the opening words of a letter written by Carmen, a Christian mother, to her three daughters, aged 25, 19, and 16. As it turned out, the operation did not go well, and sadly, Carmen died.
Having to leave behind three daughters under such grievous circumstances is enough to break anyone’s heart. Yet, this mother’s strong faith in Jehovah and his promises clearly triumphed over the tragedy, having given her the inner peace so beautifully discernible in her touching letter. Note what she said to her daughters.
“First of all, I want to tell you that I love you with all my heart. . . . You are the best daughters a mother could have, and I am very proud of you.
“I would have liked to continue with you until God’s promised new world . . . , but as it cannot be, I have asked him to help you so that you can be faithful, as you have been. We have endured many trials together, and Jehovah has never forsaken us. . . . So keep on trusting in the guidance that he provides through his organization, and continue to give support to the congregation and the elders. Preach as often as you can, and love all the brothers.
“Ours will be a temporary separation. . . . I beg your forgiveness for all the mistakes I have made and for all the times that I did not understand you or did not tell you how much I love you. . . . I know that each of you has your own needs. Jehovah knows that better than you do, and he will provide everything you need and will reward you for all that you have endured.
“Do not lose sight of your goal—life in the new world—and keep on striving to attain it. May Jehovah bless you and strengthen you so that you will be faithful until the end. . . . Don’t be sad, my precious daughters. I love you!”
Tragedy can strike anyone at any time. “Time and unforeseen occurrence befall them all,” wrote King Solomon of old. (Ecclesiastes 9:11) Those who have strong faith in God, however, can have the same assurance as the apostle Paul, who said: “I am convinced that neither death nor life . . . nor any other creation will be able to separate us from God’s love that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.”—Romans 8:38, 39; Hebrews 6:10.

