Are God’s Eyes Upon You?
DOES Jehovah, the Master Creator, have the ability to see? Of course he does! The Bible reasons plainly: “The One forming the eye, can he not look?” (Psalm 94:9) Jehovah’s vision is vastly superior to that of humans. Not only does he see our outward appearance but he is also “the examiner of hearts,” and he can make “an estimate of hearts.” (Proverbs 17:3; 21:2) Yes, he has the ability to evaluate our thinking, motivation, and inmost desires.
Jehovah is aware of the difficulties we may encounter in life, and he responds to our entreaties. The psalmist wrote: “The eyes of Jehovah are toward the righteous ones, and his ears are toward their cry for help. Jehovah is near to those that are broken at heart; and those who are crushed in spirit he saves.” (Psalm 34:15, 18) How comforting it is to know that Jehovah understands our circumstances and heeds our heartfelt supplications!
Jehovah God is aware of works committed even in utter darkness. Yes, “all things are naked and openly exposed to the eyes of him with whom we have an accounting.” (Hebrews 4:13) So whether our actions are good or bad, they all are noted by God. (Proverbs 15:3) For example, Genesis 6:8, 9 states that “Noah found favor in the eyes of Jehovah” and that he “walked with the true God.” Yes, Noah gained Jehovah’s approval and blessing because he was obedient and upheld God’s righteous principles. (Genesis 6:22) In contrast, the people of Noah’s day were violent and depraved. God was not blind to this situation. He “saw that the badness of man was abundant in the earth and every inclination of the thoughts of his heart was only bad all the time.” Eventually, Jehovah brought destruction upon the wicked ones but preserved alive Noah and his family.—Genesis 6:5; 7:23.
Will Jehovah look with favor upon you? Indeed, the eyes of Jehovah “are roving about through all the earth to show his strength in behalf of those whose heart is complete toward him.” (2 Chronicles 16:9) Soon he will again remove from the earth all wicked ones and deliver those who are meek at heart.—Psalm 37:10, 11.

